[[Keira Knightley]]

CATEGORIES: 1985 births, Living people, 20th-century English actresses, 21st-century English actresses, Best Actress Empire Award winners, English child actresses, English female models, English film actresses, English people of Scottish descent, English people of Welsh descent, English stage actresses, English television actresses, Actresses from London, People from Teddington, English radio actresses

Keira Christina Knightley ( Knightley began acting as a child on television and made her film debut in 1995. She had a supporting role as Sabé in Star Wars Episode I: The Phantom Menace (1999) and her first significant role came in The Hole (2001). She gained widespread recognition in 2002 after co-starring in the film Bend It Like Beckham and achieved international fame in 2003 after appearing as Elizabeth Swann in the Pirates of the Caribbean film series (2003–present).
Since the Pirates of the Caribbean films, Knightley has become known for starring in period drama films, such as Pride & Prejudice (2005), Atonement (2007), Silk (2007), The Duchess (2008), A Dangerous Method (2011), and Anna Karenina (2012). Knightley has also appeared in a variety of genres of Hollywood films, including the romantic comedy Love Actually (2003), the historical action King Arthur (2004), the psychological thriller The Jacket (2005), biographical action Domino (2005), the historical drama The Edge of Love (2008), the film noir London Boulevard (2010), the dystopian science fiction Never Let Me Go (2010), the romantic drama Last Night (2010), and the dark comedy Seeking a Friend for the End of the World (2012).
Knightley earned nominations for the Academy Award for Best Actress and the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress for her role as Elizabeth Bennet in Joe Wright's 2005 adaptation of Jane Austen's novel Pride and Prejudice. Two years later she was nominated again for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress, as well as the BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role for her performance in Wright's Atonement. In its 2008 list, Forbes identified Knightley as the second highest-paid actress in Hollywood, with reported earnings of $32 million in 2007, making her the only non-American on the list of highest-paid actresses that year.

Early life

Knightley was born in Teddington, London, England, the daughter of Sharman Macdonald, an actress turned playwright, and Will Knightley, an actor.
Knightley lived in Richmond, attending Stanley Junior School, Teddington School and Esher College. at the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art.84

Career

1993–2002: Career beginnings

After getting an agent at 6, she worked mostly on commercials and small TV roles. Her first role was "Little Girl" in Royal Celebration, a 1993 TV film. A year later, she had a small role in the film A Village Affair. She later starred in 1995's Innocent Lies and 1998's Coming Home. She was a princess in the 1996 film The Treasure Seekers.83–84 Later in 1999, she appeared as Rose in Oliver Twist.84
Knightley appeared in several television films in the mid- to late 1990s—as well as ITV1's The Bill In 2000 Knightley appeared in the video to Five's song "Don't Wanna Let You Go".
Knightley's first starring role was in 2001, when she played the daughter of Robin Hood in the made-for-television Walt Disney Productions feature Princess of Thieves. She trained for several weeks in archery, fencing and horse riding.85 During this time, Knightley also appeared in The Hole, a thriller that received a direct-to-video release in the United States. Its director Nick Hamm described her as "a young version of Julie Christie".
She appeared in the miniseries adaptation of Doctor Zhivago as Lara, alongside Scottish actor Hans Matheson in the title role, which first aired in 2002 to good reviews and high ratings.

2003–07: Breakthrough and acclaim

After Bend It Like Beckham's UK release raised her profile, she was cast in the big-budget action film Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl, along with Orlando Bloom and Johnny Depp. Produced by Jerry Bruckheimer, it opened in July 2003 to positive reviews
Knightley had a role in the British romantic comedy Love Actually, which opened in November 2003, which co-starred her childhood idol Emma Thompson.88 Her next film, King Arthur, opened in July 2004 to negative reviews;
In the same month, Knightley was voted by readers of Hello! magazine as the film industry's most promising teen star.
She appeared in three films in 2005, the first of which was The Jacket, alongside Adrien Brody.
Pride & Prejudice was released in 2005.
In 2006, Knightley was invited to join the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.
Knightley starred in three major films in 2007: Silk, an adaptation of the novel by Alessandro Baricco, Atonement, a feature film adaptation of Ian McEwan's novel of the same name (co-starring James McAvoy, Vanessa Redgrave and Brenda Blethyn),

2008–10: Transition into independent films

In 2008, Knightley appeared alongside Sienna Miller, Cillian Murphy and Matthew Rhys in John Maybury's The Edge of Love, a fictional wartime drama about Welsh poet Dylan Thomas, his wife Caitlin Macnamara, childhood friend Vera Williams, and her romance and marriage with a British soldier. Penned by Knightley's mother, Sharman Macdonald, the playwright initially crafted the screenplay with Knightley as Macnamara in her mind. Once her daughter agreed to portray Williams, Macdonald enlarged the character, making her a singer.
Knightley, who watched Marlene Dietrich films for preparation, was expecting to mime to her pre-recorded voice, but was told by Maybury to sing live in front of the crew while shooting. "I was shaking like a leaf," Knightley later commented, "I thought my knees were going to buckle. In the first couple of songs, I sounded like a pubescent boy, it was so embarrassing." While the actress received positive reviews for her role,
She then filmed Saul Dibb's The Duchess (2008), based on the best-selling biography Georgiana, Duchess of Devonshire by Amanda Foreman,
In December 2009, Knightley made her West End debut in Martin Crimp's version of Molière's comedy The Misanthrope, at the Comedy Theatre in London alongside Damian Lewis, Tara FitzGerald and Dominic Rowan. Reviews for her portrayal of Jennifer in the play were generally positive. The Daily Telegraph described her performance as revealing "both power and poignancy" and The Independent called her performance "not only strikingly convincing but, at times, rather thrilling in its satiric aplomb."Keira Knightley in The Misanthrope at the Comedy Theatre, review Daily Telegraph 17 December 2009
In 2010, Knightley appeared in Massy Tadjedin's romantic drama Last Night, in which she co-starred with Eva Mendes, Sam Worthington and Guillaume Canet.

2011–present: Recent work and upcoming projects

Knightley's only film of 2011 was David Cronenberg's historical drama A Dangerous Method, co-starring Viggo Mortensen, Michael Fassbender and Vincent Cassel. Based on writer Christopher Hampton's 2002 stage play The Talking Cure and set on the eve of World War I, the film depicts the turbulent relationships between fledgling psychiatrist Carl Jung, his mentor Sigmund Freud and Sabina Spielrein played by Knightley, the troubled but beautiful young psychoanalyst who comes between them. 
The costume film premiered at the 68th Venice International Film Festival to a positive reception, while Knightley earned generally favourable reviews by critics, Andrew O'Hehir of Salon."
In 2012, she appeared with Steve Carell in the dramedy Seeking a Friend for the End of the World.
Knightley is slated to appear in The Emperor's Children with Rachel McAdams, Emma Thompson and Richard Gere. The film, a dark comedy, was written by Noah Baumbach and will be directed by Scott Cooper. Knightley played Cathy Muller in 2014's Jack Ryan: Shadow Recruit, alongside Chris Pine.
She will re-team with her Atonement co-star Benedict Cumberbatch for the 2014 historical drama film The Imitation Game. She will play Joan Clarke opposite Cumberbatch's Alan Turing.

Media attention

Knightley has been described by press reports as "famously open with media",
Knightley was the celebrity face for the luxury goods brand Asprey, Shiatzy Chen as well as Lux haircare products in Japanese television commercials.
A 41-year-old man was charged with harassment in February 2010 after trying to contact the actress on several occasions outside the Comedy Theatre in London, where she appeared in the play The Misanthrope.
Knightley received media attention for her perspectives on feminism, voiced in an interview for Harper's Bazaar UK published in the February 2014 edition.  Knightley explained that female artists face greater hurdles in the film industry compared to their male counterparts, and also revealed that she was perplexed by the use of "feminist" in a derogatory sense:
 
 I think it's great that the discussions are finally being allowed to be had feminism, as opposed to anybody mentioning feminism and everybody going, 'Oh, fucking shut up.' Somehow, it feminism became a dirty word. I thought it was really weird for a long time, and I think it's great that we're coming out of that.

Personal life

Knightley was in a relationship with actor Del Synnott from 2001 to 2003.  The couple met during the filming of Princess of Thieves.  Knightley was also in a relationship with actor Jamie Dornan from 2003 to 2005. Knightley and Righton married on 4 May 2013 in Mazan, Vaucluse, South of France. The couple lives in the London Borough of Islington.Canonbury's celebrity status is confirmed as Keira Knightley moves in 
While appearing as a guest on The Graham Norton Show alongside former Arsenal legend Thierry Henry on 24 January 2014, she revealed that she was a fan of West Ham United. 
Knightley has denied rumours she is anorexic, although her family has a history of anorexia. Knightley sued the Daily Mail after they claimed she lied about having anorexia; the article said that a teenage girl died from anorexia, indicating that Knightley's physical appearance may have influenced her in some way. She was awarded a settlement.
In July 2006, Knightley said she has become a workaholic, suggesting that she would take a one-year break from acting to travel and focus on her personal life.[ref]
</ref>

Charity work

Knightley is the face of an Amnesty International campaign to support human rights, marking the 60th anniversary of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
In April 2009, Knightley appeared in a video to raise awareness of domestic abuse entitled Cut shot for Women's Aid.
In November 2010, Knightley became patron of the Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) Trust, a British charity that funds medical research into the disease spinal muscular atrophy.Celebrities head up the battle to fight SMA at SMA Trust web site
For International Women's Day 2014, Knightley was one of the artist signatories of Amnesty International's letter to UK Prime Minister David Cameron campaigning for women's rights in Afghanistan.contactmusic.com/story/keira-knightley-campaigns-for-women-in-afghanistan_4099982

Filmography

West End appearances

Discography

Notes






