[[Rod Grams]]

CATEGORIES: 1948 births, 2013 deaths, American businesspeople, American Lutherans, American television news anchors, Cancer deaths in Minnesota, Carroll College (Montana) alumni, Businesspeople from Minnesota, Deaths from colorectal cancer, Members of the United States House of Representatives from Minnesota, Minnesota Republicans, People from Princeton, Minnesota, Republican Party United States Senators, United States Senators from Minnesota

Rodney Dwight "Rod" Grams (February 4, 1948 – October 8, 2013) was a politician from Minnesota. He served as a Republican in both the United States House of Representatives and the U.S. Senate.

Early life

Grams was born in Princeton, Minnesota and attended Brown Institute (1966–68), Anoka-Ramsey Community College (1970–72), and Carroll College (1974–75). 
Grams spent 23 years in the field of television and radio broadcasting before launching a career in politics. From 1982–91 he was the senior news anchor at KMSP-TV in Minneapolis/St. Paul. Before that, he worked as a news anchor/producer for KFBB-TV in Great Falls, Montana; WSAU-TV in Wausau, Wisconsin; and WIFR-TV in Rockford, Illinois. Prior to his years in broadcasting, Grams worked at an engineering consulting firm for seven years. In 1985, Grams formed Sun Ridge Builders, a Twin Cities construction and residential development company, serving as its president and CEO. He was involved in architectural design and the use of solar energy in residential homes. 

Early political career

Grams launched his political career by winning the 1992 Republican nomination in Minnesota's 6th congressional district. He defeated Democratic incumbent Gerry Sikorski in the general election. During the campaign, Grams benefited from high name recognition in the district—from years as news anchor at KMSP-TV -- and Sikorski's involvement in the House banking scandal. 

U.S. Senate

After David Durenberger announced he would not seek reelection, Grams surprised many by announcing, just months into beginning his first term in the US House, that he would run for the US Senate. However, Grams faced opposition for the Republican party endorsement from State Senator Gen Olson, Bert McKasy (former chief of staff to David Durenberger), and Doug McFarland. During the party endorsement process, the Grams campaign closely aligned itself with supporters of Allen Quist, who was challenging incumbent Governor Arne Carlson for reelection in the 1994 Gubernatorial race. Weeks before the Republican Party's state convention, McFarland dropped out of the US Senate race after endorsing Allen Quist for Governor and joining his ticket to become Quist's Lieutenant Governor running mate. Later, McFarland threw his support behind McKasy in the US Senate Republican Party endorsement campaign.  
After numerous ballots at the convention in St. Paul, Grams won the state Republican party endorsement against State Senator Gen Olson and Bert McKasy.  Grams moved on to win the Republican primary against Arne Carlson's Lieutenant Governor Joanell Dyrstad, who had been replaced as his running mate with State Senator Joanne Benson. In the general election against Democratic Farm Labor candidate Ann Wynia and Independence Party candidate Dean Barkley, Grams won a close election to become Minnesota's next US Senator. 
Grams ran for re-election in 2000 as the incumbent, losing to Mark Dayton. During the campaign, Grams' wife Christine Gunhus was revealed to have written anonymous disparaging emails about Grams' potential Democratic rival, Mike Ciresi, from her home computer.

Post-Senate career

After his 2000 re-election defeat, Grams went back into private business and in 2004 became the owner of three radio stations in Little Falls, Minnesota.[ref]
Changing Hands - 5/17/2004 - Broadcasting & Cable[/ref]  
Grams attempted a political comeback in the 2006 U.S. Senate campaign. He sought the GOP nomination for his former US Senate seat, facing Mark Kennedy and Gil Gutknecht.  However, after a poor showing early in the endorsement process, Grams dropped his candidacy.  Grams switched his political plans and ran in the 2006 U.S. House election, challenging the incumbent Jim Oberstar in Minnesota's 8th congressional district. Oberstar defeated Grams handily.
Grams remained active in politics and interested in running for public office.  In 2008, Grams shared he considered challenging incumbent Norm Coleman for the Republican U.S. Senate nomination but was too busy in his private life to make a run, stating, "And my wife (Chris) would have killed me if I would have, because of some things that we're doing." However, it became unclear whether Grams would run as a Republican. In an interview, he expressed disappointment over the perceived failings of the Republican Party, going as far as to ponder whether he can call himself a Republican or vote for party candidates anymore.
Grams considered a 2010 run for Governor of Minnesota stating, "I'm so damn unhappy with the Republicans right now ... I'm so unhappy with the candidates that we have I could puke. I wanted to get out there and mix it up."Rod Grams Thinking About Running for Governor|  

Illness and death

On September 4, 2013 it was announced that Grams had been battling colon cancer since 2012 and was receiving hospice care at his home.

Electoral history



Further reading




