[[Oakland International Airport]]

CATEGORIES: Buildings and structures in Oakland, California, Transportation in Oakland, California, Airports in Alameda County, California

For the airport in Oakland County, Michigan, see Oakland County International Airport.

Oakland International Airport  It is one of three international airports in the San Francisco Bay Area. The airport has passenger service to destinations in the United States, as well as Mexico and Europe. Cargo flights fly to destinations in the United States, Canada and Japan. OAK is the closest airport to the San Francisco financial district.
Oakland is a focus city for Southwest Airlines and Allegiant Air. As of July 2013, Southwest has 108 daily departures on peak-travel days of the week. Alaska Airlines combined with sister-carrier Horizon Air has been the second-busiest carrier at OAK through 2013. Beginning January 2014, Delta will overtake Alaska as OAK's No. 2 carrier.Official Airline Guide published schedules for Winter/Spring 2014
The top five airlines by passenger count between February 2012-January 2013 were Southwest Airlines (69.90%), Alaska Airlines (7.22%), JetBlue Airways (4.99%), Allegiant (3.11%), Skywest (2.77%).transtats.gov/airports.
Passengers at the airport peaked in 2007 at 14.6 million and declined to 9.3 million in 2011.
It is formerly the location of Naval Air Station Oakland. (The former Naval Air Station Alameda is closer to the San Francisco Bay Bridge.)

History

Early Years

The city of Oakland looked into the construction of an airport starting in 1925. In 1927 the announcement of the Dole prize for a flight from California to Hawaii provided the incentive to purchase 680 acres in April 1927 for the airport.
Boeing Air Transport (a predecessor of United Airlines) began scheduled flights to Oakland in December 1927. It was joined by Trans World Airlines (TWA) in 1932. In 1929 Boeing opened the Boeing School of Aeronautics on the field, which expanded rapidly in 1939 as part of the Civilian Pilot Training Program. Thousands of pilots and mechanics were trained before the facility was changed into the United Air Lines training center in 1945.
In 1943, the U.S. Armed Forces temporarily took over Oakland Airport and opened Naval Air Station Oakland. It was transformed it into an airlift base for military flights to the Pacific islands, ordering all scheduled service to move to San Francisco International Airport. After the war, airlines slowly returned to Oakland: Western Airlines began flights in 1946, and was followed by American Airlines, TWA, United, Transocean Airlines and Pacific Southwest Airlines (PSA).
The airport's first Jet Age airline terminal (now Terminal 1) designed by John Carl Warnecke & Associates was opened in 1962, part of a $20 million expansion on bay fill that included 10000-ft runway 11/29. The May 1963 OAG showed 15 airline flights arriving Oakland each day, including nine from San Francisco; in June 1963 TWA flew Oakland's first scheduled jet, a Convair 880 to Chicago.
During the Vietnam War, World Airways shuttled thousands of military passengers through Oakland to their bases in Southeast Asia, and an International Arrivals facility was built, allowing the airport to handle international flights for the first time. By the late 1960s World Airways had broken ground on the World Airways Maintenance Center at Oakland International Airport. The Maintenance Hangar could store four Boeing 747s.
After the war Oakland's traffic slumped, but airline deregulation prompted several low-fare carriers to begin flights. This increase prompted the airport to build a $16.3 million second terminal, Lionel J. Wilson Terminal 2, with seven gates for PSA and AirCal service.
FedEx Express opened a cargo base in Oakland in 1988, which is now one of the busiest air freight terminals in the United States. In 1987 an Air France Concorde visited Oakland. In the 1990s Southwest Airlines opened a crew base in Oakland, and expanded its flights to become the airport's dominant passenger carrier. The airport has international arrival facilities, including U.S. Customs and Border Protection officials.  Mexicana Airlines flew between Oakland and cities in Mexico for many years.  In the past Corsairfly flew Orly Airport to OAK to Papeete, Tahiti, Martinair flew to Schiphol Airport and CityBird flew to Brussels Airport in Brussels.

2000s

United Airlines vacated its  Oakland Maintenance Center in May 2003 and transferred work to its base at San Francisco International Airport.
Oakland International Airport began a $300 million expansion and renovation project in 2004, including adding five gates in Terminal 2. The new concourse partially opened in fall 2006, with full opening by spring 2007, and a new baggage claim in Terminal 2 opened in summer 2006. The former Terminal 2 baggage claim has been replaced by a renovated and expanded security screening area. As part of this program, airport roadways, curbsides and parking lots were renovated by the end of 2008.
In 2008 Oakland suffered a series of service cutbacks due to high fuel costs and airline bankruptcies, more than other Bay Area airports. In just a few days Oakland's numerous non-stops to Hawaii were eliminated following the liquidation of ATA Airlines and Aloha Airlines, although Hawaiian Airlines started a daily flight to Honolulu a month later. Skybus Airlines stopped flying to Columbus, OH when it ended operations on April 5. American Airlines and Continental Airlines both dropped Oakland on September 3, United Airlines ended service to Los Angeles on November 2, and TACA ended service to San Salvador on September 1.
A groundbreaking ceremony for a new control tower took place October 15, 2010.  A grant awarded to the Federal Aviation Administration from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA) helped fund the project.  The new, environmentally "green" tower was opened in 2013 and replaced the previous north and south field towers.  The new tower was formally dedicated in a ceremony on November 22, 2013.
The Port of Oakland and Coulomb Technologies has announced that electric vehicle (EV) driver services have arrived at Oakland International Airport (OAK) with the installation of eight ChargePoint Network charging stations for EVs in the Premier Parking Lot.
Oakland International is the first Northern California airport to offer EV charging services as part of the ChargePoint Network, providing drivers EV services including real-time charging station status and reservations.
For more than 30 years, OAK has worked with its stakeholders to develop programs that minimize the effect of aircraft noise, to the extent possible, on surrounding communities, while maintaining a safe and efficient air transportation center. Through regularly scheduled stakeholder meetings, a sophisticated noise-monitoring system, proactive communications with neighboring communities and pilot education, OAK has successfully lessened the impact of airport operations on neighboring communities, in order to improve their quality of life.
For nearly a century Oakland International Airport (OAK) has served the shipping and travel needs of the San Francisco Bay Area. The original airfield was built in 1927 and is still used by air cargo and corporate and general aviation operators. In 1962 a new terminal (Terminal 1), 10,000-foot runway and 10-story air traffic control tower was built to usher in the jet-age. Terminal 2 was opened in 1985 and is now used just by Southwest Airlines.
In 2008 OAK completed its $300 million Terminal Improvement Program, with projects that added a new concourse with five more gates and waiting areas expanded ticketing, security and baggage claim facilities added new utilities and improved terminal access and eased congestion in front of the terminals through a new roadway and curbside system. These projects are one part of the on-going Airport Development Program (ADP).
Even at the completion of these projects, there is already demand driving the need for additional infrastructure improvements. The main planning tool to provide guidance on near-term and long-term Airport land-use is a Master Plan. The airport's 20-year Master Plan was completed in 2006, with input from the OAK Aviation Stakeholder Advisory Committee.
Oakland International Airport, a revenue division of the Port of Oakland, takes a leadership role in promoting a sustainable operating environment—whether that's looking at current day-to-day operations or forecasting future needs and requirements.
The Port of Oakland is an independent department of the city of Oakland and is required to do its part to be a good neighbor, an environmental steward, and a responsible business operator in its efforts to support the city's sustainability goals. Through its efforts, the Port of Oakland contributed to the recent recognition of the city of Oakland as one of the best examples of urban sustainability at the 2005 United Nations World Environment Day conference in San Francisco.
The Port of Oakland has adopted a sustainability policy, also known as the "Three E's," that is based on the values of environmental responsibility, economic vitality and social equity.

2009-present

On September 14, 2009, OAK was the scene where Malaysia-based AirAsia honored its new partners: the Oakland Raiders of the National Football League.  The airline's affiliate, AirAsia X had one of their planes of executives and crew members "touch down" at OAK in acknowledgment of the to-be announced sponsorship.   AirAsia executives have new optimism that service between the U.S. and the airline's main base in Kuala Lumpur, could possibly happen earlier than originally expected.

Allegiant Air inaugurated service at OAK in February 2009, with Bellingham, Washington twice weekly. Service is however, doubled from two to four arrivals and departures each through the summer months, along with added flights during the winter-holiday period.  Later in the year, the airline also added service between OAK and Eugene Airport in Oregon twice weekly. In November 2011, Allegiant announced new services between Mesa, AZ and OAK beginning January 18, 2012; in April 2012 services to destinations in Oregon, Idaho and Montana also began, making Oakland a new focus city for the airline. On March 20, Allegiant announced new Provo flights from OAK with returning flights departing on Friday and Monday.
Adding to Hawaiian Airlines' service to Honolulu, Alaska Airlines added nonstop service to Kona with three flights weekly and Kahului (Maui) daily. Both were unserved prior to Alaska's entrance.
In August 2010, Mexicana Airlines suspended all its flights out of the airport and its other destinations indefinitely until further notice due to financial problems.
Carlsbad, California-based California Pacific Airlines announced in May 2010, that OAK has been included as one of its (proposed) original destinations. Nonstop service with Carlsbad was planned to begin in early 2012 but the airline has postponed commencing operations.  Connections from this northern San Diego County base will include Cabo San Lucas in Baja California, and other resort-locations in Mexico to be announced at a later date.

Spirit Airlines returned to OAK after several years of absence, with flights to and from Las Vegas that started in August 2011.
SeaPort Airlines proposed a new plan for daily flights from Visalia to OAK. SeaPort's fares would be set at $80 per one-way trip to OAK. Also, 9-seat Cessna Caravans and 9-seat Piper Chieftan SeaPort intends to run are newer than the 19-passenger Beech 1900D aircraft by Great Lakes.thebusinessjournal.com/news/transportation/2873-visalia-airport-favors-current-airline-for-contract
Low-cost Mexican airline Volaris started service between OAK and the airline's two main locations: Guadalajara, and Toluca on July 16, 2009.
In 2012, Oakland International Airport celebrated 85th Anniversary, commemorating the first transpacific crossing by air from OAK to Hawaii, on June 29, 1927. The Bird of Paradise, flown by Hegenberger and Maitland.
On June 3, 2012, United Airlines discontinued operations at OAK.
In mid-2012, Arkefly chose OAK as a San Francisco Bay Area Gateway flying twice-weekly to Amsterdam. Arkefly is provided 18 weeks of scheduled service in the summers of 2012 and 2013.
Terminal 1 is currently undergoing a $200 million upgrade. This building will be renovated and seismically retrofitted over the next few years. Future improvements include larger restrooms; replacing concourse carpeting with terrazzo floors; new airline ticketing and check-in areas; food, beverage and retail concession improvements; and improved universal access and overall comfort and convenience enhancements.
In 2013, FedEx opened a $30 million upgrade of its hub facility at OAK, including additions to accommodate the airline's new Boeing 777 fleet.
On September 3, Norwegian Air Shuttle (DY) announced new, year-round flights from OAK to Oslo (OSL) and Stockholm (ARN). The new flights will begin in May 2014 using new state-of-the art Boeing 787 Dreamliner aircraft seating 291 passengers. The flights are the first-ever nonstop services offered from the two Scandinavian capitals to the San Francisco Bay Area.
In 2014, Hawaiian Airlines has announced it will further expand its Oakland gateway to the islands with new nonstop flights to both Lihue Airport on Kaua'i and Kona International Airport on the Big Island.  These new flights will solidify Oakland as Hawaiian's largest Bay Area gateway city (and its second-largest mainland city behind LAX, and its only mainland city with flights to all four main Hawaiian islands.

Facilities and aircraft

Oakland International Airport covers  and has four runways:
A number of general aviation FBOs are at the North Field:
In 2008 the airport had 269,631 aircraft operations, average 740 per day: 46% general aviation (188,064), 42% scheduled commercial, 12% air taxi and 
Terminals, airlines and destinations

There are two terminals at Oakland International Airport:

Top destinations

Charter airlines

Cargo airlines

Transportation

Public

Oakland International is not yet directly connected to the Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART) system by rail, but AirBART shuttle buses and AC Transit's Lines 73 and 805 buses take passengers between the terminal and the Coliseum/Oakland Airport station. AC Transit line 21's route from the Airport to Oakland's Dimond district, has a few in-between stops within the nearby island city of Alameda. The Fruitvale BART station is included as a stop for this line. Since the airport's renovation, AirBART now has a single stop located halfway between terminals 1 and 2 on the third curb. The bus has a layover of 5–10 minutes depending on the passenger load. AC Transit stops at the fourth curb between the terminals.  Unless early, it departs immediately upon the completion of passenger boarding, to fit a set schedule.  AirBART generally comes more often than AC Transit buses after 9:30 pm daily. AirBART and Line 73 run during regular hours from about 5 am to midnight, whereas Line 805 is a night bus that runs from midnight to 5 am.

Road

Oakland International is accessible from Interstate 880 (Nimitz Freeway) which is  away. The airport can be reached by exiting Hegenberger Road or 98th Avenue heading west; both streets converge into Airport Road before looping around in front of the terminals.

Underway: Oakland Airport Connector

The Oakland Airport Connector (OAC) is an automated people mover, currently under construction, that will directly connect BART Coliseum Station to the terminal buildings at Oakland International Airport. Unlike the AirBART connector bus currently operating between the station and the airport terminals, the Oakland Airport Connector will be operated by BART and integrated into the BART fare system.
When built, the Oakland Airport Connector will replace AirBART buses. The connector's automated people movers (APMs) will be electrically powered and operate on a fixed, elevated guideway. The APMs will arrive at the BART Coliseum Station every four-and-one-half minutes and are designed to transport travelers to the airport in about eight minutes with an on-time performance of more than 99 percent.
In early 2010, the project lost $70 million of federal stimulus funding because the Metropolitan Transportation Commission had "equity concerns" related to the planned high fares on the connector.
Despite the setback, federal and state funding for the Oakland Airport Connector became complete in September 2010, and the groundbreaking was held October 20, signaling the start of construction.
The OAC is scheduled to be complete and ready for revenue service in 2014.

Recent publicity

Military aircraft mistake

On September 27, 2007, Oakland airport authorities ordered North American Airlines Flight 1777, carrying 200 U.S. Marines home from duty in Iraq, to park 
The DoT released the report of its investigation on January 30, 2008. The investigation concluded that the airport did not break any laws or regulations in the incident. The investigation found that the contract under which military chartered transport aircraft are serviced at the airport does not require access to the terminal facilities for military passengers. The report stated that airport management was concerned that they could not provide "an adequate level of escort and control of such a large group of military personnel in or around the terminal area". The airport personnel were also concerned over the proper safeguarding and securing of the weapons carried on the military transport. The report further stated that a contributing factor was a lack of communication and coordination between the Department of Defense and the Department of Homeland Security, especially with regard to security screenings of military personnel on the chartered flights. The report recommended that a task force be established with representatives from Homeland, Defense, and Transportation departments and airlines and airports to develop a uniform process for handling military personnel on all military chartered flights at U.S. airports. Commenting on the report, Mica stated, "The shocking thing is that there is no protocol for handling our returning troops, and at Oakland they got a very rude welcome. We just need to get some regular order of the process so we don't have a recurrence of what we saw happen here."

Awards

The LEED Silver Certification Award has environmentally-cautious initiatives for Terminal 2's renovation and expansion were recognized by the U.S. Green Building Council.  During March 2010, for the first time among the country's passenger-terminals, the council awarded OAK's No. 2 for Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) Silver Certification.








