[[Alain de Botton]]

CATEGORIES: 1969 births, Living people, People educated at The Dragon School, People educated at Harrow School, Alumni of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, Alumni of King's College London, English people of Egyptian-Jewish descent, English people of Swiss descent, English writers, English Jews, British Jewish writers, English atheists, Jewish atheists, Swiss atheists, Swiss Jews, Swiss philosophers, Swiss emigrants to the United Kingdom, Swiss people of Egyptian-Jewish descent, 20th-century Sephardi Jews, 21st-century Sephardi Jews, English philosophers, Jewish philosophers, Atheist philosophers, Swiss writers, Fellows of the Royal Society of Literature

Alain de Botton, FRSL (born 20 December 1969) is a Swiss-British writer and television presenter resident in the United Kingdom.
His books and television programmes discuss various contemporary subjects and themes, emphasizing philosophy's relevance to everyday life. At 23, he published Essays in Love (1993), which went on to sell two million copies. Other bestsellers include How Proust Can Change Your Life (1997), Status Anxiety (2004) and The Architecture of Happiness (2006). In August 2008, he was a founding member of a new educational establishment in central London called The School of Life. In May 2009, he was a founding member of a new architectural organization called "Living Architecture".
In October of that same year, de Botton was appointed an Honorary Fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA), in recognition of his services to architecture. In 2011, de Botton was elected as a Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature (FRSL).

Early life and family

He was born in Zurich, the son of Jacqueline (née Burgauer) and Gilbert de Botton, who was born in Alexandria, Egypt and expelled (along with the rest of the Jewish community) under Nasser. Gilbert went to live and work in Switzerland, where he co-founded an investment firm, Global Asset Management; his wealth was estimated by one source to have reached £234 million in 1999., 1999 Sunday Times Rich List now behind a paywall De Botton's Swiss-born mother was Ashkenazi, and his father was from a Sephardic Jewish family from the town of Boton in Castile and León.
De Botton's ancestors include Abraham de Boton."Gilbert de Botton", The Telegraph, obituaries, 30 August 2000. De Botton's paternal grandmother was Yolande Harmer. Alain spent the first twelve years of his life in Switzerland where he was brought up speaking French and German.

Education

He was sent to the Dragon School, a boarding school in Oxford, where English became his primary language. Describing himself as a shy child, he boarded at Harrow School, before going up to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he read History (1988–1991), graduating with a double starred first (MA)The Real World: Alain de Botton, philosopher, writer and TV presenter, The Independent and subsequently completed a Master's degree (MPhil) in Philosophy at King's College London (1991–1992).kcl.ac.aspx He began studying for a PhD in French philosophy at Harvard University,New York, Alain de Botton, Volume 35, New York Magazine Co., 2002, page 90 but gave up this research to write books for the general public.

Writing

De Botton has written in a variety of formats to mixed response. Positive reviews of his books attest that he has made literature, philosophy and art more accessible to a wider audience.
Negative reviews allege that de Botton tends to state the obvious

Essays

De Botton has written books of essays in which his own experiences and ideas are interwoven with those of artists, philosophers and thinkers. These have been called a "philosophy of everyday life."Alain de Botton to deliver the RIBA Trust Annual Lecture 2006, riba.Alain de Botton profile, British Council Arts website; accessed 1 March 2014.

Fiction

In his first novel, Essays in Love (titled On Love in the U.S.), published in 1993, de Botton deals with the process of falling in and out of love. In 2010, Essays in Love was adapted to film by director Julian Kemp for the romantic comedy My Last Five Girlfriends. 

Non-fiction

In 1997 he published his first non-fiction book, How Proust Can Change Your Life, based on the life and works of Marcel Proust."Author of The Art of Travel talks with Robert Birnbaum", identitytheory."Interview with Alain de Botton", writerspace.
This was followed by The Consolations of Philosophy in 2000. The title of the book is a reference to Boethius's Consolation of Philosophy, in which philosophy appears as an allegorical figure to Boethius to console him in the period leading up to his impending execution. In The Consolations of Philosophy, de Botton attempts to demonstrate how the teachings of philosophers such as Epicurus, Montaigne, Nietzsche, Schopenhauer, Seneca, and Socrates can be applied to modern everyday woes. The book has been both praised and criticized for its therapeutic approach to philosophy.
In The Architecture of Happiness"AOL interviews Alain de Botton about The Architecture of Happiness", lifestyle.ca (2006), he discusses the nature of beauty in architecture and how it is related to the well-being and general contentment of the individual and society. He describes how architecture affects people every day, though people rarely pay particular attention to it. A good portion of the book discusses how human personality traits are reflected in architecture. He ends up defending Modernist architecture, and chastising the pseudo-vernacular architecture of housing, especially in the UK. "The best modern architecture," he argues, "doesn't hold a mirror up to nature, though it may borrow a pleasing shape or expressive line from nature's copybook. It gives voice to aspirations and suggests possibilities. The question isn't whether you'd actually like to live in a Le Corbusier home, but whether you'd like to be the kind of person who'd like to live in one." 
In The Pleasures and Sorrows of Work (2009), de Botton produced a survey of ten different jobs, including accountancy, rocket science and biscuit manufacture. The book, a piece of narrative non-fiction, includes two hundred original images and aims to unlock the beauty, interest and occasional horror of the modern world of work.
In response to a question about whether he felt "pulled" to be a writer, de Botton responded: So I think where people tend to end up results from a combination of encouragement, accident, and lucky break, etc. etc. Like many others, my career happened like it did because certain doors opened and certain doors closed. You know, at a certain point I thought it would be great to make film documentaries. Well, in fact, I found that to be incredibly hard and very expensive to do and I didn't really have the courage to keep battling away at that. In another age, I might have been an academic in a university, if the university system had been different. So it's all about trying to find the best fit between your talents and what the world can offer at that point in time. "The Art of Connection – A Conversation with Alain de Botton", Wild River Review, 19 November 2007. 
In August 2009, de Botton replied to a competition advertised among British literary agents by BAA, the airport management company, for the post of "writer-in-residence" at Heathrow Airport. The post involved being seated at a desk in Terminal 5, and writing about the comings and goings of passengers over a week. De Botton was duly appointed to the position. The result was the book, A Week at the Airport, published by Profile Books in September 2009. The book features photographs by the documentary photographer Richard Baker, with whom de Botton also worked on The Pleasures and Sorrows of Work. 
In January 2012, de Botton published Religion for Atheists, a look at some of the more interesting and consoling benefits of religions for those who happen not to believe in them. As de Botton put it: 'Religions are in the end too complex, wise and fascinating to be abandoned simply to those who happen actually to believe in them'. In April 2012, he  published How to Think More about Sex, one in a series of six books on topics of emotional life published by his enterprise, The School of Life. 
In October 2013, he published Art as Therapy, co-written with the Australian-Scottish art historian, John Armstrong. Art as Therapy argues that certain great works of art "offer clues on managing the tensions and confusions of everyday life"."Art as Therapy", cooper.
In February 2014, de Botton publishes his fourteenth book, a title called "The News: A User's Manual", a study of the effects of the news on modern mentality, viewed through the prism of 25 news stories, culled from a variety of sources, which de Botton analyses in detail. The book delves with more rigour into de Botton's analyses of the modern media which appeared in Status Anxiety.

Newspapers, lecturing and television

De Botton used to write articles for several English newspapers, and from 1998 to 2000, wrote a regular column for The Independent on Sunday. He travels extensively to lecture and has his own production company, Seneca Productions, which makes television documentaries based upon his works. In July 2011, he spoke in Edinburgh about "Atheism 2.0", an idea of atheism that also incorporates our human need for connection, ritual and transcendence.com, TED Talks|Alain De Botton: Atheism 2.0 In July 2009, he spoke at Oxford University about the philosophy of failure and success, and questions the assumptions underlying these two judgments.com, TED Talks|Alain de Botton: A kinder, gentler philosophy of success; accessed 26 February 2014.

Other projects

The School of Life

De Botton's project from 2008 is The School of Life – a new cultural enterprise based in central London aiming to offer instruction on how to lead a fulfilled life. In an interview with metkere.com de Botton said: The idea is to challenge traditional universities and reorganize knowledge, directing it towards life, and away from knowledge for its own sake. In a modest way, it's an institution that is trying to give people what universities should I think always give them: a sense of direction and wisdom for their lives with the help of culture.[ref]
 [/ref]

Living Architecture

In May 2009, de Botton launched a new architecture project called "Living Architecture" – which builds a series of innovative houses in the UK using leading contemporary architects. These include Peter Zumthor, MVRDV, JVA, NORD and Michael and Patti Hopkins. The most recent house to be announced is a collaboration between the Turner-prize winning artist Grayson Perry, and the architecture firm FAT. The houses are rented out to the general public. De Botton, the creative director and chairman of Living Architecture, aims to improve the appreciation of good contemporary architecture – a task which is the practical continuation of his theoretical work on architecture in his book The Architecture of Happiness. In October 2009, he was appointed an honorary fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA), in recognition of his services to architecture.

Personal life

De Botton has described his relationship with his father as difficult, stating: "When I sold my first bestseller (and a million dollars was peanuts for my father) he was not impressed and wondered what I was going to do with myself."שלומציון קינן, ראיון עם אלן דה בוטון, "הארץ", 2007 When his father died, his family was left a large trust fund,
Alain's stepmother Janet de Botton is a prominent patron of the arts and competition bridge player.com; accessed 26 February 2014.
De Botton lives in London.

Publications

Filmography

TV series

Radio

In 2011 he presented a series of talks for the BBC Radio 4 series A Point of View.






