[[All-American Girl (1994 TV series)]]

CATEGORIES: 1994 American television series debuts, 1995 American television series endings, 1990s American television series, American Broadcasting Company network shows, American television sitcoms, English-language television programming, Television series by Buena Vista Television

All-American Girl is a 1994 ABC situation comedy starring Margaret Cho and featuring Jodi Long, Clyde Kusatsu, Amy Hill, B.D. Wong, and J.B. Quon as her Korean-American family. 
It is the second American sitcom centered on a person of Asian descent (Korean), namely Cho. (Pat Morita's short-lived 1976 sitcom Mr. T and Tina was the first.)
Notable guest stars during the run of the show include Oprah Winfrey, Jack Black, David Cross, Ming-Na, Vicki Lawrence, Quentin Tarantino, Tsai Chin, Mariska Hargitay, Billy Burke, Robert Clohessy and Garrett Wang.
Diedrich Bader was a one time regular in the last episode of All American Girl, which was a pseudo pilot for a proposed but unrealized version of All American Girl, before achieving fame on The Drew Carey Show. On the DVD commentary for the series, Margaret Cho revealed that most of All American Girl's set furniture was reused by The Drew Carey Show.

Premise and production notes

At the time the show was launched, the premise centered around Cho, as Margaret Kim. The onscreen Margaret was a twenty-three-year-old, modern American young woman who lived with her more traditional Korean family. She had a contentious relationship with her mother (Long).
Themes often revolved around Margaret's desire to live a wild lifestyle and her parents' disapproval. Also in the family was a zany (but wise) grandmother (Hill) and Margaret's over-achieving medical student brother Stuart (Wong).
Margaret worked as the clerk at the beauty counter of a department store, and her friends Gloria (Judy Gold) and Ruthie (Maddie Corman) were often seen interacting with her.  Various episodes found Margaret trying to reconcile her own desires - dating whomever she wanted, finding a career in music or stand-up comedy, and living on her own - with her parents' more traditional expectations of her. 
Midway through the season, the premise changed and Margaret moved into the basement of her parents' house. In an effort to boost the ratings, producers and writers kept tweaking the premise.  
By the final episode, the entire cast, except for Cho and Hill, was fired. With very little explanation, Margaret suddenly was living with three men (Phil, Jimmy, and Spencer). One of the roommates was played by Diedrich Bader, who went on to success in The Drew Carey Show; also, actress Mariska Hargitay appeared as a sassy bartender. Hill made a guest appearance, briefly mentioning the support of Margaret's parents for her decision to move out on her own. In this new scenario, Margaret worked for a music magazine but struggled with typical issues for a young adult, such as paying the phone bill. This episode was shot on film rather than tape and was a pilot for a proposed but unrealized follow-up series, The Young Americans.
During the run of the show Amy Hill's character Grandma became the most popular character on the show and was arguably considered the breakout character of the show. This was even noted in the interview by Margaret Cho and Amy Hill that they gave in the show's 2006 DVD release.

Behind the scenes

Producers initially described the show as being semi-autobiographical and based loosely on Cho's stand-up comedy; however, in the commentary track of the DVD set release, Cho pointedly states, "This is not based on my stand-up" every time the tag "Based on the stand-up of Margaret Cho" appears at the end of an episode. The show's format was continually being changed by producers and the network in an attempt to boost poor ratings, and the result was criticized as a poorly written show. It was canceled in 1995, after one season (19 episodes).
Cho has gone on to comment on the challenges of making the show. The details of these challenges have been outlined in her one-woman show and book,  ''I'm The One That I Want.
When the show was canceled, she spiraled into drug and alcohol addiction, on which she has since based much material in her live stage shows.

Reception

The show gained a mixed reception from critics and a mostly negative reception from the Asian American community.

Ratings

DVD release

The complete series was released on DVD in a four disc set from Shout! Factory/Sony BMG Music Entertainment on January 31, 2006, featuring commentary by Cho, joined twice by Hill, on one episode per disc and a new retrospective featurette featuring new interviews with Cho and Hill.

Episode list






