[[Dymaxion car]]

CATEGORIES: Buckminster Fuller, Concept automobiles, Three-wheeled motor vehicles

The Dymaxion car was a concept car designed by U.S. inventor and architect Buckminster Fuller in 1933..

Noguchi's role

Isamu Noguchi was involved with the development of the Dymaxion car, creating plaster wind tunnel models that were a factor in determining its shape, and during 1934 drove it for an extended road trip through Connecticut with Clare Boothe Luce and Dorothy Hale. (Archive link)

Design

The Dymaxion car was a three-wheeler, steered by a single rear wheel, and could do a U-turn in its own length. However, the rear-wheel steering made the car somewhat counterintuitive to operate, especially in crosswind situations. The body was teardrop-shaped in the manner designed by Aurel Persu, and naturally aerodynamically efficient. The car was twice as long as a conventional automobile, at  through the front wheels. The front axle was also a Ford component, being the rear axle of a contemporary Ford roadster turned upside-down.
The 1929 automobile of German inventor and helicopter pioneer Engelbert Zaschka exhibited features that were important to Buckminster Fuller. Zaschka's three-wheeled car could also easily be folded, disassembled and re-assembled, as could Fuller's Dymaxion House and many geodesic domes.com: Dymaxion - Synergetics Stew January 2009

World's Fair accident

An accident at the 1933 Chicago World's Fair damaged the first prototype badly, killing the driver, and seriously injuring the two passengers, one of whom was William Sempill, aviation pioneer and Japanese spy. The Dymaxion had rolled over, and although the driver was wearing a seatbelt, the prototype's canvas roof had not offered sufficient crash protection. The cause of the accident was not determined, although Buckminster Fuller reported that the accident was due to the actions of another vehicle that had been following the Dymaxion closely.
In his 1988 book The Age of Heretics, author Art Kleiner maintained the real reason Chrysler refused to produce the car was because bankers had threatened to recall their loans, feeling the car would destroy sales for second-hand cars and for vehicles already in the distribution channels.

Influential design

Although the Dymaxion cars were not produced, the design was influential on several subsequent designs., which, like the Dymaxion, is a three-wheeled, ultra light, aerodynamic, fuel-efficient vehicle design.

Current status

There were 3 original cars: car 1 was badly damaged; car 2 survives in the Harrah Collection of the National Automobile Museum in Reno, Nevada; and car 3 changed hands many times but was lost, presumed scrapped, in the 1950s.
Extensive research was carried out during the manufacture of car 4 Car 2 was shipped to Rudgwick in order for the work to be carried out before returning to the National Automobile Museum in Reno, Nevada
The Dymaxion car is the subject of a film by filmmaker and comedian Noel Murphy: The Last Dymaxion: Buckminster Fuller's Dream Restored.
Czech restoration company Ecorra is building a replica for the Lane Motor Museum in Nashville, Tennessee.





Further reading




