[[John Pople]]

CATEGORIES: Alumni of Trinity College, Cambridge, Theoretical chemists, British expatriates in the United States, Carnegie Mellon University faculty, Deaths from liver cancer, English emigrants to the United States, Fellows of the Royal Society, International Academy of Quantum Molecular Science members, Knights Commander of the Order of the British Empire, Nobel laureates in Chemistry, American Nobel laureates, British Nobel laureates, Northwestern University faculty, People educated at Bristol Grammar School, People from Burnham-on-Sea, British physical chemists, Wolf Prize in Chemistry laureates, Recipients of the Copley Medal, 1925 births, 2004 deaths, English Nobel laureates, Alexander von Humboldt Fellows

Sir John Anthony Pople, 

Major scientific contributions

His scientific contributions are in four different areas:

Statistical mechanics of water

His early paper on the statistical mechanics of water, according to Michael J. Frisch, "remained the standard for many years.  This was his thesis topic for his Ph D at Cambridge supervised by John Lennard-Jones.

Nuclear magnetic resonance

In the early days of nuclear magnetic resonance he studied the underlying theory, and in 1959 he coauthored the text book High Resolution Nuclear Magnetic Resonance with W.G. Schneider and H.J. Bernstein.

Semi-empirical theory

He made major contributions to the theory of approximate molecular orbital (MO) calculations, starting with one identical to the one developed by Rudolph Pariser and Robert G. Parr on pi electron systems, and now called the Pariser-Parr-Pople method. Subsequently, he developed the methods of Complete Neglect of Differential Overlap (CNDO) (in 1965) and Intermediate Neglect of Differential Overlap (INDO) for approximate MO calculations on three-dimensional molecules, and other developments in computational chemistry. In 1970 he and David Beveridge coauthored the book Approximate Molecular Orbital Theory describing these methods.

Ab initio electronic structure theory

He pioneered the development of more sophisticated computational methods, called ab initio quantum chemistry methods, that use basis sets of either Slater type orbitals or Gaussian orbitals to model the wave function. While in the early days these calculations were extremely expensive to perform, the advent of high speed microprocessors has made them much more feasible today. He was instrumental in the development of one of the most widely used computational chemistry packages, the Gaussian suite of programs, including coauthorship of the first version, Gaussian 70. His research group developed the quantum chemistry composite methods such as Gaussian-1 (G1) and Gaussian-2 (G2). He was a founder of the Q-Chem computational chemistry program.R. Schleyer and Pople.

Career and honors

After obtaining his Ph D, he was a research fellow at Trinity College, Cambridge and then from 1954 a lecturer in the mathematics faculty at Cambridge. In 1958, he  moved to the National Physical Laboratory, near London as head of the new basics physics division. In 1964 he moved to Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, where he had experienced a sabbatical in 1961 to 1962. In 1993 he moved to Northwestern University in Evanston, Illinois where he was Trustees Professor of Chemistry until his death.
He received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1998. He was made a Knight Commander (KBE) of the Order of the British Empire in 2003. He was a founding member of the International Academy of Quantum Molecular Science.
An IT room and a scholarship are named after him at Bristol Grammar School, as is a supercomputer at the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center.

Family and death

He was married to Joy Bowers from 1952 until her death from cancer in 2002. Pople died of liver cancer in Chicago in 2004. He was survived by his daughter Hilary, and sons Adrian, Mark and Andrew.






