[[National Physical Laboratory (United Kingdom)]]

CATEGORIES: 1900 establishments in the United Kingdom, Alan Turing, Buildings and structures in Richmond upon Thames, Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Laboratories in the United Kingdom, Metrology, Organisations based in Richmond upon Thames, Physics laboratories, Research institutes established in 1900, Research institutes in London, Serco Group, Science and technology in London, Standards organizations, Teddington

The National Physical Laboratory (NPL) is the national measurement standards laboratory for the United Kingdom, based at Bushy Park in Teddington, London, England. It is the largest applied physics organisation in the UK.

Description

NPL is an internationally respected centre of excellence in measurement and materials science. Since 1900, when Bushy House was selected as the site of NPL, it has developed and maintained the primary national measurement standards. Today it provides the scientific resources for the National Measurement System financed by the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills. NPL also offers a range of commercial services, applying scientific skills to industrial measurement problems, and manages the MSF time signal. The NPL cooperates with professional networks such as those of the IET to support scientists and engineers concerned with areas of work in which it has expertise.
NPL is mainly based on the Teddington site but also has a site in Huddersfield for dimensional metrology
Teddington was also home to the UK National Chemical Laboratory but this was closed in 1965 and some of its work was transferred to NPL.

Operation

The laboratory was initially run by the UK government, with members of staff being part of the civil service. Administration of the NPL was contracted out in 1995 under a GOCO model, with Serco winning the bid and all staff transferred to their employ. Under this regime, overhead costs  halved, third party revenues grew by 16% per annum, and the number of peer-reviewed research papers published doubled. Ethosjournal. Retrieved on 2014-04-12. It was decided in 2012 to change the operating model for NPL from 2014 onward to include academic partners and to establish a postgraduate teaching institute on site.

Buildings

NPL was initially sited entirely within Bushy House but grew to fill a large selection of buildings on the Teddington site.
In January 2013 funding for a new £25m Advanced Metrology Laboratory was announced that will be built on the footprint of an existing unused building.

Image:Npl bushy house 2.JPG|Bushy House
Image:Npl building2.JPG|the Darwin building
Image:Npl new building module1.JPG|Part of the new building
File:National Physical Laboratory - geograph.uk - 16240.jpg|NPL's main entrance on Hampton Road
File:PSM V60 D136 Bushy house ground plan.png|Ground floor plan of Bushy House in 1901/1902
File:PSM V60 D136 Bushy house basement plan.png|Basement plan of Bushy House in 1901/1902

Researchers

 File:Robert Watson-Watt.jpg|Robert Watson-Watt
File:Atomic Clock-Louis Essen.jpg|Louis Essen (right)

Researchers who have worked at NPL include Donald Davies, who was one of two independent inventors of packet switching in the early 1960s; D. W. Dye who did important work in developing the technology of quartz clocks; Louis Essen, who invented a more accurate atomic clock than those first built in America. Others who have spent time at NPL include Harry Huskey, a computer pioneer; Alan Turing, one of the fathers of modern digital computing who was largely responsible for the early ACE computer design; Robert Watson-Watt, generally considered the inventor of radar, Oswald Kubaschewski, the father of computational materials thermodynamics and the numerical analyst James Wilkinson. H.J. Gough one of the pioneers of research into metal fatigue worked at NPL for 19 years from 1914-38. The inventor Sir Barnes Wallis did early development work there on the "Bouncing Bomb" used in the "Dam Busters" wartime raids.
Dr Clifford Hodge also worked there and was engaged in research on semiconductors

Directors of NPL

File:EVAppleton. V. Appleton
File:Wl-bragg. L. Bragg
File:Charles G. Darwin, Bain News Service photo portrait. G. Darwin
File:Peter Clapham NPL crop.jpg|Peter Clapham






