[[Changchun]]

CATEGORIES: Changchun, Cities in Jilin, Provincial capitals in China

Changchun is the capital and largest city of Jilin province, located in the northeast of the People's Republic of China, in the center of the Songliao Plain. Changchun is an important industrial base with a particular focus on the automotive sector. Apart from this industrial aspect, Changchun is also one of four "National Garden Cities" awarded by the Ministry of Construction of P.R. China in 2001 due to its high urban greening rate.

History

Early history

Changchun was initially established on Imperial Decree as a small Trading post and frontier village during the reign of the Jiajing Emperor. Trading activities mainly involved furs and other natural products during this period. In 1800, Emperor Jiaqing of the Qing dynasty selected a small village on the east bank of the Yitong River and named it "Changchun Ting".新京特別市公署『新京市政概要』12-13頁、新京商工公会刊『新京の概況 建国十周年記念發刊』1-7頁、『満洲年鑑』昭和20年（康徳12年）版 389-390頁、他を参照。
At the end of 18th century peasants from overpopulated provinces such as Shandong and Hebei began to settle in the region. In 1889, the village was promoted into a city known as "Changchun Fu".

Railway era

In May 1898, Changchun got its first railway station, located in Kuancheng, part of the railway from Harbin to Lüshun (the southern branch of the Chinese Eastern Railway), constructed by the Russian Empire.
After Russia's loss of the southernmost section of this branch as a result of the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-1905, the Kuancheng station (Kuanchengtze, in contemporary spelling) became the last Russian station on this branch. The next station just a short distance to the south—the new "Japanese" Changchun station—became the first station of the South Manchuria Railway, which now owned all the tracks running farther south, to Lüshun, which they re-gauged to the standard gauge (after a short period of using the narrow Japanese  gauge during the war).[ref]
Luis Jackson, Industrial Commissioner of the Erie Railroad. "Rambles in Japan and China". In Railway and Locomotive Engineering, vol. 26 (March 1913), pp. 91-92[/ref]
A special Russo-Japanese agreement of 1907 provided that Russian gauge tracks would continue from the "Russian" Kuancheng Station to the "Japanese" Changchun Station, and vice versa, tracks on the "gauge adapted by the South Manchuria Railway" (i.e. the standard gauge) would continue from Changchun Station to Kuancheng Station... concerning the junction of the Japanese and Russian Railways in Manchuria" - June 13, 1907. 
[/ref]
An epidemic of pneumonic plague occurred in surrounding Manchuria from 1910 to 1911.oxfordjournals.pdf 

Changchun city planning and development from 1906-1931

The Treaty of Portsmouth formally ended the Russo-Japanese War of 1904–05 and saw the transfer and assignment to Japan in 1906 the railway between Changchun and Port Arthur, and all the branches.
Having realized at length the vital importance of the geographical location of Changchun as the conjuncture of Japan, China and Russia, a mission of planners and engineers were dispatched to Changchun by Japanese Government to investigate on the spot the site for a new railway station.
Japan, without the consent of Chinese Government, did a secret purchase and grab of land from local farmers at considerable high price. Consequently, Changchun Railway Station was constructed and a leasehold of the South Manchuria Railway Affiliated Areas(SMRAA) was developed near and far. In order to turn Changchun into a stronghold for pillaging agricultural and mineral resources of Manchuria, Japan started to blueprint the master plan of Changchun and invested heavily on the urban construction of the city.
As the prelude and preparation of invasion and long-lasting occupation of China, Japan initiated at the beginning of 1907 the planning programme of the SMRAA which embodied distinctive colonial characteristics. The guiding ideology of the overall design was to build a high standard colonial city with sophisticated facilities, multiple functions and large scale.
The comprehensive plan was to meet the needs of (a) comfort demand of Japanese employees at Manchurian Railways; (b) assurances of Changchun to be a base for Japanese control of the whole Northeast of China; and (c) effective counterweight of Russia in this part of China. Accordingly, nearly 7 million Yen on average was allocated on a year-to-year basis for urban planning and construction during the period of 1907-31.Akira Koshizawa, Manchukuo Capital Planning (Jiangsu: Social Sciences Academic Press,2011), 26-97
Railway nexus status was thickly underlined in the planning and construction, the main design concepts of which read as follows: under conventional grid pattern terms, two geoplagiotropic boulevards were newly carved eastward and westward from the grand square of the new railway station. The two helped forming two intersections with the gridded prototypes, which led to two circles of South and West. The two sub-civic centres served as axis on which eight radial roads were blazed that took the shape of a sectoral structure.
This kind of radial circles and the design concept of urban roads were at that time quite advanced and scientific. It activated to great extend the serious urban landscapes as well as a clearly identification of the traditional gridded pattern.
With the new Changchun railway station as its centre, the urban plan divided the SMRAA into such rectangles as residential quarters of 15%, commerce of 33%, grain depot of 19%, factories of 12%, public entertainment of 9% and administrative organs(including Japanese garrison) of 12%. Each block provided the railway station with supporting and systematic services in the light of its own functions.
In the meantime, a comprehensive system of judiciary and military police was established which was totally independent of China. This accounted for the widespread domain of military facilities within the urban construction area of 3. 967k㎡，such as railway garrison, gendarmerie, police department and its 18 local police stations.
Perceiving Changchun as a tabula rasa upon which to erect new and sweeping conceptions of the built environment, Japanese used the city as a practical laboratory to create two distinct and idealized urban milieus, each appropriate to a particular era. From 1906 to 1931 Changchun served as a key railway town through which the Japanese orchestrated informal empire; between 1932 and 1945 the city became home to a grandiose, new Asian capital. Yet while the facades the town and later the capital—as well as the attitudes of the state they upheld—contrasted markedly, the shifting styles of planning and architecture consistently attempted to represent Japanese rule as progressive, beneficent, and modern.
Behind the development of Changchun, in addition to the railway trade driven, it suggested an important period of the Northeast modern architectural culture reflecting the urban design endeavours and revealing Japanese ambition of invading and occupying China. Japanese architecture and culture had been widely applied to Manchukuo to highlight the special status of the Japanese puppet. Once again, the urban planning will and should stem from a culture, be it aggressive or creative. Changchun's planning and construction process can serve as a good example.
Changchun expanded rapidly as the junction between of the Japanese-owned South Manchurian Railway and the Russian-owned Chinese Eastern Railway which continued to have different rail gauges, as well as permit licences until 1935. Changchun had railway repair shops, and branch lines originating in Changchun extended into Korea and Inner Mongolia.

Manchukuo and World War II

On March 10 1932 the capital of Manchukuo, a Japan-controlled puppet state in Manchuria, was established in Changchun.大同元年4月1日国務院佈告第1号「満洲国国都ヲ長春ニ奠ム」（大同元年3月10日） The city was then renamed Hsinking () as well as the Headquarters of the Japanese Kwantung Army.

=Construction of Hsinking=

Hsinking was the only Direct-controlled municipality (特别市) in Manchukuo after Harbin was incorporated into the jurisdiction of Binjiang Province., which was 5 times more than Japan's major cities.康徳9年7月15日国務院佈告第13号・康徳9年7月15日祭祀府佈告第1号による。
In accordance with the Metropolitan Plan of Great Hsinking, the area of publicly shared land (including the Imperial Palace, government offices, roads, parks and athletic grounds) in Hsinking was . As Hsinking's city orientation was the administrative center and military commanding center, land for military use exceeded the originally planned figure of 9 percent, while only light manufacturing including packing industry, cigarette industry and paper-making had been developed during this period. Japanese force also controlled Hsinking's police system, instead of Manchukuo government.首都警察廳正式成立ノ件（大同元年10月18日民政部訓令第286号） Major officers of Hsinking police were all ethnic Japanese.後に「首都警察廳官制中改正ノ件」（康徳4年9月30日勅令第282号）により、新京特別市のみを管轄とした。
The population of Hsinking also experienced rapid growth after being established as the capital of Manchukuo. According to the census in 1934 taken by the police agency, the city's municipal area had 141,712 inhabitants. with 153,614 Japanese settlers. This population amount made Hsinking the third largest metropolitan city in Manchukuo only after Mukden(now Shenyang) and Kharubin(now Harbin), as the metropolitan mainly focused on military and politics function.『満洲年鑑』等では「新京市政公署」の記述も見られる。

=Japanese chemical warfare agents=

In 1936, the Japanese established Unit 100 to develop plague biological weapons, although the declared purpose of Unit 100 was to conduct research about diseases originating from animals. During the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937–1945) and World War II the headquarters of Unit 100 ("Wakamatsu Unit") was located in downtown Hsinking, under command of veterinarian Yujiro Wakamatsu. Factories of Death: Japanese Biological Warfare, 1932-45 , and the American Cover-Up. London: Routledge, 1994. This facility was involved in research of animal vaccines to protect Japanese resources, and, especially, biological-warfare. Diseases were tested for use against Soviet and Chinese horses and other livestock. In addition to these tests, Unit 100 ran a bacteria factory to produce the pathogens needed by other units. Biological sabotage testing was also handled at this facility: everything from poisons to chemical crop destruction.

Siege of Changchun

Severely damaged during World War II, the city was taken by the Soviet Red Army in 1945. The Russians maintained a presence in the city during the Chinese civil war until 1946.
Kuomintang forces occupied the city in 1946, but were unable to hold the countryside against communist forces. The city fell to the communists in 1948 after the 5 month Siege of Changchun by the People's Liberation Army. The siege caused famine with a civilian death toll of  between 100,000 to 300,000. As of 2009 the history of the siege is still subject to official censorship in the PRC.

People's Republic

Renamed Changchun by the People's Republic of China government, it became the capital of Jilin in 1954. The Changchun Film Studio is also one of the remaining film studios of the era.  Changchun Film Festival has become a unique gala for film industries since 1992.
From the 1950s, Changchun was designated to become a center for China's automotive industry. Construction of the First Automobile Works (FAW) began in 1953FAW Group Steps up Global Expansion FAW Official Site, Mar 27, 2007 and production of the Jiefang CA-10 truck, based on the Soviet ZIS-150 started in 1956. In 1958, FAW introduced the famous Hongqi (Red Flag) limousines This series of cars are billed as "the official car for minister-level officials".
Changchun hosted the 2007 Winter Asian Games.

Geography

Changchun lies in the middle portion of the Northeast China Plain. Its municipality area is located at latitude 43° 05′−45° 15′ N and longitude 124° 18′−127° 02' E. The total area of Changchun municipality is  Changchun prefecture is dotted with 222 rivers and lakes. Yitong River, a small tributary of Songhua River runs through the city proper.

Climate

Changchun has a four-season, monsoon-influenced, humid continental climate (Köppen Dwa). Winters are long (lasting from November to March), cold, and windy, but dry, due to the influence of the Siberian anticyclone, with a January mean temperature of .长春城市介绍

Administrative divisions

The sub-provincial city of Changchun has direct jurisdiction over 6 districts, 4 development areas, 3 county-level cities and 1 County:

Demographics

According to the Sixth China Census, the total population of the City of Changchun reached 7.677 million in 2010. The statistics in 2011 estimated the total population to be 7.59 million. The birth rate was 6.08 percent and the death rate was 5.51 percent. The urban area had a population of 3.53 million people.
As in most of Northeastern China the ethnic makeup of Changchun is predominantly Han nationality (96.57 percent), with several other minority nationalities.
In 2010 the sex ratio of the city population was 102.10 males to 100 females.

Economy

Changchun achieved a GDP of RMB332.9 billion in 2010, representing a rise of 15.3 percent year on year. Primary industry output increased by 3.3 percent to RMB25.27 billion. Secondary industry output experienced an increase of 19.0 percent, reaching RMB171.99 billion, while the tertiary industry output increased 12.6 percent to RMB135.64 billion.

The city's leading industries are production of automobiles, agricultural product processing, biopharmaceuticals, photo electronics, construction materials, and the energy industry. Changchun is the largest automobile manufacturing base in China, producing 9 percent of the country's automobiles in 2009.
Changchun is increasingly faced with competition from nearby cities, seeing its dominance of the northeast as a regional industrial powerhouse diminish as other nearby cities continue to narrow the gap.
Foreign direct investment in the city was US$3.68 billion in 2012, up 19.6% year on year. However, investors still need to be convinced. In 2004 Coca-Cola set up a bottling plant in the city's ETDZ in 2004 with an investment of US$20 million.
Changchun is an important transportation and communication hub of Northeast China—it is situated as the Northeast Asia's geometric center. South Liaodong peninsula coastline, north to Russia and Eastern Europe, east to North Korea, South Korea, Russia, and west to Mongolia.
Changchun's main industry is the manufacturing of transportation facilities and machinery. It produces 50 percent of passenger trains (see Changchun Railway Vehicles), and 10 percent of tractors made in China.
Changchun is the largest automobile research and development center in China. The first Chinese truck and car was made in Changchun. FAW (First Automotive Works) Group is based in Changchun. The automaker's factories and associated housing and services occupies a substantial portion of the city's southwest end. Specific brands produced in Changchun includes the Red Flag luxury brand, as well as joint ventures with Audi, Volkswagen, and Toyota. In 2012, FAW sold 2.65 million units of auto. The sales revenue of FAW amounted to RMB 408.46 billion, reprensenting a rise of 10.8% on year.
The GDP per capita of Changchun was ¥58,691 in 2012.
Changchun hosts the yearly Changchun International Automobile Fair, Changchun Film Festival, Changchun Agricultural Fair, Education Exhibition and the Sculpture Exhibition.
Other large companies in Changchun are Yatai Group, a major conglomerate involved in wide range of industries and Jilin Grain Group, a major processor of grains.The China Perspective | Changchun Economic News and Data

Development zones

=Changchun High Technology Development Zone=

The zone is one of the first 27 state-level advanced technology development zones and is situated in the southern part of the city, covering a total area of  focusing on developing five main industries, namely bio-engineering, automobile engineering, new material fabrication, photo-electricity, and information technology.

=Changchun Economic and Technological Development Zone=

Established in April 1993, the zone enjoys all the preferential policies stipulated for economic and technological development zones of coastal open cities. The total area of CETDZ is 112.72 sqkm, of which 30 sqkm has been set aside for development and utilization.asia | Changchun Economic and Technology Development Zone
It is located  from the Changchun international airport. The zone is devoted to developing five leading industries: namely automotive parts and components, photoelectric information, bio-pharmaceutical, fine processing of foods, and new building materials. In particular, high-tech and high value added projects account for over 80 percent of total output. In 2006 the zone's total fixed assets investment rose to RMB38.4 billion. Among the total of 1656 enterprises registered are 179 that are foreign-funded. The zone also witnessed a total industrial output of RMB 277 billion in 2007.

=Changchun Automotive Economic Trade and Development Zone=

Founded in 1993, the Changchun Automotive Trade Center was re-established as the Changchun Automotive Economic Trade and Development Zone in 1996. The development zone is situated in the southwest of the city and is adjacent to the China First Automobile Works Group Corporation and the Changchun Film ThemeCity. It covers a total area of approximately 300,000 square meters. Within the development zone lies an exhibition center and five specially demarcated industrial centers. The Changchun Automobile Wholesale Center began operations in 1994 and is the largest auto-vehicle and spare parts wholesale center in China. The other centers include a resale center for used auto-vehicles, a specialized center for industrial/commercial vehicles, and a tire wholesale center.

Culture

Dialect

Changchun dialect is phonologically close to the Northeastern Mandarin language, but the dialect itself carries with it strong cultural and regional connotations.

Cuisine

Ginseng is considered one of the treasures of Northeast China. In the dish Ginseng Chicken, ginseng is placed inside a less-than-one-year-old chicken. Another local favorite is chicken cooked with Maotai wine, which adds the famous Chinese liquor Maotai to flavor the dish. Many of Changchun's local dishes are a fusion of Korean and Chinese recipes since Changchun has a big Korean minority population.
In Changchun, deer tail is considered a fine delicacy and an aphrodisiac. Many a wedding night involves the consumption of these once fluffy tails. In order to remove their fur, they are soaked in lukewarm water. Locals then stewed the tails for hours in a pot with many seasonings, including Chinese cinnamon.
The Songhua River is abundant in White Fish, which is quite tender and has mild taste. The fish is either steamed with soup or "dry steamed" without soup. 'Sweetened red bean paste covered with snow' is a popular dessert. It gains its name as local people throw some white sugar on it before eating.

Infrastructure

Changchun is a very compact city, planned by the Japanese with a layout of open avenues and public squares. The city is developing its city layout in a long-term bid to alleviate pressure on limited land, aid economic development and absorb a rising population. According to a draft plan up until 2020, the downtown area will expand southwards to form a new city center around Changchun World Sculpture Park, Weixing Square and their outskirts, and the new development zone.

Railways

Changchun has three passenger rail stations,  most trains only stop at the central Changchun Railway Station (
Despite once having the most complex tram system in Northern China, there is now only one remaining route open, route 54 (see Changchun Tram). However, Changchun is notable for having China's first urban light rail system, opened in 2002, which was developed from the existing tramway system. There is currently one line encompassing  of track.

Road network

Changchun is linked to the national highway network through the Changchun–Harbin Expressway, the Changchun–Jilin–Huichun Expressway and the busiest section in the province, the Changchun–Jilin North Highway. This section connects the two biggest cities in Jilin and is the trunk line for the social and economic communication of the two cities.
Changchun is served by a comprehensive bus system—most buses (and the tram) charge 1 Yuan (元) per ride. Private automobiles are becoming very common on the city's congested streets. Bicycles are relatively rare compared to other northeastern Chinese cities, but mopeds, as well as pedal and even animal-drawn carts are relatively common.

Air

Changchun Longjia International Airport () opened in 2005 and serves as the main civilian airport for both Changchun and Jilin. By Taxi, it takes about 45 minutes to reach downtown from the airport. A new high speed train (CRH), which started service to the airport in 2011 takes about 10 minutes to reach the downtown train station. Domestic flights are available to 26 cities including Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou, Chongqing, Chengdu and Shenzhen. Currently international and regional flights are available to Hong Kong, Taipei, Seoul, Tokyo, Osaka and Nagoya.

Military

Changchun is headquarters of the 16th Group Army of the People's Liberation Army, one of the three group armies that comprise the Shenyang Military Region responsible for defending China's northeastern borders with Russia and North Korea.

Universities and colleges

Changchun has 27 regular institutions of full-time tertiary education with a total enrollment of approximate 160,000 students. Jilin University and Northeast Normal University are two key universities in China.

Sports

As a major Chinese city, Changchun is home to many professional sports teams:

Film



Notes and references

Resources




