[[Same-sex marriage in the Netherlands]]

CATEGORIES: Same-sex marriage in the Netherlands, Dutch society

Same-sex marriage (Dutch: Huwelijk tussen personen van gelijk geslacht The Netherlands was the first country in the world to legalize same-sex marriage.

History

Legislative action

As early as the mid-1980s, a group of gay rights activists, headed by Henk Krol – the editor-in-chief of the Gay Krant – asked the government to allow same sex couples to marry. Parliament decided in 1995 to create a special commission, which was to investigate the possibility of same-sex marriages. At that moment, the Christian Democrats (Christian Democratic Appeal) were not part of the ruling coalition for the first time since the introduction of full democracy. The special commission finished its work in 1997 and concluded that civil marriage should be extended to include same-sex couples. After the election of 1998, the government promised to tackle the issue. In September 2000 the final legislation draft was debated in the Dutch Parliament.
The marriage bill passed the House of Representatives by 109 votes to 33. Only the Christian parties, which held 26 of the 75 seats at the time, voted against the bill. Although the Christian Democratic Appeal would form the next government, they did not indicate any intention to repeal the law.
The main article in the Act changed article 1:30 in the marriage law to read as follows:
The law came into effect on 1 April 2001, and on that day four same-sex couples were married by the Mayor of Amsterdam, Job Cohen, who became a registrar specifically to officiate at the weddings. A few months earlier, Mayor Cohen had been junior Minister of Justice of the Netherlands and was responsible for putting the new marriage and adoption laws through parliament.

Requirements and rights

Dutch law requires either partner must have Dutch nationality or to reside in the Netherlands. The marriageable age in the Netherlands is 18, or below 18 with parental consent. The law is only valid in the European territory of the Netherlands and on the Caribbean Islands of Bonaire, St. Eustatius and Saba, but does not apply to the other constituent countries of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
The single legal difference between same-sex marriages and heterosexual marriages is parentage by both partners is not automatic. The legal mother of a child is its biological mother (article 1:198 of the civil law) and the father is (in principle) the man she is married to when the child is born. Moreover, the father must be a man (article 1:199). The other partner may thus become a legal mother only through adoption. Only in the case when a biological father does not become a parent (e.g. in case of  artificial insemination by lesbian couples), both female spouses obtain parental authority automatically (article 1:253sa).

Religious denominations

The Dutch Remonstrants were the world's first Christian denomination to perform same-sex unions and marriages in 1986.Jan Andries de Boer: Same-sex marriage and the church
