[[Bend It Like Beckham]]

CATEGORIES: 2002 films, 2000s comedy-drama films, 2000s romantic comedy films, 2002 in women's football, English-language films, Punjabi-language films, Hindi-language films, German-language films, American films, American romantic comedy films, American comedy-drama films, American coming-of-age films, British films, British Indian films, British comedy-drama films, British romantic comedy films, British teen films, British coming-of-age films, German films, German romantic comedy films, Sports comedy films, Association football films, Female buddy films, Films about women's sports, Films about women in the Indian diaspora, Films about immigration, Films set in London, Films directed by Gurinder Chadha, Independent films, Santa Clara Broncos women's soccer, Fox Searchlight Pictures films, David Beckham

Bend It Like Beckham is a 2002 British-German comedy-drama film starring Parminder Nagra, Keira Knightley, Jonathan Rhys-Meyers, Anupam Kher, Shaznay Lewis, and Archie Panjabi, first released in the United Kingdom. The film was directed by Gurinder Chadha. Its title refers to the football player David Beckham and his skill at scoring from free kicks by "bending" the ball past a wall of defenders.
The movie is about the 18-year-old daughter of Punjabi Sikhs in London. She is infatuated with football, but her parents have forbidden her to play because she is a girl. She joins a local women's team, which makes its way to the top of the league. Eventually, both young women win scholarships to Santa Clara University in California.

Plot

Jesminder "Jess" Bhamra is the 18-year-old daughter of Punjabi Sikh Indians from Hounslow, west London. Jess is infatuated with football, but her parents have forbidden her to play because she is a girl. She plays in the park sometimes with her good friend Tony, a closeted homosexual, and his buddies, where her skills draw the attention of Juliette "Jules" Paxton, who plays for a local women's team, the Hounslow Harriers. Their coach, Joe, is impressed with her play and puts her on the team. Jess pretends to have a job to play with the team, and Jules and Jess become fast friends, despite the fact that both are attracted to Joe. Jess enlists the aid of her sister to cover for her when the team travels to Germany for a big match, but everything unravels when Jules spies Joe kissing Jess, and then her parents find out and forbid her to continue. Meanwhile Jules' mother wrongly fears her daughter is a lesbian, thinking the girls' spat is a lovers' quarrel, and Jess' parents are confronted by a similar accusation before Jess reveals the truth about her attraction to Joe.
While the elder Bhamras are distracted by the elaborate preparations for the upcoming wedding of their older daughter, Pinky, Jess continues to play, and the Harriers make their way towards the top of the league. Joe encourages Jess to come clean with her parents, and eventually approaches Mr. Bhamra to explain she has a chance to win a prestigious scholarship, but he refuses to believe it. Jess and Jules must sort their differences, make peace with their parents, overcome cultural prejudice, win their way to prestigious scholarships to Santa Clara University in California, and most importantly, dance at a Sikh wedding.

Cast

Reception

Critical reception

The film surprised the critics, and it was met with mostly positive reviews. Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times noted that the film "was really full of easy humor, an impeccable sense of milieu that is the result of knowing the culture intimately enough to poke fun at it while understanding its underlying integrity." Times of India review. 10 July 2002
Planet Bollywood gave the film a 9 out of 10 and stated that the "screenplay not only explores the development of Jesse as a person, but also the changing values and culture of NRI teens: Jesse's urge to break the social norm of the Indian homemaker, her sister's (Archie Punjabi) sexually-active relationship, and the gay Indian played by Ameet Chana."Bend It Like Beckham. Planet Bollywood review. (27 June 2003). Retrieved on 3 November 2011. The Hindu argues, "if ever there is a film that is positive, realistic and yet delightful, then it has to be Dream Production's latest venture directed by Gurinder Chadha ... Light hearted, without taking away the considerable substance in terms of values, attitudes and the love for sport, the film just goes to prove that there are ways to be convincing and honest."Bend It Like Beckham. The Hindu. 19 July 2002 The BBC gave it 4 out of 5 stars and argued that "Mr. Beckham ought to be proud to have his name on such a great film."Jamie Russell Bend it Like Beckham (2002). Bbc.co. Retrieved on 3 November 2011.
Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gives Bend It Like Beckham a rating of 85%, based upon 147 reviews (125 fresh and 22 rotten).
The film's plot originally resolved with the two female leads ending up together romantically, but director Gurinder Chadha rewrote the script for fear of upsetting conservative Indians. The film retained its message challenging homophobia and the role of women in society, but the two female leads fight over their male coach instead.
The British film went on to set the record in India for most number of tickets sold during a single weekend for a foreign movie. It also went on to become the highest-grossing Indian-themed film ever in the US with $32 million in box office revenue. AfterEllen. Retrieved on 3 November 2011.

Awards and nominations

Soundtrack

The UK release of the soundtrack features bhangra music, songs by Spice Girls' Victoria Beckham (whose song "IOU" can be heard during a scene involving Jules' mother but was not included on the original soundtrack) and Melanie C (Melanie C's song "I Turn To You" was used in the film but is not included in the soundtrack) and the band Texas. It also features "Baddest Ruffest" by Backyard Dog, the aria Nessun Dorma, from Puccini's Turandot, and excerpts from the dance band Basement Jaxx. The US release rearranges the tracks, and excludes some material. The single "Dream the dream", which is recorded by Shaznay Lewis (portrays Mel in the film) appears in the movie, but didn't make it the final cut on the soundtrack.

North Korean broadcast

To mark the tenth anniversary of North Korea's relations with the United Kingdom, an edited version of Bend It Like Beckham was broadcast on North Korean state television on 26 December 2010. The British Ambassador to South Korea, Martin Uden, posted on Twitter that it was the "1st ever Western-made film to air on TV" in North Korea.








