[[Gina Gershon]]

CATEGORIES: 1962 births, Actresses from Los Angeles, California, American female singers, American film actresses, American stage actresses, American television actresses, American voice actresses, American women writers, Circle in the Square Theatre School alumni, Emerson College alumni, Jewish American actresses, Living people, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses

Gina L. Gershon (born June 10, 1962) is an American film, television and stage actress, singer and author, known for her roles in the films Cocktail (1988), Showgirls (1995), Bound (1996), Best of the Best 3: No Turning Back (1996), Face/Off (1997), The Insider (1999), Demonlover (2002), Category 7: The End of the World (2005), P.S. I Love You (2007), Five Minarets in New York (2010), Killer Joe (2011) and House of Versace (2013). She has also had supporting roles in FX's Rescue Me and HBO's How to Make It in America.

Early life

Gershon was born in Los Angeles, the daughter of Mickey (née Koppel), an interior decorator, and Stan Gershon, who worked in the import/export business and sales.

Career

Gershon attended the Circle in the Square Professional Theater School in New York, working first with David Mamet and later with Harold Guskin and Sandra Seacat, whom she has described in interviews as "a huge influence."Paul Chutkow: "I Dream of Gina," Cigar Aficionado, Sept/Oct 1998   Kay: "Gina Gershon;" The Lab Magazine; August 12, 2012 Gershon is one of the founding members of the New York-based theater group Naked Angels.NetGlimse Gina Gershon biography
She has appeared on Broadway three times, as Sally Bowles in the revival of Cabaret, in the revival of the sex farce Boeing-Boeing, and is currently playing Rosie Alvarez in the Broadway revival of Bye Bye Birdie at the Roundabout Theatre Company.
Her first acting venues were stage appearances in Camille and The Substance of Fire. She had a cameo role in The Cars 1984 video "Hello Again" alongside Andy Warhol. Her break came with a bit part in 1986's Pretty in Pink which led to more substantial roles in Sweet Revenge with Nancy Allen and Cocktail, with Tom Cruise and Elisabeth Shue. Gershon also worked in television, with a recurring role on Melrose Place playing a Heidi Fleiss-esque Hollywood madame. She won critical acclaim for her portrayal of Nancy Sinatra in the made-for-TV biopic Sinatra. In 1996, she played Corky, an ex-con who gets mixed up in an affair with Violet (played by Jennifer Tilly), in the mobster flick Bound. The following year, she costarred with John Travolta and Nicolas Cage in Face/Off.
Gershon is regarded as a gay icon Retrieved on 04-19-07 because of her roles in movies such as Bound (in which she played a butch lesbian), Prey for Rock & Roll, and Showgirls (in which she played a bisexual, and which is regarded as a camp classic). She was ranked #23 on the Maxim Hot 100 Women of 2004.
Gershon played Jew's harp on "I Can't Decide", a song on the Scissor Sisters 2006 release Ta-Dah. She also played Jew's harp on the song "I Do It For Your Love", Paul Simon's collaboration with Herbie Hancock on his album Possibilities, in a duo with bassist Christian McBride on the song "Chitlins and Gefiltefish", on McBride's 2011 album Conversations with Christian, and on "Maria" from her album In Search of Cleo. On television, she has recurring roles on HBO's Curb Your Enthusiasm (as a Hasidic dry cleaner), Rescue Me, and the U.S. dramedy series Ugly Betty (as Italian cosmetics mogul Fabia, the rival of Wilhelmina Slater). She also has served as the voiceover for Major League Baseball's "I Live For This" promotional campaign.
Gershon also appears in Lenny Kravitz's music video entitled "Again". She and her brother Dann are the authors of the children's book Camp Creepy Time. On September 10, 2008, Gershon appeared in a video on funnyordie.com, parodying former Republican vice presidential nominee Sarah Palin, titled "Gina Gershon Strips Down Sarah Palin"
In 2011, she appeared as a recurring character in the HBO series How to Make It in America.hbo.html#/how-to-make-it-in-america/cast-and-crew/nancy-frankenburg/bio/gina-gershon.com, retrieved 2013-06-18
Gershon's first book written for an adult audience, In Search of Cleo: How I Found My Pussy and Lost My Mind, is the true story of the hunt for her runaway cat

Personal life

A 2008 Vanity Fair article linked her romantically with former President Bill Clinton. Vanity Fair links Bill Clinton to actress Gina Gershon  Speaking on the U.S. television show Live with Regis and Kelly on June 9, she said, "It is such a crazy, outrageous lie... I met him three times at events. rumors disturbed me on so many levels."

Filmography

Music






