[[Paul M. Fleiss]]

CATEGORIES: 1933 births, Living people, American Jews, American money launderers, American pediatricians, Breastfeeding activists, Genital integrity activists, Physicians from California, Place of birth missing (living people), University of California, Irvine alumni, University of California, Los Angeles alumni, Wayne State University alumni

Paul Murray Fleiss, M.D. (born September 8, 1933) is an American pediatrician and author known for his unconventional medical views. Fleiss was a popular and sought-after pediatrician in the Los Angeles area, both among poor and middle-class patients living near his Los Feliz office and among Southern California celebrities. Fleiss is a breastfeeding and anti-circumcision advocate, recommends but does not insist upon childhood vaccination, and has stated that he could be "convinced either way" as to whether HIV causes AIDS. In 1994, Fleiss pled guilty to conspiracy and bank fraud in relation to his daughter Heidi Fleiss' prostitution ring.
 History == 
Fleiss initially trained as a pharmacist and osteopath.  He relocated from Detroit to California to take advantage of 1962 legislation allowing an osteopath to convert his degree to an MD.  He earned his B.S. in pharmacy from Wayne State University, his D.O. from the University of California, Irvine, and his M.P.H. from the University of California, Los Angeles.
Fleiss is the father of "Hollywood madam" Heidi Fleiss. In 1994, Fleiss pled guilty to charges of conspiracy and bank fraud.  He helped Heidi launder hundreds of thousands of dollars by lying on her loan application and falsely claiming that she was an employee of his medical practice. He was sentenced to one day in prison and community service. Following the felony convictions, the Medical Board of California placed him on probation for 1 year and publicly reprimanded him for "unprofessional conduct" and "dishonesty".
Fleiss was the subject of a 1996 made-for-TV movie entitled "The Good Doctor: The Paul Fleiss Story". In it, Fleiss (played by Michael Gross) was portrayed sympathetically, as the victim of his daughter Heidi's machinations. The New York Times noted that "the sweeping inaccuracies in 'The Good Doctor: The Paul Fleiss Story' evidently didn't hurt its ratings", and the film was subsequently retitled "The Making of a Hollywood Madam" and shown on cable television.

Medical views and opinions

Fleiss is known for his unconventional medical views.  He is quoted by the Los Angeles Times as stating that he 'could be "convinced either way" on whether HIV causes AIDS'. Fleiss is a breastfeeding advocate and anti-circumcision activist. He is the author or co-author of three books: Sweet Dreams (2001), Your Premature Baby Comes Home with Juliette M. Alsobrooks (2006), and What Your Doctor May Not Tell You about Circumcision with Frederick M. Hodges (2003).

Pediatric practice

Fleiss was described in the Los Angeles Times as "everyone's favorite baby doctor" and having been "one of Southern California's most sought-after physicians" for thirty years. Sometimes described in the media as a "pediatrician to the stars", he counts numerous celebrities or their children among his patients, including Leonardo DiCaprio, Madonna, Pamela Anderson, Harrison Ford, Robert De Niro, and Cindy Crawford.
In 2005, Fleiss was investigated for his role in the death from untreated AIDS of Eliza Jane Scovill, the daughter of AIDS denialist Christine Maggiore, who was HIV-positive. Against standard medical practice, Scovill was never tested for HIV, and Fleiss was investigated by the Medical Board of California for gross negligence in her care as well as in the care of a second child who was also HIV-positive.






