[[Abe Fortas]]

CATEGORIES: 1910 births, 1982 deaths, Rhodes College alumni, Yale Law School alumni, American legal scholars, Washington, D.C. lawyers, United States Supreme Court justices, United States federal judges appointed by Lyndon B. Johnson, Jewish American politicians, People from Memphis, Tennessee, American Jews, People associated with the New Deal, Public Works Administration

Abraham "Abe" Fortas (June 19, 1910 – April 5, 1982) was a U.S. Supreme Court Associate Justice from 1965 to 1969. Originally from Memphis, Tennessee, Fortas became a law professor at Yale University, and then an advisor for the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
Fortas next worked at the Department of the Interior under President Franklin D. Roosevelt, and during that time President Harry S. Truman appointed him to delegations that helped set up the United Nations in 1945.
Later on in private legal practice in 1948, Fortas represented Lyndon Johnson in the hotly contested Democratic Senatorial Second Primary electoral dispute, and he made close ties with the president-to-be. Fortas also represented Clarence Earl Gideon before the U.S. Supreme Court, in a case involving the right to counsel.
As an appointee to the Supreme Court by Johnson, Fortas maintained a close working relationship with the president, and in 1968 Johnson tried to elevate Fortas to the position of Chief Justice, but that nomination faced a filibuster at least in part due to ethics problems that later caused him to resign from the Court. Fortas returned to private practice, sometimes appearing before the judges with whom he had served, and his successor, Justice Blackmun.

Early years

Fortas was born in Memphis, Tennessee, the son of Ray (née Berson) and William Fortas.google. His parents were Orthodox Jews, were of British descent, and his father worked as a cabinetmaker. Fortas acquired a lifelong love for music from his father, who encouraged his playing the violin, and was known in Memphis as "Fiddlin' Abe Fortas". He attended public schools in Memphis, graduating from South Side High School in 1926. He next attended the Southwestern at Memphis college (now called Rhodes College), graduating in 1930.
Fortas left Memphis to enroll in Yale Law School. He graduated second in his class in 1933 (second only to another Memphian, Luke Finlay), and he was the editor in chief of the Yale Law Journal. One of his professors, William O. Douglas, was impressed with Fortas, and Douglas arranged for him to stay at Yale to become an assistant professor of law.
Shortly thereafter, Douglas left Yale to run the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) in Washington, D.C. Fortas commuted between New Haven and Washington, both teaching at Yale and advising the SEC.

Personal life

In 1935, Fortas married Carolyn E. Agger, who would become a successful tax lawyer. They had no children, and after he became an Associate Justice, they lived in the Georgetown section of Washington, D.C. [ref]
</ref>
Fortas was an amateur musician who played the violin in a quartet, called the "N Street Strictly-no-refunds String Quartet" on Sunday evenings. It often included notable musicians passing through town, such as Isaac Stern. Fortas was a good friend of the first democratically elected Governor of Puerto Rico, Luis Muñoz Marín, calling him "a spectacularly great figure", and had developed a deep love for the island since the days of the Franklin Roosevelt Administration. Visiting the island, frequently lobbying for the island in Congress, participating in the drafting of the Constitution of Puerto Rico, and giving legal advice to Muñoz Marín and his administrators whenever requested. He directed the Kennedy State Dinner at the White House in honor of Muñoz Marín on November 13, 1961. The Spanish cellist Pablo Casals performed a concert at the occasion, breaking his boycott of the United States, which had recognized General Franco to his chagrin. Fortas also developed a good friendship with Casals.
The Academy Award winning Puerto Rican actor and director José Ferrer portrayed Fortas in the film Gideon's Trumpet (1980).

Early career

Fortas served as general counsel of the Public Works Administration and as Undersecretary of the Interior during the administration of Franklin D. Roosevelt. While he was working at the U.S. Department of the Interior, the Secretary of the Interior, Harold L. Ickes, introduced him to a young congressman from Texas, Lyndon Johnson.
In 1945, Fortas was granted a leave of absence from the Department of Interior to join the Armed Forces of the United States. According to his official biography, within a month, Fortas was discharged because of an arrested case of ocular tuberculosis. Later in 1945, he was appointed by President Harry Truman as an advisor to the U.S. delegation during the organizational meeting of the United Nations in San Francisco and at the 1946 General Assembly meeting in London.

Private practice

After leaving government service, Fortas founded a law firm with Thurman Arnold in 1946, then known as Arnold & Fortas. Former Federal Communications Commission commissioner Paul A. Porter joined the firm in 1947, and after the appointment of Fortas to the Supreme Court, the firm dropped his name, and is thereafter it was named Arnold & Porter. For many years, it has been one of Washington's most influential law firms, and today is among the largest law firms in the world.
In 1948, Lyndon Johnson ran for the Democratic nomination for one of the two seats in the U.S. Senate for Texas. Johnson won the Democratic primary by only 87 votes. His opponent, the former Governor of Texas, Coke R. Stevenson, persuaded a federal judge to issue an order taking Johnson's name off of the general election ballot while the primary results were being contested. There were serious allegations of corruption in the voting process, including 200 votes for Johnson that had been cast in alphabetical order. Johnson asked Fortas for help, and Fortas persuaded Supreme Court Justice Hugo Black to overturn the ruling. Johnson then won the general election and became a U.S. Senator.
During the Red Scare of the late 1940s and early 1950s, Fortas came to widespread notice as the defense attorney for Owen Lattimore. In 1950, Fortas often clashed with Senator Joseph McCarthy when representing Lattimore before the Tydings Committee, and also before the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee.

Durham v. United States

Fortas was known in Washington circles to have a serious interest in psychiatry, still a controversial subject at the time. In 1953, this expertise led to his appointment to represent the indigent Monte W. Durham, whose insanity defense had been rejected at a lower court trial two years earlier, in an appeal before a U.S. Court of Appeals.
Durham's defense had been denied because the District Court had applied the M'Naghten Rules, requiring that the defense prove the accused didn't know the difference between right and wrong for an insanity plea to be accepted. Adopted by the British House of Lords in 1843, generations before the origins of  modern psychiatry, this test was still in common use in American courts over a century later.
The effect of this standard was to exclude psychiatric and psychological testimony almost entirely from the legal process. In a critical turning point for American criminal law, the Court of Appeals accepted Fortas's call to abandon the M'Naghten Rule and to allow for testimony and evidence regarding defendants' mental state.

Gideon v. Wainwright

In 1963, Fortas represented Clarence Earl Gideon's appeal before the Supreme Court. Gideon, a poor man from Florida, had been convicted of breaking into a pool hall. He could not afford a lawyer, and none was provided for him when he asked for one at trial. In its landmark ruling in Gideon v. Wainwright, the Supreme Court held for Gideon, ruling that state courts are required under the Sixth Amendment to provide counsel in criminal cases for defendants unable to afford their own attorneys or lawyers.

Associate Justice of the Supreme Court

In 1965, Lyndon Johnson, by then the President of the United States, persuaded Supreme Court Justice Arthur Goldberg to resign his seat to become the U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations because the President wanted Goldberg for that position.[ref]
