[[Generative art]]

CATEGORIES: Art media, Computer art, Digital art, New media, Electronic music, Art genres, Art movements, Painting techniques, Conceptual art

Generative art refers to art that in whole or in part has been created with the use of an autonomous system. An autonomous system in this context is generally one that is non-human and can independently determine features of an artwork that would otherwise require decisions made directly by the artist.  In some cases the human creator may claim that the generative system represents their own artistic idea, and in others that the system takes on the role of the creator.
"Generative Art" is often used to refer to computer generated artwork that is algorithmically determined. But generative art can also be made using systems of chemistry, biology, mechanics and robotics, smart materials, manual randomization, mathematics, data mapping, symmetry, tiling, and more.

Examples of generative art

Music

Visual art

[/ref]

Software art

Architecture

Literature

Live coding

Generative systems may be modified while they operate, for example by using interactive programming languages such as Max/MSP, Fluxus, Isadora, Quartz Composer and openFrameworks.  This is a standard approach to programming by artists, but may also be used to create live music and/or video by manipulating generative systems on stage, a performance practice that has become known as Live coding.  As with many examples of Software Art, because live coding emphasises human authorship rather than autonomy, it may be considered in opposition to generative art.

Generative art systems and methods

Generative art systems can be categorized as being ordered, disordered, or complex. Here complex systems are those that have a mixture of both order and disorder and typically exhibit emergence. Ordered generative art systems can include serial art, data mapping, the use of symmetry and tiling, number sequences and series, proportions such as the golden ratio, and combinatorics. Disordered generative art systems typically exploit some form of randomization, stochastics, or aspects of chaos theory.
While ordered generative art systems are as old as art itself, and disordered generative art systems came to prominence in the 20th century, contemporary generative art practice tends to lean in the direction of complex generative systems. Evolutionary computing approaches have been especially productive as a way to harness and steer complex expressions of aesthetic form and sound at a high level either by interactively choosing and breeding individual results leading to improved hybrids, or by applying automatic selection rules, or both.
Other computational generative systems that move towards complexity include diffusion-limited aggregation, L-systems, neural networks, cellular automata, reaction-diffusion systems, artificial life, and other biologically inspired methods such as swarm behaviour.
While some generative art exists as static artifacts produced by previous unseen processes, generative art can also be viewed developing in real-time. Typically such works are never displayed the same way twice. For example, graphical programming environments (e.g. Max/Msp, Pure Data or vvvv) as well as classic yet user-friendly programming environments such as Processing or openFrameworks are used to create real-time generative audiovisual artistic expressions in the Demoscene and in VJ-culture.

History of the term

The use of the word "generative" in the discussion of art is scattered throughout the literature. Usage of the term has developed over time.
The use of Artificial DNA defines a generative approach to Art focused on the construction of a system able to generate unpredictable events, all with a recognizable common character.
The use of Autonomous Systems, required by some contemporary definitions, focuses a generative approach where the controls are strongly reduced. This approach is also named "emergent".
It is not clear when the term generative was first used, although Boden and Edmonds Boden and Edmonds What is Generative Art?, Digital Creativity 20(1/2): 21-46 have noted the use of the term "generative art" in the broad context of automated computer graphics in the 1960s, beginning with artwork exhibited by Georg Nees and Nake in 1965:
The first such exhibition showed the work of Nees in February 1965, which some claim was titled "Generative Computergrafik". While Nees does not himself remember, this was the title of his doctoral thesis published a few years later.  "Generative art" and related terms was in common use by several other early computer artists around this time, including Manfred Mohr. Also if the term "Generative Art" with the meaning of dynamic artwork-systems able to generate several artwork-events was clearly used the first time for the "Generative Art" conference in Milan in 1998.
The term has also been used to describe geometric abstract art where simple elements are repeated, transformed, or varied to generate more complex forms.  Thus defined generative art was practiced by the Argentinian artists Eduardo McEntyre and Miguel Ángel Vidal in the late 1960s. In 1972 the Romanian-born Paul Neagu created the Generative Art Group in Britain. It was populated exclusively by Neagu using aliases such as "Hunsy Belmood" and "Edward Larsocchi." In 1972 Neagu gave a lecture titled 'Generative Art Forms' at the Queen's University, Belfast Festival.
Osborne, Harold, ed. The Oxford Companion to Twentieth-Century Art, Oxford ; New York: Oxford University Press
Walker, J. A. Glossary of art, architecture, and design since 1945 (3rd ed.), London; Boston: Library Association Publishing; G.K. Hall.
In 1970 the School of the Art Institute of Chicago created a department called "Generative Systems." As described by Sonia Landy Sheridan the focus was on art practices using the then new technologies for the capture, inter-machine transfer, printing and transmission of images, as well as the exploration of the aspect of time in the transformation of image information.
In 1988 Clauser Clauser, H. R. Towards a Dynamic, Generative Computer Art, Leonardo, 21(2), 1988. identified the aspect of systemic autonomy as a critical element in generative art:
 

In 1989 Celestino Soddu defined the Generative Design approach to Architecture and Town Design in his book "Citta' Aleatorie".C. Soddu, Citta' Aleatorie, Masson Publisher 1989 "
In 1989 Franke referred to "generative mathematics" as "the study of mathematical operations suitable for generating artistic images."
Franke, H. W.
From the mid-1990s Brian Eno popularized the terms generative music and generative systems, making a connection with earlier experimental music by Terry Riley, Steve Reich and Philip Glass. Generative Music, In Motion Magazine
From the end of the 20th century, communities of generative artists, designers, musicians and theoreticians began to meet, forming cross-disciplinary perspectives.  
The first meeting about generative Art was in 1998, at the inaugural International Generative Art conference at Politecnico di Milano University, Italy. and Colabella, E. ed.s "Generative Art", Dedalo 
In Australia, the Iterate conference on generative systems in the electronic arts followed in 1999.csse.edu.html  
On-line discussion has centred around the eu-gene mailing list,  These activities have more recently been joined by the Generator.x conference in Berlin starting in 2005.
In 2012 the new journal GASATHJ, Generative Art Science and Technology hard Journal was founded by Celestino Soddu and Enrica Colabella GASATHJ jointing several generative artists and scientists in the Editorial Board.
Some have argued that as a result of this engagement across disciplinary boundaries, the community has converged on a shared meaning of the term.  As Boden and Edmonds put it in 2011:
In the call of the Generative Art conferences in Milan (annually starting from 1998), the definition of Generative Art by Celestino Soddu:
Discussion on the eu-gene mailing list was framed by the following definition by Adrian Ward from 1999:
A similar definition is provided by Philip Galanter:

Theories of generative art

In the most widely cited theory of generative art Philip GalanterPhilip Galanter What is Generative Art? Complexity theory as a context for art theory, 2003 International Conference on Generative Art describes generative art systems in the context of complexity theory. In particular the notion of Murray Gell-Mann and Seth Lloyd's effective complexity is cited. In this view both highly ordered and highly disordered generative art can be viewed as simple. Highly ordered generative art minimizes entropy and allows maximal data compression, and highly disordered generative art maximizes entropy and disallows significant data compression. Maximally complex generative art blends order and disorder in a manner similar to biological life, and indeed biologically inspired methods are most frequently used to create complex generative art. This view is at odds with the earlier information theory influenced views of Max BenseMax Bense Aesthetica; Einfhrung in die neue Aesthetik, Agis-Verlag  and Abraham MolesAbraham Moles Information theory and esthetic perception, University of Illinois Press where complexity in art increases with disorder.
There are two additional points worth noting. Galanter notes that given the use of visual symmetry, pattern, and repetition by the most ancient known cultures generative art is as old as art itself. He also addresses the mistaken equivalence by some that rule-based art is synonymous with generative art., Vague Terrain (2006) For example, some art is based on constraint rules that disallow the use of certain colors or shapes. Such art is not generative because constraint rules are not constructive, i.e. by themselves they don't assert what is to be done, only what cannot be done.
In a later article Margaret Boden and Ernest Edmonds present an overview of generative art and allied practices to develop a more precise language for critical discussion. They agree that generative art need not be restricted to that done using computers, and that some rule-based art is not generative. They go on to develop a technical vocabulary that includes Ele-art (electronic art), C-art (computer art), D-art (digital art), CA-art (computer assisted art), G-art (generative art), CG-art (computer based generative art), Evo-art (evolutionary based art), R-art (robotic art), I-art (interactive art), CI-art (computer based interactive art), and VR-art (virtual reality art).
In both accounts the term generative art does not describe an art movement, ideology, or theory of aesthetics. The term refers to how the art is made, and does not take into account why it was made or what the content of the artwork is.

Questions of generative art

The discourse around generative art can be characterised by the theoretical questions which motivate its development.  McCormack et al. propose the following questions, shown with paraphrased summaries, as the most important:
Another question is of postmodernism—are generative art systems the ultimate expression of the postmodern condition, or do they point to a new synthesis based on a complexity-inspired world-view?Philip Galanter Complexism and the role of evolutionary art in "The art of artificial evolution : a handbook on evolutionary art and music", Springer





Additional general resources


