[[Asmodeus]]

CATEGORIES: Mythological kings, Demons in Judaism, Demons in Christianity, Testament of Solomon, Goetic demons, Old Testament Apocrypha people

Asmodeus (, ʾAšmədʾāy; see below for other variations) is a king of demons"Asmodeus" in The New Encyclopaedia Britannica. Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica Inc., 15th edn., 1992, Vol. 1, p. 635. mostly known from the deutero-canonical Book of Tobit, in which he is the primary antagonist. The demon is also mentioned in some Talmudic legends, for instance, in the story of the construction of the Temple of Solomon. He was supposed by some Renaissance Christians to be the King of the Nine Hells. Asmodeus also is referred to as one of the seven princes of Hell. In Binsfeld's classification of demons, each one of these princes represents one of the seven deadly sins (Lust, Gluttony, Greed, Sloth, Wrath, Envy, and Pride). Asmodeus is the demon of lust and is therefore responsible for twisting people's sexual desires.
It is said in Asmodeus; Or, The Devil on Two Sticks that people who fall to Asmodeus' ways will be sentenced to an eternity in the second level of hell.rookebooks.com/product?prod_id=22955 Asmodeus; Or, The Devil on Two Sticks By Alain Rene Le Sage - 1841 - London - Joseph Thomas

Etymology

The name Asmodai is believed to derive from Avestan language *aēšma-daēva, where aēšma means "wrath", and daēva signifies "demon".  While the daēva Aēšma is thus Zoroastrianism's demon of wrath and is also well attested as such, the compound aēšma-daēva is not attested in scripture. It is nonetheless likely that such a form did exist, and that the Book of Tobit's "Asmodaios" () reflect it.
The spellings Asmodai, and Sidonai (שִׁדֹנאָי, Šidonʾāy). Some traditions have subsequently identified Shamdon as the father of Asmodeus.
The Jewish Encyclopedia of 1906 refutes the otherwise accepted etymological relation between the Persian "Æshma-dæva" and Judaism's "Ashmodai" claiming that the particle "-dæva" could not have become "-dai" and that Æshma-dæva as such—a compound name—never appears in Persian sacred texts. Still, the encyclopedia proposes that the "Asmodeus" from the Apocrypha and the Testament of Solomon are not only related somewhat to Aeshma but have similar behaviour, appearance and roles,Jewish encyclopedia 1906 full text unedited version , entry "Asmodeus" paragraph "Asmodeus, Ashmedai, and Æshma."   to conclude in another article under the entry "Aeshma", in the paragraph "Influence of Persian Beliefs on Judaism"Jewish encyclopedia unedited full text 1906 version, entry "Aeshma"  that Persian Zoroastrian beliefs could have heavily influenced Judaism's theology on the long term, bearing in mind that in some texts there are crucial conceptual differences while in others there seems to be a great deal of similarity, proposing a pattern of influence over folk beliefs that would extend further to the mythology itself in general.

In the texts

In the Kabbalah

According to the Kabbalah and the school of Rashba,  Asmodeus is a cambion born as the result of a union between Agrat Bat Mahlat, a succubus, and King David.

In the Book of Tobit

The Asmodeus of the Book of Tobit is attracted to Sarah, Raguel's daughter, and is not willing to let any husband possess her (). According to some translations Asmodeus is strangled.
Asmodeus would thus seem to be a demon characterized by carnal desire; but he is also described as an evil spirit in general: 'Ασμοδαίος τὸ πονηρὸν δαιμόνιον or τõ δαιμόνιον πονηρόν, and πνεῦμα ἀκάθαρτον (), "Asmodeus loved Sarah," implies that he was attracted not by women in general, but by Sarah specifically.

In the Talmud

The figure of Ashmedai in the Talmud is less malign in character than the Asmodeus of Tobit. In the former, he appears repeatedly in the light of a good-natured and humorous fellow. But besides that, there is one feature in which he parallels Asmodeus, inasmuch as his desires turn upon Solomon's wives and Bath-sheba. But even here, Ashmedai seems more like a Greek satyr than an evil demon.
Another Talmudic legend has King Solomon tricking Asmodai into collaborating in the construction of the Temple of Jerusalem.
Another legend depicts Asmodai throwing king Solomon over 400 leagues away from the capital by putting one wing on the ground and the other stretched skyward. He then changed places for some years with King Solomon. When King Solomon returned, Asmodai fled from his wrath.
Another passage describes him as marrying Lilith, who became his queen.
He has also been recorded as the off-spring of the union between Adam and the angel of prostitution, Naamah, conceived while Adam was married to Lilith.

In the Testament of Solomon

In the Testament of Solomon, a 1st–3rd century text, the king invokes Asmodeus to aid in the construction of the Temple. The demon appears and predicts Solomon's kingdom will one day be divided (Testament of Solomon, verse 21–25). When Solomon interrogates Asmodeus further, the king learns that Asmodeus is thwarted by the angel Raphael, as well as by sheatfish found in the rivers of Assyria. He also admits to hating water and birds because both remind him of God.

In the Malleus Maleficarum

In the Malleus Maleficarum (1486), Asmodeus was considered the demon of lust. Sebastien Michaelis said that his adversary is St. John. Some demonologists of the 16th century assigned a month to a demon and considered November to be the month in which Asmodai's power was strongest. Other demonologists asserted that his zodiacal sign was Aquarius but only between the dates of January 30 and February 8.
He has 72 legions of demons under his command. He is one of the Kings of Hell under Lucifer the emperor. He incites gambling, and is the overseer of all the gambling houses in the court of Hell. Some Catholic theologians compared him with Abaddon. Yet other authors considered Asmodeus a prince of revenge.

In the Dictionnaire Infernal

In the Dictionnaire Infernal by Collin de Plancy, Asmodeus is depicted with the breast of a man, a cock leg, serpent tail, three heads (one of a man spitting fire, one of a sheep, and one of a bull), riding a lion with dragon wings and neck, all of these animals being associated with either lascivity, lust or revenge.

In the Lesser Key of Solomon

Asmodai appears as the king 'Asmoday' in the Ars Goetia, where he is said to have a seal in gold and is listed as number thirty-two according to respective rank.
He "is strong, powerful and appears with three heads; the first is like a bull, the second like a man, and the third like a ram; the tail of a serpent, and from his mouth issue flames of fire."

In The Magus

Asmodeus is referred to in Book Two, Chapter Eight of The Magus (1801) by Francis Barrett.

Later depictions

Asmodeus was named as an angel of the Order of Thrones by Gregory the Great.
Asmodeus was cited by the nuns of Loudun in the Loudun possessions of 1634.
Asmodeus' reputation as the personification of lust continued into later writings, as he was known as the "Prince of Lechery" in the 16th century romance Friar Rush.
In 1641, the Spanish playwright and novelist Luis Velez de Guevara published the satirical novel El diablo cojuelo, where Asmodeus is represented as a mischievous demon endowed with a playful and satirical genius. The plot presents a rascal student that hides in an astrologer's mansard. He frees a devil from a bottle. As an acknowledgement the devil shows him the apartments of Madrid and the tricks, miseries and mischiefs of their inhabitants.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/624832/Luis-Velez-de-Guevara The French novelist Alain-René Lesage adapted the Spanish source in his 1707 novel le Diable boiteux,
Asmodeus was widely depicted as having a handsome visage, good manners and an engaging nature; however, he was portrayed as walking with a limp and one leg was either clawed or that of a rooster. He walks aided by two walking sticks in Lesage's work, and this gave rise to the English title The Devil on Two Sticks
In the film Gabriel, Asmodeus is shown as a very handsome owner of a brothel in Purgatory, where a fallen angel is forced to work. He's disfigured one of the workers, til she looks like him. He also blows up the soup kitchen, just before the final confrontation between Gabriel (Andy Whitfield) and Sammael/ Michael. He's portrayed by the Australian actor Michael Piccerilli.
On 18 February 1865, author Evert A. Duyckinck sent President Abraham Lincoln a letter, apparently mailed from Quincy.  Duyckinck signed the letter "Asmodeus", with his initials below his pseudonym.  His letter enclosed a newspaper clipping about an inappropriate joke allegedly told by Lincoln at the Hampton Roads Peace Conference.  The purpose of Duyckinck's letter was to advise Lincoln of "an important omission" about the history of the conference.  He advised that the newspaper clipping be added to the "Archives of the Nation". "Evert A. Duyckinck to Abraham Lincoln, Saturday, February 18, 1865 (Sends clipping with story Lincoln allegedly told at Hampton Roads conference)." The Abraham Lincoln Papers at the Library of Congress. 



References and sources

| last = Rudwin
| first = Maximilian Josef
| authorlink = Maximilian Josef Rudwin
| origyear = 1931
| year = 1970
| title = The Devil in Legend and Literature
| publisher = AMS Press Open Court Publishing Company
| location = New York
| chapter = Asmodeus, dandy among demons
| isbn = 978-0-404-05451-9
| oclc = 257946679
| lccn = 71111780
| url =
| ref = harv}}
| last1 = Mathers
| first1 = Samuel Liddell MacGregor (trans.)
| authorlink1 = Samuel Liddell MacGregor Mathers
| last2 = Crowley
| first2 = Aleister
| authorlink2 = Aleister Crowley
| origyear = 1904
| year = 1995
| title = The Goetia: The Lesser Key of Solomon the King
| publisher = Samuel Weiser, Inc.
| isbn = 978-0-87728-847-3
| oclc = 33044028
| lccn = 95037057
| url =
| ref = harv}}

