[[Christian Bök]]

CATEGORIES: 1966 births, Living people, York University alumni, Carleton University alumni, University of Calgary faculty, Writers from Toronto, 20th-century Canadian poets, 21st-century Canadian poets

Christian Bök (born August 10, 1966 in Toronto, Canada) is an experimental Canadian poet. He is the author of Eunoia, which won the Canadian Griffin Poetry Prize, and which has been said to be "Canada's best-selling poetry book ever."Ed Park, "Crystal Method," Village Voice, Dec. 16, 2003.

Life and work

He was born "Christian Book", but changed his last name "to avoid unseemly confusion with the Bible."
He began writing seriously in his early twenties, while earning his B.A. and M.A. degrees at Carleton University in Ottawa. He returned to Toronto in the early 1990s to study for a Ph.D. in English literature at York University, where he encountered a burgeoning literary community that included Steve McCaffery, Christopher Dewdney, and Darren Wershler-Henry.  he teaches at the University of Calgary.The Xenotext Experiment: An Interview with Christian Bök
In 1994, Bök published Crystallography, "a pataphysical encyclopaedia that misreads the language of poetics through the conceits of geology." The Village Voice said of it: "Bök's concise reflections on mirrors, fractals, stones, and ice diabolically change the way you think about language — his, yours — so that what begins as description suddenly seems indistinguishable from the thing itself." Crystallography was reissued in 2003, and was  nominated for a Gerald Lampert Award.
Bök is a sound poet and has performed an extremely condensed version of the "Ursonate" by Kurt Schwitters. He has created conceptual art, making artist's books from Rubik's Cubes and Lego bricks. He has also worked in science-fiction television by constructing artistic languages for Gene Roddenberry's Earth: Final Conflict and Peter Benchley's Amazon.

Eunoia

Bök is most famous for Eunoia (2001), a book which took him seven years to write. Eunoia consists of univocalics: The book uses only one vowel in each of its five chapters. In the book's main part, each chapter used just a single vowel, producing sentences such as this: "Enfettered, these sentences repress free speech." In preparation for the project, Bök read the dictionary a total of five times, compiling an exhaustive list of vocabulary; Bök aimed to use almost all of these words during his work.
Edited by Darren Wershler-Henry and published by Coach House Books,
in 2001, Eunoia won the 2002 Griffin and sold 20,000 copies. The book was also a bestseller there, reaching #8 on the Top 10 bestselling charts for the year.

The Xenotext experiment

On April 4, 2011 Bök announced a significant break-through in his 9-year project to engineer "a life-form so that it becomes not only a durable archive for storing a poem, but also an operant machine for writing a poem".
The project has continued for over a decade at a cost exceeding $110,000 and he hopes to finish the project in 2014.calgaryherald.html?id=7874911

Recognition

Eunoia won the Griffin Poetry Prize in 2002.
Bök's poem "Vowels" was used in the lyrics of a song on the EP A Quick Fix of Melancholy (2003) by the Norwegian band Ulver.
In 2006, Christian Bök and his work were the subject of an episode of the television series Heart of a Poet, produced by Canadian filmmaker Maureen Judge.Heart of a Poet: Season 1
On May 31, 2011, The BBC World Service broadcast Bök reading "The Xenotext." 

Bibliography








