[[Ontario International Airport]]

CATEGORIES: Airports in the Inland Empire (California), Airports in San Bernardino County, California, Airports in the Greater Los Angeles Area, Ontario, California, Airports established in 1929, 1929 establishments in California, Public transportation in San Bernardino County, California



LA/Ontario International Airport , formerly and still commonly known as Ontario International Airport, is a public airport two miles east of downtown Ontario, a city in San Bernardino County, California, USA, and about 38 miles east of Downtown Los Angeles. It is owned and operated by the Los Angeles World Airports (LAWA), an agency of the city of Los Angeles. In 2008, 6.2 million passengers used the airport, 13.5% less than 2007.6% than the year previous.
In early 2011 Southwest Airlines carried 54% of the passengers.
For a number of years, the airport operated alongside Ontario Air National Guard Station, which was closed as a result of the 1995 Base Realignment and Closure Commission.

History

In 1923, a landing field was established east of Central Avenue (, now in the southwest corner of the airport, for $12,000, and established the Ontario Municipal Airport.
In 1941, the city bought  On 27 February 1942, an Army Air Corps plane made the first landing at the new airport. By 1943, the airport was an Army Air Corps P-38 training base and P-51 operating base.
In 1946, the Ontario Municipal Airport was renamed the "Ontario International Airport" because of the transpacific cargo flights originating from the facility. In 1949, Western Airlines began scheduled flights. In 1955, Bonanza Air Lines flights started. Western and Bonanza nonstop flights did not reach beyond Las Vegas. In 1962, Western began nonstop flights to San Francisco (one Electra daily). In 1967, Bonanza began nonstop F27 fights to Phoenix. Ontario and Los Angeles entered into a joint powers agreement, making Ontario International Airport part of the Los Angeles regional airports system. In 1968, the airport saw its first scheduled jet fights. In 1969, Continental Airlines started 720B nonstops to Denver and Chicago; Air California started 737 flights to San Jose; Pacific Southwest Airlines (PSA) started San Francisco flights; and Western began 737 nonstops to Sacramento and Salt Lake City. In 1970, United Airlines started a nonstop to Chicago and American started flights to Dallas (and Chicago, for a short time). In October 1974, Ontario hosted the Concorde supersonic airliner during a promotional round-the-world flight.
In 1981, a second east-west runway, 26L/8R, was built, necessitating the removal of the old NE-SW runway 4/22.  Remnants of the 4/22 runway are visible in the present-day taxiways. With the completion of the new runway, the existing runway 25/7 became 26R/8L. In 1985, the city of Los Angeles acquired Ontario International Airport outright from the city of Ontario. In 1987, Runway 26R/8L was extended to the east to bring the two runway thresholds side by side, so aircraft would be higher over neighborhoods. 26R/8L became the main departing runway and 26L/8R the main arrival runway. In 1998, a new terminal designed by DMJM Aviation opened. Taxiways D, S, R, U, and W were widened, and better taxiways and runway outlines

Present-day operations

The airport covers 
Thanks to Ontario's long runways (runway 8L/26R is longer than any at LAX), it is often an alternate landing site for large aircraft destined for LAX. Due to Ontario's small customs facilities and limited connecting flights, such flights typically do not disembark passengers at Ontario. The aircraft typically are refueled and departs to LAX.
The airport is about  northwest of downtown Riverside. Motorists can use the San Bernardino Freeway (Interstate 10), Ontario Freeway (Interstate 15), or the Pomona Freeway (State Route 60). It is served by Omnitrans bus route 61 and by private shuttles.
ONT currently has more than 64 daily departures and arrivals.
LA/Ontario Airport is owned by the city of Los Angeles (LA World Airports). Ownership and control of the airport became an issue in late 2010 when the city of Ontario, supported by the Southern California Association of Governments, criticized and questioned LAWA's operation of the airport.A. should relinquish control of Ontario Airport, Daily BreezeRegional support for Inland control of Ontario airport, The BizPress

Noise restrictions

LA/Ontario has few noise restrictions/abatement rules, unlike other Southern California airports such as John Wayne Airport, Bob Hope Airport, Long Beach Airport, and San Diego International Airport, which all have very strict policies. The airport is allowed to operate 24/7, but during the hours of 10pm to 7am all aircraft must arrive from the east on runway 26L or 26R and take-off to the east on runway 8R or 8L, depending on ATC instruction. This procedure is known as "Contra-Flow" operations and applies to turbo-jet or turbo-fan aircraft.  This procedure is similar to the one employed by Los Angeles International Airport, in which aircraft arrive from the west and depart to the west (known as "over-ocean" operations) between midnight and 6:30 a.m.  Both of these procedures are employed as long as weather and/or construction activity permits.  This is done in an effort to be better neighbors and minimize the noise impact to the surrounding communities as much as possible. As of August 6, 2012, the FAA has suspended all airports from opposite end take-offs and landings. Because of this, Ontario's 10pm to 7am operations now take off and land in the same direction.

Terminals

LA/Ontario International Airport has three terminals. The terminal numbering scheme is designed to accommodate future growth. The airport's master plan calls for five terminals to be spaced adjacent to and in between the existing Terminals 2 and 4. The "international terminal" (which is a small building designed primarily to segregate arriving international passengers to clear customs) would be razed and be part of the new Terminal 1. One terminal would be dedicated exclusively to Southwest Airlines and the other to United Airlines, while the other airlines would share the remaining terminals.
Terminal 2 has  and 14 gates (401 - 414). The International terminal has 2 gates.
Ontario Airport formerly had two other terminals: the main terminal and a small terminal for Delta Air Lines and SkyWest Airlines. The old terminals are west of the current terminals. The old control tower is still used as an auxiliary tower. The previous design was of the traditional walk-up type with only one jetway gate; the new terminals use the modern jetway system. The old terminals currently house the administration and the USO. The old terminals will be demolished when the new Terminal 1 is constructed.
Remote parking is located on the east end of the airport (moved from its former location at the west end). On the east end is a ground transportation center that consolidates the rental car companies in one central location. A circulator bus circles the airport and provides connections to each of the terminals, rental car and remote parking lots, and public transit stops.
General aviation is located at the south side of the airport, although most general aviation pilots tend to use a number of nearby airports: Redlands Airport, Chino Airport, Brackett Airport in La Verne, Cable Airport in Upland, or Rialto Municipal Airport.

Airlines and destinations

Top destinations

Cargo operations

Ontario is a major southwestern gateway hub for UPS. Over 200 pilots are based at the Ontario hub.  LA/ONT is the UPS Western Region hub for both air and trucking operations within a 13-state region. In addition to serving intra-regional traffic, the hub links to UPS's global hub in Louisville. The Ontario hub processes inbound UPS Next Day Air and UPS 2nd Day Air packages destined for Los Angeles, San Bernardino, Orange, San Diego, Riverside and Ventura counties. It provides outbound package delivery service from homes and businesses in the Inland Valley for delivery to destinations around the world. ONT serves as gateway for UPS' cargo flights to and from China. The Ontario facility sorts and distributes a majority of UPS international packages bound for delivery to the Pacific Rim. Four of the six direct weekly flights flown by UPS to China originate at the Ontario hub.

Popular culture








