[[Covering space]]

CATEGORIES: Algebraic topology, Homotopy theory, Fiber bundles, Topological graph theory

In mathematics, more specifically algebraic topology, a covering map (also covering projection) is a continuous function p  from a topological space, C, to a topological space, X, such that each point in X has an open neighbourhood evenly covered by p (as shown in the image); the precise definition is given below. In this case, C is called a covering space and X the base space of the covering projection. The definition implies that every covering map is a local homeomorphism.
Covering spaces play an important role in homotopy theory, harmonic analysis, Riemannian geometry and differential topology. In Riemannian geometry for example, ramification is a generalization of the notion of covering maps. Covering spaces are also deeply intertwined with the study of homotopy groups and, in particular, the fundamental group. An important application comes from the result that, if X is a "sufficiently good" topological space, there is a bijection from the collection of all isomorphism classes of connected coverings of X and subgroups of the fundamental group of X.

Formal definition

Let X be a topological space.  A covering space of X is a space C together with a continuous surjective map
such that for every 
The map p is called the covering map, the space X is often called the base space of the covering, and the space C is called the total space of the covering.  For any point x in the base the inverse image of x in C is necessarily a discrete space called the fiber over x.
The special open neighborhoods U of x given in the definition are called evenly-covered neighborhoods.  The evenly-covered neighborhoods form an open cover of the space X.  The homeomorphic copies in C of an evenly-covered neighborhood U are called the sheets over U.  One generally pictures C as "hovering above" X, with p mapping "downwards", the sheets over U being horizontally stacked above each other and above U, and the fiber over x consisting of those points of C that lie "vertically above" x.  In particular, covering maps are locally trivial.  This means that locally, each covering map is 'isomorphic' to a projection in the sense that there is a homeomorphism, h, from the pre-image p−1(U), of an evenly covered neighbourhood U, onto  will equal p locally (within p−1(U)).

Alternative definitions

Many authors impose some connectivity conditions on the spaces X and C in the definition of a covering map.  In particular, many authors require both spaces to be path-connected and locally path-connected.  This can prove helpful because many theorems hold only if the spaces in question have these properties.  Some authors omit the assumption of surjectivity, for if X is connected and C is nonempty then surjectivity of the covering map actually follows from the other axioms.

Examples

Properties

Common local properties

Homeomorphism of the fibres

For every x in X, the fiber over x is a discrete subset of C. On every connected component of X, the fibers are homeomorphic. 
If X is connected, there is a discrete space F such that for every x in X the fiber over x is homeomorphic to F and, moreover, for every x in X there is a neighborhood U of x such that its full pre-image p−1(U) is homeomorphic to , the covering is a triple cover and so on).

Lifting properties

If .  The curve Γ is called the lift of γ. If x and y are two points in X connected by a path, then that path furnishes a bijection between the fiber over x and the fiber over y via the lifting property. 
More generally, let  at the level of fundamental groups satisfy
Moreover, if such a lift g of f exists, it is unique.
In particular, if the space Z is assumed to be simply connected (so that  is simply connected, the lifting property for paths is a special case of the lifting property for maps stated above. 
If  follows from the fact that for all such n, the n-sphere Sn is simply connected and hence every continuous map from Sn to X can be lifted to C.

Equivalence

Let , then one says that p2 dominates p1.

Covering of a manifold

Since coverings are local homeomorphisms, a covering of a topological n-manifold is an n-manifold. (One can prove that the covering space is second-countable from the fact that the fundamental group of a manifold is always countable.) However a space covered by an n-manifold may be a non-Hausdorff manifold.  An example is given by letting C be the plane with the origin deleted and X the quotient space obtained by identifying every point  do not have disjoint neighborhoods in X.  
Any covering space of a differentiable manifold may be equipped with a (natural) differentiable structure that turns p (the covering map in question) into a local diffeomorphism – a map with constant rank n.

Universal covers

A covering space is a universal covering space if it is simply connected. The name universal cover comes from the following important property: if the mapping .  This can be phrased as 
 The universal cover of the space X covers all connected covers of the space X. 
The map f is unique in the following sense: if we fix a point x in the space X and a point d in the space D with .
If the space X has a universal cover then that universal cover is essentially unique: if the mappings .
The space X has a universal cover if it is connected, locally path-connected and semi-locally simply connected. The universal cover of the space X can be constructed as a certain space of paths in the space X.
The example  from unit quaternions to rotations of 3D space described in quaternions and spatial rotation is also a universal cover.
If the space X carries some additional structure, then its universal cover usually inherits that structure:
The universal cover first arose in the theory of analytic functions as the natural domain of an analytic continuation.

G-coverings

Let G be a discrete group acting on the topological space X. It is natural to ask under what conditions the projection from X to the orbit space X/G is a covering map. This is not always true since the action may have fixed points. An example for this is the cyclic group of order 2 acting on a product . Thus the study of the relation between the fundamental groups of X and X/G is not so straightforward. 
However the group G does act on the fundamental groupoid of X, and so the study is best handled by considering groups  acting on groupoids, and the corresponding orbit groupoids. The theory for this  is set down in Chapter 11 of the book Topology and groupoids referred to below. The main result is that for discontinuous actions of a group G on a Hausdorff space X which admits a universal cover, then the fundamental groupoid of the orbit space X/G is isomorphic to the orbit groupoid of the fundamental groupoid of X, i.e. the quotient of that groupoid by the action of the group G. This leads to explicit computations, for example of the fundamental group of the symmetric square of a space.

 Deck transformation group, regular covers

A deck transformation or automorphism of a cover . The set of all deck transformations of p forms a group under composition, the deck transformation group Aut(p). Deck transformations are also called covering transformations. Every deck transformation permutes the elements of each fiber. This defines a group action of the deck transformation group on each fiber. Note that by the unique lifting property, if f is not the identity and C is path connected, then f has no fixed points.
Now suppose  is considered as a discrete topological group.
Every universal cover  is regular, with deck transformation group being isomorphic to the fundamental group π1(X).
The example  from above is a regular cover. The deck transformations are multiplications with n-th roots of unity and the deck transformation group is therefore isomorphic to the cyclic group Cn.
Another example: .

Monodromy action

Again suppose  on the fiber over x. This is known as the monodromy action.
There are two actions on the fiber over  acts on the right. These two actions are compatible in the following sense:
If p is a universal cover, then Aut(p) can be naturally identified with the opposite group of .
If p is a regular cover, then Aut(p) is naturally isomorphic to a quotient of .
In general (for good spaces), Aut(p) is naturally isomorphic to the quotient of the normalizer of .

More on the group structure

Let  is an injective homomorphism.
Therefore .
For a covering  can also be seen to be equal to
the set of homotopy classes of those closed curves γ based at x whose lifts γC in C, starting at c, are closed curves at c. If X and C are path-connected, the degree of the cover p (that is, the cardinality of any fiber of p) is equal to the index x) : p#(π1(C, c))}} of the subgroup .
A key result of the covering space theory says that for a "sufficiently good" space X (namely, if X is path-connected, locally path-connected and semi-locally simply connected) there is in fact a bijection between equivalence classes of path-connected covers of X and the conjugacy classes of subgroups of the fundamental group  are equivalent. Connected cell complexes and connected manifolds are examples of "sufficiently good" spaces.
Let N(Γp) be the normalizer of Γp in .  The deck transformation group Aut(p) is isomorphic to the quotient group N(Γp)/Γp. If p is a universal covering, then Γp is the trivial group, and Aut(p) is isomorphic to π1(X).
Let us reverse this argument. Let N be a normal subgroup of .  Let c1 in C be in the fiber of x.  Then for every other c2 in the fiber of x, there is precisely one deck transformation that takes c1 to c2. This deck transformation corresponds to a curve g in C connecting c1 to c2.

Relations with groupoids

One of the ways of expressing the algebraic content of the theory of covering spaces is using groupoids and the fundamental groupoid. The latter functor gives an equivalence of categories
between the category of covering spaces of a reasonably nice space X and the category of groupoid covering morphisms of π1(X). Thus a particular kind of map of spaces is well modelled by a particular kind of morphism of groupoids.  The category of covering morphisms of a groupoid G is also equivalent to the category of actions of G on sets, and this allows the recovery of more traditional classifications of coverings.  Proofs of these facts are given in the book 'Topology and Groupoids' referenced below.

Relations with classifying spaces and group cohomology

If X is a connected cell complex with homotopy groups . 
Moreover, for every  the group of cellular n-chains Cn(T) (that is, a free abelian group with basis given by n-cells in T) also has a natural ZG-module structure. Here for an n-cell σ in T and for g in G the cell g σ is exactly the translate of σ by a covering transformation of T corresponding to g. Moreover, Cn(T) is a free ZG-module with free ZG-basis given by representatives of G-orbits of n-cells in T. In this case the standard topological chain complex
where ε is the augmentation map, is a free ZG-resolution of Z (where Z is equipped with the trivial ZG-module structure, ). This resolution can be used to compute group cohomology of G with arbitrary coefficients.
The method of Graham Ellis for computing group resolutions and other aspects of homological algebra, as shown in his paper in J. Symbolic Comp. and his web page listed below, is to build a universal cover of a prospective  inductively  at the same time as  a contracting homotopy of this universal cover. It is the latter which gives the computational method.

Generalizations

As a homotopy theory, the notion of covering spaces works well when the deck transformation group is discrete, or, equivalently, when the space is locally path-connected. However, when the deck transformation group is a topological group whose topology is not discrete, difficulties arise. Some progress has been made for more complex spaces, such as the Hawaiian earring; see the references there for further information.
A number of these difficulties are resolved with the notion of semicovering due to Jeremy Brazas, see the paper cited below. Every covering map is a semicovering, but semicoverings satisfy the "2 out of 3" rule: given a composition  of maps of spaces, if two of the maps are semicoverings, then so also is the third.  This rule does not hold for coverings, since the composition of covering maps need not be a covering map. 
Another generalisation is to actions of a group which are not free.  Ross Geoghegan in his 1986 review (MR0760769) of two papers by M.A. Armstrong on the fundamental groups of orbit spaces wrote: "These two papers show which parts of elementary covering space theory carry over from the free to the nonfree case. This is the kind of basic material that ought to have been in standard textbooks on fundamental groups for the last fifty years." At present, "Topology and Groupoids" listed below seems to be the only basic topology text to cover such results.

Applications

