[[Congregation of St. Basil]]

CATEGORIES: Congregation of St. Basil, Roman Catholic teaching orders, Religious organizations established in 1822, Roman Catholic religious institutes established in the 19th century, 1822 establishments in France

The Congregation of St. Basil (CSB), also known as the Basilian Fathers or Basilians, is a small, international Catholic community of priests and students for the priesthood focused on broad Christian education, preaching and life in community. 
The motto of the Basilians is "teach me goodness, discipline and knowledge" from Psalm 119. The CSB crest includes the founding date of the Congregation (1822), the motto in Latin and four symbols: a chalice representing the Blessed Sacrament, an open book representing knowledge, a fleur-de-lis representing both the Blessed Virgin and the French origins of the Basilians and a Greek cross representing Christ and honoring St. Basil, the Greek patron of the congregation.

Founding

During the turmoil and persecution of the Catholic Church during the French Revolution and the Reign of Terror, a clandestine school was established by Joseph Lapierre in Saint-Symphorien-de-Mahun in the department of Ardèche, in the south-central part of France. Following several years of operation, the congregation was founded in 1822 by a group of ten priests in order to ensure the continuation of the schools operating in and around Annonay, a town of about 5,000 at the time. The schools became known for their range of teaching including humanities, rhetoric, philosophy, mathematics, physics and chemistry.
The members of the new group devoted themselves to Christian education, preaching, and life in community. 
On November 21, 1822, during the feast of the Presentation of Our Lady, the ten founders chose Joseph Lapierre as the first Superior General and St. Basil as the patron for the order. St. Basil the Great was a fourth century (330-379 CE) Greek bishop and doctor of the Church known as a theologian, a champion of orthodoxy and particularly for his care of the poor and underprivileged. He was considered a father of communal monasticism who moderated some of the more severe practices in monastic life and helped establish a balance between work and prayer. St. Basil also believed in incorporating secular learning, particularly the "pagan classics," into a Christian education. 
Other patrons of the Basilians are: the Blessed Virgin Mary, St. Joseph, St. Francis of Assisi, St. Thomas Aquinas, and St. John Bosco.
The ten founding priests were:

History

France

In their early years, the Basilians were not a religious congregation in the canonical sense. They were an association or society of secular priests willing to live in community and pool their resources to support Christian education and preaching. The members did not take formal religious vows of poverty, chastity and obedience until later. In the early years, boundaries were somewhat fluid on membership in the association, based on who lived in the community and taught at the schools at any time.
The early years of the Basilian congregation were full of challenges. The local bishop, who was prepared to suppress the congregation, died the night before signing a decree.  However within a couple of generations, the Basilians had grown sufficiently to be formally approved by Pius IX in 1863. 
During the French Third Republic, Catholic schools were again a target, this time of the Socialists who were determined to secularize education. The decrees of 1880 targeted Jesuits but affected all teaching orders including the Basilians, and as a result of the persecution they were forced to close one of their schools in 1881 and one of their houses.
The French government finally suppressed all religious orders in what was known as "La loi de Combes" in 1903. The Basilian confreres were dispersed and their property was sold at auction. The religious life of the Basilian Fathers in France was suspended for twenty years, a blow from which they never recovered.

Canada

Bishop Armand-François-Marie de Charbonnel was named the Bishop of Toronto in 1850.  He was a Basilian student in Annonay from 1811 to 1819 and turned to Patrick Moloney, an Irish Basilian to assist him in his work with the largely Irish Catholic community in Toronto. The order decided to send four of its members, including Father Moloney, and established St. Michael's College in 1852, quickly followed by St. Basil's parish in 1856.    
This effort was a large investment, risk and sacrifice for the congregation as it represented a significant percentage of the total number of available Basilian priests.
Three high schools were served by the Basilian order in Toronto including Michael Power/St. Joseph High School, and Father Henry Carr Catholic Secondary School.
The institute also founded Assumption College, which became Assumption University in Windsor, Ontario, now federated with the University of Windsor; St. Thomas More College in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan federated with the University of Saskatchewan; and St. Joseph's College in Edmonton, Alberta affiliated with the University of Alberta.  St. Thomas College (later St. Thomas University (New Brunswick) in Chatham, New Brunswick, was founded by the Basilians in 1910, and in 1923 the college was transferred to the local diocesan clergy.
Toronto remains one of the largest centers for the Congregation of St. Basil, and is home to the Basilian Curial Offices and the Cardinal Flahiff Basilian Centre.

Division and Reunion

Discussion between the Congregation in France and North America resulted in the amicable Decree of Separation in June 1922 creating two separate religious congregations, each with their own constitutions.
The French and North American branches were reunited in 1955, an occasion celebrated in Annonay.

United States

The Basilian Fathers have been active in the United States since the late nineteenth century. The first Basilian ministry in the United States was in Texas with the founding of St Basil's College in Waco in 1899,  The Basilians founded and still operate St. Thomas High School and the University of St. Thomas both in Houston, Texas.  
Basilian mission work serving Spanish-speaking populations in Texas has included: Galveston, Houston, Sugar Land, Rosenberg, Wharton, New Gulf, Bay City, Angleton, Freeport and Eagle Lake. The work in Texas also served as the platform for Basilian mission work in Mexico and Colombia.
The Basilians also opened Catholic Central High School in Detroit, Michigan and Andrean High School in Merrillville, Indiana.  They co-sponsor Detroit Cristo Rey High School with the Sisters, Servants of the Immaculate Heart of Mary.
In 1937 the Basilians took over Aquinas Institute in Rochester, New York, and in 1948 established St. John Fisher College in the same city. St. John Fisher remains a Basilian College and the Basilians maintain strong links to the Aquinas Institute.

Latin America

The Basilians started missions to Mexico in 1961 and Colombia in 1987. The Basilian Fathers have served in Mexico City and currently serve in Tehuacán, Puebla, Mexico, and Bogotá, Cali, and Medellín, Colombia in Latin America. The congregation established parishes and schools in Colombia and Mexico, and is affiliated with St. Basil's Medical Centre in Colombia.

The Basilians Today

As well, there are Basilians engaged in Christian education, pastoral care, and media ministry in Canada and the US.

Notable Basilians






