[[Tiberios III]]

CATEGORIES: Byzantine admirals, 7th-century births, 706 deaths, 8th-century Byzantine emperors, 7th-century Byzantine emperors, Twenty Years' Anarchy

Tiberios III (or Tiberius III) () (died 15 February 706)Kazhdan, pg. 2084 was Byzantine emperor from 698 to 21 August 705. 624  Although his rule was considered generally successful, especially in containing the Arab threat to the east, he was overthrown by the former emperor Justinian II and subsequently executed.

Rise to power

Tiberius was a Germanic naval officer from the region of Pamphylia and originally named Apsimaros (Αψίμαρος),Canduci, pg. 200 who rose to the position of droungarios of the Cibyrrhaeotic Theme. As admiral John the Patrician retreated from Carthage to Crete, the fleet rebelled, deposed and murdered their commander,Moore, Tiberius III and chose Apsimaros as his replacement. 334  Changing his name to Tiberios,Bury, pg. 354 Apsimaros sailed on Constantinople which was suffering from a plague and proceeded to besiege it. 354
His revolution attracted the support of the Green faction,Norwich, pg. 334 as well as detachments from the field army and the imperial guard, and officers loyal to him opened the gates of the city and proclaimed him emperor, after which his troops the proceeded to pillage the city. 354  When he was firmly established on the throne, he commanded that the nose of deposed Emperor Leontius be cut off, and ordered him to enter the monastery of Psamathion. 334  Leontios had also mutilated his predecessor Justinian II in the same fashion three years earlier. 200

Reign and deposition

As emperor, Tiberios III made the tactical decision to ignore Africa, where Carthage was now definitively lost. 334 before proceeding to attack the Umayyad Caliphate under Abd al-Malik, winning minor victories while raiding into northern Syria in 700 and 701. 355  He then proceeded to invade and for a period hold territory in Armenia, while Arab reprisals in 703 and 704 were repelled from Cilicia with heavy Arab losses. 334
Success in the military sphere was accompanied by Tiberios' attempt to strengthen the empire militarily by reorganizing its administration.Bury, pg. 356  He sent a delegation to the Caliph at Damascus, asking for the return of many Cypriot prisoners who had been captured near the Propontis, and subsequently returned them to their place of birth. He strengthened the defence of the island at the same time by increasing the garrison numbers with troops from the Taurus Mountains. 356  He also reorganized the Cibyrrhaeotic ThemeBury, pg. 356 and repaired the sea walls of Constantinople. 2084
Domestically, his only known act of note was the banishment of Philippikos Bardanes, the son of a notable patrician, to the island of Cephalonia. Philippikos, a future emperor, had dreamed that his head was overshadowed by an eagle, which Tiberios took to mean that he was planning to rebel against him. 357
Meanwhile, in 704, Justinian II escaped from exile in Cherson,Moore, Tiberius III fleeing to the court of the khagan of the Khazars, Busir Glavan. 335  Tiberios paid a bounty to Busir to have Justinian killed,Bury, pg. 358 but Justinian, who had married the khagan's sister and been warned by her, escaped. 359  Seeking the aid of Tervel of Bulgaria, he eventually made his way back to Constantinople at the head of Slav and Bulgar army in 705. 336  For three days, Justinian tried to convince the citizens of Constantinople to open the gates, but to no avail. 360  In the meantime, his troops had discovered a long abandoned water conduit beneath the city walls, through which Justinian and some of his supporters managed to enter the city. 336  Hearing that Justinian had taken control of the Blachernae Palace in the night, Tiberios fled to Bithynia where he evaded capture for several months. 337
With his capture, Tiberios, together with his brother Herakleios and the former emperor Leontios,Kazhdan, pg. 2084 were paraded in chains through the city streets before being presented before Justinian in the Hippodrome of Constantinople. 337  There, before a jeering populace, Justinian placed his feet on the necks of Tiberios and Leontios in a symbolic gesture of subjugation before ordering their execution by beheading.Bury, pg. 361



Sources

Primary Sources

Theophanes the Confessor, Chronographia.

Secondary Sources




