[[Herbert Howells]]

CATEGORIES: 1892 births, 1983 deaths, 20th-century classical composers, Alumni of St John's College, Cambridge, Composers for pipe organ, English composers, English classical organists, Cathedral organists, Members of the Order of the Companions of Honour, People from Lydney, Music in Gloucestershire, Alumni of the Royal College of Music, Burials at Westminster Abbey, Musicians from Gloucestershire

Herbert Norman Howells CH, CBE (17 October 1892 – 23 February 1983) was an English composer, organist, and teacher, most famous for his large output of Anglican church music.

Life

Background and early education

Howells was born in Lydney, Gloucestershire, the youngest of the six children of Oliver Howells, a plumber, painter, decorator and builder, and his wife Elizabeth.
The Howells family's financial position was always precarious and at some point in Howells' adolescence his father became bankrupt, a deep humiliation in a small community at the time and one from which Howells never fully recovered.
Another formative experience for the young Howells was the premiere in September 1910 at the Gloucester Three Choirs Festival of Ralph Vaughan Williams' Fantasia on a Theme of Thomas Tallis. Howells liked to relate in after years how Vaughan Williams sat next to him for the remainder of the concert and shared his score of Edward Elgar's The Dream of Gerontius with the awestruck aspiring composer.

Study at the Royal College of Music

In 1912, following the example of Ivor Gurney, Howells moved to London to study at the Royal College of Music. Here his teachers included Charles Villiers Stanford, Hubert Parry and Charles Wood. Among Howells' contemporaries in the student body were Gurney, Arthur Bliss and Arthur Benjamin.
Howells blossomed in what he considered the "cosy family" atmosphere of the College, and his Mass in the Dorian Mode was performed at Westminster Cathedral under R.R. Terry within weeks of his arrival.
Howells' promise seemed likely to be cut short in 1915 when he was diagnosed with Graves' disease and given six months to live. His poor health prevented him from being conscripted in World War I, arguably preserving him from the worse fate awaiting Gurney and others of his friends and contemporaries. At St Thomas' Hospital he was given the previously untried treatment of radium injections in the neck, administered twice a week over a period of two years.

Marriage and teaching

In 1920 Howells married Dorothy Dawe (1891 – 1975), and produced two children, Ursula (1922 – 2005), later an actress, and Michael (1926 – 1935).
In the same year he joined the staff of the Royal College of Music, where he was to remain until 1979. and a choral work, A Kent Yeoman's Wooing Song, written the following year.

Family tragedy and the war

In September 1935 Howells' placid existence as teacher, adjudicator and occasional composer was abruptly shattered when his nine-year-old son Michael contracted polio during a family holiday, dying in London three days later.
From the late 1930s Howells turned increasingly to choral and organ music, composing a second series of Psalm Preludes followed by a set of Six Pieces (begun 1939), of which the third, Master Tallis's Testament, a particular favorite of the composer's, recalled his formative experience of Vaughan Williams' Tallis Fantasia.

Hymnus Paradisi and after

In 1949, fourteen years after Michael Howells' death, the organist Herbert Sumsion asked Howells if he had anything that could be performed at the 1950 Three Choirs Festival to be held at Gloucester. Howells decided to bring out the incomplete choral work he had written in his son's memory between 1936 and 1938. (In later years Howells claimed it was at the urging of Vaughan Williams that the piece was disinterred). The work, retitled Hymnus Paradisi at Sumsion's suggestion, was completed and orchestrated in time for its first performance on 7 September 1950, the day after the 15th anniversary of Michael's death. It was Howells' greatest public and critical success, and for many years was his best known work. p. 109, Spicer (1998). p. 106 Shorter choral works written around this time include the carol-anthem Long long ago (1951), the introit Behold O God our Defender for the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II in 1953, and The House of the Mind (1954) for chorus and strings.
Though not an orthodox Christian,
Howells continued to compose until his late 80s, but wrote nothing further on the scale of the Stabat Mater. One of the last works to appear  in his lifetime was the Requiem, edited for performance from his manuscripts in 1980 and published the following year, almost fifty years after its composition.Prefatory note to  The statement in this note that the Requiem was composed in 1936, with the implication that it was a memorial work for Michael Howells, is incorrect (see above)
He died on 23 February 1983 in a nursing home in Putney, one day after his good friend Sir Adrian Boult, and his ashes were interred in Westminster Abbey.
Howells was appointed CBE in 1953 and Companion of Honour in 1972. His academic awards included an honorary doctorate from the University of Cambridge, awarded in 1961. A "Herbert Howells Society", started by his daughter Ursula in 1987, and a "Herbert Howells Trust", founded after her death in 2005, exist to promote his works.

Notes






