[[Winnie Ewing]]

CATEGORIES: 1929 births, Living people, Politicians from Glasgow, Members of the European Parliament for Scottish constituencies, Members of the United Kingdom Parliament for Scottish constituencies, Scottish National Party MSPs, Scottish National Party MPs, Female members of the United Kingdom Parliament for Scottish constituencies, Presidents of the Scottish National Party, Scottish lawyers, Alumni of the University of Glasgow, UK MPs 1966–70, UK MPs 1974, UK MPs 1974–79, Politics of Moray, Scottish National Party MEPs, MEPs for the United Kingdom 1973–79, MEPs for the United Kingdom 1979–84, MEPs for the United Kingdom 1984–89, MEPs for the United Kingdom 1989–94, MEPs for the United Kingdom 1994–99, Members of the Scottish Parliament 1999–2003

Winifred Margaret 'Winnie' Ewing (born 10 July 1929) is a Scottish nationalist, lawyer and prominent SNP politician who was formerly a Member of Parliament (Hamilton 1967–70; Moray and Nairn 74–79), Member of the European Parliament (Highlands and Islands 1975–1999) and Member of the Scottish Parliament (Highlands and Islands 1999–2003). Her election victory in 1967 was a significant by-election in Scottish political history and began a surge of support for the SNP.

Background

Born Winifred Margaret Woodburn in Glasgow, she was educated at Battlefield School and Queen's Park Senior Secondary School. In 1946 she matriculated at Glasgow University where she earned an MA and went on to study for an LLB. Though not very active in politics at that time, she joined the Student Nationalists. After graduation she qualified and practised as a solicitor and notary public. She was Secretary of the Glasgow Bar Association from 1962–67.scottish.uk/vli/history/whisp/whisp-99/wh16-01.

Political biography

She became active in campaigning for Scottish independence through her membership of the Glasgow University Scottish Nationalist Association, and came to prominence in 1967 when she won the watershed Hamilton by-election as the Scottish National Party (SNP) candidate.  A practising solicitor at the time of her election, she proved to be a sound choice as her eloquence and ability bolstered a hard-fought SNP campaign and saw her through to victory. She was also helped on to victory by a team of enthusiastic helpers, among them her election agent, John McAteer.  She famously said at the time of her election, 'stop the world, Scotland wants to get on', and her presence at Westminster proved to be a real focus for the SNP with a significant rise in membership being the result.  Furthermore, many political commentators speculate that it was as a result of her victory that the then Labour Government established the Kilbrandon Commission to look into the establishment of a devolved Scottish Assembly.
Despite her high profile she was unsuccessful in retaining the Hamilton seat at the 1970 General Election, but she managed to be re-elected to Westminster at the February 1974 Election for Moray and Nairn, and held her seat in the repeat election in October of the same year.  She first became an MEP in 1975, at a time when the European Parliament was still composed of representative delegations from national parliaments.  She ceased to be a Westminster MP after the May 1979 election, but within weeks had won a seat at the European Parliament in the first direct elections to the Parliament.
It was during her time as an MEP that she acquired the nickname Madame Ecosse (French for Mrs Scotland) because of her strong advocacy of Scottish interests in Strasbourg and Brussels. The term was meant to be given in jest and used in a disparaging way by her opponents, but Ewing used the term as a badge of pride and it stuck. She had been a former Vice President of the European Radical Alliance which included French, Guyanan, Flemish, Luxembourg, Italian, Corsican and Spanish (Canary Islands) MEPs.
In 1999 she gave up being an MEP and became an MSP in the first session of the Scottish Parliament, representing the Highlands and Islands.  As the oldest member it was her duty to preside over the opening of the Scottish Parliament, a session she opened with the famous words,  'The Scottish Parliament, adjourned on the 25th day of March in the year 1707, is hereby reconvened'.
During the controversy that arose in the early years of the Scottish Parliament surrounding proposals to repeal Clause 28 (a law banning the active promotion of homosexuality in schools) she joined her son Fergus Ewing in abstaining, although her daughter in law Margaret Ewing supported repeal as did the majority of her party's MSPs.
In 2003 she lost her husband, Stewart Ewing, in a fire accident.  He had been active with her in politics for many years, and had himself served as an SNP councillor for the Summerston area in Glasgow. The same year she lost her husband she stood down from being an MSP, although she continued to serve as the SNP's President, a position she held for many years.
On 15 July 2005 she announced she would be stepping down as President of the Scottish National Party at its September Conference, bringing to an end her 38-year career in representative politics.
Her son Fergus Ewing serves as SNP MSP, as did his late wife Margaret Ewing, and her daughter Annabelle Ewing, who was also an MP between 2001–2005.

Outside parliament

Ewing is a vice president of equal rights charity Parity.
On April 2009, BBC Alba broadcast a biographical documentary Madame Ecosse,

Further reading








