[[Tenacious D]]

CATEGORIES: American comedy duos, Comedy rock, Musical groups established in 1994, Musical groups from Los Angeles, California, Psychedelic drug advocates, Rock music duos, Rock music groups from California, Epic Records artists, Columbia Records artists, Tenacious D, American comedy musical groups, Kerrang! Awards winners, American musical duos

Tenacious D is an American comedy rock duo that was formed in Los Angeles, California, United States in 1994. Composed of lead vocalist and guitarist Jack Black and lead guitarist and vocalist Kyle Gass, the band has released three albums – Tenacious D (2001), The Pick of Destiny (2006) and Rize of the Fenix (2012). Tenacious D's studio releases, and (as of 2006) its live performances, feature a full band lineup, including such musicians as guitarist John Konesky and bassist John Spiker. Drummer Dave Grohl (Foo Fighters, Nirvana) played on every studio release, with Bad Religion drummer Brooks Wackerman replacing Grohl on tour.
The band first gained popularity in 1999 when they starred in their eponymous television series and began to support large rock acts. In 2001, they released Tenacious D, their debut album featuring a full band. The first single, "Tribute", was the band's most successful achieving their only Top 10 in any chart, until they released "The Metal", which was first shown at Saturday Night Live. In 2006, they starred in, and recorded the soundtrack for, the film Tenacious D in The Pick of Destiny. In support of the film, the band went on a world tour, appearing for the first time with a full band. They released their newest album Rize of the Fenix on May 15, 2012.
Tenacious D's music showcases Black's theatrical vocal delivery and Gass' acoustic guitar playing abilities. Critics have described their fusion of vulgar absurdist comedy with rock music as "mock rock".

History

Beginnings

Jack Black and Kyle Gass met in Edinburgh, Scotland, during the Edinburgh Fringe of 1989.  Both were members of the Los Angeles-based theatre troupe, The Actors' Gang Gass taught Black to play guitar, in exchange for Black helping Gass with his acting.
Initially when Black and Gass performed live they covered songs by Bobby McFerrin.

Television series (1997–2000)

Cross, with Mr. Show writer Bob Odenkirk, continued his involvement with Tenacious D by producing three half-hour shows based on the band. this led to their cameo in the Foo Fighters' "Learn to Fly" music video. The popularity of Tenacious D further increased as they began to open for high profile acts, including Beck, Pearl Jam and Foo Fighters.

First album Tenacious D (2001–03)

In May 2000, Tenacious D signed to Epic Records. As Black's profile increased due to his roles in films such as High Fidelity the band worked on recording their first album with producers the Dust Brothers. In 2001, they released their debut Tenacious D. It peaked at #33 on the Billboard 200 on October 13, 2001.
Although the critical reaction varied, by November 2005, the album had achieved platinum status in the US.
The first single from the album was "Tribute": a tribute to the "greatest song in the world" which, in the song, Tenacious D claimed they had performed in order to save their souls from a demon. A third video, an animation depicting Black and Gass as cherubs, was made for "Fuck Her Gently", directed by Ren and Stimpy-creator John Kricfalusi.
The album also included "Dio", a song written as a tribute to rock singer Ronnie James Dio, which mocked him somewhat for being too old.

The Pick of Destiny (2000–08)

On November 7th 2000, Tenacious D has just finished writing the rough first script for a movie. This script was later scrapped for a plot line about the two searching for a sacred guitar pick. 
In October 2003 Black announced that the screenplay for The Pick of Destiny—a fictional portrayal of the band's formation—had been completed. Dave Grohl again played drums, and further lent vocals to "Beelzeboss (The Final Showdown)" as well as acting in the film, as Satan.

The film had its premiere at Grauman's Chinese Theatre in Los Angeles on November 9, 2006. Many of the actors who had cameos in the film were in attendance; including Ronnie James Dio, Dave Grohl, and Ben Stiller. The film was released worldwide on November 22. The soundtrack had been released just over a week earlier, on November 14. Tenacious D in the Pick of Destiny grossed US$8,334,575 in the US and Canada and a total of US$13,426,450 worldwide, falling well short of its US$20 million production budget and US$40 million in estimated marketing costs. said that DVD sales have shown that the film has picked up a cult audience.
Kevin Crust of the Los Angeles Times said that the film "might best be enjoyed in an enhanced state of consciousness, a herbal supplement, and we aren't talking ginkgo biloba."
The soundtrack was produced by John King of the Dust Brothers, but the reviews were less favourable than for the band's first album. Rolling Stone comments that the soundtrack "never quite takes off".
To coincide with the release of their new film and album, Tenacious D embarked on their 2006–07 tour of the US, Canada, UK, Australia, and New Zealand. This tour included the band's first appearance at New York City's Madison Square Garden. Unlike other tours, this one featured a full backing band. Konesky and Spiker resumed their roles from the album, and Brooks Wackerman was added as drummer.

Rize of the Fenix and touring (2008 – present)

In November 2006, Black expressed wishes to take a year-long break from acting, though Gass hinted a desire for Tenacious D to end at their current highpoint.
The band played the main stage at the 2008 Reading and Leeds Festivals in the UK, playing Leeds on Friday, August 22 and Reading on Sunday, August 24. Jack Black also stated on the Late Show with David Letterman that he had an idea for a song called "Rize of the Fenix", which he described as a "rise from the ashes" workout song similar to "Eye of the Tiger". He performed a vocal sample of the song along to keyboards. Tenacious D played the main stage at Bonnaroo music festival in 2010, which featured the band playing the song "Dio" as a tribute to the late Ronnie James Dio.
Gass has hinted that the band's third album may be called Tenacious D 3-D, reasoning that "It's the third record, so it should probably be 'Tenacious 3-D.' There's going to be a '3' and a 'D,' so you have to connect them." In terms of lyrical themes for the new songs, Black noted that "We're gonna be talking about love, there are gonna be some songs about sex and there's gonna be songs about food".
In a May 2011 interview at Attack of the Show, Black announced that three songs on their upcoming album would be named "Rize of the Fenix", distinguishable by either letter or number. In February 2012 it was revealed that the title of the album would in fact be spelled Rize of the Fenix and will be released on May 15, 2012.
On March 26, 2012 a 6-minute film was uploaded to the Tenacious D Vevo on YouTube. The mockumentary, titled 'Tenacious D - To Be the Best', documents the uncertain future Tenacious D faced after the box-office failure of The Pick of Destiny, KG's subsequent breakdown and incarceration in "an institution", and Jack's embracing of an indulgent Hollywood lifestyle. The film shows a deranged Kyle escaping the facility and attempting to kill Jack and then himself, before they each realize their importance to each other and revive the band. They produce a new album in 75 minutes in the studio, described as "awful", but try again and emerge with another new album, described at the end of the film as "the greatest album recorded by anyone, ever". The film features numerous cameo appearances, including Maria Menounos, Val Kilmer, Dave Grohl, Yoshiki Hayashi, Josh Groban, Richard Ghagan, Michael White, Tim Robbins and Jimmy Kimmel.
The band released the album on April 28, 2012 in its entirety on their Soundcloud account. Rize of the Fenix was officially released on May 15, 2012 with mostly positive reviews from music critics.
On the Rize of the Fenix commentary on Spotify, Black stated "....."
Tenacious D are set to provide a cover of The Last in Line on the Dio tribute album This is Your Life. The album is a compilation of various Dio covers from contemporary metal bands. 

Musical style

Lyrics and themes

Satire and comedy are a major aspect of Tenacious D's lyrical content. Gass said of their approach: "I'd love to do the straight music thing, but that's kind of against our mission, which is to rebel against the serious singer-songwriter mentality."

Influences

Black has said that the first song he enjoyed was ABBA's "Take a Chance on Me". leading to an attempt to themselves write an even better song.
Gass has described Tenacious D's comic assertion that they are the best band as being "ridiculous because it's a matter of opinion". have in turn been influenced by the work of Tenacious D.

Appearances

Film and television

Black and Gass first performed together in Bio-Dome (1996), followed by The Cable Guy (1996), Bongwater (1997), Shallow Hal (2001), School of Rock (2003) and Year One (2009). Black has starred in a number of films himself including Nacho Libre, High Fidelity, The Holiday, King Kong, Orange County, Tropic Thunder and Gulliver's Travels, while he has provided the voice of the main protagonist in the animated Kung Fu Panda films. In 2006, Tenacious D starred in their own film, Tenacious D in The Pick of Destiny, in which they set out to become the greatest rock band in the world, by means of a guitar pick with mystic powers.
Black and Gass have made several television appearances performing songs from their first album. On June 16, 2001, Tenacious D were featured as puppets performing "Friendship" on an episode of Crank Yankers.
In the run up to the release of the film The Pick of Destiny, Tenacious D performed the "Pick of Destiny" at the 2006 American Music Awards and on Late Night with Conan O'Brien. Tenacious D was a musical guest on Saturday Night Live for the first time, although they had previously appeared as an uncredited musical guest on May 2, 1998.

Internet

Black and Gass were interviewed on August 29, 2012, by Tony Hawk as part of the "Dissent" series on the web channel, Ride. The interview was conducted in the Sirius/XM studios as part of the Hawk's "Demolition Radio" program. The interview's topics include comedy rock and Upland Skatepark.

Live

In 2001, Tenacious D started their second nationwide concert tour, performing at larger venues, many of which sold out. Until 2006, Tenacious D usually performed only with acoustic guitars, rarely with a full backing band. The band has also staged two international concert tours as well as numerous domestic tours, Many of these recordings have been recorded and released through Live Music Archive and are available for free digital download.
The band uses an electronic musical toy saxophone called a Sax-A-Boom on-stage.
In August 2008, the band performed on the main stages of the Reading and Leeds Festivals. The band played a Guns N' Roses cover.
On October 23, 2010, the band performed live at the BlizzCon 2010 convention in Anaheim, California.  The performance, featured the debut of new songs, and was viewed via an online stream (BlizzCon Virtual Ticket) at blizzcon.com and on DIRECTV as a Pay Per View event.
On Friday, June 11, 2010, Tenacious D was in the middle of their "One Day Tour" in Manchester, TN for the annual Bonnaroo Music Festival. The band opened for 'Kings of Leon', the first headliner of Bonnaroo 2010.
Throughout November and December 2011, the band supported Foo Fighters during their Wasting Light tour of Australia and New Zealand.
In June 2012, Tenacious D played at the Rock am Ring music festival in Germany. This is the biggest event that Tenacious D have ever played with 86,500 people in attendance.
On Saturday 9 June 2012, Tenacious D played the main stage at Download Festival at Donington Park in Derbyshire, England.
On Sunday 11 August 2013, Tenacious D played at a theme park Gröna Lund in Stockholm, Sweden. The area holding 17.000 fans was quickly full, forcing Gröna Lund to close the gates 3 hours before the concert. Over 5000 fans were left outside with no chance to see Tenacious D. The Swedish Police called it "chaos" and some fans were even seen swimming into the theme park via the water entrance. Lots of fans also rented peddle boats to see the show from the water 

Politics

Tenacious D are supporters of cannabis legalization. They have also performed at a NORML benefit concert.
In 2004, Tenacious D supported John Kerry's US presidential election campaign by playing a benefit concert for him. Black and Gass were also critical of George W. Bush's presidency. In 2012, Tenacious D performed at the House of Blues in Cleveland and did a surprise gig at Kent State University earlier on that day too to encourage voting. Tenacious D backed Barack Obama that year. 

Other projects

Tenacious D have appeared in numerous music videos by other bands, including "Push" by Dio, "Photograph" by Weezer and "Learn to Fly" by the Foo Fighters.
In addition to appearing in videos, Black and Gass sang backup vocals on the 2002 Styx album Cyclorama, on the song "Kiss Your Ass Goodbye".
Gass appeared in the Good Charlotte music video for the song "Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous". Trainwreck has broken up as of early 2011.
Gass also has a YouTube series called "Guitarings", cohosted by Tenacious D touring and session guitarist John Konesky, in which they interview musicians, give guitar lessons and discuss a range of topics related to guitars.

Band members

Discography



Notes




