[[Edgar Davids]]

CATEGORIES: 1973 births, Living people, Jewish footballers, People from Paramaribo, Surinamese emigrants to the Netherlands, Dutch people of Surinamese descent, Surinamese Jews, Dutch Jews, Dutch expatriate footballers, Expatriate footballers in England, Expatriate footballers in Spain, Dutch footballers, AFC Ajax players, A.C. Milan players, Barnet F.C. players, Crystal Palace F.C. players, Juventus F.C. players, FC Barcelona footballers, Inter Milan players, Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players, Barnet F.C. managers, La Liga footballers, Serie A footballers, Eredivisie players, Premier League players, The Football League players, Football Conference players, UEFA Euro 1996 players, 1998 FIFA World Cup players, UEFA Euro 2000 players, UEFA Euro 2004 players, FIFA 100, Netherlands under-21 international footballers, Netherlands international footballers, Doping cases in association football, Dutch sportspeople in doping cases, Expatriate footballers in Italy, Dutch expatriates in Italy, The Football League managers, Football Conference managers, Player-coaches

Edgar Steven Davids (; born 13 March 1973) is a Surinamese-born Dutch former professional footballer. After beginning his career with Ajax, he subsequently played in Italy for Milan and Juventus before a loan spell with Barcelona. He went on to play for Internazionale and Tottenham Hotspur before returning to Ajax. Having struggled with injuries for two years, Davids returned to competitive football during a brief spell with Crystal Palace before retiring at the age of 37. In 2012, he was appointed player-manager at English League Two club Barnet. He resigned by mutual agreement as manager in January 2014.
He was capped 74 times by the Netherlands at international level, scoring six goals, and represented his country at the FIFA World Cup (once) and the UEFA European Football Championship (three times). Davids was well known for his dreadlocked hair and the protective goggles he wore due to glaucoma.

Early life

Edgar Davids was born in Suriname to an African father and a Jewish mother. They later moved to the Netherlands when Edgar was an infant.

Club career

Ajax

After being rejected on two previous occasions by the club, He made his first team debut on 6 September 1991 in a 5–1 home win over RKC Waalwijk. He helped the Amsterdam club to three domestic Eredivisie titles, as well as continental success with the 1992 UEFA Cup and the 1995 UEFA Champions League. In the 1996 UEFA Champions League Final, he missed Ajax's first penalty in the shoot-out, which they ultimately lost to Juventus. While at Ajax, he was nicknamed "The Pitbull" by Ajax manager Louis van Gaal due to his fierce style of play and bite in the midfield.

Milan and Juventus

At the start of the 1996–97 season Davids moved to Italy to play for Milan. After an unsuccessful spell where he failed to establish himself in the first team he moved on to league rivals Juventus in December 1997 for a £5.3 million transfer fee. Juventus manager Marcello Lippi once described him as "my one-man engine room."
He was often inspirational in Europe, playing 15 times as the club made it all the way to the 2002–03 UEFA Champions League final before losing to Milan on penalties.

Barcelona

Davids joined Barcelona on loan in January 2004 from Juventus. Joining midway through a season where the club was struggling in midtable and recently appointed manager Frank Rijkaard was under considerable pressure, Davids led Barça's successful resurgence of form which saw them finishing second to Valencia in the league.

Internazionale and Tottenham Hotspur

In the summer of 2004, he permanently moved on to Italian club Inter Milan on a three-year contract.it, Edgar Davids joins Inter, 11 July 2004 When Internazionale terminated the remaining years of his contract in August 2005, he moved to England on a free transfer to play for Tottenham Hotspur.bbc.co.stm, Tottenham complete Davids signing , 3 August 2005'' He had a successful stay at Tottenham and instantly became a fan's favourite. His first and only goal was in a 2–1 away win against Wigan Athletic. Davids played for Spurs in the 2005–06 and the 2006–07 seasons, with the club finishing fifth in both seasons.

Return to Ajax

Davids signed once more for Ajax on 28 January 2007nos. 28 January 2007 and played his first match against Ajax's rivals Feyenoord on 4 February. After the mid-season switch, Davids proved his value for the Ajax team again. He was one of the key midfielders in the run for the Dutch championship that was lost on one single goal to PSV on the final day of the league. He also played a major role in Ajax's cup campaign. He secured the KNVB Cup for Ajax by scoring the final penalty in a thrilling penalty shoot-out against AZ. Prior to the start of the 2007–08 season, Davids' leg was broken in a pre-season friendly against Go Ahead Eagles, sidelining him for around three months.
He played against Los Angeles Galaxy on 6 December 2008 in an exhibition match held at Mount Smart Stadium in Auckland, New Zealand, as part of an Oceania XI All-Star team, despite the fact he is not from Oceania and has never played for an Oceanic club or national team. However, he failed to make a decision for over a week and the club withdrew their offer on 30 October.

Crystal Palace

On 20 August 2010, Davids agreed a pay-as-you-play deal with English Championship club Crystal Palace. He made his debut on 24 August 2010 at left-back in the Second Round of the League Cup against Portsmouth. On 8 November 2010, he announced his departure from the club, stating it was "one of the greatest experiences of my life".

International career

Davids was an integral part of the Dutch national team since his debut on 20 April 1994 in Tilburg against Ireland (0–1),
During UEFA Euro 1996, he was sent home by then manager Guus Hiddink for saying in a radio interview: "Hiddink should stop putting his head in some players' asses."
Nonetheless, Davids remained appreciated by Hiddink, who included him in the Dutch squad for the 1998 FIFA World Cup in France. Davids' most notable performance for the national team came in the second round match against FR Yugoslavia. He scored the winning goal in the last minute of the game and ensured that the Dutch team went through to the next round to meet Argentina. The Netherlands eventually finished 4th overall and Davids was named to the official FIFA "Team of the Tournament".
In 1999, Davids began wearing protective glasses, following surgery in his right eye caused by glaucoma, Davids first wore them on September 4, 1999 in a friendly match against Belgium.rin.
Davids played in the UEFA Euro 2000 when he was named for the UEFA "Team of the Tournament". The Netherlands reached the semi-finals and played against Italy in a thrilling game that ended up being decided in Italy's favour with a penalty shootout.
During the Netherlands' UEFA Euro 2004 qualifying matches, Davids scored the Netherlands' first qualifying goal in their opening 3–0 victory against Belarus and subsequently bossed the midfield in five of the remaining seven Group 3 fixtures and both legs of the play-off victory against Scotland.
After Euro 2004, new national team coach Marco van Basten appointed Davids as captain of the team. However, lack of first team football at his club Inter meant Davids also lost his place in the national team in October 2004, thus losing the captain's armband in the process, which was later handed to Edwin van der Sar. At the latter stages of the qualifying series for the 2006 FIFA World Cup in October 2005, he was re-called back into the national team, though not as captain. He fell out of the picture again shortly after, thereby missing out on the Dutch squad for the World Cup.
Davids was selected to appear on the cover of the football game FIFA Football 2003 alongside Manchester United winger Ryan Giggs and Brazilian international Roberto Carlos.

Coaching career

Ajax

In June 2011, Davids was elected to the new supervisory board at Ajax alongside Johan Cruyff.

Barnet

Since 2010, Davids had been living in North London with his partner and had been participating in street football as well as managing Sunday league amateur side Brixton United.
In March 2013, Davids became a hero for the Barnet faithful after he rescued 36 travelling fans who were stranded on the hard shoulder of the motorway.
Despite initially guiding Barnet off the foot of League Two, and lifting them out of the relegation zone, Barnet dropped back into the bottom two on the final day of the 2012–13 season, following a defeat to Northampton Town, and were relegated out of the Football League at the expense of AFC Wimbledon who were able to escape by beating Fleetwood Town. On 21 May 2013, it was announced that Davids would remain in charge of Barnet for the club's 2013–14 Conference Premier season. In July 2013, Davids announced his decision to wear the number 1 shirt for the 2013–14 season, a shirt number traditionally worn by goalkeepers, saying that he intends to "set a trend" of midfielders wearing the number 1 shirt.eurosport.com/blogs/world-of-sport/edgar-davids-set-trend-midfielders-wearing-no-1-214615824.html
Discipline was a major problem for Davids in the 2013-14 season. He was booked in each of the first eight league games he played, and he was sent off three times in those first eight games. There was also controversy when it emerged that he would not attend away games that required an overnight stay, leaving assistant manager Ulrich Landvreugd to take charge.
Davids resigned from his post as manager on 18 January 2014.

Personal life

He was engaged to fashion designer Olcay Gulsen. 
In 1999 Edgar Davids started his own Street Soccer fashion label called Monta Soccer.montasoccer. It currently has multiple fashion lines. The Monta Sports, The Monta Studio and Monta Juniors.montasoccer.com/collections/monta-juniors

Honours

Club

Individual

Playing statistics

Club

International



International goals

Managerial statistics






