[[List of Governors of Idaho]]

CATEGORIES: Governors of Idaho, Lists of state governors of the United States, Lists of Idaho politicians, State constitutional officers of Idaho

The Governor of Idaho is the head of the executive branch of Idaho's governmentID Const. art. IV, § 5 and commander-in-chief of the state's militia. art. IV, § 4  The governor has the duty to see state laws are executed, power to either approve or veto bills passed by the Idaho Legislature.
Idaho Territory had 16 territorial governors appointed by the President of the United States from the territory's organization in 1863 until the formation of the state of Idaho in 1890. Four of these never took office, resigning before reaching the territory.
Thirty individuals have held the office of governor of Idaho since the state's admission to the Union in 1890, two of whom—C. A. Bottolfsen and Cecil D. Andrus—served non-consecutive terms. The state's first governor, George Laird Shoup, had the shortest term of three months, and Cecil D. Andrus served as governor the longest at 14 years.  Four governors resigned, but none has died while in office.  There have been 20 Republican and 12 Democratic governors.  The current governor is C. L. "Butch" Otter, who took office on January 1, 2007; his current term will expire in January 2015.

Governors

Governors of the Territory of Idaho

Idaho Territory was created from Dakota Territory, Nebraska Territory, and Washington Territory on March 4, 1863. Initially, the territory included all of modern-day Idaho and Montana, and most of Wyoming. On May 26, 1864, Montana Territory was split from Idaho Territory, and most of the Wyoming portion was reassigned to Dakota Territory. The portion east of the 111th meridian was split off as part of the new Wyoming Territory on July 25, 1868, giving Idaho Territory its final borders.
Due to the long distance between Washington, D.C. and Boise, there was often a lengthy gap between a governor being appointed and his arrival in the territory; four resigned before even arriving. 

Governors of the State of Idaho

Idaho was admitted to the Union on July 3, 1890. Since then, the state has had 30 governors, two of whom served non-consecutive terms.  The terms for governor and lieutenant governor are four years, commencing on the first Monday in the January following the election. Prior to 1946, the offices were elected to terms of two years.



Other high offices held

Sixteen of Idaho's governors have served higher federal offices or as governors of other states. Nine have served in the U.S. Senate, eight of those representing Idaho, and three have served in the U.S. House, one representing Idaho, one New York, and one the territories of Idaho and Washington. Idaho shares a governor with Arizona Territory, and one was appointed to Washington Territory but never took office. Two governors have been U.S. Secretaries of the Interior, and one served as ambassador to the Ottoman Empire. Six governors (marked with *) resigned to take a new office, including both territorial delegates, both Secretaries of the Interior, and two senators.
In addition, two people who were appointed governor of Idaho Territory but never took office held other high offices. Gilman Marston, appointed governor in 1870, was a representative and senator from New Hampshire,
All representatives and senators mentioned represented Idaho except where noted.

Living former governors

, five former governors were alive. The most recent death of a former governor was that of Robert E. Smylie (1955–1967), who died at age 89 on July 17, 2004. The most recently serving governor to pass away was Don Samuelson (1967–1971), at age 86 on January 13, 2000.

Notes






