[[Carl Ferdinand Cori]]

CATEGORIES: 1896 births, 1984 deaths, 20th-century Austrian people, 20th-century Czech people, American biochemists, Austrian biochemists, Czech biochemists, Nobel laureates in Physiology or Medicine, American Nobel laureates, Austrian Nobel laureates, Foreign Members of the Royal Society, Czech Nobel laureates, Recipients of the Albert Lasker Award for Basic Medical Research, Recipients of the Austrian Decoration for Science and Art, Washington University in St. Louis faculty, Harvard University people, Charles University in Prague alumni, Austro-Hungarian emigrants to the United States, Austro-Hungarian people, People from Prague, People from Buffalo, New York, Burials at Mount Auburn Cemetery

Carl Ferdinand Cori, ForMemRS

Biography

Carl was the son of Carl Cori, a physician, and Martha Lippich. He grew up in Trieste, where his father was the director of the Marine Biological Station. In late 1914 the Cori family moved to Prague and Carl entered the medical school of Charles University in Prague. While studying there he met Gerty Theresa Radnitz. He was drafted into the Austro-Hungarian Army and served in the ski corps, and later was transferred to the sanitary corps, for which he set up a laboratory in Trieste. At the end of the war Carl completed his studies, graduating with Gerty in 1920. Carl and Gerty married that year and worked together in clinics in Vienna.
Carl was invited to Graz to work with Otto Loewi to study the effect of the vagus nerve on the heart (Loewi would receive the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1936 for this work). While Carl was in Graz, Gerty remained in Vienna. A year later Carl was offered a position at the State Institute for the Study of Malignant Diseases (now the Roswell Park Cancer Institute) in Buffalo, New York and the Cori's moved to Buffalo. In 1928, they became naturalized citizens of the United States.
While at the Institute the Coris' research focused on carbohydrate metabolism, leading to the definition of the Cori cycle in 1929. In 1931 Carl accepted a position at the Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, Missouri. Carl joined as professor of pharmacology and in 1942 was made professor of biochemistry. In St. Louis, the Cori's continued their research on glycogen and glucose and began to describe glycogenolysis, identifying and synthesizing the important enzyme glycogen phosphorylase. For these discoveries, they received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1947.
In 1946, Carl Cori won the Albert Lasker Award for Basic Medical Research and in 1959, the Austrian Decoration for Science and Art.
Gerty died in 1957 and Carl married Anne Fitz-Gerald Jones in 1960. He stayed on at Washington University until 1966, when he retired as chair of the biochemistry department. He was appointed visiting professor of Biological Chemistry at  Harvard University while  maintaining a laboratory space at the Massachusetts General Hospital, where he pursued research in genetics. From 1968 to 1983 he collaborated with noted geneticist Salomé Glüecksohn-Waelsch of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York, until the 1980s when illness prevented him from continuing.  In 1976 Carl received the Laurea honoris causa in Medicine from the University of Trieste.
Carl shares a star with Gerty on the St. Louis Walk of Fame



Further reading




