[[List of Governors of Washington]]

CATEGORIES: Lists of state governors of the United States, Governors of Washington (state), Lists of Washington (state) politicians, Lists of territorial governors of the United States, State constitutional officers of Washington (state)

The Governor of Washington is the head of the executive branch of Washington's government and the commander-in-chief of the state's military forces. art. III, § 2WA Const. art. III, § 8 The governor has a duty to enforce state laws,WA Const. art. III, § 5 the power to either approve or veto bills passed by the Washington Legislature and line-item veto power to cancel specific provisions in spending bills. art. III, § 12 The governor may also convene the legislature on "extraordinary occasions".
Washington Territory had 14 territorial governors from its organization in 1853 until the formation of the state of Washington in 1889. Territorial governors were appointed by the President of the United States. Elisha Peyre Ferry had the longest term of eight years and went on to become the state's first governor.  William H. Wallace was appointed governor but never took office due to being elected as the territory's congressional delegate. George E. Cole was appointed governor and took office, but his appointment was never ratified by the U.S. Senate and he was replaced as governor after four months.
Twenty-one individuals have held the office of governor of Washington since the state's admission to the Union, with Arthur B. Langlie serving non-consecutive terms. Langlie and Daniel J. Evans are the state's only three term governors.  Populist Party candidate John Rankin Rogers is the only non Democratic or Republican nominee to win office. The current governor is Jay Inslee, who took office at 10:30 am, January 16, 2013; his term will expire in January 2017.

Governors

Governors of the Territory of Washington

Washington Territory was created on March 2, 1853 from the northern half of Oregon Territory.  At this point, Washington Territory also included the northern panhandle of modern Idaho and parts of Montana.
Due to the long distance between Washington, D.C. and Olympia, there was often a lengthy gap between a governor being appointed and his arrival in the territory.

Governors of the State of Washington

Washington was admitted to the Union on November 11, 1889.  The term for governor is four years, commencing on the second Monday in the January following the election. art. III, § 4  If the office of governor is vacant or the governor is unable to discharge their duties, the lieutenant governor assumes the office of governor.  If both the offices of governor and lieutenant governor are unable to fulfill their duties, the secretary of state is next in line, and then the treasurer. art. III, § 10  There is no limit to the number of terms a governor may serve.  The office of  lieutenant governor is not elected on the same ticket as the governor.




Other high offices held

Six of Washington's territorial governors and four of its state governors have served higher federal or confederate offices, or as governors of other states. Three represented Washington Territory as delegates to the U.S. House, and one additionally represented Idaho Territory in the same fashion, as well as serving as Governor of Idaho Territory. Two territorial governors represented eastern states, one as a representative from, and governor of, New Jersey, and one represented Virginia both in the United States and Confederate Houses. Three governors represented the state in the U.S. Senate, and two represented the state in the House. One governor has served in the United States Cabinet. Two of the territorial governors (marked with *) resigned their office to serve as territorial delegates.

Living former governors

, five former governors are alive. The most recent former governor to die was Booth Gardner (1985–1993), on March 15, 2013. The most recently serving governor to die was Dixy Lee Ray (1977–1981), on January 2, 1994. Albert Rosellini lived to be 101 years and 262 days old, making him the longest lived United States governor. 

Notes



Washington Territorial and State Governors | publisher=Washington Secretary of State | accessdate=July 1, 2010}}




