[[Luxury vehicle]]

CATEGORIES: Luxury vehicles, Car classifications

Luxury vehicle is a marketing term for a vehicle that provides luxury — pleasant or desirable features beyond strict necessity — at increased expense (see luxury goods).
The term suggests a vehicle with higher quality equipment, better performance, more precise construction, comfort, higher design, technologically innovative modern, or features that convey an image, brand, status, or prestige, or any other 'discretionary' feature or combination of them. The term is also broad, highly variable and relative. It is a perceptual, conditional and subjective attribute that may be understood differently by different people; "what may be luxury for one may be premium for another."
In contemporary usage, the term may be applied to any vehicle type— including sedan, coupe, hatchback, station wagon, and convertible body styles, as well as to minivans, Moreover, there is a convergence in the markets and a resulting confusion of luxury with high price: where there may have been a clear difference in price between luxury and others, there is no longer an absolute separation between premium and luxury, with what may be premium brands now more expensive than the equivalent so-called luxury ones. 43.

Definition

Automobile manufacturers market specific makes and models that are targeted at particular socio-economic classes, and thus "social status came to be associated more with a particular vehicle than ownership of a car per se." Therefore, automakers differentiate among their product lines in "collusion" with the car-buying public. While a high price is the most frequent factor, it is "styling, engineering, and even public opinion which cars had the highest and lowest status associated with them."
Every era in automobile history has had "a group of car marques and models that have been expensive to purchase, due to their alleged superiority of their design and engineering". Aimed at wealthy buyers, such automobiles might be generically termed luxury cars. This term is also used for unique vehicles produced during "an era when luxury was individualistic consideration, and coachwork could be tailored to an owner like a bespoke suit." Although there is considerable literature about specific marques, there is a lack of systematic and scholarly work that "analyzes the luxury car phenomenon itself."
Luxury vehicle makers may either be stand-alone companies in their own right, such as BMW and Mercedes, or a division/subsidiary of a mass market automaker (e.g., Lexus is part of Toyota). Badge engineering is often used for cost savings, for example, the Lincoln vehicles that are based on Ford platforms or Acura models derived from Honda.
Though widely used, the term luxury is broad and highly variable. It is a perceptual, conditional and subjective attribute and may be understood differently by different people: "What is a luxury car to some... may be 'ordinary' to others."

Global references

According to the European Commission, the "luxury vehicle" segment is classified as F-segment. However, the boundaries between the traditional segments are increasingly becoming blurred and diluted as features once exclusive to luxury vehicles become standard equipment on even small cars.

Luxury market segments

Premium compact segment

The compact executive car segment or premium compact class
The premium compact segment is targeted at a niche market of consumers who found the existing entry-level luxury offerings (mostly consisting of compact executive cars - see below) to be too expensive.
Premium compacts may share components with mass market cars from the marque's parent company (the Audi A3 for example, shares much of its engineering with the cheaper Volkswagen Golf), and/or have less sophisticated platforms compared to upmarket vehicles in the lineup (such as the Mercedes-Benz B-Class which is front-wheel drive compared to the other marque's more expensive cars that are rear-wheel drive). However, the BMW 1 Series retains the front-engine longitudinal-engine rear-wheel drive configuration of more expensive BMWs.
The body style tends to be a hatchback or compact wagon, previously associated with economy cars but regaining popularity in the United States for its afforded utility, although as of 2013 there are sedans such as the Audi A3 and Mercedes-Benz B-Class. The luxury branding and style, high-quality interior materials, wide range of convenience features, and performance powertrains are key to distinguishing them from mass market equivalents (one mistake made by the Cadillac Cimarron) and making these appeal to consumers.

Entry-level luxury/compact executive cars

This category is known as the compact executive car in Britain where it specifies both the price range and vehicle dimensions. In the U.S., there is a broader category called entry-level luxury, which includes the bottom vehicles in the line-up of luxury brands as well as the top-of-the-line models of some non-luxury brands.
Dimensionally, compact executive cars are smaller than Mid-size cars and sometimes even smaller than compact/Small family cars. Mass market compact cars typically use the economical front wheel drive transverse engine layout, well suited to the inline-4 engine, which also maximizes interior room. Compact executive cars also tend to have more complicated independent suspensions, sportier transmissions, and high revolution engines that may require premium gasoline. The more complex powertrain and mechanical layouts of compact executive cars comes at increased cost and reduced interior passenger and trunk space.
Compact executive cars include the Acura ILX, Alfa Romeo 159, Volvo S60, Lexus IS, Infiniti G/Q50, Saab 9-3, BMW 2 Series, BMW 3 Series, Audi A4, Cadillac ATS, Mercedes-Benz CLA-Class and Mercedes-Benz C-Class which particularly emphasize sporty handling. In the United States and Canada these vehicles are known as entry-level luxury cars.
The American and Canadian classification of entry-level luxury includes is a broad category which includes not only compact executive cars, but also midsize cars such as the Lexus ES, Acura TL, Buick LaCrosse, being similar in price to the BMW 3 Series and Mercedes-Benz C-Class. while the TL has recently been targeted at the entry-level luxury sport market due to its SH-AWD.
Recently, the entry-level luxury has been very competitive, and there has been price-overlapping with well-equipped non-luxury cars.

Mid-luxury/executive cars

The mid-luxury segment is commonly referred to as executive cars in Britain, Obere Mittelklasse in German, and Grandes Routières in French. Although Maserati vehicles have traditionally been priced as ultra-luxury cars, the new Maserati Ghibli III is intended to compete with high-spec executive cars, such as the Audi S6/S7, BMW 550i and Mercedes-Benz E550/CLS550.edmunds.html 
Although having similar dimensions to mid-size cars and large family cars, executive cars are engineered and positioned as premium vehicles with better performance and technology amenities. There are also higher development and production costs, as many well-known mid-luxury cars use the longitudinal (usually front engine rear wheel drive layout) engine mounting which affords space for powerful engines such as a V8, instead of the more economical transverse engine layout of mass market cars which are restricted to inline-4 or V6. Executive cars usually have lower sales and production volumes compared to mid-size cars, as base trims with less equipment and smaller engines are not sold in U.S. and Canadian markets.
Vehicles in this segment include the mid-range models of several luxury car manufacturers. Executive cars such as the BMW 5 Series are crucial to a luxury automaker's bottom line, and although not the highest-selling model, they generate a significant amount of profits due to the lucrative technology options.

High-end luxury/full-size luxury cars

Also known as full-size luxury cars, grand saloons, or premium large cars, while "Oberklasse" is used in Germany. Many of these are the marque's showcases for the newest automotive technology.
Vehicles in this category include some of the models from the flagship lines of luxury car brands. Examples include the Porsche Panamera, Acura RL, Audi A8, BMW 7 Series, Infiniti Q45, Jaguar XJ, Lexus LS, Mercedes-Benz CLS-Class, Mercedes-Benz S-Class, Volkswagen Phaeton, and in the US, the Lincoln Town Car, Chrysler 300C, and Cadillac XTS. In the United States in 2004, the bestselling full-size luxury nameplates were the Lexus LS, Mercedes-Benz S-Class, and BMW 7 Series.

Ultra-luxury cars

R.L. Polk and Company, a global automotive information and marketing firm that provides services.
This bracket includes the lineup of Rolls Royce and Bentley, as these marques do not offer lower-priced offerings in the entry-level luxury or mid-luxury segments like more mainstream luxury brands like Audi, Porsche, BMW, and Mercedes-Benz. As of late 2011, super luxury automakers have been "pledging higher sales and offering ever sexier models" despite the economic uncertainty.
Bentley and Rolls Royce have recently moved into more affordable price brackets with new models priced considerably lower than their traditional offerings (Bentley Mulsanne and Rolls Royce Phantom and Maserati Quattroporte). These new cars, the Bentley Flying Spur and Continental GT sister cars and Rolls Royce Ghost, Although Rolls-Royce and Bentley have traditionally been considered "as a purveyor of boxy British land yachts", newer offerings such as the Bentley Continental Flying Spur and Bentley Continental GT have "upended the super-premium auto segment, making Bentley for the first time a plausible choice for younger Hollywood and music stars".hollywoodreporter.wordpress.com/bentley-rental/rent-bentley-continental-gt
Maserati vehicles such as the Maserati Quattroporte have traditionally been priced as ultra-luxury cars, although the new Maserati Ghibli III is intended to compete with high-spec executive cars, such as the Audi S6/S7, BMW 550i and Mercedes-Benz E550/CLS550.edmunds.html
The most expensive variants of flagship cars from Audi, BMW, and Mercedes-Benz are often included here as well. They often feature a longer wheelbase and have V12 engines for great refinement and smoothness,
There are ultra-high performance cars from "exotic brands" that also exceed 

Luxury SUV/Crossover

Although only becoming popular in the 1990s, this category has been said to be created with Kaiser Jeep's 1966 Super Wagoneer as the first true luxury four-wheel drive (4x4) vehicle.
The venerable Grand Wagoneer was still the leader in the luxury SUV market in 1986, and continued to be produced virtually unchanged through 1991, long after Chrysler bought out American Motors Corporation (AMC) in 1987.
The SUV models generated higher-profit-margins than ordinary automobiles, and automakers introduced new luxury models during the late 1990s.
SUVs from the luxury marques grew at almost 40 percent to more than 430,000 vehicles, excluding SUV-only brands like Hummer and Land Rover, while luxury car sales in the U.S. during 2003 suffered a 1% decline, and non-luxury SUV sales were flat. By 2004, 30 percent of major luxury brands' U.S. sales are now SUVs. Luxury brands in particular led the development of crossover SUVs (as opposed to body-on-frame SUVs), making it one of the fastest growing segments in the market, as the forecast for 2002 was approximately 240,000 vehicles and that could double by 2006.
Certain luxury SUVs use body-on-frame underpinnings, often being badge-engineered versions of their non-luxury counterparts, and retaining the rugged off-road and towing capabilities. Examples include the Lexus LX and Lincoln Navigator, which are the premium versions of the Toyota Land Cruiser (itself a luxurious SUV in the United States) and Ford Expedition, respectively.
Other luxury SUVs are crossovers using unibody construction, often sharing the platform with compact executive and executive cars. For example, the Infiniti FX is based upon the Nissan FM platform that also underpins other Infiniti cars. Audi and BMW developed crossovers to compete in the SUV segment as they did not have an existing body-on-frame vehicle in their lineup.

Characteristics

Features

Luxury cars tend to offer a higher degree of comfort than their mainstream counterparts, common amenities include genuine leather upholstery and polished "woodgrain-look" dashboards. Compared to mainstream vehicles, luxury cars have traditionally emphasized comfort and safety.
Contemporary luxury cars also offer higher performance and better handling, which is often known as sport luxury. However in Europe, where large-displacement engines are often heavily taxed and many luxury buyers shy away from conspicuous consumption, brands offer buyers the option of removing exterior engine-identifying badges.
Forbes noted that the reputation of luxury marques enables them to continually introduce many new safety technologies and comfort amenities, such as anti-lock brakes, electronic stability control and DVD entertainment systems, before they trickle down to mass market cars. Numerous "smart car" features are largely only found on luxury cars as of 2009.

Layout and powertrain

The rear-wheel drive with longitudinal engines (FR) is a common layout of luxury cars. European marques like Mercedes-Benz, BMW, and Jaguar have almost never adopted front-wheel drive and retained a lineup mostly or entirely made up of FR cars. Japanese brands such as Lexus and Infiniti also have predominantly FR lineups. The FR layout, while more expensive than the FF, has been retained by these luxury manufacturers as it allows for higher performance engines (particularly the straight-6, V8, and other engine configurations with more cylinders), better handling, and a smoother ride.

American manufacturers also largely followed the FR for their luxury brands (as well as their mass-market cars of the time). However, due to the Arab Oil Embargo of 1973 and the 1979 fuel crises, began eliminating their FR platforms in favor of the more economical front wheel drive transverse engine layout (FF). Chrysler went 100% FF by 1990 and GM's Cadillac and Buick brands for the US were entirely FF by 1997. One of the few notable holdouts was Ford's Lincoln Town Car and Lincoln LS.
In the 21st century, as part of the revamp of its design and image,

History and sales

In the United States luxury market, Cadillac and Lincoln had long been the best-selling and second best-selling luxury brands until 1998, when they were overtaken by Japanese and German brands.
Since the 1980s, a host of new manufacturers have entered the luxury market to challenge the traditional players. The three major Japanese auto manufacturers, Honda, Toyota, and Nissan, created their respective luxury brands particularly for the US. As a result of voluntary export restraints imposed in 1981, these manufacturers were limited to a number of vehicles they could export. While these companies sidestepped this by establishing US production facilities for mass market vehicles, their home factories soon begun producing higher-priced cars as they carried a greater profit margin per car. Acura was launched in 1986, while Lexus and Infiniti were unveiled in 1989. By 1992, these three divisions had sales of over 
The Late-2000s recession was the first time since the Great Depression of the 1930s that the luxury car market suffered considerably, something not seen in previous economic downturns. Many such customers saw their net worth decline following the collapse in financial markets and real-estate values. For example, some of the steepest dropoffs came at the high end, including the BMW 7 Series and Rolls Royce Phantom, and Mercedes-Benz unexpectedly dropped the starting price of its all-new 2010 E-Class. The unusually sharp decline in luxury car sales have led observers to believe that there is a fundamental shift and reshaping of the luxury automotive market, with one industry official suggesting that the marques no longer command the premiums that they used to, and another saying that conspicuous consumption was no longer attractive in poor economic conditions.
 Additionally, mainstream brands have been able to offer amenities and devices such as leather, wood, and anti-lock brakes, previously found only on luxury cars, as the costs decline.
However, luxury vehicle sales have not collapsed as much as their non-luxury counterparts. Luxury vehicle marques generally benefited from financially healthier dealerships, better leasing and certified pre-owned programs and loyal customers, so sales are expected to rebound more quickly than mass market cars. Others note that there is growing interest in luxury vehicles from emerging markets such as China and Russia.
The entry-level luxury segment has been very competitive, and there has been price-overlapping with well-equipped non-luxury cars.
In 2010, BMW was the best-selling luxury vehicle manufacturer by sales, ahead of rivals Audi AG and Daimler AG's Mercedes-Benz marque.







