[[Georges River]]

CATEGORIES: Botany Bay, Rivers of Sydney

Georges River, formerly known as Tucoerah River, is an intermediate tide dominated drowned valley estuary, located to the south and west of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
The source of the Georges River is from the land surrounding the Dharawal Nature Reserve, approximately  from the Tasman Sea. The Georges River is the main tributary of Botany Bay; with the Cooks River being a secondary tributary.
The total catchment area of the river is approximately  and the area surrounding the river is managed by a large number of local government authorities and NSW Government agencies.
The land adjacent to the Georges River was occupied for many thousands of years by the Tharawal and Eora Aboriginal peoples. They used the river as an important source of food and a place for trade.

Geography

Course

From its source south–west of Appin within heath habitat of Wollondilly Shire, the Georges River flows north through rugged sandstone gorges to the east of Campbelltown, roughly parallel to the Main South railway line, with its eastern bank forming a boundary with Holsworthy Army Base. At Glenfield it reaches the urban environment and then travels to Liverpool where the river turns east and flows past the suburbs of East Hills, Lugarno, and Blakehurst, before emptying into Botany Bay at Taren Point in the southern suburbs of Sydney, where it joins with the estuarine catchment.
Major tributaries include O'Hares Creek, Bunbury Curran Creek, Cabramatta Creek, Prospect Creek, Salt Pan Creek and the Woronora River. The Georges River is popular for recreational activities such as water skiing and swimming. The banks of the river along the lower reaches are marked by large inlets and indentations overlooked by steep sandstone ridges and scarps, many being home to expensive residential properties.
The Georges River features some artificial lakes in the suburb of Chipping Norton, near Liverpool. These lakes, known as the Chipping Norton Lakes, are the result of sand mining and quarrying operations in the twentieth century. The Lakes are now a popular watersports and recreational facility for the residents of the south-western suburbs of Sydney.
Liverpool Weir now forms the uppermost tidal limit and presence of salt water on the Georges River.
Georges River National Park adjoins the upper reaches of the Georges River. This bushland is some of the most pristine in western Sydney.

History

Aboriginal history

Prior to the arrival of Europeans, Georges River was formerly known as Tucoerah River by the traditional custodians of the area.

European history

The Georges River was named in honour of King George III, by Governor Arthur Phillip.
The river was first explored by Bass and Flinders in 1795 on their first voyage on the Tom Thumb after their arrival in New South Wales.  The exploration led to the establishment of Bankstown .
A dam was constructed by David Lennox using convict labour at Liverpool in 1836, as a water supply to Liverpool.
In February 2007, Liverpool and Campbelltown City Council were awarded a $2 million grant from the NSW Environmental Trust under their Urban Sustainability Initiative.environment.gov.htm The grant was to allow the councils, in conjunction with Wollondilly Shire Council and the Georges River Combined Councils Committee, to develop a Comprehensive Strategic Plan focused on the rehabilitation of the catchment area.campbelltown.gov.asp?fileId=13828&cacheDefeat=0.4095564579588126

Crossings

Bridges over the Georges River include from east to west: 

Fish

The Georges River is a popular area for recreational fishing.  Species present in the river include bream, whiting, yellowtail, jewfish and flathead.  The river is also host to a number of commercial oyster farms.  The upper ends of the Georges River are abundant with Bass during the summer months and during the winter months these bass migrate down to the lower ends of the river towards the salt water to breed.  Waste water inflows to the river are carefully managed to maintain the estuarine habitat.








