[[University of Massachusetts Lowell]]

CATEGORIES: University of Massachusetts Lowell, University of Massachusetts, Public universities and colleges in Massachusetts, New England Association of Schools and Colleges, Buildings and structures in Lowell, Massachusetts, Educational institutions established in 1975, Universities and colleges in Middlesex County, Massachusetts, Visitor attractions in Lowell, Massachusetts

The University of Massachusetts Lowell (also known as UMass Lowell or UML) is an urban public research university in Lowell, Massachusetts, United States, and part of the University of Massachusetts system. With more than 1,100 faculty members and nearly 17,000 students, it is the largest university in the Merrimack Valley and the second-largest public institution in the state behind UMass Amherst. Umb. Retrieved on 2013-08-23.
The university offers 120 bachelor's, 39 master's and 33 doctoral degree programs, including nationally recognized programs in science, engineering and technology.uml.aspx Academically, UMass Lowell is organized into six schools and colleges: College of Fine Arts, Humanities and Social Sciences; College of Health Sciences; College of Sciences; the Francis College of Engineering; the Graduate School of Education; and the Manning School of Business. Uml. Retrieved on 2013-08-23.

History

The University of Massachusetts Lowell owes its origins to two institutions founded in the 1890s: the Lowell State College on the south side of the Merrimack River and Lowell Textile School on the north side. Each would follow its own path of expansion through the 20th century.

Lowell Normal School

The Lowell Normal School was chartered in 1894 as a teacher training institution for women. The tenth and final normal school to be established in Massachusetts, it opened in 1898 with 108 students and five faculty members. The original classroom building opened the next year at the corner of Broadway and Wilder Streets, and quickly became a landmark in the city.
After being threatened with closure during the Great Depression, school administrators rallied local support to help keep it open. A delegation of prominent individuals representing Lowell's powerful interest groups traveled to Boston and convinced state officials of the school's importance. The result was that the school not only survived but continued to grow and expand. In 1950, Dr. Daniel O'Leary assumed the presidency and initiated an ambitious building program. The physical plant of the campus expanded during post-war era from a single structure to a multi-building complex, forming an area now known as UMass Lowell's South Campus.
As the demand for more qualified teachers grew, the legislature reorganized the Normal School into Lowell State College in 1960 with a curriculum that expanded beyond education to include baccalaureate degrees in other fields as well, including nursing and music. Beginning in 1967, the college was authorized to confer two more degrees: Master of Education and Master of Music Education.

Lowell Textile School

In 1895, the Lowell Technological Institute to train technicians and managers for work in Lowell's booming textile industry. Modeled after the now-defunct Polytechnic College of Pennsylvania, Lowell Textile was the combined effort of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and corporations eager to form a school dedicated to textile education. Under the guidance of founder James T. Smith, Lowell Textile opened its doors in February 1897 in the upper floors of a downtown commercial block located on Middle Street. The school offered three-year training programs in cotton or wool manufacture, design, textile chemistry and dyeing.
In 1903, the school moved from downtown to its permanent location just northwest of the Merrimack River. The yellow brick mill-like Southwick Hall was dedicated to Royal and Dierexa Southwick. Grandparents of the wealthy businessman Frederick Ayer, the Southwicks were Quakers and abolitionists who came to Lowell in the 1820s to help establish the Lowell Carpet Company. Ten years later, the school granted its first bachelor degrees in textile dyeing and textile engineering.
In 1953, President Martin Lydon expanded the curriculum to include programs in plastics, leather, paper, and electronics technology, increased the liberal arts, and renamed the school the Lowell Technological Institute.

A new university

In 1972, a feasibility study was conducted on merging the school with the nearby Lowell State College. The schools merged in 1975 to form the University of Lowell, a comprehensive institution. In 1991, the campus became part of the University of Massachusetts system in 1991 and was renamed the University of Massachusetts Lowell.
. Under Chapter 142, the UMass system was restructured to combine the Amherst, Boston, and Worcester campuses with the University of Lowell and Southeastern Massachusetts University (now UMass Dartmouth).

Academics

UMass Lowell is well known for its science and engineering programs, including several "on the rise" technologies (e.g., the field of nanotechnology). It is the first university in the United States to offer a bachelor's degree in plastics engineering and it is one of a few public universities in the United States to offer degrees in meteorology and sound recording technology. UMass Lowell has a radiation laboratory with a research reactor and Van de Graaff accelerator that provides students with real-world experience in particle physics, nuclear engineering and health physics.
The university also boasts a baseball research center that is the official baseball bat and ball testing center for Major League Baseball.
The UMass Lowell doctorate of physical therapy degree program is the only DPT program offered by a public institution in Massachusetts.
UMass Lowell's Manning School of Business has a diverse curriculum in the fields of finance, marketing, management information systems, operations and more. The College of Health Sciences is a leader in fields such as work environment and clinical lab sciences, and includes the School of Nursing, elevated from a department as of June 1, 2013. The College of Fine Arts, Humanities and Social Sciences includes the School of Criminology and Justice Studies, as well as signature programs including sound recording technology, music business and more.
The freshman retention rate is 78.2 percent and four-year graduation rate is 29 percent (U.S. News & World Report). Since 2007, UMass Lowell's six-year graduation rate, the standard measurement in higher education, has increased from 44 to 54 percent. Enrollment has increased 45 percent since 2007 and the average SAT score for incoming freshmen has climbed 63 points.

Rankings

U.S. News & World Report ranks UMass Lowell No. 158 on its top-tier National Universities list in the Best Colleges of 2014. First included in the top-tier group four years ago, UMass Lowell's three-year, 25-spot gain in the ranking is the second-fastest in the nation. Colleges.rankingsandreviews. Retrieved on 2013-08-23. U.S. News & World Report also named UMass Lowell No. 85 in the top public universities and second among public universities in Massachusetts. Washington Monthly ranked UMass Lowell No. 194 nationally for 2013. ((cite web|url=
UMass Lowell is known for having one of the highest returns-on-investment (ROI) in the country. Forbes ranked UMass Lowell as the 10th best value amongst all universities and colleges nationwide for 2013 and 4th best value amongst non-military academies. ((cite web|url= UMass Lowell is one of just 75 in the nation whose graduates have a 30-year net ROI of more than $1 million. The university is in the top 1 percent in the United States for ROI, according to Affordable Colleges Online, which also placed UMass Lowell at No. 10 nationally. ((cite web|url= found that UMass Lowell provides the 10th best ROI among 437 public universities in the U.S. and 50th out of 1,060 colleges and universities for 2013. ((cite web|url= PayScale also ranked UMass Lowell 40th in the Northeast Region for highest mid-career salary amongst state universities ($95,100) and 80th overall (tied with Boston College). ((cite web|url=
UMass Lowell's Francis College of Engineering is ranked No. 140 in the country for graduate engineering programs, and No. 122 in electrical engineering and No. 85 in computer engineering.
UMass Lowell's Manning School of Business is ranked No. 94 for their part-time MBA program, according to U.S. News & World Report. ((cite web|url=  
UMass Lowell's Graduate School of Education is ranked No. 103 in the country, according to U.S. News & World Report.
University of Massachusetts Lowell Profile | World Ranking Guide. Worldranking.com. Retrieved on 2013-08-23.
UMass Lowell's online program ranked sixth in the U.S. overall among online colleges on Guide to Online Schools' 2013 Online College Rankings.
In June 2013, Business Insider named UMass Lowell as the "Most Underrated College in America." 

Student life

The Big Seven

The Big Seven are the main organizations on campus funded directly from the student activities fee (other registered student organizations have budgets granted through the Student Government Association). They are:

Greek life

Athletics

UMass Lowell athletic teams compete in a variety of men's and women's sports in Division I. Men's sports include baseball, basketball, cross country, golf, ice hockey, track and field, and soccer. Women's sports are basketball, cross country, track and field, field hockey, soccer, rowing, softball, and volleyball. The university will add men's and women's lacrosse next year. As of July 1, 2013, 14 of UMass Lowell's Division II teams moved up to Division I, joining the America East Conference. The River Hawks formerly competed in the Northeast-10 Conference at the Division II level. Past champions include the 1988 men's basketball team, the 1991 men's cross country team, the ice hockey team (three times) and the field hockey team twice (2005, 2010). The 2010 field hockey team finished its season with a perfect 24-0 record.
The university's men's hockey team plays in the Hockey East Association and plays its home games at the Tsongas Center at UMass Lowell.  In 2013, the men's hockey team won the Hockey East regular-season and tournament championships and advanced to the NCAA Division I Championship "Frozen Four," all for the first time in the university's history. The men's hockey team repeated as Hockey East champions in 2014 while advancing to the NCAA Division I Men's Ice Hockey Championship for the third straight year and sixth time overall. ((cite web|url=
The nickname "River Hawks" came about during the school's transition from the University of Lowell to UMass Lowell and was inspired by the campus's location along the Merrimack River.  The University of Lowell's nickname was the Chiefs, which was abandoned in favor of the current name. A campus-wide poll was conducted for student input and final candidates included the Ospreys and the Raging Rapids, according to the Connector student newspaper.

University demographics

Total enrollment for the 2013-2014 academic year is 16,969. In-state enrollment represents 92 percent of undergraduates and 71 percent of graduate students. International students make up 1 percent of the undergraduate population and 14 percent of the graduate population. Students of color represent 21 percent of the total undergraduate population and 18 percent of the graduate population. The male-female ratio is 60/40 for undergraduates and 52/48 for the graduate population.  The total enrollment has increased 45 percent since 2007 and UMass Lowell is now the second-largest campus in the University of Massachusetts system.Lowell (link inactive)
Located in the historic industrial city of Lowell,  the Merrimack River. UMass Lowell has three campus clusters: North, South and East.  The university has increased student housing by more than 1,800 beds in the last four years, including opening two new, all-suites residence halls in August 2013.

Recent developments

UMass Lowell and the city reached an agreement in 2009 for the school to acquire the Tsongas Arena and the 
The university bought the DoubleTree Hotel in downtown Lowell in 2009. Now called the UMass Lowell Inn & Conference Center, the building includes student housing, year-round lodging for the public and is home to events for the university and community, a restaurant called 50 Warren that is open to the public year-round, business and cultural programs, conferences and more.
The university broke ground in June 2010 on the Mark and Elisia Saab Emerging Technologies and Innovation Center, the first new academic building built from the ground up on campus in 30 years. The building, originally called just the "Emerging Technologies and Innovation Center" or "ETIC," is located on the former site of Smith Hall (demolished in July 2010), cost $80 million to construct with funding from a variety of sources including the state, federal government, alumni and other private donors. On March 30, 2011, the university held a topping-off ceremony marking the completion of the ETIC's steel frame. The ceremony also included the opening of a time capsule that was placed in the cornerstone of Smith Hall during its 1947 construction, as well as the compilation of a new time capsule to be included in the Saab Center. The building's grand opening was on Oct. 11, 2012. Uml. Retrieved on 2013-08-23. The center was renamed as the Mark and Elisia Saab Emerging Technologies and Innovation Center in December 2012 in honor of the Lowell couple's generous support for the building and the university overall. 
New Technology Building Named in Honor of Alumnus, Wife. Uml. Retrieved on 2013-08-23.
In January 2011, the university announced that it had acquired the former St. Joseph's Hospital in Lowell for $6.3 million. The complex, renamed University Crossing, consisted of approximately  of developable space. The university is constructing a new student center at the site that will include a food court, bookstore and more, and is set to open in 2014. The University Police and some administrative functions have relocated to an existing, renovated building at University Crossing. The complex is located near the university's North, South and East campuses and will serve as a central point uniting all three.
Boston Globe article
The university broke ground in April 2011 on the new Health and Social Sciences Building on South Campus. Construction of the building was completed in spring 2013 and it officially opened with a ceremony on April 18, 2013. The  building, construction of which was funded by the state's Higher Education Bond Bill of 2008, is home to the School of Criminology and Justice Studies, School of Nursing and Department of Psychology, which include some of the university's most popular majors. Uml. Retrieved on 2013-08-23.
In November 2011, the university broke ground on a $16 million parking garage on North Campus. The garage is a six-story, 650-space parking facility that opened in Fall 2012. Uml. Retrieved on 2013-08-23. A second new garage was built on South Campus and opened for the Fall 2013 semester.
In January 2012, construction of a new residence hall on East Campus, to be named University Suites, began with the demolition of the former Institute of Plastics Innovation Building. The suite-style residence hall opened in August 2013 and houses 472 students. It also features the Hawk's Nest, a cafe that is open to the public; a multipurpose room; learning commons and other amenities. An apartment-style residence hall, Riverview Suites, also opened for the Fall 2013 semester and was constructed by a developer on private property adjacent to the university's South Campus.
In May 2012, it was announced that a new building to house the Manning School of Business will be erected in the name of alumnus John Pulichino '67 and his wife, Joy Tong, who donated $4 million for student scholarships. The new Pulichino Tong Business Building will offer students a world-class business education with top facilities, including a trading room. Uml. Retrieved on 2013-08-23.

Notable alumni

Notable faculty








