[[Rahsaan Patterson]]

CATEGORIES: African-American musicians, American male child actors, African-American male actors, Neo soul singers, LGBT African Americans, American rhythm and blues musicians, Musicians from New York, People from the Bronx, Male actors from New York, Living people, LGBT musicians from the United States, Gay musicians, 1974 births

Rahsaan Patterson is an American singer and actor, best known for portraying "The Kid" on the popular 1980s television show Kids Incorporated. His singing and songwriting style have been said to be reminiscent of Stevie Wonder,allmusic ((( Love in Stereo > Overview ))) while his voice has also drawn comparisons to Chaka Khan.Rahsaan Patterson | SoulTracks - Soul Music Biographies, News and Reviews

Career

1984: Kids Incorporated

After appearing in a school talent show in 1984, Patterson auditioned for the television show Kids Incorporated. He was cast as "The Kid", and remained on the show for the next few years, appearing alongside such future stars as Fergie, Mario Lopez and Shanice.

Music career

After Kids Incorporated, Patterson gained experience as a backup vocalist for several artists (including Kids co-star Martika). Following his vocal contributions on Colour Club's self-titled album, as well as writing for other artists (his credits include Brandy's platinum Top 5 smash "Baby", and Tevin Campbell's hit "Back to the World").

1997-98: Rahsaan Patterson

Patterson signed with MCA Records. Collaborating with Keith Crouch and Jamey Jaz, among others, released his self-titled debut album on January 28, 1997. The album peaked at No. 48 on Billboard's Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums Chart.
There were two singles released, "Stop By" and "Where You Are" peaked No. 53 on Billboard's Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart.
Receiving positive reviews from critics, the album failed to find a large audience (the single "Where You Are" did receive attention on R&B radio, and it appeared on the soundtrack to the 1996 Damon Wayans and Adam Sandler movie, "Bulletproof" ). Patterson did, however, develop a loyal following both in the U.S. and abroad.

1999-2002: Love in Stereo, SoundTracks

Patterson went to work on his followup, Love In Stereo,  with Jamey Jaz and new collaborators such as Van Hunt. When Love in Stereo was released in late 1999 it received better reviews than its predecessor, although the mainstream overlooked it. The album peaked at #51 on Billboards Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums Chart and two singles, "The Moment" and "Treat You Like A Queen" which peaked at no. 61 on Billboards Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs. Rahsaan toured in support of Stereo playing dates throughout U.S. and Europe.
Although Patterson and MCA parted ways, he remained busy, continuing to perform live, working as a session singer, and contributing to both soundtracks (Brown Sugar) and compilation albums (Steve Harvey's Sign of Things to Come), while working on his next album.

2004-08 After Hours, Wines & Spirits

Patterson's third album, After Hours was released internationally in April 2004,   garnering positive reviews. With the forming of his own label, After Hours was released in the U.S. in late October. The album debuted at No. 65 on Billboard's Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart. The singles, "So Hot", "April's Kiss" and "Forever Yours" were issued but failed to chart on Billboard. Further collaborative efforts followed.
Patterson's most recent album, Wines & Spirits{{cite web|last=Harold |first=Claudrena N. |url= |title=Rahsaan Patterson: Wines and Spirits In August 2008 Patterson released a Christmas album, The Ultimate Gift, by November Patterson won a BET J award for Underground Artist of the year.
In 2008 Patterson joined with Australian-born producer/multi-instrumentalist/songwriter Jarrad 'Jaz' Rogers and Copenhagen-based electro-soul songstress Ida Corr to form the London-based alternative soul/pop/funk trio SugaRush Beat Company, who released their self-titled album through RCA (UK) in the summer of 2008.The SugaRush Beat Company interview by Pete Lewis, 'Blues & Soul' March 2008

2009-11: Bleuphoria, Touring

After the release of Wines and Spirits, Rahsaan resumed touring throughout the U.S. and overseas, and working with several recording artists'. On December 14, 2010 a new song was available on iTunes, "Easier Said Than Done"  a slow funk groove aimed as the lead single from his new album. On February 12, 2011, he performed at B.B. King's Blues Club to a sold out crowd, the show received rave reviews.{{cite web|last=John |first=Christian |url= |title=Rahsaan Patterson - 12 February 2011, New York 
Personal life

Patterson is openly gay. In a 2008 discussion about being a gay artist with gay station Logo, for example, he said that "For me, it's not about being 'the gay artist'; I'm an artist."

Discography

Albums

Singles

Collaborations

Also appears on






