[[Dionne Brand]]

CATEGORIES: Canadian feminists, Canadian women poets, Canadian women novelists, Trinidad and Tobago feminists, Trinidad and Tobago poets, Trinidad and Tobago women novelists, 1953 births, Living people, Lesbian writers, LGBT people from Trinidad and Tobago, LGBT writers from Canada, Black Canadian writers, Trinidad and Tobago emigrants to Canada, University of Toronto alumni, Fellows of the Royal Society of Canada, Governor General's Award winning poets, Harbourfront Festival Prize winners, 20th-century Canadian novelists, 21st-century Canadian novelists, LGBT poets, LGBT novelists

Dionne Brand (born January 7, 1953) is a Canadian poet, novelist, essayist and documentarian. She was Toronto's third Poet Laureate from September 2009 to  November 2012.nwpassages.asp"Dionne Brand: Biography", Canadian poetry online, University of Toronto Libraries.

Biography

Dionne Brand was born in Guayaguayare, Trinidad and Tobago. She graduated from Naparima Girls' High School in 1970, and emigrated to Canada to attend the University of Toronto, where she earned a BA in 1975."Dionne Brand, Biography / Criticism", Voices from the Gaps, University of Minnesota. Brand later attained a MA (1989) from the Ontario Institute for Studies in Education (OISE).

Academic career

Brand has held a number of academic positions, including:

Writing

Brand explores themes of gender, race, sexuality and feminism, white male domination, injustices and "the moral hypocrisies of Canada" Brand, Dionne. "Bread out of Stone", in  Libby Scheier, Sarah Sheard and Eleanor Wachtel (eds), Language In Her Eye, Toronto: Coach House Press, 1990.
She has contributed to many anthologies opposing the violent killings of Black men and women, the massacre of fourteen women in Montreal and racism and inequality as experienced by Aboriginal women of Canada, particularly Helen Betty Osborne's death in the Pas.
In his book Black Like Who?, Rinaldo Walcott includes two essays ("A Tough Geography": Towards a Poetics of Black Space(s) in Canada and "No Language is Neutral": The Politics of Performativity in M. Nourbese Philip's and Dionne Brand's Poetry) on Brand's poetry and the principal themes of her work. Black Like Who? Toronto: Insomniac Press, 1997. (Brand herself had previously used a line from Derek Walcott to title her collection No Language is Neutral, in which she "uses language to disturb" in poetry containing biographic meaning ancestral references.)Brand, Dionne.  No Language is Neutral. Toronto: Coach House Press, 1990. Brand believes that "by addressing real power can we begin to deal with racism", by participating in economic and political power.  1996.

Rivers Have Sources, Trees Have Roots

In Rivers Have Sources, Trees Have Roots (1986), Brand and co-author Krisantha Sri Bhaggiyadatta interviewed a hundred people from the Canadian Native, Black, Chinese, and South Asian communities about their perceptions of racism and its impact on their lives. The authors critiqued the existence and ubiquity of racism, disparities and resistance, arguing that two themes exist where racism prevails in their interviewees' lives: through "the culture of racism" and through structural and institutional ways.
"Rivers" gives each individual an opportunity to speak about his or her personal and migration story. The interviewees speak of their anger, resentments, and complaints of being treated as different and inferior. Brand sees racism as a powerful tool to censor oppositional voices and disagrees with the conception of racism as isolated or unusual. Toronto: Cross Communication Centre. 1986.

St. Mary Estate

Personal experience and ancestral memory  c inform her short story, "St. Mary Estate",Dionne Brand. "St. Mary Estate", in Eva C. Karpinski and Ian Lea (eds), Pens of Many Colours: A Canadian Reader (1993), Toronto: Harcourt Brace Jovanvich Canada Inc. 1993. from, Sans Souci and Other Stories, pp. 360–366,  The narrator, accompanied by her sister, revisits the cocoa estate of their birth and childhood, recalling past experiences of racism and shame.  She focuses on the summer beach house belonging to "rich whites" that was cleaned by their father, the overseer slave.  Her anger over discrimination and poverty is triggered by the recollection of living quarters made of thin cardboard with newspapers walls - barracks that depict the physical, social and psychological degradation endured by the slaves who were denied the basic human rights and freedom.

Other themes

Other topics addressed in Brand's writing include the sexual exploitation of African women. Brand says, "We are born thinking of travelling back", . In Constance Rooke (ed.), Writing Away: the PEN Canada Travel Anthology, Toronto: McClelland & Stewart Inc. 1994.  She writes: "Listen, I am a Black woman whose ancestors were brought to a new world laying tightly packed in ships. Fifteen million of them survived the voyage, five million of them women; millions among them died, were killed, committed suicide in the middle passage." 
Brand has received numerous awards. Writer Myrian Chancy says Brand found "it possible ..."Amin, Nuzhat et al. Canadian Woman Studies: An Introductory Reader. Toronto: Inanna Publications and Education Inc. 1999.

Critical reception

Critics of Brand's early work focused on Caribbean national and cultural identity and Caribbean literary theory. Barbadian poet and scholar Edward Kamau Brathwaite referred to Brand as "our first major exile female poet."Brathwaite, Edward Kamau (1985). "Dionne Brand's Winter Epigrams" in Canadian Literature 105. p. 18. Academic J. Edward Chamberlain called her "a final witness to the experience of migration and exile" whose "literary inheritance is in some genuine measure West Indian, a legacy of Derek Walcott, Brathwaite and others."Chamberlain, J. Edward (1993). Come Back to Me My Language: Poetry and the West Indies. Champaign, Illinois: University of Illinois Press, p. 266; p. 269.  They cite her own and others' shifting locations, both literal and theoretical.
Peter Dickinson argues that "Brand 'reterritorializes' … boundaries in her writing, (dis)placing or (dis)locating the national narrative of subjectivity … into the diaspora of cross-cultural, -racial, -gender, -class, and –erotic identifications."Dickinson, Peter; Veronica Strong-Boag, et al. (eds). (1998), "'In Another Place, Not Here': Dionne Brand's Politics of (Dis)Location" in Painting the Maple: Essays on Race, Gender, and the Construction of Canada. Vancouver, UBC Press, p. 114.  Dickinson calls these shifts in her conceptualization of national and personal affiliations "the politics of location which cannot be separated from the politics of 'production and reception.'"Dickinson, Peter. (1998), 117 Critic Leslie Sanders argues that, in her ongoing exploration of the notions of "here" and "there", Brand uses her own "statelessness"Sanders, Leslie (1989). "'I am stateless anyway': The Poetry of Dionne Brand" in Zora Neale Hurston Forum 3 (2), p. 20. as a vehicle for entering "'other people's experience'" and "'other places.'"Sanders, Leslie (1989), p. 26. In Sanders' words, "by becoming a Canadian writer, Brand is extending the Canadian identity in a way Marshall McLuhan would recognize and applaud."Sanders, Leslie (1989), p. 20.  But, Dickinson says, "Because Brand's 'here' is necessarily mediated, provisional, evanescent – in a word 'unlocatable' – her work remains marginal/marginalizable in academic discussions of Canadian literary canons."Dickinson, Peter (1998), pp. 119-120.
In Redefining the Subject: Sites of Play in Canadian Women's Writing, Charlotte Sturgess suggests that Brand employs a language "through which identity emerges as a mobile, thus discursive, construct."Sturgess, Charlotte (2003). Redefining the Subject: Sites of Play in Canadian Women's Writing. Amsterdam and New York: Éditions Rodopi B.V., p. 51. Sturgess argues that Brand's "work uses language strategically, as a wedge to split European traditions, forms and aesthetics apart; to drive them onto their own borders and contradictions."Sturgess, Charlotte (2003), p. 53.  Sturgess says Brand's work is at least two-pronged: it "underlines the enduring ties of colonialism within contemporary society;"Sturgess, Charlotte (2003), p. 58 and it "investigates the very possibilities of Black, female self-representation in Canadian cultural space."
Italian academic and theorist Franca Bernabei writes in the preamble to Luce ostinata/Tenacious Light (2007), the Italian-English selected anthology of Brand's poetry, that "Brand's poetic production reveals a remarkable variety of formal-stylistic strategies and semantic richness as well as the ongoing pursuit of a voice and a language that embody her political, affective, and aesthetic engagement with the human condition of the black woman—and, more exactly, all those oppressed by the hegemonic program of modernity."Bernabei, Franca (2007). "Testimonianze/Appreciations" in Luce ostinata/Tenacious Light. Ravenna, IT: A. Longo Editore snc, p. 6. The editor and critic Constance Rooke calls Brand "one of the very best poets in the world today", and "compares her to Pablo Neruda or—in fiction—to José Saramago."

Awards and honours

Brand's awards include:

Bibliography

Poetry

Fiction

Non-Fiction

Documentaries

Anthologies Edited

Sources






