[[Awake!]]

CATEGORIES: Cultural magazines, Free magazines, Monthly magazines, Jehovah's Witnesses magazines, Publications established in 1919, Audio periodicals, Downloadable magazines, 1919 in religion

Awake! is a monthly illustrated magazine published by Jehovah's Witnesses via the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania and printed in various branch offices around the world. It is considered to be a companion magazine of The Watchtower, and is distributed by Jehovah's Witnesses in their door-to-door ministry. Awake! is considered to be the second most widely distributed magazine in the world (after The Watchtower), with a total worldwide printing of 44,748,000 copies in 99 languages per month. 20 February 2012. Top 5 World's Best Magazines. Retrieved 30 May 2012.

History

The magazine was originally published bi-weekly ("every other Wednesday") under the name The Golden Age on October 1, 1919, by the International Bible Students Association. (In 1930 it was published in Danish under the name New World.") On October 6, 1937, it was renamed Consolation and continued to be published bi-weekly until July 31, 1946. On August 22, 1946, the magazine was renamed Awake!Revelation - Its Grand Climax At Hand, pages 146-147Watch Tower Publications, Watchtower Publications Index, 2008 and until 2005 was published semi-monthly in major languages (on the 8th and 22nd; The Watchtower was published on the 1st and 15th), monthly in many languages, and quarterly in a few languages. Since January 2006, Awake! has been published monthly. This will result in considerable simplification in the preparation, translation, and shipping of our literature. This change will affect about 40 percent of the languages in which Awake! is published. In most languages, Awake! is already a monthly or a quarterly publication."

Purpose

The stated purpose of the magazine has changed over time. From 1982 to 1995, each issue of the magazine included a mission statement which stated "this magazine builds confidence in the Creator's promise of a peaceful and secure new order before the generation that saw 1914 passes away". When their belief regarding the "generation" of 1914 was changed to a less literal sense, the aim was restated as "this magazine builds confidence in the Creator's promise of a peaceful and secure new world that is about to replace the present wicked, lawless system of things".Awake! 8th November 1995, Page 2

Content

Awake! contains articles about general-interest topics such as nature, geography, family life, and also the Bible and biblical history, from the Watchtower Bible And Tract Society's perspective."Awake!" October 2010 page.4 It has also presented current medical opinions of various medical conditions. Conditions that have been featured in Awake! include dementia,Awake!, September 22, 1998 stroke,Awake!, February 8, 1998 infectious diseases,Awake!, July 22, 1999 bipolar disorder,Awake!, September 8, 2001 and postpartum depression. 
The magazine includes a number of regular features:
Autobiographical articles by individual members regarding their experiences and circumstances also appear periodically, and are notable as the only regularly credited writings in any Society publication.

Authorship

The magazine's editor under the titles of The Golden Age and Consolation was Clayton J. Woodworth."Announcements", The Watchtower, February 15, 1952, page 128 When the magazine was renamed Awake!, the journal's editorship became anonymous. Its publication is overseen by the Writing Committee of the Governing Body of Jehovah's Witnesses. Awake! is published in 98 languages.

Distribution

The magazine is printed in nineteen different countries;The Watchtower, November 1, 2005, page 27 about 25% of the total is printed at one of the organization's printeries in Toronto, Canada.
Awake! is considered to be the second most widely distributed magazine in the world (after The Watchtower), with a total worldwide circulation of 43,524,000.

Accessibility

Awake! is available, in selected languages, on audio compact disc and via download in MP3, AAC, PDF and EPUB formats.Jehovah's Witnesses website — Audio recordings and digital formats of magazines

Cost

Until March 1990, Awake! was available for a small charge that varied over time and in different countries. For example, in the United States, the suggested donation per issue was $0.05 in 1950, On January 17, 1990, the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that sales of religious literature were subject to taxation, which introduced ambiguity into the formerly tax-free practice of suggesting a particular donation in exchange for the magazines. The Watch Tower Society filed an amicus curiae ("friend of the court") brief arguing that the perceived sale of religious literature should be exempt from taxation.Jehovah's Witnesses and Jimmy Swaggart
From March 1, 1990, the journals were made available at no cost, on a freewill donation basis in the United States, with the stated purpose of simplifying their Bible educational work and distinguishing themselves from those who commercialize religion. The article "Use Our Literature Wisely", which appeared in the May 1990 issue of Our Kingdom Ministry, stated that "there are growing pressures against all religious elements", and it went on to say that their main concern was to move ahead in the worldwide Kingdom preaching work, "without hindrance."
The sale of Jehovah's Witnesses' literature was gradually phased out in other countries, and Awake! has been distributed free of charge worldwide since early 2000, its printing being funded by voluntary donations from Jehovah's Witnesses and members of the public.








