[[Esther Dyson]]

CATEGORIES: 1951 births, Living people, Angel investors, Wired (magazine) people, Women in business, Women in technology, Harvard University alumni, Freeman Dyson, People from the canton of Zürich

Esther Dyson (born 14 July 1951) is a former journalist and Wall Street technology analyst who is a leading angel investor, philanthropist, and commentator focused on breakthrough efficacy in healthcare, government transparency, digital technology, biotechnology, and space. "Road Warrior: Esther Dyson". Salon Wanderlust. Retrieved 2008-10-12. "Esther Dyson, one of the preeminent visionaries of the digital age – and a quintessential road warrior .. She also invests in and sits on the boards of several U.S. start-ups. In addition, Dyson is chairwoman of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, a nonprofit civil liberties organization"
She recently founded HICCup, which just launched its Way to Wellville contest of five places, five years, five metrics.  Hiccup.  Dyson is currently focusing her career on production of health    and continues to invest in health and technology startups.8.	One on One Interview. New York Times Bits Blog. "One on One: Esther Dyson, Health Tech Investor and Space Tourist"
On 7 October 2008, Space Adventures announced that Dyson had paid to train as a back-up spaceflight participant for Charles Simonyi's trip to the International Space Station aboard the Soyuz TMA-14 mission which took place in 2009."Space Adventures Announces Esther Dyson as Back-Up Crew Member for Spring 2009 Spaceflight Mission". Space Adventures. 7 October 2008. Retrieved 2008-10-12. "Esther Dyson, an investor in Space Adventures .. will train as the back-up crew member alongside orbital spaceflight candidate Charles Simonyi, PhD, who is currently planning a mission to the International Space Station (ISS) in spring 2009. .. The price of the back-up crew member program is $3,000,000 (USD), which includes the required spaceflight training costs, along with accommodations in Star City"

Life

Esther Dyson's father is English-born physicist Freeman Dyson, and her mother is mathematician Verena Huber-Dyson, who is of Swiss parentage; and her brother is digital technology historian George Dyson. In 1977, she joined New Court Securities as "the research department",Esther Dyson on ICANN following Federal Express and other start-ups. After a stint at Oppenheimer Holdings covering software companies, she moved to Rosen Research and in 1983 bought the company from her employer Ben Rosen, renaming it EDventure Holdings. She sold EDventure Holdings to CNET Networks in 2004, but left CNET in January 2007.

Publications and business ventures

Currently, Dyson is  a board member and active investor in a variety of start-ups, mostly in online services, health care/genetics, and space travel. EDventure.
Previously, Dyson and her company EDventure specialized in analyzing the impact of emerging technologies and markets on economies and societies. She created the following publications on technology:
And since about 2003, shea has maintained an active Flickr account at Dyson's Flickrweblog moved to Flicker
She contributes monthly to www.org. She writes regularly for www project-syndicate.
She sits on the boards of 23andMe, Eventful. , Pressreader.org in the US and Russia),  WPP Group, XCOR Aerospace and Yandex(Russia - YNDX).
Dyson is an adviser to the First Monday journal and Visual Ops, an occasional contributor to Arianna Huffington's online Huffington Post, and a board member of the education non-profit TASC.
Dyson was also an early investor in several tech startups, among them TrustedID, Cygnus Solutions, Flickr (sold to Yahoo!), del.us (sold to Yahoo!), Eventful, Netbeans (sold to Sun Microsystems), Powerset, Systinet, ZEDO, CV-Online, Medscape (now part of WebMD), Linkstorm, Medstory (sold to Microsoft), Meetup, Valkee and Lexity (sold to Yahoo).
As of early 2007, Dyson describes herself as "spending more and more time on private aviation and commercial space startups"Dyson, Esther. (20 March 2007) "New Horizons for the Intrepid VC" The Wall Street Journal. and also in health care and genetics. Dyson is a founding member of Space Angels Network and has invested in XCOR, Constellation Services (transformed into Nanoracks, www.com, Zero-G (now part of Space Adventures), Icon Aircraft, and Space Adventures.  From 2005,to 2007 she hosted the Flight School conference in Aspen. Edventure. She is currently on the board of directors of 23andMe, and is one of the first ten volunteers in the Personal Genome Project.
Her latest investments include: GeriJoy,Blueprint Health Graduates Nine More Start-Ups: Interview with Founding Partner, Brad Weinberg Applied Proteomics, Genomera, Habit Labs, HealthEngage, Health Loop, HealthRally, HealthTap,i2dx Keas, Lexity,Lexity Investors & Advisors. Lexity. Medico, Medivo,kurbo, Medivo, Omada Health, Organized Wisdom, PatientsLikeMe, Resilient, Sleepio,

Philanthropy

Dyson is an active member of a number of non-profit and advisory organizations. From 1998 to 2000, she was the founding chairman of ICANN, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers. As of 2004, she sat on its "reform" committee, dedicated to defining a role for individuals in ICANN's decision-making and governance structures. She opposed ICANN's 2012 expansion of generic top-level domains (gTLDs). She has followed closely the post-Soviet transition of Eastern Europe, from 2002 to 2012 was a member of the Bulgarian President's IT Advisory Council, along with Vint Cerf, George Sadowsky, and Veni Markovski, among others. She has served as a trustee of, and helped fund, emerging organizations such as Glasses for Humanity, Bridges. She is a member of the Board of Directors of The After-School Corporation, a nonprofit organization dedicated to expanding educational opportunities for all students. She is also a member of the boards of the Sunlight Foundation, StopBadware, The Long Now Foundation.
Dyson has served as a judge for Mayor Michael Bloomberg's NYC BigApps competition in NYC.






