[[Barbara Dennerlein]]

CATEGORIES: 1964 births, Living people, German jazz organists, Hard bop organists, Post-bop organists, Female jazz musicians

Barbara Dennerlein (born 25 September 1964 in Munich, Germany) is a hard bop, post-bop, and jazz organist. She has achieved particular critical acclaim for using the bass pedalboard on a Hammond organ, and for integrating synthesizer sounds onto the instrument, and has been described as "the most interesting jazz organist to emerge during the 1980s."

Career

Early years

Dennerlein was born and grew up in Munich. She began playing the organ aged 11 after getting a small Hohner instrument for Christmas. She was encouraged by her grandfather to learn a musical instrument, and her parents were both jazz enthusiasts.

Recordings

When her third LP Bebab was issued, Dennerlein established her own record label in 1985, and assumed her own management duties, because she felt she was not getting enough support from either her existing label or from Hammond, who wanted to promote later digital models rather than the B-3 she used. She received two German Record Critics' awards for self-produced albums. Later, she made three recordings for Enja Records and three for Verve Records. On these recordings she worked with Ray Anderson, Randy Brecker, Dennis Chambers, Roy Hargrove, Mitch Watkins, and Jeff 'Tain' Watts.

Performance set-up

Dennerlein modified a Hammond's pedalboard to trigger samples of an acoustic bass, and, impressed with results, decided to modify the manuals to play samplers too.
After a variety of projects and after playing with renowned unconventional musicians, such as Friedrich Gulda, Dennerlein started playing the pipe organ in 1994. In 2002, she recorded the first of her three (to date) jazz albums on church organ.

Compositions

Dennerlein claims to have been primarily influenced by jazz, and was not initially interested in classical or church music, although it was and is popular in Germany. However, she has further said that her main influence from jazz is the ability to mix other musical styles as desired, saying "To me, jazz is a synonym for freedom. Freedom from prejudice and discrimination".
Dennerlein's first album included four of her own titles. Her compositions vary from traditional blues schemes, romantic, melancholic ballads to tempo driven compositions with elements of swing, bebop, funk and Latin rhythms. Dennerlein often uses changing meter (e.g., 3/4 to 4/4), as well as unconventional harmonic changes to add expression to her compositions.

Awards

Discography






