[[Normandy landings]]

CATEGORIES: Operation Overlord, Battle for Caen, Battles of World War II involving Canada, Battles of World War II involving France, Battles of World War II involving the United Kingdom, Battles of World War II involving the United States, Naval battles and operations of World War II (European theatre)

The Normandy landings, codenamed Operation Neptune, were the landing operations of the Allied invasion of Normandy, in Operation Overlord, during World War II. The landings commenced on Tuesday, 6 June 1944 (D-Day), beginning at 6:30 am British Double Summer Time (GMT+2). In planning, as for most Allied operations, the term D-Day was used for the day of the actual landing, which was dependent on final approval.
The landings were conducted in two phases: an airborne assault landing of 24,000 British, US and Canadian airborne troops shortly after midnight, and an amphibious landing of Allied infantry and armoured divisions on the coast of France starting at 6:30 am. Surprise was achieved thanks to inclement weather and a comprehensive deception plan implemented in the months before the landings, codenamed Operation Bodyguard, to distract German attention from the possibility of landings in Normandy. A key success was to convince Adolf Hitler that the landings would actually occur to the north at the Pas-de-Calais. There were also decoy operations taking place simultaneously with the landings under the codenames Operation Glimmer and Operation Taxable to distract German forces from the real landing areas.'''
Supreme Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Forces was General Dwight D. Eisenhower while overall command of ground forces (21st Army Group) was given to General Bernard Montgomery. The operation, planned by a team under Lieutenant-General Frederick Morgan, was the largest amphibious invasion in world history and was executed by land, sea and air elements under direct Anglo-American command with over 160,000 soldiers landing on 6 June 1944: 73,000 Americans, 61,715 British and 21,400 Canadians. stretch of the Normandy coast divided into five sectors: Utah, Omaha, Gold, Juno and Sword.

Background

After the fall of France in June 1940, the defending British Expeditionary Force, trapped along the northern coast of France, was able to evacuate over 338,000 troops to England in the Dunkirk evacuation (27 May to 4 June).
Four sites were considered for the landings: Brittany, the Cotentin Peninsula, Normandy, and Pas de Calais. As Brittany and Cotentin are peninsulas, it would be possible for the Germans to cut off the Allied advance at a relatively narrow isthmus, so these sites were rejected.
The Allies planned to launch the invasion on 1 May 1944.

Operations

Operation Overlord was the name assigned to the establishment of a large-scale lodgement on the Continent. The first phase, the amphibious invasion and establishment of a secure foothold, was codenamed Operation Neptune.
The landings were to be preceded by airborne drops near Caen on the eastern flank to secure the Orne River bridges and north of Carentan on the western flank. The Americans, assigned to land at Utah Beach and Omaha Beach, were to attempt to capture Bayeux and Caen the first day, then cut off the Cotentin Peninsula and eventually capture the port facilities at Cherbourg. The British at Sword Beach and Gold Beach and Canadians at Juno Beach would protect the American flank and attempt to establish airfields near Caen. A secure lodgement would be established and an attempt made to hold all territory north of the Avranches-Falaise line within the first three weeks.

Deception plans

Under the overall strategy of Operation Bodyguard, the Allies conducted operations designed to mislead the Germans as to the date and location of the Allied landings.
Many of the German radar stations on the French coast were destroyed in preparation for the landings.

Weather

The invasion planners set forth a set of conditions regarding the phase of the moon, the tides, and the time of day that meant only a few days in each month were deemed suitable. A full moon was desirable, as it would provide illumination for aircraft pilots and have the highest tides. The Allies wanted to schedule the landings for shortly before dawn, midway between low and high tide, with the tide coming in. This would improve the visibility of obstacles on the beach while minimising the amount of time the men had to spend exposed in the open.
Group Captain James Stagg of the Royal Air Force (RAF) met with Eisenhower on the evening of 4 June. He and his meteorological team predicted that the weather would improve sufficiently so that the invasion could go ahead on 6 June.
Allied control of the Atlantic meant that German meteorologists did not have access to as much information as the Allies on incoming weather patterns.

German order of battle

Nazi Germany had at its disposal 50 divisions in France and the Low Countries, and another 18 were stationed in Denmark and Norway. Fifteen divisions were in the process of formation in Germany, but there was no strategic reserve.
German Supreme commander: Adolf Hitler

Oberbefehlshaber West (Supreme Commander West;  OB West): Field Marshal Gerd von Rundstedt

Army Group B: Field Marshal Erwin Rommel

7th Army: Generaloberst Friedrich Dollmann

Cotentin Peninsula (Utah Beach)

Allied forces attacking Utah Beach faced the following German units of LXXXIV Corps under General der Artillerie Erich Marcks:

Grandcamps Sector (Omaha Beach)

Americans assaulting Omaha Beach were faced with troops of the 352nd Infantry Division under Generalleutnant Dietrich Kraiss, a full-strength unit of around 12,000 brought in by Rommel on 15 March and reinforced by two additional regiments.

Gold, Juno, and Sword

Allied forces attacking Gold, Juno, and Sword Beaches faced the following German units of LXXXIV Corps under General der Artillerie Erich Marcks:
Allied forces at Gold and Juno also faced:

Atlantic Wall

Alarmed by the raids on St Nazaire and Dieppe in 1942, Hitler ordered the construction of fortifications all along the Atlantic coast, from Spain to Norway, to protect against an expected Allied invasion. He envisioned 15,000 emplacements manned by 300,000 troops, but due to shortages, particularly of concrete and manpower, most of the strongpoints were never built.
Rommel believed that the Normandy coast could be a possible landing point for the invasion, so he ordered the construction of extensive defensive works along that shore. In addition to concrete gun emplacements at strategic points along the coast, he ordered wooden stakes, metal tripods, mines, and large anti-tank obstacles to be placed on the beach to delay the approach of landing craft and impede the movement of tanks.

Armoured reserves

Rommel, believing that their best chance was to stop the invasion at the shore, requested that mobile reserves—especially tanks—be stationed as close to the coast as possible. Rundstedt, General Leo Geyr von Schweppenburg (commander of Panzer Group West), and other senior commanders believed that the invasion could not be stopped on the beaches. Geyr argued for a conventional doctrine: keeping the Panzer formations concentrated in a central position around Paris and Rouen and deploying them only when the main Allied beachhead had been identified. Geyr also noted that in the Italian Campaign the armour stationed near the coast had been damaged by naval bombardment. Rommel's opinion was that because of the overwhelming Allied air superiority, large-scale movement of tanks would not be possible once the invasion was underway. Hitler made the final decision, which was to leave three Panzer divisions under Geyr's command and give Rommel operational control of three Panzer divisions as reserves. Hitler took personal control of four divisions as strategic reserves, not to be used without his direct orders.

Allied order of battle

Commander, Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force (SHAEF): General Dwight D. Eisenhower

Commander, 21st Army Group: General Bernard Montgomery

American zones

Commander, First Army (United States): General Omar Bradley
In total, the First Army contingent totalled approximately 73,000 men, including 15,600 from the airborne divisions.

British and Canadian zones

Commander, Second Army (Britain and Canada): Lieutenant General Sir Miles Dempsey
Overall, the Second Army contingent consisted of 83,115 men, 61,715 of them British.

Coordination with the French Resistance

Through the London-based État-major des Forces Françaises de l'Intérieur (EMFFI), the British Special Operations Executive orchestrated a massive campaign of sabotage to be implemented by the  French Resistance. The Allies developed four plans for the Resistance to execute on D-Day and the following days:
The resistance was alerted to carry out these tasks by means of transmission by the BBC's French service from London. Several hundred of these messages, which might be snatches of poetry, quotations from literature, or random sentences, were regularly transmitted, masking the few that were actually significant. In the weeks preceding the landings, lists of messages and their meanings were distributed to resistance groups.
A 1965 report from the Counter-insurgency Information Analysis Center details the results of the French Resistance's sabotage efforts: "In the southeast, 52 locomotives were destroyed on 6 June and the railway line cut in more than 500 places.  Normandy was isolated as of 7 June. The telephone network in the invasion area was put out of order and beginning June 20, the railway lines of France were rendered inoperable, except in the Rhone Valley where the line Marseilles-Lyon was kept open by the Germans despite heavy engagements with partisan units ... Although the German local reserves were able to reach the front area despite resistance action ... marked delays were achieved against the movement of strategic reserves. The French claim to have delayed up to 12 divisions for 8 to 15 days."

Naval activity

Naval operations for the invasion were described by historian Correlli Barnett as a "never surpassed masterpiece of planning".
The invasion fleet was drawn from eight different navies, comprising 6,939 vessels: 1,213 warships, 4,126 landing craft of various types, 736 ancillary craft, and 864 merchant vessels. There were 195,700 naval personnel involved.

Bombardment

Bombardment of Normandy began around midnight with over 2,200 British and American bombers attacking targets along the coast and further inland.
Minesweepers began clearing channels for the invasion fleet shortly after midnight and finished just after dawn without encountering the enemy.

Naval losses

At 05:10 four German torpedo boats reached the Eastern Task Force and launched fifteen torpedoes, sinking the Norwegian destroyer HNoMS Svenner off Sword beach but missing the battleships HMS Warspite and Ramillies. After firing, the German vessels turned away and fled east into a smoke screen that had been laid by the RAF to shield the fleet from the long-range battery at Le Havre.

The landings

Airborne operations

The success of the amphibious landings depended on the establishment of a secure lodgement from which to expand the beachhead to allow the build up of a well-supplied force capable of breaking out. The amphibious forces were especially vulnerable to strong enemy counter-attacks before the build up of sufficient forces in the beachhead could be accomplished. To slow or eliminate the enemy's ability to organize and launch counter-attacks during this critical period, airborne operations were used to seize key objectives such as bridges, road crossings, and terrain features, particularly on the eastern and western flanks of the landing areas. The airborne landings some distance behind the beaches were also intended to ease the egress of the amphibious forces off the beaches, and in some cases to neutralize German coastal defence batteries and more quickly expand the area of the beachhead.
The US 82nd and 101st Airborne Divisions were assigned to objectives west of Utah Beach, where they hoped to capture and control the few narrow causeways through terrain that had been intentionally flooded by the Germans. Reports from Allied intelligence in mid-May of the arrival of the German 91st Infantry Division meant the intended drop zones had to be shifted eastward and to the south.

=American airborne landings=

The American airborne landings began with the arrival of pathfinders at 00:15. Navigation was difficult because of a bank of thick cloud, and only one of the five paratrooper drop zones was accurately marked with radar signals and Aldis lamps as a result.
Troops of 101st Airborne paratroopers were dropped beginning around 01:30, tasked with controlling the causeways behind Utah Beach and destroying road and rail bridges over the Douve River.
Troops of the 82nd Airborne began arriving around 02:30, with the primary objective of capturing two bridges over the River Merderet and destroying two bridges over the Douve.
Reinforcements arrived by glider at around 04:00 (Mission Chicago and Mission Detroit) and 21:00 (Mission Keokuk and Mission Elmira), bringing additional troops and heavy equipment. Like the paratroopers, many landed far from their drop zones.
After 24 hours, only 2,500 men of the 101st and 2,000 of the 82nd Airborne were under the control of their divisions, approximately a third of the force dropped. However, this wide dispersal had the effect of confusing the Germans and fragmenting their response.

=British and Canadian airborne landings=

The first Allied action of D-Day was Operation Deadstick, a glider assault at 00:16 at Pegasus Bridge over the Caen Canal and the bridge (since re-named Horsa Bridge) over the Orne, half a mile (800 metres) to the east. Both bridges were quickly captured intact with light casualties by members of the 5th Parachute Brigade and the 7th (Light Infantry) Parachute Battalion.
Only 160 men out of the 600 members of the 9th Battalion tasked with taking out the enemy battery at Merville arrived at the rendezvous point. Lieutenant Colonel Terence Otway, in charge of the operation, decided to proceed regardless, as the emplacement had to be taken out by 06:00 to prevent its being able to fire on the invasion fleet and the troops arriving on Sword Beach. In the Battle of Merville Gun Battery, Allied forces disabled the guns at a cost of 75 casualties. The emplacement was found to contain 75 mm guns rather than the expected 150 mm heavy coastal artillery.
With this action, the last of the D-Day goals of the British 6th Airborne Division was achieved.

Utah Beach

Utah was in the area defended by two battalions of 919th Grenadier Regiment (GR.919).
The initial assault battalions were quickly followed by 28 DD tanks and several waves of engineer and demolition teams to remove beach obstacles and clear the area directly behind the beach of obstacles and mines. Gaps were blown in the seawall to allow quicker access for troops and tanks. Combat teams began to exit the beach at around 09:00, with some infantry wading through the flooded fields rather than travelling on the single road. They skirmished throughout the day with elements of the GR.919, who were armed with antitank guns and rifles. The main strongpoint in the area and another 

Pointe du Hoc

At Pointe du Hoc, the task for the two hundred men of 2nd Ranger Battalion, commanded by Lt. Colonel James Rudder, was to scale the 

Omaha Beach

Omaha, the most heavily defended beach, was assigned to the 1st Infantry Division, supplemented by troops from the 29th Infantry Division.
Casualties were around 2,000, more than all the other beaches combined, as the men were subjected to fire from the cliffs above.

Gold Beach

At Gold Beach, 25,000 men were landed, under the command of Lieutenant-General Miles Dempsey, Commander of the British 2nd Army. Casualties were also quite heavy; around 400, partly because bad weather delayed the swimming Sherman DD tanks, and also because the Germans had strongly fortified a village on the beach. However, the 50th (Northumbrian) Infantry Division  overcame these difficulties and advanced almost to the outskirts of Bayeux by the end of the day. With the exception of the Canadians at Juno Beach, no division came closer to its objectives than the 50th.
No. 47 (RM) Commando was the last British Commando unit to land and came ashore on Gold east of La Hamel. Their task was to proceed inland then turn right (west) and make a 16-kilometre (10 mi) march through enemy territory to attack the coastal harbour of Port en Bessin from the rear. This small port, on the British extreme right, was well sheltered in the chalk cliffs and significant in that it was to be a prime early harbour for supplies to be brought in, including fuel by underwater pipe from tankers moored offshore.

Juno Beach

The Canadian forces that landed on Juno Beach faced two heavy batteries of 155 mm guns and nine medium batteries of 75 mm guns, as well as machine-gun nests, pillboxes, other concrete fortifications, and a seawall twice the height of the one at Omaha Beach. The first wave suffered 50% casualties, the second highest of the five D-Day beachheads. The use of armour was successful at Juno, in some instances actually landing ahead of the infantry as intended and helping to clear a path inland.P. Official History of the Canadian Army in the Second World War. Volume III: The Victory Campaign
Despite the obstacles, the Canadians were off the beach within hours and beginning their advance inland. A single troop of four tanks managed to reach the final objective phase line, but hastily retreated, having outrun its infantry support. In particular, two fortified positions at the Douvres Radar Station remained in German hands (and would for several days until captured by British commandos), and no link had been established with Sword Beach.
By the end of D-Day, 30,000 Canadians had been successfully landed, and the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division had penetrated further into France than any other Allied force, despite having faced strong resistance at the water's edge and later counterattacks on the beachhead by elements of the German 21st and 12th SS Hitlerjugend (Hitler Youth) Panzer divisions on 7 and 8 June.

Sword Beach

On Sword, 21 of 25 DD tanks of the first wave made it safely ashore to provide cover for the infantry, who began disembarking at 07:30.
The 'Morris' strongpoint near Colleville-sur-Mer was captured after about an hour of fighting.

Analysis

The Normandy landings were the largest seaborne invasion in history, with nearly 5,000 landing and assault craft, 289 escort vessels, and 277 minesweepers participating.
Victory in Normandy stemmed from several factors. German preparations along the Atlantic Wall were only partially finished; shortly before D-Day Rommel reported that construction was only 18 per cent complete in some areas as resources were diverted elsewhere.

Crossword puzzles

Leonard Dawe, the headmaster at Strand School in Effingham, Surrey, also compiled crossword puzzles for various newspapers. In  his 17 August 1942 crossword in The Daily Telegraph, the clue  "French port" had the answer Dieppe. As this was only two days before the disastrous Dieppe Raid, the War Office suspected that the crossword had been used to pass information to the enemy. They called on Lord Tweedsmuir to investigate. His inquiry, which also included MI5, concluded it was a coincidence. Later, during the run-up to the Normandy landings, several of the operation's code names were answers in crosswords that Dawe submitted to the Telegraph. In his crossword for 2 May 1944, the clue for 17 across was "one of the U.S."; the correct answer was Utah. On 22 May the correct answer for 3 down, "Red Indian on the Missouri", was Omaha. On 27 May, "overlord" was the answer to 11 across, and three days later "Mulberry" was the answer to 11 across. A total of four top-secret codewords had appeared in less than a month, and the words "Gold", "Juno", and "Sword" had appeared in previous months. The final straw came on 1 June, when "Neptune" was the answer for 15 across. Dawe was again interrogated by MI5, and again he persuaded them that it was all a coincidence. Dawe may have picked up the words from his students, some of whom were children of military families.

War memorials and tourism

At Omaha Beach, parts of the Mulberry harbour are still visible, and a few of the beach obstacles remain. A memorial to the American National Guard sits at the former location of a German strongpoint. Point du Hoc is little changed from 1944, with the terrain covered with bomb craters and most of the concrete bunkers still in place. The Normandy American Cemetery and Memorial is nearby, in Colleville-sur-Mer.
Pegasus Bridge, a target of the British 6th Airborne, was the site of some of the earliest action of the Normandy landings. The bridge was replaced in 1994 by one similar in appearance, and the original is now housed on the grounds of a nearby museum complex.





Explanatory notes

Citations

Bibliography

Further reading




