[[Absolute continuity]]

CATEGORIES: Continuous mappings, Real analysis, Measure theory

In calculus, absolute continuity is a smoothness property of functions that is stronger than continuity and uniform continuity. The notion of absolute continuity allows one to obtain generalisations of the relationship between the two central operations of calculus, differentiation and integration, expressed by the fundamental theorem of calculus in the framework of Riemann integration.  Such generalisations are often formulated in terms of Lebesgue integration. For real-valued functions on the real line two interrelated notions appear, absolute continuity of functions and absolute continuity of measures. These two notions are generalized in different directions. The usual derivative of a function is related to the Radon–Nikodym derivative, or density, of a measure.

Absolute continuity of functions

It may happen that a continuous function f is differentiable almost everywhere on 0,1, its derivative f ′ is Lebesgue integrable, and nevertheless the integral of f ′ differs from the increment of f. For example, this happens for the Cantor function, which means that this function is not absolutely continuous. 

Definition

then

Equivalent definitions

The following conditions on a real-valued function f on a compact interval a,b are equivalent:.
If these equivalent conditions are satisfied then necessarily g = f ′ almost everywhere.
Equivalence between (1) and (3) is known as the fundamental theorem of Lebesgue integral calculus, due to Lebesgue..
For an equivalent definition in terms of measures see the section Relation between the two notions of absolute continuity.

Properties

Examples

The following functions are continuous everywhere but not absolutely continuous:

Generalizations

then
The collection of all absolutely continuous functions from I into X is denoted AC(I; X).
A further generalization is the space ACp(I; X) of curves f: I → X such that
for some m in the Lp space Lp(I).

Properties of these generalizations

Absolute continuity of measures

Definition

In most applications, if a measure on the real line is simply said to be absolutely continuous — without specifying with respect to which other measure it is absolutely continuous — then absolute continuity with respect to Lebesgue measure is meant.

Equivalent definitions

The following conditions on a finite measure μ on Borel subsets of the real line are equivalent:Equivalence between (1) and (2) is a special case of  (still holds for σ-finite measures).
For an equivalent definition in terms of functions see the section Relation between the two notions of absolute continuity.
Any other function satisfying (3) is equal to g almost everywhere. Such a function is called Radon-Nikodym derivative, or density, of the absolutely continuous measure μ.
Equivalence between (1), (2) and (3) holds also in Rn for all n=1,2,3,...
Thus, the absolutely continuous measures on Rn are precisely those that have densities;  as a special case, the absolutely continuous probability measures are precisely the ones that have probability density functions.

Generalizations

If μ is a signed or complex measure, it is said that μ is absolutely continuous with respect to ν if its variation |μ| satisfies |μ| ≪ ν; equivalently, if every set A for which ν(A) = 0 is μ-null.
The Radon–Nikodym theorem. states that if μ is absolutely continuous with respect to ν, and both measures are σ-finite, then μ has a density, or "Radon-Nikodym derivative", with respect to ν, which means that there exists a ν-measurable function f taking values in [0, +∞), denoted by f = dμ/dν, such that for any ν-measurable set A we have

Singular measures

Via Lebesgue's decomposition theorem,. every measure can be decomposed into the sum of an absolutely continuous measure and a singular measure. See singular measure for examples of measures that are not absolutely continuous.

Relation between the two notions of absolute continuity

A finite measure μ on Borel subsets of the real line is absolutely continuous with respect to Lebesgue measure if and only if the point function
is locally an absolutely continuous real function.
In other words, a function is locally absolutely continuous if and only if its distributional derivative is a measure that is absolutely continuous with respect to the Lebesgue measure.
If the absolute continuity holds then the Radon-Nikodym derivative of μ is equal almost everywhere to the derivative of F..
More generally, the measure μ is assumed to be locally finite (rather than finite) and F(x) is defined as μ((0,x]) for x>0, 0 for x=0, and -μ((x,0]) for xThe relation between the two notions of absolute continuity still holds..

Notes






