[[UB40]]

CATEGORIES: Musical groups established in 1978, English dance music groups, Musical groups from Birmingham, West Midlands, Music in Birmingham, West Midlands, Virgin Records artists, A&M Records artists, British reggae musical groups, Reggae fusion artists, Musicians from Birmingham, West Midlands

UB40 are a British reggae/pop  band formed in 1978 in Birmingham, England. The band has had more than 50 singles in the UK Singles Chart, and has also achieved considerable international success. The band has been nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Reggae Album four times, and in 1984,  were nominated for the Brit Award for Best British Group."UB40: BRITs Profile". Brits.co.uk. Retrieved 27 October 2012 One of the world's best-selling music artists, UB40 have sold over 70 million records. 
Their hit singles include their debut "Food for Thought" and two U.S. Billboard Hot 100 number ones with "Red Red Wine" and "Can't Help Falling in Love".  Both of these also topped the UK Singles Chart, as did the band's version of "I Got You Babe".
The ethnic makeup of the band's original lineup was diverse, with musicians of English, Scottish, Irish, Yemeni and Jamaican parentage. The band's initial lineup lasted for 30 years from the band's formation in 1978 until frontman Ali Campbell's departure from the band in 2008. Since that time, two other founding members (Mickey Virtue and Astro) have also left the band, and the trio of Campbell, Virtue, and Astro have since formed UB40 Reunited.

History

1978–1999

The band members began as friends who knew each other from various schools across Birmingham. The name "UB40" was selected in reference to the signing-on document issued to people claiming unemployment benefit from the UK government's Department of Health and Social Security (DHSS) at the time of the band's formation. The designation UB40 stood for Unemployment Benefit, Form 40.
Brian Travers saved up and bought his first saxophone whilst working as an electrical apprentice for NG Bailey, leaving after a few years to become a founding member of UB40 alongside Astro, James Brown, Ali Campbell, Robin Campbell, Earl Falconer, Norman Hassan and Mickey Virtue.
Before some of them could play their instruments, Ali Campbell and Brian Travers travelled around Birmingham promoting the band, putting up UB40 posters. Their sound was created and honed through many long jam sessions at various locations in Birmingham.
Their first gig took place on 9 February 1979 at The Hare & Hounds Pub in Kings Heath, Birmingham for a friend's birthday party. This was commemorated in October 2011 by the unveiling of a plaque at the venue, indicating the band receiving the Performing Rights Society's Music Heritage Award. Retrieved 18 November 2011
UB40 caught their first break when Chrissie Hynde saw them at a pub and gave them an opportunity as a support act to her band, The Pretenders. UB40's first single, "King"/"Food for Thought" was released on Graduate Records, a local independent label run by David Virr. It reached No. 4 on the UK Singles Chart.
Their first album was titled Signing Off, as the band were signing off from, or ending, their claim for unemployment benefit. It was recorded in a bedsit in Birmingham and was produced by Bob Lamb. Norman Hassan said of the recording: "if you stripped my track down, you could hear the birds in the background." This is because his tracks were recorded outside in the garden. Signing Off was released on 29 August 1980, and entered the UK Albums Chart on 2 October 1980. It reached as high as No. 2 in the UK and spent 71 weeks in total on the chart. Signing Off is now a Platinum album. As UB40 grew in popularity, they encouraged and supported local musicians and bands from Birmingham, such as Beshara, by taking them on a tour.
After great success in the UK, UB40's popularity in the United States was established when they released Labour of Love, an album of cover songs, in 1983. The album reached No. 1 on the UK Albums Chart and No. 8 on the Billboard 200 in the US. The album featured the songUB40: THE LEGENDS OF MUSIC DOCUMENTARIES "Red Red Wine", a cover version of a Neil Diamond song (in an arrangement similar to that of Tony Tribe's version); it stayed on the charts for over a hundred weeks. Three years later UB40 performed at the Birmingham Heart Beat Charity Concert 1986.
In 1987 Ray "Pablo" Falconer, producer of UB40 music, died in a car crash. Earl Falconer, who was driving, was sentenced to six months' imprisonment in June 1988. UB40 also feature in the 1988 film The Yob.
Their most successful worldwide single release is their reggae/pop version of "(I Can't Help) Falling In Love With You", which was the main title to the 1993 Sharon Stone movie Sliver and was a number one hit across Europe and in the US and in 1995, they covered the Stevie Wonder song "Superstition" for the Eddie Murphy movie Vampire in Brooklyn and it appears on their album The Best of UB40 – Volume Two which they released that year. They make a guest appearance in the 1997 movie, Speed 2: Cruise Control

2000–2009

UB40 toured South Africa in July 2007 and headlined the Live Earth concert at the Cradle of Humankind, near Johannesburg. They performed one of the longest sets for the event at approximately 54 minutes.
On 24 January 2008 it was announced that Ali Campbell would be leaving the group after 30 years. It was originally stated that this was in order for Campbell to concentrate on solo projects, but Campbell later said he was leaving due to management and business disputes,Ali Campbell interview by Pete Lewis, 'Blues & Soul' July 2010 with Mickey Virtue departing shortly afterwards citing the same issues.
It was reported by some Birmingham newspapers on 13 March 2008, that Maxi Priest would be the new lead singer of UB40 and had recorded a cover of Bob Marley's "I Shot the Sheriff" with the band, based on information from an unnamed "source close to the band." Priest had joined UB40 on their arena tour in 2007, culminating in sell-out shows at the NEC Birmingham in December.
The band released their next album, TwentyFourSeven, UB40's last with the original line-up, by way of a free insert in The Mail on Sunday's 4 May 2008 issue. which was a first, as all their official albums had previously gone Top 50 on the UK Albums Chart. Their next release, on EMI, was a collection called Love Songs, which was a compilation of hits mainly from the Labour of Love series and all featuring Ali Campbell on vocals – it reached number 3 in the UK. 
The band toured the US, which included their first show at the Hollywood Bowl.
In 2009 the band released the first new album with their new lead singer Duncan Campbell; another in the Labour of Love cover series entitled Labour of Love IV. The album was in the charts for only two weeks reaching number 24.

2010–present

UB40 announced that after completing a coast-to-coast 2010 American tour they would be playing a nationwide UK tour of theatres in October/November 2010 performing their seminal album Signing Off, in full, along with a second set of popular UB40 songs. To coincide, on 1 Nov 2010 a remastered 2CD+DVD of Signing Off was released as a '30th Anniversary Special Edition'.Ali Campbell interview by Pete Lewis, 'Blues & Soul' October 2010
In 2011 five founder members of the group and directors of their DEP International label, had bankruptcy proceedings started against them relating to debts of the record label. The five named were Robin Campbell, Brian Travers, Terence Wilson, Norman Hassan and James Brown.
In November 2013, UB40 revealed dates in anticipation of their UK Tour in Spring 2014. The announcement of the tour follows the success of the band's latest Top 30 album, Getting Over The Storm, which was awarded BBC Radio 2's 'Album Of The Week' accolade and received 5-star reviews from the UK's music press on its release in September 2013. Ali Campbell was highly critical of his replacement in UB40, stating "I sat back for five years and watched my brother Duncan murdering my songs.""Rival band remains true to its roots in reggae", Yorkshire Post, 7 March 2014. Retrieved 8 March 2014 Campbell's forthcoming solo album Rhythm Method was reworked after Astro and Virtue joined him and will now be released as a UB40 album.

Influences

UB40 were influenced by the many blues parties they attended as teenagers in the multicultural Balsall Heath area of Birmingham.  Their love of ska, reggae and early lovers rock inspired such original tracks as "King", "Madam Medusa", "Food for Thought", "Signing Off" and "One in Ten".
Their early musical style was unique, with a heavy influence of analogue synthesisers, psychedelic rock guitar, saxophone and dub producer techniques which were later perfected by Pablo Falconer.
The Campbell brothers are the sons of the late folk musician, Ian Campbell.

Achievements

UB40 is one of the most commercially successful reggae acts of all time in terms of record sales (over 70 million), chart positions and touring schedule. During their three-decade long career, they have been performing sell-out shows worldwide and headlining the Reggae Sunsplash music festival in Jamaica, as well as spreading reggae to Russia, South America, etc. They have performed twice at the Night of the Proms, in 2000 and in 2006. In 2006 UB40 was nominated for a Grammy Award (Reggae category) for their album Who You Fighting For.
All three of their UK number one hits and four of their five U.S. top ten hits were cover versions.
UB40 collaborators include: Pato Banton, Madness, Bitty McLean, Chrissie Hynde, Maxi Priest, Robert Palmer, Hunterz, Japanese artist Mikidozan, French artist Nuttea, Lady Saw, Afrika Bambaataa, 808 State.

Personnel

Members

Touring personnel

Discography

Gallery

File:DuncanCampbell.jpg|Duncan Campbell
File:Robin Campbell UB40.jpg|Robin Campbell
File:EarlFalconer.jpg|Earl Falconer
File:NormanHassan.jpg|Norman Hassan
File:TraversParryUB40.jpg|Brian Travers and Laurence Parry
File:AstroUB40.jpg|Astro








