[[John S. Pillsbury]]

CATEGORIES: 1827 births, 1901 deaths, People from Merrimack County, New Hampshire, Governors of Minnesota, University of Minnesota, Minnesota State Senators, Minnesota Republicans, American Congregationalists, American people of English descent

John Sargent Pillsbury (July 29, 1827 – October 18, 1901) was an American politician, businessman, and philanthropist. A Republican, he served as the eighth Governor of Minnesota from 1876 to 1882. He was a co-founder of the Pillsbury Company.

Early life and career

Pillsbury was born in Sutton, New Hampshire of English descent, the son of John and Susan (Wadleigh) Pillsbury. He was a descendant of Joshua Pillsbury, who emigrated from England to Newburyport, Massachusetts in 1640.

Career

Pillsbury Company

Pillsbury came to Minnesota from the Eastern U.S. in 1855 and settled in St. Anthony (now part of Minneapolis). The entrepreneur tried his hand at several different types of businesses (after his business with Walter Harriman) including hardware, real estate, and lumber, though his greatest success came when he co-founded C. A. Pillsbury and Company Pillsbury attended the University of Minnesota, where he joined Chi Psi. 

Political career

After the American Civil War, Pillsbury was elected as a 3rd class companion of the Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States.
Pillsbury served in the Minnesota Senate for several years before becoming the 8th Governor of Minnesota.

Philanthropist

Pillsbury was a noted philanthropist and often anonymously donated funds to causes he favored. In particular, he helped the University of Minnesota recover from debt in its early years, and later served as a regent. Since then, he has become known as "The Father of the University." 

Personal life

Pillsbury married Mahala Fisk on November 3, 1856.
Pillsbury died on October 18, 1901 and is interred in Lakewood Cemetery in Minneapolis, Minnesota.

Quote

A 1901 magazine article described him as follows:






	


