[[Recreational vehicle]]

CATEGORIES: Articles with inconsistent citation formats, Recreational vehicles

A recreational vehicle or RV is, in North America, the usual term for a motor vehicle or trailer equipped with living space and amenities found in a home.

Features

A recreational vehicle normally includes kitchen, bathroom, and sleeping facilities. In other countries the terms caravan, camper van or motorhome are more common, and the vehicles themselves vary, although typically being smaller than those in North America.

Function

RVs are defined as either motor vehicles or tow-able trailers and are primarily intended for leisure activities such as vacations and camping. RVs are usually found in RV Parks or campgrounds.  RVs can also be rented in most major cities and tourist areas. They are occasionally used as mobile offices for business travelers and often include customizations such as extra desk space, an upgraded electrical system, a generator, and satellite Internet. Other RVs serve as traveling permanent homes.  People who use their RVs as traveling permanent homes on a full-time basis are commonly referred to as "full-timers".

Types

Recreational vehicle types include the motorhome (class A, B, B+, and C), travel trailer, fifth wheel trailer, toy hauler, popup trailer, and slide-in camper. See also the list of recreational vehicles.

History

Most modern dictionaries give one of the meanings for the word caravan as "a camper equipped with living quarters". They in turn give one of the meanings for camper as "a recreational vehicle equipped for camping out while travelling". The earliest caravans were used for practical purposes rather than recreation, such as providing shelter and accommodation for people travelling in search of an audience for their art, or to offer their services to distant employers, or to reach a new place of abode.
In Europe, wagons built to live in, rather than just to carry persons or goods, were developed in France around 1810. They were used in Britain by showmen and circus performers from the 1820s; but Gypsies only began living in caravans (vardos) from about 1850.
The covered wagon that played a significant part in opening up of the interior of the North American continent to white settlement from about 1745 was a type of caravan. A well set-up wagon provided its occupants with living quarters as well as a means of transportation for themselves, plus their supplies and equipment."Inside a pioneer covered wagon", Robin Flinchum, PageWise, Inc, 2002
In Canada, the earliest motorhomes were built on car or truck bodies from about 1910."From Past to Present 1901–1910", RVHotlineCanada. By the 1920s the RV was well established in the US, with RV camping clubs established across the country, despite the unpaved roads and limited camping facilities."RV History", RV/MH Heritage Foundation, retrieved 2009
In Australia, the earliest known motorhome was built in 1929. It is now in the Goolwa Museum, where it has been partially restored. It is recognized by both the National Museum of Australia and the (Australian) National Motor Museum as being the first motorized caravan in Australia."Pop Kaesler's Motorhome", Campervan and Motorhome Club of Australia, retrieved 2009
Between the late 1920s and the early 1960s, some South Australian railway maintenance gangs working in country areas where they were required to live on-site, were accommodated in caravans built by the department instead of the tents they had previously used. These caravans were built like short railway carriages, about 6.1 metres (20 feet) long; but had wooden wheels with solid rubber tyres and ball bearings."Heritage Caravan", History Trust of South Australia, 2003.
In the US, the modern RV industry had its beginnings in the late 1920s and 1930s (shortly after the advent of the automobile industry), where a number of companies began manufacturing house trailers or trailer coaches, as they were then called. Often, these started out as mom and pop operations, building their units in garages or back yards. (One of these early manufacturers, Airstream, is still in business today.) Though tied to the mobile home industry in the early years—when few units were longer than 9 metres (30 ft) long, and thus easily transportable—the 1950s saw a separation of the two, as (what are now referred to as) mobile homes became larger and more immobile, and thus largely became an entirely separate industry. During the 1950s, in addition to travel trailers or trailer coaches, manufacturers began building self-contained motorhomes.

File:1933 car&trailer.jpg|1933 car & camping trailer
Image:DodgeMotorhome.jpg|An older-model Dodge motorhome
File:Westfalia Campingbox 8.jpg|Volkswagen Camper

RV lifestyle

The RV lifestyle is made up of those interested in traveling and camping rather than living in one location, as well as by vacationers. Some travel nearer the equator during the winter months in their RV and return in spring. This is sometimes referred to in the USA as snowbirding.
There are a large and growing number of people who live full-time in their RV/motorhome; these are known as fulltimers. There is another subculture of the RV lifestyle known as workamping. These workampers are people who work at the campgrounds/RV parks at which they stay, usually for pay or a reduction in site fees; or who work at businesses close to the park which need seasonal workers.
While many RVers may be retirees, other individuals and families are choosing RV travel as a way to see parts of the world while maintaining their incomes via technology available from the RV (such as the Internet, phones, faxes, etc.).
Some choose to park in locations without camping sites for a variety of reasons, including saving money, more choice of location, isolation, privacy, adventure, more self-sufficiency and to be nearer a target location.
There is a growing community of Burners (as Burning Man participants are called) who have taken recreational vehicles and modified them so as to fit their beliefs. The conversion of old schoolbuses to this end is a popular choice. Some take old diesel vehicles and burn biodiesel or waste vegetable oil in them in order to make them more environmentally friendly than conventional RVs.
The RV Lifestyle is particularly popular among senior citizens. Like many other RVers, they have often sold their homes and often travel to warm climates in the winter. In Australia, these travellers are known as grey nomads.

Other meanings

Australian English: The term "recreational vehicle" may refer to a sport utility vehicle (SUV or 4×4).
British English: The term "recreational vehicle" may refer to a sport utility vehicle (SUV or 4×4), Dune buggies or ATVs. Terms covering some of the vehicles classified as "recreational vehicle" in North America are camper van or motorhome (see below) and caravan. The term RV is used for imported North America vehicles.

Terms





Further reading




