[[Constantine IV]]

CATEGORIES: Heraclian Dynasty, 652 births, 685 deaths, Porphyrogennetoi, 7th-century Byzantine emperors, Byzantine people of the Arab–Byzantine Wars, Byzantine people of the Byzantine–Bulgarian Wars, Deaths from dysentery

Constantine IV () (c. 652 – 14 September 685), sometimes incorrectly called Pogonatos, "the Bearded", out of confusion with his father,Norwich, pg. 316 was Byzantine Emperor from 668 to 685. His reign saw the first serious check to nearly 50 years of uninterrupted Islamic expansion, while his calling of the Sixth Ecumenical Council saw the end of the monothelitism controversy in the Byzantine Empire.

Early career

The eldest son of Constans II, Constantine IV had been named a co-emperor with his father in 654. 500  He had been given the responsibility of managing the affairs at Constantinople during his father's extended absence in ItalyCanduci, pg. 197 and became senior Emperor when Constans was assassinated in 668.Kazhdan, pg. 496
The first task before the new Emperor was the suppression of the military revolt in Sicily under Mezezius which had led to his father's death. 303  Within seven months of his accession, Constantine IV had dealt with the insurgency with the support of Pope Vitalian. 315 But this success was overshadowed by troubles in the east.
As early as 668 the Caliph Muawiyah I received an invitation from Saborios, the commander of the troops in Armenia, to help overthrow the Emperor at Constantinople. 306 He sent an army under his son Yazid against the Eastern Roman Empire. Yazid reached Chalcedon and took the important Byzantine center Amorion. 307 While the city was quickly recovered, the Arabs next attacked Carthage and Sicily in 669. 310 In 670 the Arabs captured Cyzicus and set up a base from which to launch further attacks into the heart of the Empire.  Their fleet captured Smyrna and other coastal cities in 672. 323  Finally, in 672, the Arabs sent a large fleet to attack Constantinople by sea. 323  While Constantine was distracted by this, the Slavs unsuccessfully attacked Thessalonika.

The Siege of Constantinople: 674-678

Commencing in 674, the Arabs launched the long-awaited siege of Constantinople. The great fleet that had been assembled set sail under the command of Abdu'l-Rahman ibn Abu BakrBury, pg. 310 before the end of the year; during the winter months some of the ships anchored at Smyrna, the rest off the coast of Cilicia. 310  Additional squadrons reinforced the forces of Abd ar-Rahman before they proceeded to the Hellespont, into which they sailed in about April 674. 310  From April to September 674 the fleet lay moored from the promontory of Hebdomon, on the Propontis, as far as the promontory of Kyklobion, near the Golden Gate, and throughout those months continued to engage with the Byzantine fleet which defended the harbour from morning to evening. 310
Knowing that it was only a matter of time before Constantinople was under siege, Constantine had ensured that the city was well provisioned. 310  He also constructed a large number of fireships and fast-sailing boats provided with tubes or siphons for squirting fire. This is the first known use of Greek fire in combat,Norwich, pg. 323 which was one of the key advantages that the Byzantines possessed. In September, the Arabs having failed in their attempts to take the city, sailed to Cyzicus, which they made their winter quarters. 324  Over the following five years, the Arabs would return each spring to continue the siege of Constantinople, but with the same results. 310  The city survived, and finally in 678 the Arabs were forced to raise the siege. The Arabs withdrew and were almost simultaneously defeated on land in Lycia in Anatolia.  This unexpected reverse forced Muawiyah I to seek a truce with Constantine. The terms of the concluded truce required the Arabs to evacuate the islands they had seized in the Aegean, and to pay an annual tribute to the Emperor consisting of fifty slaves, fifty horses, and 3,000 pounds of gold. 324 The raising of the siege allowed Constantine to go to the relief of Thessalonika, still under siege from the Slavs.

Later Reign

With the temporary passing of the Arab threat, Constantine turned his attention to the Church, which was torn between Monothelitism and Orthodoxy. 326  In November 680 Constantine convened the Sixth Ecumenical Council (also known as the Third Council of Constantinople).  Constantine presided in person during the formal aspects of the proceedings (the first eleven sittings and then the eighteenth), surrounded by his court officials, but he took no active role in the theological discussions. 317  The Council reaffirmed the Orthodox doctrines of the Council of Chalcedon in 451. 198  This solved the controversy over monothelitism; conveniently for the Empire, most monothelites were now under the control of the Umayyad Caliphate.  The council closed in September 681. 316
Due to the ongoing conflicts with the Arabs during the 670s, Constantine had been forced to conclude treaties in the west with the Lombards, who had captured Brindisi and Taranto. 501  Also in 670, the Bulgars under Asparukh crossed the Danube into nominally Imperial territory and began to subject the local communities and Slavic tribes.  In 680, Constantine IV led a combined land and sea operation against the invaders and besieged their fortified camp in Dobruja.333-334  Suffering from bad health, the Emperor had to leave the army, which panicked and was defeated by the Bulgars. 325 In 681, Constantine was forced to acknowledge the Bulgar state in Moesia and to pay tribute/protection money to avoid further inroads into Byzantine Thrace. 326  Consequently, Constantine created the Theme of Thrace. 501
His brothers Heraclius and Tiberius had been crowned with him as Augusti during the reign of their father,Dumbarton Oaks, Catalogue of the Byzantine Coins in the Dumbarton Oaks Collection, Vol. II, Part 2 (1968), pg. 513 and this was confirmed by the demand of the populace,Bury, pg. 308 but in 681 Constantine had them mutilated so they would be ineligible to rule.  At the same time he associated on the throne his own young son Justinian II. Constantine died of dysentery in September 685. 327

Family

By his wife Anastasia, Constantine IV had at least two sons:

In art and popular culture

Constantine IV was portrayed by Iossif Surchadzhiev in the 1981 Bulgarian movie Aszparuh, directed by Ludmil Staikov.

Sources

Primary Sources

Theophanes the Confessor, Chronographia.

Secondary Sources




