[[Wood Duck]]

CATEGORIES: Ducks, Aix (genus), Animals described in 1758, Birds of Canada, Birds of Cuba, Birds of North America, Birds of the United States

The Wood Duck or Carolina Duck (Aix sponsa) is a species of perching duck found in North America.
It is one of the most colourful North American waterfowl.

Description

The Wood Duck is a medium-sized perching duck. A typical adult is from 
The adult male has distinctive multicoloured iridescent plumage and red eyes,with a distinctive white flare down the neck. The female, less colourful, has a white eye-ring and a whitish throat. Both adults have crested heads.
The male's call is a rising whistle, jeeeeee; the females utter a drawn-out, rising squeal, do weep do weep, when flushed, and a sharp cr-r-ek, cr-e-ek for an alarm call.

Behaviour

Their breeding habitat is wooded swamps, shallow lakes, marshes or ponds, and creeks in eastern North America, the west coast of the United States and western Mexico. They usually nest in cavities in trees close to water, although they will take advantage of nesting boxes in wetland locations if available. Females line their nests with feathers and other soft materials, and the elevation provides some protection from predators. Unlike most other ducks, the Wood Duck has sharp claws for perching in trees and can, in southern regions, produce two broods in a single season—the only North American duck that can do so.
Females typically lay between 7 and 15 white-tan eggs that incubate for an average of 30 days.
After hatching, the ducklings jump down from the nest tree and make their way to water. The mother calls them to her, but does not help them in any way. The ducklings may jump from heights of up to 
These birds feed by dabbling or walking on land. They mainly eat berries, acorns, and seeds, but also insects, making them omnivores.

Distribution

The birds are year-round residents in parts of its southern range, but the northern populations migrate south for the winter.Wood Duck

Conservation

The population of the Wood Duck was in serious decline in the late 19th century as a result of severe habitat loss and market hunting both for meat and plumage for the ladies' hat market in Europe. By the beginning of the 20th century Wood Ducks had virtually disappeared from much of their former range. In response to the Migratory Bird Treaty established in 1916 and enactment of the Federal Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918, wood duck populations began to recover slowly. By ending unregulated hunting and taking measures to protect remaining habitat, wood duck populations began to rebound in the 1920s. The development of the artificial nesting box in the 1930s gave an additional boost to Wood Duck production.
Landowners as well as park and refuge managers can encourage Wood Ducks by building Wood Duck nest boxes near lakes, ponds, and streams. Fulda, Minnesota has adopted the Wood Duck as an unofficial mascot, and a large number of nest boxes can be found in the area.
Expanding North American beaver populations throughout the Wood Duck's range have also helped the population rebound as beavers create an ideal forested wetland habitat for Wood Ducks.
The population of the Wood Duck has increased a great deal in the last several years. The increase has been due to the work of many people constructing Wood Duck boxes and conserving vital habitat for the Wood Ducks to breed. During the open waterfowl season, U.S. hunters have only been allowed to take two Wood Ducks per day in the Atlantic and Mississippi Flyways. However, for the 2008–2009 season, the limit was raised to three. The Wood Duck limit remains at two in the Central Flyway and at seven in the Pacific Flyway. It is the second most commonly hunted duck in North America, after the mallard.

In popular culture

In 2013, the Royal Canadian Mint created two coins to commemorate the Wood Duck. The two coins are each part of a three coin set to help promote Ducks Unlimited Canada as well as celebrate its 75th anniversary.

Gallery

File:Brautentenpaar 2008-03-21 072.jpg|Pair
File:Male Wood Duck (Aix sponsa), Parc du Rouge-Cloître, Brussels.jpg | Male
File:WoodDuckicetakeoffDec08.jpg|Taking off from ice
File:Wood duck eclipse.jpg|Male in eclipse plumage
File:Aix sponsa chick.jpg|Duckling
File:Wood Duck in profile (Aix sponsa).jpg|Male in profile
File:Wood Duck.JPG|Male Wood Duck profile
File:Wood Duck, Central Park.jpg|A Wood Duck
File:Male Aix sponsa portrait.jpg|Male portrait






