[[Hard Rock Cafe]]

CATEGORIES: Hard Rock Cafe, Companies based in Orlando, Florida, Restaurant chains in the United States, Restaurant franchises, Retail companies established in 1971, Seminole tribe, Theme restaurants, Restaurant chains in the United Kingdom

Hard Rock Cafe International, Inc. is a chain of theme restaurants founded in 1971 by Americans Isaac Tigrett and Peter Morton in London. In 1979, the cafe began covering its walls with rock and roll memorabilia, a tradition which expanded to others in the chain.  In 2007, Hard Rock was sold to the Seminole Tribe of Florida, and is headquartered in Orlando, Florida.  Currently, there are 175 Hard Rock locations in 53 countries with the largest in Orlando.

History

Restaurants

The first Hard Rock Cafe (HRC) opened on 14 June 1971, in Piccadilly, London, United Kingdom under the ownership of young Americans Peter Morton and Isaac Tigrett.  Hard Rock initially had an eclectic decor but it later started to display memorabilia. Hard Rock has amassed one of the largest collections of rock and roll memorabilia in the world.  The chain began to expand worldwide in 1982 with locations in (among others) Toronto, Los Angeles, San Francisco, Chicago, Paris and Berlin. Hard Rock Cafe locations in the United States vary from smaller, more tourist driven markets (Biloxi, Destin, Gatlinburg, Key West, etc.) to large metropolises (Houston, Philadelphia, New York, Chicago, Boston, Washington DC, etc.).  Hard Rock Cafe typically does not franchise cafe locations in the United States.  All US cafes are corporate owned and operated, except for cafes in Tampa and Four Winds casino. Retrieved 2012-05-10 However, in the transition of the Las Vegas Hard Rock Hotel property originally owned and then later sold to Rank by founder Peter Morton, Peter retained hotel naming rights West of the Mississippi. When Peter Morton sold his Las Vegas Hard Rock Hotel to the Morgans Group, he also sold those naming rights. Which then gave rise to two U.S. franchise Hotels (without cafes) in Albuquerque and Tulsa.  The Albuquerque hotel no longer pays for the Hard Rock rights and reverted to its former name in June 2013.  More hotels franchised off from Morgan's are planned for Sioux City and Vancouver.
In 1990, The Rank Group, a London-based leisure company, acquired Mecca Leisure Group and continued expansion of the concept in its geographic territory. Rank went on to purchase Hard Rock America from Peter Morton as well as Hard Rock Canada from Nick Bitove. After the completion of these acquisitions, Rank gained worldwide control of the brand.  In March 2007, the Seminole Tribe of Florida acquired Hard Rock Cafe International, Inc. and other related entities from Rank for US$965 million.

Music memorabilia

HRC is known for its collection of rock and roll memorabilia. The cafes solicit donations of music memorabilia but also purchase a number of items at auctions around the world, including autographed guitars, costumes from world tours and rare photographs; these are often to be found mounted on cafe walls. The collection began in 1979 with an un-signed Red Fender Lead II guitar from Eric Clapton, who was a regular at the first restaurant in London. Clapton wanted management to hang the guitar over his regular seat in order to lay claim to that spot, and they obliged. This prompted Pete Townshend of The Who to give one of his guitars, also un-signed with the note "Mine's as good as his! Love, Pete."
The Hard Rock Café is also in possession of a Bedford VAL 6 axle coach used in the 1967 film The Beatles Magical Mystery Tour. The vehicle was completely refurbished after filming. It is currently displayed in the US, but makes regular appearences in events in the UK, especially at the original Hard Rock Cafe in London. In 2001, a competition was ran to win the actual bus, but it was never given away; and stayed with the Cafe.

Expansion into other businesses

=Casinos and hotels=

In 1995, Peter Morton spent $80 million to open the Hard Rock Hotel near the Las Vegas Strip in Las Vegas, Nevada.  A subsequent $100 million expansion in 1999 nearly doubled the hotel's capacity.
In May 2006, Morton sold the Hard Rock Hotel & Casino, Las Vegas to Morgans Hotel Group for $770 million, including the rights to the Hard Rock Hotel brand west of the Mississippi, including Texas, California, Australia and Vancouver, British Columbia.
Today, the Seminole Tribe of Florida owns and operates all units except the Las Vegas and Tulsa properties. New properties franchised off of Morgan's are planned for Sioux City and Vancouver.  In 2004, Hard Rock International and Sol Melia Hotels and Resorts launched Lifestar Hoteles España SL, a joint venture that manages Europe's first Hard Rock Hotel in Madrid. The other joint venture hotels are in Chicago, New York and San Diego (the San Diego property includes Hard Rock condominiums).  Hard Rock also operates hotels and resorts in Orlando, Florida (a joint venture with Loews Hotels); Bali, Indonesia; and Pattaya, Thailand, (a joint venture with Ong Beng Seng/Hotel Properties Limited). Hard Rock International continues to expand internationally (including hotels, casinos, resorts, and condominiums) through several joint ventures (Becker Ventures, Ong Beng Seng/Hotel Properties Limited and Loews Hotels), including hotels in Chicago, Bali, Orlando, Penang, San Diego, Singapore, and planned openings in Abu Dhabi, Cancun, Dubai, Hungary, Panama, Punta Cana and Vallarta  The Hotel Zoso in Palm Springs, California is being converted into a 160-room Hard Rock Hotel, with the transition expected to be completed by 2014. (2013, February 10). Palm Springs hotel to be converted into Hard Rock outpost. The Los Angeles Times. A location in Atlantic City, New Jersey was planned but canceled. (2012, September 13). Hard Rock casino developers scrap Atlantic City casino project The Press of Atlantic City.
International locations include 

=Hard Rock Park=

Hard Rock Cafe International announced in March 2006 that it licensed the "Hard Rock" name to HRP Myrtle Beach Operations, LLC, to design, build, and operate a $400 million 
New owners renamed the venue Freestyle Music Park and planned to reopen retaining a music-theme but, without the Hard Rock name by Memorial Day, 2009. The park only operated one additional year and never reopened due to poor attendance.

Acquisition by the Seminole Tribe of Florida

On December 7, 2006, Rank sold its Hard Rock business to the Seminole Tribe of Florida for $965 million. Included in the deal were 124 Hard Rock Cafes, four Hard Rock Hotels, two Hard Rock Hotel and Casino Hotels, two Hard Rock Live! concert venues, and stakes in three unbranded hotels. Rank retained the Hard Rock Casino in London, and rebranded it the G Casino Piccadilly. The Hard Rock Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas was also not part of the deal, as it was sold by Peter Morton to Morgans Hotel Group in May 2006.
On January 8, 2007, Rank shareholders approved the Seminoles' $965 million offer. The Tribe announced it finalized the deal on March 11, 2007.
On June 22, 2008, the Seminole Hard Rock Hotel & Casino Hollywood began "Vegas-style" table gambling in addition to the Class II slots already in operation. To win approval for the table games, which were barred under Florida law, the Seminole Tribe paid the State of Florida $100 million as part of a 25-year pact signed by Governor Charlie Crist. On July 3, 2008, the Florida Supreme Court ruled that the governor's agreement was unconstitutional, but table games continue to operate because the Federal Department of the Interior approved the now-invalid pact with the state.

List of Hard Rock Cafes

This list currently mentions Hard Rock Cafes only and not the other type of venues, such as Bars and Hotels.







International sites


