[[Jill Dando]]

CATEGORIES: 1961 births, 1999 deaths, 1999 in London, BBC newsreaders and journalists, British reporters and correspondents, Deaths by firearm in England, English Baptists, English murder victims, English television presenters, Murder in 1999, Murdered entertainers, Murdered journalists, People from Weston-super-Mare, People murdered in London, People murdered in England, Unsolved murders in the United Kingdom, 20th-century Baptists

Jill Wendy Dando (9 November 1961 – 26 April 1999) was an English journalist, television presenter and newsreader who was 1997 BBC Personality of the Year.
Dando was murdered by gunshot outside her home in Fulham, West London. A local man Barry George was convicted and jailed for the murder but was later acquitted on appeal. A Yugoslav terrorist connection was initially dismissed by police, but has since acquired more credence. The case remains open.

Early life and career

Jill Dando was born in Ashcombe House Maternity Home, Weston-super-Mare, Somerset,Through the family photo album and was brought up a Baptist. When she was three, it was discovered she had a hole in her heart and a blocked pulmonary artery. She had heart surgery on 12 January 1965. She was educated at Worle Infant School, Greenwood Junior School, Worle Comprehensive School,Story of the murder of Jill Dando and Broadoak Sixth Form Centre, where she was head girl, and passed two A levels. She studied journalism at South Glamorgan Institute of Higher Education in Cardiff.
Dando was a keen thespian. She was a member of Weston-super-Mare Amateur Dramatic Society and Exeter Little Theatre Company, with whom she appeared in plays at the Barnfield Theatre.
Dando was a volunteer at Sunshine Hospital Radio in Weston-super-Mare in 1979. She started her first job as a trainee reporter for the local weekly newspaper, the Weston Mercury, where her father and brother worked. After five years as a print journalist, she began employment with the BBC when she became a newsreader for BBC Radio Devon in 1985. That year, she transferred to BBC South West, where she presented a regional news magazine programme, Spotlight South West. In 1987, she worked for TSW, then worked for BBC Spotlight in Plymouth. In early 1988, Dando made a move from regional to national television when she moved to London to present BBC television news.
Dando went on to present the BBC television programmes Breakfast Time, Breakfast News, the BBC One O'Clock News, the Six O'Clock News, the travel programme Holiday, the crime appeal series Crimewatch (from 1995 until her death) and occasionally Songs of Praise. In 1994 she moved to Fulham.
On 25 April 1999, Dando presented the first episode of The Antiques Inspectors. She was featured on the cover of that week's Radio Times magazine (for 24 to 30 April).
At the time of her death she was among those with the highest profile of the BBC's on-screen staff; she had been the 1997 BBC Personality of the Year. After Barry George (see below) was charged with the murder but acquitted, Crimewatch made no further appeals for information concerning the case.

Murder

On the morning of 26 April 1999, 37-year-old Dando left the Chiswick home of her fiancé, Alan Farthing. She returned alone, by car, to the house she owned in Gowan Avenue, Fulham, West London. She had lived in the house, but by April 1999 was in the process of selling it and did not visit it frequently. As Dando reached her front door at about 11:32, she was shot once in the head. Her body was discovered about 14 minutes later by neighbour Helen Doble. Dando was taken to the nearby Charing Cross Hospital where she was declared dead on arrival at 13:03 BST. 
Forensic study indicated that Dando had been shot by a bullet from a 9 mm calibre automatic pistol, with the gun pressed against her head at the moment of the shot. Richard Hughes, her next door neighbour, heard a surprised cry from Dando "like someone greeting a friend" but heard no gunshot. Hughes looked out of his front window and, while not realising what had happened, made the only certain sighting of the killer—a 6 foot (1.83 metre) tall white man aged around 40 years old, seen walking away from Dando's house.

Investigation

After the murder there was intense media coverage. An investigation by the Metropolitan Police, named Operation Oxborough, proved fruitless for over a year. Dando's status as a well-known public figure probably brought her into contact with thousands of people, and she was known by millions, so there was fevered speculation about the motive for her killing.
Within six months, the murder investigation team had spoken to more than 2,500 people and taken more than 1,000 statements. With little progress after a year, the police concentrated their attention on Barry George, who lived about half a mile from Dando's house. He had a history of stalking women, sexual offending and other anti-social and attention seeking behaviour.
George was put under surveillance, arrested on 25 May and charged with Dando's murder on 28 May.
George was tried at the Old Bailey, convicted, and on 2 July 2001 he was sentenced to life imprisonment. Concern about this conviction was widespread on the basis that the case against George appeared thin. Two appeals were unsuccessful, but after discredited forensics evidence was excluded from the prosecution's case, George's third appeal succeeded in November 2007. The original conviction was quashed and a second trial lasting eight weeks ended in George's acquittal on 1 August 2008.
Dando's family and her fiancé Alan Farthing did not ask the police to reopen the investigation. After George's acquittal, some newspapers published articles which appeared to suggest that he was guilty of the Dando murder and other offences against women. In December 2009, George accepted substantial damages from News Group Newspapers over articles in The Sun and the News of the World, following a libel action in the High Court.BBC report :December 2009

Potential suspects

Lines of inquiry explored in the police investigation included:
The original police investigation had explored the possibility of a professional killing, but since Dando was living with her fiancé and was only rarely visiting her Gowan Avenue house, it was considered unlikely that a professional assassin would have been sufficiently well informed about Dando's movements to have known when she was going there. CCTV evidence of Dando's last journey (mainly security video recordings from the Kings Mall Shopping Centre in Hammersmith, which she visited on her way to Fulham) did not show any sign of her being followed.Guardian article :2001 article 
Dando's BBC colleague Nick Ross stated on Newsnight on the night of her death that retaliatory attacks by criminals against police, lawyers and judges were almost unknown in Britain. Finally, forensic examination of the cartridge case and bullet recovered from the scene of the attack suggested that the weapon used had been the result of a workshop conversion of a replica or decommissioned gun. It was argued that a professional assassin would not use such a poor quality weapon. The police therefore soon began to favour the idea that the killing had been carried out by a crazed individual acting on an opportunist basis. This assumed profile of the perpetrator led to the focus on Barry George.
However, it is reported that cold case reviews by the police after 2008 have concluded that Dando was killed by a professional assassin..." Dando was subject to a 'hard contact execution'. Pressing the gun against her head would have silenced the fatal shot and prevented her killer from being splattered with blood.

Yugoslav connection

Soon after the killing some commentators identified the possibility of a Serbian connection.
At Barry George's first trial his defence barrister, Michael Mansfield QC, quoted from a National Criminal Intelligence Service report which stated that the Serbian warlord leader Arkan had ordered her assassination in retaliation for the NATO bombing of the Radio Television of Serbia headquarters on 23 April 1999. 16 station staff had died in the bombing..." Mansfield suggested that Dando's earlier presentation of an appeal for aid for Kosovar Albanian refugees may have attracted the attention of Bosnian-Serb hardliners. Dando's picture was on the cover of the Radio Times (edition 24 to 30 April 1999) in the week of her killing.
The theory still holds great sway with commentators. The victims were mostly Croatian émigrés, although others were targeted. The attacks were usually carried out by small teams consisting of a trigger-man supported by a spotter and were always carefully planned.  The attacks were often made as targets entered or left their homes since this was the point at which they were most vulnerable and where a case of mistaken identity was least likely.
Bob Woffinden, a journalist who specialises in miscarriages of justice has stated "Claims of responsibility are made by groups such as the IRA or ETA. In 60 years, there has not once been a claim of responsibility for an assassination carried out by Eastern European secret services." Woffinden advanced the view that a Yugoslav group was behind the Dando killing and in various newspaper articles he contested all the grounds on which the police had dismissed this possibility.

Family and personal life

Dando was the daughter of Jack Dando (February 1918 – February 2009), who died in Weston-super-Mare on his 91st birthday,Jill Dando's dad dies at 91 in Weston and Winifred Mary Jean Dando (August 1927 – January 1986),Deaths England and Wales 1984–2006 who died of leukaemia aged 58. Her only sibling, brother Nigel (born 1952), works as a journalist for BBC Radio Bristol, having previously worked as a journalist in local newspapers since the 1970s.Nigel Dando
Dando was a devout Baptist Christian. She had a relationship with BBC executive Bob Wheaton from 1989 to 1996. She had a relationship with national park warden Simon Basil. In December 1997, she met gynaecologist Alan Farthing; his divorce was finalised in November 1998. Dando and Farthing were engaged from February 1999 until her death.Profile: Jill Dando, TV's girl next door

Legacy

Dando's funeral took place on 21 May 1999 at Clarence Park Baptist Church in Weston-super-Mare.Obsessed with visiting Jill Dando's grave and acting more erratically than ever, Barry George is a man on the edge The gross value of her estate was £1,181,207; after her debts and income tax, the value was £863,756; after inheritance tax, it was £607,000, all of which her father inherited because she died intestate.Dando leaves £1m
Dando's co-presenter Nick Ross proposed the formation of an academic institute in her name and, together with her fiancé Alan Farthing, raised almost £1.5 million. The Jill Dando Institute of Crime Science was founded at University College London on 26 April 2001, the second anniversary of her murder.
A memorial garden was designed and realised by the BBC Television Ground Force team in Dando's memory, using plants and colours that were special to her. It is located within Grove Park, Weston-super-Mare (
The BBC set up a bursary award in Dando's memory, which enables one student each year to study broadcast journalism at University College Falmouth. Sophie Long, who was then a postgraduate who had grown up in Weston-super-Mare and is now a presenter on BBC News, gained the first bursary award in 2000.
In 2007, Weston College opened a new university campus on the site of the former Broadoak Sixth Form Centre where Dando studied. The Sixth Form building has been dedicated to her and named as "The Jill Dando Centre".






