[[Kattegat]]

CATEGORIES: Straits of Denmark, Straits of Sweden, Denmark–Sweden border, International straits, Straits of the Baltic Sea

The Kattegat (Danish, from Dutch, commonly used in English), or Kattegatt (Swedish) is a 30,000 km2 sea area bounded by the Jutland peninsula and the Straits islands of Denmark to the west and south, and by the provinces of Västergötland, Scania, Halland and Bohuslän in Sweden to the east. The Baltic Sea drains into the Kattegat through the Danish Straits. The Kattegat is a continuation of the Skagerrak, and may be seen as either a bay of the Baltic Sea, a bay of the North Sea, or, in traditional Scandinavian usage, neither of these.
It is a rather shallow sea and can be very difficult and dangerous to navigate, due to the many sandy and stony reefs and tricky currents that often shift. In modern times, artificial seabed canals have been dug, many reefs have been dredged by either sand pumping or stone fishing, and a well-developed light signaling network has been installed, to safeguard the very heavy international traffic of this small sea.

Geography

According to the definition established in a 1932 convention signed by Denmark, Norway and Sweden (registered in the League of Nations Treaty Series 199 - 1933), the northern boundary between the Kattegat and Skagerrak is found at the northernmost point of Skagen on Jutland, while the southern boundary towards Øresund is found at the tip of Kullen Peninsula in Scania. League of Nations Treaty Series 139, 1933. Retrieved 27 December 2012.
Waterways that drain into the Kattegat are the rivers of Göta älv at Gothenburg, together with the Lagan, Nissan, Ätran and Viskan in the province of Halland on the Swedish side, and the river of Gudenå in Jutland, in Denmark.
The main islands of the Kattegat are Samsø, Læsø and Anholt; the latter two, due to their dry summer climate, are referred to as the Danish desert belt.
A number of noteworthy coastal areas abut the Kattegat, including the Kullaberg Nature Reserve in Scania, Sweden, which contains a number of rare species and a scenic rocky shore, the town of Mölle, which has a picturesque harbour and views into the Kullaberg, and Skagen at the northern tip of Denmark.
Currently, a proposal for a bridge from Jutland to Zealand across the southern part of the Kattegat is under political consideration in Denmark: it would link the islands of Zealand and Samsø with continental Denmark.

Extent

The International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the "Kattegat, Sound and Belts" (that is, the Kattegat, Øresund, Great Belt and Little Belt) as follows:

Etymology

According to Den Store Danske Encyklopædi and Nudansk Ordbog, the name derives from the Dutch words kat (cat) and gat (hole, gate). It derives from late medieval navigation jargon, in which captains of the Hanseatic trading fleets would compare the Danish Straits to a hole so narrow that even a cat would have difficulty squeezing its way through, on account of the many reefs and shallow waters.Nudansk Ordbog (1993), 15th edition, 2nd reprint, Copenhagen: Politikens Forlag, entry Kattegat. At one point, the passable waters were a mere  wide. The name of the Copenhagen street Kattesundet has the same etymological meaning, namely "narrow passage".
An archaic name for both the Skagerrak and Kattegat was the Norwegian Sea or Jutland Sea (Knýtlinga saga mentions the name Jótlandshaf). Its ancient Latin name was Sinus Codanus.

History

Control of the Kattegat, and access to it, have been important throughout the history of international seafaring. Until the completion of the Eider Canal in 1784, the Kattegat was the only water route into and out of the Baltic region. 
Since the Middle Ages, the Danish Royal Family has prospered from the fees it received for passage through the Øresund while Copenhagen provided shelter, trade and repair opportunities and protection from piracy.  

Ecological collapse

The Kattegat was one of the first marine dead zones to be noted in the 1970s, when scientists began studying how intensive industrial activities affected the natural world.








