[[Dunkirk evacuation]]

CATEGORIES: Conflicts in 1940, 1940 in France, 1940 in the United Kingdom, Battle of France, History of Dunkirk, Evacuations, Naval battles and operations of World War II (European theatre), Battles and operations of World War II involving the United Kingdom

The Dunkirk evacuation, code-named Operation Dynamo, also known as the Miracle of Dunkirk, was the evacuation of Allied soldiers from the beaches and harbour of Dunkirk, France, between 27 May and 4 June 1940. The operation became necessary when large numbers of British, French, and Belgian troops were cut off and surrounded by the German army during the Battle of France in the Second World War. In a speech to the House of Commons, British Prime Minister Winston Churchill called the events in France "a colossal military disaster", saying that "the whole root and core and brain of the British Army" had been stranded at Dunkirk and seemed about to perish or be captured.
After the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany invaded Poland in September 1939, marking the beginning of the Second World War, the British Expeditionary Force (BEF) was sent to aid in the defence of France. Germany invaded Belgium and the Netherlands on 10 May 1940, and three of their Panzer corps attacked France through the Ardennes and rapidly drove to the English Channel. By 21 May, the German forces had trapped the BEF, the remains of the Belgian forces, and three French armies in an area along the northern coast of France. Commander of the BEF General John Vereker, 6th Viscount Gort immediately saw that evacuation across the Channel was the best course of action, and began planning a withdrawal to Dunkirk, the closest location with good port facilities. A controversial Halt Order was issued with Nazi dictator Adolf Hitler's approval 22 May. This gave the trapped Allied forces time to construct defensive works and pull back large numbers of troops toward Dunkirk. From 28–31 May 1940, in the Siege of Lille, the remaining 40,000 men of the once-formidable French First Army fought a delaying action against seven German divisions, including three armoured divisions.
On the first day of the evacuation, only 7,669 men were evacuated, but by the ninth day a total of 338,226 soldiers had been rescued by a hastily-assembled fleet of over 800 boats. Many of the troops were able to embark from the harbour's protective mole onto 39 British destroyers and other large ships, while others had to wade out from the beaches, waiting for hours in the shoulder-deep water. Some were ferried from the beaches to the larger ships by the famous little ships of Dunkirk, a flotilla of hundreds of merchant marine boats, fishing boats, pleasure craft, and lifeboats called into service for the emergency. The BEF lost 68,000 soldiers during the French campaign and had to abandon nearly all of their tanks, vehicles, and other equipment. In his speech to the House of Commons on 4 June Churchill reminded the country that "we must be very careful not to assign to this deliverance the attributes of a victory. Wars are not won by evacuations." The events at Dunkirk remain a prominent folk memory in the United Kingdom.

Background

In 1939, after the Soviet and Nazi Germany invasion of Poland marking the beginning of the Second World War, the British sent troops – the British Expeditionary Force (BEF) – to aid in the defence of France, landing troops at Cherbourg, Nantes, and Saint-Nazaire. By May 1940 the force consisted of ten divisions in three corps under the command of General John Vereker, 6th Viscount Gort.
The initial plan for the German invasion of France called for an encirclement attack through the Netherlands and Belgium, thus avoiding the fixed defensive emplacements of the Maginot Line.
On 10 May, Germany attacked Belgium and the Netherlands.

Planning and commencement of evacuation

Without telling the French, the British began planning on 20 May for Operation Dynamo, the evacuation of the BEF.
The retreat was undertaken amid chaotic conditions, with abandoned vehicles blocking the roads and a flood of refugees heading the opposite direction.
Just before 7 pm on 26 May Churchill ordered Dynamo to formally begin. By this point some 28,000 men had already departed by sea.

German advance halted

By 24 May the Germans captured the port of Boulogne and surrounded Calais.
Army Group B and the Luftwaffe were unable to complete their mission due to heavy activity in the area by the Royal Air Force, a  lack of motorised transport that slowed the advance of the infantry, and bad weather.
The Halt Order has been the subject of much discussion by historians.

Ongoing evacuation efforts

On 27 May, the first full day of the evacuation, active were one cruiser, eight destroyers, and twenty-six other craft.
On 25 and 26 May, the Luftwaffe focussed their attention on Allied pockets holding out at Calais, Lille, and Amiens, and did not attack Dunkirk.
With the docks in the harbour rendered unusable by German air attacks, Senior Naval Officer Captain (later Admiral) William Tennant initially ordered men to be evacuated from the beaches. When this proved too slow, he re-routed the evacuees to two long stone and concrete breakwaters, called the East and West Mole, as well as the beaches. Almost 200,000 troops embarked on ships from the East Mole (which stretched nearly a mile out to sea) over the next week.

Evacuation shipping routes

Three routes were allocated to the evacuating vessels. The shortest was Route Z, a distance of 

Ships used

The Royal Navy provided the anti-aircraft cruiser HMS Calcutta, thirty-nine destroyers, and many other craft. The Merchant Navy supplied passenger ferries, hospital ships, and other vessels. Britain's Belgian, Dutch, and French allies provided vessels as well. Admiral Ramsay arranged for around a thousand copies to be made of the required charts, had buoys laid around the Goodwin Sands and down to Dunkirk, and organised the flow of shipping.

Little ships

A wide variety of small vessels from all over the south of England were pressed into service to aid in the Dunkirk evacuation. They included speedboats, Thames vessels, car ferries, pleasure craft, and many other types of small craft.
The first of the "little ships" arrived at Dunkirk on 28 May.

Losses

Men and materiel

The BEF lost 68,000 soldiers (dead, wounded, missing, or captured) from 10 May until the surrender of France on 22 June.

Naval losses

Six British and three French destroyers were sunk, along with nine other major vessels. In addition, 19 destroyers were damaged.
The Royal Navy's most significant losses in the operation were six destroyers:
The French Navy lost three destroyers:

Air losses

The RAF lost 145 aircraft, of which at least 42 were Spitfires, while the Luftwaffe lost 156 aircraft in operations in the nine days of Operation Dynamo.

Aftermath

Before the operation was completed, the prognosis had been gloomy, with Winston Churchill warning the House of Commons on 28 May to expect "hard and heavy tidings".
Three British divisions and a host of logistic and labour troops were cut off to the south of the Somme by the German "race to the sea". At the end of May, a further two divisions began moving to France with the hope of establishing a Second BEF. The majority of the 51st (Highland) Division was forced to surrender on 12 June, but almost 192,000 Allied personnel, 144,000 of them British, were evacuated through various French ports from 15–25 June under the codename Operation Ariel.

Fate of the French soldiers

More than 100,000 evacuated French troops were quickly and efficiently shuttled to camps in various parts of southwestern England, where they were temporarily lodged before being repatriated.
Of the French soldiers evacuated from France in July 1940, only about 3,000 joined Charles de Gaulle's Free French army in London.
In France, the unilateral British decision to evacuate through Dunkirk rather than counter-attack to the south, and the perceived preference of the Royal Navy for evacuating British forces at the expense of the French, led to some bitter resentment. According to Churchill, French Admiral François Darlan originally ordered that the British forces should receive preference but on 31 May he intervened at a meeting in Paris to order that the evacuation should proceed on equal terms and that the British would form the rearguard.

British POWs

For every seven soldiers who escaped through Dunkirk, one man was left behind as a prisoner of war. The majority of these prisoners were sent on forced marches into Germany. Prisoners reported brutal treatment by their guards, including beatings, starvation, and murder. In particular, the British prisoners complained that French prisoners were given preferential treatment.

Dunkirk jack

The St George's Cross defaced with the arms of Dunkirk flown from the jack staff is the warranted house flag of the Association of Dunkirk Little Ships. It is known as the Dunkirk jack. The flag is flown only by civilian vessels that took part in the Dunkirk rescue operation.





Notes

Bibliography

Further reading




