[[Metformin]]

CATEGORIES: Guanidines, World Health Organization essential medicines, Biguanides

Metformin (BAN, USAN and INN, pronounced  Its use in gestational diabetes has been limited by safety concerns. It is also used in the treatment of polycystic ovary syndrome, and has been investigated for other diseases where insulin resistance may be an important factor. Metformin works by suppressing glucose production by the liver.
A preponderance of evidence suggests that metformin may prevent the cardiovascular complications of diabetes. It helps reduce LDL cholesterol and triglyceride levels, and is not associated with weight gain. , 16th edition, World Health Organization, p. 24. Retrieved December 22, 2010.
Metformin causes few adverse effects when prescribed appropriately (the most common is gastrointestinal upset) and has been associated with a low risk of hypoglycemia. Lactic acidosis (a buildup of lactate in the blood) can be a serious concern in overdose and when it is prescribed to people with contraindications, but otherwise, there is no significant risk.
First synthesized and found to reduce blood sugar in the 1920s, metformin was forgotten for the next two decades as research shifted to insulin and other antidiabetic drugs. Interest in metformin was rekindled in the late 1940s after several reports that it could reduce blood sugar levels in people, and in 1957, French physician Jean Sterne published the first clinical trial of metformin as a treatment for diabetes. It was introduced to the United Kingdom in 1958, Canada in 1972, and the United States in 1995. Metformin is now believed to be the most widely prescribed antidiabetic drug in the world; in the United States alone, more than 48 million prescriptions were filled in 2010 for its generic formulations.. IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics (April 2011). Retrieved April 28, 2011.

Medical uses

Metformin is primarily used for type 2 diabetes, but is increasingly being used in polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), and in prediabetes.

Type 2 diabetes

Evidence supports metformin as a first-line agent to treat type 2 diabetes mellitus. 
In the UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS), metformin reduced diabetes complications and overall mortality in overweight diabetics by about 30% when compared with insulin and sulfonylureas (glibenclamide and chlorpropamide) and by about 40% over 10 years when compared with the group only given dietary advice. (UKPDS study) This difference held in people who were followed up for five to 10 years after the study.
A dissenting viewpoint is presenting in two recent meta-analyses. The more recent of these, published in 2011, examined the effect of metformin vs. comparator (no treatment, placebo or other anti-diabetic drugs) in 13 trials including 13,000 subjects. No effect effect of metformin on all cause mortality (relative risk, 0.99) or cardiovascular mortality (relative risk, 1.05) relative to other treatments was seen in this analysis. Similarly, there was no significant difference between metformin and alternative treatments in the risk of stroke, heart failure, peripheral vascular disease, leg amputation, or microvascular complications. This analysis differed from earlier meta analyses in that it included treatment arms in which metformin plus a sulfonylurea was compared to treatment with metformin alone. In the UKPDS, the combination of metformin plus a sulfonylurea produced a higher mortality rate in normal weight subjects compared to a sulfonylurea alone.
A second meta analysis published in 2011 similarly concluded that metformin was not associated with significant benefits overall on endpoints including cardiovascular events, cardiovascular mortality, all-cause mortality, risk of myocardial infarction, stroke, or heart failure. A beneficial effect on cardiovascular events was seen compared to placebo, but not relative to active comparators. In subgroup analyses, metformin was associated with reduced cardiovascular morbidity in trials that enrolled patients less than 30 years old, or that excluded patients over 65 years old. This study also noted an reduction in survival when metformin was combined with a sulfonylurea.
An American Diabetes Association position paper summarizes the evidence to date regarding metformin and cardiovascular outcomes as "there may be some cardiovascular benefits from this drug metformin, but the clinical trial data are not robust."

=Advantages=

Metformin may be associated with a decreased risk of cardiovascular mortality compared with other oral diabetes agents or placebo.
All-cause mortality was slightly lower with metformin than with a sulfonylurea in observational studies, but results differed between trials and observational studies. Risk for bias in the studies was moderate. Cardiovascular mortality was slightly lower with metformin than with a sulfonylurea, but results were imprecise and had moderate risk for bias.(Low strength of evidence).
Observational studies were associated with a lower risk for all-cause mortality and cardiovascular disease mortality and morbidity than were sulfonylureas.

Metformin has a lower risk of hypoglycemia than the sulfonylureas, although it has uncommonly occurred during intense exercise, calorie deficit, or when used with other agents to lower blood glucose."Glucophage package insert". Princeton, NJ: Bristol-Myers Squibb Company; 2009.
Metformin is not associated with weight gain, rather weight loss.
In comparison with thiazolidinediones or sulfonylureas, the mean differences in body weight were about −2.5 kg.
Metformin modestly reduces LDL and triglyceride levels. Metformin decreased low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels compared with pioglitazone, sulfonylureas, and DPP-4 inhibitors.
Metformin  is similarly efficacious as most diabetes medications when used as mono therapy and decreased HbA1c levels by 1 absolute percentage point on average over the course of a study.   Metformin reduced HbA1c levels more than the DPP-4 inhibitors as mono therapy. Combination therapy (including the combination of metformin and a DPP-4 inhibitor) decreased HbA1c levels more than monotherapy did, by about 1 absolute percentage point.
Metformin is not expensive.

Prediabetes

Metformin treatment of people at risk for type 2 diabetes may decrease their chances of developing the disease, although intensive physical exercise and dieting work significantly better for this purpose. In a large U.S. study known as the Diabetes Prevention Program, participants were divided into groups and given either placebo, metformin, or lifestyle intervention, and followed for an average of three years. The intensive program of lifestyle modifications included a 16-lesson training on dieting and exercise followed by monthly individualized sessions with the goals to decrease the body weight by 7% and engage in a physical activity for at least 150 minutes per week. The incidence of diabetes was 58% lower in the lifestyle group and 31% lower in those given metformin. Among younger people with a higher body mass index, lifestyle modification was no more effective than metformin, and for older individuals with a lower body mass index, metformin was no better than placebo in preventing diabetes.
A systematic review analysed children and adolescents with clinical insulin resistance or pre-diabetes. Four randomized controlled trials were identified. All compared the effect of 6 months of metformin plus or minus lifestyle intervention with placebo plus or minus lifestyle intervention. It was found that metformin improves markers of insulin sensitivity and reduces BMI.

Polycystic ovary syndrome

Antidiabetic therapy has been proposed as a treatment for polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), a condition frequently associated with insulin resistance, since the late 1980s. The guidelines suggest clomiphene as the first medication option and emphasize lifestyle modification independently from the drug treatment.
In a dissenting opinion, a systematic review of four head-to-head comparative trials of metformin and clomifene found them equally effective for infertility.
The use of metformin throughout pregnancy in women with polycystic ovary syndrome reduces the rates of early pregnancy loss and preterm labor and protects against fetal growth restriction.

Contraindications

Metformin is contraindicated in people with any condition that could increase the risk of lactic acidosis, including kidney disorders (creatinine levels over 150 μmol/l (1.7 mg/dL),
Metformin is recommended to be temporarily discontinued before any radiographic study involving iodinated contrast agents, (such as a contrast-enhanced CT scan or angiogram), as the contrast dye may temporarily impair kidney function, indirectly leading to lactic acidosis by causing retention of metformin in the body. Guidelines with Regard to Metformin-Induced Lactic Acidosis and X-ray Contrast Medium Agents. Royal College of Radiologists. Retrieved October 26, 2007 through the Internet Archive. Metformin can be resumed after two days, assuming kidney function is normal.

Adverse effects

The most common adverse effect of metformin is gastrointestinal irritation, including diarrhea, cramps, nausea, vomiting and increased flatulence; metformin is more commonly associated with gastrointestinal side effects than most other antidiabetic drugs.
Metformin has also been reported to decrease the blood levels of thyroid-stimulating hormone in people with hypothyroidism, The clinical significance of this is still unknown.

Gastrointestinal

In a clinical trial of 286 subjects, 53.2% of the 141 given immediate-release metformin reported diarrhea, versus 11.7% for placebo, and 25.5% reported nausea/vomiting, versus 8.3% for those on placebo.
Metformin was associated with a 4,27 significantly higher incidence of gastrointestinal disturbances than placebo in 5 trials in women with poly cystic ovary syndrome.
Gastrointestinal upset can cause severe discomfort; it is most common when metformin is first administered, or when the dose is increased. The discomfort can often be avoided by beginning at a low dose (1 to 1.7 grams per day) and increasing the dose gradually. Gastrointestinal upset after prolonged, steady use is less common.

Vitamin B12 deficiency

Long-term use of metformin has been associated with increased homocysteine levels

Lactic acidosis

The most serious potential adverse effect of biguanide use is lactic acidosis ("metformin-associated lactic acidosis" or MALA), the incidence for which is 9 per 100,000 person-years.
Lactate uptake by the liver is diminished with metformin administration because lactate is a substrate for hepatic gluconeogenesis, a process that metformin inhibits. In healthy individuals, this slight excess is simply cleared by other mechanisms (including uptake by the kidneys, when their function is unimpaired), and no significant elevation in blood levels of lactate occurs.
Metformin has also been suggested to increase production of lactate in the small intestine; this could potentially contribute to lactic acidosis in those with risk factors. However, the clinical significance of this is unknown, and the risk of metformin-associated lactic acidosis is most commonly attributed to decreased hepatic uptake rather than increased intestinal production.

Overdose

A review of intentional and accidental metformin overdoses reported to poison control centers over a five-year period found serious adverse events were rare, though the elderly appeared to be at greater risk.
The most common symptoms following overdose appear to include vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, tachycardia, drowsiness, and, rarely, hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia. The major potentially life-threatening complication of metformin overdose is lactic acidosis, which is due to lactate accumulation.
Metformin may be quantitated in blood, plasma, or serum to monitor therapy, confirm a diagnosis of poisoning, or assist in a medicolegal death investigation. Blood or plasma metformin concentrations are usually in a range of 1–4 mg/L in persons receiving the drug therapeutically, 40–120 mg/L in victims of acute overdosage, and 80–200 mg/L in fatalities. Chromatographic techniques are commonly employed. Determination of metformin in human plasma using hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. J. Chrom. B 877: 3695–3700, 2009.R. Baselt, Disposition of Toxic Drugs and Chemicals in Man, 8th edition, Biomedical Publications, Foster City, CA, 2008, pp. 939–940.

Interactions

The H2-receptor antagonist cimetidine causes an increase in the plasma concentration of metformin, by reducing clearance of metformin by the kidneys; theoretically, other cationic medications may produce the same effect.

Mechanism of action

Metformin decreases glucose production in the liver, increases insulin sensitivity and enhances peripheral glucose uptake. It doesn't stimulate secretion of endogenous insulin.
Metformin decreases hyperglycemia primarily by suppressing glucose production by the liver (hepatic gluconeogenesis).
A study in 2001 suggested that activation of AMPK, an enzyme that plays an important role in insulin signaling, whole body energy balance, and the metabolism of glucose and fats, Metformin is frequently used in research along with AICAR as an AMPK agonist. More recent studies using mouse models in
which the genes for AMPKα1 and α2 catalytic subunits (Prkaa1/2) or LKB1, an upstream kinase of AMPK, had been knocked out in hepatocytes have raised doubts over the obligatory role of AMPK, since the effect of metformin was not abolished by loss of AMPK function. 
The mechanism by which biguanides increase the activity of AMPK remains uncertain; however, research suggests that metformin increases the concentration of cytosolic AMP (as opposed to a change in total AMP or total AMP/ATP). Increased cellular AMP has also been proposed to explain the inhibition of glucagon-induced increase in cAMP and activation of PKA. Metformin and other biguanides may antagonize the action of glucagon, thus reducing fasting glucose levels. Biguanides suppress hepatic glucagon signalling by decreasing production of cyclic AMP. Nature. 2013 Feb 14;494(7436):256-60. doi: 10.1038/nature11808. Epub 2013 Jan 6. PMID 23292513 Metformin also induces a profound shift in the faecal microbial community profile in diabetic mice and it has also been proposed that this may contribute to its mode of action possibly through an effect on Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) secretion.
In addition to suppressing hepatic glucose production, metformin increases insulin sensitivity, enhances peripheral glucose uptake (by inducing the phosphorylation of GLUT4 enhancer factor), decreases insulin-induced suppression of fatty acid oxidation,

Chemistry

The usual synthesis of metformin, originally described in 1922 and reproduced in multiple later patents and publications, involves the reaction of dimethylamine hydrochloride and 2-cyanoguanidine (dicyandiamide) with heating.
According to the procedure described in the 1975 Aron patent, equimolar amounts of dimethylamine and 2-cyanoguanidine are dissolved in toluene with cooling to make a concentrated solution, and an equimolar amount of hydrogen chloride is slowly added. The mixture begins to boil on its own, and after cooling, metformin hydrochloride precipitates with a 96% yield.

Structure

The structure of metformin was generally represented in a wrong tautomeric form for a number of years. This was corrected in 2005. According to these studies, the metformin has different electronic structure compared to its protonated form. The neutral species is a simple conjugated system. Upon protonation, (i) the conjugation breaks down, (ii) the intramolecular hydrogen bond breaks down, (iii) the molecule becomes non-planar (iv) two lone pairs get accumulated at the central nitrogen (v) dynamism increases in the system via C=N rotational process and via N-inversion process. Thus, electronically, metformin hydrochloride should be treated as a simple extension of metformin. The nucleophilicity of metformin hydrochloride is moderate and that is a desired property. Metformin is shown to belong to a new class of compounds called nitreones.

Pharmacokinetics

Metformin has an oral bioavailability of 50–60% under fasting conditions, and is absorbed slowly. Peak plasma concentrations (Cmax) are reached within one to three hours of taking immediate-release metformin and four to eight hours with extended-release formulations. The plasma protein binding of metformin is negligible, as reflected by its very high apparent volume of distribution (300–1000 L after a single dose). Steady state is usually reached in one or two days.
Metformin has acid dissociation constant values (pKa) of 2.8 and 11.5 and, therefore, exists very largely as the hydrophilic cationic species at physiological pH values. The metformin acid dissociation constant values (pKa) make metformin a stronger base than most other basic drugs with less than 0.01% unionized in blood. Furthermore, the lipid solubility of the unionized species is slight as shown by its low logP value of the distribution coefficient of the unionized form between octanol and water of -1.43. These chemical parameters indicate low lipophilicity and, consequently, rapid passive diffusion of metformin through cell membranes is unlikely. The logP of metformin is less than that of phenformin (-0.84) because two methyl substituents on metformin impart lesser lipophilicity than the larger phenylethyl side chain in phenformin. More lipophilic derivatives of metformin are presently being investigated with the aim of producing prodrugs with better oral absorption than metformin itself. Graham, Jeroen Punt, Manit Arora, Richard O. Day, Matthew P. Doogue, Janna K. Duong, Timothy J. Furlong, Jerry R. Greenfield, Louise C. Greenup, Carl M. Kirkpatrick, John E. Ray, Peter Timmins and Kenneth M. Williams. Clinical Pharmacokinetics of Metformin. Clin Pharmacokinet 2011; 50 (2): 81-98
Metformin is not metabolized. It is cleared from the body by tubular secretion and excreted unchanged in the urine; metformin is undetectable in blood plasma within 24 hours of a single oral dose. The average elimination half-life in plasma is 6.2 hours. Metformin is distributed to (and appears to accumulate in) red blood cells, with a much longer elimination half-life: 17.6 hours (reported as ranging from 18.5 to 31.5 hours in a single-dose study of non-diabetic people).

History

The biguanide class of antidiabetic drugs, which also includes the withdrawn agents phenformin and buformin, originates from the French lilac or goat's rue (Galega officinalis), a plant used in folk medicine for several centuries.
Metformin was first described in the scientific literature in 1922, by Emil Werner and James Bell, as a product in the synthesis of N,N-dimethylguanidine.
Interest in metformin, however, picked up at the end of the 1940s. In 1950, metformin, unlike some other similar compounds, was found not to decrease blood pressure and heart rate in animals.
While training at the Hôpital de la Pitié, French diabetologist Jean Sterne studied the antihyperglycemic properties of galegine, an alkaloid isolated from Galega officinalis, which is related in structure to metformin and had seen brief use as an antidiabetic before the synthalins were developed. Later, working at Laboratoires Aron in Paris, he was prompted by Garcia's report to reinvestigate the blood sugar lowering activity of metformin and several biguanide analogs. Sterne was the first to try metformin on humans for the treatment of diabetes; he coined the name "Glucophage" (glucose eater) for the drug and published his results in 1957.
Metformin became available in the British National Formulary in 1958. It was sold in the UK by a small Aron subsidiary called Rona. 
Broad interest in metformin was not rekindled until the withdrawal of the other biguanides in the 1970s. Metformin was approved in Canada in 1972, Produced under license by Bristol-Myers Squibb, Glucophage was the first branded formulation of metformin to be marketed in the United States, beginning on March 3, 1995. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Retrieved January 8, 2007. Data available for download on FDA website. Generic formulations are now available in several countries, and metformin is believed to have become the most widely prescribed antidiabetic drug in the world.

Formulations

Metformin is sold under several trade names, including Glucophage XR, Carbophage SR, Riomet, Fortamet, Glumetza, Obimet, Gluformin, Dianben, Diabex, Diaformin, Siofor and Metfogamma.
The liquid metformin is sold under the name Riomet. Each 5 ml of Riomet is equivalent to the 500 mg tablet form of metformin.rxwiki.com/Metformin 
Metformin IR (immediate release) is available in 500 mg, 850 mg, and 1000 mg tablets.  All of these are now available as generic drugs in the U.S.
Metformin SR (slow release) or XR (extended release) was introduced in 2004. It is available in 500 mg, 750 mg and 1000 mg strengths, mainly to counteract the most common gastrointestinal side effects, as well as to increase compliance by reducing pill burden. No difference in effectiveness exists between the two preparations.

Combinations with other drugs

When used for type 2 diabetes, metformin is often prescribed in combination with other drugs. Several are available as fixed-dose combinations, also with the purpose of reducing pill burden and making administration simpler and more convenient.
As of 2009, the most popular brand-name combination was metformin with rosiglitazone, sold as Avandamet by GlaxoSmithKline since 2002. The drug pair continued to be prescribed separately in the absence of Avandamet, which was available again by the end of that year.
In the United States, metformin is also available in combination with pioglitazone (trade name Actoplus Met), the sulfonylureas glipizide (trade name Metaglip) and glibenclamide (known as glyburide in the United States, trade name Glucovance), the dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitor sitagliptin (with the combination sold under the trade name Janumet), the dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitor saxagliptin (with the combination sold under the trade name Kombiglyze XR), and the meglitinide repaglinide (PrandiMet). Generic formulations of metformin/glipizide and metformin/glibenclamide are available (the latter being more popular). A generic formulation of metformin/rosiglitazone from Teva has received tentative approval from the FDA, and is expected to reach the market in early 2012.
In Europe, the combination of metformin and the dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitor linagliptin has approved the trade name Jentadueto. First published 25/05/2012

Research

There is tentative evidence that metformin may decrease the risk of cancer.
A direct action of metformin on cancer cells is suspected. Metformin exhibits a strong and consistent antiproliferative action on several cancer cell lines, including breast, colon, ovarian, pancreatic, lung and prostate cancer cells. These cellular studies were generally completed by preclinical studies showing a reliable antitumoral effect in various mouse models. In addition, the first clinical trials demonstrated a beneficial effect in breast and colon cancer.
Metformin appears to be effective and safe for the treatment of gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM), particularly for overweight or obese women, to immediate pregnancy outcomes. However, patients with multiple risk factors for insulin resistance may not meet their treatment goals with metformin alone and may require supplementary insulin. Evidence suggests that there are potential advantages for the use of metformin over insulin in gestational diabetes mellitus with respect to maternal weight gain and neonatal outcomes.
Metformin in conditions as non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)






