[[The Great Giana Sisters]]

CATEGORIES: 1987 video games, Amiga games, Amstrad CPC games, Cancelled ZX Spectrum games, Commodore 64 games, Mobile games, MSX games, Nintendo DS games, IOS games, Platform games, Side-scrolling video games, Video game clones, Video games developed in Germany, Video games featuring female protagonists

The Great Giana Sisters is a 1987 platform game developed by Time Warp Productions and published by Rainbow Arts. This German game product is known for its controversial production history, its baffling similarities to the famous Nintendo platform game Super Mario Bros., and for an alleged lawsuit case against the producers of the game. The scroll screen melody of the game was composed by Chris Hülsbeck and is a popular Commodore 64 soundtrack.

Plot

The player takes the role of Giana (written erroneously Gianna in the scrolling intro), a girl who suffers from a nightmare, in which she travels through 32 dungeons full of monsters, while collecting ominous diamonds and looking for her sister Maria. If the player wins the final battle, Giana will be awakened by her sister. VS Verlag, 2009, ISBN 3531162438, pp. 202 – 209 & 221.

Gameplay

The Great Giana Sisters is a 2D side-scrolling arcade game in which the player controls either Giana or her sister Maria. The game supports alternating 2 players, with second player taking control of Maria.
Each level contains a number of dream crystals which gives points when collected in order to make the game's high score. An extra life can be gained by collecting 100 dream crystals. Extra lives can also be found in the form of hidden "Lollipop" items.
Enemies can be defeated by jumping on them or shooting them after obtaining the relevant powerups. The enemies include owls, rolling eyeballs, flesh eating fish and deadly insects. The "Fire Wheel" transforms Giana into a punk with the ability to crush rocks by jumping beneath them. "Lightning Bolt" will award Giana "Dream Bubbles", a single projectile shot. "Double Lightning" gives her ability to shoot recoiling projectiles. "Strawberries" gives the ability to shoot homing projectiles. There is one defensive item in the game, the "Water-Drop", which protects Giana against fire. A number of special items can also be triggered that affects the entire screen, such as the "Clock" which will freeze all enemies on-screen, and the "Magic Bombs" will kill all enemies. These items are found in the item blocks scattered around the stages.
There are two types of stages in the game, an "Overworld" and "Underground" stage. The "Overworld stages" feature green scenery and pipe shaped objects, along with bottomless pits for Giana to avoid. The "Underground" stages feature additional hazards such as water and fire, as well as bosses.
There are in total 32 stages in the game. Hidden "Warp-Blocks" can be found to jump through portions of the game.

Development

History

The Great Giana Sisters was programmed by Armin Gessert, with graphics by Manfred Trenz and a soundtrack composed by Chris Hülsbeck under the label of Time Warp Production Inc.. The first original game version was released in 1987 on Commodore 64. who have developed the modern sequel Giana Sisters: Twisted Dreams.

Alleged lawsuit

According to several urban legends, Nintendo opened a lawsuit case against Gessert and Hülsbeck, because Nintendo saw a direct copyright infringement to its new game Super Mario Bros. But in fact, there has never been such a lawsuit. Neither Nintendo, nor the German programmers claim to be privy to any lawsuits. This myth was created shortly after the game was taken out of stores. Nintendo itself later admitted to have influenced the stop of sales directly, as it did already before with other games. VS Verlag, 2009, ISBN 3531162438, 202 – 209 & 221.
Several factors influenced the stop of the sales of the game, including conspicuous similarities: the general gameplay and the first level of The Great Giana Sisters is nearly identical in layout to the first stage found in Nintendo's Super Mario Bros. The immediate similarity to Super Mario Bros. ensured that The Great Giana Sisters was quickly noticed by both the public and the video game industry itself. Nintendo admonished the makers of The Great Giana Sisters to withdraw the game from sale, arguing with obvious performances of copyright infringement. Hülsbeck and Gessert immediately stopped the production and, at the same time, the game began vanishing from the stores.

Release

The game has been ported to numerous systems since its release. A planned port for the ZX Spectrum was reviewed in magazines, though eventually cancelled due to legal pressures. In 1993, Dutch developer Sunrise released a version for the MSX, programmed by Jan Van Valburg. Unofficially, the game has been cloned on Windows, DOS, Linux, Mac OS X, AmigaOS 4, NetBSD, AROS, MorphOS, and Symbian OS. An unofficial clone of the Commodore 64 version was also made for the Nintendo DS.
In 2005, a mobile version of the game, titled simply Giana Sisters, was released for Android phones, and appears in the Ouya's Discover Store at launch.

Reception

Upon its release, The Great Giana Sisters received strong critical praise and acclaim from the gaming magazines across Europe. Zzap!64 described the game as "amazing" and concluded with the overall opinion that Great Giana Sisters was "a fabulous, compelling and constantly rewarding arcade adventure". Powerplay's review stated that they felt the game did not live up to the standards set by Super Mario Bros., but "still achieves being an entertaining pleasure."
Despite never seeing a release, the ZX Spectrum version gained favorable reviews from Spectrum based magazines. CRASH noted that the game was "highly addictive and great fun to play. Plenty of hidden passages and surprise features should keep you hooked for weeks".
Great Giana Sisters has gained a strong cult following over the years, citing its strong soundtrack and unique charm. On the online web resource Lemon64, staff member Jan Egil Romestrand remarked that the game is "must-have" for any serious C64 games collector." As of 2012, it ranks 6th place on the Top 10 Games List on Gamebase 64.
Chris Hülsbeck's soundtrack for the game has become one of the most popular video game soundtracks of all time. It has received over 50 remixes on the popular music arrangement resource Remix64. The music of Great Giana Sisters
was featured in the live orchestra concert Symphonic Shades held in Colgone, Germany on August 23, 2008. The arrangement was made by Jonne Valtonen, and performed by the WDR Radio Orchestra. The concert was the first video game orchestra concert to be broadcast live on radio. The concert recording received an album release in 2009.

Sequels

Official

Shortly after the release of Great Giana Sisters, Time Warp began developing a sequel which was announced as Giana 2: Arther and Martha in Future World, a new game with a futuristic setting. Due to the trouble caused by the legal pressure coming from Nintendo, it was deemed too risky for the small developer to once again produce a game associated with the Giana Sisters brand. Time Warp renamed the game Hard'n'Heavy, and changed the game's protagonists into robots rather than the Giana sisters.
In April 2009, publisher DTP Entertainment and developer Spellbound Interactive, then owner of the game's IP, released a new Giana Sisters game in Europe with an extensive graphical update for the Nintendo DS, titled Giana Sisters DS.
In July 2012, Black Forest Games started a Kickstarter campaign for a new installment of The Great Giana Sisters, originally titled Project Giana and later retitled Giana Sisters: Twisted Dreams, describing the project as "the grandchild of The Great Giana Sisters." The Kickstarter was funded successfully, netting $186,158 with a goal of $150,000. The game, which is described as a direct sequel to Giana Sisters DS, features music from The Great Giana Sisters'  original composer Chris Hülsbeck (in cooperation with Fabian Del Priore) and the Swedish "SID metal" band Machinae Supremacy.

Unofficial

Giana Sisters II, an unofficial sequel, was released in 2005 on the Commodore 64. It is based on a hacked version of Great Giana Sisters. It was created by the team "7A3" in 1993, originally with commercial purpose plans though later released for free on the Internet. It fixes some of the original game bugs, removed some sprite issues, added better collision detection, and added 40 new levels. Some of the enemies were changed, and the hack also features new abilities such as swimming and flying. The level design remains very faithful to the original game.
In 2008, Rodolphe "Thor" Boixel released an unofficial sequel titled Giana's Return. In the game, Evil Swampy and his followers have stolen the magic ruby which once made it possible for Giana and Maria to return from their dream. Giana's Return took direct inspiration from the 1987 title and features very similar gameplay mechanics and looks. The soundtrack was handled by Alexander Oldemeier and David Wuttke. Giana's Return was met favorably with fans of the old games, and also garnered attention from official gaming outlets and print magazines, such as Retro Magazine. The game is available on Windows, Linux, Mac OS X, GP32, Wiz, Dreamcast, Pandora, MorphOS and SymbianOS.
Several unofficial covers have been made of the Giana Sisters theme song.






