[[Hamina]]

CATEGORIES: Hamina, Cities and towns in Finland, Populated coastal places in Finland, Municipalities of Kymenlaakso, Grand Duchy of Finland, Port cities and towns in Finland, Populated places established in 1653, 1653 establishments in Finland

Hamina () is a town and a municipality of Finland. It is located in the province of Southern Finland and is part of the Kymenlaakso region.
(
)
is water. The population density is
. The population of the main town is approximately 10,000. Hamina is unilingually Finnish speaking. Hamina is also one of the most important harbours of Finland. The port specialises in forest products and transit cargo to Russia. One of Google's three European data centers is situated in Hamina.Hamina Data Center - Google Data centers

History

Vehkalahti county was mentioned in documents for the first time in 1336. At the proposal of Count Peter Brahe, the area surrounding the Vehkalahti church (nowadays St. Mary's Church) was separated from rest of Vehkalahti in 1653 and became a town called Vehkalahden Uusikaupunki (Veckelax Nystad in Swedish, "Newtown of Vehkalahti"). The town was destroyed during the Great Northern War in 1712.Hamina
As the important foreign trade town of Viipuri was surrendered to the Russians in 1721, this town (newly renamed in honour of the King Frederick I of Sweden in 1723) was intended to replace it. The town, hitherto a small domestic trade port with restricted trade, was granted extensive privileges including foreign trade. Finnish people soon shortened the name to Hamina. The rebuilding of the town took place in 1722–1724. The star-shaped fortress and the circular town plan, designed by Axel von Löwen, are based on Central European and Italian Renaissance fortress concepts from the 16th century. Fortress towns like this are quite rare; other examples are Palmanova in Italy and Neubreisach in France.
In 1743 Hamina was surrendered to the Russians, after the Russo–Swedish War, 1741–1743, and the town of Loviisa was the next Swedish candidate for an Eastern-Finnish trade centre. Hamina became a Russian frontier town, for which a fortress was desirable.
The Treaty of Fredrikshamn (1809), by which Sweden ceded Finland, including parts of the province of Lappland and the Åland Islands, was signed in Hamina. Thus Sweden was split and the eastern half, along with previously conquered territories including Hamina (Old Finland), was formed into the Grand Duchy of Finland, an autonomous part of the Russian Empire.
Hamina Cadet School was founded in 1819 and was in operation until 1903. In 1920 the Reserve Officer School began in the same facilities.
Because the town was once founded next to the Vehkalahti Church, the municipal center had always been inside the town borders. Vehkalahti and Hamina were consolidated in 2003, and the old coat of arms was replaced with Vehkalahti's coat of arms. The old coat of arms was readopted in January 2013.Haminan vaakuna vaihtuu - Haminan kaupunki (in Finnish)

Main sights

Churches

Gallery

Image:Vehkalahti.svg|The old coat of arms, in use from 2003 to 2012
Image:Marian kirkko talvella 2.JPG|St Mary's church
Image:Johanneksenkirkko (Hamina) 1.jpg|St John's church
Image:Hamina Ortho6 s.JPG|The orthodox church of Peter and Paul
Image:Main building of the reserve officers school.jpg|Reserve officer's school
Image:Kaponieeri ja nuolilinnake.JPG|The old fortress
Image:Keskusbastioni jossa 58 varastokasemattia.jpg|Central bastion of the fortress
Image:Centrehamina.jpg|Tanelinkulma
Image:Rapsinkari.jpg|The yacht club's pavilion
Image:Batiment militaire hamina.jpg|The flag tower, the only remaining part of the Helsinki bastion
Image:Pikkuympyräkatu Hamina.jpg|Pikkuympyräkatu; "The Little Circle Street"
Image:Veturitalli Hamina.jpg|The old locomotive warehouse
Image:Aholaisenkulma.jpg|Aholaisenkulma ("The Aholainen's corner"), a historical restaurant and hotel, demolished in the autum of 2008
Image:Haminan kaupunginmuseo.JPG|The town museum
Image:Haminan kauppiaantalomuseo.JPG|The shopkeeper's museum
Image:Vehkalahden kotiseutumuseo.JPG|The Vehkalahti municipal museum

Twin towns

Notable people

Notes




