[[Marc-Vivien Foé]]

CATEGORIES: 1975 births, 2003 deaths, People from Yaoundé, Cameroonian footballers, Cameroon international footballers, Cameroonian expatriate footballers, Ligue 1 players, RC Lens players, Premier League players, West Ham United F.C. players, Olympique Lyonnais players, Manchester City F.C. players, Expatriate footballers in France, Expatriate footballers in England, 1994 FIFA World Cup players, 1996 African Cup of Nations players, 1998 African Cup of Nations players, 2000 African Cup of Nations players, 2002 African Cup of Nations players, 2001 FIFA Confederations Cup players, 2002 FIFA World Cup players, 2003 FIFA Confederations Cup players, Sport deaths in France, Canon Yaoundé players, Cardiovascular disease deaths in France, Association football players who died while playing, Recipients of the Order of Valour

Marc-Vivien Foé (1 May 1975 – 26 June 2003) was a Cameroonian international footballer, who played in midfield for both club and country. With success in the French League, and stints in England in the Premier League, his sudden death, while in the middle of an international competitive fixture, came as a shock to the worldwide footballing community. He was posthumously decorated with the Commander of the National Order of Valour.

Biography

Foé was born on 1 May 1975 in Yaoundé. He started as a junior with Second Division Union Garoua.
The following year, he was included in the Cameroon squad for the 1994 World Cup, starting all three of Cameroon's matches. Cameroon mustered just one point from three matches, and finished with a 6–1 defeat to Russia. However, Foé's performances prompted interest from European clubs.
After turning down Auxerre for a trainee position, he signed for another French club, RC Lens of Ligue 1. His debut on 13 August 1994 was a 2–1 win against Montpellier. In five seasons at Lens, he finally won the 1998 French league title.
In 1999, he was targeted by Manchester United, but refused a £3 million offer. and missed the 1998 World Cup.
Shortly after his recovery, he moved to English Premier League club West Ham United, for a club record £4.2 million in January 1999. He also scored a goal in West Ham's 3–1 win against NK Osijek in the UEFA Cup.
In May 2000, he moved back to France's Lyon on a £6 million transfer. After recovery, he won the French league Cup in 2001, and the French league title in 2002.
He was on the Cameroon squad in the 2002 World Cup. As in 1994, he played in all of Cameroon's matches. Though the team performed better since 1994, they were again eliminated. At the group stage, they beat Saudi Arabia, drew with Ireland and lost to Germany.
Foé returned to the Premier League, loaned to Manchester City in the 2002–03 season for £550,000.

Death

Foé was part of the Cameroon squad for the 2003 FIFA Confederations Cup, a tournament played between continental champions. He played in wins against Brazil and Turkey, and was rested for the match against the United States, with Cameroon having already qualified.
On 26 June 2003, Cameroon faced Colombia in the semi-final, held at the Stade de Gerland in Lyon, France. In the 72nd minute of the match Foé collapsed in the centre circle, a hereditary condition known to increase the risk of sudden death during physical exercise.
Foé's death caused a profound shock. Numerous tributes to his joyous personality and infectious humour were expressed in the media. Also Thierry Henry and other players pointed to the sky in tribute to Foé after Henry had opened the scoring against Turkey in France's Confederations Cup semi-final that evening.
It was suggested that the Confederations Cup and the Stade Gerland could have been renamed after him, and former Manchester City manager Kevin Keegan announced that the club would no longer use the number 23 shirt Foé wore during his successful season there. At Manchester City's former ground, Maine Road, there is a small memorial to him in the stadium's memorial garden, and on the walls of the players' tunnel are plaques paid for by supporters, with their names, dubbed the Walk of Pride. The first plaque on the wall is for Marc and reads "Marc Vivien Foé – 1975–2003". His first club (Lens) has given his name to an avenue near the Félix Bollaert Stadium. Foé was given a state funeral in Cameroon. Lens decided to withdraw the number 17 shirt that Foé wore during five years.
Lyon also decided to withdraw the number 17 shirt that Foé wore a year before when he played in Stade de Gerland with the Lyon team. People in Lyon were shocked as he had received a warm welcome on his return to the stadium. However when the transfer of fellow Cameroonian Jean II Makoun to Lyon, the number 17 shirt was used by Makoun, who stated on wearing the number: "In memory of Marc, for me and for the whole Cameroon, this will be for something."
Prior to the kick-off of the 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup final between United States and Brazil, his son, then fourteen years old, gave a brief speech in memory of his father.

Career statistics



International goals

Honours

Club

International

Individual








