[[Mikhail Kasyanov]]

CATEGORIES: 1957 births, Living people, Heads of government of the Russian Federation, Russian politicians, Finance ministers of Russia, Russian People's Democratic Union politicians, People's Freedom Party "For Russia without Lawlessness and Corruption" politicians, Republican Party of Russia – People's Freedom Party politicians, Other Russia (coalition), 2011–13 Russian protests

Mikhail Mikhailovich Kasyanov (; born 8 December 1957) is a Russian statesman and politician, who was the Prime Minister of Russia from May 2000 to February 2004 and minister of finance in 1999-2000. Currently, he is a co-chair of the political party RPR-PARNAS, the leader of movement People's Democratic Union and an outspoken critic of Vladimir Putin.
Kasyanov was one of the leaders of the opposition coalition The Other RussiaFormer Russian Premier Leaves Opposition Group, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty (3 July 2007) and an active participant of Dissenters' Marches. In 2008 he was refused registration as a candidate on the election of President of Russia.
In 2010 he co-founded the coalition For Russia without Lawlessness and Corruption and was co-chair of the  People's Freedom Party. Since 2012 Mikhail Kasyanov is a co-chair of the  registered political party, Republican Party of Russia – People's Freedom Party (RPR-PARNAS). He is an active speaker during protest rallies For Fair Elections.

Biography

In 1976 Kasyanov graduated from the Moscow Automobile and Road University. They have a daughter.Online Gazeta

Political career

Kasyanov was dismissed, along with the entire Russian cabinet, by President Vladimir Putin on 24 February 2004 after more than three years in office.
During this term Kasyanov's government made serious breakthroughs in launching and successfully finalizing reforms in many areas of the Russian economy and public sector – tax and fiscal reforms, customs reform, pension reform, reorganization of the national infrastructure (energy sector, railways). Inflation was reduced significantly and the Russian economy grew by almost one third. At the same time, the urgent policy of economic diversification had just started and was not fully implemented.
On the first anniversary of his dismissal (24 February 2005) Kasyanov gave a press conference at which he said that he might run for president in the 2008 elections. His bid was tentatively supported by billionaires Leonid Nevzlin  (both in exile after corruption indictments against them in Russia), and also by former chess world champion Garry Kasparov.
In April 2006 Mikhail Kasyanov was elected Chairman of the People's Democratic Union (PDU), a newly launched NGO. PDU was one of the co-founders of the first "The Other Russia" conference  in July 2006 and of the "The Other Russia" coalition that was set up at the conference. Kasyanov and the PDU were actively involved in the coalition's work and took part in the Dissenters' Marches  in Moscow and St. On 3 March 2007, Kasparov and Kasyanov spoke against Putin's government to thousands of supporters at the Saint Petersburg Dissenters' March. Petersburg The New York Times 4 March 2007
At a presentation in International Institute for Strategic Studies 26 June 2006, Kasyanov criticized Putin's administration. He said:
"Separation of powers has been effectively demolished and replaced by the so-called 'Vertical of Power' which is based on the false idea that all the meaningful social and political processes must be kept under control by the state. The government and parliament cannot function any longer without daily instructions. The judiciary is increasingly servile. Independent TV does not exist any more at the federal level and is being quickly uprooted in the regions. Moreover, the state-owned companies and the state itself increase their grip over the electronic and printed media. Responsibility of the regional level of power is totally destroyed by the abolishment of direct elections for the governors." Address on "Russia's G8 Presidency: Challenges and Opportunities". 26 June 2006
Now  PDU had regional branches in 75 regions of Russia. In June 2007 Kasyanov was nominated by the PDU as a candidate for the presidential elections. In September 2007 the new political party People for Democracy and Justice (:ru:Народ за демократию и справедливость) RIA Novosti - Russia - Ex-premier Kasyanov to set up political party was established on the basis of the PDU, and Kasyanov was elected its chairman.

2008 presidential candidacy

In 2006 Kasyanov stated his desire to run for President of Russia in 2008. Kasyanov left (opposition group) The Other Russia in July 2007 due to the group's failure to agree on a single presidential candidate. Kasyanov was nominated as a candidate in December 2007 and on 16 January 2008 he stated that he had finished collecting the 2 million signatures necessary to run as a candidate.Трое сдали, двое дописывают Gazeta 15 January 2008 Later in the month, however, the Central Election Commission rejected his candidacy on the grounds that 13.36% of the signatures were invalid.Russia Bars Opposition Candidate From March 2 Ballot The New York Times 28 January 2008 
Kasyanov described the election as a farce, calling for a boycott.
The presentation of Kasyanov's book Without Putin in the Ukrainian capital Kiev on 18 December 2009 was cancelled merely minutes before its planned opening. Kasyanov's press secretary claimed that the electricity went out in the Premier Palace Hotel minutes before the presentation was to start and that some 20 young men had blocked the entrance to the hotel to keep attendees from entering.Russian Opposition Leader's Book Premiere Blocked In Kyiv, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty (3 July 2007)

Fraud accusations and court case

Allegations that Kasyanov took a two percent commission in exchange for ignoring bribes and illegal business ventures whilst he was working at the Ministry of Finance between 1993 and 1999 led to him being dubbed as "Misha 2 percent" in the Russian media. and a Spiegel article from 2007 notes that Kasyanov insists that his only earnings as a public servant was his government salary and he was only involved in one private business venture since leaving the post of prime minister. The same article also claims that Kasyanov purchased the state-owned dacha of former Communist Party of the Soviet Union ideologue Mikhail Suslov which was worth several million euros.
On 11 July 2005, the Russian Office of Public Prosecutor started to investigate the privatization of two houses formerly owned by the government. According to allegations first made by the journalist and State Duma member Aleksandr Hinshtein  According to the court verdict of  16 March 2007, he was to return a house and pay 108,135,000 rubles in damages to the government for using the property illegally (approx. USD 4,150,000 or €3,130,000). In 2007, Kasyanov was still planning to appeal.Суд обязал экс-премьера Касьянова вернуть государству дачу "Сосновка-1" News.ru 16 March 2007

Political Career Timeline








