[[Bat Boy (character)]]

CATEGORIES: Fictional characters from West Virginia, Fictional bats

Bat Boy is a creature who made several appearances in the defunct American supermarket tabloid Weekly World News. The Weekly World News published patently fabricated stories which were purported to be factual. Within the pages of the paper, Bat Boy is described as a creature who is 'half human and half bat'. His pursuers, according to Weekly World News, are scientists and United States government officials; he is frequently captured, then later makes a daring escape. The original scientist who found him was named Dr. Bob Dillon.  Matthew Daemon, S.O.S. (Seeker of Obscure Supernaturals) crossed paths with him on several occasions.
Bat Boy was created by former Weekly World News Editor Dick Kulpa. He debuted as a cover story on June 23, 1992. The original front-page photo of Bat Boy, showing his grotesque screaming face, was the second-best selling issue in the tabloid's history, and he has since evolved into a pop-culture icon. He became the tabloid's de facto mascot of sorts. The story of Bat Boy was turned into an Off-Broadway musical, Bat Boy: The Musical.

Fictional background

According to Weekly World News, Bat Boy has a chaotic sense of morality. He has been said to steal cars and not to come to the aid of the needy. According to the mythos, the only person who cares about the chiropteran child is Dr. Bob Dillon, who discovered him in a West Virginia cave (Hellhole Cave in Pendleton County, WV). Origins of Bat Boy are sometimes credited to being in Endless Caverns in Greenbrier County, West Virginia. The original Weekly World News article lists "Hellhole Cave in the Allegheny Mountains of West Virginia". At the time of capture, he was two feet tall and weighed nineteen pounds. By February 2001, he was 2' 6". In 2004, he was five feet tall and his weight was unknown. He sheds his wings every three years, and regenerates a new pair.Weekly World News: Five things you don't know about Bat Boy!, December 10, 2002
On February 27, 2001, the Weekly World News published a story that he attacked a fifth-grader at a park in Orlando, Florida. According to the article, the girl was nearly ripped to shreds.Weekly World News: BATBOY ENDORSES GORE, February 28, 2001
On August 14, 2003, WWN reported he was running in the California gubernatorial election.
In October 2006, Weekly World News posted a video of Bat Boy "captured" on film riding on top of a New York City subway car. Bat Boy was said to be living in the subway system's tunnels during this time. This story was converted into a "documentary" video on the Weekly World News web site.weeklyworldnews.com/international_videos/2
In October 2008, Bat Boy supposedly endorsed John McCain but switched to Barack Obama soon after.
In November 2008, Bat Boy was allegedly seen protesting the passing of Proposition 8.

Genealogy

According to the Weekly World News, the discovery of Bat Boy's family tree on a genealogy chart recently "stunned" evolutionary scientists who used to think the famed imp was a pitiful, one-of-a-kind mutant - but now believe he belongs to a race of creatures who have interacted with humans for at least 400 years. In the tabloid's account, the chart itself was written on vellum and found in the same Ozark Mountains cave where Dr. Ron Dillon, a biologist, rescued Bat Boy after he was trapped by a falling rock in 1992 (it should be noted, however, that the Ozark Mountains are nowhere near West Virginia). Carbon dating supposedly revealed the chart to be over a hundred years old.

Adventures of Batboy

Cartoonist Peter Bagge originally penned the "Misadventures of Flapjack" for the Weekly World News. According to the cartoon, Bat Boy is currently hitchhiking with a typical American family after resigning from being the President of the United States (and King), has placed Weekly World News columnist Ed Anger under arrest and saying goodbyes to Beyoncé Knowles, a half sasquatch (with whom he was romantically involved), and Dr. Ron. According to past issues of WWN, Bat Boy has joined a death metal/thrash metal band as their lead singer. On a side note if ever spotted offer him eggs and he won't suck your blood through a crazy straw.
On 2006-01-16, artist Danielle Corsetto of Girls with Slingshots took over for Peter Bagge on the weekly strip.

Bat Boy: The Musical

A musical based on the Bat Boy character premiered at Tim Robbins' Actors Gang Theatre on Halloween, 1997 and has since been produced Off Broadway, in London's West End, and in scores of productions throughout the world. Music and lyrics are by Laurence O'Keefe, with a book by Brian Flemming and Keythe Farley.

Bibliography






