[[Squidward Tentacles]]

CATEGORIES: Fictional artists, Fictional characters introduced in 1999, Fictional composers, Fictional dancers, Fictional musicians, Fictional octopuses, Fictional undersea characters, Fictional waiting staff, Film characters, Nicktoon characters, SpongeBob SquarePants characters

Squidward Tentacles is a fictional character in the American animated television series SpongeBob SquarePants. He is voiced by actor Rodger Bumpass, and first appeared on television in the series' pilot episode "Help Wanted" on May 1, 1999. Squidward was created and designed by marine biologist and animator Stephen Hillenburg.
Squidward is an anthropomorphic octopus who lives in a moai between SpongeBob SquarePants and Patrick Star's houses. Portrayed as being ill-tempered, pretentious, cynical, and grouchy, he strongly despises his neighbors for their constant boisterous, noisy behavior; however, the pair are unaware of Squidward's antipathy, for them and see him as a friend. Squidward works as a cashier at the Krusty Krab. His species is an octopus according to the show creator, despite his name containing the word squid. Hillenburg made Squidward with six tentacles, believing that "it was really just simpler for animation to draw him with six legs instead of eight."
Critical reception for the character from both professionals and fans has been positive. Squidward has appeared in other media, such as trading cards, video games, plush toys and comic books. He also appears in the 2004 full-length feature film The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie, and in its sequel that is scheduled for release on February 13, 2015.

Role in SpongeBob SquarePants

Squidward is depicted as being an ill-tempered, pretentious, cynical, and grouchy turquoise octopus. He resides in the underwater city of Bikini Bottom in a moai situated in between SpongeBob SquarePants's pineapple house and Patrick Star's rock.
Squidward longs for peace and quiet, but his wishes remain unsatisfied. Squidward believes he is talented and is deserving of a higher social status. In reality, the Bikini Bottom populace does not perceive Squidward as talented in the arts at all, frequently booing him and walking out on his various performances. However, it has been shown on many occasions that Squidward may subconsciously house fondness for SpongeBob and Patrick, most notably in situations where their lives were believed to have been jeopardized, or when he has snatched an opportunity to move away, only to be agitated upon their recovery or his return.

Character

Creation and design

Stephen Hillenburg first became fascinated with the ocean and began developing his artistic abilities as a child. During college, he majored in marine biology and minored in art.  He planned to return to college eventually to pursue a master's degree in art.  After graduating in 1984, he joined the Ocean Institute, an organization dedicated to educating the public about marine science and maritime history; and began envisioning the idea for a project that would involve a cast of anthropomorphic sea life.  Although he drew several rough sketches of the concept, it would be close to a decade before his idea would become a reality.
A few years after studying experimental animation at the California Institute of the Arts, Hillenburg met Joe Murray, creator of Rocko's Modern Life, at an animation festival, and was offered a job as a director of the series. Hillenburg began working on SpongeBob SquarePants.
Hillenburg took some character designs from his comic book. He designed "SpongeBob's grumpy next door neighbor" as an octopus to emphasize the large, bulbous head of the animal, as well as that of Squidward's rather large ego. He said, "octopuses have such a bulbous head and Squidward thinks he's an intellectual so of course, he's gonna have a large bulbous head."Hillenburg, Stephen. (March 1, 2003). The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie (The Case of the Sponge "Bob") (DVD). Paramount Home Entertainment/Nickelodeon. Hillenburg drew Squidward with six tentacles, saying that "it was really just simpler for animation to draw him with six legs instead of eight." Show writer and storyboard artist Vincent Waller said that "Squidward is hard to draw—he has a very odd-shaped head. Fortunately, his emotions are pretty even, but to get a whole lot of big emoting out of him is a challenge. His nose splits everything in half, so it's always like, 'OK, how am I going to work this and still make it read?'" Hillenburg thought of making jokes with Squidward ejecting ink, but retired it because "it always looks like he's pooping his pants."
Although the character is named Squidward, there is dispute over whether he is an octopus or a squid due to conflicting statements between the show creator and Nickelodeon's official website. November 28, 2003. Paramount Home Entertainment/Nickelodeon. Hillenburg named him as such since the name Octoward, in the words of Squidward's voice actor Rodger Bumpass, "just didn't work". (March 1, 2003). The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie (The Absorbing Tale Behind The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie) (DVD). Paramount Home Entertainment/Nickelodeon. The sound of Squidward's footsteps is produced by rubbing hot water bottles. The footstep, along with the rest of the main characters', is recorded by the show's foley crew. Sound designer Jeff Hutchins said that footstep sounds "help tell which character it is and what surface they're stepping on." The idea to have Squidward ride a recumbent bicycle was inspired by Bumpass, who personally has this type of bicycle which he rides around Burbank, California. Bumpass described it his "little inside joke".

Voice

Squidward's voice is provided by actor Rodger Bumpass, who voices several other characters on SpongeBob SquarePants, including the character's mother. While creating the show and writing its pilot episode in 1997, Hillenburg and Derek Drymon, the show's then-creative director, were also conducting auditions to find voices for the show's characters. Hillenburg decided instead to give Lawrence the part of the series villain, Plankton.
Squidward was "a very nasally, monotone kind of guy", said Bumpass. He said that the character "became a very interesting character to do" because of "his sarcasm, and then his frustration, and then his apoplexy, and so he became a wide spectrum of emotions".
Several on the show's crew praise Bumpass for his performance and similitude to the character. Kenny called Bumpass "brilliant" and said, "he is sort of like Squidward." Staff writer Kent Osborne said, "I remember thinking about how much Rodger talks and acts like Squidward. That's why it's such a good voice—he's so connected to it." However, Bumpass said, "I'm not him and he's not me, but what I'm required to do for him and what I am enabled to do for him is what makes it like me. It fits my particular talents and skills very well. So in that respect, yeah, he is me, but I am not the cranky, sarcastic, underachieving kind of guy that he is. He's easy to fall in, I will say that."
Squidward's voice has been compared to that of Jack Benny's: Kenny said, "To me, there's something just so funny about that Jack-Benny-loyal-to-nobody character that Rodger Bumpass does such a great job of playing  Bumpass repudiated the relationship, saying "Jack Benny, no. Although he does have this observational sarcasm he occasionally brought out."

Reception

Squidward has received positive reception from critics and fans alike. Cast member and SpongeBob's voice Tom Kenny names Squidward his favorite character on the show. He said, "He has an extra dimension where SpongeBob and Patrick's capacity of play mystifies him, but he's also jealous of it. When he tries to participate, he just fails utterly because he doesn't believe in it." Staff writer Casey Alexander reflected himself to the character, saying "Squidward is the character I relate to the most. In an exaggerated way, he's the most human character. If I knew a human like SpongeBob, I probably would react to him like Squidward does laughter."
In her "Best SpongeBob SquarePants Episodes" list, Nancy Basile of About. Her favorite Squidward quotation is "Why must every eleven minutes of my life be filled with misery?"
In 2012, Bumpass was nominated at the 39th Daytime Emmy Awards in the Outstanding Performer in an Animated Program category for voicing Squidward. He was the first cast member to be nominated for this type of award. However, he did not win, losing to June Foray (The Garfield Show). Bumpass said, "I have the little certificate and everything, and I'm very proud of being given that." He said that "there wasn't really a competition because one of the other nominees was June Foray and she is royalty in the animation world. ... There was no way any of the other three guys had a chance. In fact, if any of us had one, there would have been a riot in that studio." He was "happy to lose to June Foray" and "very pleased and grateful to get a nomination."

In other media

Squidward has been included in various SpongeBob SquarePants-related merchandise, including board games, comic books, keychains, plush toys, trading cards and video games.[ref]
In 2009, actor Charles Brunton played Squidward in the musical adaptation of the third season episode "The Sponge Who Could Fly". Brunton said, "I loved that character! It was so much fun trying to re-create a well established cartoon character into a live performance on stage." He bought nine SpongeBob SquarePants DVDs and "acted out every single one in my bedroom" to prepare for the role. He said that "it took ages to perfect the voice and the way he used his arms."
In 2013, Squidward became the center of a "creepypasta" (a term describing urban legends or scary stories that have become Internet phenomena) called "Squidward's Suicide". It was an alleged lost episode of SpongeBob SquarePants, where Squidward commits suicide. It was originally uploaded to YouTube, but was immediately removed. The "episode" consists of "strange and upsetting noises 

Notes






