[[Lewisham]]

CATEGORIES: Districts of Lewisham, Areas of London, Districts of London listed in the Domesday Book, Major centres of London

Lewisham  Accessed 30 June 2013[ref]
 Accessed 30 June 2013[/ref]

History

It is most likely to have been founded by a pagan Jute, Leof, who settled (by burning his boat) near St Mary's Church (Ladywell) where the ground was drier, in the 6th century. As to the etymology of the name, Daniel Lysons (1796) wrote:
 
 "In the most ancient Saxon records this place is called Levesham, that is, the house among the meadows; leswe, læs, læse, or læsew, in the Saxon, signifies a meadow, and ham, a dwelling. A Latin legal record, dated 1440, mentions a place in Kent as Levesham which may refer to Lewisham.law.uh.htm; second entry; Walter Wheler, husbandman, as defendant in a plea of debt

It is now written, as well in parochial and other records as in common usage, Lewisham."'Lewisham', The Environs of London: volume 4: Counties of Herts, Essex & Kent (1796), pp. 514-36. URL:  Date accessed: 3 October 2007.

"Leofshema" was an important settlement at the confluence of the rivers Quaggy (from Farnborough) and Ravensbourne (Caesar's Well, Keston), so the village expanded north into the wetter area as drainage techniques improved. In the mid-seventeenth century, then-vicar of Lewisham, Abraham Colfe, built a grammar school, primary school and six almshouses for the inhabitants. On 5 September 1711 William Legge, the Earl of Dartmouth became the (hereditary) Viscount Lewisham 

The village of Lewisham was originally centred further south around the parish church of St Mary, towards the present site of University Hospital Lewisham. The centre migrated north with the coming of the North Kent railway line to Dartford in 1849, encouraging commuter housing. Lewisham was administratively part of Kent until 1889, and formed part of the Metropolitan Borough of Lewisham in the County of London until 1965.
The town centre was hit by a V-2 in 1944 with over 300 fatalities. It devastated the high street, which was not restored to its former glory until the mid-1950s. This horrific event is commemorated by a plaque outside the Lewisham Shopping Centre (opened in 1977). The plaque is situated on the pavement outside the Marks and Spencers store in the main shopping precinct. However, following reports that the memorial was being worn away by pedestrians, Lewisham Council made an agreement with the store to place a new plaque on a wall alongside the shop. 
The Sainsbury's store in Lewisham Shopping Centre was briefly the largest supermarket in Europe. The store still exists today and is small by modern standards. The area at the north end of the High Street was pedestrianised in 1994. It is home to a daily street market and a local landmark, the clock tower, completed in 1900 to commemorate Queen Victoria's Diamond Jubilee in 1897.
The police station, which was opened in 2004 to replace the station in Ladywell, is officially the largest in Europe.laing.html There is also another large police station in nearby Catford.
Lewisham Cricket Club was one of the most prestigious London sides during the Victorian era. They played at Lewisham Cricket Ground from 1864, which lay north of Ladywell Road until its closure in the latter part of the 19th century. Lewisham Swimming Club was also very successful with several of its members representing England in water polo and other gymkhana events. During the First World War, Lewisham Hospital's infirmary became the Lewisham Military Hospital and during the Second World War the hospital was hit by a V-1 flying bomb, which destroyed two wards, injured 70 people and killed one nurse.
Lewisham is also the site of one of the worst disasters on British Railways in the 20th century. On 4 December 1957 a crowded steam-hauled passenger express headed for the Kent coast overran signals at danger in thick fog near St. John's station and crashed into a stationary electric train for the Hayes branch line. The force of the impact brought down an overhead railway bridge onto the wreckage below. An electric multiple unit about to cross the bridge towards Nunhead managed to pull up in time. 90 passengers and crew died in the accident.
In 1977, the Battle of Lewisham'1997': The Battle of Lewisham URL: Date accessed 21 February 2008 (actually in New Cross) saw the biggest street battle against fascists since the Battle of Cable Street in 1936. Over 10,000 people turned out to oppose a National Front march which was organised on the back of increasing electoral success at that time.

Governance

Lewisham was governed by the Lewisham District Board of Works Authority until 1900. Following the London Government Act 1899, the County of London was split into 28 Metropolitan Boroughs. As a result, from 1900 to 1965, the Metropolitan Borough of Lewisham was created. After the London Government Act 1963 was passed through Parliament, the current 32 London Boroughs where formed. Today Lewisham is part of the London Borough of Lewisham based in Catford. The current mayor is Steven Bullock. For the London Assembly, the Borough of Lewisham is joined with the Royal Borough of Greenwich to form the Greenwich and Lewisham constituency, with the current AM being Len Duvall. For Westminster elections, Lewisham is covered by the Lewisham Deptford constituency with the current Member of Parliament is Joan Ruddock. All representatives are part of the Labour Party.

Commercial area and amenities

Lewisham's commercial area is one of the largest in South East London. Lewisham Shopping Centre, opened in the 1970s, has 70 stores over 330,000 square feet. Shops include Marks & Spencer, W H Smith, Sainsburys, H&M, TK Maxx, JD Sports, BHS and Argos. Lewisham Market and the Library is located outside the shopping centre on the High Street.
Opened in 1894, University Hospital Lewisham is an National Health Service, acute hospital run by the Lewisham and Greenwich NHS Trust serving the whole London Borough of Lewisham as well as some surrounding areas. In July 2012 the government recommended that Lewisham's Accident & Emergency ward should be closed, with reliance on emergencies transferred to Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Woolwich. However, there was a strong campaign in Lewisham against the proposed closure, including a march on 24 November 2012

Education

Sixth form and further education providers in Lewisham include Christ the King Sixth Form College and LeSoCo. Lewisham is also home to Goldsmith's College and the Laban Dance College (part of Trinity College of Music).

Transport

Lewisham has a major transport interchange served by Southeastern rail services, the Docklands Light Railway (DLR), London Buses and National Express Coaches.

Rail

All trains are operated by Southeastern. With trains to London Victoria, London Charing Cross, London Cannon Street both via London Bridge and via Sidcup, Orpington, Hayes, Dartford via Bexleyheath and Gillingham via Woolwich Arsenal.

DLR

The Docklands Light Railway has services to Canary Wharf, Bank and Stratford.

Buses

Lewisham is served by many Transport for London bus services connecting it with areas including Beckenham, Bexleyheath, Bromley, Brixton, Catford, Central London, Croydon, Crystal Palace, Eltham, Greenwich, New Cross, Orpington, Peckham, Penge, Sidcup, Stratford, Thamesmead and Woolwich.

Regeneration

There is planned regeneration of Lewisham town centre. At the end of Lewisham High Street and the start of Rushey Green, stands the 2006 Kaleidoscope Centre in Catford designed by van Heyningen and Haward Architects. This new PCT centre provides state of the art facilities and treatment specifically for children and young people in the area.lewishampct.uk/?assetId=926&assetGroupId=10
The Renaissance development on Loampit Vale has seen several 5 to 24 story residential buildings constructed as well as a the new glass mill leisure centre, which opened in 2013, replacing the Laydwell leisure centre.
Lewisham Gateway is a plan to re-develop the land bounded by the DLR station, Lewisham High Street, the Shopping Centre and the Railway to Blackheath. The road layout will be changed, including the removal of the roundabout while the River Ravensbourne and the Quaggy will be re-routed. The development will include shops, restaurants, bars, cafes, leisure facilities and up to 800 homes. The first phase of construction will start in March 2014 with a 15 and 25 story residential building next to the Docklands Light Railway station.
Thurston Road industrial estate had planning consent granted in 2008, however the development has been heavily delayed.

Notable residents

Among those who were born in the Lewisham are:

Geography

Almost all of the SE13 postcode district, which is associated with Lewisham, Ladywell and Hither Green, is within the London Borough of Lewisham, except for the Coldbath Estate and part of the Orchard Estate along Lewisham Road, which are covered by the Royal Borough of Greenwich.

Other Nearby Areas:

Climate

The nearest Met Office climate station is based in Greenwich Park:








