[[William Farr]]

CATEGORIES: 1807 births, 1883 deaths, People from Kenley, People from Shropshire, English statisticians, English civil servants, 19th-century English medical doctors, Epidemiologists, Biostatisticians, Fellows of the Royal Society, Presidents of the Royal Statistical Society, Civil servants in the General Register Office, Members of HM Government Statistical Service

William Farr (30 November 1807 – 14 April 1883) was a nineteenth-century British epidemiologist, regarded as one of the founders of medical statistics.

Early life

He was born in Kenley, Shropshire, England to poor parents.  He was effectively adopted by a local squire, Joseph Pryce, when Farr and his family moved to Dorrington. In 1826 he took a job as a dresser (surgeon's assistant) in Shrewsbury infirmary. Pryce died in November 1828, and left Farr £500, which allowed him to study medicine in France and Switzerland. In Paris he heard Pierre Charles Alexandre Louis lecture.
Farr returned to England in 1831 and continued his studies at University College London, qualifying as a licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries in March 1832. He married in 1833 and started a medical practice in Fitzroy Square, London.  He became involved in medical journalism and statistics.

General Register Office

In 1837 the General Register Office (GRO) took on the responsibility for the United Kingdom Census 1841. Farr was hired there, initially on a temporary basis to handle data from vital registration.
Farr was responsible for the collection of official medical statistics in England and Wales.  His most important contribution was to set up a system for routinely recording the causes of death.  For example, for the first time it allowed the mortality rates of different occupations to be compared.

Research on cholera

There was a major outbreak of cholera in London in 1849 which killed around 15,000 people.  Early industrialisation had made London the most populous city in the World at the time, and the River Thames was heavily polluted with untreated sewage. Farr subscribed to the conventional theory that cholera was carried by polluted air rather than water – the  miasmic theory. On the other hand, as a result of studying this outbreak, the physician John Snow proposed what is now the accepted mechanism for transmission: people were infected by swallowing something and it multiplied in the intestines.
There was another epidemic in 1853, and Farr gathered statistical evidence. John Snow discovered that people supplied with water from two companies in particular: the Southwark & Vauxhall and the Lambeth water companies – which drew their water directly from the Thames were particularly likely to suffer. & Seage, G. R. (2008). Essentials of epidemiology in public health. Pg:15-21 Sudbury, Mass.: Jones And Bartlett Publishers. Farr took part in the General Board of Health's 1854 Committee for Scientific Enquiries. The conventional explanation for cholera was still multifactorial; Snow's view of cholera as solely caused by a pathogen was not accepted, though his evidence was taken seriously. Farr's research was detailed and showed an inverse correlation of mortality and elevation.
There was a further epidemic in 1866, by which time Snow had died, and Farr had accepted Snow's explanation. He produced a monograph which showed that mortality was extremely high for people who drew their water from the Old Ford Reservoir in East London. Farr's work was then considered conclusive.

Later life

In 1858, he performed a study on the correlation of health and marriage condition, and found that health decreases from the married to the unmarried to the widowed. Is Marriage Good for Your Health? New York Times In the period 1857–9 the Office ordered a difference engine, a model designed by Swedish followers of Charles Babbage.
Farr served as a commissioner in the 1871 census, retiring from the General Register Office in 1879 after he was not given the post of Registrar General. He received the Gold Medal of the British Medical Association for his work in the field of biostatistics and was made a Companion of the Order of Bath in 1880.
In his last years, Farr's approach was obsolescent. Bacteriology had changed the face of the medical issues, and statistics became an increasingly mathematic tool. Medical reformers, too, changed approach, expecting less from legislation and central government.

Learned societies and associations

In 1839, Farr joined the Statistical Society, in which he played an active part as treasurer, vice-president and president over the years. In 1855 he was elected Fellow of the Royal Society.

Works

In 1837 Farr wrote the chapter "Vital Statistics" for John Ramsey McCulloch's Statistical Account of the British Empire. In January  1837 he established the British Annals of Medicine, Pharmacy, Vital Statistics, and General Science, discontinued in August of that year. He revised a book of James Fernandez Clarke on tuberculosis.
Farr exploited his GRO post compiling abstracts in a way that went beyond the original job description. In so doing he applied the techniques of Benjamin Gompertz (the Gompertz curve), and the closely allied statistical "law of mortality" of Thomas Rowe Edmonds. Farr, by relying on the existing mathematical model of mortality, could use data sampling to cut back the required computation.
The theory of zymotic disease was Farr's contribution to the debate on aetiology. He identified urbanisation and population density as public health issues.

In drama

In The Sewer King, an episode in the 2003 British television documentary series Seven Wonders of the Industrial World, Farr was played by Norman Lovett. Internet Movie Database

Family

Farr's first wife, whom he married in 1833, had surname Langford; she died of tuberculosis in 1837. He married Mary Elizabeth Whittal in 1842, and they had eight children.



Biographies



There is another photograph of Farr at 


