[[Mayberry]]

CATEGORIES: Fictional populated places in North Carolina

Mayberry is a fictional community that was the setting for two popular American television sitcoms, The Andy Griffith Show and Mayberry R.F.D.  Mayberry was also the setting for a 1986 reunion television movie titled Return to Mayberry. Mayberry was set in North Carolina and is said to be based on Andy Griffith's hometown of Mount Airy, North Carolina.  

The name "Mayberry"

According to show episodes, the community of Mayberry was named for fictional founder Lord Mayberry. Historically, the word Mayberry is of ancient Anglo-Saxon origin and is a locational name, a dialectical variant of the placename Maesbury in Shropshire. Griffith however told Larry King in 2003 that Artie Stander is the person who thought of the name Mayberry; Stander was one of the show's creators and writers.com - Transcripts - CNN LARRY KING LIVE - A Mayberry Reunion With Andy Griffith and Don Knotts - Aired November 27, 2003 - 21:00   ET 
Mayberry is a real community in Patrick County, Virginia, located 22 miles northeast of Andy Griffith's hometown of Mount Airy, North Carolina. The Mayberry Trading Post, home of the Mayberry, Virginia post office until it closed in 1922, told local TV station WGHP-TVWGHP-TV: Mayberry, Virginia Trading Post that Griffith and his father made many trips to the Mayberry Trading Post.  Griffith incorporated several community places and names from his childhood home into the show. The term "Mayberry" is mentioned many times in television shows such as Cheers, House, M.D., Criminal Minds, Supernatural, How I Met Your Mother, and Scrubs. According to the episode "The Battle of Mayberry," the town was almost named Taylortown in honor of Colonel Carleton Taylor, who was one of the first settlers in the town. There actually is a Taylortown in North Carolina, but it has nothing to do with the fictional town of Mayberry or the show.

Specific features

Mayberry had one traffic light and little in the way of indigenous crime save moonshining and bootlegging. Out of town bank robbers, scam artists, escaped convicts, and vagrants occasionally found their way to Mayberry. The county and the town share the same name and jurisdiction. We learn in episode 44 "Sheriff Barney" from the mayor of nearby Greendale that Mayberry County has had the lowest crime rate in the state for two years in a row under Sheriff Taylor. The town only had one long-distance telephone line, as referenced in the episode "Man in a Hurry", that two old ladies shared each Sunday preventing others from using the telephone.
In the opening scene of Year 8, episode 30 (the last episode) you can see a sign at the railroad station listing the population and elevation:
Population: 5,360
Elevation: 671

Mayberrians

Archetypal small town

Real-life models

Many towns in North Carolina have been proposed as "the original Mayberry," but many assume Mayberry was loosely based on Andy Griffith's hometown of Mount Airy, North Carolina but actually, Griffith has indicated that nearby Pilot Mountain, N.C., also in Surry County, North Carolina, inspired him in creating the town. It is likely that Pilot Mountain was the inspiration for the fictional town of "Mount Pilot", a nearby larger town in relation to Mayberry, often referred to and occasionally visited by the characters in The Andy Griffith Show. The county seat of Surry County is in Dobson; thus, this is the location of the nearest courthouse to Mount Airy. One episode has a fictional nearby location - "Pierce County."  Another episode has Barney Fife referring to himself and Sheriff Taylor as the law west of Mount Pilot.
Other placenames used in the show refer to actual places in North Carolina, such as Raleigh—which was also often called "Capital City" – Siler City, Winston-Salem, Stokes County, North Carolina, and Charlotte. One of the stars of the show, Frances Bavier (who played Aunt Bee) retired to Siler City in real life. In episode 249 "A Girl For Goober" the towns of Manteo and Toast are mentioned. Andy Griffith owned a home in Manteo (on North Carolina's Atlantic coast), and Toast is about 2 miles outside of Mt. Airy in Surry County. Stokes County, which borders Surry County to the east, is mentioned as the location of Myers Lake in episode 140 "Andy And Helen Have Their Day". In episode 62 "Cousin Virgil" the bus picks up Barney's cousin in Currituck. There is a Currituck County in eastern North Carolina.  In episode 17 "Alcohol And Old Lace" while looking for moonshine stills Barney suggests looking into Fancy Gap, Virginia, a town just across the state line from Mt. Airy, N.C. In episode 60 "Bookie Barber" Aunt Bea states that Floyd's Barbershop has received phone calls from as far away as Morehead City. In episode 136 "Opie's Fortune" a man from Bannertown lost $50. Bannertown is a few miles from Mt. Airy in Surry County, NC. In episode 68 "Barney Mends a Broken Heart" the towns of Harnett and Yancey are mentioned. There is both a Harnett County and a Yancey County in North Carolina.  In episode 3 "The Guitar Player"  played by James Best, who later played Sheriff Rosco P. Coltrane on The Dukes of Hazzard, Best's character Jim Lindsey buys his guitar picks in Winston-Salem, which is actually the nearest big city to Mount Airy, NC (37 miles).

=Origins and expansion=

Mayberry originated in an episode of The Danny Thomas Show and was the setting for The Andy Griffith Show, Mayberry RFD and the 1986 reunion movie Return to Mayberry.  Although the county seat of an agricultural county, black people were rarely seen in the original series, but occasionally seen on RFD.

Eponymous real life community

Mayberry is the name of a real community in Patrick County, Virginia; located 22 miles northeast of Andy Griffith's hometown of Mount Airy, North Carolina.  The Mayberry Trading Post, home of the Mayberry, Virginia post office until it closed in 1922, told local TV station WGHP-TV that Griffith and his father made many trips to the Mayberry Trading Post.

Town landmarks

Public buildings

=Houses=

Entertainment venues

Commercial buildings

=Places to eat=

==To eat and stay==

Physical landmarks

In popular culture

Due to the success and fame of the television show, "Mayberry" has been used as a term for both idyllic small town life and for rural simplicity (for both good and ill).
In a song by Rascal Flatts titled "Mayberry". Mayberry is mentioned: "Well I miss Mayberry sitting on the porch drinking ice cold Cherry Coke where everything is black and white."
In the song called Grandpa's Interview on the Neil Young album Greendale: "Shows with love and affection, Like mama used to say, A little Mayberry livin', Can go a long way."






