[[Neomycin]]

CATEGORIES: Aminoglycoside antibiotics, Otologicals

Neomycin is an aminoglycoside antibiotic found in many topical medications such as creams, ointments, and eyedrops. The discovery of neomycin dates back to 1949. It was discovered in the lab of Selman Waksman, who was later awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology and medicine in 1951. Neomycin belongs to aminoglycoside class of antibiotics that contain two or more aminosugars connected by glycosidic bonds. Due to the inherent oto- and nephrotoxicity of these substances, systemic use has declined, as safer alternatives have become available.

Uses

Neomycin is typically used as a topical preparation, such as Neosporin. It can also be given orally, where it is usually combined with other antibiotics. Neomycin is not absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and has been used as a preventive measure for hepatic encephalopathy and hypercholesterolemia. By killing bacteria in the intestinal tract, it keeps ammonia levels low and prevents hepatic encephalopathy, especially prior to GI surgery.  It has also been used to treat small intestinal bacterial overgrowth.  It is not given intravenously, as neomycin is extremely nephrotoxic (causes kidney damage), especially compared to other aminoglycosides. The exception is when neomycin is included, in very small quantities, as a preservative in some vaccines - typically 0.025 mg per dose.

Molecular biology

Neomycin resistance is conferred by either one of two aminoglycoside phosphotransferase genes. A neo gene is commonly included in DNA plasmids used by molecular biologists to establish stable mammalian cell lines expressing cloned proteins in culture; many commercially available protein expression plasmids contain neo as a selectable marker. Non-transfected cells will eventually die off when the culture is treated with neomycin or similar antibiotic. Neomycin or kanamycin can be used for prokaryotes, but geneticin (G418) is, in general, needed for eukaryotes.

Spectrum

Similar to other aminoglycosides, neomycin has excellent activity against Gram-negative bacteria, and has partial activity against Gram-positive bacteria.  It is relatively toxic to humans, and many people have allergic reactions to it. The following represents MIC susceptibility data for a few medically significant Gram-negative bacteria.


Composition

Standard grade neomycin is composed of a number of related compounds including neomycin A (neamine), neomycin B (framycetin), neomycin C, and a few minor compounds found in much lower quantities.  Neomycin B is the most active component in neomycin followed by neomycin C and neomycin A.  The quantities of these components in neomycin vary from lot-to-lot depending on the manufacturer and manufacturing process. Robertson. "Comparative Study of Responses to Neomycins B and C by Microbiological and Gas-Liquid Chromatographic Assay Methods."Applied Microbiology 18.3 (1969): 396-98. Nih. Web. 23 Oct. 2013.

Safety

In 2005–06, neomycin was the fifth-most-prevalent allergen in patch test results (10.0%). Patch-test results of the North American Contact Dermatitis Group 2005–2006. Dermatitis. 2009 May–Jun;20(3):149-60.

History

Neomycin was discovered in 1949 by the microbiologist Selman Waksman and his student Hubert Lechevalier at Rutgers University. It is produced naturally by the bacterium Streptomyces fradiae.

Neomycin as a DNA binder

Aminoglycosides such as neomycin are known for their ability to bind to duplex RNA with high affinity. The association constant for neomycin with A-site RNA has been found to be in the ~109 M−1 range.




