[[David Croft (TV producer)]]

CATEGORIES: English comedy writers, 1922 births, 2011 deaths, British Army personnel of World War II, David Croft sitcoms, English television writers, Officers of the Order of the British Empire, People from Poole, Graduates of the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst, Royal Artillery soldiers, Essex Regiment officers, People educated at Rugby School

Major David John Croft OBE (7 September 1922 – 27 September 2011), born David John Andrew Sharland, was an English writer, producer and director. David Croft is particularly noted for producing and co-writing a string of popular BBC sitcoms with Jimmy Perry and Jeremy Lloyd including Dad's Army, Are You Being Served?, It Ain't Half Hot Mum, Hi-de-Hi! and 'Allo 'Allo!.

Early life

Croft was born into a showbiz family: his mother, Annie Croft (1896–1995), was a famous stage actress and his father, Reginald Sharland (1886–1944), had a successful career as a radio actor in Hollywood. His first public appearance was at age 7, when he was seen in a commercial which aired in cinemas. Chips (1939). Croft was educated at St John's Wood Preparatory School and Rugby School in Warwickshire.guardian.co. Retrieved 27 September 2011 He married theatrical agent Ann Callender on 2 June 1952, and they had seven children. They have fifteen grandchildren. Croft enlisted in the Royal Artillery in 1942.  He served during the Second World War in North Africa, India and Singapore. After contracting rheumatic fever in North Africa, was sent home to convalesce and then underwent officer training at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. He was posted to India, arriving as the war in Europe ended, and was assigned to the Essex Regiment, rising to the rank of Major. When his military service ended he began working in the entertainment industry, as an actor, singer and writer.

Career

Croft met Freddie Carpenter, who produced many pantomimes for Howard & Wyndham across the UK, resulting in Croft writing scripts such as Aladdin, Cinderella and Babes in the Wood. Through his lifelong friend, composer/conductor Cyril Ornadel, Croft met the producer Fiona Bentley, who had obtained rights to adapt and musicalise a number of Beatrix Potter stories.davidcroft.co.
Croft relocated to the Northeast of England to work at Tyne Tees Television, where he produced many editions of the variety show The One O'Clock Show. For Tyne Tees Croft also directed and produced the admags Ned's Shed and Mary Goes to Market, as well as producing his first sitcom, Under New Management, set in a derelict pub in the North of England.
After leaving Tyne Tees Television to work at the BBC in the mid-1960s, he produced a number of the Corporation's popular sitcoms such as Beggar My Neighbour, Further Up Pompeii! and Hugh and I. It was while producing Hugh and I that he was introduced to actor Jimmy Perry, who handed him an unsolicited script for a pilot called The Fighting Tigers about the British Home Guard during the Second World War. Croft liked the idea. The two men co-wrote nine series of the show, which was retitled Dad's Army, as well as a feature film and a stage show based on it.official website/Biography
While Dad's Army was still running, Croft began to co-write Are You Being Served? with Jeremy Lloyd. He was to continue both writing partnerships for the rest of his career in several hit series including It Ain't Half Hot Mum, Hi-de-Hi! and 'Allo 'Allo!. He then started up You Rang, M'Lord?, a show that spoke of policies and unfairness in 1927. His last full series Oh, Doctor Beeching!, broadcast from 1995 to 1997, was co-written with Richard Spendlove. He created a television pilot in 2007, entitled Here Comes The Queen, with Jeremy Lloyd. This pilot starred Wendy Richard and Les Dennis, but because of Wendy Richard's death the show never went to a full series.Daily Mirror: Miss Brahms Is Back
As a producer, Croft's regular practice was to signal the end of an episode with the caption "You Have Been Watching ...", followed by vignettes of the main cast.
He was the subject of This Is Your Life in 1995 when he was surprised by Michael Aspel outside BBC Television Centre.

Death

David Croft died in his sleep on 27 September 2011, at his home in Portugal. He was 89 years old.

Awards and honours

Croft became an Officer of The Most Excellent Order of the British Empire with Jimmy Perry in 1978 for services to television.  He also received the 1981 Desmond Davis award from the British Academy of Film and Television Arts, for his outstanding contributions to the industry.Television – Desmond Davis Award
Croft's awards include:

Production and writing career

In addition to writing most of the episodes of these television series, Croft also worked as producer, director and, later, executive producer.

Written with Jimmy Perry

Written with Jeremy Lloyd

Written with Richard Spendlove



Bibliography

|location=Manchester |publisher=Manchester University Press |year=2004 |isbn=0-7190-6556-9|ref=harv}}




