[[Lunfardo]]

CATEGORIES: Buenos Aires, Italian-Argentine culture, Tango, Languages of Argentina, Languages of Uruguay, Cant languages, Spanish slang

Lunfardo is a dialect originated and developed in the late 19th and early 20th centuries in the lower classes in Buenos Aires and the surrounding Gran Buenos Aires,Lunfardo history, with historical accounts in newspapers of the nineteenth century. and from there spread to other cities nearby, such as Rosario and Montevideo, cities with similar socio-cultural situations. 

Origin

Lunfardo (or briefly, lunfa) began as prison slang in the late 19th century, so guards would not understand the prisoners. 

Etymology

Most sources believe that Lunfardo originated among criminals, and later became more commonly used by other classes. 

Lunfardo today

Today, some Lunfardo terms have entered in the language spoken all over Argentina and Uruguay,  while a great number of Lunfardo words have fallen into disuse or have been modified in the era of suburbanization. Furthermore, the term "Lunfardo" has become a synonymous with "speech of Buenos Aires",  mainly of the inhabitants of the City of Buenos Aires, and its surrounding areas (Greater Buenos Aires). The Montevideo speech has almost as much "lunfardo slang" as the Buenos Aires speech. 
In Argentina, neologisms that have reached a minimum level of acceptance are considered  The original slang has been immortalized in numerous tango lyrics.

Characteristics

Lunfardo words are inserted in the normal flow of Rioplatense Spanish sentences.  
Tango lyrics use lunfardo sparsely, but some songs (such as El Ciruja, or most lyrics by Celedonio Flores) employ lunfardo heavily. "Milonga Lunfarda" by Edmundo Rivero is an instructive and entertaining primer on lunfardo usage. 
A characteristic of lunfardo is its use of word play, notably vesre (from "al revés", reversing the syllables, similar to English back slang or Greek ποδανά-podaná). Thus, tango becomes gotán and café con leche (coffee with milk) becomes feca con chele.
Lunfardo employs metaphors such as bobo ("dumb") for the heart, who "works all day long without being paid", or bufoso ("snorter") for pistol.
Finally, there are words that are derived from others in Spanish, such as the verb abarajar, which means to stop a situation or a person (e.g. to stop your opponent's blows with the blade of your knife) and is related to the verb "barajar", which means to cut or shuffle a deck of cards.

Examples

Nouns

Verbs

Modern slang

Since the 1970s, it is a matter of debate whether newer additions to the slang of Buenos Aires qualify as lunfardo.  
Some examples of modern talk:
Many new terms had spread from specific areas of the dynamic Buenos Aires cultural scene: invented by screenwriters, used around the arts-and-crafts fair in Plaza Francia, culled from the vocabulary of psychoanalysis.  
A rarer feature of Porteño speech that can make it completely unintelligible is the random addition of suffixes with no particular meaning, usually making common words sound reminiscent of Italian surnames. These endings include -etti, -elli eli, -oni, -eni, -anga, -ango, -enga, -engue, -engo, -ingui, -ongo, -usi, -ula, -usa, -eta, among others.  



Notes






