[[Turn A Gundam]]

CATEGORIES: Turn A Gundam, 1999 anime television series, 1999 manga, 2002 anime films, 2004 manga, Anime featured in the Super Robot Wars series, Fuji Television shows, Gundam anime and manga, Kadokawa Shoten manga, Kodansha manga, Kōichi Tokita, Post-apocalyptic television series, Real Robots, Sunrise (company)

 is a 50 episode anime series that aired between 1999 and 2000 on Japan's FNN networks, which was created for the Gundam Big Bang 20th Anniversary celebration. It was also compiled into two feature-length movies entitled Turn A Gundam I: Earth Light and Turn A Gundam II: Moonlight Butterfly.
Turn A Gundam was directed by Yoshiyuki Tomino, who was the main creator of the Gundam franchise and had written and directed many previous Gundam works. This series was made after Tomino had recovered from his depression that had influenced Mobile Suit Victory Gundam, and the general tone and mood of Turn A Gundam is much more hopeful and less dark than his other Gundam series.
Turn A Gundam is also the last of the Gundam metaseries (not counting the compilations and future video game cut scenes) to be hand painted on cels. Gundam SEED, created in 2002, was the first series to use digital coloring.
On 22 July 2010, Bandai Entertainment announced that they had acquired the license to release Turn A Gundam in the United StatesAnime News Network: Bandai Ent. Adds Tales of the Abyss, Turn A Gundam. Retrieved on 22 July 2010, and that they were planning to release the series on Region 1 DVD in 2011. The release was cancelled in January 2012 when Bandai Entertainment announced it would no longer offer any new products in the North American territory.
However, on 2 January 2012, Bandai Entertainment announced that they will stop offering new DVD, Blu-ray disc and manga releases by February. Bandai Entertainment will be restructured to focus on licensing rights to other companies. Many anime and manga titles that were previously licensed for release in North America were cancelled, including Turn A Gundam.animenewsnetwork.com/feature/bandai_downsizing_ken_iyadomi_interview



Turn A Gundam takes place in the year  in the official Japanese Turn A guide book and Correct Century in the English 2001 Correct Century A Bibliographical Study of "Black History" as the black paged introduction of Gundam Officials.2001 Correct Century A Bibliographical Study of "Black History", Gundam Officials 公式百科事典 The population of the Earth is, at the beginning of the series, limited to simple, steam-driven technology after past cataclysms; the Moon is populated by the Moonrace, humans who left Earth after a great war long ago to reside in technologically advanced lunar colonies until such time as they deemed the Earth suitable to return to.

Plot summary

Turn A Gundam follows the character Loran Cehack, a young member of the Moonrace. Selected as part of a reconnaissance mission to determine whether or not the Earth was fit for resettlement, Loran lands on the continent of North America, spends one year living on Earth as the chauffeur to the Heim family, and grows attached to its people. With the expectation of a peaceful resettlement operation from his people, he and a pair of his close friends sent down with him confirm that the Earth is now fit for the Moonrace to make their return. He's taken by surprise when the Moonrace intends to return to Earth via an offensive with mobile suits, and their first attack sparks a violent conflict between Earth and moon.
The night of the first attack, Loran is at the White Doll, an enormous humanoid statue, for a coming-of-age ceremony. When the Moonrace attacks and the battle in town can be seen from a distance the children panic. In the midst of this panic, the White Doll shatters, revealing a metallic figure within, and the shrine collapses around it. During the panic, Loran recognizes the White Doll as a mobile suit, and succeeds in applying his knowledge of the Moonrace's mobile suits to pilot it. The death of the Heim patriarch in the attack pulls the family and Loran into the budding war; Loran becomes the designated pilot of the White Doll, and its discovery prompts the excavation of further mobile suits in the various "mountain cycles" covering the Earth. As the Moonrace's invasion rapidly turns into a full-fledged war against the increasingly-armed Earthrace, it becomes clear that this state of affairs is divisive among both groups; while the Moonrace's queen Dianna Soriel attempts to negotiate with the local leaders for a peaceful solution by which the Moonrace can come to reside on the Earth, the militaristic among both populations interfere with the negotiations again and again, forcing the war to continue as opposed to accepting a compromise.

Media

Anime

The titular WD-M01 Turn A Gundam is designed by Syd Mead.  The original design of the mecha was rejected by Yoshiyuki Tomino due to its exotic appearance and Tomino decided that he wanted a figure that is closer to the previous Gundam designs.  The old design was renamed and used for the Mobile Suit Sumo instead.「∀ガンダム」全記録集, Kondasha, ISBN 4-06-330088-9.  He designed Turn A Gundam using real world industrial design aspects, which was aimed to make it look simple and realistic. It needed to be big enough so that the suit can hide behind it, making it easier for the anime production staff to draw. Syd Mead imagined it to be like a clam shell and finally settled with a design that looked like MS-14 Gelgoog's shield.ROBOの石, 石垣 純哉(mechanical design assistant) homepage 

=Episode list=

Manga

Relationship with previous Gundam series

The 2001 Correct Century, A Bibliographical Study of "Black History", printed in black pages in front of the Universal Century Gundam Officials Encyclopedia, is supposedly uncovered by a fictional Lecturer in Black History named Yokk Wakk Onimott during Correct Century 1993. Onimott spends two years to fix the broken pages, five years to interpret the language, and a year to find a publisher. He states that the book was first printed around 3,000 years ago by the Rhea branch of the Earth Federation Government University. Included in the book is a picture drawn by Kunio Okawara showing a mobile suit supposed to be MS-04 as a S.U.I.T. project of the Zeon forces in UC0072~0075. It supposedly was found in 1993 Correct Century in the mountain cycle Library A-a. The white page introduction by another fictional writer, Minaka Junkers, an economy assistant professor of the Rhea branch of the Earth Federation Government University, states the book was published in UC0100 to celebrate the Centennial anniversary of the Universal Century. Thus it is officially claimed that the Universal Century is a time before Correct Century, possibly around 3,000 years before the story of Turn A begins.Gundam Officials 公式百科事典

Theme Songs

Openings:
Endings:
Inserts:

Reception

Mobile Suit Gundam 00 writer Yōsuke Kuroda cited Turn A when asked about his favorite series within the franchise.
The Turn A Gundam was chosen to be the 100th Master Grade model of Gunpla (abbreviation of Gundam Plastic Model) and at an earlier time, the first release of the Turn A Gundam DVD box set was announced.  Two of the three Model Magazine in Japan, Hobby Japan and Dengeki Hobby was informed to build their own Turn A model using the old 1/100 kit for a display in the official announcement of the MS100 Turn A.  Hobby Japan modeller Seira Masuo drastically redesigned the unitHobby Japan, June, 2007 issue, Gunpla LOVE while Dengeki Hobby modeller went for the original approach of diorama. Tomino addressed his little disappointment in the design of Turn A Gundam not having good reception, but he commented that it was happy to see that it was not pointless work as Turn A was selected as the 100th Master Grade model.






