[[Windaria]]

CATEGORIES: 1986 anime films, Action anime and manga, Drama anime and manga, Fantasy anime and manga, Films based on novels, Films directed by Kunihiko Yuyama, Japanese films

, also called Legend of Fabulous Battle Windaria and Once Upon a Time, is a Japanese animated film produced by Kaname Productions and Idol. The film was directed by Kunihiko Yuyama and written by Keisuke Fujikawa. It was released theatrically in Japan on July 19, 1986.

Plot

The mountainous kingdom of Paro and the coastal city-state of Itha had been at peace for over a century. They would have remained that way but for the ambitions of Paro's power-hungry king. Paro invaded Itha, despite the love between Jill, Paro's prince, and Ahanas, Itha's princess.  Caught between duty and emotion, the star-crossed lovers were forced to fight a war to its bitter conclusion. Isu was a simple farmer from the neutral village of Saki, but he saved Itha from being destroyed by being a spy from Paro, and found himself hungering for wealth and glory that the Ithan monarchy could provide. Agents from Paro made him an offer to fulfill his wishes, and he left his wife Marin behind in what would turn into a battlefield between the two kingdoms.

Voice cast

Production

Windaria is based on a novel of the same name, authored by Keisuke Fujikawa, the film's screenwriter.

Soundtrack

Release and marketing

Windaria was released theatrically in Japan on July 19, 1986.
Windaria was first distributed in Japan to home video by Victor Entertainment. The eventual laserdisc release contained a trailer, a pilot film (in which characters are colored differently than the final version), and a second audio track.
A generous amount of Windaria-related merchandise has been marketed in Japan since the movie's 1986 debut. Fujikawa's Douwa Meita Senshi Windaria bunkobon was published by Kadokawa Shoten during March 1986.

Reception

Critical reception for the original Japanese version of Windaria has been favorable. Ralph Jenkins of Mania. The reviewer elaborated, "The overriding theme of this grim allegory is that a promise -- especially between lovers -- is something so sacred that it thrives even beyond death, and taking it for granted can beget devastating consequences." Jenkins noted both Inomata's character designs and the film's musical score to be memorable.








