[[Project A-ko]]

CATEGORIES: 1980s science fiction films, 1986 anime films, Central Park Media, CPM Press, Fantasy-comedy films, Impact event films, Parody anime and manga, Project A-ko

 is a 1986 animated fantasy-parody film that had several sequels and a spin-off. This series references a number of other works of anime from the 1970s and 1980s, such as Macross, Fist of the North Star and Gundam. The title itself is a reference to the 1985 Jackie Chan movie Project A, although the film bears no resemblance to Project A; the working title ended up sticking.

Summary

The plot revolves around A-ko Magami and her best friend C-ko Kotobuki, a bubbly, carefree optimist. Although A-ko possesses superhuman speed and strength, she considers herself an average teenager; she mostly worries about getting to school on time, chronically oversleeping her alarm clock each morning. The pair transfers to the all-girls Graviton High School and catch the unwanted attention of B-ko Daitokuji, a rich, spoiled and brilliant fellow student.
B-ko develops a crush on C-ko, and determines to win her over by creating powerful mecha to defeat A-ko. She tries this every morning before the bell rings, but only succeeds in making the girls more tardy to school. A figure in a trench coat is seen monitoring the interactions and reporting to a large spacecraft as it approaches Earth. The aliens' conclusion is that they have located a lost princess whom they have been looking for.
After realizing that A-ko and B-ko were rivals back in kindergarten, B-ko dons the "Akagiyama 23", a powered suit. As the aliens invade Earth and engage the weak Graviton military, A-ko and B-ko escalate their own fight, destroying much of the school and the city. C-ko is abducted in the middle of this confrontation by the trench-coated spy "D", revealed to be a member of the Lepton Kingdom of Alpha Cygni, an all-female race of aliens. C-ko is their princess.
Witnessing the abduction, A-ko and B-ko set aside their differences. Infiltrating the spaceship, A-ko confronts D and the ship's alcoholic Captain Napolipolita, while B-ko rescues C-ko. B-ko then reneges on the truce and opens fire on A-ko, D and the Captain, destroying the ship's navigation system. The vessel lands, precariously perched on top of the city's Military Command Tower.
A-ko awakens the next morning, sore from the previous day's adventures, and walks with C-ko to school. The girls pass by a disheveled D and the Captain begging for donations to repair their ship. The film ends with B-ko, ready for yet another fight, smiling as A-ko appears on the horizon.

Characters

Production

Production of the first movie included several artists who would later create other popular works, including Kia Asamiya and Atsuko Nakajima. Also noted is the western source of the soundtrack, credited to Joey Carbone and Richie Zito.
In Japanese, "-ko" is a common suffix for girls' names, like Hanako, Rumiko, and Yuriko, or indeed Eiko, which sounds just like A-ko. The literal meaning is "child", so A-ko is a generic "Child A", a common way to reference peripheral characters in Japanese contemporary drama. In the making-of documentary for the film, it is stated that "A-ko", "B-ko", and "C-ko" were intended as generic "Jane Doe"-type names.
Project A-ko was initially planned to be part of the Cream Lemon series of pornographic OVAs, but during the production of the series, it was decided to make it into a more mainstream title. The only sequence animated during its Cream Lemon days left in the revised production is B-ko's private bath scene. In a nod to Project A-ko's origins as a Cream Lemon episode, the owner and several working girls from the brothel in the Cream Lemon episode "Pop Chaser" can be seen in one of the classrooms A-ko and B-ko crash through during a fight sequence in the film.
Director Katsuhiko Nishijima states (possibly in jest) that he took on this project because he was missing some teeth at the time and needed the funding from this film to buy new ones.2002 Collectors series DVD behind the scenes footage

Video release in North America

Project A-Ko was Central Park Media's first video release in 1991. They later released a dubbed version produced by Manga Entertainment to VHS in 1992. The English dub for the rest of the franchise was produced with Ocean Studios instead.
After releasing Project A-ko on DVD in its original widescreen video format, Central Park Media later released a "Collector's Series" version in 2002, which features remastered video and coloring, a large number of A-ko related extras, commentary and interviews by many of the Project A-ko staff, and a free Project A-ko soundtrack CD.
On May 17, 2011, Eastern Star released a newly remastered R1 Project A-ko DVD. It contains many of the extras of the original CPM release, sans the soundtrack CD.

Sequels

Three sequels were brought directly to video. Central Park Media has released these OVAs in the DVD collection Project A-ko: Love and Robots:
After this original series, a spin-off entitled A-ko the Vs (1990) was created and released in the OVA format. In this two-part series (a "Grey side" and "Blue side"), A-ko and B-ko are partners hunting monsters in an extraterrestrial environment, with no relationship to the previous series. Central Park Media released it as Project A-ko: Uncivil Wars.






