[[Vassar College]]

CATEGORIES: Vassar College, 1861 establishments in New York, Educational institutions established in 1861, Former women's universities and colleges in the United States, Members of the Annapolis Group, Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools, National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities members, Seven Sister Colleges, Universities and colleges in Dutchess County, New York, Universities and colleges in New York, Visitor attractions in Poughkeepsie, New York

Vassar College is a private, coeducational liberal arts college in the town of Poughkeepsie, New York, in the United States. Founded as a women's college in 1861 by Matthew Vassar, the school became a coeducational institution in 1969. The College offers B.A. degrees in more than 50 majors and features a flexible curriculum designed to promote a breadth of studies.
The Vassar campus comprises over  ecological preserve. A new science building is under construction, with plans to be completed in 2015.
Vassar was listed in the 2014 annual ranking of U.S. News & World Report as "most selective" and was rated the 13th best liberal arts college in the nation and 6th for "Best Value". For the class of 2017, the institution had an acceptance rate of 24.1%, enrolling 666 students. The total number of students attending the college was around 2,400.
The College offers many extracurricular organizations including student theater, a capella groups, club sports, volunteer and service groups, and a circus troupe. The weekly Miscellany News is one of several student publications distributed on campus. Vassar College's varsity sports teams, known as the Brewers, play as part of the NCAA Division III and in the Liberty League.



Vassar was founded as a women's college in 1861 and became coeducational in 1969.
Vassar was the second of the Seven Sisters colleges, higher education schools then strictly for women, and historically sister institutions to the Ivy League. It was chartered by its namesake, brewer Matthew Vassar, in 1861 in the Hudson Valley, about 70 mi (115 km) north of New York City.  The first person appointed to the Vassar faculty was the astronomer Maria Mitchell, in 1865.
Vassar adopted coeducation in 1969. However, immediately following World War II, Vassar accepted a very small number of male students on the G.I. Bill. Because Vassar's charter prohibited male matriculants, the graduates were given diplomas via the University of the State of New York. These were reissued under the Vassar title after the school formally became co-educational.
Vassar's campus, also an arboretum, marked by period and modern buildings. The renovated library has unusually large holdings for a college of its size. It includes special collections of Ellen Swallow Richards, Albert Einstein, Mary McCarthy, and Elizabeth Bishop.
In its early years, Vassar was associated with the social elite of the Protestant establishment. E. Digby Baltzell writes that "upper-class WASP families educated their children at colleges such as Harvard, Princeton, Yale, and Vassar."
Roughly 2,400 students attend Vassar, and 98% live on campus. About 60% come from public high schools, and 40% come from private schools (both independent and religious). Vassar is currently 57% women and 43% men, at national average for national liberal arts colleges.  Students are taught by more than 290 faculty members, virtually all holding the doctorate degree or its equivalent. The student-faculty ratio is 8:1, average class size, 17.
In recent freshman classes, students of color comprised 25–33% of matriculants. International students from over 50 countries comprise 10% of the student body.  In May 2007, falling in with its commitment to diverse and equitable education, Vassar returned to a need-blind admissions policy wherein students are admitted by their academic and personal qualities, without regard to financial status.
Vassar president Frances D. Fergusson served for two decades. She retired in the spring of 2006, and was succeeded by Catharine Bond Hill, former provost at Williams College.

Academics

