[[Kirk Hammett]]

CATEGORIES: 1962 births, American heavy metal guitarists, American musicians of Filipino descent, American people of Irish descent, Exodus (band) members, Guitarists from San Francisco, California, Lead guitarists, Living people, Metallica members, Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductees, San Francisco State University alumni, Songwriters from San Francisco, California

Kirk Lee Hammett (born November 18, 1962) is the lead guitarist and a songwriter in the heavy metal band Metallica and has been a member of the band since 1983. Before joining Metallica he formed and named the band Exodus. In 2003, Hammett was ranked 11th on Rolling Stones list of The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time.

Early life

Hammett was born on November 18, 1962 in San Francisco, California, the son of Teofila "Chefela" (née Oyao) and Dennis L. Hammett, a Merchant Marine.google.%22&hl=en&sa=X&ei=8J4_U-GsOOPhsAT9y4HQDA&ved=0CCgQ6AEwAA His mother is of Filipino descent and his father was of part Irish ancestry. He attended De Anza High School in Richmond, California. While attending De Anza High School, he met Les Claypool of Primus, and they remain close friends.
After purchasing a 1978 Fender Stratocaster copy, Hammett attempted to customize his sound with various guitar parts, eventually buying a 1974 Gibson Flying V. Hammett also took a job at Burger King as a youth before quitting once he saved enough money to purchase a Marshall amplifier.

Career

Exodus (1980–1983)

Hammett's musical interests eventually drew him into the fledgling thrash metal genre. In 1980, he formed the band Exodus with vocalist Paul Baloff, guitarist Gary Holt, bassist Geoff Andrews, and drummer Tom Hunting. He played on Exodus' 1982 Demo. Exodus was an influential band in the Bay Area thrash movement.

Metallica (1983–present)

In 1983 Hammett was invited to join Metallica following the dismissal of the band's original lead guitarist Dave Mustaine, who went on to form the band Megadeth. This was prior to the recording of Kill 'Em All. At the time Hammett was taking private lessons from guitar virtuoso Joe Satriani.
Hammett has written and contributed riffs for Metallica songs since the band's second album . One of these riffs, used in "Enter Sandman" became one of Metallica's most popular songs. It was the first track and first single on Metallica's self-titled Black Album and was ranked 399th on Rolling Stone's list of The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time.com 500 greatest songs of all time The bridge for "Creeping Death" was originally an Exodus riff that Hammett took with him to Metallica.
In 1986, during the band's European leg of their tour to support "Master of Puppets", Hammett, and bassist Cliff Burton had a dispute over sleeping arrangements on the band's tour bus and it was decided by a card draw, which Burton won by picking the Ace of Spades. Once the draw was completed, Burton looked at Hammett, and stated "I want your bunk," to which Hammett agreed, saying that he might be able to sleep better in the front of the bus anyway. Early the following morning the tour bus slid off the road and overturned, throwing Burton out of the window – subsequently killing Burton. Hammett has stated in an interview that he once thought that it easily could've been him who was killed instead, since Burton was sleeping in what was considered Hammett's bunk.
Hammett initially wanted to have guitar solos on Metallica's 2003 album, St. Anger, but drummer Lars Ulrich and producer Bob Rock thought that the solos did not sound right in the songs. He later admitted himself, "We tried to put in solos but they sounded like an afterthought so we left them out".
On April 4, 2009, Hammett, along with Metallica bandmates Lars Ulrich, James Hetfield, and Robert Trujillo and former Metallica bandmates Jason Newsted and the deceased Cliff Burton, were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. In 2009, Hammett provided the foreword to British author Joel McIver's book To Live Is to Die: The Life and Death of Metallica's Cliff Burton.NET – METALLICA Guitarist Provides Foreword To First-Ever CLIFF BURTON Biography. Roadrunnerrecords. Retrieved on 2010-11-05.

Other appearances

In 2005, Hammett was featured playing the guitar roles on the Carlos Santana track "Trinity" alongside steel-pedal guitarist, Robert Randolph.
In 2006, Hammett voiced himself on The Simpsons ("The Mook, the Chef, the Wife and Her Homer"). He also provided various voices on the Adult Swim show Metalocalypse, including a two fingered fan ("The Curse of Dethklok"), The Queen of Denmark ("Happy Dethday"), and a Finnish barkeep ("Dethtroll"). He also appeared as a guest in an episode of Space Ghost: Coast to Coast titled "Jacksonville", alongside fellow Metallica member James Hetfield.
In 2010, Hammett played with Nicolas Abou Chedid on Nico's solo album.
Hammett played guitar on the track "Satan" with Orbital for the Spawn: The Album soundtrack released in July 1997.
After performing a set with Metallica at Bonnaroo in June 2008, Hammett played one song with My Morning Jacket and a couple songs with the annual Superjam collaboration, which also included Les Claypool and members of Gogol Bordello playing primarily Tom Waits songs.
He also appeared on the "Kichigai" E.P. by punk band Septic Death. He played additional lead guitar on the title track.
He appeared as a guest guitarist on K'Naan's "If Rap Gets Jealous" off of the Troubadour album.
Hammett is one of the main characters in Guitar Hero: Metallica, along with the rest of the current line-up of Metallica.
Hammett can be seen in the background in Primus' "John the Fisherman" video fishing off of Les Claypool's boat.
Hammett appeared in an episode of Jon Benjamin Has a Van as an actor and guitarist.

Book

On October 1, 2012, Hammett released his first book, Too Much Horror Business, a collection of photos detailing Hammett's lifelong love of monster movies and horror memorabilia. "Kirk Hammett of Metallica Talks His Book 'Too Much Horror Business'". Artistdirect

Personal life

thumb|right|upright|Kirk Hammett live in Mexico in 2010. Hammett has been married twice. His first marriage to ex-wife Rebecca lasted 3 years, having ended in 1990, during the recording of The Black Album. Hammett has been married to his second wife Lani since 1998. They have two sons, Angel (b. September 29, 2006), and Vincenzo (b. June 28, 2008). He and his family reside in San Francisco.
Between the end of touring promoting the Black Album and the start of touring in promotion of Load, he studied at San Francisco State University, focusing on Film and Asian arts.

Equipment and techniques

Hammett is known for always having his picking hand taped to protect his skin due to his habit of palm muting and fast picking during lengthy tours.
Hammett's playing style is noted for his extensive use of the wah-wah pedal in his solos. Hammett says "The wah-wah is an extension of my personality." Hammett's use of the wah-pedal hadn't been featured in recent Metallica solos, but has seen a resurgence in his solos on the newest album Death Magnetic, in songs like "The Unforgiven III."

Guitars

In 2007, ESP Guitar Company announced the release of a 20th Anniversary Limited KH-20 Guitar to celebrate 20 years of relationship with Kirk Hammett (based on the KH-2 guitar with some modification). Only 41 guitars were in production, with the price at US$9,999 a piece.
In January 2009, ESP also announced the rare release of Hammett's famous "ouija" guitar, which was very limited and for 2009 only. Espguitars. Retrieved on 2010-11-05.
Kirk Hammett's current tour guitars:
On the 25th anniversary of Metallica's debut album Kill 'Em All,Hammett appears on the cover of Feb. 2008's Guitar World sporting his new custom ESP. This model is the KH20, the 20th anniversary model from ESP.Guitar World – Covers Archive
In the video for "One", Hammett is seen using what is most likely an ESP Vintage Plus. It appears however to be modified; it has a Floyd Rose tremolo, which could have been Hammett's own work or a custom model. Uk.com. Retrieved on 2010-11-05.

Amplifiers and cabinets

Throughout Metallica's career, Hammett has used a range of different amplifiers. For the first two albums, he used Marshall amplifiers and cabinets, with occasional effects. For the recording of Metallica's third album, Master of Puppets (1986), he and James Hetfield bought a Mesa/Boogie MarkIIC+ amplifier, and used Mesa/Boogie Dual Rectifier heads. Even when he made his move Randall Amplifiers in 2007, he still used Mesa/Boogie amps in his setup, and still does to this day. He currently uses 2 rackmounted Dual Rectifier 2-channel heads in tandem with his Randalls.
In September 2007, Randall Amplifiers announced a partnership with Hammett to design a line of signature amps, heads, combos and preamp modules.Randall Amplifiers Announces Partnership With Kirk Hammett of Metallica
In December 2011, it was announced by Fortin Amps that they would team up with Randall to start a new line of tube amps based on the Fortin Meathead amplifier. Hammett is currently using a prototype of the amp that he used for the Big 4 show at Yankee Stadium and for all of the shows in India and Asia, and was recently sent a second prototype.

Effects

To avoid problems with pedals being damaged during live performances, Hammett keeps his effect pedals in a rack along with his amplifiers and his tech controls them through a pedalboard sidestage. The pedal controller allows him to change between different effect pedals and amplifiers.
In 2008, Jim Dunlop started working in partnership with Hammett to create a signature Wah-wah pedal, the KH95. It is now available to buy in stores.

Accessories

Discography

Death Angel

Headbanged

Exodus

Metallica








