[[David Pearce (philosopher)]]

CATEGORIES: 20th-century philosophers, 21st-century philosophers, Alumni of Brasenose College, Oxford, British philosophers, British technology writers, English diarists, Hedonism, English essayists, English science writers, Living people, People from Brighton, Transhumanists, Utilitarians, Year of birth missing (living people), Animal rights advocates

David Pearce is a British independent philosopher.
Pearce co-founded Humanity+, then known as the World Transhumanist Association, and is a prominent figure in the transhumanism movement, inspiring a strain of transhumanism based on paradise engineering and ending suffering.

The Hedonistic Imperative

Pearce is primarily known as the author of The Hedonistic Imperative, a 1995 book-length manifesto in which he theorizes how to "eradicate suffering in all sentient life" through paradise engineering.
In his work, Pearce outlines how drugs and technologies, including genetic engineering and nanotechnology, could enable the end of suffering in all sentient life.Humanity+ Transhumanism Resources In the long-term, however, suffering could be abolished by genetic engineering through biotechnology.

Transhumanism

In 1998, Pearce co-founded Humanity+, the international transhumanism association, with fellow philosopher Nick Bostrom, now the director of the Future of Humanity Institute at Oxford University.
Pearce's ideas have inspired a strain of transhumanism based on paradise engineering. Pearce is  vegan, and the increasing number of vegans and vegetarians in the transhumanism movement has been attributed to his influence.

BLTC Research

Pearce runs a web-hosting company and owns  BLTC Research, a series of websites based in Kemptown, Brighton, UK, originally set up by Pearce in 1995 when he published The Hedonistic Imperative. According to the BLTC Research mission statement, the organization publishes online texts in support of paradise engineering and abolishing sentient suffering for future generations.
Essays and articles on the BLTC network of websites feature information on many areas of science, including pharmacology,  biopsychiatry and quantum mechanics.

Affiliations and appearances

Pearce is co-editor of Singularity Hypotheses (Springer, 2012), holds a position on the advisory board of the Lifeboat Foundation,
He has been a speaker at many conferences, including the Singularity Summit, and given talks at the University of Oxford, Lund University and Harvard University. His work has been covered by Vanity Fair,

Quotes

 "The Hedonistic Imperative outlines how genetic engineering and nanotechnology will abolish suffering in all sentient life. This project is ambitious but technically feasible. It is also instrumentally rational and ethically mandatory. The metabolic pathways of pain and malaise evolved only because they once served the fitness of our genes. They will be replaced by a different sort of neural architecture. States of sublime well-being are destined to become the genetically pre-programmed norm of mental health. The world's last aversive experience will be a precisely dateable event."Philosophical "-Isms" - Philosophy Research Base - erraticimpact.com 








