[[Battle of Monterey]]

CATEGORIES: 1846 in Mexico, Battles of the Mexican–American War, Naval battles of the Mexican–American War, Battles and conflicts without fatalities, California Campaign, United States Marine Corps in the 18th and 19th centuries, Monterey, California, History of Monterey County, California, 1846 in California

The Battle of Monterey, at Monterey, California, occurred on 7 July 1846, during the Mexican-American War. The United States captured the town unopposed.

Preliminaries

Prior to the Mexican-American War the Californio forces had already driven the Mexican appointed Governor Manuel Micheltorena and most of his soldiers from Alta California. The Californio Governor, Pio Pico, with about 100 poorly armed and poorly equipped soldiers, was nominally in charge in Alta California and had consolidated his forces in Pueblo de Los Angeles—the largest city then in California with about 1,500 residents.
The main forces available to the United States in California were the about 400-500 bluejacket sailors and U.S. Marines on board the five ships of the Pacific Squadron there. Speculating that war with Mexico over Texas etc. was very possible, the U.S. Navy had sent several additional naval vessels to the Pacific in 1845 and 1846 to protect U.S. interests there and prevent possible British action. It took about 200 days, on average, for ships to travel the over- trip from the East coast around Cape Horn to get to California. More ships assigned to the Pacific Squadron would continue to arrive from 1846 to 1847.
On 26 May, Commodore Sloat received word of the Battle of Palo Alto and the Battle of Resaca de la Palma, upon which he sent a coded message to Secretary of the Navy George Bancroft that he was leaving for California.J., 1974, The Mexican War, 1846-1848, New York:Macmillan, ISBN0803261071
They joined the sloop 
On 6 July, Sloat decided to seize Monterey and San Francisco, wondering if "Captain Freemont will cooperate with us."

Battle

Capt. William Mervine of the Cyane came ashore with a small party from the Savannah at 7:30 AM on 7 July, seeking the surrender of the port from the Mexican commandant, Capt. Mariano Silva.
At 10 AM 225 sailors and marines from Sloat's three warships landed. The British ships observed but took no action.

Aftermath

Sloat recognized Mexican real estate titles and church lands.
Capt. John B. Montgomery of the Portsmouth received Sloat's message to seize Yerba Buena (San Francisco) and by 8 AM on 9 July, read the pronouncement at the Customs House.
Commodore Robert F. Stockton arrived Monterey Bay aboard the Congress on 15 July and took over command from Sloat.
The Bear Flag revolutionaries were soon combined with John C. Frémont's 60 man exploratory force to form the U.S. sponsored California Battalion under the command of Frémont. The California Battalion, which varied from 160 to 400 men, drew regular army wages and were used to garrison and maintain order in the towns that had surrendered.
The Americans held northern California but General Jose Maria Castro and Governor Pio Pico planned resistance in the south.






