[[Marion Barry]]

CATEGORIES: 1936 births, Living people, Mayors of Washington, D.C., Washington, D.C. City Council members, Washington, D.C. Democrats, African-American mayors, African-American politicians, People from Itta Bena, Mississippi, People from Memphis, Tennessee, People from Washington, D.C., African-Americans' civil rights activists, American politicians convicted of crimes, American shooting survivors, American people convicted of drug offenses, Eagle Scouts

Marion Shepilov Barry, Jr. (born March 6, 1936) is an American politician who served as the second elected Mayor of the District of Columbia from 1979 to 1991, and again as the fourth Mayor from 1995 to 1999. He has been a member of the Council of the District of Columbia, representing Washington, D.C.'s Ward 8, since 2005. A Democrat, Barry previously served two other tenures on the DC Council, as an at-large member from 1975 to 1979 and as Ward 8 representative from 1993 to 1995. In the 1960s, he was involved in the African-American Civil Rights Movement, serving as the first chairman of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC).
Barry came to national prominence as mayor of the national capital, the first prominent civil-rights activist to become chief executive of a major American city; he gave the presidential nomination speech for Jesse Jackson at the 1984 Democratic National Convention. His celebrity transformed into international notoriety in January 1990, when Barry was videotaped smoking crack cocaine and arrested by FBI officials on drug charges. The arrest and subsequent trial precluded Barry seeking re-election, and Barry served six months in a federal prison. After his release, however, he was elected to the DC city council in 1992 and ultimately returned to the mayoralty in 1994, serving from 1995 to 1999.
Despite his history of political and legal controversies, Barry remains a popular and influential figure in the local political scene of Washington, D.C. The alternative weekly Washington City Paper nicknamed him "Mayor for life," a designation that remained long after Barry left the mayoralty.

Early life

Marion Barry was born in Itta Bena, Mississippi, the third of ten children. His father died when he was four years old, and a year later his mother moved the family to Memphis, Tennessee, where her employment prospects were better. When Marion Barry was growing up, he attended a one-room schoolhouse.  There were about 40-50 kids in the school, both white and black.
The first time Barry noticed racial issues was when he had to walk to school while the white students were able to ride the bus. He had a number of jobs as a child, including picking cotton, delivering and selling newspapers, and bagging groceries. While in high school, Barry worked as a waiter at the American Legion post and, as a Boy Scout, earned the rank of Eagle Scout.

Education and civil rights activism

Undergraduate studies at LeMoyne College

Barry attended LeMoyne College (now LeMoyne-Owen College), graduating in 1958. In his junior year of college, all of the racial injustices he had seen started to come together.  There was a fair ground in Memphis that he and his friends decided to go to; it was a segregated fair.  They went to the fair at the time that the white people were supposed to go, because they wanted to see the science exhibit.  When they were close to the exhibit, a policeman stopped them and asked them to leave.  Barry and his friends left without protesting the policeman.  At that time, Barry did not know much about his race, or why they were treated poorly, but it did not sit well with him.  After this experience, Barry became a more active member of the NAACP chapter at LeMoyne; he became the president. 47-52 While at LeMoyne, his ardent support of the civil rights movement earned him the nickname "Shep", in reference to Soviet propagandist Dmitri Shepilov. Barry began using Shepilov as his middle name.  In 1958 at LeMoyne, he criticized a college trustee for remarks he felt were demeaning to African Americans, which nearly caused his expulsion. While he was a senior and the president of the NAACP, Barry heard of Walter Chandler—the only white member on LaMoyne's board of trustees—making comments that black people should be treated as a "younger brother not as an adult."  Barry did not appreciate the comments made by Chandler, and wrote a letter to LeMoyne's president asking if Walter Chandler could be removed from the boardWalters, Ronald "Democratic Destiny and The District of Columbia" p. 61-69 A friend of Barry's was the editor of the school newspaper, The Magician, and told Barry to run the letter in the paper.  From there, the letter made it to the front page of Memphis' conservative morning paper.

Master's degree at Fisk University

Barry also earned an M.S. in organic chemistry from Fisk University in 1960. Barry is a member of Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity.  While in graduate school at Fisk, Barry was arrested several times because of sit-ins, stand-ins, etc. After graduating from Fisk, Barry joined the American civil rights movement, focusing on the elimination of the racial segregation of bus passengers. He was elected the first chairman of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC). Soon after he became the chair of SNCC in 1960, Marion Barry helped develop an organizing project in McComb, Mississippi.  The project was both a voter registration and a direct action project.  Barry and the other members of SNCC who went down to McComb were able to pick which field they wanted to work in.  Barry said that they lived with the local people instead of in hotels, motels, or their own houses because that was a way they could stay safe and learn what it was like to live there.  That way, he would know what it was like to live there and would be able to organize the members of SNCC accordingly.

Doctoral studies

He began a doctoral program at the University of Kansas, but he quit the program when white parents opposed him tutoring their children. He contemplated law school to help with his activism, but decided against it because he would have to take a year off from school.  If he would have taken a year off, there was a chance of him being drafted to the military, which he did not want to do.  He made the decision to go to The University of Tennessee because he was awarded a graduate fellowship.  Additionally, The University of Tennessee was a southern, integrated institution.  He had never had the chance to experience that before He began doctoral chemistry studies at the University of Tennessee in Knoxville, the only African American in the class. There too he was prohibited from tutoring white children, and his wife was not allowed to work at the school. He quit the program in favor of his new duties at SNCC.

Working for the SNCC

During his time leading SNCC, Barry led protests against racial segregation and discrimination.  After he left McComb in 1964, Barry's job in SNCC was now to go around the country to all of the state legislatures.  His job was to convince them to vote to make the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party the democratic party of Mississippi.  He even slept on the boardwalk in Atlantic City the night after speaking to the New Jersey legislature.
After he left the New York legislature, James Forman asked him to go to Washington, D.C. to manage SNCC's office.  At the time, over half of the population of Washington D.C. was black, and they had no political representation.
In 1965, Barry moved to Washington, D.C. to open a local chapter of SNCC, where he was heavily involved in coordinating peaceful street demonstrations as well as a boycott to protest bus fare increases. The first thing Barry did in Washington D.C. was organize a "mancott" of the bus system when the owner decided to raise prices from 20 to 25 cents.  Barry organized the entire boycott to provide rides to work and to notify the city.  The boycott cost the bus line thousands of dollars, Barry proved his ability to organize.  Barry and Treadwell married in 1972. They separated five years later.
Barry was active in the aftermath of the 1968 Washington, D.C. riots, organizing through Pride Inc. a program of free food distribution for poor black residents whose homes and neighborhoods had been destroyed in the rioting. Barry convinced the Giant Food supermarket chain to donate food, and spent a week driving trucks and delivering food throughout the city's housing projects. He also became a board member of the city's Economic Development Committee, helping to route federal funds and venture capital to black-owned businesses that were struggling to recover from the riots.
When President Richard Nixon declared July 21, 1969, to be National Day of Participation in honor of the moon landing by Apollo 11, Barry criticized Nixon for honoring the moon landing with a holiday when Nixon had previously opposed a holiday for Dr. Martin Luther King following his assassination. Said Barry, "Why should blacks feel elated when we see men eating on the moon when millions of blacks and poor whites don't have enough money to buy food here on earth?"

D.C. Board of Education (1971–1974)

In 1971, Barry announced his candidacy for at-large member of the school board in 1971, running against the incumbent, Anita L. Allen.
After being seated in 1972, the members of the board unanimously elected Barry president of the board. He served as Board president for two years, reorganizing the school system's finances and building consensus on the board.
In response to the 1972 blaxploitation film Super Fly, Barry quickly formed a protest group named Blacks Against Narcotics and Genocide (BANG). Barry said the film was harmful to black youth, that it glorified drug abuse. BANG called for a boycott of the film.
Barry advocated for a larger budget for education He also commented, "Since it is a known fact that the majority makeup of an elected government will be black, the conferees' agreement indicates to me that some members of Congress are saying that black people cannot be fiscally responsible, and therefore, have to have a predominantly white Congress overseeing how our monies are spent."

D.C. Council (1974–1979) and shooting

Upon establishment of Washington's Home Rule in 1974, Barry was elected an at-large member of Washington's first elected city council, and while serving as a council member became chair of the District of Columbia Committee on Finance and Revenue. He was re-elected in 1976.
While serving on the D.C. city council, Barry was shot on March 9, 1977, by radical Hanafi Muslims (from a breakaway sect of the Nation of Islam) when they overran the District Building. Barry was shot near his heart

1978 mayoral election

Having credentials as an activist, legislator, and "hero" in a hostage crisis, as well as an early endorsement from the Washington Post, He was only the second person elected to the position.

Washington, D.C. Mayor (1979–1991)

First term

Barry's first four years in office were characterized by increased efficiency in city administration and government services, in particular the sanitation department. Barry also instituted his signature summer jobs program, in which summer employment was made available to every school-age resident. At the same time, Barry straightened  the city's chaotic finances and attacked the deficit by introducing spending controls and laying off ten percent of the city's workforce. DC political reporter Jonetta Rose Barras characterized the first Barry administration as "methodical, competent, and intellectually superior."
However, unemployment rose dramatically during his first administration, as did crime rates, in part because many of his layoffs were centered in the police department (1,500 terminations by 1981). Barry's campaign promise to "take the boards off" public housing – i.e., to rehabilitate dilapidated and condemned public housing units – was slow in fulfillment. The city's deficit was a constant problem as well: Barry had recalculated the Washington Administration's claim of a $41 million surplus and found that the city was actually $285 million in debt, a long-term accrual that even his annual surpluses were unable to surmount by the end of his term. In addition, graft and embezzlement among Barry appointees such as Employment Services Director Ivanhoe Donaldson began late in Barry's first term, although it would not be discovered for several years. Barry himself was touched by a number of "mini-scandals," including travels whose finances he often kept secret, and the first reports of his cocaine use at downtown nightclubs.

Second term

In 1982, Barry faced re-election against a challenge from fellow Democrat Patricia Roberts Harris, an African-American woman who had served in two cabinet positions under President Jimmy Carter, as well as from council members John L. Ray and Charlene Drew Jarvis. In the primary election held September 14, 1982, Barry won by a landslide, with over 58% of the vote,Ourcampaigns. Brooke Lee.com
Barry's second term was much more troublesome than his first. Though Washington experienced a massive real estate boom that helped alleviate the city's fiscal problems for a time, government spending skyrocketed; the administration managed to post a fifth straight budget surplus, but the next year struggled with a $110 million deficit. Much of the disparity was caused by Barry's policy of combatting unemployment by creating government jobs; The city government's payrolls swelled so greatly that by 1986 nobody in the administration knew exactly how many employees it had.
Wasteful contract spending also became a problem in the second Barry administration; in his first term Barry had made a point of insisting that any firm wishing to do business with the city have minority partners, and shepherding legislation requiring 35% of all contracts to go to minority-owned firms. The policy was modified in his second term such that the administration gave contracts to Barry's political connections and high-end campaign contributors to the tune of $856 million, but without any oversight from the city. As such, the cost of services such as heating oil for the public schools inflated 40 percent, without any guarantee that the goods and services were being provided. City councilman John A. Wilson commented that "What started out to benefit the minority community at large has meant some politically influential blacks can move out to posh suburbs."
Major scandal caught up to the mayor in his second term. Several of his associates were indicted for financial malfeasances, including former administration officials Ivanhoe Donaldson and Alphonse G. Hill. Barry also began to be plagued by rumors and press reports of womanizing and of alcohol and drug abuse; in particular, stories abounded of his cocaine use in the city's nightclubs and red-light district. In 1984, Barry's onetime lover Karen Johnson was convicted of cocaine possession and contempt of court for refusing to testify to a grand jury about Barry's drug use.
Nevertheless, Barry's second four years in office had some high points, including the District's entry into the open bond market with Wall Street's highest credit rating, and Barry's nomination speech for Jesse Jackson at the 1984 Democratic Convention.

Third term

Barry sought a third term as mayor in 1986.  By this time, his dominance of city politics was so absolute that he faced only token opposition in the Democratic primary in the form of former school board member Mattie Taylor.  Barry dispatched Taylor easily and defeated Republican city councilwoman Carol Schwartz almost as easily in the November 4 general election.com For the third time, Barry received the endorsement of The Washington Post but "with far greater reservations and misgivings" than at any time in the past.
By this time, however, Barry was openly suffering from the effects of longstanding addictions to cocaine and alcohol; he would later admit that he lost control of his drug habit soon after being sworn in for a third term. His public appearances were marked by glassy eyes and slurred speech.  His aides began scheduling all of his daily events later and later in the day as he began arriving to his office as late as lunchtime, and nodding off to sleep at his desk. His ability to function as mayor had become so impaired that even his closest associates urged him not to run again, going so far as to attempt to instead create an endowed professorship for him at the University of the District of Columbia. In the wake of Barry's inattention, the city declined badly. Notoriously, Barry was watching Super Bowl XXI in Pasadena, California when a winter blizzard struck Washington in January 1987, leaving city crews to badly mishandle the road clearing.
In 1987 crack exploded in the city, and it was broken yet again when 1990 had 474 homicides, making Washington's murder rate the highest in the nation. The Washington, D.C. government's employment and deficits grew even as city services suffered; in particular, there were frequent press reports of deaths occurring because police lacked cars to get to crime scenes, and EMS services responded slowly or went to the wrong address.

1990 arrest & drug conviction

By late 1989, federal officials had been investigating Barry on suspicion of illegal drug possession and use; that Fall, they were able to make cases against several of Barry's associates for cocaine use, including Charles Lewis, a native of the U.S. Virgin Islands who was implicated in a drug investigation involving Barry and a room at Washington's  Ramada Inn in December 1988.
On January 18, 1990, Barry was arrested with a former girlfriend, Hazel Diane "Rasheeda" Moore, in a sting operation at the Vista Hotel by the FBI and D.C. Police for crack cocaine use and possession.
Barry was charged with three felony counts of perjury, 10 counts of drug possession, and one misdemeanor count of conspiracy to possess cocaine, even though the cocaine belonged to the government informant. The criminal trial ended in August 1990 with a conviction for only one possession incident, which had occurred in November 1989, and an acquittal on another. The jury hung on the remaining charges. Six or seven jurors (of whom two were white and the rest black) believed that the evidence against Barry was overwhelming and that he had displayed "arrogance" during the trial. Against these, five black jurors were convinced that the prosecution had falsified evidence and testimony as part of a racist conspiracy against Barry, and even disputed factual findings that had not been contested in court. After scolding the jurors for not following his instructions, the judge declared a mistrial on the remaining charges.
As a result of his arrest and the ensuing trial, Barry decided in June 1990 not to seek re-election as mayor.
After his arrest and through his trial, Barry continued as mayor. He even ran as an independent for an at-large seat on the council against 74-year-old incumbent Hilda Mason. Mason, a former ally who had helped Barry recuperate after the 1977 shooting, took the challenge personally, saying, "I do feel very disappointed in my grandson Marion Barry." Mason was endorsed by a majority of the council members and by Jesse Jackson, who was running for shadow senator.
Barry was sentenced to six months in federal prison shortly before the November election, which he lost – in the first (and to date only) electoral loss of his career – despite doing well among the voters of Ward 8. His wife and son moved out of the house later that month.
In October 1991, Barry surrendered himself at a correctional facility in Petersburg, Virginia. While serving his time, Barry was accused of letting a woman perform oral sex on him in a prison waiting room,
In May 2013, after Toronto mayor Rob Ford was allegedly videotaped smoking what is reported to be crack,Thestar.Politico."Nationalpost.com

Political comeback (1992–1994)

D.C. Council

Barry was released from prison in 1992, and two months later filed papers to run for the Ward 8 city council seat in that year's election. Barry ran under the slogan "He May Not Be Perfect, But He's Perfect for D.C." He defeated the four-term incumbent, Wilhelmina Rolark, in the Democratic primary, winning 70 percent of the vote, saying he was "not interested in being mayor", and went on to win the general election easily.

1994 mayoral election

Despite his earlier statements to the contrary, observers of Barry's council victory expressed beliefs that he was laying ground for a mayoral run in 1994. Despite much opposition, including an abortive effort to recall his 1992 council election,[ref]
</ref> Barry won a three-way Democratic primary contest for mayor with 48% of the vote on September 13, pushing Kelly into last place.<ref></ref> The victory, coming after Barry's videotaped crack use and conviction, shocked the nation, carrying front page headlines in newspapers such as the ''Los Angeles Times'' and ''Boston Globe''.<ref name=barras />
Though facing a credible challenge from Republican councilmember Carol Schwartz, who received the endorsement of the Washington Post and captured 42% of the vote, Barry was victorious in the general election with 56%.com  To date, this is the only time since the restoration of home rule that a Democratic candidate for mayor has dropped below the 60 percent mark.
Another oft-repeated Barry quote came in the aftermath of his electoral victory, in which he counseled those voters who opposed his mayoral campaign to "get over it."

D.C. Mayor fourth term (1995–1999)

Barry was sworn into office on January 2, 1995, and was almost immediately confronted with a financial crisis.
The next two years were dominated by budgetary and policy battles between Barry and the Control Board — along with Chief Financial Officer Anthony A. Williams — for power over the District of Columbia's operation. The conflict was ultimately settled when in 1997 the Clinton Administration and Senator Lauch Faircloth agreed on legislation that rescued the city from its financial crisis but stripped Barry of all authority (including hiring and firing) over nine District agencies, making them directly answerable to the Control Board. Barry was left with control of only the Department of Parks and Recreation, the public libraries, and the Board of Tourism, as well as the ceremonial trappings of his office — a condition he characterized "a rape of democracy."
Barry declined to run for a fifth term in office in June 1998, stating his belief that Congress would not restore full home rule while he was mayor. He was succeeded by city CFO Anthony A. Williams.

D.C. Council (2002–present)

After leaving office, Barry performed consulting work for an investment banking firm. On March 6, 2002, Barry declared his intention to challenge at-large council member Phil Mendelson in the Democratic primary. Within a month, he decided against running, after an incident in which U.S. Park Police found traces of marijuana and cocaine in his car.
On June 12, 2004, Barry announced that he was running in the Democratic primary for the Ward 8 council seat, a position he held before becoming mayor.  Barry received 58% of the vote, defeating the incumbent council member, Sandy Allen, on September 14, 2004.
During the 2006 mayoral election, Barry endorsed Adrian Fenty despite Linda Cropp hiring many members of Barry's former political machine. Barry has publicly clashed with Fenty over DC United's proposed soccer stadium in Barry's Ward 8. Barry is the stadium's most outspoken supporter on the council, whereas Fenty has attempted to distance himself from his initial support for the project.
In July 2007, Marion Barry was chosen as one of fifty wax statues to debut in the Washington D.C. franchise of Madame Tussauds Wax Museum.  Barry was chosen by a majority of Washington residents and tourists from Tussauds' "Top 10 Wish List," in a contest that pitted him against Cal Ripken, Al Gore, Denzel Washington, Carl Bernstein, Halle Berry, Martin Sheen, Marilyn Monroe, Nancy Reagan and Oprah Winfrey.
Barry ran for re-election in 2008 and easily held off all five challengers in the Democratic primary: Ahmad Braxton-Jones, Howard Brown, Chanda McMahan, Sandra Seegars and Charles Wilson. No Republican or Statehood Green candidates filed to run in the Ward 8 council race.

Vote on gay marriage

In May 2009, Barry voted against a bill committing Washington, D.C. to recognize same-sex marriages performed elsewhere. During his 2008 reelection campaign, Barry had told members of the Gertrude Stein Democratic Club, the city's largest LGBT political group, "I don't think you should make the bill a litmus test. But if a bill like that were to come up, I would vote for it."

Legal problems

=Failures to file tax returns and pay taxes=

On October 28, 2005, Barry pleaded guilty to the misdemeanor charges stemming from an IRS investigation. The mandatory drug testing for the hearing showed Barry as being positive for cocaine and marijuana. On March 9, 2006, he was sentenced to three years probation for misdemeanor charges of failing to pay federal and local taxes, and underwent drug counseling.
In 2007, federal prosecutors sought to have his probation revoked for failure to file his 2005 tax return. U.S. Magistrate Judge Deborah Robinson refused, saying that prosecutors had not proved that the failure was willful, even if Barry was aware he had missed the deadline. According to Judge Robinson, sentencing Barry to jail without proving that he willfully failed to file his taxes would contradict precedent set by the United States Supreme Court.
On February 9, 2009, prosecutors filed a motion in federal court to revoke Barry's probation for not filing his 2007 tax return, which violated his probation.
On September 9, 2011, the Internal Revenue Service filed a notice of federal tax lien against Barry because of $3,200 of unpaid federal income taxes for 2010.

=Alleged traffic violations=

On September 10, 2006, Barry was stopped by Secret Service Uniformed Division police officers after stopping at a green light and running a red light. A judge found him not guilty of the charges.
On December 16, 2006, the Park Police pulled over Barry for driving too slowly, which Barry later said was because he was trying to figure out where to enter an elementary school's parking lot for a nonprofit foundation's event.

=Conflict of Interest: Personal benefit from contract to girlfriend=

On July 4, 2009, Barry was taken into custody by the Park Police after political consultant Donna Watts-Brighthaupt, his ex-girlfriend, claimed he was stalking her.
An investigative report by Special Counsel said that Barry had personally benefited from a contract that he had awarded to his then-girlfriend Donna Watts-Brighthaupt.
Barry responded to the Special Counsel report by claiming he had violated no written rules or procedures on such contracts Barry apologized for his "very, very poor judgment."
In response to the Special Counsel report, several council members said they would like to hear a response from Barry before considering a censure. On March 2, 2010, the Council of the District of Columbia voted 12–0 in favor of stripping Barry of all committee assignments, ending his chair of the Committee on Housing and Workforce Development, and removing him from the Committee on Finance and Revenue.

Asian American racist remarks controversy

At a party celebrating his primary victory for his D.C. council seat on April 3, 2012, Barry said, "We've got to do something about these Asians coming in, opening up businesses, those dirty shops. They ought to go, I'll just say that right now, you know. But we need African-American businesspeople to be able to take their places, too."
Several other council members, Mayor Vincent Gray, and Delegate Eleanor Holmes Norton criticized Barry's comments.
Barry apologized for his comments, saying in a written statement, "It is to these less than stellar Asian-American businessmen in Ward 8 that my remarks were directed, not the whole of Asian businessmen in Ward 8 or the Asian-American population."
While apologizing to Asian Americans, Barry slurred the Poles by calling them Polacks.

Personal life

Marion Barry married Effi Slaughter, his third wife, just after announcing his candidacy for mayor in 1978.  The couple had one son, Christopher Barry. The Barrys divorced in 1993, but she returned to Washington and supported him in his successful bid for a city council seat in 2004.  Effi died on September 6, 2007, after an 18-month battle with acute myeloid leukemia.
Barry's mother, Mattie Cummings, died at age 92 in Memphis on November 8, 2009.

Electoral history







|title=Marion Barry: Some Notes
|last=Smith
|first=Sam
|work=The Progressive Review
|year=1998
|url=
|accessdate=2008-08-02
}}
|title=Visible Man: Can Marion Barry survive salvation?
|last=Dolan
|first=Michael
|work=Washington City Paper
|date=1995-01-06
|url=
|accessdate=2008-08-02
}}




