[[Shoot 'em up]]

CATEGORIES: Shoot 'em ups, Video game genres, Video game terminology

Shoot 'em up (also known as shmup or STG) is a subgenre of the shooter genre of video games.
In a shoot 'em up, the player character engages in a lone assault, often in a spacecraft or aircraft, shooting large numbers of enemies while dodging their attacks. There is no consensus as to which design elements compose a shoot 'em up. restrict the definition to games featuring spacecraft and certain types of character movement; others allow a broader definition including characters on foot and a variety of perspectives. Shoot 'em ups call for fast reactions and for the player to memorise levels and enemy attack patterns. "Bullet hell" games feature overwhelming numbers of enemy projectiles.
The genre's origins can be traced back to Spacewar!, one of the very earliest computer games, developed in 1961 and eventually released in amusement arcades in the early 1970s. However, Tomohiro Nishikado, creator of Space Invaders, is generally credited with inventing the genre. Space Invaders premiered in Japanese arcades in 1978. Shoot 'em ups were popular throughout the 1980s and early 1990s. In the mid-1990s, shoot 'em ups became a niche genre based on design conventions established in the 1980s, and increasingly catered to specialist enthusiasts, particularly in Japan.

Definition

A "shoot 'em up", also known as a "shmup"Buchanan, Levi, Top 10 Classic Shoot 'Em Ups, IGN, April 8, 2008, May 26, 2009 or "STG",Davies, Jonti. The Shooting Never Stops. GameSpy. 30 July 2008. Final Form On Jamestown's Origins, Mechanics. Game Set Watch. 5 April 2011. is a game in which the protagonist combats a large number of enemies by shooting at them while dodging their fire. The controlling player must rely primarily on reaction times to succeed. 70 Beyond this, critics differ on exactly which design elements constitute a shoot 'em up. Some restrict the genre to games featuring some kind of craft, using fixed or scrolling movement. Others widen the scope to include games featuring such protagonists as robots or humans on foot, as well as including games featuring "on-rails" (or "into the screen") and "run and gun" movement. Mark Wolf restricts the definition to games featuring multiple antagonists ("'em" being short for "them"), calling games featuring one-on-one shooting "combat games". Formerly, critics described any game where the primary design element was shooting as a "shoot 'em up", but later shoot 'em ups became a specific, inward-looking genre based on design conventions established in those shooting games of the 1980s.

Design

Common elements

Shoot 'em ups are a subgenre of shooter game, in turn a type of action game. These games are usually viewed from a top-down or side-view perspective, and players must use ranged weapons to take action at a distance. The player's avatar is typically a vehicle under constant attack. Thus, the player's goal is to shoot as quickly as possible anything that moves or threatens him. In some games, the player's character can withstand some damage; in others, a single hit will result in his destruction. The main skills required in shoot 'em ups are fast reactions and memorising enemy attack patterns. Some games feature overwhelming numbers of enemy projectiles and the player has to memorise their patterns to survive. 66 These games belong to one of the fastest-paced video game genres.
Large numbers of enemy characters are typically featured. These enemies may behave in a certain way dependent on their type, or attack in formations that the player can learn to predict. The basic gameplay tends to be straightforward and many games offset this with boss battles and a variety of weapons.

Types

Shoot 'em ups are categorized by design elements, particularly viewpoint and movement:
"Fixed shooters" (such as Space Invaders) consist of levels that each fit within a single screen. The protagonist's movement is fixed to a single axis of motion, and enemies attack in a single direction (such as descending from the top of the screen).Game Genres: Shmups, Professor Jim Whitehead, January 29, 2007, Accessed June 17, 2008
"Rail shooters" limit the player to moving around the screen while the game follows a specific route;Goldstein, Hilary, Panzer Dragoon Orta, IGN, January 10, 2003, July 17, 2008 these games often feature an "into the screen" viewpoint, with which the action is seen from behind the player character, and moves "into the screen", while the player retains control over dodging.Kalata, Kurt, Space Harrier, Hardcore Gaming 101, Accessed February 02, 2010 The term "rail shooter" is also often applied to light gun shooters that use "on-rails" movement,
"Tube shooters" feature craft flying through an abstract tube.Reed, Kristan, Gyruss, EuroGamer, April 19, 2007, Accessed February 17, 2009
"Scrolling shooters" include vertical or horizontal scrolling games. In a vertically scrolling shoot 'em up (or "vertical scroller"), the action is viewed from above and scrolls up (or very occasionally down) the screen. This has the advantage of allowing complex patterns of enemies, as well as allowing even simple graphics to function convincingly. Vertical scrollers are best suited for arcade machines with tall screens; screens used with home computers or consoles tend to be wider than they are tall, thus are less suited to vertical scrolling. The other main type of scrolling shooter is a "horizontal shooter" or "side-scrolling shooter", in which the action is viewed side-on and scrolls horizontally. 38 A small number of scrolling shooters, such as Sega's Zaxxon, feature an isometric point of view. Others dispense with scrolling altogether, instead using a flip-screen device: when a player reaches the edge of the screen, a whole new scene appears at once.
Some shooters may feature multidirectional movement ("multidirectional shooter"), generally with a static screen, where the protagonist may rotate and move in any direction.
 is a shoot 'em up in which the entire screen is often almost completely filled with enemy bullets.  This type is also known as "curtain fire",Sheffield, Brandon, Q&A: Capcom's Kujawa On Revisiting Classics, Bullet Hell, April 22, 2008, Accessed March 2, 2009 "manic shooters" or "maniac shooters". 77 This style of game originated in the mid-1990s, and is an offshoot of scrolling shooters.
"Cute 'em ups" feature brightly coloured graphics depicting surreal settings and enemies. Newer, particularly Japanese, cute 'em ups may employ overtly sexual characters and innuendo. 82
"Run and gun" (or "run 'n' gun") describes a shoot 'em up in which the protagonist fights on foot, perhaps with the ability to jump. Run and gun games may use side scrolling, vertical scrolling or isometric viewpoints and may feature multidirectional movement. 19

History

Origins and rise

The genre's exact origins are a matter of some confusion. 33 Video game journalist Brian Ashcraft pinpoints Spacewar! (one of the very earliest computer games) as the first shoot 'em up,Ashcraft, p. 72 but the later Space Invaders is more frequently cited as the "first" or "original" in the genre. The game featured combat between two spacecraft.Surette, Tim, Gaming pioneer passes away, GameSpot, June 7, 2006, Accessed June 16, 2008
However, it was not until 1978's seminal Space Invaders, created by Nishikado at Japan's Taito Corporation, that the shooter genre became prolific. and has influenced most shooting games released since then.

Golden age and refinement

In 1979, Namco's Galaxian - "the granddaddy of all top-down shooters" according to IGN - was released.Galaxian Mini, IGN, April 21, 2003, Accessed June 17, 2008 Its use of colour graphics and individualised antagonists were considered "strong evolutionary concepts" among space ship games. That same year saw the release of SNK's debut shoot 'em up Ozma Wars, notable for being the first action game to feature a supply of energy, resembling a life bar, a mechanic that has now become common in the majority of modern action games.The History of SNK, GameSpot, Accessed February 16, 2009
In 1981, Defender established scrolling in shoot 'em ups, offering horizontally extended levels. Unlike most later games in the genre, the player could move in either direction. The game's use of scrolling helped remove design limitations associated with the screen, Konami's Scramble, released in 1981, is a side-scrolling shooter with forced scrolling. It was the first scrolling shooter to offer multiple, distinct levels. Atari's Tempest, released in 1981, is one of the earliest tube shooters and an early attempt to incorporate a 3D perspective into shooter games.Terminator 3: The Redemption, Yahoo Games! Accessed March 2, 2009Leo, Jonathan, "Rez HD", GameAxis Unwired, March 2008, p. 47
Vertical scrolling shooters emerged around the same time. Namco's Xevious, released in 1982, is frequently cited as the first vertical shooter and, although it was in fact preceded by several other games featuring vertical scrolling, it was the most influential. Xevious is also the first to convincingly portray realistic landscapes as opposed to purely science fiction settings. 75 While Asteroids (1979) allowed the player to rotate the game's spacecraft,Mielke, James, Asteroids Review, GameSpot, November 19, 1998, Accessed February 17, 2009 1982's highly acclaimed Robotron: 2084 was most influential on subsequent multi-directional shooters.Gerstmann, Jeff, Robotron: 2084 Review, GameSpot, December 20, 2005, Accessed February 17, 2009Staff, Top 10 Tuesday: Game Designers, IGN, Accessed February 17, 2009
Sega's Space Harrier, a rail shooter released in 1985, broke new ground graphically and its wide variety of settings across multiple levels gave players more to aim for than high scores. The game also introduced the need for the player to memorise levels in order to achieve any measure of success. 76 Gradius, with its iconic protagonist, defined the side-scrolling shoot 'em up and spawned a series spanning several sequels. The game received acclaim for its surreal graphics and setting and the protagonist, Opa-Opa, was for a time considered Sega's mascot.Kalata, Kurt, Fantasy Zone, Harcore Gaming 101, Accessed February 02, 2010 R-Type, an acclaimed side-scrolling shoot 'em up, was released in 1987 by Irem, employing slower paced scrolling than usual, with difficult levels calling for methodical strategies.Navarro, ALex, Raiden Review, GameSpot, November 17, 2004, Accessed February 13, 2009Buchanan, Levi, Raiden, IGN, February 17, 2004, Accessed February 13, 2009
Shoot 'em ups such as SNK's Ikari Warriors (1986) featuring characters on foot, rather than spacecraft, became popular in the mid-1980s in the wake of action movies such as  Rambo: First Blood Part II. Taito's Front Line (1982) established the upwards-scrolling formula later popularized by Commando, in 1985. Commando also drew comparisons to RamboSegre, Nicole, "Commando," Sinclair User, February 1986 (issue 47) and indeed contemporary critics considered military themes and protagonists similar to Rambo or Schwarzenegger prerequisites for a shoot 'em up, as opposed to an action-adventure game. In 1986, Arsys Software released WiBArm, a shooter that switched between a 2D side-scrolling view in outdoor areas to a fully 3D polygonal third-person perspective inside buildings, while bosses were fought in an arena-style 2D battle, with the game featuring a variety of weapons and equipment. Also in 1987, Konami created Contra as an coin-op arcade game that was particularly acclaimed for its multi-directional aiming and two player cooperative gameplay. However, by the early 1990s and the popularity of 16-bit consoles, the scrolling shooter genre was overcrowded, with developers struggling to make their games stand out (one exception being the inventive Gunstar Heroes, by Treasure).IGN's Top 100 Games, IGN, July 25, 2005, Accessed February 19, 2009

Bullet hell and niche appeal

A new type of shoot 'em up emerged in the early 1990s: variously termed "bullet hell", "manic shooters", "maniac shooters" and , these games required the player to dodge overwhelming numbers of enemy projectiles and called for still more consistent reactions from players. Bullet hell games arose from the need for 2D shoot 'em up developers to compete with the emerging popularity of 3D games: huge numbers of missiles on screen were intended to impress players. Toaplan's Batsugun (1993) provided the prototypical template for this new breed, with Cave (formed by former employees of Toaplan, including Batsugun's main creator Tsuneki Ikeda, after the latter company collapsed) inventing the type proper with 1995's DonPachi. 78-80 Manic shooter games marked another point where the shoot 'em up genre began to cater to more dedicated players. Games such as Gradius had been more difficult than Space Invaders or Xevious, but bullet hell games were yet more inward-looking and aimed at dedicated fans of the genre looking for greater challenges. 77-78 While shooter games featuring protagonists on foot largely moved to 3D-based genres, popular, long-running series such as Contra and Metal Slug continued to receive new sequels.Maragos, Nich, Space Harrier (PS2), 1UP, January 1, 2000, Accessed February 17, 2009Brudwig, Erik, Rez HD is Coming, IGN, January 22, 2008, Accessed February 17, 2009
Treasure's shoot 'em up, Radiant Silvergun (1998), introduced an element of narrative to the genre. It was lavished with critical acclaim for its refined design, though it was not released outside of Japan and remains a much sought after collectors' item. Both Radiant Silvergun and Ikaruga were later released on Xbox Live Arcade. The Touhou Project series spans fifteen years and nineteen games as of 2011 and was listed in the Guinness World Records in October 2010 for being the "most prolific fan-made shooter series".

Notes




