[[Wiley College]]

CATEGORIES: Council of Independent Colleges, Educational institutions established in 1873, Education in Harrison County, Texas, Historically black universities and colleges in the United States, National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities members, Red River Athletic Conference, Universities and colleges accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools, Universities and colleges in Texas, Wiley College, Buildings and structures in Harrison County, Texas

Wiley College is a four-year, private, historically black, liberal arts college located on the west side of Marshall, in the U.S. state of Texas. Founded in 1873 by the Methodist Episcopal Church's Bishop Isaac Wiley and certified in 1882 by the Freedman's Aid Society, it is notable as one of the oldest predominantly black colleges west of the Mississippi River.blackpast.wileyc.asp
In 2005–2006, on-campus enrollment approached 450, while an off-campus program in Shreveport, Louisiana, for students with some prior college credits who seek to finish a degree, enrolled about 250. As of the fall of 2006, total enrollment was about 750. By fall of 2013, total enrollment was approximately 1400. Wiley is an open admissions college and about 96 percent of students receive some financial aid.wiley.edu
The Wiley staff learned that over a 15-year period, Melvin B. Tolson's debate teams lost only one of 75 debates. The Wiley Forensic Society competed against historically black colleges, but earned national attention with its debates against the University of Southern California and Harvard University.

U.S. Civil Rights movement

200px|left|thumb|The Fred Thomas Long Student Union building at Wiley CollegeWiley, along with Bishop College, was instrumental in the Civil Rights Movement in Texas. Wiley and Bishop students launched the first sit-ins in Texas in the rotunda of the Old Harrison County Courthouse to protest segregation in public facilities.
James L. Farmer, Jr., son of James L. Farmer, Sr., graduated from Wiley and became one of the "Big Four" of the Civil Rights Movement. Together with Roy Wilkins,  Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., and Whitney M. Young Jr.,  James L. Farmer, Jr. helped organize the first sit-ins and Freedom Rides in the United States.core-online.ht"James L. Farmer, Jr."

Debate Team

Tony Scherman's article about the Wiley College debate team for the 1997 Spring issue of American Legacy sparked a renewed interest in its history.com – American Legacy Magazine's Story: The Great Debaters, Turns from Pages to the Big Screen Directed By and Starring Denzel Washington and Produced By Oprah Winfrey The success of the 1935 Wiley College debate team, coached by professor and poet Melvin Tolson, was the subject of a 2005 AMS Pictures documentary, The Great Debaters, The Real Great Debaters of Wiley College, which received heavy play around Texas, followed by 2007 drama movie, The Great Debaters, directed by and starring Denzel Washington. In 1935, the Wiley College debate team defeated the reigning national debate champion, the University of Southern California (depicted as Harvard University in The Great Debaters).  In 2007, Denzel Washington announced a donation of US$1 million to Wiley so the team could be re-established.wileyc.eduWiley College – A Place Where Every Student Can Succeed, Dallas News
The Wiley College Debate Team, now also known as the Melvin B. Tolson/Denzel Washington Forensics Society of Wiley College, is under the direction of Christopher Medina. The purpose of tThe Wiley College Debate Team is not only to compete at a national and regional level, but also to instill a strong work ethic, a drive for academic excellence, and a spirit of ethical competition in its student leaders.Forensic Society Debaters of Wiley College
In the 2009–2010 seasonm the Wiley Debate Team continued to win a plethora of awards and achievements at many of the tournaments for the Texas and Louisiana regions. One of the most historical tournament for the team was the Western Round-Up Swing at McNeese State University on November 20–22, 2009. This was a history-making tournament, as the two-year-old Wiley College Forensic Team won their first overall tournament trophy.wileyc.pdf
The team was nationally ranked fourth in debate at the 2010 Pi Kappa Delta National Tournament. Seventy-five years ago, the team was denied participation at this tournament because it was reserved for white students. Captain Sean Allen and Member Terrance Muse received first place in Duo Interpretation. Captain Caress Russell received first place in Poetry Interpretation. Novice Members Tanreka Smith & Jendayi Douglas received third place in Novice Parliamentary Debate. Many other rewards of Excellence were rewarded to the team for Student Congress, Extemporaneous Speaking, and other various categories.pikappadelta.html
Former three-year team captain Sean Allen graduated from Wiley in 2013. He is working as a full time Coach, giving back to his team.
The team provides the public with honors and reward updates as well as current schedule on their website (

Athletics

Wiley College teams, nicknamed athletically as the Wildcats, are part of the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA), primarily competing in the Red River Athletic Conference (RRAC). Men's sports include baseball, basketball, cross country, soccer and track & field; while women's sports include basketball, cross country, soccer, track & field and volleyball.

Notable faculty



Notable alumni















