[[Kawaii]]

CATEGORIES: Concepts in aesthetics, Japanese aesthetics, Japanese culture, Japanese popular culture, Japanese fashion, Japanese words and phrases

 is the quality of cuteness in the context of Japanese culture."kawaii", Oxford Dictionaries Online.かわいい - kawaii - 可愛い - cute Japanesefile. Accessed May 7, 2011 from  T. Beautiful is an Adjective. Accessed May 7, 2011, from 
It has become a prominent aspect of Japanese popular culture, entertainment, clothing, food, toys, personal appearance, behavior, and mannerisms. The noun is , literally,  "lovability", "cuteness" or "adorableness".
The root word is "kawai", formed from the kanji "ka" (可), meaning "acceptable", and "ai" (愛), meaning "love".  The kanji spelling is ateji,

Aesthetics



Gender performance

Japanese women who feign kawaii behaviors (e.g., high-pitched voice, squealing giggles.

Physical attractiveness

In Japan, cuteness is expected of men and women. There is a trend of men shaving their legs to mimic the neotenic look. Japanese women often try to act cute to attract men. A study by Kanebo, a cosmetic company, found that Japanese women in their 20s and 30s favored the "cute look" with a "childish round face". Women also employ a look of innocence in order to further play out this idea of cuteness. Having large eyes is one aspect that exemplifies innocence; therefore many Japanese women attempt to alter the size of their eyes. To create this illusion, women may wear large contacts, false eyelashes, drastic eye makeup, and even have an East Asian blepharoplasty, commonly known as double eyelid surgery.

Idols



Cute fashion

=Lolita=

Lolita fashion is a very well-known and recognizable style in Japan. Based on Victorian fashion and the Rococo period, girls mix in their own elements along with gothic style to achieve the porcelain-doll look.

=Sweet Lolita=

Sweet Lolita is a subset of Lolita fashion that includes even more ribbons, bows, and lace, and is often fabricated out of pastels and other light colors. Another subset of Lolita fashion related to "sweet Lolita" is Fairy Kei. Head-dresses such as giant bows or bonnets are also very common, while lighter make-up is also used to achieve a more natural look. Curled hair extensions, sometimes accompanied by eyelash extensions, are also popular in helping with the baby doll look. Themes such as fruits and sweets are often used as patterns on the fabrics used for dresses. Purses often go with the themes and are shaped as hearts, strawberries, or stuffed animals. Baby, the Stars Shine Bright is one of the more popular clothing stores for this style and often carries themes. Mannerisms are also important to many Sweet Lolitas. Sweet Lolita is not only a fashion, but also a lifestyle.

Kawaii men

Although kawaii is typically a female-dominated fashion, there are men who decide to partake in this trend. Some men decide to transform themselves into women, more specifically kawaii women. They are able to transform themselves by wearing wigs, false eyelashes, applying makeup, and wearing kawaii female clothing. In this way both Japanese men and women conform to the expectations of Kawaii in some way or another.

Products

This concept of "kawaii" has had an influence on a variety of products, including candy, such as Hi-Chew, Koala's March and Hello Panda. Cuteness can be added to products by adding cute features, such as hearts, flowers, stars and rainbows.

=Cute characters=

Cute elements can be found almost everywhere in Japan, from big business to corner markets and national government, ward, and town offices. Many companies, large and small, use cute mascots to present their wares and services to the public. For example:
Cute can be also used to describe a specific fashion senseTime Asia: "Arts: Kwest For Kawaii". Retrieved on 2006-04-19 from  New Yorker "FACT: SHOPPING REBELLION: What the kids want". Retrieved on 2006-04-19 from  of an individual, and generally includes clothing that appears to be made for young children, apart from the size, or clothing that accentuates the cuteness of the individual wearing the clothing. Ruffles and pastel colors are commonly (but not always) featured, and accessories often include toys or bags featuring anime characters.
These cute cartoon characters are popular in Japan: 

=Non-kawaii imports=

There have been occasions in which popular Western products failed to meet the expectations of kawaii, and thus did not do well in the Japanese market. Cabbage Patch Kids dolls did not sell well in Japan, because the Japanese considered their facial features to be "ugly" and "grotesque" compared to the flatter and almost featureless face of Hello Kitty. Also, the doll Barbie, portraying an adult woman, did not become successful in Japan compared to the Lika-chan, a doll who was modeled after an 11-year-old girl.

=Kawaii industry=

Kawaii has gradually gone from a small subculture in Japan to an important part of Japanese modern culture as a whole. There is an overwhelming amount of modern items featuring kawaii themes, not only in Japan, but worldwide.(Research Paper) Kawaii: Culture of Cuteness And characters associated with kawaii have an astounding popularity these days. We can see the "global cute" by the billion-dollar sellers like Pokémon and Hello Kitty. "Cute Inc." Wired Dec. 1999. 01 May 2005 
Japan has become a powerhouse in the kawaii industry and images of Doraemon, Hello Kitty, Pikachu, and Sailor Moon are popular in mobile phone accessories. However, Professor Tian Shenliang says that Japan's future is dependent on how much of an impact kawaii brings to humanity.卡哇伊熱潮 扭轉日本文化
The Japanese Foreign Ministry has also recognized the power of cute merchandise and have sent three 18-year-old girls overseas in the hopes of spreading Japanese culture around the world. The girls are dressed in uniforms and maid costumes that are commonplace in Japan.日本的"卡哇伊文化"_中国台湾网
Kawaii manga and magazines have brought tremendous profit to Japanese press industry."萌文化"在日本大行其道_旅游_环球网 Moreover, the worldwide revenue from the computer game and its merchandising peripherals are closing in on $5 billion, according to a Nintendo press release titled "It's a Pokémon Planet".

History

Original definition

The original definition of kawaii came from Lady Murasaki's The Tale of Genji where it referred to pitiable qualities. During the Shogunate period under the ideology of neo-Confucianism, women came to be included under the term kawaii as the perception of women being animalistic was replaced with the conception of women as docile.

Cute handwriting

The rise of cuteness in Japanese culture emerged in the 1970s as part of a new style of writing. 1995. "Cuties in Japan"  Many teenage girls began to write laterally using mechanical pencils. These pencils produced very fine lines, as opposed to traditional Japanese writing that varied in thickness and was vertical. Also, the girls would write in big, round characters and they added little pictures to their writing, such as hearts, stars, smiley faces, and letters of the Latin alphabet.
These pictures would be inserted randomly and made the writing very hard to read. As a result, this writing style caused a lot of controversy and was banned in many schools. During the 1980s, however, this new "cute" writing was adopted by magazines and comics and was put onto packaging and advertising.
From 1984 to 1986, , meaning "fake-child writing".(1995). Women, media, and consumption in Japan. Hawai'i Press, USA. Although it was commonly thought that the writing style was something that teenagers had picked up from comics, he found that teenagers had come up with the style themselves, as part of an underground movement.

Cute merchandise

, author of Cool Japan, claims cute fashion in Japan can be traced back to the Edo Period with the popularity of netsuke.Com: "Japan smitten by love of cute" 
Because of this growing trend, companies such as Sanrio came out with merchandise like Hello Kitty. Hello Kitty was an immediate success and the obsession with cute continued to progress in other areas as well. The 1980s also saw the rise of cute idols, such as Seiko Matsuda, who is largely credited with popularizing the trend. Women began to emulate Seiko Matsuda and her cute fashion style and mannerisms, which emphasized the helplessness and innocence of young girls.jref.php?t=16924 URL accessed February 11, 2009. The market for cute merchandise in Japan used to be driven by Japanese girls between 15 and 18 years old.time.html
No longer limited to teenagers, however, the spread of making things as cute as possible, even common household items, is currently embraced by people of all ages.

Influence on other cultures

Kawaii products are seemingly gaining more popularity beyond the borders of Japan into other Asian markets and it's seemingly becoming more popular in the US especially among the young anime and manga fans as well as among those who are influenced by the Japanese culture. Cute merchandise and products are especially popular in some other parts of East Asia, such as China, Hong Kong, South Korea, Taiwan and South-East Asian countries like Vietnam, Philippines, Thailand and Singapore. From Pokemon To Puffy, Japanese Stuff Is Oh, So 'Q!' Stock Up On Those Hello Kitty Dumplings.
Sebastian Masuda, owner of 6%DOKIDOKI and a global advocate for kawaii influence, takes the quality from Harajuku to the western markets in his stores and artwork. The underlying belief of this Japanese designer is that "kawaii" actually saves the world.(Kataoka, 2010) The infusion of kawaii into other world markets and cultures is achieved by introducing kawaii via modern art, audio visual and written media and the fashion trends of Japanese youth, especially in high-school girls. (n.d). "Dissemination of Japanese Young Fashion and Culture to the World-Enjoyable Japanese Cute (Kawaii) Fashions Spreading to the World and its Meaning". Sen-I Gakkaishi, 66(7), pp. 223–226. Retrieved from: 
Japanese kawaii seemingly operates as a center of global popularity due to its association with making cultural productions and consumer products "cute". This mindset pursues a global marketBrown, J. (2011). Re-framing "Kawaii": Interrogating Global Anxieties Surrounding the Aesthetic of 'Cute' in Japanese Art and Consumer Products. International Journal Of The Image, 1(2), 1. Retrieved from: 
The dissemination of Japanese youth fashion and "kawaii culture" is usually associated with the western society and trends set by western designers borrowed or taken from Japan With the emergence of China, South Korea, and even Singapore as economic centers in Asia, the Kawaii merchandise and product popularity has shifted back to the east. In these Asian markets, the kawaii concept takes on various forms and different types of presentation depending on the target audience.
Taiwan culture, in particular government, has embraced and elevated kawaii to a new level of social consciousness. The introduction of the A-Bian doll was seen as the development of a symbol to advance democracy and assist in constructing a collective imagination and national identity for Taiwanese. The A-Bian dolls are kawaii likeness of sports figure, famous individuals, and now political figures that use kawaii images as a means of self-promotion and potential votes.1A-Bian Family.  The creation of the A-Bian doll has allowed Taiwanese President Chen staffers to create a new culture where the "kawaii" image of a politician can be used to mobilize supports, and gain election votes. C. (2011, September). "Kawaii in Taiwan politics". International Journal of Asia-Pacific Studies, 7(3). 1–16. Retrieved from here
Japanese popular "kawaii culture" has had an effect on Singaporean youth. The emergence of Japanese culture can be traced back to the mid-1980s when Japan became one of the economic powers in the world. Kawaii has developed from a few kid television shows to an internet sensation.2All things Kawaii.  Japanese media is used so abundantly in Singapore that youths are more likely to imitate the fashion of their Japanese idols, learn the Japanese language, and continue purchasing Japanese oriented merchandise., Teh, L.L. (2004). "The impact of japanese popular culture on the Singaporean youth". Keio Communication Review, 24. 17–32. Retrieved from: 
In American cultures the symbol of kawaii is shown by placing the "peace" hand sign over the face in social environments and pictures. Most of the time accompanied with the hashtag "kawaii" on social sites such as Facebook and Instagram.
The Asian countries of China, Hong Kong, South Korea, and Thailand either produce kawaii items for international consumption or have websites that cater for kawaii as part of the youth culture in their country. Kawaii has taken on a life of its own, spawning the formation of kawaii websites, kawaii home pages and finally kawaii social networking pages.3World of Kawaii.  While Japan is the origin and Mecca of all things being kawaii, artists and businesses around the world are imitating the kawaii theme. (2010, October). I love kawaii. Ibuki Magazine. 1–2. Retrieved from: 
Kawaii has truly become "greater" than itself. The interconnectedness of today's world via the internet has taken kawaii to new heights of exposure and acceptance, producing a kawaii "movement". The popularity of kawaii and kawaii products have become a part of the "world's culture".
The Kawaii concept has become something of a global phenomenon. The aesthetic cuteness of Japan is very appealing to people globally. The wide popularity of Japanese kawaii is often credited with it being "culturally odorless." The elimination of exoticism and national branding has helped kawaii to reach numerous target audiences and to span every culture, class, and gender group. (2011, October). Triumph of kawaii. William & Mary ideation. Retrieved from:  The palatable characteristics of kawaii have made it a global hit, resulting in Japan's global image shifting from being known for austere rock gardens to being known for "cute-worship".



Further reading




