[[Thermodynamic potential]]

CATEGORIES: Thermodynamics, Potentials, Fundamental theorems, Thermodynamic equations

A thermodynamic potential is a scalar quantity used to represent the thermodynamic state of a system. The concept of thermodynamic potentials was introduced by Pierre Duhem in 1886. Josiah Willard Gibbs in his papers used the term fundamental functions. One main thermodynamic potential that has a physical interpretation is the internal energy . In thermodynamics, certain forces, such as gravity, are typically disregarded when formulating expressions for potentials. For example, while all the working fluid in a steam engine may have higher energy due to gravity while sitting on top of Mount Everest than it would at the bottom of the Mariana Trench, the gravitational potential energy term in the formula for the internal energy would usually be ignored because changes in gravitational potential within the engine during operation would be negligible.

Description and interpretation

Five common thermodynamic potentials are:Alberty (2001) p. 1353
where  are also included as natural variables, although they are sometimes ignored.
These five common potentials are all energy potentials, but there are also entropy potentials. The thermodynamic square can be used as a tool to recall and derive some of the potentials.
Just as in mechanics, where potential energy is defined as capacity to do work, similarly different potentials have different meanings. Internal energy ( is the sum of non-mechanical work done on the system and the heat given to it.
Thermodynamic potentials are very useful when calculating the equilibrium results of a chemical reaction, or when measuring the properties of materials in a chemical reaction. The chemical reactions usually take place under some simple constraints such as constant pressure and temperature, or constant entropy and volume, and when this is true, there is a corresponding thermodynamic potential that comes into play. Just as in mechanics, the system will tend towards lower values of potential and at equilibrium, under these constraints, the potential will take on an unchanging minimum value. The thermodynamic potentials can also be used to estimate the total amount of energy available from a thermodynamic system under the appropriate constraint.
In particular: (see principle of minimum energy for a derivation)Callen (1985) p. 153

Natural variables

The variables that are held constant in this process are termed the natural variables of that potential. 1352 The natural variables are important not only for the above mentioned reason, but also because if a thermodynamic potential can be determined as a function of its natural variables, all of the thermodynamic properties of the system can be found by taking partial derivatives of that potential with respect to its natural variables and this is true for no other combination of variables. On the converse, if a thermodynamic potential is not given as a function of its natural variables, it will not, in general, yield all of the thermodynamic properties of the system.
Notice that the set of natural variables for the above four potentials are formed from every combination of the  conjugate pairs, and in fact we may define four additional potentials for each species. 1355 Using IUPAC notation in which the brackets contain the natural variables (other than the main four), we have:

The fundamental equations

The definitions of the thermodynamic potentials may be differentiated and, along with the first and second laws of thermodynamics, a set of differential equations known as the fundamental  equations follow. 1354 (Actually they are all expressions of the same fundamental thermodynamic relation, but are expressed in different variables.) By the first law of thermodynamics, any differential change in the internal energy  of a system can be written as the sum of heat flowing into the system and work done by the system on the environment, along with any change due to the addition of new particles to the system:
where .)
By the second law of thermodynamics, we can express the internal energy change in terms of state functions and their differentials. In case of reversible changes we have:
where
and  is volume, and the equality holds for reversible processes.
This leads to the standard differential form of the internal energy in case of a quasistatic reversible change:
Since  are thermodynamic functions of state, the above relation holds also for arbitrary non-reversible changes. If the system has more external variables than just the volume that can change, the fundamental thermodynamic relation generalizes to:
Here the .
Applying Legendre transforms repeatedly, the following differential relations hold for the four potentials:
Note that the infinitesimals on the right-hand side of each of the above equations are of the natural variables of the potential on the left-hand side.
Similar equations can be developed for all of the other thermodynamic potentials of the system. There will be one fundamental equation for each thermodynamic potential, resulting in a total of  fundamental equations.
The differences between the four thermodynamic potentials can be summarized as follows:

The equations of state

We can use the above equations to derive some differential definitions of some thermodynamic parameters. If we define  to stand for any of the thermodynamic potentials, then the above equations are of the form:
where . From the chain rule it follows that:
Where , then we have:
and so on. In all, there will be  equations of state for a particular potential are known, then the fundamental equation for that potential can be determined. This means that all thermodynamic information about the system will be known, and that the fundamental equations for any other potential can be found, along with the corresponding equations of state.

The Maxwell relations

Again, define .  We may take the "cross differentials" of the state equations,  which obey the following relationship:
From these we get the Maxwell relations. 181 There will be 
Using the equations of state involving the chemical potential we get equations such as:
and using the other potentials we can get equations such as:

Euler integrals

Again, define  to be the natural variables of the internal energy.
Since all of the natural variables of the internal energy  are extensive quantities
it follows from Euler's homogeneous function theorem that the internal energy can be written as:
From the equations of state, we then have:
Substituting into the expressions for the other main potentials we have:
As in the above sections, this process can be carried out on all of the other thermodynamic potentials. Note that the Euler integrals are sometimes also referred to as fundamental equations.

The Gibbs–Duhem relation

Deriving the Gibbs–Duhem equation from basic thermodynamic state equations is straightforward. 538Callen (1985) p. 60 Equating any thermodynamic potential definition with its Euler integral expression yields:
Differentiating, and using the second law: 
yields:
Which is the Gibbs–Duhem relation. The Gibbs–Duhem is a relationship among the intensive parameters of the system. It follows that for a simple system with  independent parameters, or degrees of freedom. For example, a simple system with a single component will have two degrees of freedom, and may be specified by only two parameters, such as pressure and volume for example. The law is named after Josiah Willard Gibbs and Pierre Duhem.

Chemical reactions

Changes in these quantities are useful for assessing the degree to which a chemical reaction will proceed. The relevant quantity depends on the reaction conditions, as shown in the following table.  denotes the change in the potential and at equilibrium the change will be zero.
Most commonly one considers reactions at constant , so the Gibbs free energy is the most useful potential in studies of chemical reactions.



Notes



 | author=Alberty, R. A.
 | url = 
 | title = Use of Legendre transforms in chemical thermodynamics
 | journal=Pure Appl. Chem.
 | year=2001 | volume= 73 | issue=8 | pages=1349–1380
 | doi=10.1351/pac200173081349
 | format=PDF}}
 | first = Herbert B. | last = Callen | authorlink = Herbert Callen | year = 1985
 | title = Thermodynamics and an Introduction to Themostatistics | edition = 2nd
 | publisher = John Wiley & Sons | location = New York | isbn = 0-471-86256-8
 | url =
 | title = Fundamentals of Engineering Thermodynamics | edition = 3rd| isbn = 0-471-07681-3 | year=1996 | publisher=J. Wiley & Sons | location=New York ; Toronto  }}

Further reading




