[[People's Daily]]

CATEGORIES: Chinese-language newspapers (Simplified Chinese), Newspapers published in the People's Republic of China, Communism in China, Communist newspapers, Publications established in 1948, Multilingual news services, Media in Shijiazhuang, 1948 establishments in China


The People's Daily is a daily newspaper in China. The paper is an official newspaper of the government of China, published worldwide with a circulation of 3 to 4 million. In addition to its main Chinese-language edition, it has editions in English, Japanese, French, Spanish, Russian, Arabic, Tibetan, Kazakh, Uyghur, Zhuang, Mongolian, Korean and other minority languages in China. Similar to Pravda's relationship with the Soviet Union, the newspaper provides direct information on the policies and viewpoints of the government. It is elected by UNESCO as "one of the 10 most authoritative and most influential newspapers of the world".people.cn/GB/50142/104580/index.people.cn/GB/50142/104580/index.html

History

The paper was established on 15 June 1946 and was published in Pingshan, Hebei, until its offices were moved to Beijing in March 1949. Ever since its founding, the People's Daily has been under direct control of the Party's top leadership. Deng Tuo and Wu Lengxi served as editor-in-chief from 1948–1958 and 1958–1966, respectively, but the paper was in fact controlled by Mao's personal secretary Hu Qiaomu.
During the Cultural Revolution, the People's Daily was one of the few sources of information from which either foreigners or Chinese could figure out what the Chinese government was doing.  During this period, an editorial in the People's Daily would be considered an authoritative statement of government policy and was studied nationwide.
Newspaper articles in the People's Daily are often not read for content so much as placement.  A large number of articles devoted to a political figure or idea is often taken as a sign that the mentioned official is rising.  
Editorials in the People's Daily are also regarded both by foreign observers and Chinese readers as authoritative statements of government policy. Distinction is made between editorials, commentaries, and opinions.  Although all must be government approved, they differ sharply on the amount of official authoritativeness they contain.  For example, although an opinion piece is unlikely to contain views that are opposed to those of the government, it may express a viewpoint, or it may contain a debate that is still under consideration and may reflect only the opinions of the writer.  By contrast, an official editorial, which is rather infrequent, means that the government has reached a final decision on an issue.
During the Tiananmen Square Protests of 1989, the People's Daily editorial of 26 April, which condemned "unlawful parades and demonstrations," marked a significant moment in the newspaper's history.  The editorial increased tension between the government and protesters, and top CPC leaders argued about whether to revise it.   
Since the mid-1990s, the People's Daily has faced a decline of governmental subsidies combined with increasing competition from international news sources and Chinese tabloids.  As part of its effort to modernize, it began an online edition in 1997, and the web bulletin forums, such as the Strengthening Nation Forum in the Chinese edition, has been known for their surprisingly candid content. 
The People's Daily is also responsible for the publication Global Times,
The internet new portal of People's Daily includes pages in Arabic, French, Russian, Spanish, Japanese and English. In comparison to the original Chinese version, the foreign language version offer less in-depth discussion of domestic policies and affairs and more editorial about China's foreign policies and motives, often explaining China's positive intentions.
The People's Daily also maintains a multilingual internet presence; and established the People's Daily Online (人民网) in 1997 and the search engine Jike (即刻 "immediately") in 2010.

Former and present chief officers





Further reading




