[[Allopurinol]]

CATEGORIES: Antigout agents, Xanthine oxidase inhibitors, World Health Organization essential medicines

Allopurinol (Zyloprim, and generics) is a drug used primarily to treat hyperuricemia (excess uric acid in blood plasma) and its complications, including chronic gout. It is a xanthine oxidase inhibitor which is administered orally.
It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines, a list of the most important medication needed in a basic health system.

Medical uses

Gout and hyperuricemia

Subsequently the uric acid lowering capacity of allopurinol was noted and the drug went on to be developed for its more famous use: to treat hyperuricemia (excess uric acid in blood plasma) and its complications. Allopurinol does not alleviate acute attacks of gout, and there is currently controversy over the issue of whether it can actually make acute gout attacks worse initially, but is useful in chronic gout to prevent future attacks.

Tumor lysis syndrome

Allopurinol was also commonly used to treat tumor lysis syndrome in chemotherapeutic treatments as these regimes can rapidly produce severe acute hyperuricemia, although it has gradually been replaced by urate oxidase therapy.

Thiopurine co-therapy

Allopurinol can cause severe pancytopenia if given with full-dose  mercaptopurine or its pro-drug azathioprine, due to the inhibition of xanthine oxidase that metabolizes mercaptopurine. For this reason, allopurinol has been strongly contraindicated during thiopurine therapy in the past.
However, in recent years the use of allopurinol in combination with azathioprine or mercaptopurine has been revived. First, it was shown that an azathioprine/allopurinol combination significantly improved renal transplant graft survival.

Reperfusion injury

Other established indications for allopurinol therapy include ischemic reperfusion injury, kidney stones with a uric acid component (uric acid nephrolithiasis), and protozoal infections (Leishmaniasis).

Renal disease, Heart failure and Angina

Allopurinol can be used in patients with poor kidney function, but it may also help them. A study of allopurinol use in patients with chronic kidney disease suggested that "Allopurinol decreases C-reactive protein and slows down the progression of renal disease in patients with chronic kidney disease. In addition, allopurinol reduces cardiovascular and hospitalization risk in these subjects.".
A mechanistic study in patients with chronic heart failure has shown that the actions of allopurinol may be due to its inhibition of xanthine oxidase rather than a urate-lowering effect. This study also showed for the first time that a high dose (600 mg) is significantly better at improving endothelial function compared to standard doses.
A recent study has suggested that allopurinol may help reduce the effects of angina in ischaemic heart disease by reducing the workload on the heart.

Epilepsy

Allopurinol is used as an add-on drug for refractory epilepsy, because it is an adenosine agonist, which inhibits glutamine release from excitatory neurons, but does not change the plasma concentration of other epilepsy drugs.Drug-Resistant Epilepsy N Engl J Med 2011; 365:2238-2240December 8, 2011

Blood pressure

Allopurinol can decrease blood pressure reducing hypertension.

Side-effects

Because allopurinol is not a uricosuric, it can be used in patients with poor kidney function.  However, allopurinol has two important disadvantages.
First, its dosing is complex. More common is a less-serious rash that leads to discontinuing this drug. 
Studies have found HLA-B*5801 allele as a genetic marker for severe cutaneous adverse reactions that include Steven Johnson Syndrome and toxic epidermal necrosis caused by allopurinol.
More rarely, allopurinol can also result in the depression of bone marrow elements, leading to cytopenias, as well as aplastic anemia. Moreover, allopurinol can also cause peripheral neuritis in some patients, although this is a rare side effect. Another side effect of allopurinol is interstitial nephritis.
It is suspected to cause congenital malformations in a newborn infant whose mother was on allopurinol treatment through the pregnancy, and should be avoided whenever possible by women trying to conceive or during pregnancy.

Mechanism of action

Allopurinol is a purine analog; it is a structural isomer of hypoxanthine (a naturally occurring purine in the body) and is an inhibitor of the enzyme xanthine oxidase. Xanthine oxidase is responsible for the successive oxidation of hypoxanthine and xanthine, resulting in the production of uric acid, the product of human purine metabolism. In addition to blocking uric acid production, inhibition of xanthine oxidase causes an increase in hypoxanthine and xanthine. While xanthine cannot be converted to purine ribotides, hypoxanthine can be salvaged to the purine ribotides adenosine and guanosine monophosphates. Increased levels of these ribotides may cause feedback inhibition of amidophosphoribosyl transferase, the first and rate-limiting enzyme of purine biosynthesis. Allopurinol, therefore, decreases uric acid formation and may also inhibit purine synthesis.

History

Allopurinol was first synthesized and reported in 1956 by Roland K. Robins (1926-1992), in a search for antineoplasitic agents.
Allopurinol inhibits the breakdown (catabolism) of the thiopurine drug mercaptopurine, and it was later employed by Gertrude Elion to enhance the action of mercaptopurine in the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia. However, no improvement in leukemia response was noted with mercaptopurine-allopurinol co-therapy, and this use of the drug was abandoned.

Metabolism

A common misconception is that allopurinol is metabolized by its target, xanthine oxidase, but this action is principally carried out by Aldehyde oxidase.

Brand names

Allopurinol has been marketed in the United States since August 19, 1966, when it was first approved by FDA under the trade name of Zyloprim.accessdata.gov/scripts/cder/drugsatfda/index. Allopurinol is now a generic drug sold under a variety of brand names including Allohexal, Allosig, Milurit, Alloril, Progout, Zyloprim, Zyloric, Zyrik and Aluron.nlm.gov/dailymed/search.cfm?startswith=Allopurinol&x=0&y=0



Further reading




