[[Evesham Abbey]]

CATEGORIES: 700s establishments, Christian monasteries established in the 8th century, Benedictine monasteries in England, Monasteries in Worcestershire, Evesham

Evesham Abbey was founded by Saint Egwin at Evesham in England between 700 and 710 A.D. following an alleged vision of the Virgin Mary by a swineherd by the name of Eof.
According to the monastic history, Evesham came through the Norman Conquest unusually well, because of a quick approach by Abbot Æthelwig to William the Conqueror. Simon de Montfort (1208–1265) is buried beneath the high altar of the ruined abbey, the spot marked by an altar-like memorial monument dedicated by the Archbishop of Canterbury in 1965.simondemontfort.htm The abbey is of Benedictine origin, and became in its heyday one of the wealthiest in the country. During the Dissolution of the Monasteries, the abbey was demolished leaving only the bell tower surviving into the 21st century.

Early foundation

The year of the foundation of Evesham Abbey (that is, when a monastic community was first established) is problematic. William Tindal (1794) comments that "I have a MS. but without name or reference, which says that he Ecgwine began his Abbey in the year 682. This is before he was made bishop, and seems improbable. Tanner Mon. p.168 says in 701. The date of Constantine's charter may decide the point as to the consecration of his Abbey, but there is reason to suppose that Egwin began to build as early as the year 702".2 third footnote. The year 702 is also given in Saint Egwin and his Abbey of Evesham by the Benedictines of Stanbrook (London: Burns & Oates, 1904), p.15.  Tindal (1756-1804), a Fellow of Trinity College, Oxford and chaplain of the Tower of London, was the grandson of the historian Rev Nicolas Tindal. (Dictionary of National Biography) George May gives 701 as the year that Ethelred conferred on Ecgwine the whole peninsula , p.21 with the erection of the monastery commencing in the same year.24
On the other hand, the year of the consecration derives from the grant of the first privilege to the Abbey from Pope Constantine "written in the seven hundred and ninth year of our Lord's incarnation."Sayers & Watkiss, Thomas of Marlborough: History of the Abbey of Evesham (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2003), section 323, page 319 Ecgwine returned from Rome bearing this charter, which was apparently read out by Archbishop Berhtwald at a council of "the whole of England" held at Alcester,Thomas of Marlborough: History of the Abbey of Evesham , p. although that meeting was probably fictitious. (meaning the foundation can also be dated to 709):
"When the blessed Ecgwine saw that longed-for day when the place which he had built would be consecrated, and a monastic order established to serve God in that place, he then abandoned all concerns for worldly matters, and devoted himself to a contemplative way of life. Following the example of the Lord by humbling himself, he resigned his bishop's see, and became abbot of the monastery."Thomas of Marlborough: History of the Abbey of Evesham, section 18, page 23
The charter of Ecgwine (written 714) records that on the feast of All Saints "Bishop Wilfrid and I consecrated the church which I had built to God, the Blessed Mary, and to all Christ's elect".Thomas of Marlborough: History of the Abbey of Evesham, footnote 2 to page 38 Bishop Wilfrid was Egwin's successor to the see of Worcester (though he is sometimes confused with Wilfrid, Archbishop of York, who died c. 709).
Although the exact year of the foundation remains unclear, it can be reasonably assumed that the date of the abbey's consecration was the feast of All Saints in 709. That the consecration occurred on this feast day provides a neat connection with All Saints Church. That Abbot Clement Lichfield lies buried beneath the Chantry Chapel, now known as the Lichfield Chapel in consequence, provides the link to the closing days of the life of the abbey.

Dissolution

During the Dissolution of the Monasteries of the 16th century, on its surrender to the king in 1540, the abbey was plundered and demolished by the townsfolk. 112-127. Retrieved: 26 September 2010. Only the bell tower survives. The coat of arms of Evesham Abbey is still used in modern times as the crest of Prince Henry's High School, Evesham.

Excavations

The antiquary Edward Rudge began excavations of the abbey, on parts of his property, between 1811 and 1834. The results were given to the Society of Antiquaries of London, illustrations of the discoveries were published in their Vetusta Monumenta with by a memoir by his son, Edward John Rudge. Rudge commissioned an octagon tower for the site of the battlefield in 1842, to honour Simon de Montfort, earl of Leicester.

Burials of saints

Other burials

GWR Star Class steam engine

One of the Great Western Railway Star class locomotives was named Evesham Abbey and numbered 4065.  It was subsequently rebuilt as a Castle class locomotive being renumbered as 5085 while retaining the name Evesham Abbey.





Bibliography




