[[Tipper Gore]]

CATEGORIES: 1948 births, American Episcopalians, American people of English descent, American photographers, Boston University alumni, Democrats (United States), Gore family, Living people, People from Arlington County, Virginia, Artists from Washington, D.C., Second Ladies of the United States, Spouses of members of the United States House of Representatives, Spouses of United States Senators, Peabody College alumni, Writers from Virginia, American people of Swedish descent, American people of German descent, American people of Scottish descent, American women photographers

Mary Elizabeth "Tipper" Gore (née Aitcheson; born August 19, 1948) is an author, photographer, former second lady of the United States, and the wife of Al Gore, from whom she is currently separated. She became well known for her role in the Parents Music Resource Center (PMRC), criticizing music with profane language and promoting Parental Advisory stickers (nicknamed "Tipper Stickers") on record covers, especially in the heavy metal, punk and hip hop genres.

Background

Born Mary Elizabeth Aitcheson in Washington, D.C., Tipper Gore is the daughter of John Kenneth "Jack" Aitcheson, Jr., a plumbing-supply entrepreneur, and his first wife, Margaret Ann (née Carlson) Odom (who lost her first husband during World War II). Her nickname, Tipper, derives from the lullaby "Tippy, Tippy, Tin", Gore grew up in Arlington, Virginia. Her parents divorced and she was raised by her mother and grandmother.
She attended St. Agnes (now St. Stephen's & St. Agnes School), a private Episcopal school in Alexandria, Virginia, where she excelled in athletics and played the drums for an all-girl band, The Wildcats.
She met Gore at his senior prom in 1965. Although she came to the prom with one of his classmates, Gore and Tipper began to date immediately afterwards. When Gore began attending Harvard University, she enrolled in Garland Junior College (now part of Simmons College) and later transferred to Boston University, receiving her B.A. in psychology in 1970.S. Congress in 1976. In 1982, she resumed her photography career, working part-time for Quarante Magazine (1982–1985) published by Kathleen Katz of Arlington.
On May 19, 1970, she and Gore were married at the Washington National Cathedral. (born on June 5, 1977), Sarah LaFon Gore (born on January 7, 1979), and Albert Gore III (born on October 19, 1982).
She worked as a photographer for newspapers and magazines, including Quarante Magazine (1982 - 1984), published by Kathleen Katz of Arlington, Virginia. A longtime family friend of Al and Tipper Gore confirmed on June 1, 2010, that the Gores had sent out an e-mail to family friends announcing that they had made a mutual decision to separate.
Gore was mocked by the rock group Warrant on their 1990 album Cherry Pie in the track Ode to Tipper Gore, which included frequent obscenity, due to her involvement with the Parents Music Resource Center.

Author

Tipper Gore is the author of a number of books including:

Politics and activism

In 1985, Tipper Gore co-founded the Parents Music Resource Center (PMRC) with Susan Baker, wife of then United States Secretary of the Treasury James Baker, because Tipper heard her then 11-year-old daughter playing "Darling Nikki" by Prince. John Denver, Joey Ramone, and Frank Zappa criticized the group, arguing that it was a form of censorship. In response, NPR further stated that according to Gore, she "wasn't out to censor the objectionable material" and quoted her as stating that she is "a strong believer in the First Amendment" who is calling for greater "consumer information in the marketplace."
Gore was actively involved in her husband's presidential campaign in 2000, making numerous campaign stops nationwide such as at Chicago's Taste of Polonia over Labor Day Weekend where she appeared along with Hadassah Lieberman.Taste of PoloniaCopernicus Foundation page on the festival
In 2002, Gore was urged by her supporters to run for the vacant U.S. Senate seat her husband once held in Tennessee, which was being vacated by Fred Thompson; however, she declined.

Personal life

In 2003, Gore spoke at the "Erasing the Stigma Awards" about her experience with depression after her son, Al Gore III, was hit by a car when he was a young child.Tipper Gore Honors Mental Health Achievements
In June 2010, the Gores announced their marital separation, "a mutual and mutually supportive decision that we have made together following a process of long and careful consideration."






