[[Georgina Beyer]]

CATEGORIES: 1957 births, Living people, New Zealand Labour Party MPs, Transgender and transsexual politicians, Transgender and transsexual women, Women mayors of places in New Zealand, Mayors of Carterton, New Zealand, Māori MPs, LGBT mayors, LGBT politicians from New Zealand, People from the Wairarapa, People educated at Onslow College, New Zealand list MPs, Māori politicians, LGBT rights activists from New Zealand, Members of the New Zealand House of Representatives, New Zealand MPs for North Island electorates, Te Āti Awa, Ngāti Mutunga, Ngāti Raukawa, Ngāti Porou

Georgina Beyer (born November 1957) is a trans woman who became the world's first openly transsexual mayor, as well as the world's first openly transsexual Member of Parliament, and from 27 November 1999 until 14 February 2007 was an MP for the Labour Party in New Zealand. She was also among a very small number of former sex workers to hold political office.

Early life

Beyer was born George Bertrand in 1957
Her mother married again in 1962. Her mother's second husband was Colin Beyer, a recent law school graduate.
She lived in Australia for some time, and on her return to New Zealand began seeking work as an actor with increasing success, culminating in a GOFTA award nomination for "Jewel's Darl" in 1987. In 1984 she underwent sex reassignment surgery.
Beyer became a part of the Wellington gay nightclub scene, initially as a singer and drag-queen performer, and later as a sex worker.
After shifting to Carterton, in the Wairarapa, she worked as a radio host.  Beyer was the local news presenter and part of the inaugural breakfast crew on Paul Henry's Radio Station - TODAY FM WAIRARAPA 89.3.

Political career

Local politics

She also began to take an interest in local politics, first winning election to a local school board, and subsequently being elected mayor of Carterton in 1995, serving in that role until 2000. This made her the world's first transsexual mayor.

Parliament

At the 1999 general election, Beyer was selected as the Labour Party's candidate for the  electorate. She surprised the political commentators to win the typically right-leaning electorate with a 3,033-vote majority over National's Paul Henry and become the world's first transsexual MP.
At the 
In a December 2002 interview, Beyer said: "I get asked questions no other politician would ever have to answer. Regarding the surgery, you know. 'Did it hurt?', or, 'When you have sex now as a woman, is it different to how you had sex as a man?' Well, honey, obviously."

Maiden speech

Traditionally, newly elected MPs have the floor for 10 minutes to introduce themselves to their colleagues. An excerpt from her speech follows:

Political views

In June 2004, Beyer spoke at the UniQ: Queer Students Association national conference at Waikato University, Hamilton, where she reiterated her support for the Civil Union Bill. She stated that she did not believe that gay marriage would be legal in New Zealand for at least 20 years, and feared that gay and lesbian New Zealanders were facing a turbulent time in which rights gained since homosexual law reform in 1986 would be questioned and attacked.  She became emotional while referring to her internal battle between her membership of the Parliament of New Zealand, which she described as the world's oldest "true" democracy, and her Māori heritage, when it came to the Seabed and foreshore legislation of May 2004.

Human Rights and Gender Identity

In 2004, a bill in Beyer's name was drawn from the ballot for members' bills, and introduced to Parliament.  The Bill was intended to add "gender identity" to the Human Rights Act 1993, and thereby prohibit discrimination against people because of their gender identity.  The Bill had been Labour Party policy in the 1999 and 2002 election manifestos, and had attracted controversy. Beyer maintained that the Bill ensured human rights for transgender people, and merely clarified existing provisions of the law.  In 2006, the acting Solicitor-General wrote a legal opinion that indicated that transgender people were already within the ambit of the Human Rights Act, and Beyer withdrew her Bill.

Retirement

In early 2004, Beyer announced that she would not stand in the 2005 elections. Tension with her electorate committee, which opposed Beyer's views on the seabed and foreshore, may also have contributed to the decision. In September, Beyer changed her mind. She announced that she would seek a position on the Labour list, without recontesting the Wairarapa seat. She stated that a rally by the conservative Destiny Church the previous month had influenced her decision, as she believed that the message of such rallies must be opposed.
Beyer resigned from parliament effective from 15 February 2007, and gave her valedictory speech to Parliament on the previous day. The vacant list position was filled by Lesley Soper.
In 2010, Beyer stated that she was struggling financially since leaving politics and was applying for welfare. 
She was diagnosed with chronic kidney disease in 2013, and will require dialysis several times a day until she can receive a kidney transplant.

Public speaking

Beyer was a keynote speaker at the First International Conference on LGBT Human Rights in Montreal in 2006 and the Second in Copenhagen in 2009, as well as for the Egale Canada Human Rights Trust's annual Gala, held in Toronto on September 24, 2010.

Political offices

Further reading

Notes




