[[Jackie Earle Haley]]

CATEGORIES: 1961 births, Male actors from California, American male child actors, American male film actors, American male television actors, Living people, People from San Antonio, Texas, People from Northridge, Los Angeles, 20th-century American male actors, 21st-century American male actors

Jackie Earle HaleyAccording to the State of California. California Birth Index, 1905-1995. Center for Health Statistics, California Department of Health Services, Sacramento, California. Searchable at  (born Jack Earle Haley; July 14, 1961) is an American film actor. An Academy Award nominee, he is perhaps best known for his roles as Moocher in Breaking Away, Kelly Leak in The Bad News Bears, pedophile Ronnie McGorvey in Little Children, the vigilante Rorschach in Watchmen, and horror icon Freddy Krueger in the remake of A Nightmare on Elm Street. He also starred as Guerrero in Fox's drama Human Target.

Early life and career

Haley was born and raised in Northridge, California, the son of Haven Earle "Bud" Haley, a radio show host/disc jockey and actor.
Haley has appeared in numerous films, including Damnation Alley, John Schlesinger's The Day of the Locust, and Losin' It, as well as guest roles on TV. A well known child actor, he starred as Kelly Leak in the comedy The Bad News Bears. He also starred in The Bad News Bears in Breaking Training and The Bad News Bears Go to Japan.
He played Moocher in Peter Yates' acclaimed 1979 film Breaking Away and later in the short-lived TV series of the same name. Throughout the 1970s, he often played a tough, angry, pimply, long-haired misfit; although in his feature debut, the offbeat 1972 film, The Outside Man, he played Eric, a boy apparently so desperately lonely that he tries to impress the mob assassin holding him and his mother (Georgia Engel) hostage. Haley also shot a pilot for an American version of the popular British comedy The Young Ones titled Oh, No! Not THEM!. In 1974 he played Norm a misfit kid in the 12th episode of the Saturday morning children's show, Shazam! 
Haley's acting career went dormant during most of the 1990s and early 2000s, when he moved to San Antonio, Texas, and eventually turned to directing,
Haley owns a production company, JEH Productions, in San Antonio, Texas. In 2008, he appeared in Semi-Pro and starred in Winged Creatures with Kate Beckinsale, Guy Pearce and Dakota Fanning.
Haley played the role of Freddy Krueger in the A Nightmare on Elm Street remake.
Haley was a series regular on Human Target as Guerrero, an ally of the protagonist Christopher Chance. The series premiered on January 17, 2010 on Fox,McDonnel, Jen TV tonight: Human Target The Gazette  December 22, 2010 
He played Willie Loomis in the 2012 film adaptation of Dark Shadows, directed by Tim Burton, and played Confederate States Vice President Alexander H. Stephens in Lincoln, directed by Steven Spielberg.

Personal life

Haley's first marriage was to Sherry Vaughan in 1979. He has two children: a son, Christopher (born 1986), by his second wife, and a daughter, Olivia (born 1998), mother, Jennifer Hargrave. He married his third wife, Amelia Cruz, in 2004.  The couple reside in San Antonio, Texas.

Awards

Wins

Nominations

Filmography






