[[Karelian language]]

CATEGORIES: Finnic languages, Finnish language, Languages of Russia, Languages of Finland, Karelian language, Subject–verb–object languages

Karelian language (karjala, karjal or kariela) is a Finnic language spoken mainly in the Russian Republic of Karelia. Linguistically Karelian is closely related to the Finnish dialects spoken in eastern Finland and some Finnish linguists even classified Karelian as a dialect of Finnish. Karelian is not to be confused with the Southeastern dialects of Finnish, sometimes referred to as karjalaismurteet ('Karelian dialects') in Finland.
There is no standard Karelian language so each writer writes in Karelian according to his own dialectal form. Written forms have been developed for North Karelian; Olonets Karelian; Tver Karelian, and Lude. All variants, except the Tver Karelian, are written with the Latin script based Karelian alphabet, though the Cyrillic script has been used in the past.

Classification

The Karelian language belongs to the Finnic branch of the Uralic languages and it is closely related to Finnish. Finnish and Karelian have common ancestry in the Proto-Karelian language spoken in the coast of Lake Ladoga in the Iron Age and Karelian forms a dialect continuum with the Eastern dialects of Finnish.helsinki.html Earlier some Finnish linguists classified Karelian as a dialect of Finnish, sometimes known in older Finnish literature as Raja-Karjalan murteet ('Border Karelian dialects'), but today, however, Karelian is seen as a proper language. Besides Karelian and Finnish, the Finnic subgroup also includes Estonian and other minority languages spoken around the Baltic Sea.

Geographic distribution

Karelian is spoken by about 100,000 people mainly in the Republic of Karelia, Russia but notable Karelian-speaking communities can also be found in Tver region northwest of Moscow. Karelian is also spoken in Finland where Karelian-speakers are estimated to be around 5,000, most of whom belong to the older generations.

Official status

In the Republic of Karelia Karelian has official status as a minority language and since the late 1990s there have been moves to pass special language legislation, which would give Karelian an official status on par with Russian.

Dialects

Karelian language has three main varieties which can be considered as dialects or separate languages: Karelian Proper which comprises North Karelian and South Karelian (including the Tver enclave dialects), Olonets Karelian, and Lude. These varieties constitute a continuum of dialects, the ultimate ends of which are no longer mutually intelligible. Varieties can be further divided into individual dialects:

Phonology

Vowels

=Monophthongs=

Karelian language has 8 vowels, if not including vowel length:
The vowel length in Karelian is like the one in the Finnish language but the long mid and open vowels have been diphthongized so only the close vowels 

=Diphthongs=

North KarelianП.М. Зайков. Грамматика карельского языка. Петрозаводск: Периодика, 1999 and Olonets Karelian have 21 diphthongs:

=Triphthongs=

In addition to the diphthongs North Karelian has a variety of triphthongs:
Olonets Karelian has only the triphthongs ieu, iey, iäy, uau, uou and yöy.

Writing system

Alphabet

Karelian is written using a Latin alphabet consisting of 28 characters. It extends the ISO basic Latin alphabet with the additional letters Č, Š, Ž, Ä and Ö and excludes the letters C, Q, W and X. This unified alphabet is used to write all Karelian variants except Tver Karelian. The very few texts that were published in Karelian from medieval times through the 19th century used the Cyrillic alphabet. With the establishment of the Soviet Union, Finnish, written with the Latin alphabet, became official. However, from 1937–39 Karelian written in Cyrillic replaced Finnish as an official language of the Karelian ASSR (see "History" below).

Orthography

Karelian is written with orthography similar to Finnish orthography. However, some features of the Karelian language and thus orthography are different from Finnish:
Notice that /c/ and /č/ have length levels, which is not found in standard Finnish. For example, in Kalevala, Lönnrot's orthography metsä : metsän hides the fact that the pronunciation of the original material is actually /mettšä : metšän/, with palatalization of the affricate. The exact details depend on the dialect, though. See Yleiskielen ts:n murrevastineet.
Karelian actually uses . Furthermore, in Karelian, voiced consonants occur also in native words, not just in loans as in standard Finnish.)
The sounds represented by č, š and ž are native to Karelian, but not Finnish. Speakers of Finnish do not distinguish  (initial). For example, the native Karelian words kiza, šoma, liedžu and seičemen are kisa, soma, lietsu and seitsemän in standard Finnish.

History

Prehistory

The Late Proto-Finnic language evolved from the Early Proto-Finnic language after the Proto-Lappic was separated from it around 1500–1000 BCE. It has been proposed that the Late Proto-Finnic language evolved into three dialects: Northern dialect, spoken in the western Finland; Southern dialect, spoken in the area of the modern day Estonia and northern Latvia, and Eastern dialect, spoken in the regions east of the Southern dialect. In the 6th century, Eastern dialect arrived at the western shores of the Lake Ladoga and in the 9th century, Northern dialect reached the same region. These two dialects blended together and formed the Proto-Karelian language.

Medieval period

By the end of the 13th century, speakers of the Proto-Karelian language had reached the Savo region in the eastern Finland increasingly mixing with population from the western Finland. In 1323 Karelia was divided between Sweden and Novgorod according to the Treaty of Nöteborg, which started to slowly separate descendants of the Proto-Karelian language from each other. In the areas occupied by Sweden, Proto-Karelian started to develop into dialects of Finnish; Savonian dialects and Southeastern dialects.
Birch bark letter no. 292 is the oldest known document in any Finnic language. The document is dated to the beginning of the 13th century. It was found in 1957 by a Soviet expedition, led by Artemiy Artsikhovskiy in the Nerev excavation on the left coast side of Novgorod.А.В. Арциховский, В.И. Борковский. Новгородские грамоты на бересте (из раскопок 1956–1957 гг.). М.: Из-во Акад. Наук СССР, 1963. The language used in the document is thought to be an archaic form of the language spoken in Olonets Karelia, a dialect of the Karelian language.Itämerensuomalaista kirjoitusta 1200-luvulta 
In the regions ruled by Novgorod, protolanguage started to evolve into Karelian language. In 1617 Novgorod lost parts of the Karelia to Sweden in the Treaty of Stolbovo, which led the Karelian speaking population of the occupied areas to flee from their homes. This gave rise to the Karelian speaking population in the Tver and Valday regions.

19th century

In the 19th century a few books were published in Karelian using the Cyrillic script, notably A Translation of some Prayers and a Shortened Catechism into North Karelian and Olonets (Aunus) dialects in 1804, and the gospel of St. Matthew in South Karelian Tver dialect, in 1820. Karelian literature in 19th century Russia remained limited to a few primers, songbooks and leaflets.111

Soviet period

In 1921, the first all-Karelian congress under the Soviet regime debated whether Finnish or Karelian should be the official language (next to Russian) of the new "Karelian Labour Commune" (Карялан тыöкоммууни in Cyrillic Karelian, Karjalan Työkommuuni), which two years later would become the Karelian ASSR. In the end they chose Finnish. In 1931, a Karelian literary language using the Latin alphabet was standardized for the Tver Karelian community. From 1937–39 the Soviet government replaced Finnish in the Karelian ASSR with Karelian written in the Cyrillic alphabet. During this period Karjalan Sanomat was written in Karelian using Cyrillic, rather than in Finnish. The effort was dropped in 1940 and Finnish (written as always in the Latin alphabet) once again became official.
In the 1980s, publishing began again in various adaptations of the Latin alphabet for Olonets Karelian and the White Sea and Tver dialects of Standard Karelian.

Recent events

In 2007 a standard alphabet was adopted to write all dialects.
In 2008, Joensuu University launched Finland's first Karelian language professorship, in order to save the language. A year later, Finland's first Karelian language nest (pre-school immersion group) was established in the town of Nurmes.

Media in Karelian

Examples of Karelian dialects

North Karelian

A sample from the book Luemma vienankarjalaksi:

Olonets Karelian

=Sample 1=

Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights:

=Sample 2=

A sample from the book Karjalan kielen harjoituskogomus III–IV luokku Livvin murdehel. Note the older alphabet:
|-
!|Olonets KarelianBogdanova, Leena; Ščerbakova, Tamara. Karjalan kielen harjoituskogomus III–IV luokku Livvin murdehel. Petroskoi «Periodika», 2004, p. 14.
!|
!|Standard Finnish
!|
!|English translation
|-
||Karjalas on čoma luondo. Korgiet koivut,
||
||Karjalassa on kaunis luonto. Korkeat koivut,
||
||There is beautiful nature in Karelia.  Tall birches,
|-
||vihandat kuuzet da pedäjät čomendetah meččiä.
||
||vihannat kuuset ja petäjät koristavat metsiä.
||
||green spruces and Scots pines decorate the forest.
|-
||Joga kohtaine on täüzi muarjua da siendü.  
||
||Joka paikka on täynnä marjaa ja sientä. 
||
||Every place is full of berries and mushrooms. 
|-
||Kehtua vai kerätä! Järvet da jovetgi ollah kalakkahat:
||
||Kehtaa vain kerätä! Järvet ja joetkin ovat kalaisat:
||
|| If only one picked them! The lakes and rivers, too, are full of fish:
|-
||ongo haugii, lahnua, säüniä, matikkua, kuhua, siigua. 
||
||on haukia, lahnoja, säyneitä, madetta, kuhaa, siikaa. 
||
||there is pike, carp bream, ide, burbot, zander, whitefish. 
|-
||Ota ongiruagu da juokse järvele!
||
||Ota onkivapa ja juokse järvelle!
||
||Take a fishing rod and run to the lake!
|}

Tver Karelian

A sample from the book Armaš šana:








