[[Cameron Mackintosh]]

CATEGORIES: 1946 births, Anglo-Scots, English people of Scottish descent, English businesspeople, English theatre managers and producers, Knights Bachelor, LGBT businesspeople from the United Kingdom, LGBT people from England, Living people, People from Enfield Town, People educated at Prior Park College, American Theater Hall of Fame inductees

Sir Cameron Anthony Mackintosh (born 17 October 1946) is a British theatrical producer notable for his association with many commercially successful musicals. At the height of his success in 1990, he was described as being "the most successful, influential and powerful theatrical producer in the world" by the New York Times."The Musical is Money to His Ears" New York Times, 9 December 1990 He is the producer of shows such as Les Misérables, The Phantom of the Opera, Mary Poppins, Oliver!, Miss Saigon and ''Cats.
Mackintosh was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II in 1996 for services to musical theatre. In the Sunday Times Rich List of 2011, Mackintosh was estimated to have a fortune of £675 million ($1.1 billion), making him the third richest person in the British music industry."The top 50 richest people in music: Sunday Times Rich List"'. This is Money. Retrieved 19 December 2012

Early life

Mackintosh was born in Enfield, London, the son of Diana Gladys (née Tonna), a production secretary, and Ian Robert Mackintosh, a timber merchant and jazz trumpeter."Cameron Mackintosh: Wizard of the West End" The Independent, 21 July 2001"Mackintosh wins tourist award for London's starring role" The Independent, 21 April 2006 Mackintosh was raised in his mother's Roman Catholic faith and educated at Prior Park College in Bath."Dance" priorparkcollege.com, accessed 20 December 2012
He first knew that he wanted to become a theatre producer after his aunt took him to a matinee of the Julian Slade musical Salad Days when he was 8 years old.

Theatrical career

Mackintosh began his theatre career in his late teens, as a stagehand at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, and then became an assistant stage manager on several touring productions. He began producing his own small tours before becoming a London-based producer in the 1970s."Cameron Mackintosh biography from official site" cameronmackintosh.Rothstein, Mervyn. "A Life in the Theatre: Cameron Mackintosh" playbill.com, accessed 20 December 2012
In 1981, he produced Andrew Lloyd Webber's Cats, then considered an unlikely subject for a musical. It became the hit of the season and went on to become one of the longest running musicals on both sides of the Atlantic. After the success of Cats, he approached the French writing team Claude-Michel Schönberg and Alain Boublil about bringing their musical Les Misérables (then a successful French concept album) to the London stage. The musical opened in 1985 at the Barbican before transferring to the Palace Theatre. Les Misérables had a shaky start at the box office and a lukewarm critical reception before becoming a massive hit, largely by word-of-mouth.
In 1986, Mackintosh produced Andrew Lloyd Webber's The Phantom of the Opera, which is (most likely) the most commercially successful musical of all time,
He produced Claude-Michel Schönberg and Alain Boublil's next musical Miss Saigon, which opened at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane in the West End in September 1989, and was similarly successful," 'Miss Saigon' listing, West End" albemarle-london.Simonds, Jon. "AmerAsians and the Theater" newsun.com, accessed 20 December 2012
Mackintosh has produced several other successful musicals, including Five Guys Named Moe (both in London in 1990" 'Five Guys Named Moe' listing, Lyric Theatre" thisistheatre." 'Follies' inLondon" sondheimguide. Additionally he was responsible for presenting the West End transfers of the National Theatre revivals of Oklahoma! (1999),"Mackintosh Takes RNT's 'Oklahoma!' to Lyceum" whatsonstage.com, 20 March 2001 and Carousel (1993).
Mackintosh's less successful London productions include Moby Dick (1993),Jones, Kenneth. "UK's 'Moby Dick!' Musical Gets NYC Reading In Anticipation of US Licensing" playbill.com, 14 July 1996 He produced the stage adaptation of John Updike's The Witches of Eastwick (2000) which, despite some positive reviews and run of over 15 months, failed to replicate the worldwide success of his previous blockbusters.
Walt Disney Theatrical president Thomas Schumacher met with Mackintosh in 2001 to discuss making Mary Poppins into a stage musical. Mary Poppins: Anything Can Happen If You Let It. Disney Editions New York. pp. 348–349. ISBN 0-7868-3657-1 Mackintosh's involvement in the development of the 1964 musical adaptation led to his producing both the 2004 West End and 2006 Broadway productions, at the Prince Edward Theatre and the New Amsterdam Theatre, respectively, along with Schumacher.com, accessed 19 December 2012
Gans, Andrew. "Playbill.com, 19 September 2006 He co-produced the London transfer of Avenue Q, which opened in the West End at the Noël Coward Theatre on 1 June 2006. "London's 'Avenue Q' Extends to January 2010" playbill.com, 30 July 2009
In 1998, Mackintosh celebrated thirty years in show business with Hey, Mr. Producer!, a gala concert featuring songs from shows he had produced during his career. The concert was performed twice, on 7 and 8 June, with proceeds going to the Royal National Institute of Blind People and the Combined Theatrical Charities. Many celebrities took part, and the 8 June performance was attended by Queen Elizabeth and Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh. Producer!'" albemarle-london.com, accessed 19 December 2012
In 2008–9, Mackintosh produced a revival of Lionel Bart's Oliver! at the Theatre Royal Drury Lane. The production  was cast via the hit BBC television series I'd Do Anything. Jodie Prenger became the winner and was subsequently cast as Nancy in the production, with Rowan Atkinson as Fagin. The publicity and attention surrounding the production was unprecedented on the West End stage, and it was reported in January 2009 that the production was the fastest-selling show in West End history, with £15 million of pre-opening sales.com, 15 January 2009
Mackintosh has voiced interest in producing a Broadway revival of Barnum with American actor Neil Patrick Harris in the title role.com, 5 February 2010
In April 2010 Mackintosh staged a West End revival of the musical Hair in London's Gielgud Theatre. This production was transferred from Broadway where a production was revived in 2009.Hair stages a Sixties reunion London Evening Standard, 15 April 2010
In 2013 he worked with the Chichester Festival Theatre on a revival of "Barnum (musical)", starring Christopher Fitzgerald (actor). Due the Theatre's refurbishment it was performed in a giant tent 'Theatre in the Park' in July and August.
On January 27, 2014, Cameron Mackintosh was the first British producer to be inducted into Broadway's prestigious American Theater Hall of Fame."Cameron Mackintosh enters Broadway Hall of Fame" bestoftheatre.co.uk, accessed 11 February 2014

Influence

Mackintosh is notable as a producer for his transformation of the musical into a global, highly profitable brand, and was the first theatrical producer to recognise that both touring productions and worldwide productions (often in countries where musicals were seldom seen, such as the former eastern bloc countries in the early 90s) were potentially highly lucrative markets which could, collectively, match and even surpass the revenues generated from New York and London productions.
Mackintosh has also had considerable success in bringing legitimate theatre directors (such as the Royal Shakespeare Company's Trevor Nunn and Nicholas Hytner) and technicians to the world of musical theatre.
He is renowned for how closely he works with the creative team of a production.
He has recently expressed his interest in producing musicals from the otherwise neglected Asian and African regions, citing that the potential in these markets is inexhaustible.
Mackintosh's Delfont Mackintosh group owns seven London theatres, the Prince Edward, the Prince of Wales, the Novello, the Queen's, the Gielgud, the Wyndham's, and the Noël Coward.

Personal life

Mackintosh was knighted in the 1996 New Year Honours for services to musical theatre.
His partner is Australian-born theatre photographer Michael Le Poer Trench.
In 2006, Mackintosh was listed 4th on The Independent on Sunday's Pink List, a list of the most influential "out-and-proud" gay men and women. The list recognises the most influential members of the performing arts community at the end of each year.
He is a Patron of The Food Chain, a London-based HIV charity.
His younger brother, Robert Mackintosh, is also a producer.
In 1994 Mackintosh bought the Nevis Estate, on North Morar, to the east of Mallaig in the West Highlands of Scotland, covering around 

Politics

In 1998 Mackintosh was named in a list of the biggest private financial donors to the Labour Party,





Further reading




