[[Kurtosis]]

CATEGORIES: Theory of probability distributions, Statistical deviation and dispersion

In probability theory and statistics, kurtosis (from the Greek word κυρτός, kyrtos or kurtos, meaning curved, arching) is any measure of the "peakedness" of the probability distribution of a real-valued random variable. (2003) The Oxford Dictionary of Statistical Terms, OUP. ISBN 0-19-920613-9 In a similar way to the concept of skewness, kurtosis is a descriptor of the shape of a probability distribution and, just as for skewness, there are different ways of quantifying it for a theoretical distribution and corresponding ways of estimating it from a sample from a population. There are various interpretations of kurtosis, and of how particular measures should be interpreted; these are primarily peakedness (width of peak), tail weight, and lack of shoulders (distribution primarily peak and tails, not in between).
One common measure of kurtosis, originating with Karl Pearson, is based on a scaled version of the fourth moment of the data or population, but it has been argued that this really measures heavy tails, and not peakedness. It is common practice to use an adjusted version of Pearson's kurtosis, the excess kurtosis, to provide a comparison of the shape of a given distribution to that of the normal distribution. Distributions with negative or positive excess kurtosis are called platykurtic distributions or leptokurtic distributions respectively.
Alternative measures of kurtosis are: the L-kurtosis, which is a scaled version of the fourth L-moment; measures based on 4 population or sample quantiles.

Pearson moments

The fourth standardized moment is defined as
where μ4 is the fourth moment about the mean and σ is the standard deviation.
The fourth standardized moment is lower bounded by the squared skewness plus 1
Pearson K (1929) Editorial note. Biometrika 21: 370-375
where μ3 is the third moment about the mean.
The fourth standardized moment is sometimes used as the definition of kurtosis in older works, but is not the definition used here.
Kurtosis is more commonly defined as the  fourth cumulant divided by the square of the second cumulant, which is equal to the fourth moment around the mean divided by the square of the variance of the probability distribution minus 3,
which is also known as . The "minus 3" at the end of this formula is often explained as a correction to make the kurtosis of the normal distribution equal to zero. Another reason can be seen by looking at the formula for the kurtosis of the sum of random variables. Suppose that Y is the sum of n identically distributed independent random variables all with the same distribution as X.  Then
This formula would be much more complicated if kurtosis were defined just as μ4 / σ4 (without the minus 3).
More generally, if X1, ..., Xn are independent random variables, not necessarily identically distributed, but all having the same variance, then
whereas this identity would not hold if the definition did not include the subtraction of 3.
The fourth standardized moment must be at least 1, so the excess kurtosis must be −2 or more.  This lower bound is realized by the Bernoulli distribution with p = ½, or "coin toss".  There is no upper limit to the excess kurtosis and it may be infinite.

Interpretation

The exact interpretation of the Pearson measure of kurtosis (or excess kurtosis) is disputed.  The "classical" interpretation, which applies only to symmetric and unimodal distributions (those whose skewness is 0), is that kurtosis measures both the "peakedness" of the distribution and the heaviness of its tail. and H.L. MacGillivray (1988), "Kurtosis: A Critical Review", The American Statistician, 42:2, pp. 111–119. Various statisticians have proposed other interpretations, such as "lack of shoulders" (where the "shoulder" is defined vaguely as the area between the peak and the tail, or more specifically as the area about one standard deviation from the mean) or "bimodality". (1970), "Is Kurtosis Really 'Peakedness'?", The American Statistician, 24:2, pp. 19–22. Balanda and MacGillivray assert that the standard definition of  kurtosis "is a poor measure of the kurtosis, peakedness, or tail weight of a distribution"Balanda and MacGillivray, p. 114. and instead propose to "define kurtosis vaguely as the location- and scale-free movement of probability mass from the shoulders of a distribution into its center and tails".

Terminology and examples

A high kurtosis distribution has a sharper peak and fatter tails, while a low kurtosis distribution has a more rounded peak and thinner tails.
A distribution with positive excess kurtosis is called leptokurtic, or leptokurtotic. "Lepto-" means "slender".thefreedictionary. Examples of leptokurtic distributions include the Student's t-distribution, Rayleigh distribution,  Laplace distribution, exponential distribution, Poisson distribution and the logistic distribution.  Such distributions are sometimes termed super Gaussian.
A distribution with negative excess kurtosis is called platykurtic, or platykurtotic. "Platy-" means "broad".yourdictionary. Examples of platykurtic distributions include the continuous or discrete uniform distributions, and the raised cosine distribution. The most platykurtic distribution of all is the Bernoulli distribution with p = ½ (for example the number of times one obtains "heads" when flipping a coin once, a coin toss), for which the excess kurtosis is −2. Such distributions are sometimes termed sub-Gaussian.P. Kahane, "Local properties of functions interms of random Fourier series," Stud. Math., 19, No. i, 1-25 (1960). See also Buldygin, V. V., & Kozachenko, Y. V. (1980). "Sub-Gaussian random variables". Ukrainian Mathematical Journal, 32(6), 483-489.

Graphical examples

The Pearson type VII family

The effects of kurtosis are illustrated using a parametric family of distributions whose kurtosis can be adjusted while their lower-order moments and cumulants remain constant. Consider the Pearson type VII family, which is a special case of the Pearson type IV family restricted to symmetric densities. The probability density function is given by
where a is a scale parameter and m is a shape parameter.
which is shown as the red curve in the images on the right.

Kurtosis of well-known distributions

Several well-known, unimodal and symmetric distributions from different parametric families are compared here.  Each has a mean and skewness of zero. The parameters have been chosen to result in a variance equal to 1 in each case. The images on the right show curves for the following seven densities, on a linear scale and logarithmic scale:
Note that in these cases the platykurtic densities have bounded support, whereas the densities with positive or zero excess kurtosis are supported on the whole real line.
There exist platykurtic densities with infinite support,
and there exist leptokurtic densities with finite support.

Sample kurtosis

For a sample of n values the sample excess kurtosis is
The variance of the sample kurtosis of a sample of size n from the normal distribution isDuncan Cramer (1997) Fundamental Statistics for Social Research. Routledge. ISBN 9780415172042 (p 89)
An approximate alternative is 24/n but this is inaccurate for small samples.

Estimators of population kurtosis

Given a sub-set of samples from a population, the sample excess kurtosis above is a biased estimator of the population excess kurtosis.  The usual estimator of the population excess kurtosis (used in DAP/SAS, Minitab, PSPP/SPSS, and Excel but not by BMDP) is G2, defined as follows:
For computationally efficient ways of calculating the sample kurtosis see Algorithms for calculating higher-order statistics.

Applications

D'Agostino's K-squared test is a goodness-of-fit normality test based on a combination of the sample skewness and sample kurtosis, as is the Jarque–Bera test for normality.
For non-normal samples, the variance of the variance depends on the kurtosis; for details, please see variance.
Pearson's definition of kurtosis is used as an indicator of intermittency in turbulence.doi.1017/S0022112059000581

Other measures of kurtosis

A different measure of "kurtosis", that is of the "peakedness" of a distribution, is provided by using L-moments instead of the ordinary moments.





Further reading




