[[Bruce Dickinson]]

CATEGORIES: 1958 births, People from Worksop, Alumni of Queen Mary, University of London, People educated at Oundle School, English male singers, English heavy metal singers, English rock singers, Iron Maiden members, English tenors, English radio DJs, English aviators, English fencers, Living people, Bruce Dickinson, Singers with a four-octave vocal range

Paul Bruce Dickinson (born 7 August 1958) is an English musician, airline pilot and broadcaster best known as the lead vocalist of the heavy metal band Iron Maiden.
Dickinson began his career in music fronting small pub bands at school and University, including Styx (not the American band of the same name) in 1976, Speed, (1977–78), and Shots in early 1979. He then joined the band Samson later in 1979, where he gained some popularity under the stage name "Bruce Bruce". He left Samson in 1981 to join Iron Maiden, replacing Paul Di'Anno, and debuted on their 1982 album The Number of the Beast. During his first tenure in the band, they issued a series of US and UK platinum and gold albums in the 1980s, resulting in Dickinson gaining worldwide fame, and becoming one of the most acclaimed heavy metal vocalists of all time.
Dickinson quit Iron Maiden in 1993, being replaced by Blaze Bayley, in order to pursue his solo career which saw him experiment with a wide variety of heavy metal and rock styles. Dickinson rejoined the band in 1999 along with guitarist Adrian Smith, with whom he released four subsequent studio albums. Since his return to Iron Maiden, Dickinson issued one further solo record in 2005, Tyranny of Souls. He is the older cousin of Rob Dickinson, former lead singer of British alternative rock band Catherine Wheel. His son, Austin, is the lead singer in metalcore band Rise to Remain.

Childhood

Paul Bruce Dickinson was born in the small mining town of Worksop, Nottinghamshire.
Dickinson started school at Manton Primary in Worksop while his parents moved away to Sheffield.
Dickinson's first musical experience was dancing in his grandparents' front room to Chubby Checker's "The Twist", when he still lived with them in Worksop.
By the time he moved to Sheffield, Dickinson's parents were earning a good living from buying property, refurbishing it and then selling it for a profit.
At Oundle, Dickinson was picked on and routinely bullied by the older boys of Sidney House, the boarding house that he belonged to,
Oundle was where Dickinson became attracted to hard rock, after hearing Deep Purple's "Child In Time" being played in another student's room.
Dickinson initially wanted to play the drums,
Returning home to Sheffield in 1976, Dickinson enrolled at a local comprehensive school, at which he joined his first band.

University

After leaving school with A-levels in English, History and Economics, Dickinson confessed, "I didn't really know what I wanted to do."
In college, Dickinson got involved in the Entertainments Committee: "one day you'd be a roadie for The Jam, the next you'd be putting up the Stonehenge backdrop for Hawkwind or whatever."
Although Speed would play several gigs at the Green Man pub in Plumstead, the band did not last long, but it encouraged Dickinson to continue to work toward being a musician.
Dickinson played pubs with Shots on a regular basis to small audiences.
The next step in Dickinson's career was taken in a pub called the Prince of Wales in Gravesend, Kent, where Shots were playing regularly, when Barry Graham ("Thunderstick") and Paul Samson paid a visit.
On 19 July 2011, Dickinson was presented with an honorary music doctorate from his alma mater, in honour of his contribution to the music industry.

Samson: 1979–1981

 "In my naïvety, I thought people who were in rock 'n' roll bands were great artists, and it was a huge shock to the system to realise that they weren't, that they didn't even aspire to be, really. Some of them did, maybe, but some of them, like Samson, were very frightened of the idea."
 —Bruce Dickinson on his Samson band-mates.  
After meeting Paul Samson and Barry Purkis at the Prince of Wales, and while still undertaking his final university exams, Dickinson joined Samson onstage at Bishop's Stortford to perform one of their songs, "Rock Me Baby", cementing his role as their new lead vocalist.
The band had already released their debut album, Survivors, in 1979 on an independent label, two months before Dickinson joined.
It was during these early rehearsals that the nickname "Bruce Bruce" came about, derived from Monty Python's "Bruces sketch".
Dickinson was dismayed to learn that not all rock performers were "great artists"; he felt that some, such as Samson, were only interested in women, drugs and alcohol, which he was unable to relate to.
While fronting the band, Dickinson also came across Iron Maiden for the first time, who were supporting Samson at the Music Machine in 1980.
Dickinson remained in the band for another year, recording two studio albums with them—Head On and Shock Tactics.

Iron Maiden

Beginnings and success: 1981–1985

Dickinson went to audition for Iron Maiden at a rehearsal room in Hackney in September 1981 and immediately discovered that this was a much more professional operation than he was used to with Samson.
Iron Maiden had a strict and organised routine that suited the band's writing style, which Dickinson described as a "time table". Following the release, the band embarked on a supporting tour around the globe.
 "I guess it was the first time I really thought about leaving. I don't just mean Iron Maiden, I mean quitting music altogether. I just thought, 'Nothing is worth feeling like this for.' I began to feel like I was a piece of machinery, like I was part of the lighting rig."
  — Bruce Dickinson on 1984-5's World Slavery Tour.  
On the following albums, 1983's Piece of Mind and 1984's Powerslave, Steve Harris's song-writing monopoly was pushed aside in favour of other members' ideas, with Dickinson contributing to a number of tracks, including the singles "Flight of Icarus" and "2 Minutes to Midnight".

Growing tensions and departure: 1986–1993

After a six-month break, which Dickinson mostly spent practising fencing,
After a subsequent tour, Iron Maiden started working on their next studio effort, Seventh Son of a Seventh Son, which featured more progressive rock elements than the band's previous records.
 "I thought it wouldn't be a problem to go out and do the shows at all ... but it wasn't a good vibe ... we walked out onstage and it was like a morgue. The Maiden fans knew I'd quit, they knew these were the last gigs, and I suddenly realised that, as the frontman, you're in an almost impossible situation. If you're like, 'Wow, this is really fucking cool tonight, man,' they're all gonna sit there going, 'What a wanker. He's leaving. How can it be cool?' Or do you go on and say, 'Look, I'm really sorry I'm leaving – not to put a damper on the evening, but I am quitting'? I mean, what do you do?"
  — Dickinson on his farewell tour with Iron Maiden.  
During the next album's writing stage, Adrian Smith left Iron Maiden, and was replaced by Janick Gers. Iron Maiden's eighth studio release, 1990's No Prayer for the Dying, had a raw sound that, according to AllMusic, did not "hold up well" compared to past efforts,
After the Fear of the Dark Tour, Dickinson decided to leave Iron Maiden to concentrate on his solo career.

Return: 1999–present

Along with Adrian Smith, Dickinson rejoined Iron Maiden in 1999 with Janick Gers remaining in the band, after he was approached by manager Rod Smallwood.
After embarking on a small tour, the band set about recording Brave New World, their first studio album with Dickinson since 1992. Dickinson insisted that they find a replacement for the now retired Martin Birch, the band's regular producer, and record in a different studio than the one in which they made No Prayer for the Dying and Fear of the Dark, to which Harris agreed.
In 2003 they recorded and released Dance of Death at London's SARM Studios with Kevin Shirley, now the band's new regular producer.

=Ozzfest incident=

In 2005, Iron Maiden co-headlined the US festival tour, Ozzfest, with Black Sabbath. Lead singer Ozzy Osbourne's wife, Sharon, encouraged family friends and members of other bands to sabotage Iron Maiden's last performance at Hyundai Pavilion in San Bernardino, California on 20 August,
Following the concert at San Bernardino, Osbourne released a further statement which accused Dickinson of making several anti-American comments,

Solo career

In early 1989, Zomba asked Dickinson to produce a track for the movie A Nightmare on Elm Street 5: The Dream Child,
Later that year, Dickinson participated on a re-recording of Deep Purple's "Smoke on the Water", as part of the humanitarian effort Rock Aid Armenia.
For his second solo effort, Dickinson received the collaboration of American producer, Keith Olsen, and, while working on the record in LA, decided to leave Iron Maiden.
After the Balls to Picasso supporting tour finished, he started working on a new studio record, Skunkworks. Dickinson decided that Skunkworks would be the title of the band as well, but the record company refused to release the album without his name on the cover.
After a short period of inactivity, Dickinson once again teamed up with Roy Z and Tribe of Gypsies to record his next album, Accident of Birth; "It was actually Roy that dragged me back into some assemblance, because he called up and he said, 'Listen, I've got some stuff and it's like a metal record.' And I wasn't thrilled, I wasn't really sure that I had anything to offer... Then he played me some backing-tracks he'd done for what was to become Accident of Birth down the phone and I thought 'There is something there.'" During The Chemical Wedding's supporting tour, the live album, Scream for Me Brazil was recorded in São Paulo, after which Dickinson and Smith returned to Iron Maiden in February 1999.
In 2000, Dickinson performed vocals on the song, "Into the Black Hole", for Ayreon's Universal Migrator Part 2: Flight of the Migrator.

Personal life

Dickinson has three children with his second wife, Paddy Bowden: Austin, born 1990, Griffin, born 1992, and Kia, born 1994.
His first son, Austin, is the lead singer in metalcore band Rise to Remain,
In an interview with Sarah Montague for BBC's HARDtalk, Dickinson described himself as a conservative and a eurosceptic.

Other work

Dickinson's interests include literature, writing, fencing (at which he has competed internationally, placing 7th in Great Britain,

Aviation

Dickinson learned to fly recreationally in Florida in the 1990s
Following Astraeus' closure on 21 November 2011, Dickinson branched into entrepreneurship when he launched Cardiff Aviation Ltd on 1 May 2012, an aircraft maintenance business based at the Twin Peaks Hangar in St Athan, Vale of Glamorgan, Wales.
His role as a pilot has led to some high-profile flights, which include returning a group of British RAF pilots from Afghanistan in 2008,

Radio and TV

Dickinson presented Bruce Dickinson's Friday Rock Show on BBC radio station 6 Music from 2002–2010. In March 2010, the BBC announced that, after over eight years, Dickinson's show was to be axed.
In 2005, Dickinson hosted a 5-part historical TV series about aviation, Flying Heavy Metal, which was shown on the Discovery Channel, and later on Discovery Turbo in the UK. he also appeared in a season five episode when two Buffalo Airways planes were brought to his Cardiff Aviation base in Wales.

Writing

 "I always fancied the idea of writing a book, and I was bored on the road, so I sat down and started at page one! I had an idea for this character called Lord Iffy Boatrace, who's an upper class chinless wonder. I wrote it the same way I write a song. Write the first note, and don't know what the second one's going to be. About halfway through you suddenly realise what it is you're writing about."
  — Bruce Dickinson on writing his first novel.  
During a 1986–1987 Iron Maiden tour, and in the wake of a divorce, Dickinson started writing his first book.
Following its completion, Dickinson approached Sidgwick & Jackson, who, according to Dickinson, agreed to publish the book before reading it based on Iron Maiden's album sales alone.
Dickinson has turned his hand to scriptwriting, co-authoring Chemical Wedding with director Julian Doyle. The film, in which Dickinson played a few small cameo roles and composed the soundtrack, was released in 2008 and starred Simon Callow.

Singing style

Although Dickinson never received formal training, he still possessed a wide vocal range which was trademarked by his quasi-operatic tenor. Along with Ronnie James Dio and Rob Halford, Dickinson is one of the pioneers of the operatic vocal style later to be adopted by power metal vocalists and regularly appears near the top in lists of the greatest rock vocalists/front-men of all time.
Dickinson's singing varied notably in the 1990s in the recording of albums such as No Prayer for the Dying, Fear of the Dark and his first solo work Tattooed Millionaire, making use of a much more raspy and unpolished sound,

Discography

 * Dickinson appeared on the album's re-issue only, as it had been originally completed before he joined the band.

Notes






