[[Pets.com]]

CATEGORIES: Companies disestablished in 2000, Companies established in 1998, Defunct online companies, Defunct companies based in the San Francisco Bay Area, Defunct websites, Online companies, Online retail companies of the United States, Dot-com bubble

Pets.  It began operations in August 1998 and closed in November 2000. A high-profile marketing campaign gave it a widely recognized public presence, including an appearance in the 1999 Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade and an advertisement in the 2000 Super Bowl.  Its popular sock puppet advertising mascot was interviewed by People magazine and appeared on Good Morning America.
Although sales rose dramatically due to the attention, the company was weak on fundamentals and actually lost money on most of its sales.  Its high public profile during its brief existence made it one of the more noteworthy failures of the dot-com bubble of the early 2000s.  US$300 million of investment capital vanished with the company's failure. The company was headquartered in San Francisco.com S-1 Registration Statement filed with the SEC in connection with its IPO.

History

Pets.  It launched in August 1998 and went from an IPO on a major stock exchange (the Nasdaq) to liquidation in 268 days.  Other similar business-to-consumer companies from the same period include Webvan (groceries) and Boo.
After its start by Greg McLemore, the site and domain was purchased in early 1999 by leading venture capital firm Hummer Winblad and executive Julie Wainwright. Amazon.com's first round of venture funding, purchasing a majority 54% stake in the company. The CEO of Pets. Pets.com, in summer 2000.
The company rolled out a regional advertising campaign using a variety of media (TV, print, radio and eventually a Pets. It started with a five-city advertising campaign rollout and then expanded the campaign to 10 cities by Christmas, 1999. The company succeeded wildly in making its mascot, the Pets. The Pets.  In January 2000, the company aired its first national commercial as a Super Bowl ad which cost the company $1.2 millionA Startup's Best Friend? Failure and introduced the country to their answer as to why customers should shop at an online pet store: "Because Pets Can't Drive!" That ad was ranked #1 by USA Today's Ad Meter and had the highest recall of any ad that ran during the Super Bowl. The company went public in February 2000; the former Nasdaq stock symbol was IPET.
Pets. Pets. They believed that the revenue target was close to $300 million to hit the break even point and that it would take a minimum of four to five years to hit that run rate. This time period was based on growth of Internet shopping and the percentage of pet owners that shopped on the Internet.
Despite its success in building brand recognition, it was uncertain whether a substantial market niche existed for Pets.  The company hoped to shift customers into higher margin purchases, but customer purchasing patterns failed to change and during its second fiscal year the company continued to sell merchandise for approximately 27% less than cost, so the dramatic rise in sales during Pets.
By the fall of 2000, and in light of the venture capital situation after the bursting of the dot-com bubble, the Pets. They aggressively undertook actions to sell the company. PetSmart offered less than the net cash value of the company, and Pets. The company announced they were closing their doors on the afternoon of November 6, 2000, mere hours before the 2000 United States presidential election. Pets.com raises $82.5 million in IPO to $0.19 the day of its liquidation announcement.  At its peak, the company had 320 employees, of which 250 were employed in the warehouses across the U.S.  While the offer from PetSmart was declined, some assets, including its domain, were sold to PetSmart.
The Pets.  In June 2008, CNET named Pets.

Sock puppet

Pets.com hired the San Francisco office of TBWA\Chiat\Day to design its advertising campaign.  The firm had recently created the popular Taco Bell chihuahua.  For Pets. The puppet, performed by Michael Ian Black (an alumnus of MTV's surrealist comedy sketch show The State), was a simple sock puppet with button eyes, flailing arms and a stick microphone emblazoned with "pets.
As the puppet's fame grew through 1999 and 2000, it gained almost cult status and widespread popularity. The puppet made an appearance on ABC's Good Morning America, Nightline, Live with Regis and Kathie Lee, and even had a balloon made in its image for the 1999 Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade. In addition to the media appearances the Pets.
The sock puppet toy was the last item available for order on the Pets.
As Pets. Representatives from Robert Smigel sent letters, including a cease and desist demand, to Pets. Pets.Information on Smigel's lawsiut at The Smoking Gun
The publicity surrounding the Pets.E-Trade Chimp on a Horse commercial, aired during the 2001 Super Bowl The commercial, which parodies the famous Crying Indian public service advertisement from 1971, shows a chimpanzee riding on horseback through a ruined dot-com landscape. The chimpanzee comes across a company named "eSocks.
After the company folded, Hakan and Associates and Bar None, Inc. purchased the rights to the puppet under a joint venture called Sock Puppet LLC for $125,000. Bar None, Inc., an American automotive loan firm, rebranded the microphone to say 1-800-BAR-NONE and gave the puppet a new slogan: "Everybody deserves a second chance." Bar None shot multiple commercials with the sock puppet. Bar None. Accessed 2009-03-11.








