[[John Kluge]]

CATEGORIES: 1914 births, 2010 deaths, American billionaires, American philanthropists, Columbia University alumni, Wayne State University alumni, American mass media owners, German businesspeople, German emigrants to the United States, American businesspeople, Metromedia, Major League Soccer executives, University of Virginia people, People from Chemnitz, People from Charlottesville, Virginia, People from New Rochelle, New York

John Werner Kluge ( He was best known as a television industry mogul in the United States.

Early life and education

Kluge was born in Chemnitz, Germany and emigrated to the United States in 1922. He earned his B.A. degree in economics from Columbia University in 1937. Prior to attending Columbia University, Kluge went to Wayne State University for two years.

Metromedia and Metromedia Company

Kluge's major move into media was by purchasing stock in the Metropolitan Broadcasting Corporation in the mid-1950s. The Metropolitan Broadcasting Corporation was the successor of the DuMont Television Network, which was spun off from DuMont Laboratories after the television network ceased operations in 1956.  Metropolitan Broadcasting consisted of two stations, WABD in New York City and WTTG in Washington, D.C., both former DuMont outlets now operating as independent stations.  Kluge joined the company as its board chairman and largest stockholder in 1958, acquiring the bulk of his shares from founder Allen B. DuMont for about USD $6,000,000.
After gaining control in 1959, Kluge began the company's expansion further into broadcasting, with holdings in television and radio.  In the early 1960s, Kluge bought an outdoor advertising firm, and in 1961 the company's name was changed to Metromedia to reflect the diversity of its interests.
In 1986, Kluge sold the Metromedia television stations to the 20th Century Fox film studio, which is now controlled by the News Corporation, for a reported USD $4 billion.  Those stations would later form the core of what would become the Fox television network.  The following year, Forbes Magazine placed Kluge at the top of its list as the richest man in America.
In retaliation for a lawsuit brought by Paul Winchell, who sought the rights to his children's television program, "Winchell-Mahoney Time", Metromedia management, under orders from Kluge, destroyed the video tapes. Winchell was later awarded nearly $18 million as compensation for Metromedia's capricious behavior.
Following the Fox disposal, Kluge's activities had been carried out through a private venture named Metromedia Company in which he was a partner with Stuart Subotnick. Metromedia's more recent activities have included Eastern European, Commonwealth of Independent States and China telecom/cable/radio ventures through Metromedia International Group and the ill-fated US telecom backbone operation Metromedia Fiber Network.  In July 2008, the Metromedia Restaurant Group, part of the Metromedia Company, closed over 300 company-owned Bennigan's and Steak and Ale restaurants.  Metromedia was also the original team operators of the New York/New Jersey Metrostars Major League Soccer franchise.

Philanthropy

John W. Kluge Center

In celebration of the 200th Anniversary of the Library of Congress, Kluge donated an unprecedented $60 million to create the John W. Kluge Center at the Library of Congress.  It was created as an academic center where accomplished senior scholars and junior post-doctoral fellows might gather to make use of the Library's incomparable collections and to interact with members of the United States Congress. In addition, his gift would establish a $1 million prize to be given in recognition of a lifetime of achievement in the human sciences, comparable to the Nobel Prizes in literature and economics. The Kluge Prize would honor lifetime intellectual achievement in the same way as the Kennedy Center Honors recognize lifetime achievement in the performing arts.

Columbia University

Kluge has given over $510 million to Columbia University.  Acknowledging the scholarship funds that enabled him to attend, Kluge gave more than $110 million to Columbia University between 1987 and 1993, primarily to endow financial aid for undergraduates from underprivileged backgrounds. His donations also help many of these students pursue Ph.D.s after they graduate by financing their doctoral studies.  On April 11, 2007, Columbia University's President Lee C. Bollinger announced a $400 million pledge from Kluge, which the university will receive upon the donor's death. The donation marks the fourth largest gift to an institution of higher learning in America, all designated for financial aid. This marks the largest pledge ever devoted exclusively to student aid to any single institution of higher education in the United States.

University of Virginia

In 2001, Kluge donated his  estate in Albemarle County, Virginia to the University of Virginia.  The estate, valued in excess of $45 million, was the largest gift in the University's history.virginia.html  UVa has been holding classes and seminars in the various buildings and on the grounds of Morven Farm in an effort to incorporate the land grant into their various course offering.  Many developments are in the works to improve the farm and make it part of the landscape of Charlottesville.

Personal

Kluge was a collector of contemporary Indigenous Australian art, and owned works by prominent artists including Clifford Possum Tjapaltjarri.
Kluge was married four times.  His first wife was Theodora Thomson Townsend, his second was Yolanda Galardo Zucco, the third was Patricia Maureen Rose, and his fourth was Maria Tussi Kuttner. Patricia Kluge has since filed for bankruptcy after taking on too much leverage during the recession.  He had homes in New Rochelle, New York,Graveside Politics Virginia and Florida with his fourth wife, Maria Tussi Kluge, at the time of his death in 2010.








