[[High Society (1956 film)]]

CATEGORIES: 1956 films, 1950s musical films, 1950s romantic comedy films, American films, American musical films, American romantic comedy films, English-language films, Films directed by Charles Walters, Comedy of remarriage films, Film remakes, Films about music and musicians, Films about tabloid journalism, Films based on plays, Films set in Rhode Island, Films shot in Los Angeles, California, Films shot in Rhode Island, Films shot in VistaVision, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer films, Films set in country houses, Film scores by Cole Porter

High Society is a 1956 American musical comedy film directed by Charles Walters and starring Bing Crosby, Grace Kelly, and Frank Sinatra. The film was produced by Sol C. Siegel for Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, and shot in VistaVision and Technicolor, with music and lyrics by Cole Porter. Based on the play The Philadelphia Story by Philip Barry, with a screenplay by John Patrick, the film is about a successful popular jazz musician who tries to win back the affections of his ex-wife, who is preparing to marry another man. The jazz musician encounters additional competition from an undercover tabloid reporter, who is also in love with his ex-wife, who now must choose between three very different men. High Society was the last film appearance of Grace Kelly, before she became Princess consort of Monaco.

Plot

The highly successful jazz musician C.K. Dexter Haven was divorced from wealthy Newport, Rhode Island socialite Tracy Samantha Lord, but remains in love with her. She, however, is about to get married to a bland gentleman of good standing, George Kittredge.
Spy magazine, in possession of embarrassing information about Tracy's father, sends reporter Mike Connor and photographer Liz Imbrie to cover the nuptials. Tracy begins an elaborate charade as a private means of revenge, pretending that her Uncle Willy is her father Seth Lord and vice versa.
Connor falls in love with Tracy. She must choose between three very different men in a course of self-discovery.

Cast

Production

The film stars Bing Crosby, Grace Kelly, Frank Sinatra, Celeste Holm, John Lund, Louis Calhern, Sidney Blackmer, Margalo Gillmore, and Lydia Reed, along with Louis Armstrong as himself. As name-checked by Crosby in the song 'Now You Has Jazz', where each musician takes a small solo, Armstrong's band include: Edmond Hall (clarinet), Trummy Young (trombone), Billy Kyle (piano), Arvell Shaw (bass), and Barrett Deems (drums).
This film featured Kelly's final role before she became Princess of Monaco; it was released three months after her marriage to Prince Rainier III. Grace Kelly wore the Cartier engagement ring given to her by Rainier in the movie.

Musical numbers

Producer Sol C. Siegel paid Porter $250,000 for his first original film score in eight years; it introduced a couple of pop standards, including "True Love" and "You're Sensational". Not only did Sinatra and Crosby collaborate for the first time, but behind the scenes two master orchestrators—Conrad Salinger and Nelson Riddle—melded their  arrangements under the baton of Johnny Green. Armstrong and his band get a couple of standout moments and Kelly has her only role in a musical.
A soundtrack was released in the year of the film's release and was a major success in both America and Great Britain. It has been said

Release

Critical reception

Opening on July 17, 1956, High Society garnered mixed reviews, often being compared as a lesser offering to The Philadelphia Story, a previous adaptation of the same play starring Cary Grant in the Crosby part, Katharine Hepburn in the Kelly role, and James Stewart in an Oscar-winning turn as the drunken reporter played in the remake by Sinatra. Variety noted: "Fortified with a strong Cole Porter score, film is a pleasant romp for cast toppers Bing Crosby, Grace Kelly and Frank Sinatra. Their impact is almost equally consistent. Although Sinatra has the top pop tune opportunities, the crooner makes his specialties stand up and out on showmanship and delivery, and Kelly impresses as a femme lead."
Bosley Crowther of The New York Times described it as "flimsy as a gossip-columnist's word," missing "the snap and the crackle that its un-musical predecessor had." According to Time, in spite of its "Who's Who cast" the film is "simply not top-drawer"; a "good deal of the screenplay seems as dated today as the idle rich..."

Box office

At the North American box office, High Society was a success. It was one of the 10 highest grossing films of 1956 in the US and Canada earning $5,602,000, and $2,656,000 elsewhere, resulting in a profit of $1,148,000.

Accolades

High Society received two Oscar nominations, but the tally might have been higher if not for one of the more famous Academy Award gaffes in its history. High Society was nominated in the 1956 Academy Awards for Best Motion Picture Story, even though the movie was based on the 1940 movie The Philadelphia Story and thus was not eligible in that category; additionally, the nominated writers, Elwood Ullman and Edward Bernds, did not write this particular movie. After some investigation, it was discovered that Ullman and Bernds did indeed write a movie called High Society—a 1955 Bowery Boys movie.
According to the book Inside Oscar, Steve Broidy, president of The Bowery Boys home studio Allied Artists, told the press, "This just proves what we've known all along—that the Bowery Boys series couldn't have lasted this long if not for the fine writers." The joking in the press aside, Ullman and Bernds sent a telegram to the Academy Award Board of Governors, acknowledging the error and requesting their names be removed from the final ballot. While the request was granted, their nomination does stand on the official record.

Broadway adaptation

More than forty years following the film's release, it was adapted for the stage as a Broadway musical with several Porter songs from other sources added to the score. The Broadway production opened on April 27, 1998 at the St. James Theatre, where it ran for 144 performances.Society'' at the Internet Broadway Database






