[[University of Salford]]

CATEGORIES: Buildings and structures in Salford, Education in Salford, University of Salford, Educational institutions established in 1896, 1896 establishments in England, University Alliance

The University of Salford is a public university located in Salford, England, approximately  west of Manchester city centre. Its origins come from the Royal Technical Institute, Salford which was opened in 1896. This later became a College of Advanced Technology in 1956 and gained university status, following the Robbins Report into higher education, becoming the University of Salford in 1967.
It has around 20,000 students and is situated in  of parkland on the banks of the River Irwell.

History

Origins of the Royal Technical Institute

The university's origins can be traced to 1896 with the opening of the Royal Technical Institute, Salford, a merger of Salford Working Men's College founded in 1858 and Pendleton Mechanics' Institute founded in 1850.
At the start of the 20th century, mechanical engineering, chemical works, textiles and construction dominated the industrial scene in Salford. This heavily influenced the choice of subjects offered in the nine departments initially opened. These were Engineering, Electrical Engineering & Applied Physics, Mathematics, Chemistry, Building, Dyeing, Spinning & Weaving, Domestic, and Art. Some 1,240 students registered for the first session in these departments. There were originally 19 members of staff.
In 1921 the Institute was renamed the Royal Technical College, Salford. In 1958 the institution split into two organisations, one remaining as the Royal Technical College, and a break away college, the Peel Park Technical College which changed its name first in 1961 to the Salford Technical Institute, before becoming the Salford College of Technology in 1970, and finally the University College Salford in 1992.

Royal College of Advanced Technology

In 1956 the Royal Technical College became a CAT, known as the Royal College of Advanced Technology. In 1963, the government completed an inquiry into the state of higher education in the United Kingdom and produced the Robbins Report which paved the way for the Royal College of Advanced Technology (and other Colleges of Advanced Technology) to assume university status by Royal Charter.

University status

The Royal College of Advanced Technology, became the University of Salford on 10 February 1967 when Her Majesty The Queen handed over the institution's Royal Charter. The first Vice-Chancellor was Clifford Whitworth, after whom the university's main library is named. The first chancellor was HRH Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, who remained the university's chancellor until 1991. Prince Philip took a keen interest in the university whilst in office which has continued since and he visited the university's award winning acoustics laboratories in 2008.
In 1996, the break-away University College Salford merged with the University of Salford to form a single institution.
In 2012, the University of Salford announced a partnership with the UK's biggest arms company, (BAE Systems), and four other North-Western universities (Liverpool, Manchester, UCLAN and Lancaster) in order to work on the Gamma Programme which aims to develop "autonomous systems". According to the University of Liverpool, "autonomous systems are technology based solutions that replace humans in tasks that are mundane, dangerous and dirty, or detailed and precise, across sectors, including aerospace, nuclear, automotive and petrochemicals".liv.ac.

Governance

=Chancellors=

=Vice-Chancellors=

Campus and facilities

The main Peel Park campus is less than 1.5 miles (2.4 kilometres) from Manchester city centre on the banks of the River Irwell, adjacent to Peel Park, possibly the first public park in the world which opened on 22 August 1846. Date of page creation:6 August 2007. Retrieval Date: 1 October 2007. A former president of the Students' Union described Salford in 2007 as "a relaxed campus close to Manchester, but cheaper and greener."The Times Online, Review of the University of Salford. Date of page creation:21 September 2007. Retrieval Date: 1 November 2007.
Salford Crescent railway station is adjacent to the campus, and high frequency bus services operate to Manchester, Salford and Bolton and Liverpool. There are other university facilities within a mile of the main campus, namely the Frederick Road and Adelphi campuses. Most of the university administration is located along Salford Crescent, opposite the Peel Campus. The Salford Museum and Art Gallery, said to be the first unconditionally free public library in England.

MediaCityUK

In October 2011, the university opened a learning, teaching and research space at MediaCityUK. Over 1,500 students will have opportunities to work near media professionals using the latest industry specified equipment, studios and laboratories.

Major investment projects

The university embarked on a £150 million programme of investment in 2004, to deliver new buildings and carry out major refurbishment projects. These included:

Research and development centres

The United National Institute for Prosthetics & Orthotics Development UNIPOD is located in the University's  Prosthetics & Orthotics division of its School of Health, Sport & Rehabilitation Sciences. It is the only Prosthetics and Orthotics higher education provider in England.
The KidsCan Children's Cancer Research Centre is located in the University's  John Armstrong Welsh Laboratories at the  Centre for Biochemistry, Drug Design and Cancer Research. Centre for Biochemistry, Drug Design and Cancer Research. University of Salford, p. 1 It was established  in 2002 to develop  treatments with fewer side effects for children and young adults. 2

Facilities

Peel Hall has seating for nearly 400 people, hosts many musical performances and is the main venue for the midday recitals. The hall is housed in the Peel Building, a red brick and terracotta Victorian building located on the Peel Park Campus.
The university's Robert Powell Theatre, named after the Salford actor, mostly stages live performances of modern works and participatory work for younger audiences.
Situated in the heart of the Peel Park Campus, the Chapman Gallery hosts a wide range of modern and contemporary art exhibitions which showcase the work of up and coming artists, university staff, students and the community of Salford.
The Tom Husband Leisure Centre is situated on the Peel Park Campus and adjacent to the Students' Union. It contains a gym, 25m swimming pool, sauna and spa, squash courts, climbing wall, and a multi-use sports hall.
The Adelphi Studio Theatre is a small theatre venue based in the School of Music, Media and Performance's Adelphi Building.

Organisation

The university is organised into three colleges, each of which is sub-divided into schools:
International students come from China, India, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Cyprus, Greece, Nigeria, the Republic of Ireland, Romania, Malaysia and Bulgaria. With its three colleges, 12 schools, nearly 20,000 students, and over 2,500 staff, Salford had a turnover of some £156m in 2006/07.
The university is a founding member of the Northern Consortium of universities.
In October 2008 it was announced that compulsory redundancies are likely at the university as part of a plan to save £12.5 million over three years. A notice by the university registrar said that Salford needed to invest £300 million in university estate and £40 million in moving the arts and media faculty to the "MediaCityUK" site at Salford Quays, where the BBC is to establish its northern headquarters. The notice went on to say that that these additional costs came in the context of a number of pressures: salary bills that had "exceeded the university's expectations"; a "serious problem" with student retention; the "credit crunch"; and three "seriously underperforming" schools. Affected schools include the School of Nursing, Salford Business School and the School of Community Health Sciences and Social Care .5 million

Teaching quality and rankings

The Times newspaper ranked Salford 84th out of 114 UK institutions in 2010. The Complete University Guide ranked Salford 64th out of 114 institutions in 2008.
As of 2012 the university ranks in the top ten for Town & Country Planning and Landscape, Building, and Middle Eastern and African Studies.
The University ranked in the 551 - 600 range of the world's top 600 universities in the QS World University Rankings in the 2012-13 figures.

Student life

Students' Union

University House on the Peel Park Campus is home to the University of Salford Students' Union (USSU). As well as representing students, the union plays host to a number of services, including shops and a bar
The Two Cities Boat Race is an annual boat race which has been running since 1972. It is now an established event in the sporting and social calendar of Salford and Manchester. The event is also significant for the amount of work put in by volunteers from both universities, to help with event set-up, stewarding, and  programme selling, raising money for many different charities. In 2007 the recipient of the proceeds was SPARKS, a charity which supports medical research for children.
In the season 1971–72 the University Rugby League club won the UAU Championship beating Sheffield University in the final at The Willows, the then home of Salford Rugby League Club.

Accommodation

There are five self-catered halls of residence:
Eddie Colman and John Lester Courts are two blocks of flats containing 755 rooms in total, and each flat is shared between two, three or four people. The flats are the closest accommodation to Salford Shopping City in Pendleton – colloquially referred to as 'the Precinct'. Eddie Colman and John Lester Courts were sold by the University of Salford to Campus Living Villages in December 2008. Eddie Colman was a resident of nearby Archie Street, the model for the television series 'Coronation Street' and was a player for Manchester United. He was killed in the Munich Disaster of 6th February 1958 along with seven other players. "Student homes shine amid Europe property gloom." Reuters. Friday 10 July 2009. Retrieved on 5 October 2011.
Constantine Court is the only en suite university-owned accommodation, consisting of 80 rooms in seven houses. This accommodation is located in the centre of the main university campus, and is situated close to the Students' Union shop, a bank and Salford Crescent railway station. Adjacent Horlock Court comprises 168 rooms in 14 houses.
Bramall and Matthias Courts are flats close to the Adelphi Campus. Bramall is typically occupied by undergraduates, whereas Matthias tends to be postgraduates. Matthias flats are usually shared between two or three people, and Bramall flats are shared between two, three or four. Bramall and Mathias Courts are now owned by Campus Living Villages.CLV Salford website
Castle Irwell Student Village is the largest area of accommodation, housing up to 1,600 students, and is situated on the site of the old Manchester Racecourse. There are both houses (shared between 10-12 people) and flats (six people). Castle Irwell is a popular choice for first years, due to the cheap rent. There are also grass rugby and football pitches and several floodlit AstroTurf pitches used in society meetings and varsity rags. This accommodation is the furthest from the main university campus but is served by a free university bus, running every half an hour. A taxi rank is situated outside Castle Irwell and it is near to various amenities in Lower Broughton, including takeaways and local shops.
Seaford Road iQ Village is owned and run by CRM Ltd in partnership with the university. This is the newest accommodation site, consisting of a square of houses around a central reception, lounge and laundry building. Each house contains six flats, which are typically shared by six people with en suite bathrooms. The site also has 'deluxe' rooms available for an extra cost. This accommodation is very close to Castle Irwell. The site includes a purpose built SPAR, Subway, and two takeaways. The halls are also served by the free university bus.

Academic staff

Notable alumni

Academia

Business

Media, entertainment & design

Military

Politics

Science

Sports



Bibliography




