[[Scott McNealy]]

CATEGORIES: 1954 births, Living people, American computer businesspeople, American libertarians, American technology chief executives, Businesspeople in software, Cranbrook Educational Community alumni, Fellows of the British Computer Society, Harvard University alumni, People from Columbus, Indiana, Stanford Graduate School of Business alumni, Sun Microsystems people

Scott McNealy (born November 13, 1954) is an American businessman. He co-founded computer technology company Sun Microsystems in 1982 along with Vinod Khosla, Bill Joy, and Andy Bechtolsheim.  he is chairman of Wayin, based in Denver.Sun Microsystems co-founder Scott McNealy to keynote Demogala Denver tech conference

Biography

Sun Microsystems, along with companies such as Apple Inc., Silicon Graphics, 3Com, and Oracle Corporation, was part of a wave of successful startup companies in California's Silicon Valley during the early and mid-1980s. In 1982, McNealy, who was then manufacturing director at Onyx Systems,"Scott McNealy and Sun Microsystems", Center for Management Research, Case Code LDEN039, 2006  The name "Sun" was derived from Bechtolsheim's original SUN (Stanford University Network) computer project, the SUN workstation.
In 1984, McNealy took over the CEO role from Khosla, who would ultimately leave the company in 1985. On April 24, 2006, McNealy stepped down as CEO after serving in that position for 22 years, and turned the job over to Jonathan Schwartz.  McNealy is one of the few CEOs of a major corporation to have had a tenure of over twenty years.
Unlike most people who become involved in high technology industries, Scott McNealy did not come from the world of amateur programmers, hackers, and computer scientists. Instead, his background was in business, having earned a Bachelor of Arts in Economics from Harvard and an MBA from the Stanford Graduate School of Business. Prior to college, he graduated from Cranbrook School in Bloomfield Hills, Michigan, where his father was in the automotive industry as the Vice Chairman of the American Motors Corporation; most of his work experience prior to joining Sun was in automotive manufacturing.
According to the book The Decline and Fall of Nokia, Scott McNealy was the "dream candidate" to become CEO of Nokia in 2010. 

Personal life

McNealy was born in Columbus, Indiana. He is married, and has four sons: Maverick, Dakota, Colt, and Scout. He is known to be an enthusiastic ice hockey player and has been ranked as one of the best golfers in executive ranks; McNealy has self-deprecatingly referred to himself as a "golf major" who wound up running a high-tech business. He is a self-described libertarian. He was the Co-Founder and Chairman of Wayin.

Positions at Sun

Opinions

In 1999, Stephen Manes quoted McNealy as saying, "You have zero privacy anyway.  Get over it."
McNealy was an early advocate of the networked environment; his company's motto was "The Network is the Computer". At times, he has been known to be skeptical of products that do not integrate well with networked environments.  One example McNealy has given involved the Apple iPod. As quoted in The Register, McNealy said, "There's a pendulum thing where stuff is on the client side and then goes back into the network where it belongs. The answering machine put voicemail by the desk, and then it went back into the network. Your iPod is like your home answering machine. I guarantee you it will be hard to sell an iPod five or seven years from now when every cell phone can access your entire music library wherever you are."
Most notably, McNealy is an outspoken libertarian and proponent of laissez-faire capitalism. He makes regular appearances on Fox Business channel  to discuss libertarian business issues.foxbusiness.com/v/1904955463001/sun-microsystems-mcnealy-on-economy/





 

 

 


