[[Green Park tube station]]

CATEGORIES: Victoria Line stations, Piccadilly Line stations, Jubilee Line stations, Tube stations in the City of Westminster, Railway stations opened in 1906, Mayfair

Green Park tube station is a London Underground station located on the north side of Green Park, close to the intersection of Piccadilly and the pedestrian Queen's Walk. The station was originally named Dover Street due to its location in that street. It is in fare zone 1.
The station is served by the Piccadilly line, between Piccadilly Circus and Hyde Park Corner, the Victoria line, between Victoria and Oxford Circus, and the Jubilee line, between Bond Street and Westminster.
The station is one of two tube stations serving Buckingham Palace, the other being St James's Park.

History and structure

The station was opened on 15 December 1906 by the Great Northern, Piccadilly and Brompton Railway (GNP&BR), the precursor of the Piccadilly line. When the station was rebuilt in 1933 with escalator access to the platforms, a new sub-surface ticket hall was built to the west under the roadway and new station entrances were constructed on the corner of Piccadilly and Stratton Street and on the south side of Piccadilly. The station name was changed at this time.
With the rebuilding of the station and similar works at Hyde Park Corner, the little-used Piccadilly line station between the two at Down Street was taken out of use.
The Victoria line platforms opened on 7 March 1969; interchange between that line and the Piccadilly line was via the ticket hall (without having to pass through the exit barriers). Even today changing between the Jubilee and Victoria lines and the Piccadilly line involves a long walk. The Jubilee line platforms opened on 1 May 1979, at which time the next station south on the Jubilee Line was its then southern terminus, Charing Cross; those platforms were closed when the Jubilee line was extended on a new alignment towards Westminster; at the same time interchange facilities at Green Park were improved. When travelling south from Green Park on the Jubilee Line, Green Park Junction, where the new line diverges from the old, is visible from the train. While passenger services no longer operate to Charing Cross on the Jubilee Line, the old line is used regularly to reverse trains when the eastern part of the line is closed due to engineering works.
On 9 October 1975, terrorists belonging to the Provisional Irish Republican Army detonated a bomb outside Green Park tube station, killing 23-year old Graham Ronald Tuck. 

Step-free access project

In 2008 TfL proposed a project to provide step-free access to all three lines. The project was a TfL-funded Games-enabling project in its investment programme (and not a project specifically funded as a result of the success of the London 2012 Games bid). 
Work commenced in May 2009 to install two lifts from the ticket hall to the Victoria line platforms and an existing interchange passageway giving access to the Piccadilly and Jubilee lines platforms from the lower lift lobby.  This work was completed ahead of schedule in August 2011 when the new lifts were brought into service, along with a third lift between street level on the south side of Piccadilly and the ticket hall. All platforms have level access to the trains, making the station fully accessible (the first one within the Circle Line).  There is also a new ramp from the ticket hall into the park featuring green walls and a stunning canopy above the staircase and lift on the south side of Piccadilly, the new street structures featuring artwork within the Portland stone cladding designed by John Maine RA.

In popular culture

The opening scene of the 1997 film version of Henry James's The Wings of the Dove was set on the east-bound platforms at both Dover Street and Knightsbridge stations, both represented by the same studio mock-up, complete with a working recreation of a 1906 Stock train.

Gallery

Image:green.tube.arp.jpg|Jubilee Line platform
Image:Green Park Victoria Line train.jpg|Victoria Line platform and train in 2007

Transport links

London Buses routes 9, 14, 19, 22, 38 and C2 serve the station.

Notes






