[[Peter Hook]]

CATEGORIES: 1956 births, 20th-century English musicians, 21st-century English musicians, Alternative rock bass guitarists, British alternative rock musicians, English DJs, English New Wave musicians, English rock bass guitarists, Ivor Novello Award winners, Joy Division members, Living people, Music in Salford, Musicians from Manchester, New Order members, People from Broughton, Greater Manchester, Post-punk musicians, British synthpop new wave musicians, 24 Hour Service Station artists, The Durutti Column members

Peter Hook (born 13 February 1956) is an English bass player, musician, singer, DJ, nightclub owner, and author. He is currently lead vocalist and bassist for Peter Hook and The Light.
Hook was a co-founder of the seminal post-punk band Joy Division along with Bernard Sumner in the mid-1970s. Following the death of lead singer Ian Curtis, the band reformed as the modern rock band, New Order, and Hook played bass with them until his departure in 2007. The band has since reformed without Hook. He has also recorded an album with Revenge (One True Passion), two albums with Monaco (Music for Pleasure and Monaco) and one album with Freebass (It's A Beautiful Life) as bassist, keyboardist and lead vocalist.

Early life

Born Peter Woodhead in Salford, Lancashire, to Irene Acton (1928–2000; since 1962 Irene Hook), and John Woodhead. When he was the age of 3, in 1959, his parents divorced and he and his brothers were brought up by his maternal grandmother Alicia Acton (born Chapman; 1896–1968) until 1962, when his mother re-married Ernest W. Hook. Like his band-mate Bernard Sumner, he took his stepfather's surname, although in contrast to his friend he kept it, even creating his nickname, "Hooky," from it. Because of his stepfather's work, he spent part of his childhood in Jamaica before returning to Salford. The Factory Story (Virgin Books 1996)

Playing style

Hook has said that he developed his high bass lines when he started playing with Joy Division because the speaker that he used initially (bought from his former art teacher for £10) was so poor he had to play that high to be able to hear what he was doing, as Bernard Sumner's guitar was so loud.Barrett, Christopher "Joy Division", Music Week, 25 August 2007
With New Order's ever increasing use of sequenced synthesised bass, especially throughout most of 1989's Technique and 1993's Republic, Hook's bass playing became ever more melodic and rhythmic, often exploiting the higher notes on his basses.
Hook also contributed backing vocals on numerous Joy Division songs in concert and sang co-lead with Ian Curtis on live versions of Joy Division's "Interzone." He sings lead on two New Order songs ("Dreams Never End" and "Doubts Even Here" from the 1981 debut album Movement).

Equipment

Basses

Amplification and effects

The main equipment Hook used during the early days of New Order were an Alembic F-2B preamp/ Roland rack unit/ Amcron DC-300A power amp fed through two large custom built 2 x 15 Gauss loaded flightcase cabinets designed and built by Chris Hewitt of Tractor Music. These can be seen in the "Love Will Tear Us Apart" music video, as can Hook's Yamaha BB1200. The Alembic- Amcron- Gauss system was designed by Peter Hook, Chris Hewitt and Martin Hannett. In the earlier days of Joy Division, Hook used a Sound City L120 head and then a Hiwatt Custom 100 Watt head. The Sound City and Hiwatt heads were both used with a Vox Foundation 1x18 cabinet bought from Hook's former art teacher. The Hiwatt was then used on top of a 4x15 Gauss loaded Marshall cabinet put together by Tractor. The Marshall 4 x 15 Gauss cabinet was stolen during New Order's first visit to America. He has also used an Ampeg SVT rig, and has expressed interest in Ashdown amplification.
For the most part, his distinctive tone comes from the use of a chorus pedal, an Electro-Harmonix Clone Theory. This has recently been reissued by Electro-Harmonix, and whilst having similar circuitry as the original has a somewhat different tone than the original 1970s ones (described by many reviewers/players as "less exciting").
With Revenge and Monaco, he updated an Ampeg SVT, which is used at maximum volume when playing live.
In New Order from 1990 onwards Hook used Hiwatt 200 watt heads mounted on Hiwatt 1x15 and 4x10 combined speaker cabinets with Fane speakers.
He is currently using Trace Elliot amplification.

Other work

In 1984, Hook recorded the single "Telstar" with the band Ad Infinitum, which was composed of him and members of the Stockholm Monsters.
In the late 1980s, Hook also worked as a producer for bands such as Inspiral Carpets and The Stone Roses. In 2003 he contributed bass to a number of tracks on Hybrid's album Morning Sci-Fi, including the single "True to Form". Hook also co-owned the Suite Sixteen recording studio formerly Cargo Studios which Hook purchased with Chris Hewitt in 1984. Cargo and Suite Sixteen in Kenion St Rochdale were major studios in the history of punk and post punk music. A blue plaque was unveiled on the Kenion St Music Building in Rochdale that used to house the studios in September 2009 and Peter Hook played a special concert in Rochdale on that day with Section 25 donating all proceeds to the Back Door Music Project,a Rochdale youth project for people interested in music.
New Order have broken up more than once, and Hook has been involved with other projects. In 1995 he toured with The Durutti Column. He then played and recorded with a new band project called Freebass with bass players Mani (The Stone Roses) and Andy Rourke (ex-The Smiths).
He also contributed to Perry Farrell's Satellite Party. His bass can be heard on "Wish Upon a Dogstar" and "Kinky". Inspired by Clint Boon of Inspiral Carpets, he started with the Return To New York nights in London. He contributed a distinctive bassline to Hybrid's 2003 single "True to Form", as well as another track from their Morning Sci-Fi album, "Higher Than a Skyscraper", playing on stage with them on a number of dates of their ensuing tour.
In November 2008 Hook performed a selection of Joy Division and New Order songs in Paris, Brussels, Oss and Krefeld with Section 25. Hook is featured on "Dirty Thirty" and "Blunts & Robots", two tracks off of The Crystal Method's 2009 album Divided by Night. Hook recently compiled "The Hacienda Acid House Classics" following on from his original mix of "The Hacienda Classics" in 2006.
In October 2009, Hook published his book on his time as co-owner of the Hacienda, How Not To Run A Club.
Hook then opened a new club and live venue in Manchester, FAC 251 – The Factory, in February 2010 singing lead vocals with his band, The Light. The club is situated in the old head offices of Factory Records in Manchester City Centre. On 18 May 2010, the 30th anniversary of Ian Curtis' death, The Light performed a set of Joy Division songs including every track from Unknown Pleasures.
In 2010, Hook also recorded and released two EPs on American indie record label 24 Hour Service Station as Man Ray followed in December, blending Hook's trademark high range bass sound and old school punk inflected vocal chant with Murphy's classic synths, guitars and drum machines to produce an indie dance track reminiscent of classic New Order. The song was also used as the theme to FAC 251 – The Factory.
In 2011, Peter Hook And The Light released "1102 2011 EP", four versions of Joy Division songs, including the previously unrecorded "Pictures In My Mind." The EP takes its name from the palindromic recording date of 11 February 2011 at Blueprint Studio, Salford. Featured Happy Mondays' vocalist Rowetta sings versions of "Atmosphere", "New Dawn Fades" and "Insight". Hook sings "Pictures In My Mind", an unfinished Joy Division track discovered on a demo recording unearthed by the band's "bootleg society" from a rehearsal tape stolen in 1977, setting it between Warsaw and Unknown Pleasures. The effervescent and punk tinged tune was completed for this release, and was declared "a worthy addition to the Joy Division canon" by BBC 6Music DJ  Mark Radcliffe.
In 2012, Hook launched a brand new Masters Degree Program

Personal life

In 1979, Hook was questioned as a suspect in the Yorkshire Ripper case. Joy Division's touring schedule coincided with Peter Sutcliffe's movements which led to the police's suspicion. Following gigs in Halifax, Huddersfield, Leeds and Manchester, Hook was questioned and drummer Stephen Morris was arrested.
He has two children from his first relationship with Iris Bates. In 1994, he married comedian Caroline Aherne but the marriage broke down in 1996. He subsequently married Rebecca, and he has a daughter with her named Jessica. 
In July 2012 Hook was awarded a Honorary Fellowship from the University of Central Lancashire during the graduation of the university's creative art students.

Film portrayals

In Michael Winterbottom's 2002 film 24 Hour Party People, which focused on Factory Records, Hook was played by Ralf Little. In Anton Corbijn's 2007 film Control, which focused on the life of Ian Curtis, he was played by Joe Anderson.






