[[University of Oregon]]

CATEGORIES: University of Oregon, Flagship universities in the United States, 1876 establishments in Oregon, Eugene, Oregon, Educational institutions established in 1876, Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities

The University of Oregon (UO) is a public, coeducational research university in Eugene, Oregon, United States. UO was founded in 1876 and graduated its first class two years later.
As a flagship university of the Oregon University System, the UO is one of the nation's many public teaching and research universities.
As of March 2012, University of Oregon faculty and alumni include two Nobel Prize recipients, 10 Pulitzer Prize winners, 19 Rhodes scholars, four Marshall scholars, 58 Guggenheim Fellows, and 129 Fulbright scholars.

History

The  years

The Oregon State Legislature established the university on October 12, 1872, despite the new state's funding woes.   The doors officially opened in 1876, with Deady Hall its sole building. The first year of enrollment contained 155 students taught by five faculty members. The first graduating class was in 1878, graduating five students. In 1881, the university was nearly closed, it was $8,000 in debt before Henry Villard donated $7,000 toward to help pay for the debt. In 1913, and again in 1932, there were proposals to merge the university with what is now referred to as Oregon State University. Evidently, both proposals were defeated.

Maturity as a university

During Prince Lucien Campbell's tenure as president from 1902 to 1925, the university experienced tremendous growth compared to its early years. The budget, enrollment, facilities, and faculty members all grew several times
its amount prior to his presidency. Numerous schools were also established during his tenure, including the School of Music in 1902, the School of Education in 1910, the School of Architecture, the College of Business in 1914, the School of Law in 1915, the School of Journalism in 1916, and the School of Health and Physical Education in 1920.
However, the University of Oregon lost its School of Engineering to Oregon Agricultural College, now known as Oregon State University.
The Zorn-MacPherson Bill in 1932 proposed that the University of Oregon and Oregon State College (now "University"), to be merged into one university. The bill lost in a landslide vote of over 6 to 1. In 1969, the UO was admitted into the Association of American Universities.
With financial support from the state dwindling from 40% to 13% of the university budget,

Push for independence and growth

The University occupies 80 buildings.  However, there are also many ongoing construction projects, which are expected to help accommodate an increase in total undergraduate enrollment.
In reaction to a growing movement to establish an independent university board, the Oregon Legislature in 2013 passed SB 270, requiring local governing boards for the state's three largest institutions.
Proponents of local governing boards believe an independent board will give the university more autonomy, and free it from relying on inadequate state funding. Additionally, it is believed that an independent board will help pave the way for a new $1.6 billion endowment.
On March 31, 2012, a Political Action Committee called Oregonians For Higher Education Excellence was formed by Columbia Sportswear CEO Tim Boyle.
On August 1, 2012, former provost and executive vice-chancellor of UC Irvine, Michael R. Gottfredson took over as president of the University of Oregon.registerguard. Gottfredson succeeded interim president Robert M. Berdahl.

Institution

Colleges and schools

The University of Oregon is organized into eight schools and colleges—six professional schools and colleges, an Arts and Sciences College and an Honors College.

=School of Architecture and Allied Arts=

The School of Architecture and Allied Arts (called "triple-A" or "AAA") was founded by Ellis F. Lawrence in 1914.  The school offers undergraduate and graduate degrees in architecture, art, including digital arts, arts and administration, art history, interior architecture, landscape architecture, and planning, public policy and management, and product design, a graduate degree in historic preservation. The school also offers an architectural program, digital arts program, and product design program in Portland, Oregon.
The school offers the only accredited degree in architecture, landscape architecture, and interior architecture in Oregon. The National Architectural Accrediting Board accredits both the undergraduate bachelor of architecture five-year degree and the master of architecture. Other nationally accredited degrees include the planning and public administration, landscape architecture, and interior architecture programs. The undergraduate architecture program is consistently ranked among the highest in the country, and is currently ranked as the #1 public program for "Sustainable Design Practice and Principles" by DesignIntelligence magazine.

=College of Arts and Sciences=

right|thumb|Detail of the decoration over the front entrance to Gilbert Hall The College of Arts and Sciences (CAS) covers a large array of departments in the arts and sciences. The creative writing graduate program is nationally recognized as being among the best in the nation—fewer than two percent are admitted out of 700+ applicants each year.

=Charles H. Lundquist College of Business=

The Charles H. Lundquist College of Business was founded in 1884 and offers courses in fields such as accounting, decision sciences, entrepreneurship, finance, management, and marketing. It is also home to the University of Oregon Investment Group and the Warsaw Sports Marketing Center, one of the first programs to offer an M.B.A. in sports business OSU and PSU withdrew from the program and the Lundquist College is now its sole administrator.

=College of Education=

The College of Education was established in 1896 as a branch of the Department of Philosophy and later merged with the Department of Science and Arts in 1900. It wasn't until 1910 that the School of Education was established as an independent college. In 1908, this college was accredited by the Northwest Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools. For the 4th consecutive year, the UO special education program ranked third in the nation.

=Robert D. Clark Honors College=

The Clark Honors College is a small college intended to complement the existing majors already in place at the university by joining select students and faculty for a low student to teacher ratio (25:1 maximum). The mean Grade point average GPA of admitted students was 3.93, and the mean Scholastic Aptitude Test Reading + Math only score was 1360 (97th/98th percentile).

=School of Journalism and Communication=

The School of Journalism and Communication is one of the oldest journalism schools in the United States. It also awards the annual Payne Award for Ethics in Journalism. Allen Hall, the re-modeled home of the SOJC, was officially re-opened on March 3, 2013.

=School of Law=

The School of Law was formed in 1884 in Portland and relocated to Eugene in early 1915."Oregon Law: Student life". University of Oregon.

=School of Music and Dance=

The School of Music and Dance was initially just the Department of Music in 1886, and developed into the School of Music in 1900. It was admitted to the National Association of Schools of Music in 1928. The school offers over 20 ensembles in vocal and instrumental music, giving approximately 200 public performances a year.

==Oregon Bach Festival==

The UO is the home of the Oregon Bach Festival, a donor-supported program of the University and the only major music festival affiliated with an American university. Founded in 1970 by German conductor Helmuth Rilling and UO professor (and past president of the American Choral Directors Association) Royce Saltzman, the festival has grown into an international program that draws hundreds of musicians and over 40,000 attendees annually.  The festival's focus is choral and orchestral music, and it hosts a professional choir and orchestra each year to perform major works by Bach and other composers; it also sponsors a master class in conducting that draws participants from around the world.
The festival has presented such artists as Frederica von Stade, Bobby McFerrin, Garrison Keillor, and Thomas Quasthoff, who made his American debut in Eugene in 1995.  The festival actively commissions and premieres new choral-orchestra works, including pieces by Arvo Pärt, Osvaldo Golijov, and Tan Dun.  A Bach Festival recording of the world-premiere performance of Krzyztof Penderecki's Credo won the 2001 Grammy Award for best choral performance.

Research institutes

=Institute of Molecular Biology=

Oregon's Institute of Molecular Biology, founded in 1959, is one of the first of the University's research institutes and, possibly, its most illustrious. It was conceived by University of Oregon physical biochemist Terrell Hill, who recognized the future of biology studied at the molecular level, and, at the same time, recognized that the interdisciplinary nature of these studies would require an administrative unit that could transcend the parochial interests of the classical departments of Biology, Chemistry and Physics. Rather than creating a Department of Molecular Biology, the University opted for an interdisciplinary research institute, in which the appointees would exercise their research responsibilities through the Graduate School and their formal teaching within an existing department of the (then) College of Liberal Arts.
Following Hill's advice, the University sought to attract a Director by offering a five-member institute to be molded according to the Directors taste. These appointments would be subject to veto by the College department only on the basis of scientific competence but never on the basis of the appointees area of research.  Aaron Novick, a physical chemist with post-war interests in the genetics of bacteria, took the bait and quickly filled the four other positions, two of them with young biologists (Frank Stahl and George Sreisinger) working with bacteriophage T4 at a time when bacteriophages were too chemical for a typical biology department and too biological for a typical chemistry department. This small group gained sufficient recognition to initiate an expansion of the Institute to its present size of 19 faculty.
Streisinger's subsequent development of the zebrafish as a model organism for the study of vertebrate development is cited as an outstanding accomplishment of an Institute noted for many accomplishments, including those of Peter von Hippel, Brian Matthews, John Schellman, Vicki Chandler, Ira Herskowitz and Eric Selker, who, like Stahl and Streisinger, are, or were, members of the National Academy of Sciences. An identifiable factor in the Institute's success is its organization as a commune, in which resources are shared among the several laboratories.

Internal university governance

The internal governance of the university is conducted in accordance with The Constitution of the University of Oregon. The UO Constitution provides a collaborative process that ensures a strong voice for the faculty, acting through the University Senate. The representation of students, civil servants, and administrative employees in the senate ensures that this predominantly faculty body operates in the best interests of the entire university community.

Campus

thumb|Lillis Complex (University of Oregon) The campus is spread over  Eugene is located near many prominent geographic features such as the Willamette River, Cascade Mountains and the Pacific Ocean. Also within a two-hour drive is the Portland metropolitan area.
Based on Ellis F. Lawrence's vision, many of the university's buildings are planned around several major quadrangles, many of which abut the 13th Avenue pedestrian mall.uoregon.pdf (PDF)  The university is known for being the site of a pioneering participatory planning experiment known as the Oregon Experiment, which is also the subject of a book of the same name that evolved into the well known book A Pattern Language by Christopher Alexander. The two major principles of the project are that buildings should be designed, in part, by the people who will ultimately use them with the help of an "architect facilitator", and that construction should occur over many small projects as opposed to a few large ones.
Although academic buildings are spread throughout the campus, the majority are located along East 13th Avenue, with heavy pedestrian traffic at the intersection with Kincaid Street. Student recreation and union centers are located toward the center of the campus, with residence halls on the east side of campus. Sports facilities are grouped in the southern-central part of campus with the Autzen Stadium and PK Park complexes across the Willamette River. The university also owns and operates several satellite facilities, including a large facility in the White Stag Block of downtown Portland.

Old campus and memorial quad

The oldest section of campus is located in the northwest area of the current campus. The university's first building, Deady Hall, opened on October 16, 1876, when the University had an enrollment of 177 students. It was originally known as "the building" before being named after Judge Matthew Deady in 1893. The second building on campus is known as Villard Hall and is home to the Theater Arts and Comparative Literature Departments. Completed in 1886, the hall was named after railroad magnate Henry Villard, who provided financial aid to the university in 1881. Before its naming, it was known as "the new building." Both Deady and Villard Halls were designated National Historic Landmarks in 1977.
Just south of Old Campus is the Memorial Quad, which runs north and south along Kincaid Street, capped at both ends by the main campus library, Knight Library, on the south side, and the Lillis Business Complex on the north. It is flanked on the west by the tallest building on campus, Prince Lucien Campbell Hall, also known as "PLC,", Condon Hall on the west, housing the Geography department, and the Jordan Schnitzer Museum of Art on the east, which was remodeled and reopened on January 23, 2005. Also adjacent to Memorial Quad is Chapman Hall, which houses the Robert D. Clark Honors College.

Central campus

The center of campus houses a mixture of academic buildings, an administration building, and student recreation buildings. Just to the east of Memorial Quad, facing 13th Avenue is Johnson Hall where offices for higher administration and trustee offices are found, including the offices of the University President. Directly across 13th Avenue, facing Johnson Hall is "The Pioneer" a statue of a bearded, buckskin-clad pioneer cast in bronze by sculptor Alexander Phimister Proctor in 1919. In 1932, Proctor's "Pioneer Mother" statue was dedicated in the Women's Memorial Quadrangle on the other side of Johnson Hall; the two statues are aligned so that they can "see" one another through the large windows of the hall's main floor.
Lawrence Hall is located at the end of hardscape walkway, directly north of the intersection of 13th Avenue and University Street. It houses the School of Architecture and Allied Arts and is named after its first Dean, Ellis F. Lawrence in 1957.
Additionally, Erb Memorial Union and the recreation center are situated in this part of campus.

Lorry I. Lokey Science Complex and east campus

thumb|Willamette Hall, the centerpiece of the Physics departmentThe Lorry I. Lokey Science Complex comprises multiple science buildings to the east of Lawrence Hall, on the north side of 13th Avenue. Willamette Hall's Paul Olum Atrium is the center of the university's hard sciences complex. The construction of the $45.6 million additions of Willamette Hall, home of the physics department; Cascade, home of the geology department; Deschutes Hall, home of the computer science department; and Streisinger Halls to the complex was completed in 1989.
Within the Lokey Science Complex are two facilities focused on integrative science. Lokey Laboratories is associated with the Oregon Nanoscience and Microtechnologies Institute (ONAMI) and was dedicated to Lorry I. Lokey on February 19, 2008 for his $25 million donation toward the project.  It is located underground, beneath the quad between Heustis and Deschutes Halls, to minimize vibrations. The newest building, the Lewis Integrative Science Building, sits at the north end of this quad and opened in the fall of 2012.  Immediately to the east of the Lokey Science Complex is Oregon Hall, which houses administrative offices including the Office of the Registrar and Office of Admissions.
The northeast corner of campus is home to the Ford Alumni Center and Matthew Knight Arena. The majority of the rest of the eastern part of campus is dedicated to residence halls. 
Carson Hall, located near the Erb Memorial Union, provides dining services along with dormitories. Just south is the Living-Learning Center, opened in 2006. It is a collection of functions including dormitories, classrooms, study areas, dining rooms, and recreational rooms to provide a single location for many student activities.

South campus

The center of south campus is where much of the on-campus athletic facilities reside. Hayward Field, home to the Ducks track and field program, sits in the eastern area of the athletic facilities. It has hosted a number of prominent track and field events such as the US Track and Field Olympic Trials, the NCAA Track and Field Championships, and USATF Championships.
To the west of the athletic facilities lies Pioneer Cemetery and further west is where the current facilities for the College of Education exists, in the southwest corner of campus. The HEDCO Education building and the Frohnmayer Music Center are in the vicinity. The Knight Law Center is located just opposite of Hayward Field in the southeast corner of campus. The Many Nations Longhouse and the Museum of Natural and Cultural History are East of Knight Law.

Other areas and satellites

The controversialPittman, Alan (14 January 2010). "Park or parking lot?" Eugene Weekly. Riverfront Research Park is a small facility maintained by the university, located across Franklin Boulevard from the main campus, next to the Willamette River. The park is used for creating new technologies, such as research about artificial intelligence at the Computational Intelligence Research Lab, and it is the home of the Zebrafish Information Network (ZFIN), the zebrafish model organism database. Local controversy has existed since before the development and approval of the site master plan by the City of Eugene in 1989. Controversy stems from the lack of citizen involvement in the planning process for the use of public lands, and the potential for multi-story office buildings and parking lots to replace open space, civic space, and wildlife habitat along the Willamette River. The University and Student Senates have each passed resolutions 
The complex for the Ducks football and baseball team is located north across the Willamette River. It includes the football stadium (Autzen Stadium),the baseball park (PK Park), an indoor practice football field (Moshofsky Center), an outdoor practice field (Kilkenny Field), and the Casanova Center which includes offices, the athletics Hall of Fame, locker rooms, weight rooms, a film review theater, and a treatment center.
The university also leases space in Old Town Portland in the White Stag Block. UO-Portland provides an urban study environment for the School of Architecture and Allied Arts, the School of Journalism and Communication, the School of Law, and the Lundquist College of Business.  Additionally, the Division of Continuing Education, the Labor Education Resource Center, and the Department of Athletics have active offices there.  The Duck Store has an outlet in the building.

Sustainability

The University of Oregon received a grade of "B+" from the Sustainable Endowments Institute on its College Sustainability Report Card 2011.
The undergraduate architecture program is consistently ranked among the highest in the country, and is currently ranked as the #1 public program for "Sustainable Design Practice and Principles" by DesignIntelligence magazine.
There has also been a push for sustainable buildings on campus with a development plan that requires any new building or renovation to incorporate sustainable design. "When University of Oregon says energy conservation, it means business" (PDF). Oregon Department of Energy Pull-out. The Lillis Business Complex was the catalyst for the policy. The building, completed in 2003 has earned a LEED Silver rating, the highest rating of any college business building in the United States.
The Green Product Design Network (GPDN) was created by a group of leaders from the UO with expertise in green chemistry, product design, business, communications, and journalism.

Libraries and museums

The multi-branch University of Oregon Libraries serves the campus with library collections, instruction and reference, and a wide variety of educational technology and media services. The UO is Oregon's only member of the Association of Research Libraries. The main branch, the Knight Library, houses humanities and social sciences, Learning Commons, Music Services, Government Publications, Maps and Aerial Photos, Special Collections & University Archives, Media Services, the Center for Educational Technologies, and a Cinema Studies lab to be available in Winter 2010. "New Cinema Studies major at UO addresses student and industry demand". University of Oregon School of Journalism and Communication. Other branch locations are:
The UO Libraries hosts Scholars' Bank, an open access (OA) digital repository created to capture, distribute and preserve the intellectual output of the University of Oregon. Scholars' Bank uses open-source DSpace software developed by Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Hewlett-Packard.
The Libraries' Educational Video Group maintains the UO Channel, which uses streaming media to provide access to campus lectures, interviews, performances, symposia, and documentary productions.
The UO is the founding member and host of the Orbis-Cascade Alliance, a consortium of academic and research libraries in Oregon,Washington and Idaho. The combined collections of the Alliance exceed 20 million volumes and can be searched via the Summit union catalog.  The Orbis Cascade Alliance serves faculty and the equivalent of more than 258,000 full-time students.  In addition to its members, the Alliance extends selected services to more than 280 libraries, museums, archives, and historical societies in seven western states.
The University of Oregon is home to the Jordan Schnitzer Museum of Art and the Museum of Natural and Cultural History.
There are multiple galleries around the main campus, including (but not limited to):

Student life and culture

Representation

The Associated Students of the University of Oregon (ASUO) is the student government at the University of Oregon.  It is a non-profit organization funded by the University of Oregon. Its purpose is to provide for the social, cultural, educational and physical development of its members, and for the advancement of their individual and collective interests both within and without the University. The ASUO is the student government and is run by students for students and works on campus-, city-, state-, and federal-level campaigns. Membership consists of all students at the University of Oregon, who have paid the current term or semester student incidental fee.
Additionally, the Erb Memorial Union (EMU) board of directors is responsible for making general policy decisions and long-range plans for the operation of the EMU. The board allocates the EMU's multi-million dollar budget, assigns space for student groups and advises staff in the management of the EMU. The sixteen-member board consists of twelve students (seven elected in a campus-wide election and five direct appointments from either EMU programs or the ASUO), three faculty members appointed by the University of Oregon President and one EMU staff member elected by their peers.
Every fiscal year, the EMU Board prepares a benchmark increase to the ASUO Senate for approval. After the benchmark process, the EMU presents its final budget to the senate, requesting a decrease, increase, or no change in incidental fees to be allocated to the EMU.  If the budget request is approved, the budget must be signed by the ASUO President and then the UO President. Unlike the budget process, any general policy decisions by the EMU Board do not require senate oversight or approval.
Student participation in governance of the university extends to membership in the University Senate, which has five student members with full voting rights plus the ASUO President as a nonvoting member. Students are also represented on the university's Board of Trustees by a voting member appointed by the Governor of Oregon.

Facilities and housing

thumb|The north building of the Living-Learning Center housing complex at the University of Oregon, opened in 2006The Erb Memorial Union (EMU) is the student union, which provides many various student life amenities and sits on the southeast corner of 13th and University. It contains a food court, restaurants and cafes, student groups, meeting rooms and performance spaces, the campus radio station 88.1 KWVA, the Break Pool Hall, and offices for administration. South of the Erb Memorial Union across a small quad is the Student Recreational Center (SRC) which is an exercise and recreation facility. It includes fitness equipment, rock climbing walls, a swimming pool, racquetball courts, an indoor elevated running track and basketball courts. Covered tennis courts and several turf fields, and outdoor tennis courts within a running track are located near the recreation center.
There is currently a project under way to renovate and expand the EMU, as well as the SRC. This proposal includes a 1500 seat concert hall. The $161 million projects are expected to be completed by 2015.
There are nine Residence Halls: Barnhart, Bean, Carson, Earl, the Global Scholars Hall, Hamilton, the Living-Learning Center, Riley, and Walton. This 451-bed student housing facility is part of the university's plan to increase total undergraduate enrollment to 24,000 students in the near future.

Activities

There are more than 250 student groups at the University of Oregon.

=Media=

The University of Oregon has a diverse array of student-run and student-created media, including the Daily Emerald,  the Oregon Commentator, and Ethos Magazine among others
The Libraries' Educational Video Group maintains the UO Channe, which uses streaming media to provide access to campus lectures, interviews, performances, symposia, and documentary productions.
The University is also home of two radio stations: KWAX (classical music) and KWVA (campus radio).

=Forensics=

In addition to its athletic teams, the university also has a competitive intercollegiate Speech and Debate team. The University of Oregon Forensics program was founded in 1876, at the same time as the university. Initially the program consisted of two student-formed forensic societies, which developed into "doughnut league" inter-dorm competitions in the 1890s. In 1891, the UO began intercollegiate competition. Forensics continued to grow as a staple of the university's community and by 1911, the team was so successful that it began charging admission to debates. Money raised during these events was often donated to the fledgling University of Oregon football program.
Parliamentary debate was integrated into UO Forensics in 1998–99 and the team has been competitive since. In 2001, the UO's Alan Tauber and Heidi Ford claimed a national title, winning the first ever National Parliamentary Tournament of Excellence (NPTE).  In 2011, the team of Matt Gander and Hank Fields claimed both national titles, winning the NPTE and the National Parliamentary Debate Association Championship, coached by Thomas Schally, Benjamin Dodds, Sarah Hamid, and Will Chamberlain.

=Traditions=

Athletics

The University of Oregon is a member of the Pacific-12 Conference and the Division I Football Bowl Subdivision of the NCAA. The athletic programs have garnered 21 NCAA team championships,Schools with the Most NCAA Championships
The university competes in 14 sports: football, men's and women's basketball, cross country, track and field, baseball, softball, men's and women's tennis, men's and women's golf, women's soccer, women's lacrosse, women's volleyball, and acrobatics & tumbling. This does not include club sports which competes at the Division I level in Rugby, Soccer, Rowing, and Waterpolo. As well as women's Division I club athletics in Rowing, Rugby, and Waterpolo.
With 20 NCAA championships between them, cross country and track and field are the two programs at the university that have enjoyed the most success. The programs have produced many world-class athletes including Steve Prefontaine and Alberto Salazar. Nike had been formed by the former track and field head coach Bill Bowerman and former University of Oregon track runner Phil Knight. The successes of the programs have given the name of Track Town, USA to Eugene.
Created in 1893, the football team played its first game in 1894 and won its first Rose Bowl in 1917 against the University of Pennsylvania. The 1938–39 men's basketball team, nicknamed the "Tall Firs," won the first-ever NCAA basketball tournament by defeating Ohio State in the March 28, 1939 championship game.
Originally recognized as an official sport at the university in 1908, baseball was disbanded in 1981 due to concerns with Title IX. In 2007, the athletic director Patrick Kilkenny announced plans to reinstate baseball and to drop wrestling while adding women's acrobatics & tumbling.

Mascot

The mascot of the University of Oregon is the fighting duck. The popular Disney character Donald Duck has been the mascot for decades, thanks to a handshake agreement made between then-Athletic Director Leo Harris and Walt Disney in 1947. but both were unpopular and discontinued.

Song

The fight song is "Mighty Oregon", written by professor Albert Perfect and student John DeWitt Gilbert in 1916. It has undergone several changes since its original performance.

In fiction and popular culture

Onscreen

The film National Lampoon's Animal House (1978) was filmed on the university campus and the surrounding area. The building used as the exterior of the Delta House (which belonged to the University of Oregon Pi Kappa Alpha chapter) was demolished in 1986, but the interior scenes were shot in the Sigma Nu house, which still stands today. The Omega house belongs to the Phi Kappa Psi fraternity and still stands today. The sorority house where Bluto climbs the ladder to peek in on the coeds was actually the exterior of the Sigma Nu fraternity."University archives". UO Libraries. Other buildings that were used during filming include Johnson Hall, Gerlinger Hall, Fenton Hall, Carson Hall, and the Erb Memorial Union (EMU). The EMU dining facility known as "The Fishbowl" was the site of the famous food-fight scene. The Knight Library and the Jordan Schnitzer Museum of Art can also be seen in the movie.
Other films shot at the university include

Notable alumni, faculty, and staff

Image:Gene D. Block. Block, M.S. (1972) and P.h.D (1975), chancellor of UCLA
Image:Lee Bollinger - Daniella Zalcman less noise.S., president of Columbia University
Image:Philknightfootball.A. (1959), co-founder, chairman, and former CEO of Nike; 47th richest person in the world
Image:Kesey4.S. (1957), author best known for writing One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest
Image:Palahniukmic.A. (1986), author of Fight Club, Choke, and Lullaby
Image:Ann Curry 2012 Shankbone.A. (1978), The Today Show anchor person and co-host of Dateline NBC
Image:Suzanne Bonamici.S. (1980), J.D. (1983), U.S. Representative for Oregon's 1st congressional district
Image:Peter defazio.A. (1977), U.S. Representative for 
Image:Ron Wyden official photo.D. (1974), senior United States Senator for Oregon
Image:Kent Beck no Workshop Mapping XP.S., M.S. (1987), Software engineer, creator of the Extreme Programming and Test Driven Development software development methodologies, also named agile software development
Image:Plos bjorkman. Bjorkman, B.A. (1971), biochemist, Max Delbrück Professor of Biology at the California Institute of Technology
Image:Pzm london lg.D. (1985), founder and co-author of the Pharyngula science blog, noted critic of intelligent design (ID) and the creationist movement








