[[David Kennedy]]

CATEGORIES: 1955 births, 1984 deaths, American Roman Catholics, Harvard University alumni, Cocaine-related deaths in Florida, American people of Irish descent, Kennedy family, People from Washington, D.C., Robert F. Kennedy

David Anthony Kennedy (June 15, 1955 – April 25, 1984) was the fourth of eleven children of Robert F. Kennedy.

Life

David Anthony Kennedy, born on June 15, 1955, was the fourth child of Robert F. Kennedy and Ethel Kennedy. As a child, David was shy, introverted and sensitive, and shared a particularly strong bond with his father.
On June 4, 1968, eleven days before his 13th birthday, Kennedy nearly drowned while he and his siblings were swimming in the Pacific Ocean near the Malibu, California beach house of Hollywood film director John Frankenheimer, a Kennedy family friend.
A 1973 Jeep accident left Kennedy's then girlfriend, Pamela Kelley, paralyzed.  His oldest brother, Joseph Kennedy II, had been driving the Jeep and was charged with reckless driving. Kennedy sustained a fractured vertebra and became addicted to the painkillers he was given in the hospital. Kennedy spent two years as a student at Harvard University, pursuing a major in American history before dropping out in 1976. He had ambitions of becoming a journalist and spent several months as an intern for a Tennessee newspaper in 1974. Some staff there were impressed with his aptitude.
In 1974
Kennedy and his siblings were the target of kidnap threats, and were given Secret Service protection.
After dropping out of Harvard, Kennedy alternated his time between the Kennedy family home "Hickory Hill" in McLean, Virginia, and New York until February 1979, when he moved to New York City full-time. He was frequently seen in the Manhattan discos with a succession of attractive women. His most notable involvement was with British actress Rachel Ward, whom he met in one such establishment in 1979. In his memoir Symptoms of withdrawal: a memoir of snapshots and redemption, cousin Christopher Kennedy Lawford describes Kennedy as his best friend, and devotes much of chapter 10 to their relationship with one another and the extended Kennedy family.

Health problems and death

Kennedy was diagnosed twice with bacterial endocarditis, an inflammation of the heart often associated with the use of intravenous drugs. As well as experiencing drug overdoses in 1976 and 1978, he also had some skirmishes with the law, including speeding offenses and a DUI. Kennedy spent 6 weeks in Sussex, England, under the care of Dr. Margaret Patterson, an addiction specialist, during the autumn of 1978. Kennedy remained in Boston with his girlfriend, fashion photographer Paula Sculley.
In the spring of 1984, Kennedy completed a month-long stay at St. Mary's Hospital and Rehabilitation Center in Minneapolis. He flew down to Palm Beach, Florida, on April 19 for Easter, where several members of the Kennedy family had gathered. Kennedy checked into room 107 of the Brazilian Court hotel and spent the next few days partying. On April 25th, at the insistence of concerned family members, staff went to check on his welfare and found him dead on the floor of his suite from an overdose of cocaine, Demerol, and Mellaril. Kennedy was interred in the family plot at Holyhood Cemetery in Brookline, Massachusetts, and was the first of four Kennedy grandchildren reaching adulthood to die prematurely. He was later followed in death by his younger brother Michael and cousins John, Jr. and Kara.








