[[Tarkan (singer)]]

CATEGORIES: 1972 births, People from Alzey, Crossover (music), Living people, German people of Turkish descent, Atlantic Records artists, World Music Awards winners, Turkish male singers, Turkish pop singers, Turkish-language singers



Tarkan Tevetoğlu (

Early life

Tarkan was born in Alzey, West Germany, to Ali and Neşe Tevetoğlu. The name Tarkan is said to originate from an ancient Turki king or title,
His parents were part of the generation of Turkish immigrants who came to  West Germany during that country's economic boom. His father's parents boasted a decorated military past as war heroes that fought in the Ottoman armies in the Russo-Turkish Wars,
Tarkan has three step siblings named Adnan, Gülay and Nuray from his mother's first marriage, and a brother, Hakan, and younger sister, Handan from her marriage to his father. His father died of a heart attack in 1995 at the age of 49, and was buried in his home village of Rüzgarlı Köy, in the Turkish district of Ikizdere in the Rize Province of the Turkish Black Sea region. His mother later married an architect, Seyhun Kahraman. Other than his native Turkish, the speaks English fluently. Although he still understands German, he speaks little, primarily because he has been living in the USA and Turkey for the last 20 years.Interview with Tarkan on German TV

Career

Tarkan has charted both in Europe and in the Americas with his definitive song "Şımarık" (Spoilt/Kiss Kiss/Chanson Du Bisou/Besos). As a result of its widespread success and immediately recognizable sound of Tarkan kissing on the track, "Şımarık" was reincarnated into English as "Kiss Kiss" by Stella Soleil and later Holly Valance (which notched her a UK number one hit), after the composer Sezen Aksu sold the music rights. It has been covered by various artists across the world in various languages. Another successful Aksu collaboration was the hit single "Şıkıdım" (Shake). Because of his success, he became the prime example of Turkish pop obtaining an audience outside Turkey. Over the years his works have maintained their popularity, with Tarkan's 2007 studio album Metamorfoz selling over a quarter of a million copies in the first two weeks of its release on December 25, 2007.Hürriyet reports

Beginnings

When the Tevetoğlu family relocated to Turkey, Tarkan began to study music in Karamürsel at high school, before being accepted at the Üsküdar Musiki Cemiyeti Academy in Istanbul. Music legend has it that just as he was preparing to return to Germany, he met Mehmet Söğütoğlu, chairman of the record company İstanbul Plak. For the album he had teamed up with then little known songwriter-composer Ozan Çolakoğlu, who later co-produced his albums. Tarkan's debut provoked mixed feelings among Turks. But it seemed that young people in Turkish cities who were satisfying their hunger with new sounds from Westerns acts such as Michael Jackson and U2 were looking for their own home grown idol. Being considered rebellious by traditionalists for his lyrics and his style of dress (particularly his earrings) only made him more attractive to the young. Although his debut album was not extraordinary when compared to other pop albums of the period, what distinguished Tarkan from the earliest days of his musical career was this unique style and image. Completely Detached – Quantara.de

Şıkıdım era (1994-1996)

The success of Tarkan in the early 90s was seen by some as a sign of growing admiration for Western music, and the artist's real success came two years later. Collaborating with Turkey's "little sparrow", prominent producer and songwriter Sezen Aksu,The name minik serçe, that is "little sparrow" was given to Sezen Aksu by journalist Yavuz Gökmen. Aksu has a song with the same title as well. Tarkan's highly anticipated second album Acayipsin (Oh - You're Something Else) sold more than two million copies in Turkey and 750 thousand copies in Europe. including becoming the first male to make the front cover of the domestic edition of the Cosmopolitan (Cosmo).
In 1994, he experienced a dip in the newfound celebrity status the album had generated, when he made a live broadcast gaffe on the private Turkish TV channel ATV's anniversary celebration during an interview. When asked how he was on live television, his response was "Çişim var, ağabey." ("I've gotta pee, man.") He was publicly criticised for the comment and only after performing traditional songs on another TV special did he endear himself again to the nation.
In part to remove himself from media scrutiny, Tarkan moved to New York, USA in 1994 to complete his education at Baruch College and learn English. Again Tarkan stripped for this project, but this time he wasn't alone. Sharing a bed with a female American model for the slow love song, the opening scenes of the video show the two naked and simulating the aftermath of a love scene. Unused sex scenes from the video are still aired on celebrity entertainment programmes from time to time in Turkey. Tarkan has described Ertegün as his mentor in music and business.

Universal kisses (1997-2000)

In July 1997, the hit song "Şımarık" kick started promotions in Turkey for his third studio album Ölürüm Sana (I'd Die For You). This album took a total of three years to complete. Tarkan collaborated once more with Aksu and music engineer Çolakoğlu for the album, which would go on to become his highest grossing album and win the artist his first music industry award for his song "Şımarık". In Turkey alone, Ölürüm Sana sold 4.5 million copies. However, it was only an indication of things to come.
Signed by the French branch of recording label PolyGram (now Universal Music) after the single "Şımarık" was released in Europe in 1999, Tarkan reached number three in places like Switzerland, France, and Germany. The song also reached number one in Belgium. He was awarded a gold disc at the Cannes Midem Awards. As the first artist of Turkish origin to sell 500,000 albums in France, in an interview for CNN he said: "It feels wild, you know, because in the beginning I never thought it was going to really happen. It's all in Turkish, you know, and nobody understands a word. But I think it's a groove. It's the kisses that are universal."
Following the success of the single, Tarkan released a compilation album for Europe entitled Tarkan. He won a World Music Award in Monaco for its rapid sales. He released two more singles in Europe under the Universal ticket: "Şıkıdım" and "Bu Gece" ("Tonight").
Tarkan travelled throughout Europe and Latin America to promote his music. Appearing in Ukraine, Morocco, Tunisia and Russia, he gave a total of eighteen concerts in seventeen European cities. In Latin America the album provided Tarkan with a strong fan base, especially in Mexico and Argentina, where Universal Music funded a promotional tour at the end of 1999. However, this visit had to be postponed until the second week of March 2000, because Tarkan was called up for military service, which he had suspended to allow for studies in New York. In 2000, the self-titled album was released in the USA with a Universal Latino ticket. Sales went platinum in Latin America.Reader Requests, TarkanDeluxe
This album was also to mark an end in his successful musical partnership with Aksu and temporarily end friendly relations between the two artists. A copyright dispute erupted between Tarkan and Aksu over the track "Şımarık", which ultimately blocked the singer's chance to release an English-language version of the song. The music was initially credited as composed by Aksu, Tarkan and Çolakoğlu, but Tarkan later admitted in a 2006 interview that this had been done without Aksu's consent, who was the true copyright owner. During the dispute, Sezen Aksu released the publishing rights instead to other artists, including Holly Valance.

=Military service=

At the height of his fame in 1999, Tarkan was called up for military service, which had been legally deferred since 1995. The deadline for commencement had ended in 1998, but due to contractual obligations abroad after the success of his compilation album he did not return to Turkey to do his military service. The media discussed whether Tarkan should be viewed as a deserter and stripped of his citizenship; even the Turkish parliament discussed the issue. Tarkan returned to Turkey in 2000 and took advantage of this law, completing his service in twenty-eight days. Before entering the army, he gave a return concert in Istanbul, the benefits of which were donated to an earthquake victims' fund. Of his time in military training, he said:

Karma (2001-2002)

In January 2001, Tarkan joined a global brand and became the first Pepsi spokesperson in Turkey. This preceded the release of his album Karma and for the first time two singles in his domestic market in the same year: "Kuzu Kuzu" ("Like A Lamb") and "Hüp" ("Whoop"). Although Karma was not released worldwide, it was distributed in large shipments to Russia, where he had become the largest-selling non-Russian pop star. A million copies shipped to other areas of Europe, including Denmark. His so-called Karma-era style projected an image totally different from his earlier persona, with regard to both music and looks. His appearance – tight trousers, loose, unbuttoned shirts or tight T-shirts - and his new hairdo set a trend among young Turkish men, who started to copy his looks. Tarkan: Turkey's Last Greatest Star - Sabah. Translation by Ali Yıldırım. According to hairdressers, his Kuzu Kuzu hairstyle is still the most frequently requested style in the salons of Turkey. According to Lang,
This period was not free of scandals, either. In 2001 researcher Dr. N Aysun Yüksel published a book titled Tarkan – Yıldız Olgusu (Tarkan – Anatomy of a Star), which was withdrawn from bookshelves by a court order after Tarkan's lawyer Süheyl Atay sued the writer. According to the court's decision the book published personal information and copyrighted photos of the artist, and violated his good reputation. The Turkish Radio and Television Supreme Council considered banning the video, directed by Ferzan Özpetek, from television broadcast, as some viewers complained that the scene in which Tarkan kisses actress Sinemis Candemir was too "explicit" and "pornographic". The case was reported through Europe by the BBC. There was no ban, and fans had their say by voting it the video of the year in 2001 at Kral music station's video awards.
After becoming the face of Pepsi in Turkey, Tarkan also became the official mascot of the Turkish national football team for the 2002 World Cup. He recorded the football song "Bir Oluruz Yolunda" ("United For You"), which became an anthem for the fans.

Dudu (2003-2004)

His EP/hybrid album Dudu (Woman) was the first to be released by his own label HITT Music, in the summer of 2003. It was the first album of its kind to sell over a million copies in Turkey, while the title track won Tarkan a "Song of the Year Award" in Russia. Because his successful creative partnership with Aksu had ended over the ownership of "Şımarık", he worked with singer-songwriter Nazan Öncel on both Karma and Dudu. Öncel's own Yan Yana Fotoğraf Çektirelim  album was published under the HITT label. He also released his own perfume line entitled "Tarkan" at the start of 2004.
Although musically a continuation from Karma, image-wise Dudu presented different visuals from the 2001-2003 period. Sexuality became secondary in terms of fashion and concerts were toned down to become intimate affairs. It was a declaration that glitz and sex were no longer a necessary tool to sell his works. Indicating his desire to show different sides of his personality, "It's not important how sexy I look or whether I dance sexy," he said of his new look.Tarkan'ın imaj tarihçesi (Tarkan's image history) Hürriyet

Coming closer to Europe (2005-2006)

In 2005, Tarkan finally announced that his English language album was ready after over a decade of effort. The plans for Come Closer began in 1995, when media mogul Ahmet Ertegün encouraged Tarkan to break into the international market. Eventually, he managed to break through without the aid of an English language album with "Şımarık", but Tarkan's manager, Ahmet San, entered Tarkan into contractual obligations that would hinder further success in Europe. In the framework of a larger agreement with Ertegün's Atlantic Records, Tarkan had tied his artist's rights to a French publishing company, Jonathan Productions, in which San owned shares. The contract specified that Tarkan could not release his own works without the company's permission. Once "Şımarık" hit the international stage, Tarkan was virtually blocked from releasing anything, as Charles Ibgui, the director of Jonathan Productions, stated in a letter sent to the artist's then domestic label İstanbul Plak: "neither Tarkan nor his producer Mehmet Söğütoğlu can without our permission release any album in any language anywhere in the world". This dissolved the relationship between singer and manager San. Consequently, Tarkan later commented in a newspaper interview that San had "destroyed his American dream" and the English album "had been scrapped". Ertegün preferred something more American in style, while Tarkan insisted on including many Turkish elements.
On October 10, 2005, Tarkan finally released his debut English language single "Bounce" in Turkey. Come Closer was released in parts of Europe on April 7, 2006, by the Universal Music label. The album features such songwriters as Lester Mendez, who co-wrote Shakira's "Underneath Your Clothes"; Brian Kierulf, who produced songs for Britney Spears;Britney Spears review - Rollingstone. "Bounce" was released in Germany a few days after the release of the album. The German version of the single included an oriental remix, as well as a hip-hop version featuring American reggaeton singer Adassa. A second single, "Start the Fire", was released in August; it included a remix by Turkish DJ Mousse T. A music video for the Mousse T. version was also produced prior to the single's release.
The album was not a breakthrough success. It was released only in a few European countries and Turkey, and Tarkan appeared on several television shows to promote the album in Germany, Macedonia, Bulgaria, Romania and Russia. The promised world wide tour effectively only included a few Central and Eastern European countries, Azerbaijan, Russia, Austria and Germany. On The Fringes Of Fame Worldwide release was postponed and domestic sales did not approach the success of his previous albums, with only 110,000 copies sold in Turkey.MÜYAP: 2006 Foreign albums
This period, like others, was stamped with scandal. A Turkish music pirate, well before the official release, leaked four stolen demo recordings from the debut English album onto the internet.

Metamorphosis (2007-2008)

Tarkan released another Turkish language album on December 25, 2007, which was comprised almost solely of his own work. Called Metamorfoz ("metamorphosis" in English), seven of the songs were written by Tarkan, three other songs were collaborations with long-time engineer and producer Çolakoğlu.com album teaser site The album sold over 300,000 copies in the first two weeks of its release. Tarkan also became the most downloaded artist at TTNetMüzik, a digital music provider where his songs were made legally available in a digital format at the start of January 2008. Out of nearly two million tracks that were purchased after six weeks downloading, nearly 100,000 of those acquired were Tarkan songs, making him the highest grossing single artist at the music portal.
Unlike the public's reception, the critical response to Metamorfoz was lukewarm. Most music critics found the album musically lacking from Tarkan's previous albums, though not all.Müzigin Orhan Pamuk'u (Music's Orhan Pamuk) – Sabah. Tarkan received congratulations from the chairman of the Turkish Language Association for his lyricsmanship by using correct language, traditional idioms and sayings in his lyrics, showing it was said a good example to Turkish youth in preserving the culture of the Turkish language.Medyatava, Hürriyet reports
The album was released in Germany on February 1, 2008, by Urban.Universal Music newsletter

Write My Name Across Your Heart (2010-2011)

Tarkan released his eighth album, Adimi kalbine Yaz, on 29 July 2010. The album received highly positive reaction from critics and also his fans all around the world. It sold more than 300,000 copies one week after its release and the singles of the album topped the music charts of Turkey.

Popularity

Tarkan is undoubtedly one of the most popular singers in Turkey. In addition to his record-breaking album sales, he is known for staging concerts that draw tens of thousands of people. "I've never seen such a sight before. I'll never forget this picture as long as I live," he said after the 2004 festival.Tarkan Rocks Turkish Thrace
His popular image has been courted by several companies; he became the face first for Pepsi, then for two Turkish telephone companies, Turkcell and Avea. Tarkan's popularity can also be measured by the fact that he became the first Turkish singer to require personal security guards. His bodyguard is Levent Ağaoğlu, the founder of Legend Security. His bodyguards escort him during his personal travels as well.Tarkan'a gölge oldu (He became Tarkan's shadow) – Sabah
In recent years, Tarkan has gained international recognition beyond his parents' native Turkey. He is popular in Eastern European countries like Romania and Bulgaria, and in Russia, where he has performed extensively.
While his song "Şımarık" has been sampled by various artists in these countries, the lucrative film industry in India has also poached several Tarkan hits, including "Şıkıdım", "Kuzu Kuzu" and "Dudu", for various Bollywood films. His Kış Güneşi song has been chosen as one of "The Unforgettable Hits of Turkish Music" by Hürriyet newspaper.Türk müzigin unutulmayan sarkilari – Hürriyet Tarkan also has many fans in Iran. In conjunction with the release of Metamorfoz, Tarkan became the first Turksh artist to have a mp3 player named after him. German manufacturer of storage products and audio devices TrekStor joined up with Tarkan for their mp3 player series i. Packed with special features, the digital player was titled the i.Tarkan Ahead of the Game, Tarkan Deluxe

Paparazzi terror

The dark side of Tarkan's popularity comes with the media, particularly with the paparazzi. On 29 December 2007, Tarkan gave an interview to Taraf, explaining how the Turkish paparazzi terrorised him when he was leaving the studio of TRT, the national television channel, where he was recording his New Year's Eve concert. Upon leaving the building a group of 10-15 paparazzi, angered by Tarkan's refusal of answering their questions, started to smack and kick his car, shouting offensive words, and blocked his way with their vehicles. When the singer's car finally managed to take the road, they followed him to his home, where other media personnel were already waiting for him to arrive. The mass of paparazzi blocked the entrance to his house, and thus the singer was forced to flee to a hotel and spend the night there. He gave the interview to Taraf in the hotel and published the newspaper article on his official website, aiming to direct attention to the dangerous behaviour of the Turkish yellow press. That time his angry comments about journalists' behaviour were printed in almost all newspapers.Tarkan News Round-up

=The PETA Controversy=

In February 2008, the animal rights organization PETA (People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals) commenced a drive to persuade Tarkan to swear off fur after being spotted wearing fur on the cover of his 2005 album, Come Closer, which featured a coat with a fur lined collar. PETA encouraged its members to send personal email messages to Tarkan and his management, in the hope the artist would set an example for his many fans by quitting the use of fur.PETA Protest Update

Personal life

Tarkan does not like to talk about his personal life, which has partly fueled the "is he-is he not gay" discussion, and the subject of his relationships often fills the front pages of Turkish newspapers and magazines. In 2001, when Tarkan was moving houses in New York, a worker stole what the domestic media tried to portray as compromising photos which suggested his homosexuality, but were simply photos with other men in swimwear in a public nude beach.Tarkan'ın belalısı gözaltına alındı (Tarkan trouble-maker under arrest)
In special interview to Hürriyet, Tarkan contested the widespread assumption that he was gay.blogspot.html Arman, Ayşe. Gentle as a Lamb - Hürriyet, translation by Ali Yıldırım Tarkan subsequently gave fewer and fewer interviews and television appearances, limiting himself to a small number of trusted journalists. In 2006, he claimed that his relationship with the media had gone wrong.
In a rare interview in 2006 he said, "There's a trust crisis between me and the media. I'm fed up with being forced into arguments, that all my words are twisted around. I don't want to do it any more. It's no fun any longer. They are aiming right for my head ... When I go to America, I'm so jealous of their talk shows. There are no such things in Turkey. Who shall I talk to in Turkey, in which talk show? Plus, they would film me in ridiculous places and I would end up being shown as someone I'm not. And in the end, the topic will always come back to the same question: 'Are you gay? Are you bisexual?'"Arman, Ayşe. Bu ülke beni ille de gay yapacak (This country will make me gay, no matter what) - Hürriyet
He was together with female lawyer Bilge Öztürk for 7 years until they amicably split in 2008.Gay değilim, evliliğe inanmam (I'm not gay, I don't believe in marriage) - Milliyet Tarkan owns a ranch-like property in Polonezköy, Istanbul, where he cultivates fruit trees and keeps animals.Özcan, Tarkan ile komşu oldu (Özcan and Tarkan became neighbours) – Akşam Gazetesi Tarkan also owns a flat in Murray Hill, New York, worth approximately 5 million dollars, according to the Turkish pressTarkan'ın ABD'deki evinin değeri 5 milyon dolar oldu! (Tarkan's flat in the US is worth 5 million dollars!) – Akşam Gazetesi (the flat was sold on 29 June 2010 for $1,475,000).
In February 2010 during a drug raid police officials found narcotics in the singer's house. In September 2011 he admitted before court that he had been using drugs, he however claimed that he never paid for them.

Awards

List of awards Tarkan has won during his career:Note: The awards section is incomplete due to the inconsistency of Turkish websites. Tarkan has won many more awards but not every of them can be found on the world wide web.
International
Domestic

Discography

Albums

Singles

Domestic Promo Singles



Further reading



Notes




