[[Honolulu International Airport]]

CATEGORIES: Airports in Hawaii, Transportation in Honolulu, Hawaii, WAAS reference stations, Buildings and structures in Honolulu, Hawaii, Airports established in 1927

Honolulu International Airport  is the principal aviation gateway of the City & County of Honolulu and the State of Hawaii and is identified as one of the busiest airports in the United States, with traffic now exceeding 21 million passengers a year and rising."The State of Hawaii Airport Activity Statistics By Year 2007-1994", Department of Transportation, Airports Division, State of Hawaii.
It is located in the Honolulu census-designated place three miles (5 km) northwest of Oahu's central business district., effective 2007-12-20"Honolulu CDP, HI." U.S. Census Bureau. Main roads leading to the airport are Nimitz Highway and the Queen Liliuokalani Freeway of Interstate H-1.
Honolulu International Airport serves as the principal hub of Hawaiian Airlines, the largest Hawaii-based airline.  Hawaiian offers flights between the various airports of the Hawaiian Islands and also serves the continental United States, Australia, New Zealand, American Samoa, Tahiti, Japan, South Korea and Taiwan. It is host to major United States and international airlines, with direct flights to American, Asian, and Pacific Rim destinations. In addition to not only serving most major western cities, and many smaller ones especially in California, recent announcements have revealed new routes on the East Coast to both New York-JFK, and Washington-Dulles joining the already established routes to Atlanta-Hartsfield and Newark-Liberty.
It is also the base for Aloha Air Cargo, which previously offered both passenger and cargo services under the name Aloha Airlines. This airline ceased passenger flights on March 31, 2008 and sold off its cargo services to Seattle-based Saltchuk Resources, Inc (also owners of inter-island sea-based shipping company Young Brothers and Hawaiian Tug & Barge.)
In 2012, the airport handled 19,291,412 passengers, 278,145 aircraft movements and processed 412,270 metric tonnes of cargo.

History

HNL opened in March 1927 as John Rodgers Airport, named after World War I naval officer John Rodgers.
The U.S. military grounded all civil aircraft and took over all civil airports after the attack on Pearl Harbor, and Rodgers Field was designated Naval Air Station Honolulu.  The Navy built a control tower and terminal building, and some commercial traffic was allowed during daylight hours.  Rodgers Field was returned to the Territory of Hawaii in 1946.  At the time, at , it was one of the largest airports in the United States, with four paved land runways and three seaplane runways.
John Rodgers Airport was renamed Honolulu Airport in 1947; "International" was added to the name in 1951. Being near the center of the Pacific Ocean it was a stop for many transpacific flights. By 1950 it was the third-busiest airport in the United States in terms of aircraft operations, and its 
The original terminal building on the southeast side of runways 4 was replaced by the John Rodgers Terminal, which was dedicated on August 22, 1962 and opened on October 14, 1962. From 1970 through 1978, the architect Vladimir Ossipoff designed a terminal modernization project that remodeled this terminal and created several additions,[ref]
[/ref]
Pan Am used Honolulu as a transpacific hub for many years, initially as a connecting point between the West Coast and Polynesia (Fiji, New Caledonia and New Zealand) in 1946,

Modernization and history since 2006

On March 24, 2006 Hawaii Governor Linda Lingle unveiled a $2.3 billion modernization program for Hawaii airports over a 12-year period, with $1.7 billion budgeted for Honolulu International Airport.
As part of the modernization, flight display monitors throughout the airport have been upgraded, new food and beverage vendors have been added, and a new parking garage across from the International Arrivals terminal has been completed.  Current projects include an international arrivals corridor with moving sidewalks built atop the breezeway leading to the Ewa Concourse.  The first phase of the project was completed in October 2009, while the remainder of the two phase project was completed in 2010.
In 2011, Hawaiian Airlines renovated the check-in lobby of the Interisland Terminal, replacing the traditional check-in counters with six circular check-in islands in the middle of the lobbies, which can be used for inter-island, mainland, and international flights. This renovation project was fully funded by Hawaiian Airlines and not a part of the modernization program.Hawaiian airlines renovating inter-island terminal check-in lobby at Honolulu International Airport, Honolulu Star Advertiser retrieved 2011-03-31
Future projects include construction of a Mauka Concourse branching off the Interisland Terminal, the first concourse expansion at HNL in 15 years.  Construction of the concourse will involve replacing the existing Commuter Terminal.
By 2012 Hawaiian Airlines was re-establishing Honolulu Airport as a connecting hub between the United States mainland and the Asia-Pacific region. "ANALYSIS: Honolulu's reascendant connecting hub." Flightglobal. October 30, 2012. That year, according to a Massachusetts Institute of Technology study, the airport had 24% fewer domestic departure flights than it did in 2007. "MIT study: Number of flights from Honolulu fell 24% in five years." Pacific Business News. May 8, 2013.

Authority

Honolulu International Airport is part of a centralized state structure governing all of the airports and seaports of Hawaii Airports Administrator.
The Hawaiahu District officials.

Facilities and aircraft

The airport has four major runways, which it shares with the adjacent Hickam Air Force Base.  The principal runway designated 8R/26L, also known as the Reef Runway, was the world's first major runway constructed entirely offshore.  Completed in 1977, the Reef Runway was a designated alternate landing site for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration space shuttle program in association with Hickam Air Force Base, which shares Honolulu International Airport's airfield operations.
In addition to the four paved runways, Honolulu International Airport has two designated offshore runways designated 8W/26W and 4W/22W for use by seaplanes.
The entire terminal complex features twenty-four hour medical services, restaurants, shopping centers and a business center with conference rooms for private use.  Passengers have the option of using various short-term and long-term parking structures on the grounds of Honolulu International Airport.
For the 12-month period ending December 8, 2006, the airport had 323,726 aircraft operations, an average of 886 per day: 55% scheduled commercial, 26% general aviation, 15% air taxi and 5% military. There are 206 aircraft based at this airport: 48% single-engine, 27% multi-engine, 16% military, 6% helicopter and 3% jet.
All Nippon Airways has its Honolulu Office in Airport Building 47."ANA City offices/Honolulu." All Nippon Airways. Retrieved on 13 August 2011. "Honolulu 300 Rodgers Bldg. No. 47 Honolulu International Airport Honolulu, HI. 96819" When Mid-Pacific Airlines was in operations, its headquarters were on the airport property."World Airline Directory." Flight International. May 16, 1981. 1452. "Head Office: Honolulu International Airport, Hawaii, USA."

Terminals

Honolulu International Airport has three terminal buildings. A fleet of Chance RT-52 buses provide interterminal transportation between the ticket counters of all three terminals and between the concourses in the Interisland and Main terminals.  These buses, known as "Wiki Wiki" buses (from the Hawaiian word for "quick"), are the namesake for the WikiWikiWeb, the first wiki.
The largest airline at Honolulu airport is Hawaiian Airlines offering 13,365 seats per day, which represents a 45% market share.  The #2 and #3 carriers are United and Japan Airlines (JAL) with 7.7% and 7.4% market share respectively.
Traffic between Honolulu and the mainland United States is dominated by flights to and from Los Angeles and San Francisco. These two cities, plus Seattle, account for around half of all flights between the mainland and Honolulu. Hawaiian Airlines, with 10 routes, has the highest market share on routes between Honolulu and the mainland.
Internationally Japan is the dominant market. Two-thirds of international seats are heading either for Nagoya, Osaka, Tokyo (Haneda and Narita airports) with services provided by JALways/Japan Airlines, Air Japan, China Airlines, Delta, Hawaiian, or United. Narita alone is served with 61 weekly departures with Japanese carriers operating twice as many flights as US carriers.
Other major international routes are to Seoul (25 weekly departures operated by Korean Airlines, Asiana Airlines and Hawaiian), Sydney (12 weekly departures operated by Hawaiian, Jetstar and Qantas) and Vancouver (19 weekly departures spread between Air Canada and Westjet).  In October 2009, China-based Hainan Airlines was granted approval for a nonstop flight from Honolulu to Beijing.

Commuter Terminal (Gates 62–80)

The Commuter Terminal serves smaller airlines which operate flights between both the smaller and major commercial airports in the island chain.
Boarding and deplaning is conducted directly on the tarmac, using an auxiliary incline ramp to avoid the air-stairs.
Passengers who depart from the commuter terminal, and is bound to another island, and wishing to connect to a flight bound for the U.S. Mainland may not have baggage checked all the way to their final destination. The bags must be claimed at the next airport and be re-checked after completing pre-departure agriculture inspection formalities.

Interisland Terminal (Gates 49–61)

The Interisland Terminal mainly serves the interisland and some US mainland flights and departing international flights (gate 54) of Hawaiian Airlines; most of Hawaiian's U.S. Mainland and International departures leave from Gates 15–34. It is designed to handle flights of jet aircraft between the major commercial airports in the Hawaiian Islands. The former Aloha Airlines and Mokulele Airlines Alii Lounge has been converted to a second Hawaiian Airlines Premier Club Lounge near Gate 56.
On the ground level, Hawaiian Airlines uses Baggage Claim B for U.S. Mainland arrivals, and Baggage Claim C is used for interisland and U.S. Mainland arrivals. International arrivals on Hawaiian use the International Arrivals Baggage Claim located in the Main Terminal. Mokulele Airlines and Aloha Airlines formerly occupied Baggage Claim C.

Main Overseas Terminal (Gates 6–34)

The Main Overseas Terminal serves U.S domestic and international destinations. All boarding gates in the Main Overseas Terminal at Honolulu International are common use, shared among all airlines, and may change daily as the need arises. No gates are assigned to any specific airline. The Main Overseas Terminal is divided into three concourses:
Gates 26–34 in addition to serving U.S. domestic flights can serve  International flights and provide arrivals access directly into the International Arrivals Building to CBP screening via an enclosed secure corridor. Prior to this opening fully in early 2012 arriving international passengers had to board a Wiki Wiki bus to International arrivals.

Airlines and destinations

Top destinations

Scheduled cargo services

Fixed-base operators

A number of fixed-base operators are located along Lagoon Drive on the airport's southeastern perimeter. While these focus on general aviation services, there are a few small passenger airline operations that operate from these facilities, rather than from the main terminal complex. Air tour flights typically depart from this area as well.

Public transport

TheBus routes 19, 20, and 31 stop on the upper (departure) level of the airport.  Routes 19 and 20 connect the airport to Pearlridge Center (20 only), Hickam AFB (19 only), Downtown Honolulu, Ala Moana Center, and Waikiki.  Route 31 connects the airport to Tripler Army Medical Center, via Kalihi Transit Center.  Routes 9, 40, 40A, 42, and 62 run on Nimitz Highway within walking distance of the airport.

Accidents

In popular media

The airport is featured in the two racing video games, Test Drive Unlimited and Test Drive Unlimited 2.
The airport has also been featured in several episodes of the Hawaii Five-0 (2010) television series, as well as in the 2006 film, Snakes on a Plane, and the 2014 film Godzilla.






