[[Ceiba pentandra]]

CATEGORIES: Ceiba, Plants described in 1791, Ayahuasca, Trees of Barbados, Trees of Belize, Trees of Brazil, Trees of Central America, Trees of Guyana, Trees of Hispaniola, Trees of Mexico, Trees of Puerto Rico, Flora of Senegal, Trees of Suriname, Trees of Trinidad and Tobago, Fiber plants, Malay words and phrases, Crops originating from the Americas, Flora of Sierra Leone, National symbols of Equatorial Guinea, National symbols of Guatemala, Puerto Rico national symbols, Flora of the Caribbean

Ceiba pentandra   is a tropical tree of the order Malvales and the family Malvaceae (previously separated in the family Bombacaceae), native to Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean, northern South America, and (as the variety C. pentandra var. guineensis) to tropical west Africa. Kapok is the most used common name for the tree and may also refer to the cotton obtained from its seed pods. The tree is also known as the Java cotton, Java kapok, silk-cotton or ceiba.

Characteristics

The tree grows to 60–70 m (200–230 ft) tall and has a very substantial trunk up to 3 m (10 ft) in diameter with buttresses. The trunk and many of the larger branches are often (but not always) crowded with very large, robust simple thorns. The leaves are compound of 5 to 9 leaflets, each up to 20 cm (8 in) and palm like. Adult trees produce several hundred 15 cm (6 in) seed pods. The pods contain seeds surrounded by a fluffy, yellowish fibre that is a mix of lignin and cellulose.

Uses

The fibre is light, very buoyant, resilient, resistant to water but it is very flammable. The process of harvesting and separating the fibre is labour-intensive and manual. It is difficult to spin but is used as an alternative to down as filling in mattresses, pillows, upholstery, zafus, and stuffed toys such as teddy bears, and for insulation. It was previously much used in life jackets and similar devices until synthetic materials largely replaced the fibre. The seeds produce an oil used locally in soap and that can be used as fertilizer.
Native tribes along the Amazon River harvest the kapok fibre to wrap around their blowgun darts. The fibres create a seal that allows the pressure to force the dart through the tube.
The commercial tree is most heavily cultivated in the rainforests of Asia, notably in Java (hence its nicknames), Philippines, Malaysia, Hainan Island in China as well as in South America. The flowers are an important source of nectar and pollen for honeybees.

Ethnomedical uses

Ceiba pentandra bark decoction has been used as a diuretic, aphrodisiac, and to treat headache, as well as type II diabetes. It is used as an additive to some versions of the hallucinogenic drink Ayahuasca.

Kapok seed oil

A pressed seed oil can be derived from the seeds of the kapok tree. The oil has a yellow colour and a pleasant, mild odour and taste. It becomes rancid quickly when exposed to air. Kapok oil is produced in India, Indonesia and Malaysia. It has an iodine value of 85-100, which makes it a nondrying oil. This means that it does not dry out significantly when exposed to the air. Kapok oil has some potential as a biofuel and in paint preparation.

Religion and folklore

The kapok is a sacred symbol in Maya mythology.
According to the folklore of Trinidad and Tobago, the Castle of the Devil is a huge kapok growing deep in the forest in which Bazil the demon of death was imprisoned by a carpenter. The carpenter tricked the devil into entering the tree in which he carved seven rooms, one above the other, into the trunk. Folklore claims that Bazil still resides in that tree.

Symbolism

C. pentandra is the national emblem of Guatemala, Puerto Rico,

Gallery

Image:Kapok leaves I IMG 5949.jpg|Kapok leaves in Kolkata, West Bengal, India
Image:Kapok Fruit I IMG 3839.jpg|Kapok Fruit in Kolkata, West Bengal, India
Image:Kapok bark I IMG 2556.jpg|Kapok bark in Kolkata, West Bengal, India
Image:Ceiba_pentandra_MS4104.JPG|Buttress roots
Image:Ceiba_pentandra_fruit_out_hg.jpg|Fruit
Image:Bombax LalBagh.JPG|Largest known Kapok specimen, Bangalore, India
Image:Ceiba_Nassau_1900.jpg|In Nassau, Bahamas photographed by William Jackson
Image:Night view from Palm Beach Florida by Volkan Yuksel DSC09837.jpg| Night view of the Kapok Tree from Palm Beach, Florida








