[[BNSF Railway]]

CATEGORIES: BNSF Railway, Berkshire Hathaway, Companies based in Fort Worth, Texas, Transportation in Fort Worth, Texas, Alabama railroads, Arizona railroads, Arkansas railroads, California railroads, British Columbia railways, Colorado railroads, Idaho railroads, Iowa railroads, Kansas railroads, Kentucky railroads, Louisiana railroads, Manitoba railways, Minnesota railroads, Mississippi railroads, Missouri railroads, Montana railroads, Nebraska railroads, Nevada railroads, New Mexico railroads, North Dakota railroads, Oklahoma railroads, Oregon railroads, South Dakota railroads, Tennessee railroads, Texas railroads, Utah railroads, Washington (state) railroads, Wisconsin railroads, Wyoming railroads, Railroads in the Chicago Switching District, Companies operating former Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway lines, Companies operating former Canadian Pacific Railway lines, Companies operating former Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad lines, Companies operating former Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul and Pacific Railroad lines, Companies operating former Chicago and North Western Transportation Company lines, Companies operating former Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific Railroad lines, Companies operating former Great Northern Railway (U.S.) lines, Companies operating former Illinois Central Railroad lines, Companies operating former Kansas City, Mexico and Orient Railway lines, Companies operating former Missouri–Kansas–Texas Railroad lines, Companies operating former Northern Pacific Railway lines, Companies operating former St. Louis–San Francisco Railway lines, Companies operating former Southern Pacific Transportation Company lines, Companies operating former Spokane, Portland and Seattle Railway lines, Companies operating former Western Pacific Railroad lines, Defunct Florida railroads, Mojave Desert, Railway lines in Chicago, Illinois, Economy of the Western United States, Class I railroads in North America, Railway companies established in 1996

The BNSF Railway is the second-largest freight railroad network in North America, second to the Union Pacific Railroad (its primary competitor for Western U.S. freight), and is one of seven North American Class I railroads. It has three transcontinental routes that provide high-speed links between the western and eastern United States.  BNSF trains traveled over 169 million miles in 2010, more than any other North American railroad.
According to corporate press releases, the BNSF Railway is among the top transporters of intermodal freight in North America. It also hauls bulk cargo.  For instance, the railroad hauls enough coal to generate roughly ten percent of the electricity produced in the United States.
Headquartered in Fort Worth, Texas, the railroad is a wholly owned subsidiary of Berkshire Hathaway Inc.
The creation of BNSF started with the formation of a holding company, the Burlington Northern Santa Fe Corporation on 22 September 1995. This new holding company then purchased the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway (often called the "Santa Fe") and Burlington Northern Railroad, and formally merged the railways into the Burlington Northern and Santa Fe Railway on 31 December 1996. On 24 January 2005, the railroad's name was officially changed to "BNSF Railway," using the initials of its original name.
In 1999, Burlington Northern Santa Fe and the Canadian National Railway announced their intention to merge and form a new corporation entitled North American Railways to be headquartered in Montreal, Canada. The United States' Surface Transportation Board (STB) placed a 15-month moratorium on all rail mergers, which ended this merger.
On November 3, 2009, Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway announced it would acquire the remaining 77.4 percent of BNSF it did not already own for $100 per share in cash and stock - a deal valued at $44 billion. The company is investing an estimated $34 billion in BNSF and acquiring $10 billion in debt.

History

BNSF's history dates back to 1849, when the Aurora Branch Railroad in Illinois and the Pacific Railroad of Missouri were formed. The Aurora Branch eventually grew into the Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad, (CB&Q), a major component of predecessor Burlington Northern. A portion of the Pacific Railroad became the St. Louis-San Francisco Railway (Frisco).
The Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway (ATSF) was chartered in 1859. It built one of the first transcontinental railroads in North America, linking Chicago and Southern California; major branches led to Texas, Denver, and San Francisco. The Interstate Commerce Commission denied a proposed merger with the Southern Pacific Transportation Company in the 1980s.
The Burlington Northern Railroad (BN) was created in 1970 through the consolidation of the Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad, the Great Northern Railway, the Northern Pacific Railway and the Spokane, Portland and Seattle Railway. It absorbed the St. Louis-San Francisco Railway (Frisco) in 1980. Its main lines included Chicago-Seattle with branches to Texas (ex-Burlington) and Montgomery, Alabama (ex-Frisco), and access to the low-sulfur coal of Wyoming's Powder River Basin.

BN-ATSF merger

On June 30, 1994, BN and ATSF announced plans to merge; they were the largest and smallest (by mileage) of the "Super Seven," the seven largest of the then-twelve U.S. Class I railroads. The long-rumored announcement was delayed by a disagreement over the disposition of Santa Fe Pacific Gold Corporation, a gold mining subsidiary that ATSF agreed to sell to stockholders. 14-16 This announcement began the next wave of mergers, as the "Super Seven" were merged down to four in the next five years. The Illinois Central Railroad and Kansas City Southern Railway (KCS), two of the five "small" Class Is, announced on July 19 that the former would buy the latter,Michael W. Blaszak, Illinois Central, KCS seek a potent union, Trains, October 1994, pp. 14-16 but this plan was called off on October 25. The Union Pacific Railroad (UP), another major Western system, started a bidding war with BN for control of the SF on October 5. 20-24 The UP gave up on January 31, 1995, paving the way for the BN-ATSF merger. 18 Subsequently, the UP acquired the Southern Pacific Transportation Company (SP) in 1996, and Eastern systems CSX Transportation and Norfolk Southern Railway split Conrail in 1998.
On February 7, 1995, BN and ATSF heads Gerald Grinstein and Robert D. Krebs both announced shareholders had approved the plan, which would save overhead costs and combine BN's coal and ATSF's intermodal strengths. Although the two systems complemented each other with little overlap,Kevin P. Keefe, Will Rob Krebs win the West?, Trains, May 1995, pp. 14-15 in contrast to the Santa Fe-Southern Pacific merger, which failed because it would have eliminated competition in many areas of the Southwest, BN and ATSF came to agreements with most other Class Is to keep them from opposing the merger. UP was satisfied with a single segment of trackage rights from Abilene, Kansas to Superior, Nebraska, which BN and ATSF had both served. KCS gained haulage rights to several Midwest locations, including Omaha, East St. Louis, and Memphis, in exchange for BNSF getting similar access to New Orleans. SP, initially requesting far-reaching trackage rights throughout the West,Scanner, Trains, June 1995, p. 21 soon agreed on a reduced plan, whereby SP acquired trackage rights on ATSF for intermodal and automotive traffic to Chicago, and other trackage rights on ATSF in Kansas, south to Texas, and between Colorado and Texas. In exchange, SP assigned BNSF trackage rights over the former Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific Railroad between El Paso and Topeka and haulage rights to the Mexican border at Eagle Pass, Texas.J. David Ingles, BN-Santa Fe widens its lanes, Trains, July 1995, pp. 22-23 Regional Toledo, Peoria and Western Railway also obtained trackage rights over BN from Peoria to Galesburg, Illinois, a BN hub where it could interchange with SPNews Photos, Trains, July 1996, p. 30 (which had rights on BN dating from 1990Interstate Commerce Commission, Finance Docket No. 31730 (Sub-No. 1), August 25, 1995). The Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) approved the BNSF merger on July 20, 1995 (with final approval on August 23), less than a month before UP announced on August 3 that it would acquire SP. 18 Parents Burlington Northern Inc. and Santa Fe Pacific Corporation were acquired on September 22, 1995 by the new Burlington Northern Santa Fe Corporation. The merger of the operating companies was held up by issues with unions;Scanner, Trains, June 1996, p. 23 ATSF merged on December 31, 1996 into BN, which was renamed the Burlington Northern and Santa Fe Railway Company."Moody's Transportation Manual, 1992, p. 12

Effect of UP-SP merger

The Union Pacific-Southern Pacific merger further enlarged the combined BNSF network. Unlike BN and ATSF, UP and SP had significant overlap, where competition between the two would become a monopoly. UP and BNSF announced in late September 1995 that, in exchange for BNSF not opposing the merger, it would obtain ownership of  of trackage rights to reach these "two-to-one" shippers. Significant additions included rights over SP's Central Corridor from Denver via the Moffat Tunnel and Salt Lake City, and over Donner Pass, to the San Francisco Bay Area, with an alternate route through the Feather River Canyon along UP. The ATSF trackage in California's Central Valley was linked to BN's line into Oregon, through trackage rights over UP between Stockton and Keddie and acquisition of UP's section of the "Inside Gateway" to the beginning of BN trackage at Bieber. In Texas, BNSF received rights in several directions from the Houston area: west over UP to San Antonio, with a branch to Waco, and continuing over SP to Eagle Pass (replacing the haulage rights they had just obtained); south over UP to Brownsville; east over SP to New Orleans (including the purchase of this line east of Lake Charles); and northeast over SP to Memphis with a branch on UP to Little Rock. Ownership of a short connection between Waxahachie and Dallas also went from UP to BNSF. UP, in return, got a few short sections of trackage rights over BNSF, mainly connecting the SP at Chemult to the UP at Bend, Oregon, and connecting the SP at Mojave with existing UP rights on ATSF at Barstow, California. Keefe, Carving up the West, Trains, December 1995, pp. 16-18Surface Transportation Board, Finance Docket No. 32760, August 6, 1996 On April 18, 1996, UP, BNSF, and the Chemical Manufacturers Association entered into an agreement giving BNSF rights over the UP line between Houston and East St. Louis, paralleling the Houston-Memphis SP line, and allowing BNSF to participate in the UP's plan for directional running, in which each line would serve through trains in only one direction. 19-22Surface Transportation Board, Finance Docket No. 32760 (Sub-No. 19), September 9, 1996 The Surface Transportation Board, successor to the ICC, approved the UP-SP merger on July 3,Arrivals & Departures, Trains, September 1996, p. 20 and UP control of SP took effect on September 11, 1996. 22 BNSF trackage rights operations began on the Central Corridor on October 10, and soon thereafter on other lines.J. David Ingles, BNSF begins service on UP merger routes, Trains, January 1997, pp. 20-21
BNSF continued projects started by its predecessors, most notably BN's work on reopening Stampede Pass. BN had closed Stampede Pass, the Northern Pacific Railway's main line across Washington, in 1984, in favor of the ex-Great Northern Railway's Stevens Pass. BN never abandoned the line and began rehabilitating it in early 1996, and the route reopened in early December, relieving the crowded Stevens Pass. 40-51 The ex-ATSF main line, now known as the Southern Transcon, has also seen steady work to add tracks, giving BNSF more capacity on this major intermodal route. 20-22

Attempted merger with CN

On December 20, 1999, BNSF and the recently privatized Canadian National Railway announced plans (STB Finance Docket No. 33842) to combine as subsidiaries of a new holding company, North American Railways, which would control about  of railroad. With CN's lines located primarily in Canada and, through subsidiary Illinois Central Railroad, on a north-south corridor near BNSF's eastern edge, the two systems had little overlap. The combination would have benefited both companies by expanding available cash for capacity improvements, and allowing for longer single-system movements. Shippers and the Surface Transportation Board expressed concern and surprise about the timing, since the merger that produced BNSF had been the only one in the 1990s that did not cause severe deterioration in service. Blaszak, CN, BNSF seek to combine; timing curious, Trains, March 2000, pp. 16-18 The STB imposed on March 17, 2000 a 15-month moratorium (STB Ex Parte No. 582) on mergers involving any two Class I railroads, citing widespread opposition not only to the merger but its effects, likely starting the final round of mergers into two big systems. BNSF and CN immediately turned to the U.S. Court of Appeals,Michael W. Blaszak, STB slams on the brakes on mergers, Trains, June 2000, pp. 16-17 which on July 14 ruled that the STB's right to regulate mergers allowed a moratorium, and the two railroads called off the merger. Blaszak, Stymied: BNSF, CN won't fight on, Trains, October 2000, pp. 18-19 The STB released its final rules (STB Ex Parte No. 582 (Sub-No. 1)) on June 11, 2001, requiring any new application to merge two Class I railroads, with the exception of smaller Kansas City Southern Railway, to demonstrate that competition would be preserved and address effects of defensive moves by other carriers. Blaszak, Lawyers, start your engines!, Trains, September 2001, pp. 16-17 Since then, no Class I mergers have taken place.
On November 3, 2009, Warren Buffett said Berkshire Hathaway would buy BNSF for $44 billion. The acquisition was approved by the boards of both companies and was approved by BNSF shareholders on February 12, 2010. "Buffett's firm to buy Burlington Northern,"  November 3, 2009

Operations

Markets and services

With BNSF's large system, it hauls many different commodities, most notably coal and grain, as well as intermodal freight.
Predecessor Burlington Northern Railroad (BN) entered Wyoming's low-sulfur coal-rich Powder River Basin in the 1970s through construction of the Powder River Basin Joint Line with Union Pacific Railroad predecessor Chicago and North Western Transportation Company. Coal goes north in unit trains on the three-to-four-track Joint Line to Gillette or south to Orin, where older BN lines and other railroads take it in all directions to coal-burning power plants.
BNSF serves over 1,500 grain elevators, located mostly in the Midwest on former BN lines. Most commonly, grain may move west on the Northern Transcon to the Pacific Northwest and its export terminals, or south to Texas and Gulf of Mexico ports. Frailey, The Empire of BNSF,  , June 2001, pp. 30-41
The Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway's main contribution to BNSF was the Southern Transcon, a fast intermodal corridor connecting Southern California and Chicago. Most traffic is either trailers of trucking companies such as intermodal partner J. B. Hunt, or containers from the Ports of Long Beach and Los Angeles. The latter begins its trip on the triple-track Alameda Corridor, shared with the Union Pacific Railroad, and then follows BNSF rails from downtown Los Angeles. Its route, the Southern Transcon, has been almost completely double-tracked, and triple-tracking has begun in areas such as Cajon Pass.
BNSF transports Boeing 737 fuselages from the Wichita, Kansas plant to Renton, Washington.Steve Wilhelm, BNSF adding rail cars to meet Boeing 737 transport demand, Puget Sound Business Journal, Updated: Feb 11, 2013

Finances

Trackage

The BNSF Railway directly owns and operates track in 27 U.S. states: Alabama, Florida, Arizona, Arkansas, California, Colorado, Idaho, Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, Louisiana, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Oregon, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Washington, Wisconsin, and Wyoming. The railway also operates a small amount of track in Canada, including an approximate 30-mile (48 kilometer) section that runs from the U.S.-Canada border to Vancouver, a yard in Winnipeg, and approximately 70 miles of joint track with the Canadian National Railway, which runs south to the U.S. border.
For administrative purposes, BNSF is divided into fourteen operating divisions: California, Chicago, Colorado, Gulf, Kansas, Los Angeles, Montana, Nebraska, Northwest, Powder River, Southwest, Springfield, Texas, and Twin Cities. Each division is further divided into hundreds of subdivisions, which represent segments of track ranging from 300-mile mainlines to 10-mile branch-lines.
Not including second, third and fourth main-line trackage, yard trackage, and siding trackage, BNSF directly owns and operates over 24,000 miles (38,624 kilometers) of track. When these additional tracks are counted, the length of track which the railway directly controls rises to more than 50,000 miles (80,467 kilometers).
Additionally, BNSF Railway has gained trackage rights on more than 8,000 miles (12,875 kilometers) of track throughout the United States and Canada. These rights allow the BNSF to operate its own trains with its own crews on competing railroads' main tracks. BNSF locomotives also occasionally show up on competitors' tracks throughout the United States and Canada by way of leases, mileage equalizations, and other contractual arrangements.

Yards and facilities

BNSF operates various facilities all over the United States to support its transportation system. Facilities operated by the railway include yards and terminals throughout its rail network, system locomotive shops to perform locomotive service and maintenance, a centralized operations center for train dispatching and network operations monitoring in Fort Worth, and regional dispatching centers.
BNSF Railway also operates numerous transfer facilities throughout the western United States to facilitate the transfer of intermodal containers, trailers, and other freight traffic. BNSF Railway has direct control over a total of 33 intermodal hubs and 23 automotive distribution facilities. On February 9, 2005, BNSF announced that it plans to build a new intermodal transfer facility near the port of Los Angeles called the Southern California International Gateway. The new facility, with direct rail access to the recently constructed Alameda Corridor, would supplement the container transloading abilities of the Intermodal Container Transfer Facility (ICTF) built by Southern Pacific in the 1990s.
The BNSF mechanical division operates eight locomotive maintenance facilities that perform preventive maintenance, repairs and servicing of equipment. The largest of these facilities are located in Alliance, Nebraska and Topeka, Kansas. The mechanical division also controls 46 additional facilities responsible for car maintenance and daily running repairs.
The BNSF system mechanical division, a subset of the mechanical division, operates two maintenance-of-way work equipment shops, responsible for performing repairs and preventive maintenance to BNSF's track and equipment, in Brainerd, Minnesota and Galesburg, Illinois. The system mechanical division also operates the Western Fruit Express Company's refrigerated car repair shop in Spokane, Washington.
In 2006, BNSF teamed with Vancouver, WA-based Tri Star to run BNSF's new transload facility in Fontana, CA, near the California Speedway.
Large freight car hump yards are located throughout the BNSF system.
In 2005, Argentine Yard processed the most freight cars.

Routes

Operating divisions

The BNSF system is divided into 13 divisions grouped into three regions. Each division includes numerous subdivisions, normally comprising a single main line and branches.

Passenger train service

The BNSF Railway hosts commuter trains: BNSF Railway Line for Metra (Chicago), Coaster (San Diego), Metrolink (Southern California), New Mexico Rail Runner Express, Northstar Commuter Rail, and Sounder (Puget Sound).
The line used by Rail Runner was sold to the state of New Mexico, but BNSF still dispatches it and operates freight trains as needed.
Metra's cars that were originally purchased by BNSF predecessor Chicago Burlington & Quincy have letterboards above the doors. In about 2011, about 15 of the remaining cars had the original "BURLINGTON" lettering restored, while the rest now read "BNSF RAILWAY". Other Metra cars assigned to BNSF have the current BNSF "swoosh" logo next to the door.
Many Amtrak routes use BNSF rails: the Amtrak Cascades, California Zephyr, Carl Sandburg, Coast Starlight, Empire Builder, Heartland Flyer, Illinois Zephyr, Lincoln Service, Pacific Surfliner, San Joaquin, Southwest Chief, Sunset Limited, and Texas Eagle.
Although it does not have a steam program like the Norfolk Southern and Union Pacific, the BNSF has allowed for the Southern Pacific 4449, Santa Fe 3751 and Milwaukee Road 261 steam locomotives to operate excursions over their rails.

Safety

As one of the leading supporters of the Operation Lifesaver program to promote safety at railway crossings and rights-of-way, the BNSF Railway, in 2000, established a grade-crossing closure program. This program, in which BNSF works with communities and landowners to identify unnecessary or redundant crossings, has helped close more than 2,900 of BNSF's railway crossings throughout the United States. Due to the program, BNSF has been the industry leader in lowering the number of grade-crossing collisions.
On June 7, 2006, BNSF became the second Class I railroad, second to Norfolk Southern Railway, to recruit railfans to help ensure the company's rail network remains safe. Called the Citizens for Rail Security, BNSF designed a program that encourages railfans to register on an official company website. They can print out a small identification card, containing a list of general safety guidelines for a railfan to follow, as well as a toll-free telephone number to alert a BNSF representative of suspicious activities or potential security breaches. As of April 2010, CRS had more than 9,200 members.
BNSF has had a similar program for employees since 2003. The BNSF On Guard program has been highly successful, with more than 200 employees reporting suspicious activities since its inception. Retrieved June 29, 2006.
BNSF also contracts with News Link, a small business in Lincoln, Nebraska, to publish employee newsletters focused on safety for each of the railroad's 14 operating divisions and nearly all of its system shops. These newsletters vary in length from four to 28 pages, published ranging from monthly to quarterly.

Equipment

According to the 2007 BNSF Annual Report, at the end of 2007 the railway had more than 40,000 employees; 6,400 locomotives; and 85,338 freight cars.
At the end of 2007, the average age (from date of manufacture) was 15 years for the BNSF's locomotive fleet and 14 years for the freight car fleet.
On January 24, 2006, BNSF announced a $2.4 billion program of infrastructure upgrades for 2006. The upgrade program includes: double- and triple-tracking  of track in Wyoming's Powder River Basin region; expansions at eight of the railroad's larger intermodal facilities, and extending many sidings and expanding and improving refueling facilities. In making the announcement, BNSF chairman Matthew K. Rose cited improvements in the company's return on invested capital, and expressed hope for continued improvement.4 Billion Capital Commitment Program for 2006; About $400 Million Again Slated for Track/Facilities Expansion. Retrieved January 30, 2006.  In March, 2008, the railroad was completing the triple-tracking of Cajon Pass in California, creating four tracks through the pass—three BNSF (former Santa Fe and newly installed) and one Union Pacific (former Southern Pacific).

Paint schemes

The assortment of colors used on the BNSF Railway makes it one of the most colorful large railroads in North America. Many locomotives are painted in "Heritage" schemes, which are primarily based on Great Northern Railway's colors of Omaha Orange and Pullman Green. Other designs include Santa Fe's silver-and-red "Warbonnet", and a modified version of the "Heritage II" scheme with BNSF's new logo (adopted in 2005) and black rather than dark green. Some older units continue to bear the Grinstein Green and Crème of predecessor Burlington Northern or Santa Fe's blue and yellow.

File:BNSF 726 GE C44-9W.jpg|"Warbonnet"
File:BNSF 2958 EMD GP39-2 Stockton.jpg|"Heritage I"
File:BNSF C44-9W 5518.jpg|"Heritage II"
File:BNSF 5824 GE ES44AC.jpg|"New Image" (introduced in 2005, sometimes referred to as Heritage III)
File:BNSF 9819 EMD SD70MAC.jpg|"BN Executive" scheme with "BNSF" on the side
File:BNSF 6371 EMD SD40-2. The letters "BNSF" are below the locomotive's cab.

The first locomotive to bear BNSF lettering was BN SD70MAC No. 9647, introduced in late August 1995, just as the Interstate Commerce Commission was approving the merger. VMV Enterprises in Paducah, Kentucky painted it in a one-of-a-kind "commemorative" scheme, combining Santa Fe's "Warbonnet" with BN's "Executive" colors of dark "Grinstein green" and cream (instead of SF's red and silver). "BNSF" replaced "SANTA FE" on the front of the unit, and "Burlington Northern Santa Fe" was painted on the side. Keefe and Steve Glischinski, Meanwhile, back in Fort Worth..., Trains, November 1995, pp. 18-18A Dubbed as "Premium Heritage," the paint scheme was widely rejected by the public, and was often called the "Vomit Bonnet" and the "Barfbonnet." In the spring of 2013, this unit was sent to Relco in Albia, Iowa, repainted into the current BNSF orange and green paint scheme.
BN however, did not stop using its "Executive" colors on its current order of EMD SD70MACs. Experimenting with distributed power equipment in 1995, four units (9713–9716) were built between June and July 1995; making these units numbered ahead of the current production order (9617-9645). On December 28, 1995, SD70MAC 9708 emerged from the EMD London, Ontario facility as the last unit for Burlington Northern in 1995. However, units 9709 and 9710 were completed shortly thereafter and did not appear somewhere between January 1 and January 8. Originally believed that units 9711 and 9712 would emerge as BN 9711 and 9712 to fill in the gap between 9710 and 9713, these units were the very first locomotives to carry a short-lived "BNSF" in Santa Fe billboard style lettering along the carbodies, yet retaining the executive scheme without any major modifications. At that point, 9710 was now deemed as the very last new locomotive delivered to Burlington Northern.
By January 1996, BNSF had begun painting locomotives in the old BN and ATSF schemes by adding "BNSF" on the sides. 17 Then, in late May, the company introduced a new design on BN SD60M 9297 (now 8197), painted mainly in BN predecessor Great Northern Railway's pre-1967 colors of orange and dark "Pullman green," but also incorporating red and silver, and said to represent all three major BN predecessors and Santa Fe. On the front was a new logo, placing "Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railway" in the Santa Fe cross. Some of the striping details were different on each side,Steve Glischinski, It's 'all in the family' with the latest BNSF locomotive paint scheme, Trains, August 1996, pp. 16-17 and employees voted for the simpler right-side design, which, with some minor changes, became the new scheme,News Photos, Trains, October 1996, p. 28 replacing the older BN scheme. However, president and CEO Robert Krebs said the railroad was big enough for two designs, and Santa Fe's "Warbonnet" (with "BNSF" instead of "Santa Fe" on the frontRailroad News, Trains, October 1997, pp. 30-31) remained alongside the new "Heritage I" scheme. Blaszak, BNSF strives for an effective blend, Trains, April 1997, p. 43 A third "Heritage II" scheme appeared by September 1998, with "Warbonnet"-style yellow trim and BNSF nosepiece replacing the new logo. 20Power Desk, Trains, February 1998, p. 20 As for test locomotive No. 9297 (now 8197), when a passing crew saw its prominent orange, it was jokingly dubbed the "Great Pumpkin,"News Photos, Trains'', December 1996, pp. 34-35 a name that has stuck among railfans for that particular unit.
On January 24, 2005, as part of its tenth anniversary celebration, the Burlington Northern and Santa Fe Railway was renamed BNSF Railway, which adopted a new logo. Slight differences were present on the six locomotives,Front-runner for new BNSF image, Trains, June 2005, p. 20 and on April 11 BNSF officially chose the design it had applied to No. 7701. 25 The most notable difference was on 7695, which features the logo in yellow rather than black. The "New Image" scheme is sometimes referred to by railfans as the "Nike Swoosh" scheme, a tongue-in-cheek jab at the perceived blandness or unoriginality of the new logo's design, and used jokingly to suggest that the design was inspired or created by someone from the famous footwear and apparel company; more commonly it is known simply as the "Swoosh" scheme or "H3". Some railfans also refer to the new logo as "The Wedge" or simply "Wedge". Another BNSF "one of a kind?", Trains, August 2005, p. 25 Other unique locomotives include Dash 9-44CW 4723, with stickers announcing its presence in Microsoft Train Simulator.



Notes






