[[Montréal–Pierre Elliott Trudeau International Airport]]

CATEGORIES: Certified airports in Quebec, Transport in Montreal, Pierre Trudeau, Canadian airports with United States border preclearance, Airports established in 1941, Buildings and structures in Dorval, Buildings and structures in Montreal, Transport in Dorval, Saint-Laurent, Quebec



Montréal–Pierre Elliott Trudeau International Airport  from Montreal's downtown core. The airport terminals are located entirely in Dorval, while the Air Canada headquarters complex and one runway is located in Saint-Laurent, Montreal."Detailed Map of Dorval." City of Dorval."ab11e5b4-ccb1-430e-9a7c-598d63c7480b." City of Montreal. It is an international airport serving Greater Montreal, along with the regions of northern Vermont and New York.Aéroports de Montréal The airport is named in honour of Pierre Elliott Trudeau, the 15th Prime Minister of Canada.
The airport is one of two managed and operated by Aéroports de Montréal (ADM), a not-for-profit corporation without share capital; the other airport is Montréal–Mirabel northwest of Montreal, which was initially intended to replace the one in Dorval but now deals almost solely with cargo. Montréal–Trudeau is owned by Transport Canada, which has a 60-year lease with Aéroports de Montréal, as per Canada's National Airport Policy of 1994.
Trudeau is the busiest airport in the province of Quebec, the fourth busiest airport in Canada by passenger traffic and by aircraft movements, with 14.09 million passengers in 2013 and 230,619 movements in 2012. It is one of eight Canadian airports with United States border preclearance and is one of the main gateways into Canada with 8,436,165 or 61.7% of its passengers being on non-domestic flights, the highest proportion amongst Canada's airports during 2011. It is one of four Air Canada hubs, and, in that capacity, serves mainly Quebec, the Atlantic Provinces and Eastern Ontario. The air route between YUL and Toronto Pearson International Airport is currently the 14th busiest air route in the world, in terms of flights per week, while the air route between YUL and Paris-Charles de Gaulle is the 7th busiest in terms of passengers carried (1.1 million) between Europe and a non-European destination.eurostat.ec.eu/portal/page/portal/statistics/search_database On an average day, nearly 40,000 passengers transit through Montréal-Trudeau.
Airlines servicing Trudeau offer non-stop flights to five continents, namely Africa, Asia, Europe, North America and South America.com - International destinations served (direct flight without stop)admtl.com - Destinations served in Canada (direct flight without stop) It is one of only two airports in Canada with direct flights to 5 continents or more, the other being Toronto Pearson International Airport. Trudeau airport is headquarters and large hub for Air Canada, the country's largest airline. It is also an operating base for Air Inuit, Air Transat, CanJet and Sunwing Airlines. It also plays a role in general aviation as home to the headquarters of Innotech-Execair, Starlink, ACASS and Maintenance Repair & Overhaul (MRO) facilities of Air Transat and Air Inuit. Transport Canada operates a Civil Aviation Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul facility on site, with a fleet of Government owned and operated civil aircraft. Bombardier Aerospace has an assembly facility on site to build regional jets and Challenger business jets.

History

Early days

The birth of Dorval Airport was in the 1940s. It was becoming clear that the Saint-Hubert Airport (Montreal's first official airport, in operation since 1927) could no longer meet the city's aviation needs. The Minister of Transport purchased land at the Dorval Race Track, the best location for the new airport with good weather and few foggy days. Montréal–Dorval International Airport opened on September 1, 1941, as RCAF Station Lachine with three paved runways. By 1946 the airport was hosting more than a quarter of a million passengers a year, growing to more than a million in the mid-1950s. During World War II thousands of Allied aircraft passed through Dorval on the way to England. At one time Dorval was the major transatlantic hub for commercial aviation and the busiest airport in Canada with airlines such as British Overseas Airways Corporation (B.O.A.C).
Airport diagram for 1954

Growth

In November 1960, the airport was renamed Montreal–Dorval International Airport/Aéroport international Dorval de Montréal. On December 15 of that year, the Minister of Transport inaugurated a new $30 million terminal. The structure was built by Illsley, Templeton, Archibald, and Larose and Larose. The Canadian Encyclopedia (2001-09-11). Retrieved on 2013-07-26. It was the largest terminal in Canada and one of the biggest in the world. Montréal–Dorval International Airport was the gateway to Canada for all European air traffic, serving more than two million passengers a year. Eight years later, Montréal–Dorval International Airport underwent a major expansion program. The Government of Canada predicted that Dorval would be completely saturated by 1985, and also projected that 20 million passengers would be passing through Montreal's airports annually. They decided to construct a new airport in Sainte-Scholastique (Montréal–Mirabel International Airport). As the first phase in the transition that would eventually see Dorval closed, international flights were to be transferred to the new airport in 1975.

The opening and closing of Mirabel Airport

On November 29, 1975, Montréal–Mirabel International Airport went into service. With an operations zone of Helibellule.

Back to Montréal–Dorval, renaissance

With all international scheduled flights going back to Montréal–Dorval in 1997, as well as charter flights in 2004, Montréal–Dorval International Airport was finally able to become a true hub, where passengers would not have to travel to different airports depending on the type of flight. The consolidation of flights to Montréal–Dorval resulted in an increase of passenger traffic, not only because of transfer of flights, but because of new connecting opportunities. In 2012, the airport handled 13,798,821 passengers, a new record.
A "domestic" flight is a flight within Canada. A "transborder" flight is between Montreal and a destination in the United States. An "international" flight is between Montreal and a destination that is not within the United States or Canada.
* 

Operation Yellow Ribbon

On September 11, 2001, Dorval Airport participated in Operation Yellow Ribbon, taking in 7 diverted flights that had been bound for the closed airspace over the United States, even though pilots were asked to avoid the airport as a security measure. Mirabel International Airport also took in 10 other diverted flights totaling 17 diverted flight in the Montreal area bound for American cities.

Operation Hestia

As part of Operation Hestia, Canada's military response to the 2010 Haiti earthquake, the airport was the official gateway for repatriation flights from Haiti.

Renaming

Starting as Dorval Airport, then Montréal–Dorval International Airport, the airport was renamed on January 1, 2004, by the federal government to Montréal–Pierre Elliott Trudeau International Airport in honour of former Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau. The renaming had been announced in September 2003 by then Minister of Transport David Collenette. This move provoked some opposition, especially Quebec sovereigntists opposed to some of the policies of the former prime minister, as well as opposition from many aviation historians and enthusiasts who recalled Trudeau's role as an opponent of the airport, planning to close it in favour of Mirabel Airport.

Public Transport

The Société de transport de Montréal (STM) presently has four regular bus routes serving Trudeau International Airport, including route "204 Cardinal" seven days a week, route "209 Sources" Monday to Friday, and route "356 Lachine /Montreal–Trudeau /Des Sources" and 378 Sauvé /Côte-Vertu /Montreal–Trudeau night buses. Three of the four routes can take passengers to and from the Dorval bus terminus and train station, within walking distance of the Via's Dorval station.STM.m. to 5:00 a.m. Bus #204:, bus #209, and bus #356 A shuttle bus runs between the airport and Via's Dorval station.
On March 29, 2010, the STM introduced the 747 Montreal-Trudeau/Downtown route. Operating 7 days a week, 24 hours a day, and 365 days a year, this route connects the airport to eight downtown stops, including transfer stops at Lionel-Groulx metro station, Central Station, and Berri-UQAM metro station. The service runs every 10–12 minutes from 8:30 a.m. to 8 p.m, every 30 minutes from 5:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 8 p.m. to 1 a.m., and every hour from 2 a.m. to 5 a.m. Regular bus fare is not accepted; the minimum tariff is a day pass, with all other STM pass-type fares (3-day, weekly, monthly and Unlimited Weekend) also accepted.
Prior to the introduction of this public transportation service,

Société de transport de Montréal

Expansion

Terminal expansion (2000–2005)

Montréal–Trudeau underwent a major expansion and modernization designed to increase the terminal's capacity and substantially enhance the level of passenger service. In February 2000, with a budget of C$716 million, ADM announced plans for an extensive expansion plan that would bring Montréal–Trudeau up to standard with other North American airports its size. The airport terminal had for the most part remained the same, with the exception of minor renovations, since its opening in the 1960s. With increased passenger volume resulting from the transfer of international scheduled passengers from Mirabel Airport in 1997, as well as Air Canada's intentions to make Montréal–Trudeau its Eastern Canada hub, there was a strong need to greatly expand the terminal, whose capacity of roughly 7 million passengers per year had been exceeded.
The expansion program included the construction of several brand-new facilities, including a jetty for flights to the United States (US Preclearance Terminal), another for other international destinations (International Terminal), and a huge international arrivals complex. A 18-gate Transborder Concourse, an 11-gate International Concourse, new customs hall and baggage claim area for non-domestic flights, and an expanded parking garage, were built between 2000 and 2005. Additionally, sections of the domestic area were renovated and expanded, accompanied with additional retail space. The International part of the Aeroquay satellite was demolished, leaving the domestic part for regional carriers. The completion of the CAD$716 million expansion gives Montréal–Trudeau the ability to serve 15 million passengers a year. 18 This ironically accomplished one of the goals that was to be met with the construction of Mirabel. (In the 1970s, the federal government projected that 20 million passengers would be passing through Montreal's airports annually by 1985, with 17 million through Mirabel). Aéroports de Montréal financed all of these improvements itself, with no government grants. By the end of 2007, $1.5 billion had been spent to upgrade Montréal–Trudeau.New Sector for departures to the United States

New hotel, transborder terminal expansion and modernization (2006–2009)

On June 15, 2006, construction began on a new four-star Marriott hotel at the airport, above the transborder terminal. Originally scheduled to be completed by September 2008, the 279 first-class room hotel opened its doors on 19 August 2009. Construction was slowed down because of the recession and a collapse in the Transborder market. It contain an underground train station that will eventually connect the airport with downtown Montreal as well as ADM's corporate headquarters.S. Departures wing.
On the same day, Montreal–Trudeau airport opened the doors to the refurbished, expanded, modernized and user-friendly transborder terminal, meeting the industry's highest standards. This increased the total area of the terminal from . Furthermore, the terminal is equipped with a new baggage sorting room which allows U.S. customs officers to retrieve luggage for secondary inspection.

International terminal expansion (2011–2016)

In July 2011, Mr. James Cherry, the CEO of Aéroports de Montréal, announced that they're planning a two-phase expansion of Montréal–Trudeau's international terminal. Upon completion, this expansion project will add a total of six new gates for wide-body jets, including two for A-380s. In other words, the international terminal will be expanded to 17 contact gates compared to 11 currently. Furthermore, 2 remote stands will also be added. The total cost of the project is expected to be between CAD500 million and CAD600 million.
On December 20, 2012, phase I of this project, which is the opening of a new boarding lounge and gate at the far end of the international terminal, will be officially completed at a cost of CAD270 million. The expansion of the international jetty - Phase II - has already started and is scheduled to be completed in September 2016.

Other projects

Starting in 2006, the airport administration began the process of land access to upgrade road traffic to the airport, a new parking garage, and the improvement of the domestic terminal.
On November 30, 2006, the airport administration announced plans to relocate numerous hangars at the western part of the airport in order to expand the transborder and international jetty.
As of May 2011, photographs, films and animated works from the National Film Board of Canada, which is headquartered in Montreal, are on display as part of the airport's Montreal Identity/L'Aerogalerie program.
In 2012, the last 4 hangars remaining were demolished to leave the space for the future expansion of the international jetty. The tenants, Air Creebec and Air Inuit, were relocated in some new facilities.
As of November 6, 2013, you can now save time and money with its new online reservation parking service.
On December 13, 2013, a new service was added for all the national and international passengers departing from Montreal. You can now go online and reserve via SecurXpress your priority passage through the security screening checkpoint.
On December 19, 2013, some new commercial zones opened in the public and international areas of the terminal. Also, a newly enhanced duty-free was opened in the international jetty which offers an even broader array of quality brands and products. With these additions, the airport now boasts more than 90 stores and restaurants. In addition to the commercial enhancements, newly installed media walls in the public area and along the international jetty will make access to the information for passengers easier. These interactive displays will be introduced around the terminal building, providing passengers with flight schedules, waiting time at the security screening checkpoints, walking times to the gates, a map of the terminal and other useful information.

Dorval interchange

Aéroports de Montréal, the City of Montreal, Transports Québec and Transport Canada are planning to improve the Dorval interchange and build direct road links between the airport and highways 20 and 520. Once the certificate of authorization was obtained, work began in June 2009 with a potential end date of 2017. The project will entail redesigning the roads network within the airport site.Dorval interchange renovations 

Rail shuttle to downtown Montreal

Aéroports de Montréal is planning to introduce an express rail shuttle service, called the Aérotrain, to accelerate access to the airport from the downtown core. This 
The Quebec provincial budget of 2010 set aside $200 million for this project. However, as this project will likely cost over $1 billion, there remains a vast financial gap to fill.

Airbus A380

The last round of construction improved Montréal–Trudeau so that it is prepared to handle the new Airbus A380. An Airbus-marked aircraft (MSN007) took off from Paris-Charles de Gaulle Airport and landed at Montréal–Trudeau on 12 November 2007 with some 500 guests aboard. It left Montreal on 13 November to go to Orlando International Airport in Florida (United States). It returned to Montreal on 15 November, continuing to Paris on the same day, and then back to its Toulouse base.
As part of the 60th anniversary of Air France in Canada celebrations, Air France sent their Airbus 380 to Montreal–Trudeau on their AF346/347 scheduled flight on October 7, 2010, as a one-day special flight. It was also the first A380 of Air France to land in Canada.
Air France became the first operator of the type in Montreal on April 22, 2011, when they officially launched their daily A380 service from Paris. They were using gate 55, which is equipped with two air bridges to load and unload passengers on both decks of the A380 simultaneously.
Service by the A380 during summer 2012 was reduced to 4 weekly flights, and was canceled in October 2012.fr - Flight Schedules

Terminals

The airport is divided into three concourses, with each one being used for passenger traffic heading to certain areas. The domestic terminal, which is accessible by the check-point A, holds 26 gates: 1–12, 15, 17, 19, 21, 23, 25, 27–30, 32, 34, 47–49.
The International terminal, which is also accessible by the check-point A, is dedicated to flights with destinations outside of Canada and the United States. In 2011, the airport handled 5.2 million passengers on international flights, making it the 2nd busiest airport in Canada in terms of international passenger traffic.
The International terminal holds 12 gates: 50–53, 55–62. Gate 53 and 62 are used by Passenger Transfer Vehicles.
Finally there's a concourse dedicated to all U.S. bound flights. This one is accessible by the check-point C and it holds 18 gates: 72–89.

Lounges

There are several airport lounges at Trudeau Airport. Air Canada has three Maple Leaf Lounges at Montréal–Trudeau: one in the Domestic jetty, one in the Transborder jetty and one in the International jetty.

Airlines and destinations

Some 40 airlines offer non-stop services to more than 130 regular and seasonal destinations worldwide.

Scheduled airlines and destinations

Charter airlines and destinations

Cargo

Incidents and accidents






