[[Porno for Pyros]]

CATEGORIES: Alternative rock groups from California, Musical groups established in 1992, Musical groups disestablished in 1998, Musical groups from Los Angeles, California

Porno for Pyros was an American alternative rock band formed in Los Angeles, California in 1992, following the initial break-up of Jane's Addiction. The band comprised former Jane's Addiction members Perry Farrell (vocals) and Stephen Perkins (drums), alongside Peter DiStefano (guitar) and Martyn LeNoble (bass).
The band released two studio albums, Porno for Pyros (1993) and Good God's Urge (1996), before parting ways in 1998, after guitarist Peter DiStefano was diagnosed with cancer.

History

Following the demise of the critically and commercially successful Jane's Addiction, frontman Perry Farrell and drummer Stephen Perkins formed Porno for Pyros after acquiring guitarist Peter DiStefano and bass player Martyn LeNoble. Farrell named the band after viewing an ad for fireworks in a pornographic magazine.Browne 1993  Prior to releasing their eponymous first album, Porno for Pyros embarked on a nationwide tour to support the new band. By the time the band's debut album was released in 1993, anticipation surrounding the project was enough to briefly drive the album to the No. 3 position on the Billboard top 200 list. Reaction to the album was mixed, with some fans ecstatic and others disappointed and special effects (including, but not limited to, pyrotechnics).
For the band's follow-up album, Good God's Urge, bass player LeNoble quit after completing the majority of the bass tracks. Ex-Minutemen bassist Mike Watt was brought in to finish up the album tracks
Perkins and Watt subsequently formed the jazz-punk improvisation group Banyan
The Jane's Addiction/Porno for Pyros book Whores (by Brendan Mullen) states that a third Porno for Pyros album was penned but never recorded.

Reunions

In April 2009, the original lineup of Farrell, Perkins, DiStefano, and LeNoble performed at Farrell's 50th birthday party.facebook.php?fbid=10151716406069181

Discography

Studio albums

Singles

Music videos






