[[Bill Maher]]

CATEGORIES: 1956 births, Living people, 20th-century American male actors, 20th-century American writers, 21st-century American male actors, 21st-century American writers, Male actors from New Jersey, Male actors from New York City, American agnostics, American cannabis activists, American libertarians, American male comedians, American male film actors, American male television actors, American people of Hungarian-Jewish descent, American people of Irish descent, American satirists, American stand-up comedians, American television talk show hosts, Animal rights advocates, Cornell University alumni, Critics of religions, Drug policy reform activists, Former Roman Catholics, Free speech activists, Liberalism in the United States, People from Beverly Hills, California, People from River Vale, New Jersey, Religious skeptics, Writers from New Jersey, Writers from New York City

William "Bill" Maher, Jr.  (; born January 20, 1956) is an American stand-up comedian, television host, political commentator, satirist, author, and actor. Before his current role as the host of HBO's Real Time with Bill Maher, Maher hosted a similar late-night talk show called Politically Incorrect, originally on Comedy Central and later on ABC.
Maher is known for his sarcastic attitude,
Maher supports the legalization of marijuana and same-sex marriage. His critical views of religion were the basis for the 2008 documentary film Religulous.  He serves on the board of PETA and is an advisory board member of Project Reason.

Early life

Maher was born in New York City. His father, William Maher, Sr., was a network news editor and radio announcer, and his mother, Julie Maher (née Berman), was a nurse.
Maher was raised in River Vale, New Jersey, and graduated from Pascack Hills High School in Montvale in 1974. He then enrolled in Cornell University and graduated with a Bachelor of Arts with a double major in English and history in 1978.  Maher has said selling pot allowed him to make enough money to get through college and enter comedy.Bill Maher: How did I get here?; Bloomberg BusinessWeek; September 5, 2013

Career

Early career

Maher began his career as a stand-up comedian and actor. He was host of the New York City comedy club Catch a Rising Star in 1979. Maher began appearing on Johnny Carson's and David Letterman's shows in 1982. He made limited television appearances including a recurring role in Sara (1985), appeared in Max Headroom (1987), two separate appearances on Murder, She Wrote (1989, 1990), a recurring role in Charlie Hoover (1991) and other productions. His feature film debut was in D.C. Cab (1983). He later appeared in Ratboy (1986), House II: The Second Story (1987), Cannibal Women in the Avocado Jungle of Death (1988), and Pizza Man (1991), among others.

Television career

=Politically Incorrect with Bill Maher=

Maher assumed the host role on Politically Incorrect with Bill Maher, a late-night political talk show that ran on Comedy Central from 1993 to 1997 and on ABC from 1997 to 2002. The show regularly began with a topical monologue by Maher preceding the introduction of four guests, usually a diverse group of individuals, such as show business, popular culture, political pundits, political consultants, authors, and occasionally news figures. The group would discuss topical issues selected by Maher, who also participated in the  discussions. Jerry Seinfeld, a regular guest on the show, stated that Politically Incorrect reminded him of talk shows from the 1950s and 60s "when guests interacted with each other as much as with the host."
Politically Incorrect won an array of awards, including an Emmy Award for Outstanding Technical Direction, two CableACE awards for Best Talk Show Series, and a Genesis Award for Best Television Talk Show. Maher earned numerous award nominations for his producing, writing and hosting of Politically Incorrect, including ten Emmy nominations, two TV Guide nominations, and two Writers Guild nominations.  ABC decided against renewing Maher's contract for Politically Incorrect in 2002, after he made a controversial on-air remark shortly after the September 11 attacks.
Maher's remarks after 9/11 were not the first time he had sparked controversy on Politically Incorrect. In the same year, he expressed his deep regrets and apologized after being widely criticized for comparing his dogs to retarded children.
The show was canceled on June 16, 2002, and the Sinclair Broadcast Group had dropped the show from its ABC-affiliated stations months prior. On June 22, 2002, just six days after the cancellation of Politically Incorrect, Maher received the Los Angeles Press Club president's award (for "championing free speech"). Maher was on the board of judges for the 2002 PEN/Newman's Own First Amendment Award. "Vanessa Leggett to receive 2002 PEN/Newman's Own First Amendment Award". Pen American Center.

=Real Time with Bill Maher=

In 2003, Maher became the host, co-producer and co-writer of Real Time with Bill Maher, a weekly hour-long political comedy talk show on the cable television network HBO. HBO announced in July 2011 the show had been renewed for its tenth season (2012) and is currently in its 12th.
As with his previous show, Politically Incorrect, Maher begins Real Time with a comic opening monologue based upon current events and other topical issues. He proceeds to a one-on-one interview with a guest, either in-studio or via satellite. Following the interview, Maher sits with three panelists, usually consisting of pundits, authors, activists and journalists, for a discussion of the week's events. In the segment "New Rules" at the end of each show, Maher delivers a humorous editorial on popular culture and American politics.
In late May 2005, Alabama Congressman Spencer Bachus sent a letter to Time Warner's board of directors requesting Real Time be canceled after remarks Maher made after noting the military had missed its recruiting goals by 42 percent. Bachus said he felt the comments were demeaning to the military and treasonous.  Maher stated his highest regard and support for the troops and asked why the congressman criticized him instead of doing something about the recruitment problem.
Real Time has earned widespread praise. It has been nominated for more than ten Primetime Emmy Awards and six Writer's Guild awards. In 2007, Maher and his co-producers were awarded the Television Producer of the Year Award in Variety Television by the Producers Guild of America.org; May 29, 2012 Maher holds the record for the most Emmy nominations without a win, having been nominated on 22 occasions and not winning once. Eleven of the nominations were for Politically Incorrect, while nine were for Real Time. The other two were nominations for two of his HBO comedy specials: Bill Maher: I'm Swiss and Bill Maher: The Decider.

==Christine O'Donnell clip==

On September 17, 2010, Maher aired a clip of Delaware Republican Senatorial candidate Christine O'Donnell from the October 29, 1999, episode of his old show Politically Incorrect on his current show Real Time with Bill Maher,

Political commentator

Maher is a frequent commentator on various cable news networks, including CNN, MSNBC, FOX News Channel and HLN.  Maher has regularly appeared on CNN's The Situation Room with Wolf Blitzer
Maher hosted the January 13, 2006 edition of Larry King Live, on which he was a frequent guest. Maher appeared as a special guest on the June 29, 2010 edition of the show, on which CNN anchor Larry King announced his retirement.

Other work

In 2013 Maher became one of the producers for the HBO newsmagazine series Vice. "HBO, Bill Maher Team With Vice for Newsmagazine". The Hollywood Reporter. "TV review: 'Vice' on HBO". Daily News.

Views and beliefs

Politics

Maher eschews political labels, referring to himself as "practical". He has also referred to himself as a "9/11 liberal", noting that his formerly liberal view of Muslims changed as a result of the attacks on September 11, 2001, and he differentiates himself from liberals in his opinion that all religions are not the same. The A.V. Club.
Maher favors ending corporate welfare and federal funding of non-profits as well as the legalization of gambling, prostitution, and marijuana.  Maher is a member of the advisory boards for both the NORML and Marijuana Policy Project, organizations which support regulated legalization of marijuana. He describes himself as an environmentalist, and he has spoken in favor of the Kyoto treaty on global warming on his show Real Time. He often criticizes industry figures involved in environmental pollution. (August 1, 2001.) "Is Bill Maher a libertarian?", Salon (news website).
Maher is a board member of People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals.
Before the 2004 U.S. presidential election, Maher became candid in his stated opposition to the re-election of President George W. Bush and in his support for Senator John Kerry D-Massachusetts.
Known for protesting against the demonization of the word "liberal", during the campaign Maher criticized Kerry for being ashamed of the word. On his show, the comedian has noted the paradox of people claiming they distrusted "elite" politicians while at the same time wanting elite doctors to treat them and elite lawyers to represent them in court."Say it loud: I'm elite and proud!" Salon; April 13, 2007 Maher supports the death penalty.(2002-12-16 broadcast.) "CNN American Morning with Paula Zahn: Talk with Bill Maher". (Transcript.) Cnn.")
He was originally against the Iraq War, and has summarized his opinion by saying that the United States and the world have had to pay too high a price for the war. He is skeptical of Iraq surviving without civil war.
In the 2008 U.S. presidential election, Maher announced his support for Senator Barack Obama D-Illinois.
On February 23, 2012, after his 'Crazy Stupid Politics' special streamed on Yahoo! Screen, Maher announced that he was contributing $1 million to Priorities USA, the Obama SuperPAC.
Maher is a gun owner, and explained in his February 12, 2013 appearance on the late night TV talk show Conan that he owns guns for personal home protection. However, he does not identify himself as a "proud" gun owner, commenting that being a proud gun owner is akin to "saying I'm a 'proud remote control owner'". Maher has stated that statistics showing that gun owners are more likely to harm a member of their household are caused by irresponsible gun owners, and believes that tragedies such as school shootings will not lead to fundamental change in gun laws because both Democrats and Republicans favor guns.
On June 7, 2013, Bill Maher expressed on his show limited support for the NSA's PRISM intelligence data collection from private phone calls and the Internet, saying that the threat of terrorists obtaining and using nuclear weapons was the tipping point for him. While he stated that he trusted the Obama administration to employ the program responsibly, he described the NSA's access to private data as a "slippery slope", and worried about whether other politicians would be as responsible.

Religion

Maher is highly critical of religion and views it as highly destructive.  He is described as an agnostic, and refers to himself as one in his feature film Religulous. "Believers, Skeptics and a Pool of Sitting Ducks", The New York Times  As for labels, he has denied being an atheist, saying, "I'm not an atheist. There's a really big difference between an atheist and someone who just doesn't believe in religion. Religion to me is a bureaucracy between man and God that I don't need. But I'm not an atheist, no."Thompson, Stephen (October 9, 2002). "Is There a God?". The AV Club. Maher has also occasionally referred to himself as an "apatheist", saying "I don't know what happens when you die, and I don't care", adding, "there's atheist and there's agnostic, and I'm okay with us not splitting the difference on those; if you are just not a super-religious person, you are on my team"."Bill Maher explains his 'apatheism,' apathetic atheism". CNN Belief Blogs. July 12, 2011 He has reiterated his stance in subsequent interviews, rejecting both the certitude of the existence, as well as the certitude of nonexistence of deities, concluding, "I'm saying that doubt is the only appropriate response for human beings.""Bill Maher: The God Botherer". The Sunday Times April 1, 2009  He is an advisory board member of author Sam Harris's Project Reason, a foundation that promotes scientific knowledge and secular values within society.
Maher and director Larry Charles teamed up to make the movie Religulous, described by trade publication Variety as a documentary "that spoofs religious extremism across the world." It was released on October 3, 2008. (September 10, 2007.) "Maher preaches to the TIFF choir". The Toronto Star.) "Toronto festival wary of serious films: 'Religulous' finds following at film fest". Variety.
Maher is critical towards organized religion as a whole, but believes that "all religions are not alike." Maher says there is something different about Islam, in that "there is no other religion that is asking for the death" of people who dare to criticize it. "Bill Maher On Islam: 'All Religions Are Not Alike'". RealClearPolitics. "Bill Maher on Israel, uncut and uncensored". The Jewish Journal of Greater Los Angeles. On October 29, 2010, during a Real Time segment, Maher commented on a news story that reported that the name Mohammed had become the most popular baby name in the United Kingdom. He asked, "Am I a racist to feel alarmed by that? Because I am. And it's not because of the race, it's because of the religion. I don't have to apologize, do I, for not wanting the Western world to be taken over by Islam in 300 years? Sharia law is being institutionalized in England? Well, then I am right, I should be alarmed."
On Fox News in a televised debate with Bill O'Reilly, Maher said that "if Jesus was in charge of the country we'd probably have health care for everybody."
Maher received the 2009 Richard Dawkins Award from Atheist Alliance International. "A note about the 'Richard Dawkins Award' being presented to Bill Maher this weekend". The Richard Dawkins Foundation.
Maher was ranked first by MormonVoices, a group associated with Foundation for Apologetic Information & Research, on its Top Ten Anti-Mormon Statements of 2011 list for saying "By any standard, Mormonism is more ridiculous than any other religion".

Health care

Maher has stated that the American Medical Association is a powerful lobbying group and one of the primary reasons why the United States had failed to enact health care reform.(2009-06-15). Keith Olbermann: Bill Maher Talks About Taking On Obama. Countdown With Keith Olbermann. Retrieved June 30, 2009.Countdown With Keith Olbermann; MSNBC; June 15, 2009
On August 24, 2009, Maher was a guest on The Tonight Show with Conan O'Brien. On the topic of getting health care reform legislation passed, Maher stated that Obama should forget about trying to get 60 votes for it, "he only needs 51." "Forget getting the sixty votes or sixty percent — sixty percent of people don't believe in evolution in this country — he just needs to drag them to it, like I said, they're stupid; get health care done, with or without them."
Maher has expressed the view that most illness is generally the result of poor diet and lack of exercise, and that medicine is often not the best way of addressing illness. In an episode of his show about the 2008 presidential candidates' health plans, Maher stated that poor nutrition is a primary cause of illness, and that "the answer isn't another pill."Real Time with Bill Maher; September 28, 2007; HBO He also has said:" If you believe you need to take all the pills the pharmaceutical industry says you do, then you're already on drugs!"
He has expressed his distaste for the pharmaceutical and health care industries in general, on the grounds that they make their money out of treating people who are made sick by consuming unhealthy food that corporations urge upon the public. He maintains that mass consumption of high-fructose corn syrup is a contributor to the rise in frequency of obesity in the United States.Larry King Live – Interview With Bill Maher; CNN; September 13, 2004
In a discussion with Michael Moore about the film Sicko, Maher said, "The human body is pretty amazing; it doesn't get sick, usually, for no reason. I mean, there's some genetic stuff that can get to you, but, basically, people are sick in this country because they're poisoned. The environment is a poisoning factor, but also, we gotta say, they poison themselves. They eat shit. People eat shit, and that's, to my way of thinking, about 90 percent of why people are sick, is because they eat shit."Maher and Moore Chew (Out) the Fat; Kerry Trueman, The Huffington Post; May 30, 2007
On October 9, 2009, on his HBO show, Maher debated the effectiveness of flu vaccinations with Bill Frist and stated, "Why would you let them be the ones to stick a disease into your arm? I would never get a swine flu vaccine or any vaccine. I don't trust the government, especially with my health."  Maher also expressed skepticism about the seriousness of the swine flu and whether completely healthy people could die from it.
Maher's comments on medicine have generated criticism from the medical and skeptic communities, and his remarks have been called unscientific and even harmful.
Maher responded to the criticism, saying, "What I've read about what they think I'm saying is not what I've said. I'm not a germ theory denier. I believe vaccinations can work. Polio is a good example. Do I think in certain situations that inoculating Third World children against malaria or diphtheria, or whatever, is right? Of course. In a situation like that, the benefits outweigh costs. But to me living in Los Angeles? To get a flu shot? No."Slotek, Jim (October 28, 2009). "Needling Bill Maher". Winnipeg Sun.

Views on 9/11 conspiracy theories

Maher has been a critic of 9/11 conspiracy theories. On October 19, 2007, Maher confronted several 9/11 truthers and had them ejected from his show audience after they interrupted the live show numerous times by calling out from the audience.  The incident drew significant media attention and praise from Fox News talk show host and frequent critic John Gibson.

Personal life

Maher has never married."Clips From Last Night: Bill Maher on why he's never been married... and American innovation". Piers Morgan Live. CNN. July 12, 2011."Side Dish: Bill Maher is so in love, he may even break his biggest rule - get married!". Daily News (New York). October 26, 2009. Regarding marriage, Maher is quoted on his website as saying, "I'm the last of my guy friends to have never gotten married, and their wives — they don't want them playing with me. I'm like the escaped slave — I bring news of freedom."
In 2003, he began dating former Playboy Cyber Girl Coco Johnsen. In November 2004, at the end of their 17-month relationship, she sued him for USD $9 million for "pain and suffering" for alleged "insulting, humiliating and degrading racial comments." Her suit stated that Maher promised to marry her and father her children, support her financially, and purchase a Beverly Hills home. Her suit also alleged that she quit her job as a flight attendant and occasional model to be with him. Maher's filing stated that, after the relationship had ended, Johnsen "launched a campaign to embarrass, humiliate, and extort ridiculous sums of money from Bill Maher." Johnsen accused another former boyfriend of rape and kidnapping in 1997, and the charges were later dismissed for lack of evidence."Maher: Ex Is Serial Shakedown Artist". The Smoking Gun. November 29, 2004."The Fix ". Salon. November 30, 2004. "Bill Maher Cries 'Con'". E!. The lawsuit was dismissed on May 2, 2005. "It Won't Hurt You. It's Vapor." New York magazine. p. 6."Judge Dismisses $9M Lawsuit Against Bill Maher". Fox News/Associated Press. May 4, 2005.
In 2005, he began dating Karrine Steffans, best-selling author  and former hip hop model.A Bawdy Lifestyle, and How to Shake It Washington Post; July 28, 2005 When commentators suggested there was a pattern to his dating because both his girlfriend and former girlfriend were black, Maher said, "People say I'm into black women. Robert De Niro is into black women. I'm just into women who are real, and they happen to be black."
From 2009 to 2011, Maher dated neuroscientist and science educator Cara Santa Maria."Bill Maher & Cara Santa Maria Split". InTouch Weekly. March 21, 2011
In 2012, Maher purchased a minority ownership interest in the New York Mets.

Bibliography

Filmography






