[[Horizon Air]]

CATEGORIES: Companies based in Seattle, Washington, Airlines based in Washington (state), Economy of the Northwestern United States, Economy of the Southwestern United States, Regional airlines of the United States, Regional Airline Association members, Airlines established in 1981

Horizon Air Industries, Inc.  operating as Horizon Air is a regional airline based in SeaTac, Washington, United States."Media Contacts: Alaska Airlines," Alaska Airlines"TOP INDUSTRIES." City of SeaTac. Retrieved July 20, 2008."City of SeaTac Zoning." City of SeaTac. Retrieved August 20, 2008.  It is the eighth largest regional airline in the USA, serving 38 cities in the United States, Canada, and Mexico. Horizon Air has been featured in several films, including the 1983  motion picture WarGames and 1995 motion picture Georgia.
Horizon Air and its sister carrier Alaska Airlines are subsidiaries of Alaska Air Group. It is also a substantial codeshare partner of American Airlines and Delta Air Lines.

History

1980s

Horizon Air was formed in May 1981 by Milt Kuolt, and started operations on September 1, 1981 with three Fairchild F-27 aircraft. 32  Its headquarters were in an area that is now within SeaTac, Washington."World Airline Directory." Flight International. March 31, 1984. 844.
Horizon Air's first route was from Yakima to Seattle, and one week later, Pasco to Seattle. 52 The general offices of Horizon Air were operated out of an old house behind Sea-Tac airport. Horizon acquired Air Oregon on June 17, 1982, after both airlines were losing hundreds of thousands of dollars monthly, in order to consolidate and reduce their operating deficit. 119-125 Horizon agreed to purchase Transwestern Airlines of Utah in September 1983, once again to try to reduce operating deficit of the airline.
An initial public offering occurred in 1984 to secure operating capital, which after only one profitable year since founding, was needed to keep the airline afloat. thumb|left|Horizon Fokker F28
On September 8, 1985 Horizon signed an agreement with de Havilland Canada to begin purchasing the airline's first brand new aircraft, the de Haviland Dash 8.
In 1988 Horizon signed a codeshare agreement with Northwest Airlines.  In 1989, Horizon became an international carrier when it began service to Vancouver, BC and Victoria, BC in May of that year using both Dash-8-100s and Fairchild Swearingen Metroliner.

1990s

Horizon was the launch customer for the Dornier 328 turboprop, intending to replace the Fairchild Metroliners with this new aircraft which promised jetliner speed and comfort.

2000s

In the spring of 2007, Horizon launched service from Los Angeles and Seattle to Santa Rosa, California to take advantage of the burgeoning wine and tourism industry. This was a significant coup 

2010s

At the beginning of 2011, Alaska Airlines' management took over decisions about Horizon's route choices and marketing.

Destinations

Horizon's 38 destinations are located in the U.S. states of California, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, Oregon, and Washington. Horizon also has service to Alberta and British Columbia, Canada as well as Baja California Sur, Mexico. Codesharing with Alaska Airlines, American Airlines,

Fleet

Horizon Air operates 50 narrow-body aircraft as of October 2013, with a single economy class service: 
The average Horizon Air fleet age is 8.9 years old as of October 2013.
In May 2011, SkyWest Airlines began operating six of Alaska Airlines' West Coast routes using five Bombardier CRJ-700s purchased from Horizon Air.  SkyWest owns, operates, crews, and maintains the aircraft, while Alaska Airlines schedules, prices, and markets the flights.usatoday.com/flights/story/2011/02/Alaska-Airlines-signs-flying-deal-with-SkyWest/44166418/1 Alaska Airlines signs flying deal with SkyWest

Fleet history

Aircraft that have been in service with Horizon Air in the past are (in alphabetical order):
On May 31, 2011, Horizon Air phased out the last of its CRJ-700 planes and now operates only the Q400.

Livery

At the start of the carrier, Horizon had a painted sunrise with a small beach with capitalized words saying "Horizon". Until recently, the current Horizon Air livery was very similar to its parent, Alaska Airlines, except for a dark red (rather than blue) cheatline, and the tail includes a stylized sun and sunset logo, rather than an Eskimo. Eleven Q400s are currently painted in special liveries. Some Dash 8-100's and -200's (no longer in service with Horizon Air) had names of Horizon destinations preceded by "Great City of" or "Great Cities of" printed on the front of the airplane.  The first Dash 8-100, N811PH was dedicated as the "Great Cities of Seattle/Tacoma" and the second airplane, N812PH was the "Great City of Portland".  N824PH was dedicated as the "Great Cities of Pullman/Moscow" on one side and the "Great Cities of Moscow/Pullman" on the other side. N363PH (Dash-8-Q200) was the first airplane to incorporate the "deep bing cherry red" on the underside of the engine nacelle.  This became the standard for Horizon's brand liverey as well as the current Alaska Airlines livery.  Prior to this change the underside of the nacelle was painted "Horizon White". 
On January 25, 2011 Horizon Air announced it was retiring its public brand and adopted the trademark Eskimo of its sister company, Alaska Airlines, on its fleet.  As part of the brand change, Horizon's Bombardier Q400 fleet will be repainted with a new paint scheme prominently featuring "Alaska" across the fuselage and the Eskimo on the tail. The plane will continue to include the Horizon logo on the sides of the aircraft, which will now appear in Alaska's dark blue color.

=Special liveries=

Ten Q400s are painted in special liveries: 
Many of the airline's other special liveries feature the colors and logos of universities located on the West Coast.Horizon Air to add more college logos to planes Puget Sound Business Journal  These include:
In addition, two aircraft were in the "Comfortably Greener" scheme to highlight the fuel-saving attributes of the Q400 over regional jets. First N439QX, then N438QX were painted in this scheme; The aircraft were later repainted into the airline's standard Alaska/Horizon livery introduced in 2011.

Services

Many of the airline's services are the same as those offered by Alaska Airlines, which is Horizon Air's sister company.

Board Room

Board Room is the Alaska Air Group airport lounge, and are located in five west coast airports including: Anchorage, Los Angeles, Portland, San Francisco, and Seattle.  Board Room Members also have access to Delta Air Lines Sky Club at airports across the country. Memberships start at $45 for a single-day pass, up to $875 for a new three-year membership.

Mileage Plan

Mileage Plan is the travel rewards program of the Alaska Air Group, Alaska Airlines and Horizon Air. The program's airline partners also include Oneworld member airlines American Airlines, British Airways, Cathay Pacific, LAN, and Qantas; SkyTeam member airlines Air France, Delta Air Lines; as well as Air Pacific, Era Aviation, Frontier Alaska, Mokulele Airlines, and PenAir.
The Mileage Plan program has no membership fee, and any mileage will be valid to the last day of the 24th month following the month of the last flight or transaction date. In addition, if a Mileage Plan member does not accumulate mileage within nine months after becoming a member, or a Mileage Plan member's account remains inactive at zero mileage for a consecutive 24 month period, the Mileage Plan account will be canceled.
The MVP, MVP Gold and MVP Gold 75 program is the frequent flyer service status program and is divided into three membership levels, MVP, MVP Gold, and MVP Gold 75, based on the member's travel in the last calendar year. All membership levels include free checked baggage. Higher-tiered members are provided with increased travel benefits such as bonus mileage, priority boarding and airport lounge access.
MVP level is achieved or retained when the member earns  on Alaska Airlines, Horizon Air, American Airlines, Delta Air Lines, KLM, Air France, or LAN Airlines, or 30 one-way segments on any combination of Mileage Plan members. Membership benefits include 50% bonus mileage, priority check-in at First Class counters, priority seating on board Alaska Airlines and Horizon Air flights, as well as a 50% discount on Board Room lounge membership initiation fees. Members booked in fare class Y and YAS can be upgraded to First Class at any time, and all other fare categories within 48 hours of flight.
MVP Gold level is achieved or retained when the member earns  on Alaska Airlines, Horizon Air, American Airlines, Delta Air Lines, KLM, Air France, LAN, or 60 one-way segments on any combination of Mileage Plan members. Membership benefits include 100% bonus mileage, priority check-in at First Class counters, and priority seating on board Alaska Airlines and Horizon Air flights. Members booked in fare class Y, S, B, M, H, or Value and Full Flex fares can be upgraded to First Class at any time, and all other fare categories within 72 hours of flight. Travel companions also receive this benefit, and members are given four complimentary upgrade certificates for guests annually.
MVP Gold 75 level is achieved or retained when the member earns  bonus is awarded to MVP Gold 75 members.

On board services

Since 1991, Starbucks coffee is served in-flight on all Horizon Air flights, and is brewed at the terminal and served in thermos containers on board the aircraft.

Incidents and accidents

Since Horizon Air's founding, no fatal accidents have occurred.








