[[Kurt Vonnegut]]

CATEGORIES: Kurt Vonnegut, 1922 births, 2007 deaths, Accidental deaths from falls, Accidental deaths in New York, American agnostics, American anti–Iraq War activists, American anarchists, American atheists, American humanists, American military personnel of World War II, American pacifists, American prisoners of war in World War II, American satirists, American socialists, Anarcho-pacifists, University of Tennessee alumni, American tax resisters, American Unitarian Universalists, Cornell University alumni, General Electric people, Iowa Writers' Workshop faculty, Members of the American Academy of Arts and Letters, People from Barnstable, Massachusetts, People from Indianapolis, Indiana, Recipients of the Purple Heart medal, United States Army soldiers, University of Chicago alumni, University of Iowa faculty, World War II prisoners of war held by Germany, Vonnegut family, Carnegie Mellon University alumni, Harvard University faculty, City College of New York faculty, American people of German descent, American essayists, American science fiction writers, American short story writers, Writers from Indiana, Writers from Massachusetts, Writers who illustrated their own writing, American male writers, 20th-century American writers, 20th-century American novelists, Postmodern writers, American male novelists, Guggenheim Fellows, Anarchist writers

Kurt Vonnegut, Jr. (
The New York Times headline at the time of Vonnegut's passing called Vonnegut "the counterculture's novelist."

Life

Early years

Kurt Vonnegut, Jr., was born in Indianapolis, Indiana, to third-generation German-American parents Kurt Vonnegut, Sr., and Edith (Lieber) Vonnegut."Kurt Vonnegut" NNDB Retrieved November 13, 2010 Both his father and his grandfather Bernard Vonnegut attended the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and were architects in the Indianapolis firm of Vonnegut & Bohn. His great-grandfather, Clemens Vonnegut, Sr., was the founder of the Vonnegut Hardware Company, an Indianapolis firm. The Army transferred him to the Carnegie Institute of Technology and finally the University of Tennessee to study mechanical engineering.
On Mother's Day 1944, while on leave during World War II, he discovered that his mother had committed suicide with sleeping pills.

World War II

Reassigned to a combat unit due to the manpower needs of the Allied invasion of France, Vonnegut was captured while a private with the 423rd Infantry Regiment, 106th Infantry Division during the Battle of the Bulge. On December 19, 1944, the 106th Division was cut off from the rest of Courtney Hodges's First Army. "The other American divisions on our flanks managed to pull out; we were obliged to stay and fight. Bayonets aren't much good against tanks". Slaughterhouse Five. Letters of Note. Imprisoned in Dresden, he was chosen as a leader of the POWs because he spoke some German. After telling some German guards "what he was going to do to them when the Russians came", he was beaten and had his position as leader revoked. He witnessed the Allied firebombing of Dresden in February 1945, which destroyed most of the historic city.travel/GermanOriginality
Vonnegut was part of a group of American prisoners of war who survived the bombing in an underground slaughterhouse meat locker used as an ad hoc detention facility. The German guards called the building Schlachthof Fünf ("Slaughterhouse Five"), and the POWs adopted that name. Vonnegut said that the aftermath of the attack on the defenseless city was "utter destruction" and "carnage unfathomable". The experience was the inspiration for his famous novel, Slaughterhouse-Five, and is a central theme in at least six of his other books. In Slaughterhouse-Five he recalls that the ruins of the city looked like the surface of the moon. He said the German guards put the surviving POWs to work, breaking into basements and bomb shelters to gather bodies for mass burial, while German civilians cursed and threw rocks at them. Armageddon in Retrospect. New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons, 2008. Vonnegut remarked, "There were too many corpses to bury. So instead the Germans sent in troops with flamethrowers. All these civilians' remains were burned to ashes."
Vonnegut was liberated by Red Army soldiers in May 1945 at the Saxony-Czechoslovakian border. On his return to America, he was awarded a Purple Heart for what he called a "ludicrously negligible wound,"Sarah Land Prakken: The Reader's Adviser: A Layman's Guide to Literature, R. R. Bowker 1974, ISBN 0-8352-0781-1, p. 623Arthur Salm: Novelist Kurt Vonnegut: So it goes, The San Diego Union-Tribune April 15, 2007 later writing facetiously in Timequake that he was given the decoration after suffering a case of "frostbite". Timequake. Vonnegut's experience as a soldier and prisoner of war had a profound influence on his later work.

Post-war career

After the war, Vonnegut attended the University of Chicago as a graduate student in anthropology and also worked at the City News Bureau of Chicago. He described his work there: "Well, the Chicago City News Bureau was a tripwire for all the newspapers in town when I was there, and there were five papers, I think. We were out all the time around the clock and every time we came across a really juicy murder or scandal or whatever, they'd send the big time reporters and photographers, otherwise they'd run our stories. So that's what I was doing, and I was going to university at the same time."Wikipedia City News Bureau of Chicago Vonnegut admitted that he was a poor anthropology student, with one professor remarking that some of the students were going to be professional anthropologists and he was not one of them. According to Vonnegut in Bagombo Snuff Box, the university rejected his first thesis on the necessity of accounting for the similarities between Cubist painters and the leaders of late 19th Century Native American uprisings, saying it was "unprofessional."
He left Chicago to work in Schenectady, New York, in public relations for General Electric, where his brother Bernard worked in the research department. Vonnegut was a technical writer, but was also known for writing well past his typical hours while working. While in Schenectady, Vonnegut lived in the tiny hamlet of Alplaus, located within the town of Glenville, just across the Mohawk River from the city of Schenectady. Vonnegut rented an upstairs apartment located along Alplaus Creek across the street from the Alplaus Volunteer Fire Department, where he was an active Volunteer Fire-Fighter for a few years. To this day, the apartment where Vonnegut lived for a brief time still has a desk at which he wrote many of his short stories; Vonnegut carved his name on its underside. The University of Chicago later accepted his novel Cat's Cradle as his thesis, citing its anthropological content, and awarded him the M.A. degree in 1971. 64: Kurt Vonnegut", Paris Review, Issue 69, Spring 1977
In the mid-1950s, Vonnegut worked very briefly for Sports Illustrated magazine, where he was assigned to write a piece on a racehorse that had jumped a fence and attempted to run away. After staring at the blank piece of paper on his typewriter all morning, he typed, "The horse jumped over the fucking fence," and left.org, June 3, 2008. On the verge of abandoning writing, Vonnegut was offered a teaching job at the University of Iowa Writers' Workshop. While he was there, Cat's Cradle became a best-seller, and he began Slaughterhouse-Five, now considered by some to be one of the best American novels of the 20th century, appearing on the 100 best lists of Time magazine
Early in his adult life he moved to Barnstable, Massachusetts, a town on Cape Cod

Personal life

The author's name appears in print as "Kurt Vonnegut, Jr.," throughout the first half of his published writing career; beginning with the 1976 publication of Slapstick, he dropped the "Jr." and was simply billed as Kurt Vonnegut. His older brother, Bernard Vonnegut, was an atmospheric scientist at the University at Albany, who discovered that silver iodide could be used for cloud seeding, the process of artificially stimulating precipitation.U.S. Pat. No. 3,877,642
After returning from World War II, Kurt Vonnegut married his childhood sweetheart, Jane Marie Cox, writing about their courtship in several of his short stories. In the 1960s they lived in Barnstable, Massachusetts, where for a while Vonnegut worked at a Saab dealership. The couple separated in 1970; that same year, Vonnegut began living with the woman who would later become his second wife, photographer Jill Krementz, although he did not divorce Cox until 1979. Krementz and Vonnegut were married after the divorce from Cox was finalized.
He raised seven children: three from his first marriage; three of his sister Alice's four children, adopted by Vonnegut after her death from cancer;
His daughter Edith ("Edie"), an artist, was named after Kurt Vonnegut's mother, Edith Lieber. She has had her work published in a book titled Domestic Goddesses and was once married to Geraldo Rivera. His youngest biological daughter, Nanette ("Nanny"), was named after Nanette Schnull, Vonnegut's paternal grandmother. She is married to realist painter Scott Prior and is the subject of several of his paintings, notably "Nanny and Rose."
Of Vonnegut's four adopted children, three are his nephews: James, Steven, and Kurt Adams; the fourth is Lily, a girl he adopted as an infant in 1982. James, Steven, and Kurt were adopted after a traumatic week in 1958, in which their father James Carmalt Adams was killed on September 15 in the Newark Bay rail crash when his commuter train went off the open Newark Bay bridge in New Jersey, and their mother — Kurt's sister Alice — died of cancer. In Slapstick, Vonnegut recounts that Alice's husband died two days before Alice herself, and her family tried to hide the knowledge from her, but she found out when an ambulatory patient gave her a copy of the New York Daily News a day before she herself died. The fourth and youngest of the boys, Peter Nice, went to live with a first cousin of their father in Birmingham, Alabama, as an infant. Lily is a singer, actress, and the producer of the YouTube series "The Most Popular Girls in School."
Vonnegut's first wife Jane Marie Cox later married Adam Yarmolinsky
On November 11, 1999, an asteroid was named in Vonnegut's honor: 25399 Vonnegut.
A lifelong smoker, Vonnegut smoked unfiltered Pall Mall cigarettes, a habit he referred to as a "classy way to commit suicide."
Vonnegut taught at Harvard University, where he was a lecturer in English, and the City College of New York, where he was a Distinguished Professor.
Vonnegut died on April 11, 2007, after falling down a flight of stairs in his home and suffering massive head trauma.

Writing career

Vonnegut's first short story, "Report on the Barnhouse Effect," appeared in the February 11, 1950, edition of Collier's (it has since been reprinted in his short story collection, Welcome to the Monkey House). His first novel was the dystopian novel Player Piano (1952), in which human workers have been largely replaced by machines. He continued to write short stories before his second novel, The Sirens of Titan, was published in 1959. Through the 1960s, the form of his work changed, from the relatively orthodox structure of Cat's Cradle (which in 1971 earned him a Master's Degree) to the acclaimed, semi-autobiographical Slaughterhouse-Five, given a more experimental structure by using time travel as a plot device. These structural experiments were continued in Breakfast of Champions (1973), which includes many rough illustrations, lengthy non-sequiturs, and an appearance by the author himself as a deus ex machina.
Breakfast of Champions became one of his best-selling novels. It includes, in addition to the author himself, several of Vonnegut's recurring characters. One of them, science fiction author Kilgore Trout, plays a major role and interacts with the author's character.
In 1974, Venus on the Half-Shell, a book by Philip José Farmer in a style similar to that of Vonnegut and attributed to Kilgore Trout, was published. This caused some confusion among readers, as for some time many assumed that Vonnegut wrote it; when the truth of its authorship came out, Vonnegut was reported as being "not amused." In an issue of the semi-prozine The Alien Critic/Science Fiction Review, published by Richard E. Geis, Farmer claimed to have received an angry, obscenity-laden telephone call from Vonnegut about it.
Although many of his novels involved science fiction themes, they were widely read and reviewed outside the field, due in no small part to their anti-authoritarianism. For example, in his seminal short story "Harrison Bergeron," egalitarianism is rigidly enforced by overbearing state authority, engendering horrific repression.
In much of his work, Vonnegut's own voice is apparent, often filtered through the character of science fiction author Kilgore Trout (whose name is based on that of real-life science fiction writer Theodore Sturgeon). It is characterized by wild leaps of imagination and a deep cynicism, tempered by humanism. In the foreword to Breakfast of Champions, Vonnegut wrote that as a child, he saw men with locomotor ataxia, and it struck him that these men walked like broken machines; it followed that healthy people were working machines, suggesting that humans are helpless prisoners of determinism. Vonnegut also explored this theme in Slaughterhouse-Five, in which protagonist Billy Pilgrim "has come unstuck in time" and has so little control over his own life that he cannot even predict which part of it he will be living through from minute to minute. Vonnegut's well-known phrase "so it goes," used ironically in reference to death, also originated in Slaughterhouse-Five. "Its combination of simplicity, irony, and rue is very much in the Vonnegut vein."
With the publication of his novel Timequake in 1997, Vonnegut announced his retirement from writing fiction. He continued to write for the magazine In These Times, where he was a senior editor,NY1 Story April 12, 2007 until his death in 2007, focusing on subjects ranging from contemporary U.S. politics to simple observational pieces on topics such as a trip to the post office. In 2005, many of his essays were collected in a new bestselling book titled A Man Without a Country, which he insisted would be his last contribution to letters.
An August 2006 article reported:
The April 2008 issue of Playboy featured the first published excerpt from Armageddon in Retrospect, the first posthumous collection of Vonnegut's work. The book itself was published in the same month. It included never before published short stories by the writer and a letter that was written to his family during World War II when Vonnegut was captured as a prisoner of war. The book also contains drawings by Vonnegut and a speech he wrote shortly before his death. The introduction was written by his son, Mark Vonnegut.

Art career

Vonnegut's work as a graphic artist began with his illustrations for Slaughterhouse-Five and developed with Breakfast of Champions, which included numerous felt-tip pen illustrations. Many Vonnegut works of art can be found in his novels and short story collections such as Armageddon in Retrospect. Later in his career, he became more interested in art, particularly silk-screen prints, which he pursued in collaboration with Joe Petro III. Vonnegut cited artists Paul Klee and Georges Braque as particular influences.  Vonnegut, Nanette. Kurt Vonnegut Drawings, the Monacelli Press, 2014, pp. 10-11  
In October 1980, Vonnegut exhibited his drawings in pen, pencil, and colored felt-tipped markers at the Margo Feiden Galleries Ltd. in New York. University of South Carolina Press, 2009, p. 97. Fellow writers Norman Mailer and George Plimpton attended the opening of Vonnegut's exhibition,The Michigan Daily vol. XCI, no. 23, "Slapbrush", The Michigan Daily, October 23, 1980 as did television personality and fellow artist Morley Safer..."  Reed, Peter. "The Incredible Artwork of Kurt Vonnegut," in Kurt Vonnegut Drawings, p. 21  On the occasion of the show's opening, Vonnegut expressed his preference for using colored felt-tipped markers rather than oil paints or watercolor. "Oil is such a commitment," Vonnegut explained, whereas he found watercolors "too bland, too weak." However, he said, "they make such extraordinary Magic Markers, such brilliant colors. It makes things very easy." He also compared the creative process of drawing with that involved in writing. "If you make a mistake on a picture it's satisfying to wad it up and toss it out" he said. "When you have to do that with a written page, it's a more depressing failure."Palm Beach Daily News "Felt Pens Mark Magic Change in Vonnegut's Art", Palm Beach Daily News, November 5, 1980 Whereas the writer is only satisfied upon the work's completion, Vonnegut said, "the act painting itself is enjoyable." Reed, p. 19  He further explained that "in a picture there may be 10 or 12 significant details. On a printed page there are 2,500."Palm Beach Daily News "Felt Pens Mark Magic Change in Vonnegut's Art", Palm Beach Daily News, November 5, 1980 As to his art's significance, Vonnegut declared, "My drawings are as rare as exotic postage stamps. I'm a Sunday painter who's offering his work to the public. It's great to take a venture with absolutely no risk."
In 2004, Vonnegut participated in the project The Greatest Album Covers That Never Were, for which he created an album cover for Phish called Hook, Line and Sinker, which has been included in a traveling exhibition for the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.

Politics

Vonnegut was deeply influenced by early Socialist labor leaders, especially Indiana natives Powers Hapgood and Eugene V. Debs, and he frequently quoted them in his work. He named characters after both Debs (Eugene Debs Hartke in Hocus Pocus and Eugene Debs Metzger in Deadeye Dick) and Russian Communist leader Leon Trotsky (Leon Trotsky Trout in Galápagos). He was a lifetime member of the American Civil Liberties Union and was featured in a print advertisement for them.
In 1968, he signed the "Writers and Editors War Tax Protest" pledge, vowing to refuse tax payments in protest against the Vietnam War."Writers and Editors War Tax Protest" January 30, 1968 New York Post
Vonnegut frequently addressed moral and political issues but rarely dealt with specific political figures until after his retirement from fiction. Though the downfall of Walter Starbuck, a minor Nixon administration bureaucrat who is the narrator and main character in Jailbird (1979), would not have occurred but for the Watergate scandal, the focus is not on the administration. His collection God Bless You, Dr. Kevorkian referenced controversial assisted suicide proponent Jack Kevorkian.
With his columns for In These Times, he began an attack on the George W. Bush administration and the Iraq War. "By saying that our leaders are power-drunk chimpanzees, am I in danger of wrecking the morale of our soldiers fighting and dying in the Middle East?" he wrote. "Their morale, like so many bodies, is already shot to pieces. They are being treated, as I never was, like toys a rich kid got for Christmas." In These Times quoted him as saying "The only difference between Hitler and Bush is that Hitler was elected." In a 2003 interview Vonnegut said, "I myself feel that our country, for whose Constitution I fought in a just war, might as well have been invaded by Martians and body snatchers. Sometimes I wish it had been. What has happened, though, is that it has been taken over by means of the sleaziest, low-comedy, Keystone Cops-style coup d'etat imaginable. And those now in charge of the federal government are upper-crust C-students who know no history or geography, plus not-so-closeted white supremacists, aka 'Christians,' and plus, most frighteningly, psychopathic personalities, or 'PPs.'"Kurtzman, Daniel. The Political Wisdom of Kurt Vonnegut. About.com
When asked how he was doing at the start of a 2003 interview, he replied: "I'm mad about being old and I'm mad about being American. Apart from that, OK."Hoppe, David. Aggressively Unconventional: An Interview with Kurt Vonnegut, Utne Reader. May/June 2003.
He did not regard the 2004 election with much optimism; speaking of Bush and John Kerry, he said that "no matter which one wins, we will have a Skull and Bones President at a time when entire vertebrate species, because of how we have poisoned the topsoil, the waters and the atmosphere, are becoming, hey presto, nothing but skulls and bones."
In 2005, Vonnegut was interviewed by David Nason for The Australian. During the course of the interview Vonnegut was asked his opinion of modern terrorists, to which he replied, "I regard them as very brave people." When pressed further Vonnegut also said that "They suicide bombers are dying for their own self-respect. It's a terrible thing to deprive someone of their self-respect. It's like your culture is nothing, your Race is nothing, you're nothing ... It is sweet and noble—sweet and honourable I guess it is—to die for what you believe in." (This last statement is a reference to the line "Dulce et decorum est pro patria mori" is sweet and fitting to die for one's country" from Horace's Odes, or possibly to Wilfred Owen's ironic use of the line in his Dulce Et Decorum Est.) Nason took offense at Vonnegut's comments and characterized him as an old man who "doesn't want to live any more ... and because he can't find anything worthwhile to keep him alive, he finds defending terrorists somehow amusing." Vonnegut's son, Mark, responded to the article by writing an editorial to the Boston Globe in which he explained the reasons behind his father's "provocative posturing" and stated that "If these commentators can so badly misunderstand and underestimate an utterly unguarded English-speaking 83-year-old man with an extensive public record of saying exactly what he thinks, maybe we should worry about how well they understand an enemy they can't figure out what to call."
A 2006 interview with Rolling Stone stated, " ... it's not surprising that he disdains everything about the Iraq War. The very notion that more than 2,500 U.S. soldiers have been killed in what he sees as an unnecessary conflict makes him groan. 'Honestly, I wish Nixon were president,' Vonnegut laments. 'Bush is so ignorant.' "
Though he was a dissident to the end, Vonnegut held a bleak view on the power of artists to effect change. "During the Vietnam War," he told an interviewer in 2003, "every respectable artist in this country was against the war. It was like a laser beam. We were all aimed in the same direction. The power of this weapon turns out to be that of a custard pie dropped from a stepladder six feet high."

Religion

Vonnegut was descended from a family of German freethinkers, who were skeptical of "conventional religious beliefs."Timequake, by Kurt Vonnegut, New York: G.P. Putnam's, 1997. His great-grandfather, Clemens Vonnegut, had authored a freethought book titled Instruction in Morals, as well as an address for his own funeral in which he denied the existence of God, an afterlife, and Christian doctrines about sin and salvation. Kurt Vonnegut reproduced his great-grandfather's funeral address in his book Palm Sunday, and identified these freethought views as his "ancestral religion," declaring it a mystery as to how it was passed on to him.
Vonnegut described himself variously as a skeptic,Palm Sunday, by Kurt Vonnegut, 1981. Republished by The Dial Press, 2006. freethinker,Vonnegut Unbound: The master of irreverence on life, death, God, humanism, and the souls of aspiring artists, By Christopher R. Blazejewski, The Harvard Crimson, Friday, May 12, 2000 humanist, Unitarian Universalist,Vonnegut, Fates Worse Than Death, p. 157; Haught, 2000 Years of Disbelief, p. 287 agnostic, and atheist. He disbelieved in the supernatural, considered religious doctrine to be "so much arbitrary, clearly invented balderdash," and believed people were motivated to join religions out of loneliness. 287 but was nevertheless an admirer of the Sermon on the Mount."I say of Jesus, as all humanists do, 'If what he said is good, and so much of it is absolutely beautiful, what does it matter if he was God or not?' But if Christ hadn't delivered the Sermon on the Mount, with its message of mercy and pity, I wouldn't want to be a human being. I'd just as soon be a rattlesnake." Vonnegut, A Man without a Country, pp 80-81 In 2003, he was one of the signatories of the Humanist Manifesto.
Vonnegut considered humanism to be a modern-day form of freethought,David Brancaccio: Now on PBS (transcript), 10.07.05 and advocated it in various writings, speeches and interviews. His ties to organized humanism included membership as a Humanist Laureate in the Council for Secular Humanism's International Academy of Humanism. Vonnegut went on to serve as honorary president of the American Humanist Association (AHA), having taken over the position from his late colleague Isaac Asimov, and serving until his own death in 2007. 80 In a letter to AHA members, Vonnegut wrote: "I am a humanist, which means, in part, that I have tried to behave decently without expectations of rewards or punishments after I am dead."Humanist President Kurt Vonnegut Mourned American Humanists Association Press Release, April 12, 2007
Vonnegut was at one time a member of a Unitarian congregation. Even after the merger, many individual congregations retained the pre-merger denominational designations ("Unitarian" or "Universalist") within their names. "Unitarian" is a common shorthand designation for members of the denomination, though "Unitarian Universalist" (abbreviated as UU) is the more technically correct term. Palm Sunday reproduces a sermon he delivered to the First Parish Unitarian Church in Cambridge, Massachusetts, concerning William Ellery Channing, who was a principal founder of Unitarianism in the United States. In 1986, Vonnegut spoke to a gathering of Unitarian Universalists in Rochester, New York, and the text of his speech is reprinted in his book Fates Worse Than Death. Also reprinted in that book was a "mass" by Vonnegut, which was performed by a Unitarian Universalist choir in Buffalo, New York. It was translated into Latin and set to music by acquaintances. Fates Worse than Death, pp. 69-73, 223-234 Vonnegut identified Unitarianism as the religion that many in his freethinking family turned to when freethought and other German "enthusiasms" became unpopular in the United States during the World Wars. Vonnegut's parents were married by a Unitarian minister, and his son had at one time aspired to become a Unitarian minister.

Self-assessment

In his book Bagombo Snuff Box: Uncollected Short Fiction, Vonnegut listed eight rules for writing a short story:
Vonnegut qualifies the list by adding that Flannery O'Connor broke all these rules except the first, and that great writers tend to do that. He wrote an earlier version of writing tips that was even more straightforward and contained only seven rules (though it advised using Elements of Style for more indepth advice).
In "The Sexual Revolution", Chapter 18 of his book Palm Sunday, Vonnegut grades his own works. He states that the grades "do not place me in literary history" and that he is comparing "myself with myself." The grades are as follows:

Appearances

Tributes

 | title = Kurt's Mile-High Celebration | author= Drew Bixby| publisher = Westword | accessdate = December 15, 2008}}[/ref]

Bibliography

Notes






