[[Vaitupu]]

CATEGORIES: Atolls of Tuvalu, Vaitupu

Vaitupu is the largest atoll of the nation of Tuvalu. It is located at 7.48 degrees south and 178.83 degrees west.  There are almost 1,600 people living on 5.6 km2 with the main village being Asau.

History

The exact date of Vaitupu's first settlement is unknown. According to oral history, the founder of the Vaitupuan community was a Samoan by the name of Telematua, who arrived in the 16th or 17th century. However, it is possible that Tongans may have first reached the atoll during the mid-13th century. Vaitupu has maintained contacts with Tonga throughout its history, both peaceful (marriage alliances) and hostile (visits by Tongan slave-seekers). Vaitupu was also visited by I-Kiribati, and was thus far from isolated. Kennedy, Field Notes on the Culture of Vaitupu, Ellice Islands, Journal of the Polynesian Society, vol.38, 1929, pp.2–5
Vaitupu means 'the fountain of water'.
Obed Starbuck, a whaling captain, visited Vaitupu on the Loper in 1825, naming it 'Tracy Island'. Chambers & Doug Munro, The Mystery of Gran Cocal: European Discovery and Mis-Discovery in Tuvalu, 89(2) (1980) The Journal of the Polynesian Society, 167–198 The United States Exploring Expedition under Charles Wilkes visited Vaitupu in 1841. – 1968 The Wilkes Expedition. The First United States Exploring Expedition (1838–42). Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society
Samoan pastors from the London Missionary Society successfully introduced Christianity in the 1860s. The pastors implemented religious regulations, outlawing many cultural practices. They also introduced the Samoan language, as their Bibles were written in Samoan. Vaitupuans became literate in Samoan rather than in their own language. Kennedy, Field Notes on the Culture of Vaitupu, Ellice Islands, Journal of the Polynesian Society, vol.38, 1929, pp.5–6
Vaitupuans celebrate Te Aso Fiafia (Happy Day) on 25 November of each year. Te Aso Fiafia commemorates 25 November 1887 which was the date on which the final instalment of a debt of $13,000 was repaid to H. M. Ruge and Company, a German trading firm that operated from Apia, Samoa. Vaitupu history is that Thomas William Williams, the Ruge agent, pretended to do his customers a favour by allowing them to obtain goods on credit.
Vaitupuan tradition is that chance favoured their efforts, a ship sent to collect the last payment sank, as did the second ship the trading schooner Vaitupulemele. By the time a third ship arrived most of the money had been collected. However the trading schooner Vaitupulemele appears to have a different role in the history of Vaitupu. The creation of the debt that was repaid to Ruge & Co extended beyond the purchase of goods on credit to include the purchase price of the Vaitupulemele by the Vaitupu Company. While T.M. Williams had been the Ruge agent, he later formed the Vaitupu Company with the Vaitupuan community and purchased the Vaitupulemele from Ruge & Co. However the schooner was lost during a voyage from Samoan and soon after Williams died, leaving no accounting for copra that had been shipped from Vaitupu. In any event the Vaitupuans paid the full amount claimed by Ruge & Co, although that company soon after went into liquidation.
Vaitupu Post Office opened around 1916.

Population of Vaitupu

The population of Vaitupu from 1860–1900 is estimated to be 400 people.W.F. Newton, The Early Population of the Ellice Islands, 76(2) (1967) The Journal of the Polynesian Society, 197–204. of the Polynesian Society 199 Vaitupu is home to the second-largest population in Tuvalu, numbering 1,591 (2002 Census). Despite its relatively large size, Vaitupu became so overcrowded during the 1940s that a number of families migrated to Fiji to live on Kioa Island.Michael Goldsmith, Review of Klaus-Friedrich Koch, Logs in the Current of the Sea, Journal of the Polynesian Society, 87:4 (1978), 361–62

Schools on Vaitupu

The primary school on Vaitupu is called Tolise. There used to be a primary school called Elisefou (New Ellice) on Vaitupu. The school moved to Vaitupu in 1923 and closed in 1953 when the government primary school was established. Its first Headmaster, D. G. Kennedy, was a known disciplinarian who would not hesitate to discipline his students. The two most famous Tuvaluans from the school were Tuvalu's first Governor General, Sir Fiatau Penitala Teo and its first Prime Minister, Toaripi Lauti.
Motufoua Secondary School was established in 1905. Over time the school has evolved and it is now is a boarding school for boys and girls that is administered by the Department of Education. In 2009 the student roll at Motufoua Secondary School was 550.
In 2010 the largest diesel-solar photovoltaic (PV) hybrid electricity system in the South Pacific was installed at Motufoua Secondary School.

Geography

The island, which covers approximately 5.6 square kilometres, includes swamps, mangroves, a fringing coral reef and a large lagoon.
Vaitupu atoll consists of at least 9 isles, which are:
Cyclone Ofa had a major impact on Vaitupu on 30 January and 1 February 1990 with around 85 percent of residential homes, trees and food crops were destroyed.
In the 2011 Tuvalu drought Vaitupu experienced the loss of coconut palm trees, pulaka and taro due to the high temperatures and arid soil.

Community activities

The only village on Vaitupu consists of the neighbourhoods Tumaseu and Asau. There is a church, Tolise Primary School, at least one guesthouse and a post office. An aquaculture project has been established in the lagoon.
The community activities on Vaitupu include the Nafa Moa and Talo (Taro crops and chickens competition). In this contest the community is divided into two rival teams. Members of each team compete for who can grow the heavier taro or larger chickens; the climax comes with the weigh-off between the competitors, concluding a day of good-natured rivalry and fun.
The small islet of Temotu in Loto Lagoon is home to a single family of 13 headed by the English born writer Lewis Wade.

Transportation and tourism

Today, Vaitupu can be accessed by either private boat or the government-operated MV Nivaga II after 8 hours at sea from the main island of Funafuti.  The latter's return trip and dates of sailing are at irregular intervals. There is a wharf on Vaitupu but no harbour, meaning one must board a smaller boat from the MV Nivaga II to get to the shore.  There are paths and small unpaved roads throughout the island. Only a few cars drive on Vaitupu. In the main village there is a guest house called Vivalia III located at the wharf near the main church.

General election, 2010

Notable local persons

Reverend Sir Filoimea Telito, GCMG, MBE, as a young man became a teacher at Motufoua Secondary School. After completing theological studies, he returned to Motufoua to serve as Pastor. Later he became Principal of Motufoua, then in April 2005 he was appointed to be the Governor-General of Tuvalu.
Taukelina Finikaso represents Vaitupu in the Parliament of Tuvalu. He served as Minister of Communications and Works in the Government of Tuvalu from 2006 to 2010 and was appointed the Foreign Minister on 5 August 2013 following Enele Sopoaga becoming prime minister.
Apisai Ielemia has served as Prime Minister of Tuvalu from 2006 to 2010. He represents Vaitupu in the Parliament of Tuvalu.






