[[Jobriath]]

CATEGORIES: 1946 births, 1983 deaths, American rock singers, American male singers, LGBT musicians from the United States, AIDS-related deaths in New York, Protopunk groups, Protopunk musicians, People from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Musicians from Pennsylvania, Gay musicians

Jobriath (Bruce Wayne Campbell December 14, 1946, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania – August 3, 1983), was an American country rock and glam rock musician and actor.  He was the first openly gay rock musician to be signed to a major record label, and one of the first internationally famous musicians to die of AIDS.

Biography

Early life & career

A native of King of Prussia, Pennsylvania, and raised in Houston, Texas, Bruce Campbell showed exceptional talent for playing the piano and was once introduced to Eugene Ormandy as a child prodigy. Both were produced by Stan Farber. At this time he was traced by the military police and arrested, spending nearly six months in a military psychiatric hospital after suffering a breakdown. During this period he began writing the songs that would lead to his next musical incarnation.

Jerry Brandt, the hype and Jobriath Boone

In mid-December 1972 Jerry Brandt, Carly Simon's former manager, overheard a demo tape being played by Clive Davis at Columbia Records. Davis rejected the tape as "mad, unstructured and destructive to melody", but Brandt was quick to step in. Jobriath later remarked "that coming from a man who discovered both Patti Smith and Barry Manilow...  Brandt: "In walked this beautiful creature dressed in white. I said, Why don't you come out to Malibu and hang out?" This became a feature of the mythology used to promote Jobriath, and helps to explain the acrimony that followed the dissolution of their professional and personal relationship.
Newly named Jobriath Boone, Brandt signed him to Elektra Records for a reported $500,000; allegedly the most lucrative recording contract of its time.November 1998 issue of Mojo Magazine (pp. 69-70) A huge marketing campaign and media blitz ensued, including full-page advertisements in Vogue, Penthouse, and Rolling Stone magazines, full-length posters on over 250 New York City buses and a huge 41' by 43' billboard in Times Square. All featured the forthcoming debut album sleeve design by noted photographer Shig Ikeda, which featured a nude Jobriath, made to resemble an ancient Roman statue. Elektra, concerned about spiraling production costs, postponed the Paris Opera shows until February, later canceling them due to expense.
Amidst this barrage of promotion, the debut album Jobriath was released, garnering mostly positive reviews. Rolling Stone stated that Jobriath had "talent to burn", Cashbox called it "truly one of the most interesting albums of the year" and Record World hailed it as "brilliantly incisive", referring to Jobriath as "a true Renaissance man who will gain a tremendous following". Esquire disagreed, calling it "the hype of the year". The album was co-produced by Eddie Kramer and Jobriath, featuring string arrangements by Jobriath, recorded at Olympic Studios with the London Symphony Orchestra.
During this period, Brandt continued making extravagant statements such as "Elvis, the Beatles, and Jobriath" and declaring that both he and Jobriath had booked flights on Pan American's first passenger flight to the moon. Meanwhile, Jobriath declared himself "rock's truest fairy", a comment that did little to increase his popularity at the time but has since confirmed his status as the first openly gay rock singer to be signed to a major record label.
Jobriath's debut public performance was made on television, when Brandt secured him an appearance on the popular show The Midnight Special. The costumes were designed by Jobriath and the choreography was by Joyce Trisler, of the Joffrey Ballet. The long awaited live performance finally came in the summer of 1974 with two sold-out shows at New York's Bottom Line club. Sales for the album however, were poor and it failed to secure a chart placing.
Six months after the release of the debut album, Creatures of the Street was released, again featuring Peter Frampton, as well as John Paul Jones of Led Zeppelin.

Cole Berlin, cabaret and The Chelsea Hotel

In January 1975 Jobriath announced his retirement from the music industry and moved into a pyramid topped rooftop apartment at the Chelsea Hotel in New York City. He attempted to resume his acting career and unsuccessfully auditioned for the role of Al Pacino's lover in the film Dog Day Afternoon. at a restaurant called The Covent Gardens, as well as clubs and cabarets, augmenting his income with occasional prostitution.
By the time his 10 year contract with Brandt was finally up, Jobriath was sick with AIDS. He began to feel ill in late 1981 but still managed to contribute to the Chelsea Hotel's 100th birthday celebrations in November 1982. On August 3, 1983, one week after the end of his original 10 year contract with Jerry Brandt expired, Jobriath died, becoming one of the first famous musicians to die of the disease.

Legacy

In November 2004, long-time fan Morrissey oversaw Jobriath's first CD re-issue, a compilation called "Lonely Planet Boy". It was produced by Eddie Kramer. Morrissey had previously attempted to secure Jobriath as a support act for the tour in support of his Your Arsenal album, having been unaware that the singer had died some years previously.
Both Jobriath's original studio albums were officially reissued on CD in Japan in late 2007, remastered and issued in mini-vinyl replica sleeves. They were released in the U.S. in standard jewel-box packaging in 2008 by Collectors' Choice Music.
The group Balcony released a semi-tribute track entitled "Jobriath" as a free MP3 anonymously on the internet in 2000
Def Leppard released a cover of "Heartbeat" on some versions of their 2006 album Yeah!.
"Morning Starship" was sampled by hip-hop artist Ill Bill on the title track to his 2007 mixtape album "Black Metal".
Filmmaker Kieran Turner (24 Nights) has created a feature documentary about the late singer called "Jobriath A.D."
Ann Magnuson is working on an EP featuring four Jobriath songs and a spoken-word narrative. 
On October 29, 2013, Eschatone Records released three 1971 Jobriath tracks digitally and on 10" vinyl as the EP ''Amazing Dope Tales."
On May 6, 2014, Eschatone Records will release the full-length As the River Flows album of never-before released Jobriath recordings from 1971-72 on CD, limited edition vinyl and in digital format. 

Discography

Studio albums

Compilations

Singles






