[[Moda Center]]

CATEGORIES: 1995 establishments in Oregon, Arena football venues, Basketball venues in Oregon, Indoor ice hockey venues in the United States, Indoor lacrosse venues in the United States, Indoor soccer venues in the United States, National Basketball Association venues, Portland Fire, Portland LumberJax, Portland Trail Blazers venues, Portland Winterhawks, Sports venues completed in 1995, Sports venues in Portland, Oregon, Western Hockey League arenas, Portland Thunder

Moda Center, formerly known as the Rose Garden, is the primary indoor sports arena in Portland, Oregon, United States.  It is suitable for large indoor events of all sorts, including basketball, ice hockey, rodeos, circuses, conventions, ice shows, concerts, and dramatic productions.   The arena has a capacity of 19,980 spectators when configured for basketball, fewer for other events.  The arena is equipped with state-of-the-art acoustics and other amenities.
It is owned by Vulcan Inc., a holding company owned by Paul Allen, and is currently managed by Anschutz Entertainment Group and AEG Live.  The primary tenant is the Portland Trail Blazers NBA franchise, also owned by Allen. The other major tenant of the building today is the major junior hockey franchise Portland Winterhawks of the Western Hockey League, which splits its schedule with the Memorial Coliseum next door. In addition to the Blazers and Winterhawks, several other professional sports franchises, and the Portland State University men's basketball team, either currently play home games in Moda Center, or have done so in the past.  In addition, Moda Center is a popular venue for concerts and other artistic productions.
Construction began in 1993, and the arena opened on October 12, 1995.  The arena cost US$262 million to build; construction was financed with funds obtained by a variety of sources, including the City of Portland, Allen's personal fortune, and $155 million in bonds issued by a consortium of mutual funds and insurance companies.  These bonds would become the subject of an acrimonious 2004 bankruptcy in which the Oregon Arena Corporation, the holding company which owned the arena at the time, would forfeit title to the arena in lieu of repaying the bonds per the payment terms.  Allen would later repurchase the arena from the creditors in 2007.

Description

Moda Center is a multipurpose arena which is suitable for numerous indoor sports, including basketball, ice hockey, arena football, and lacrosse, as well as for hosting other events such as concerts, conventions, and circuses. The arena is located in a sports and entertainment district known as the Rose Quarter, a parcel of land in inner northeast Portland which also includes the Memorial Coliseum arena, as well as several parking structures, restaurants, and other amenities.

Name

The original name of the facility was "Rose Garden"; however, the arena was also commonly known as the "Rose Garden Arena" to disambiguate it from the International Rose Test Garden, also located in Portland.  The name was chosen both to reflect Portland's reputation as the Rose City, and to reflect the importance to basketball heritage of Boston Garden and Madison Square Garden arenas in Boston and New York City, respectively.  When the name was selected, the remainder of the former Coliseum grounds were given the name "Rose Quarter".
In 2007, the Trail Blazers and Vulcan announced that they were seeking a corporate partner to grant naming rights for the facility, with the goal of a new name being available for the Blazers' 2008–09 season.
The renaming spurred a public outcry and petition by fans and Portlanders who preferred the old name. Portland mayor Charlie Hales initially expressed concern about the name, calling it a "head scratcher."

Structure and architecture

Moda Center is a precast concrete-framed structure with a roof made up of skeletal steel. The arena structure encloses a total of over  ice rink.
The building is composed of over 
The building, designed by architecture firm Ellerbe Becket, has been criticized by some in Portland's architectural community.  A survey of local architects and planners was conducted by the Portland Tribune, and subsequently Moda Center was listed among the five ugliest buildings in the city.

Seating

The arena has a total of over 14,000 permanent seats arranged in two bowls.  An additional 1540 permanent seats are found in the arena's 70 skyboxes. Over 4,200 portable seats may or may not be installed, depending on the arena's configuration.  When configured for basketball, the arena has a capacity of 19,980, and can accommodate a total of up to 20,796 patrons with standing room. Prior to the 1998 NBA season the capacity was reduced to 19,980 from the original 21,485 spectators. The Oregonian, October 27, 2002. When configured for hockey or lacrosse, capacity decreases to 17,544.  The arena supports numerous other configurations for events such as concerts, monster trucks, and circuses.   The seating below the suites, known as the lower bowl, is further divided into the 100 and 200 levels.  The upper bowl seats, above the suites, are the 300 level.

=Skyboxes and suites=

The arena features 70 skyboxes, each with a seating capacity of 22 guests.  Skyboxes include amenities such as a wet bar, catering, a private restroom, multiple television monitors, and a sound system.  Skyboxes may be rented on a yearly

=Theater of the Clouds=

For smaller, more intimate events, Moda Center can be placed into a configuration known as the "Theater of the Clouds".  This configuration, part of a trend of large arenas having smaller theater configurations,
The Theater of the Clouds configuration seats 6,500; with 16 of the 70 luxury boxes being usable.

Amenities

Two concourses, the 100 level and the 300 level, are open to the ticket-buying public during events; the 100 level concourse provides access to the lower bowl (including the 200-level seats); the 300-level concourse provides access to the upper bowl.  A third concourse, the 200 level, provides access to guest services such as a sports bar, a barbecue grill, an executive banquet facility, and several outdoor terraces, including two which permit smoking.  A fourth concourse, known as Suite Level, provides access to the skyboxes and is restricted to patrons who have skybox admission.  All concourses provide a variety of concession stands.   The arena also features 32 public restrooms;  women's toilets outnumber men's toilets 3 to 1.  There are wi-fi hotspots throughout the arena.  The concourses are decorated with historical memorabilia.
The primary scoreboard is a Mitsubishi-manufactured high definition video scoreboard.  This scoreboard, which hangs from the ceiling over center court, features four 15 feet by 22.5 feet (4.5 m by 6.75 m) video screens, among the biggest in the NBA.    The arena also features over 650 television monitors placed throughout, showing the action on court.  Auxiliary scoreboards located both in the arena itself and the concourses provide statistical information, including "hustle" statistics for basketball (rebounds, blocked shots, and steals).  Three media towers, one at each main entrance, provide video of other games in the NBA.

Acoustics

A unique feature found in no other multi-purpose arena what is known as the "acoustical cloud".  The acoustical cloud is a set of 160 rotating acoustic panels suspended from the Moda Center ceiling, and were intended to recreate the roar of noise that made the old Memorial Coliseum one of the loudest buildings in the NBA.  One side of each 10 feet by 10 feet (3 m by 3 m) panel reflects sound, while the other side absorbs sound.  Each panel is shaped like an airplane wing, and is 8 inches (20 cm) thick at the center and 4 inches (10 cm) thick at the edges.  The effect during Blazers games is to absorb the noise from the upper levels and reflect it back down to the court.
The panels permit the acoustics of the arena to be adjusted according to the requirements of the event.  For smaller events in which only the lower bowl of the arena is used, the panels can be lowered to further improve the sound and increase the intimacy of the arena.  The acoustical cloud cost US$2 million to design and install.  The arena is also equipped with a JBL sound system.
The acoustics of Moda Center have been widely praised compared to similar venues.

Ownership and management

Moda Center is currently owned by Vulcan Sports and Entertainment, a holding company owned by Paul Allen which manages Allen's various sports-related properties.  Tod Leiweke is the current president of Vulcan Sports and Entertainment.

Tenants and events

The arena's current primary tenant is the Portland Trail Blazers of the NBA.  Both the Trail Blazers and Moda Center are ultimately owned by Microsoft co-founder Paul Allen, who also owns the Seattle Seahawks of the National Football League.  The Trail Blazers have a lease agreement with Moda Center which runs through 2025,
It is also home to the Portland Winterhawks of the Western Hockey League, a Canadian junior hockey league.  Both the Trail Blazers and Winterhawks previously played in the Memorial Coliseum and moved to the arena when it was completed in 1995. However, the Winterhawks played home games in both facilities during the season.  Moda Center and  Winterhawks hold the Western Hockey League's record for single game attendance with a crowd of 19,103 on March 15, 1997 in which Portland tied the visiting Seattle Thunderbirds, 6–6.  The arena was also built to accommodate a NHL franchise and there has been speculation over the years about Portland landing an NHL team; however this has not occurred.  A former third tenant was the Portland Lumberjax of the National Lacrosse League, who played four seasons in the arena prior to disbanding.
The arena has hosted numerous other minor-league sports teams as well.  In 1997, an AFL team landed in Portland from Memphis as the Portland Forest Dragons. Two seasons later, they relocated to Oklahoma City. The arena will host another AFL team, the Portland Thunder, starting in 2014.
Moda Center has also hosted PBR Built Ford Tough Series bull riding events, has hosted editions of Monday Night Raw, editions of Friday Night Smackdown, Unforgiven (2004), No Mercy (2008), and UFC 102 in 2009.

History

In the early 1980s, as the National Basketball Association increased in popularity, it became apparent that the 12,888 seat Memorial Coliseum, which was the home of the Portland Trail Blazers at the time, was no longer an adequate NBA facility.  The Trail Blazers had sold out every home game since April 5, 1977.

Financing

The financing of the construction of the facility was widely hailed at the time as a good example of public-private partnership; most of the costs were borne by Allen and/or Allen-owned companies, rather than by taxpayers.
The remainder of funds came from the City of Portland ($34.5 million), Allen himself ($46 million), with the final $10 million coming from a bond backed by box office and parking revenues.

Construction and opening

Ground on the arena was broken in 1993, and the arena opened on October 12, 1995.
The first concert held in the arena was held two weeks after ground breaking, when David Bowie performed on October 25, with Nine Inch Nails opening.
Soon after the arena opened, it was the subject of several lawsuits seeking to enforce the Americans with Disabilities Act.  One lawsuit (United States v. Ellerbe Becket, Inc.) was filed by the United States Department of Justice against architect Ellerbe-Becket; another (Independent Living Resources v. Oregon Arena Corporation) was filed by a disabled advocacy group against OAC.  Both lawsuits alleged that Moda Center (and other facilities designed by Ellerbe Becket) did not provide adequate seating for patrons using wheelchairs, and that the line-of-sight of patrons in wheelchairs was frequently obstructed by standing spectators.

Notable past events

While Moda Center has never hosted the NBA Finals (Portland's last appearance in the Finals was in 1992, three years before the Garden opened), it has hosted two NBA Western Conference Finals series, in 1999 and 2000.  In 1999, the Trail Blazers were defeated by the San Antonio Spurs; in 2000 by the Los Angeles Lakers.  Both teams would go on to win the NBA championship.  One NBA-related event Moda Center—and for that matter, the Trail Blazers franchise—has never hosted is the NBA All-Star Game.  The Trail Blazers are one of several franchises to never host an All-Star game; the Blazers' All-Star drought of 42 years is second only to the Boston Celtics, who hosted the game in 1964.  According to the Oregon Sports Authority, the main issue is hotel space close to the arena; the city of Portland lacks the large "headquarters" hotel needed to host the NBA and media entourage which accompanies the game.
In 2004, Portland was selected as one of five cities in the U.S. to host the Dew Action Sports Tour, a new extreme sports franchise to start in 2005. Titled the Vans Invitational, the event was held at the Rose Quarter from August 17–21. The Rose Quarter hosted BMX: Dirt and Freestyle Motocross. The Dew Action Sports will return to Portland for a third year.
In the Winter of 2005, the Rose Quarter hosted the U.S. Figure Skating Championships, an event attended by over 100,000 spectators.
In 2009, the arena hosted first- and second-round games of the NCAA men's basketball tournament.  It was the first time NCAA men's tournament games were played in the state of Oregon since 1983, though the arena did host the finals of the 2008 Big Sky Conference men's basketball tournament.  The state had been under an NCAA-imposed tournament embargo due to sports betting being legal in the state (specifically, the Oregon Lottery's "Sports Action" game, a parlay game which allowed bettors to wager on NFL games), but was awarded 2009 tournament games when the state Legislature eliminated Sports Action from the lottery's lineup.
In addition to sports, the arena regularly hosts numerous other types of events, including concerts, circuses, ice shows, and conventions.  Portland State University  holds  its spring commencement ceremonies at the arena.
Notable non-sports related events include the 1998 Portland State commencement ceremony, where the keynote speaker was then U.S. President Bill Clinton.  The President, speaking before a packed house in the Garden (including a graduating class of 2000), gave a speech embracing immigration to the United States, and was also awarded an honorary Doctor of Humane Letters from the university.
On June 27, 2000, a Roger Waters concert at the arena became the basis for the concert video In the Flesh: Live.

Oregon Arena Corporation bankruptcy

Claiming the local economy was responsible for reduced revenues which made it unable to make payments on the loans used to finance construction, the Oregon Arena Corporation filed for bankruptcy on February 27, 2004. After negotiations concurrent with the bankruptcy failed to produce a settlement, the United States Bankruptcy Court ordered on November 8 of that year that the Oregon Arena Corporation transfer the facility to the creditors.
The team made numerous complaints about a "broken economic model",
Early in 2007, Allen and the creditors reached an agreement for Allen to repurchase the arena, and the team and the building were united under common ownership once more.  After much speculation that Allen would hire Anschutz Entertainment Group (AEG) to replace Global Spectrum, arena management elected to extend Global Spectrum's management contract by one year in the summer of 2007.  In September 2007, Global Spectrum announced that the arena would undergo $13 million in renovations.








