[[Salt Lake City International Airport]]

CATEGORIES: 1911 establishments in Utah, Buildings and structures in Salt Lake City, Utah, Airports in Utah, Transportation in Salt Lake City, Utah, Facilities of the United States Air National Guard, Airfields of the United States Army Air Forces Technical Service Command, Airfields of the United States Army Air Forces Air Transport Command in North America, Airfields of the United States Army Air Forces in Utah, Airfields of the United States Army Air Corps, Airports established in 1911

Salt Lake City International Airport 
The airport is the fourth largest and westernmost hub for Delta Air Lines and a hub for Delta Connection carriers SkyWest Airlines and Endeavor Air with nearly 300 daily departures, accounting for a 73.69% market share in 2013. Following Delta and Delta Connection, the largest carriers are Southwest Airlines (11.45% market share), United Airlines and United Express (4.30%), US Airways and US Airways Express at (3.01%), and American Airlines and American Eagle (2.91%).
In 2013, 20,186,474 passengers flew through Salt Lake City, representing a .41% increase from 2012. The airport is the twenty-first busiest airport in the United States by passenger count. There were 328,122 aircraft operations (takeoffs and landings) in 2012, about 900 per day. The airport is the fifteenth busiest airport in the United States and twenty fourth in the world by operations.World's busiest airports by traffic movements
As of April 2013 there were over 645 scheduled airline departures and arrivals per day to 89 nonstop cities in the United States, Canada, and Mexico, as well as a daily nonstop to Paris.
Salt Lake City International Airport continues to rank high for on time departures/arrivals and fewest flight cancellations among major US airports. The airport ranked 1st for on time departures and arrivals in 2013.
The airport is owned by Salt Lake City Corporation and is administered by the Salt Lake City Department of Airports. The city owns and operates two nearby airports, South Valley Regional Airport and Tooele Valley Airport.
The airport has free Wi-Fi internet access.

History

In 1911 a site for an air field was chosen on Basque Flats, named for Spanish-French sheep herders who worked the fields in the then-desolate area of the Salt Lake Valley. A cinder-covered landing strip was created, far better than the small fields at the Utah State Fairpark which had previously been used. The Great International Aviation Carnival was held the same year and brought aviation pioneers representing Curtiss Aeroplane and Motor Company and a team representing the Wright Brothers to Salt Lake City. World-famous aviator Glenn H. Curtiss brought his newly invented Seaplane to the carnival, a type of airplane which had never been demonstrated to the public before. Curtiss took off from the nearby Great Salt Lake, awing the 20,000 spectators and making international headlines.
For several years the new field was used mainly for training and aerobatic flights. That would change in 1920 when the United States Postal Service (USPS) began air mail service to Salt Lake City. The airport expanded and hangars and other buildings began to appear. In the same year, the airfield was given the name Woodward Field, named for John P. Woodward, a local aviator.
In 1925 the postal service began awarding contracts to private companies. Western Air Express, the first private company to carry U.S. mail, began flying from Salt Lake City to Los Angeles via Las Vegas. Less than a year later Western Air Express would begin flying passengers along the same route. Western Air Express later became Western Airlines, which had a large hub in Salt Lake City.
Charles Lindbergh visited Woodward Field in 1927 drawing many spectators to see The Spirit of St. Louis. During the next few years the airport would gain another runway and would span over 
The first terminal and airport administration building was built in 1933 at a cost of $52,000. By then United Airlines had begun serving Salt Lake City on flights between New York City and San Francisco.
As air travel became more popular and the United States Air Force established a base at the airport during World War II, a third runway was added (Runway diagram for 1955). The April 1957 OAG (formerly the Official Airline Guide) shows 42 weekday departures: 18 on Western, 17 United and 7 Frontier. United had flown nonstop to Chicago since 1950, but a New York nonstop didn't start until 1968. The first jets were United 720s in September 1960.
A new terminal was needed and work began on the west side of the airport on Terminal 1, designed by Brazier Montmorency Hayes & Talbot and dedicated in 1960 after seven years of work and a cost of $8 million.
After airline deregulation in 1978 hub airports appeared. Western Airlines, with ties to Salt Lake City since its inception, chose the airport as one of its hubs. Terminal 2 was designed by Montmorency Hayes & Talbot and built solely for Western and had several murals by artist LeConte Stewart.
During the 1980s the airport saw further expansion to both terminals as well as runway extension. In 1987 Western Airlines merged with Delta Air Lines. Salt Lake City would continue to be a major airline hub.
In 1991 the airport opened a new short-term parking garage. The airport opened a new runway in 1995 along with the International Terminal and E concourse for SkyWest Airlines, which was designed by Gensler. control tower, new approach control facility, and a new fire station were opened in 1999.
Concourse E was expanded in 2001 for additional gates. SkyWest Airlines opened its new maintenance hangar and training facility during the same year. In 2002, the airport saw heavy crowds as Salt Lake City welcomed over one million visitors for the Winter Olympics.
Recently the airport has upgraded its access roads and parking facilities in preparation for a new terminal. The airport has made minor upgrades to the terminals and concourses including expansion of baggage claim facilities.

International service

Delta Air Lines and Frontier Airlines have scheduled flights to cities in Canada, Mexico, and France. From 2006 through 2007, Air Canada operated by Air Canada Jazz offered nonstop service to Toronto. Aeromexico offered service from Salt Lake City to Hermosillo and Mexico City from 2002 through 2005. In November 2008, Aeromexico resumed nonstop service to Mexico City though service was once again unsuccessful.
In June 2008, Delta Air Lines began daily nonstop service to Paris-Charles de Gaulle Airport. This marked the first scheduled transatlantic route from Salt Lake City. In November 2008, Delta announced nonstop service to Narita International Airport near Tokyo, Japan, mostly as a result of Delta's merger with Northwest Airlines. The service began on June 3, 2009,  Delta has not operated the flight since October of 2011.

Terminals, airlines and destinations

Three passenger terminals have five concourses with a total of 79 gates:

Other airport information

The airport spans over  and has four runways. The runways are generally oriented in a NNW/SSE magnetic direction due to consistent prevailing winds in this direction.

Cargo operations

The airport handled 156,319 metric tonnes of cargo in 2008.
Scheduled Cargo Operators:

General aviation

Despite being the twenty-eighth busiest airport in the world in terms of aircraft operations, the airport still maintains a large general aviation presence. In 2008, 19% of aircraft movements at the airport came from general aviation traffic. This is in contrast to most large airports, which encourage general aviation aircraft to use smaller or less busy airports in order to prevent delays to commercial traffic. The airport is able to effectively handle both commercial and general aviation traffic largely in part to the airport's layout and airspace structure. Nearly all general aviation operations are conducted on the east side of the airport, away from commercial traffic. Additionally, smaller and relatively slower general aviation aircraft arrive and depart the airport in ways which generally do not hinder the normal flow of arriving or departing commercial aircraft.
2007 data shows there are 388 general aviation aircraft based at the airport., effective 24 Feb 2009 The airport has only one Fixed Base Operator, located on the east side of the airport which has been of debate between aircraft operators and the SLCDA. The airport has facilities for Air Ambulance, Law Enforcement, as well as state and federal government aircraft. Additionally, the airport is home to several flight training facilities, including one operated by Westminster College.

Military facilities

The Utah Air National Guard operates Salt Lake City Air National Guard Base on the east side of the airport.  The host wing for the installation is the 151st Air Refueling Wing (151 ARW), an Air Mobility Command (AMC)-gained unit operating the KC-135R Stratotanker.

Additional facilities

Wingpointe, an 18 hole golf course, is located on the south end of the airport.
Delta Air Lines' Sky Club, located between concourses C and D, is the only lounge at this airport.
Salt Lake City International also houses a hangar and line maintenance facility for Delta Air Lines' primary maintenance, repair and overhaul arm, Delta TechOps. Delta also operates a call center for reservations and sales as well as regional corporate offices.
SkyWest Airlines opened a new maintenance and training facility at the airport in 2001 where the company has its largest maintenance base. It is also where training is conducted for pilots, flight attendants, and other employees.
United Airlines operates a call center located near the airport.
Boeing Aircraft Company operates a manufacturing plant at the airport which manufactures vertical stabilizers and horizontal stabilizers for the Boeing 787 as well as components for the Boeing 737.
The airport and Salt Lake City Fire Department operate an Aircraft Rescue and Fire Fighting (ARFF) training facility located on the airport. The training facility has been used to train and certify thousands of fire fighters from departments all over the world, including Antarctica.
In addition to the  Air Traffic Control Tower, TRACON is also located on the airport with the Salt Lake Air Route Traffic Control Center (ARTCC) located adjacent to the airport. The Salt Lake ARTCC covers the largest geographical area in the continental United States and controls airspace as far north as the Canadian border.:Image:Tfrmap.

Financial

Salt Lake City International airport is directly responsible for the employment of over 14,000 people and indirectly provides over 100,000 jobs generating a $2.7 billion payroll. The airport contributed a $5.34 billion economic impact in 2004.
April 30, 2008 marked a significant date for the airport, as it became the only large hub airport in the U.S. to be debt free, having retired its remaining bonds, for a payout of nearly US$50 Million. This was done in response to spiking interest rates, but also put the Salt Lake Department of Airports in a better financial position for future expansion plans.

Airport expansion

A revised master plan was released in May 2006 for the airport and is available for the public to view at the airport's website. Future plans call for runway 17/35 to be realigned to more precisely parallel runways 16L/34R and 16R/34L. Plans also call for runway 16L/34R to be lengthened to 
In addition to runway reconfigurations, the airport will construct a new terminal and two new concourses. Plans call for a single terminal with an attached concourse consisting of 31 mainline gates and an additional paralleling satellite concourse consisting of 15 mainline gates and 44 regional jet gates. The two concourses would be attached with an underground automated train. The existing terminal and concourses would be demolished and would leave room for additional expansion onto the two new concourses in the future.
Other plans call for a new parking garage and expanded cargo facilities. Construction of the Airport extension of the Utah Transit Authority's (UTA) TRAX light rail system (Green Line) from the Downtown Salt Lake City to the airport began in October 2008, and began service on April 14, 2013.
In June 2010, the airport asked for public comments on the airport expansion as well as announcing the start of an environmental study of the master plan which had public hearings in the summer of 2011.

Notable incidents

Popular culture

The 1974 film Airport 1975 was filmed at Salt Lake City International Airport.
In the 1994 comedy film Dumb and Dumber, Lloyd Christmas, portrayed by Jim Carrey, is seen running to gate B2 and falling off the jetway at Salt Lake City International Airport. Lloyd is also seen sliding across the floor to recover the brief case.
The 2003 romantic comedy-drama film "Latter Days" featured a layover scene at Salt Lake City International Airport en route to Pocatello, Idaho, in which the main characters get stuck in Salt Lake City when a snow storm closes the airport.
The airport was used for filming the scenes of the fictional Chicago Hoover International Airport in the 2006 film Unaccompanied Minors.



Notes






