[[Aeroperú]]

CATEGORIES: Defunct airlines of Peru, Airlines established in 1973, Airlines disestablished in 1999, Former IATA members, Aeroperú

Empresa de Transporte Aéreo del Perú S.A., usually known as Aeroperú, was an airline from Peru, serving as flag carrier of the country from 1973 to 1999. The company was headquartered in Lima, with the city's Jorge Chavez International Airport serving as its hub.

History

Aeroperú was formed on 22 May 1973 following the reorganization of SATCO,  an earlier airline controlled by the Peruvian Army. Initially a wholly state-owned company with a fleet of three Fokker F28 Fellowships taken over from SATCO, revenue flights were commenced in October on the Lima-Cusco route. In 1974, two Douglas DC-8s were acquired from Viasa, which allowed for the launch of international routes. The inaugurational flight to Buenos Aires took place on 29 July of that year, which was soon followed by a scheduled service to Miami. By 1978, the Aeroperú network had grown to include a multitude of destinations in Latin America, as well as the US cities of New York and Los Angeles with their important Latino populations.
In July 1981, Aeroperú was gradually privatized, with the Peruvian government keeping a minority share of 20 percent. In 1982, plans were made for a merger with Faucett Perú, the other large passenger airline in the country at that time. As a preparatory measure, redundancies in the route networks of the two airlines were removed, so that Aeroperú had to suspend flights to a number of destinations,
In 1993, Aeroméxico acquired 70 percent of the shares worth $54 million, thus making Aeroperú their subsidiary.
Due to financial difficulties that had troubled the airline for most of its existence, Aeroperú was forced to suspend all flight operations on 10 March 1999. Several plans for a relaunch were made, which included a possible buy-in of Continental Airlines or a take-over by a group of foreign investors. None of these materialized, and Aeroperú was liquidated on 18 August 1999. Most of its route network as well as the role of Peruvian flag carrier was taken over by newly founded LAN Perú.

Destinations

With Lima Airport being its most important hub, Aeroperú maintained an extensive domestic route network. International flights were offered to a number of cities in Latin America, as well as the United States.

Fleet

Over the years, Aeroperú operated the following aircraft types (short-term leases are omitted):

Accidents and incidents






