[[Kylie Minogue]]

CATEGORIES: 1968 births, Living people, 20th-century Australian actresses, 20th-century Australian singers, 21st-century Australian actresses, 21st-century Australian singers, Actresses from Melbourne, ARIA Award winners, ARIA Hall of Fame inductees, Australian child actresses, Australian dance musicians, Australian expatriates in the United Kingdom, Australian female singers, Australian film actresses, Australian Living Treasures, Australian people of Irish descent, Australian people of Welsh descent, Australian pop singers, Australian television actresses, Australian television personalities, Australian soap opera actresses, Australian sopranos, Breast cancer survivors, Brit Award winners, Capitol Records artists, Chevaliers of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres, Freestyle musicians, Gold Logie winners, Grammy Award-winning artists, Ivor Novello Award winners, Kylie Minogue, LGBT rights activists from Australia, Nu-disco musicians, Officers of the Order of the British Empire, Parlophone artists, Recipients of the Centenary Medal, Singers from Melbourne, Singers with a three-octave vocal range, Synthpop musicians, The Voice (TV series) judges, The X Factor (TV series) judges, The X Factor (UK TV series), Warner Bros. Records artists, Australian people of English descent

{{Infobox musical artist 
| name            = Kylie Minogue 
| image           = Kylie Minogue Cannes.jpg
| caption         = Minogue at the 2007 Cannes Film Festival
| background      = solo_singer
| birth_name      = Kylie Ann Minogue
| birth_date      = 
| birth_place     = Melbourne, Australia
| genre           = {{flat list|
| occupation      = {{flat list|
| years_active    = 1979–present
| label           = 

Kylie Ann Minogue, OBE (; born 28 May 1968), often known simply as Kylie, is an Australian singer-songwriter and actress, working and living in London. After beginning her career as a child actress on Australian television, she achieved recognition through her role in the television soap opera Neighbours, before beginning her career as a recording artist in 1987.
Minogue has achieved worldwide record sales of more than 70 million, and has received notable music awards, including multiple ARIA and Brit Awards and a Grammy Award. She has mounted several successful and critically acclaimed concert world tours and received a Mo Award for "Australian Entertainer of the Year" for her live performances. She was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) by Queen Elizabeth II in 2008 "for services to music". In the same year she was appointed by the French Government as a Chevalier (knight) of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres, the junior grade of France's highest cultural honour, for her contribution to the enrichment of French culture. In 2011 her hit single "I Should Be So Lucky" was added to the National Film and Sound Archive of Australia's Sounds of Australia registry.H.Sc.) degree by Anglia Ruskin University in the United Kingdom for her work in raising awareness for breast cancer. In November 2011, on the 25th anniversary of the ARIA Music Awards, Minogue was inducted by the Australian Recording Industry Association into the ARIA Hall of Fame. "Prime Minister Julia Gillard to honour pop princess Kylie Minogue"
Her first single, "The Loco-Motion", spent seven weeks at number one on the Australian singles chart and became the highest-selling single of the decade in Australia. This led to a contract with the British songwriters and producers Stock, Aitken & Waterman. Her debut album, Kylie (1988), and the single "I Should Be So Lucky", both performed well on international charts, particularly in Australia and the United Kingdom. Initially presented as a "girl next door", Minogue attempted to convey a more mature style in her music and public image. Her singles were well received, but after four albums her sales were declining, and she left Stock, Aitken & Waterman in 1992 to establish herself as an independent performer. Her next single, "Confide in Me", reached number one in Australia and was a hit in several European countries in 1994, and a duet with Nick Cave, "Where the Wild Roses Grow", brought Minogue a greater degree of artistic credibility. Drawing inspiration from a range of musical styles and artists, Minogue took creative control over the songwriting for her next album, Impossible Princess (1997).
Minogue returned to prominence in 2000 with the single "Spinning Around" and the dance-oriented album Light Years, and she performed during the closing ceremonies of the 2000 Sydney Olympics. Her music videos showed a more sexually provocative and flirtatious personality and several hit singles followed. "Can't Get You Out of My Head" reached number one in more than 40 countries, and the album Fever (2001) was a hit in many countries, including the US, a market in which Minogue had previously received little recognition. In 2005, in the middle of a concert tour, she was diagnosed with breast cancer, forcing her to cancel the tour. After treatment, she resumed her career in 2006 with the Showgirl: The Homecoming Tour. In 2009, she embarked upon her For You, For Me tour, her first concert tour of the US and Canada.
In 2014 Minogue released her 12th album Kiss Me Once, while also appearing as a judge on the third series of The Voice UK and the third series of The Voice Australia. Minogue later confirmed that she would not be returning to The Voice UK for the fourth series due to the dates clashing with her tour.digitalspy.co.html

Life and career

1968–86: Early life and career beginnings

Kylie Ann Minogue was born 28 May 1968 in Melbourne, Australia, the oldest child of Ronald Charles Minogue, an accountant of Irish ancestry
The Minogue sisters began their careers as children on Australian television. From the age of 11, Kylie appeared in small roles in soap operas such as The Sullivans and Skyways, and in 1985 was cast in one of the lead roles in The Henderson Kids.
Her popularity in Australia was demonstrated when she became the first person to win four Logie Awards in one event, and the youngest recipient of the "Gold Logie" as the country's "Most Popular Television Performer", with the result determined by public vote.

1987–89: Kylie and Enjoy Yourself

During a Fitzroy Football Club benefit concert with other Neighbours cast members, Minogue performed "I Got You Babe" as a duet with the actor John Waters, and "The Loco-Motion" as an encore, and was subsequently signed to a recording contract with Mushroom Records in 1987. 18 Her first single, "The Loco-Motion", spent seven weeks at number one on the Australian singles charts and it became the country's highest-selling single in the 1980s.
Minogue's debut album, Kylie was released in July 1988. The album was a collection of dance-oriented pop tunes and it spent more than a year on the UK Albums Chart, including several weeks at number one. 673–674 The album went gold in the United States, and the single, "The Loco-Motion", reached number three on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart,
Minogue's second album Enjoy Yourself was released in October 1989. The album was a success in the United Kingdom, Europe, New Zealand, Asia and Australia. The album spawned number one singles "Hand on Your Heart" and "Tears on My Pillow". However, the album failed to sell well throughout North America, and Minogue was dropped by her American record label Geffen Records. She then embarked on her first concert tour, the Enjoy Yourself Tour, in the United Kingdom, Europe, Asia and Australia in February 1990. She was also one of the featured vocalists on the remake of "Do They Know It's Christmas?". 220
Her debut film, The Delinquents was released in December 1989. The movie was poorly received by critics but it proved popular with audiences. In the UK it grossed more than £200,000,

1990–92: Rhythm of Love and Let's Get to It

Minogue's third album, Rhythm of Love was released in November 1990. The album presented a more sophisticated and adult style of dance music and also marked the first signs of her rebellion against her production team and the "girl-next-door" image. 29 Determined to be accepted by a more mature audience, Minogue took control of her music videos, starting with "Better the Devil You Know", and presented herself as a sexually aware adult. 32 Her relationship with Michael Hutchence was also seen as part of her departure from her earlier persona. The singles from Rhythm of Love sold well in Europe and Australia. She then later embarked on the Rhythm of Love Tour in February 1991.
Minogue's fourth album, Let's Get to It was released in October 1991 and it reached number 15 on the UK Albums Chart. It was her first album to fail to reach the top ten. While the first single from the album, "Word Is Out" became her first single to miss the top ten of the UK Singles Chart, though subsequent singles "If You Were with Me Now" and "Give Me Just a Little More Time" reached the top five respectively. In support of the album, she embarked on the Let's Get to It Tour in October. She had fulfilled the requirements of her contract and elected not to renew it. She later expressed her opinion that she was stifled by Stock, Aitken and Waterman, and said, "I was very much a puppet in the beginning. I was blinkered by my record company. I was unable to look left or right."Shuker, p. 164
Minogue's first Greatest Hits album was released in August 1992. It reached number one in the United Kingdom and number three in Australia. The singles from the album, "What Kind of Fool" and her cover version of Kool & the Gang's "Celebration" both reached the top twenty of the UK Singles Chart.

1993–98: Kylie Minogue and Impossible Princess

Minogue's signing with Deconstruction Records was highly touted in the music media as the beginning of a new phase in her career. Her fifth album Kylie Minogue was released in September 1994 which sold well in Europe and Australia. It was produced by dance music producers the Brothers In Rhythm, namely Dave Seaman and Steve Anderson (musician) who had previously produced Finer_Feelings, her last single with PWL. Anderson remains Minogue's musical director to this day.  The lead single "Confide in Me" spent four weeks at number one on Australian singles chart. The next two singles from the album "Put Yourself in My Place" and "Where Is the Feeling?" reached the top twenty of the UK Singles Chart, while the album peaked at number four on the UK Albums Chart, eventually selling 250,000 copies. 51
During this period, Minogue made a guest appearance as herself, in an episode of the comedy The Vicar of Dibley. Director Steven E. de Souza was intrigued by Minogue's cover photo in Australia's Who Magazine as one of "The 30 Most Beautiful People in the World", and offered her a role opposite Jean-Claude Van Damme in the film Street Fighter. 152 The film was a moderate success, earning US$70 million in the US, but received poor reviews with The Washington Post's Richard Harrington calling Minogue "the worst actress in the English-speaking world". She then co-starred with Pauly Shore and Stephen Baldwin in the 1996 film Bio-Dome. She also appeared in the 1995 short film, Hayride to Hell and in the 1996 film Diana & Me.

In 1995, Minogue collaborated with Australian artist Nick Cave for the song "Where the Wild Roses Grow". Cave had been interested in working with Minogue since hearing "Better the Devil You Know", saying it contained "one of pop music's most violent and distressing lyrics". 99 The music video for the song was inspired by John Everett Millais's painting Ophelia (1851–1852), and showed Minogue as the murdered woman, floating in a pond as a serpent swam over her body. The single received widespread attention in Europe, where it reached the top 10 in several countries, and number two in Australia. Following concert appearances with Cave, she recited the lyrics to "I Should Be So Lucky" as poetry in London's Royal Albert Hall. 112
By 1997, Minogue was in a relationship with the French photographer Stéphane Sednaoui, who encouraged her to develop her creativity. 107–112 Inspired by a mutual appreciation of Japanese culture, they created a visual combination of "geisha and manga superheroine" for the photographs taken for Minogue's sixth album Impossible Princess and the video for "German Bold Italic", Minogue's collaboration with Towa Tei. 108–109 She drew inspiration from the music of artists such as Shirley Manson and Garbage, Björk, Tricky and U2, and Japanese pop musicians such as Pizzicato Five and Towa Tei. 108 The album featured collaborations with musicians such as James Dean Bradfield and Sean Moore of the Manic Street Preachers. Mostly a dance album, Minogue countered suggestions that she was trying to become an indie artist.
Minogue's Intimate and Live tour of 1998 was extended due to demand. 125 The Victorian Premier, Jeff Kennett, hosted a civic reception for Minogue in Melbourne,Baker and Minogue, p. 127 and she maintained her high profile in Australia with live performances, including the 1998 Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras, the opening ceremonies of Melbourne's Crown Casino,Baker and Minogue, p. 129 and Sydney's Fox Studios in 1999, where she performed Marilyn Monroe's "Diamonds Are a Girl's Best Friend", and a Christmas concert in Dili, East Timor, in association with the United Nations Peace-Keeping Forces. During this time she filmed a small role for the Australian-made Molly Ringwald 2000 film Cut.

1999–2004: Light Years, Fever and Body Language

After Minogue parted ways with Deconstruction Records, she performed a duet with the Pet Shop Boys' on their Nightlife album and spent several months in Barbados performing in Shakespeare's The Tempest. 146 She then appeared in the film Sample People and recorded a cover version of Russell Morris's "The Real Thing" for the soundtrack. In April 1999, she signed with Parlophone Records. 145 Parlophone wanted to re-establish Minogue as the pop artist they felt she essentially was, but that had been lost.
In September 2000, Minogue released her seventh studio album, Light Years. The album was a collection of dance songs, influenced by disco music. It generated strong reviews and was successful throughout Australia, Asia, Europe and New Zealand. and number two in the United Kingdom. "Kids", a duet with Robbie Williams, also peaked at number two in the United Kingdom.
At the 2000 Sydney Olympics closing ceremony, Minogue performed ABBA's "Dancing Queen" and her single "On a Night Like This".
In October 2001, she released her eighth studio album Fever. The album contained disco elements combined with 1980s electropop and synthpop.
In November 2003, Minogue released her ninth studio album Body Language following an invitation-only concert, titled Money Can't Buy, at the Hammersmith Apollo in London. The album downplayed the disco style and was inspired by 1980s artists such as Scritti Politti, The Human League, Adam and the Ants and Prince, blending their styles with elements of hip hop.
In November 2004, she released her second official greatest hits album entitled Ultimate Kylie. The album yielded two singles "I Believe in You" and "Giving You Up". "I Believe in You" was later nominated for a Grammy Award in the category of "Best Dance Recording".

2005–09: Showgirl and X

In March 2005, Minogue commenced her Showgirl: The Greatest Hits Tour. After performing in Europe, she travelled to Melbourne, where she was diagnosed with breast cancer and was forced to cancel the tour.
In November 2007, Minogue released her tenth studio album and much-discussed "comeback" album, X.
In addition for the promotion of her album, Minogue was featured in White Diamond, a documentary filmed during 2006 and 2007 as she resumed her Showgirl Homecoming Tour.
In May 2008, Minogue embarked on the European leg of the KylieX2008 tour, which was her most expensive tour to date with production costs of £10 million. The tour continued to run until August 2009.
In 2009, Minogue hosted the BRIT Awards with James Corden and Mathew Horne.

2010–12: Aphrodite and The Abbey Road Sessions

In July 2010, Minogue released her eleventh studio album, Aphrodite.
Minogue also recorded a duet with synthpop duo Hurts on their song "Devotion", which was included on the group's album Happiness.
In 2011, Minogue embarked on the Aphrodite: Les Folies Tour, travelling to Europe, North America, Asia, Australia and Africa. The tour became her biggest tour to date with over 100 personnel. It was greeted with positive reviews, praising the concept.
In 2012, Minogue began a year-long celebration for her 25 years in the music industry, which was often known as "K25". The anniversary started with her embarking on the Anti Tour, which featured b-sides, demos and rarities from her music catalogue.
Minogue also released the compilation album, The Abbey Road Sessions in October 2012. The album contained reworked and orchestral versions of her previous songs. It was recorded at London's Abbey Road Studios and was produced by Steve Anderson and Colin Elliot.
Minogue also starred in two films; a cameo appearance in the American independent film Jack & Diane and a lead role in the French film Holy Motors.

2013–present: The Voice and Kiss Me Once

In January 2013, Minogue and her manager Terry Blamey, whom she had worked with since the start of her singing career, parted ways.
In March 2014, Minogue released her 12th studio album, Kiss Me Once.
In April 2014, Minogue released a vinyl single, "Golden Boy", which was launched on Record Store Day in the United Kingdom.

Artistry

Music and voice

Minogue has been known for her soft Soprano vocal range, which has been noted as "a pleasant soft, breathy quality, and the head notes have a warm and versatile timbre."Divadevotee | Kylie Minogue- Vocal Profile/ Range (by request). She has approximately a range of 3.5 octaves. Dara Hickey reviewed Minogue's studio album Aphrodite and wrote that she is "singing in her highest vocal range ever." According to Fiona MacDonald from Madison magazine, Kylie had "has never shied away from making some brave but questionable artistic decisions".
In musical terms, Minogue has worked with many genres in pop and dance music. However, her signature or suitable music has been contemporary disco music. Her first studio album's with Stock, Aitken, and Waterman present a more bubblegum pop influence where many critics had compared her to American recording artist Madonna. According to Chris True from Allmusic, he reviewed her debut Kylie and found her music "standard late-'80s Stock-Aitken-Waterman bubblegum", however he stated that she presented the most personality of any 1980s recording artist. AllMusic. When her third album Rhythm of Love was served in the early 1990s, "The songwriting is stronger, the production dynamic, and Kylie seems more confident vocally."Rhythm of Love | Kylie Minogue. AllMusic. At the time of her third studio album, "She began to trade in her cutesy, bubblegum pop image for a more mature one, and in turn, a more sexual one." Chris True stated that when she had her relationship with Michael Hutchence, "her shedding of the near-virginal façade that dominated her first two albums, began to have an effect, not only on how the press and her fans treated her, but in the evolution of her music."Kylie Minogue >> Overview. AllMusic.
However, Minogue's work on her sixth studio album Impossible Princess, her songwriting and musical content started to change. She was constantly writing down words, exploring the form and meaning of sentences. p 111. She had written lyrics before, but called them "safe, just neatly rhymed words and that's that". "Lucky in Luck". Vogue (magazine). November 1997. The album, in musical genres, varied from her previous efforts as it incorporated "dance-pop" and "trip-hop" music, as critics reviewed. Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine had written that the album bears a resemblance to Madonna's Ray of Light. He continued that she took inspiration of " both the Brit-pop and electronica movements of the mid-'90s" and "Impossible Princess is the work of an artist willing to take risks". Her next effort Light Years; "worked up by the renaissance of pure dance-pop that was the order of the day at the onset of the 21st century." Her ninth album Body Language was quite different from her musical experiments in the past as it was a "successful" attempt at broadening her sound with electro and hip-hop for instance. With its incorporating styles of dance music with funk, disco and R&B,Kylie – Body Language. NME. the album managed to be listed on Q's "Best Albums of 2003"."Q magazine Recordings Of The Year – 2003". Rocklist. Retrieved 4 December 2009.
Her tenth record X was a more welcome back to Minogue's pop roots. In a press interview for the promotion of the album, Minogue herself stated that the album was "mainly electropop" and was a "celebration for me Minogue to be back working.""Kylie in Japanese TV – Interview – 22 January 2008". YouTube. 25 January 2008. Retrieved 6 February 2011. However, critics, including Chris True said the album did not feature enough "consistency" and he later responded to the tracks as "cold, calculated dance-pop numbers."X | Kylie Minogue. AllMusic. Her eleventh, and recent record Aphrodite "rarely strays past sweet love songs or happy dance anthems" and "the main sound is the kind of glittery disco pop that really is her strong suit." Tim Sendra from Allmusic stated "The various producers keep their eyes on the dancefloor throughout, crafting shiny and sleek tracks that sound custom-built to blast out of huge speaker columns" and found Aphrodite "One of her best, in fact."

Public image

Minogue's efforts to be taken seriously as a recording artist were initially hindered by the perception that she had not "paid her dues" and was no more than a manufactured pop star exploiting the image she had created during her stint on Neighbours. Minogue acknowledged this viewpoint, saying, "if you're part of a record company, I think to a degree it's fair to say that you're a manufactured product. You're a product and you're selling a product. It doesn't mean that you're not talented and that you don't make creative and business decisions about what you will and won't do and where you want to go."
In 1993, Baz Luhrmann introduced Minogue to the photographer Bert Stern, notable for his work with Marilyn Monroe. Stern photographed her in Los Angeles and, comparing her to Monroe, commented that Minogue had a similar mix of vulnerability and eroticism. 50 During her career Minogue has chosen photographers who attempt to create a new "look" for her, and the resulting photographs have appeared in a variety of magazines, from the cutting edge The Face to the more traditionally sophisticated Vogue and Vanity Fair, making the Minogue face and name known to a broad group of people. Stylist William Baker has suggested that this is part of the reason she has entered in the mainstream pop culture of Europe more successfully than many other pop singers who concentrate solely on selling records. 165
By 2000, when Minogue returned to prominence, she was considered to be have achieved a degree of musical credibility for having maintained her career longer than her critics had expected. 128 Her progression from the wholesome "girl next door" to a more sophisticated performer with a flirtatious and playful persona attracted new fans to her. Her "Spinning Around" video led to some media outlets referring to her as "SexKylie", and sex became a stronger element in her subsequent videos. William Baker described her status as a sex symbol as a "double edged sword" observing that "we always attempted to use her sex appeal as an enhancement of her music and to sell a record. But now it has become in danger of eclipsing what she actually is: a pop singer."Baker and Minogue, p. 211. After 20 years as a performer, Minogue was described as a fashion "trend-setter" and a "style icon who constantly reinvents herself".
Minogue has been inspired by and compared to Madonna throughout her career. Her producer, Pete Waterman, recalled Minogue during the early years of her success with the observation: "She was setting her sights on becoming the new Prince or Madonna ... What I found amazing was that she was outselling Madonna four to one, but still wanted to be her." Minogue received negative comments that her Rhythm of Love tour in 1991 was too similar visually to Madonna's Blond Ambition World Tour of the previous year for which the critics labelled her a Madonna wannabe. 58 Kathy McCabe for The Telegraph notes that Minogue and Madonna follow similar styles in music and fashion, Kylie Minogue w nowym, seksownym teledysku - 24.
In January 2007, Madame Tussauds in London unveiled its fourth waxwork of Minogue; only Queen Elizabeth II has had more models created.
In March 2010, Minogue was declared by researchers as the "most powerful celebrity in Britain". The study examined how marketers identify celebrity and brand partnerships. Mark Husak, head of Millward Brown's UK media practice, said: "Kylie is widely accepted as an adopted Brit. People know her, like her and she is surrounded by positive buzz".
Minogue is regarded as a gay icon, which she encourages with comments such as "I am not a traditional gay icon. There's been no tragedy in my life, only tragic outfits" and "My gay audience has been with me from the beginning ... they kind of adopted me." Minogue has explained that she first became aware of her gay audience in 1988, when several drag queens performed to her music at a Sydney pub, and she later saw a similar show in Melbourne. She said that she felt "very touched" to have such an "appreciative crowd", and this had encouraged her to perform at gay venues throughout the world, as well as headlining the 1994 Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras. 47 Minogue has one of the largest gay followings in the world. Kylie "Talking": Kylie Minogue in Her Own Words. Omnibus Press, 2003. ISBN 978-0-7119-9834-6. p. 47 Minogue's sister, Dannii, also has a large gay following and has been regarded as a gay icon. In 2012, MetroNOW ranked Minogue at twenty-six on their Top 50 Gay Icons. In September 2007, Minogue was hailed the greatest gay icon of all time by The Sun. Kylie's greatest gay icon ever The Sun.

Personal life

Minogue dated Neighbours co-star Jason Donovan during her run on the show. Minogue than had a relationship with INXS lead singer, Michael Hutchence from 1989 to 1991. They remained close friends until Hutchence's death in 1997. Minogue began a relationship with the French actor, Olivier Martinez, after meeting him at the 2002 Grammy Awards ceremony. 13 October 2013. Daily Mail. Retrieved 13 October 2013.
Minogue was diagnosed with breast cancer at age 36 on 17 May 2005,Friday Night with Jonathan Ross, 25 June 2010 leading to the postponement of the remainder of her Showgirl – The Greatest Hits Tour and her withdrawal from the Glastonbury Festival.
As media and fans began to congregate outside the Minogue residence in Melbourne, the Victorian Premier Steve Bracks warned the international media that any disruption of the Minogue family's rights under Australian privacy laws would not be tolerated.
Minogue underwent surgery on 21 May 2005 at Cabrini Hospital in Malvern, and commenced chemotherapy treatment soon after.
On 8 July 2005, she made her first public appearance after surgery, when she visited a children's cancer ward at Melbourne's Royal Children's Hospital. She returned to France where she completed her chemotherapy treatment at the Institut Gustave-Roussy in Villejuif, near Paris.
Minogue was acknowledged for the impact she had made by publicly discussing her cancer diagnosis and treatment; in May 2008, the French Cultural Minister Christine Albanel said, "Doctors now even go as far as saying there is a "Kylie effect" that encourages young women to have regular checks."

Humanitarian work

Minogue has been involved in humanitarian support in the areas of health research, quality of life and many other areas. Musically, she has helped fundraise on many occasions. In 1989, she participated in recording "Do They Know It's Christmas?" under the name Band Aid II to help raise money in 1989. In early 2010, Minogue along with many other artists (under the name Helping Haiti) had recorded a cover version of 1993 version of "Everybody Hurts"."X Factor Simon Cowell Earthquake Charity Single To Be REM's Everybody Hurts, Sky Sources Say". Sky News. 22 January 2010. Retrieved 25 January 2010. The single was a fundraiser to help the 2010 Haiti earthquake, with the proceeds going to both The Sun 's Helping Haiti fund and the Disasters Emergency Committee. "Kylie Minogue revealed as latest star for Simon Cowell's Haiti earthquake charity single". Daily Mail (London). Retrieved 2 February 2010. She had also spent a whole week in Thailand after the Thailand Tsunami hit in 2005. During her 2011 Aphrodite World Tour, the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami struck in Japan, which was on her itinerary. After difficult decisions, she declared she would continue to tour there, along with other international stars that decided similarly. She stated "I was here to do shows and I chose not to cancel, Why did I choose not to cancel? I thought long and hard about it and it wasn't an easy decision to make."Kylie Minogue and Julia Gillard unite for tsunami fundraiser in Japan. 23 April 20113:19PM. While she was there, she, along with Australian prime minister Julia Gillard, decided to be the star guest of an Australian Embassy fundraiser for the disaster.
In 2008, Minogue pledged her support for a campaign to raise money for abused children, to be donated to the British charities ChildLine and the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children. According to the source, around $93 million was raised. 22 September 2008 by: HOLLYSCOOP TEAM. She spoke out in relation to the cause, saying: "Finding the courage to tell someone about being abused is one of the most difficult decisions a child will ever have to make." In 2010 and 2012, she was involved in supporting the AIDS Support Gala, which has been held by the American Foundation for Aids Research (Amfar). 14 May 2012 Last updated at 11:11 GMT. According to her official website, "Kylie has been a long-time supporter of the charity first appearing as a guest, helping Sharon Stone with the auction in Cannes and has since chaired three amfAR gala dinners in Los Angeles, New York and Paris." Minogue spoke about the cause saying "This is another great opportunity for me to support amfAR, an organisation whose work is so very important. I'm excited to be one of the co-chairs at this event alongside some amazing personalities."Kylie | CINEMA AGAINST AIDS CANNES 2012. 14 May 2012.
Ever since Minogue's breast cancer diagnosis in 2005, she has been a known avid sponsor and ambassador to the cause. In May 2010, she held a breast cancer campaign for the first time. She later spoke about the cause saying "It means so much to me to be part of this year's campaign for Fashion Targets Breast Cancer. I wholeheartedly support their efforts to raise funds for the vital work undertaken by Breakthrough Breast Cancer."
In April 2014, Minogue had launched her new campaign entitled One Note Against Cancer, which is a charity organisation to help cancer research. Member's of the public are asked to donate money by buying a musical note from eBay site from Minogue's charity single "Crystallize".  

Legacy

In February 2012, VH1 had ranked Minogue at number 47 on their VH1 Greatest Women in Music and number 49 on the "50 Greatest Women of the Video Era"."VH1′s 100 Greatest Women In Music LIST".. Retrieved 13 February 2012 | 4:35 pm."50 Greatest Women of the Video Era". Retrieved 2 October 2012. Channel 4 had listed her as one of the world's greatest pop stars. Series 1 | Episode 7 | T4: Rimmel London Presents: The World's Greatest Pop.... The Official Chart Company revealed that she is the 12th best selling singer in the United Kingdom to date, and the third best selling female artist, selling over 10.1 million sales."The Official Singles Charts' biggest selling artists of all time revealed!". The Official Chart Company. Retrieved 4 June 2012. According to the British Phonographic Industry (BPI), all her studio albums have been certified, and with her singles as well, she has a total of 27 certified records."BPI – Search >> Kylie Minogue – Artist". British Phonographic Industry. 1987–present. Retrieved 2 October 2012. In January 2011, She received a Guinness World Records citiation for having the most consecutive decades with top five albums, with all her albums doing so. She has sold more than 70 million records worldwide.
Dino Scatena from smh.co." He then stated "Who could have imagined this tiny, unsophisticated star of Neighbours, with the bad '80s perm and questionable vocal ability, would go on to become Australia's single most successful entertainer and a world-renowned style idol?" Throughout her career the singer has been known for reinventing herself in fashion and her musical content. Fabulous Magazine had labelled her a "Master of Reinvention."Are you a master of re-invention?. Kate Wills. In November 2006, Minogue posed for Vogue Australia, which Larissa Dubecki from The Age had labelled her the "Mother of Reinvetion" by saying "This unveiling is as cleverly managed as every aspect of her career, and her illness, to date. Like sharks, celebrities cannot remain static; they must keep moving or die. Kylie has beaten her early detractors by inhabiting almost a dozen identities ..."Larissa Dubecki. 4 November 2006. "The mother of reinvention". The Age. Fiona MacDonald from Madison said Kylie was "an icon, one of the handful of singers recognised around the world by her first name alone. And yet despite becoming an international music superstar, style icon and honorary Brit, those two syllables still seem as Australian as the smell of eucalyptus or a barbeque on a hot day."Fioan MacDonald. 14 January 2013. "The iconic Kylie" Madison.
Some of Minogue's hits have garned many legacy and accolades through her career. Her worldwide hit single "Can't Get You Out of My Head" has been known with great legacy. In January 2012, NME had listed the song at number 4 on their Greatest Pop Songs in History.
Minogue has been recognised with many honorific nicknames in contemporary music. She has been compared to American recording artist Madonna in many media outlets, but because Madonna has been identified as Queen of Pop, outlets have labelled her as the Princess of Pop."Once upon a time, long before anybody had even heard of Britney, Christina, Jessica or Mandy, Australian singer Kylie Minogue ruled the charts as princess of pop. Back in 1988 her first single, "I Should Be So Lucky", spent five weeks at number one, making her the most successful female artist in the UK charts with 13 successive Top 10 entries. To date, Kylie has spent 217 weeks on the singles charts, notching up 25 Top 20 hits including four number ones. No mean feat in the fickle world of pop where you can be yesterday's news in a matter of months." in "Kylie's back on royal form", Birmingham Post: 5, 8 July 2000. By saying that, Birmingham Post said in 2000; "once upon a time, long before anybody had even heard of Britney, Christina, Jessica or Mandy, Australian singer Kylie Minogue ruled the charts as princess of pop. Back in 1988 her first single, I Should Be So Lucky, spent five weeks at number one, making her the most successful female artist in the UK charts with 13 successive Top 10 entries." From the music beginnings of her studio album Light Years, she has been recognised for her introduction to more mainstream disco music, which has been evident to her music, with people and critics dubbing her a Disco Queen. org, 2012. While William Baker, co-author of her book Kylie: La La La, was talking about her song "Better the Devil You Know", he commented that "The track transferred well onto the dance-floor and heralded a long reign for Kylie as the new queen of disco... a pop princess."Inner lines: Pg 35 – la la la – Written by William Baker and Kylie Minogue ISBN 0-340-73440-X Jon O'Brien from Allmusic reviewed her box-set Kylie: The Albums 2000–2010 and stated "Kylie has yet to make that one essential album, and the going-through-the-motions nature of her later releases suggests her time may have passed, but this box set still contains plenty of moments to justify her position as one of the all-time premier pop princesses."by Jon O'Brien Kylie Minogue >> The Albums 2000–2010. Retrieved 7 October 2012. AllMusic. In November 2011, on the twenty-fifth anniversary of the ARIA Music Awards, she was inducted by the Australian Recording Industry Association into the ARIA Hall of Fame.
Many fans, critics and celebrities have noted her as a role model. While Minogue was diagnosed with breast cancer in 2006, many media outlets have said many people, particularly woman, have been going through regular checks for cancer symptoms ever since her diagnosis. In December 2006, Sugar had voted her the Most Inspirational Celebrity by teenage girls. Daily Mail. Editor of the magazine Annabel Brog stated "Kylie couldn't be any more inspirational. She's friendly, gorgeous, talented – and this year she's shown just how strong she is too." American singer and songwriter Lady Gaga thanked her on twitter, citing her as "a supportive female."21 August 2012, 17:45. Lady Gaga Thanks Kylie Minogue As She Vows To Stay Blonde For 'Born This Way Ball' Tour. Capital FM. While Minogue was in the era of her cancer, singer Madonna released a statement to her about wishing her well, stating; "Aside from being tremendously talented, Kylie's a fighter and I know this is a battle she will win."By Bill Lamb, About. Television host Giuliana Rancic had cited Minogue's cancer story "inspirational" because in 2011, she too was diagnosed with cancer. She said "When you get diagnosed, you don't know what to do… you Google. I went online and I read your story, and it gave me the strength to go public as well."Kaufman, Donna (27 June 2012). "Kylie Minogue: I Bonded with Giuliana Rancic Over Breast Cancer". Many musical and entertainer's have cited Minogue as an influence including September,The Story of September (Part 1) YouTube. Sarah Michelle Gellar, Katy Perry, Destiny's Child, Marilyn Manson, Madonna, Lady Gaga, among many others.

Discography

Tours and concerts

Filmography








