[[KAIST]]

CATEGORIES: KAIST, Daejeon, National universities and colleges in South Korea

KAIST (also known as Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology) is a public research university located in Daedeok Innopolis, Daejeon, South Korea. KAIST was established by the Korean government with the help of American policymakers in 1971 as the nation's first research oriented science and engineering institution. KAIST has approximately 10,200 full-time students and 1,140 faculty researchers and had a total budget of US$765 million in 2013, of which US$459 million was from research contracts. From 1980 to 2008, the institute was known as the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology. In 2008, the name was shortened to KAIST.
KAIST ranked 60th globally and 12th in Asia in the QS World University Rankings (2013/14) both of which considered it 2nd within South Korea. Moreover, it was placed 24th in Engineering and Technology by QS of the same year.topuniversities.com/institution/kaist-korea-advanced-institute-science-technology
Times Higher Education ranked KAIST the third best university under the age of 50 years in the world in its 2013 league table.

History

The institute was founded in 1971 as the Korea Advanced Institute of Science (KAIS) by a loan of US$6 million (US$33 million The institute's two main functions were to train advanced scientists and engineers and develop a structure of graduate education in the country.  Research studies began by 1973 and undergraduates studied for bachelor's degrees by 1984.
In 1981 the government merged the Korean Advanced Institute of Science and the Korean Institute of Science and Technology (KIST) to form the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, or KAIST.  Due to differing research philosophies, KIST and KAIST split in 1989. In the same year KAIST and the Korea Institute of Technology (KIT) combined and moved from Seoul to the Daedeok Science Town in Daejeon. 
The first act of President Suh upon his inauguration in July 2006 was to lay out the KAIST Development Plan. The 'KAIST Development Five-Year Plan' was finalized on February 5, 2007 by KAIST Steering Committee. The goals of KAIST set by Suh were to become one of the best science and technology universities in the world, and to become one of the top-10 universities by 2011. 
In January 2008, the university dropped its full name, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, and changed its official name to only KAIST.'KAIST' Decides Not to Use Original Full Name, KAIST announcement, January 10, 2008.

Timeline

Academics

Demographics

Between 1975 and 2013 KAIST produced 12,793 bachelor's, 23,941 master's, and 9,383 doctorate degree holders giving a total of 46,117 alumni.
Governed by a special law, the university has an autonomous and flexible academic system. Other South Korean colleges and universities are required to abide by the government-directed admissions and curriculum requirements. 
Undergraduate students can join the school through an "open major system" that allows students to take classes for three terms and choose a discipline that suits their aptitude. In addition, undergraduate students are free to change their major anytime.
Admission is based on the overall grades, the math and science grades, recommendation letters from the teachers, study plan, personal statements, and other data that show the excellence of potential students. It is Korea's first test-free admissions system.
KAIST has produced many doctorates through the integrated master's and doctoral program and early-completion system. Students must publish their papers in internationally renowned academic journals.
Scholarships are given to all students in the bachelor, master and doctorate courses, and doctoral students are given military-exemption benefits. On campus dormitories are provided to all those who wish to use them.

Organization

KAIST is organized into fourteen institutes, eleven graduate schools, six colleges, one school, three divisions, and twenty departments. 

Colleges

Divisions

School

=Graduate schools=

Institutes

Other

=College of Natural Science=

The College of Natural Sciences consists of three departments and one professional graduate school: Physics, Mathematical Sciences, Chemistry and Graduate School of Nanoscience and Technology. 
Each department is in charge of not only the education of each subject but also the education of elementary science subjects for all undergraduate students. Furthermore, it maintains a wide and systematic relationship with each other department, maintaining a close, cooperative system.
The College of Natural Sciences also holds the Natural Science Research Institute as an annexed research institute. The college has greatly contributed to academic-research-business exchange through cooperative studies with governmental research institutes and companies. In addition, it actively operates international cooperative projects through academic exchanges.

=College of Life Science and Bioengineering=

Founded on June 1, 2008, the College of Life Science and Bioengineering pursues multidisciplinary education and research in the field of bioscience, biotechnology, and bioengineering. Its goal is to support the nation's endeavor to develop bioscience and technology by fostering new areas of science through convergence with IT and NT. 
The college consists of the Department of Bio and Brain Engineering, the Department of Biological Science, and the Graduate School of Medical Science and Engineering.

=College of Engineering=

The College of Engineering consists of 1 school, 4 departments, 3 divisions and 1 professional graduate school.

=College of Information Science and Technology=

In an endeavor to take the initiative in developing information technology (IT) for the 21st century, KAIST launched the new College of Information Science and Technology in 2008 by relocating the Departments of Electrical Engineering, Computer Science and Industrial and Systems Engineering from the College of Engineering and establishing the Department of Knowledge Service Engineering. When ICU merged into KAIST in 2009, the Department of Information and Communications Engineering at ICU came into the College of Information Science and Technology.

=College of Cultural Science=

The College of Culture and Science is composed of two departments: School of Humanities and Social Sciences and Graduate School of Culture and Technology.
The School of Humanities and Social Sciences offers students an undergraduate education in a range of courses in the humanities and social sciences. The Graduate School of Culture and Technology also provides master and doctoral degree programs for the purpose of producing manpower of the nation's cultural industry with support of the Ministry of Culture and Tourism.
The School of Humanities and Social Sciences has about 75 faculty members (3 professor emeritus, 18 full-time faculties, 13 visiting professors, 1 research professor, 40 lecturers), the Graduate School of Culture and Technology also has 4 full-time faculties, 5 visiting professors, 7 adjunct professors, and 89 master students and 36 doctoral students. The Graduate School established the Humanities and Social Science Research Center and the Culture and Technology Research Center, and has carried out various research projects.

=College of Interdisciplinary Studies=

The interdisciplinary major program at KAIST was founded on September 1, 2003. With the subsequent establishment of auxiliary organizations, the program was launched in earnest in April 2004.

=College of Business=

KAIST Business School (also known as KAIST College of Business) is a graduate school for research and teaching in science and technology.
In 2006, the 3 graduate schools of KAIST were combined under the single name of KAIST Business School. Whilst still maintaining a degree of autonomy, this move has allowed for increased cooperation between the schools in working towards the common goal of developing a world renowned technology-based management school. The 3 separate schools are the KAIST Graduate School of Management, KAIST Graduate School of Finance, and the KAIST Graduate School of Information & Media Management.
KAIST Business School provides general MBA programs (Techno-MBA, IMBA, Executive MBA), specialized MBA programs (Finance MBA, Information & Media MBA) and MS/Ph.D.

Campus

KAIST has two campuses in Daejeon and one campus in Seoul. The university is mainly located in the Daedeok Research Complex in the city of Daejeon, 150 kilometers south of the capital Seoul. Daedeok is also home to some 50 public and private research institutes, universities and high-tech venture capital companies.
The Daejeon campus (besides Daejeon Expo Park) plays main roles including lectures, research activities, housing services. It has a total of 29 dormitories where all students wishing to reside can stay. Twenty-three dormitories for male students and four dormitories for female students are located on the outskirts of the campus, and two apartments for married students are located outside the campus.
KAIST Seoul Campus is the home of the Business Faculty of the university. Graduate school of finance, management and information & media management is located there. The total area of Seoul Campus is . Its primary goal is to achieve an optimal combination of engineering and business studies which will make engineers more effective at their craft.
The Munji campus, previously ICU (Information and Communication University) campus, KAIST Information Technology Convergence Campus near main campus, has a total of two dormitories, one for undergraduate students and the other for graduate students.

Digital Science Library

KAIST digital science library was established in 1971 as KAIS library, and it went through a merge and separation process with KIST library. It merged with KIT in March 1990. A contemporary 5 story building was constructed as the main library, and it is being operated with an annex library. The library uses the American LC Classification Schedule.

Daedeok Innopolis

Daedeok Innopolis, formally known as the Daedeok Science Park, is a cluster of institutions in research and development of technology located in Daedeok Valley in northern Daejeon. The cluster is built around KAIST, Chungnam National University, a group of government research institutes in applied technologies, corporate research centers and more than 900 venture companies.

Research

Seven KAIST Institutes (KIs) have been set up: the KI for the BioCentury, the KI for Information Technology Convergence, the KI for the Design of Complex Systems, the KI for Entertainment Engineering, the KI for the NanoCentury, the KI for Eco-Energy, and the KI for Urban Space and Systems. Each KI is operated as an independent research center at the level of a college, receiving support in terms of finance and facilities. KAIST is currently conducting research planned by the government and private businesses that are worth mounts as much as 100 billion won. In terms of ownership of intellectual property rights, KAIST holds 2,694 domestic patents and 723 international patents so far.KAIST Institute (KI)
Unusually for a mainstream scientific institute, KAIST has an active creation science presence: it has had a creation science display on campus since 1993, and has a creationist group, the Research Association for Creation Science; see creationism in South Korea for context and details.

Electric vehicles

Researchers at KAIST have developed an electric transport system called Online Electric Vehicle (OLEV),  where the vehicles get their power from cables underneath the surface of the road via non-contact magnetic charging (a power source is placed underneath the road surface and power is wirelessly picked up on the vehicle itself). As a possible solution to traffic congestion and to improve overall efficiency by minimizing air resistance and so reduce energy consumption, the test vehicles followed the power track in a convoy. In July 2009 the researchers successfully supplied up to 60% power to a bus over a gap of  from a power line embedded in the ground using power supply and pick up technology developed in-house.com

Academic rankings

In 2013/14 QS World University Rankings ranked KAIST 60th overall in the world and 12th within Asia, coming 24th in Engineering and Technology. In the 2009 THE-QS World University Rankings (in 2010 Times Higher Education World University Rankings and QS World University Rankings parted ways to produce separate rankings) for Engineering & IT, the University was placed 21st in the world and 1st in Korea
  | title = QS World University Rankings: KAIST Rankings
