[[Alexa Internet]]

CATEGORIES: Companies established in 1996, Companies based in San Francisco, California, Internet search engines, Internet marketing companies, Marketing research companies of the United States, Amazon.com acquisitions

Alexa Internet, Inc. is a California-based subsidiary company of Amazon. Founded as an independent company in 1996, Alexa was acquired by Amazon in 1999. Its toolbar collects data on browsing behavior and transmits it to the Alexa website, where it is stored and analyzed, forming the basis for the company's web traffic reporting. As of 2014, Alexa provides traffic data, global rankings and other information on 30 million websites, and its website is visited by over 8.8 million people monthly.

Operations and history

Alexa Internet was founded in 1996 by American web entrepreneurs Brewster Kahle and Bruce Gilliat. drawing a parallel between the largest repository of knowledge in the ancient world and the potential of the Internet to become a similar store of knowledge.
The company offered a toolbar that gave Internet users suggestions on where to go next, based on the traffic patterns of its user community. Alexa also offered context for each site visited: to whom it was registered, how many pages it had, how many other sites pointed to it, and how frequently it was updated.
Alexa's operation includes archiving of webpages as they are crawled. This database served as the basis for the creation of the Internet Archive accessible through the Wayback Machine. In 1998,  the company donated a copy of the archive, two terabytes in size, to the Library of Congress. Alexa continues to supply the Internet Archive with Web crawls.
In 1999, as the company moved away from its original vision of providing an "intelligent" search engine, Alexa was acquired by Amazon. In December 2006, Amazon released Alexa Image Search. Built in-house, it was the first major application to be built on the company's Web platform.
In December 2005, Alexa opened its extensive search index and Web-crawling facilities to third party programs through a comprehensive set of Web services and APIs. These could be used, for instance, to construct vertical search engines that could run on Alexa's own servers or elsewhere. In May 2007, Alexa changed their API to require comparisons to be limited to three sites, reduced the size of embedded graphs shown using Flash, and added mandatory embedded BritePic advertisements.
In April 2007, the lawsuit Alexa v. Hornbaker was filed to stop trademark infringement by the Statsaholic service.
On November 27, 2008, Amazon announced that Alexa Web Search was no longer accepting new customers, and that the service would be deprecated or discontinued for existing customers on January 26, 2009. Thereafter, Alexa became a purely analytics-focused company.
On March 31, 2009, the Alexa website underwent a major redesign, offering new web traffic metrics, including average page views per each individual user, bounce rate, and user time on site.

Tracking

Toolbar

Alexa ranks sites based primarily on tracking a sample set of internet traffic — users of its toolbar for the Internet Explorer, Firefox and Google Chrome web browsers. The Alexa Toolbar includes a popup blocker, a search box, links to Amazon. It also allows the user to rate the site and view links to external, relevant sites.
In early 2005, Alexa stated that there had been 10 million downloads of the toolbar, though the company did not provide statistics about active usage. The Alexa Toolbar for Internet Explorer 7 has previously been flagged as malware by Microsoft Defender. especially for less-visited sites. In 2007, Michael Arrington provided examples of Alexa rankings known to contradict data from the comScore web analytics service, including ranking YouTube ahead of Google. "Alexa's Make Believe Internet"; "Alexa Says YouTube Is Now Bigger Than Google. Alexa Is Useless". TechCrunch. 2007. Retrieved June 21, 2013.
On April 16, 2008, many users reported dramatic shifts in their Alexa rankings. Alexa confirmed this later in the day with an announcement that they had released an updated ranking system, claiming that they would now take into account more data sources "beyond Alexa Toolbar users"."Alexa Overhauls Ranking System". TechCrunch. April 16, 2008. Retrieved December 1, 2012.
A number of antivirus companies have assessed Alexa's toolbar. Symantec classifies the toolbar as "trackware",

Certified statistics

Using Alexa Pro, site owners can sign up for "certified statistics," which allows Alexa full access to a site's traffic data. Site owners input Javascript code on each page of their website that sends all traffic data to Alexa, allowing Alexa to display — or not display, depending on the owner's preference — accurate statistics such as pageviews and unique pageviews.








