[[Restorationism]]

CATEGORIES: Christian primitivism, Christian terms, Protestantism, Christian radicalism

Christian primitivism, also described as restorationism, is the belief that Christianity should be restored along the lines of what is known about the apostolic early church, which restorationists see as the search for a more pure and more ancient form of the religion. and the Waldensians have been described as examples of restorationism, as have many seventh-day Sabbatarians.
Efforts to restore an earlier, purer form of Christianity are often a response to denominationalism. As Rubel Shelly put it, "the motive behind all restoration movements is to tear down the walls of separation by a return to the practice of the original, essential and universal features of the Christian religion."  The relative importance given to the restoration ideal, and the extent to which the full restoration of the early church is believed to have been achieved, also varies between groups.

Uses of the term

The terms restorationism, restorationist and restoration are used in several senses within Christianity.
See for example Cassandra Yacovazzi, The Crisis of Sectarianism: Restorationist, Catholic, and Mormon Converts in Antebellum America, Masters Thesis, Department of History, Baylor University, May 2009[/ref]
The term primitive, in contrast with other uses, refers to a basis in scholarship and research into the actual writings of the church fathers and other historical documents. Since written documents for the underground first-century church are sparse, the primitive church passed down its knowledge verbally. Elements of the primitive Christianity movement reject the patristic tradition of the prolific extrabiblical 2nd- and 3rd-century redaction of this knowledge (the Ante-Nicene Fathers), and instead attempt to reconstruct primitive church practices as they might have existed in the Apostolic Age. To do this, they revive practices found in the Old Testament.
The term apostolic refers to a nonmainstream, often literal, apostolic succession or historical lineage tracing back to the Apostles and the Great Commission. These restorationist threads are sometimes regarded critically as being Judaizers in the Ebionite tradition.

Historical models

The restoration ideal has been interpreted and applied in a variety of ways.  These are:
Ecclesiastical primitivism focuses on restoring the ecclesiastical practices of the early church.
Ethical primitivism focuses on restoring the ethical norms and commitment to discipleship of the early church.
Experiential primitivism focuses on restoring the direct communication with God and the experience of the Holy Spirit seen in the early church.
Gospel primitivism may be best seen in the theology of Martin Luther.
These models are not mutually exclusive, but overlap; for example, the Pentecostal movement sees a clear link between ethical primitivism and experiential primitivism.

Middle Ages

According to Barbara Tuchman, beginning in about 1470 a succession of Popes focused on the acquisition of money, their role in Italian politics as rulers of the papal states and power politics within the college of cardinals. at the time was centered on movements that wanted to renew the church, such as the Lollards, Hussites, and Brethren of the Common Life.
While these pre-reformation movements did presage and sometimes discussed a break with Rome and papal authority, they also provoked restorationist movements within the church, such as the councils of Constance  which were held in the first half of the 15th century.
Preachers at the time regularly harangued delegates to these conferences regarding simony, venality, lack of chastity and celibacy, and the holding of multiple benefices. The lack of success of the restorationist movements led, arguably, to the Protestant Reformation.

Protestant Reformation

The Protestant Reformation came about through an impulse to repair the Church and return it to what the reformers saw as its original biblical structure, belief, and practice,
The Reformation was not a monolithic movement, but consisted of at least three identifiable sub-currents.
Luther opposed efforts to restore "biblical forms and structures,"
Protestant groups have generally accepted history as having some "jurisdiction" in Christian faith and life; the question has been the extent of that jurisdiction. Hughes (editor), The American Quest for the Primitive Church, University of Illinois Press, 1988, 292 pages, ISBN 0-252-06029-6

First Great Awakening

During the First Great Awakening, a movement developed among the Baptists known as Separate Baptists. Two themes of this movement were the rejection of creeds and "freedom in the Spirit."

Groups arising during the Second Great Awakening

The ideal of restoring a "primitive" form of Christianity grew in popularity in the U.S. after the American Revolution.
Camp meetings fueled the Second Great Awakening, which served as an "organizing process" that created "a religious and educational infrastructure" across the trans-Appalachian frontier that encompassed social networks, a religious journalism that provided mass communication, and church related colleges.

American Stone-Campbell Restoration Movement

The American Restoration Movement aimed to restore the church and sought "the unification of all Christians in a single body patterned after the church of the New Testament."Rubel Shelly, I Just Want to Be a Christian, 20th Century Christian, Nashville, Tennessee 1984, ISBN 0-89098-021-7  The first, led by Barton W. Stone began at Cane Ridge, Bourbon County, Kentucky and called themselves simply Christians.  The second began in western Pennsylvania and Virginia (now West Virginia) and was led by Thomas Campbell and his son, Alexander Campbell; they used the name Disciples of Christ.
The Campbell movement was characterized by a "systematic and rational reconstruction" of the early church, in contrast to the Stone movement which was characterized by radical freedom and lack of dogma.
With the merger, there was the challenge of what to call the new movement.  Clearly, finding a Biblical, non-sectarian name was important. Stone wanted to continue to use the name "Christians." Alexander Campbell insisted upon "Disciples of Christ". As a result, both names were used.
The Restoration Movement began during, and was greatly influenced by, the Second Great Awakening. Dunnavant, The Encyclopedia of the Stone-Campbell Movement: Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), Christian Churches/Churches of Christ, Churches of Christ, Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing, 2004, ISBN 0-8028-3898-7, 9780802838988, 854 pages, entry on Great Awakenings
The Restoration Movement has seen several divisions, resulting in multiple separate groups.  Three modern groups originating in the U.S. claim the Stone-Campbell movement as their roots: Churches of Christ, Christian churches and churches of Christ, and the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ).  Some see divisions in the movement as the result of the tension between the goals of restoration and ecumenism, with the churches of Christ and the Christian churches and churches of Christ resolving the tension by stressing restoration while the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) resolved the tension by stressing ecumenism.S. churches associated with this movement include the Churches of Christ in Australia and the Evangelical Christian Church in Canada. Ahlstrom, A Religious History of the American People (2004)Melton's Encyclopedia of American Religions (2009)

Christadelphians

Dr. John Thomas (April 12, 1805 - March 5, 1871), was a devout convert to the Restoration Movement after a shipwreck at sea on his emigration to America brought to focus his inadequate understanding of the Bible, and what would happen to him at death. This awareness caused him to devote his life to the study of the Bible and he promoted interpretations of it which were at variance with the mainstream Christian views the Restoration Movement held.  In particular he questioned the nature of man.  He held a number of debates with one of the leaders of the movement Alexander Campbell on these topics and eventually agreed to stop because there was no practical merits to his personal beliefs and it had the potential to create division.  He later determined that salvation was dependant upon having the theology he had developed for baptism to be effective for salvation and published an "Confession and Abjuration" of his previous position on March 3, 1847. He was also rebaptised.
Following his abjuration and rebaptism he went to England on a preaching tour in June 1848 including Reformation Movement churches,Encyclopedia of new religions: new religious movements, sects and   Christopher Hugh Partridge - 2004 "In June 1848, he returned to England and was well received in Nottingham and had further speaking engagements in Derby" Although his abjuration and his disfellowship in America were reported in the British churches magazinesThe British Millennial Harbinger and Family Magazine ed. James Wallis July 1848 cover, October 1848 in full certain churches in the movement still allowed him to present his views. Thomas also gained a hearing in Unitarian and Adventist churches through his promotion of the concept of "independence of thought" with regards to interpreting the Bible.
Through a process of creed setting and division the Christadelphian movement emerged with a distinctive set of doctrines incorporating Adventism, anti-trinitarianism, the belief that God is a "substantial and corporeal" being, objection to military service, a lay-membership with full participation by all members, and other doctrines consistent with the spirit of the Restorationist movement.
One consequence of objection to military service was the adoption of the name Christadelphians to distinguish this small community of believers and to be granted exemption from military service in the American Civil War.

Mormonism

Adherents of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS), commonly called Mormons, believe that founder Joseph Smith, Jr., was a prophet of God, chosen to restore the primitive, apostolic church established by Jesus. Like other restorationalist groups, Mormons believe that the church and priesthood established by Jesus had ceased to exist after the end of the apostolic age and before the First Council of Nicaea in 325. Unlike other reformers who based their movements on intensive study of the Bible, Smith claimed a restoration of apostolic authority and revelation.
According to Smith, God appeared to him around 1820, instructing him that the creeds of the churches of the day were corrupted.(See Pearl of Great Price: Joseph Smith - History: Chapter 1:19) In addition to restoring the primitive church, Smith claimed to receive entirely new revelations. In 1830, he published The Book of Mormon, which Mormons believe he translated through divine means from the Golden Plates that he obtained from an angel. The church was organized on April 6, 1830, in New York. Originally the church was unofficially called the "Church of Christ". Four years later, in April 1834, it was also referred to as the "Church of Latter Day Saints" to differentiate the church of this era from that of the New Testament. Then, in April 1838, the full name was stated as the "Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints".
Some among the Churches of Christ have attributed the restorationist character of the Latter Day Saints movement to the influence of a preacher, Sidney Rigdon, who was associated with the Campbell movement in Ohio but left it and became a close friend of Joseph Smith. Mormons gave priority to current revelation. Primitive observances of "appointed times" like Sabbath were secondary to continuing revelation, similarly to the progressive revelation held by some non-restorationist Christian theologians.
The Mormon doctrine of the "Great Apostasy" has been criticized a heresy by some Christians as inconsistent with biblical teaching that the true church was never lost at any time.Those who argue that the true church was never lost often cite 

Adventism

Adventism is a Christian eschatological belief that looks for the imminent Second Coming of Jesus to inaugurate the Kingdom of God. This view involves the belief that Jesus will return to receive those who have died in Christ and those who are awaiting his return, and that they must be ready when he returns. Adventists are considered to be both restorationists and conservative Protestants.

=Millerites and Sabbatarianism=

The Millerites were the most well-known family of the Adventist movements. They emphasized apocalyptic teachings anticipating the end of the world, and did not look for the unity of Christendom but busied themselves in preparation for Christ's return. Millerites sought to restore a prophetic immediacy and uncompromising biblicism that they believed had once existed but had long been rejected by mainstream Protestant and Catholic churches. From the Millerites descended the Seventh-day Adventists and the Advent Christian Church.

=Seventh-day Adventists=

The Seventh-day Adventist Church grew out of the Adventist movement, in particular the Millerites. The Seventh-day Adventist Church is the largest of several Adventist groups which arose from the Millerite movement of the 1840s in upstate New York, a phase of the Second Great Awakening. Important to the Seventh-day Adventist movement is a belief in progressive revelation, teaching that the Christian life and testimony is intended to be typified by the Spirit of Prophecy, as explained in the writings of Ellen G. White.
Much of the theology of the Seventh-day Adventist Church corresponds to Protestant Christian teachings such as the Trinity and the infallibility of Scripture. Distinctive teachings include the unconscious state of the dead and the doctrine of an investigative judgment. The church is also known for its emphasis on diet and health, its holistic understanding of the person, its promotion of religious liberty, and its conservative principles and lifestyle.

=Worldwide Church of God=

The Worldwide Church of God arose from the Seventh Day churches. The personal ministry of Herbert W. Armstrong became the Radio Church of God, which became the Worldwide Church of God. It later splintered into many other churches and groups when the Worldwide Church of God disassociated itself with the Restoration movements and made major attempts to join the Protestant branch of Christianity. The largest of these groups, the Living Church of God and the United Church of God, continue in the tradition of Armstrongism.

=Advent Christian Church=

The Advent Christian Church is unaffiliated with Seventh-day Adventism, but considers itself the second "of six Christian denominations that grew out of the ministry of William Miller". Hewitt (Venture Books, 1984), as cited by "The Advent Christian Church: An Introduction", AreaChurches.
Advent Christians such as George Storrs and Jonas Wendell influenced the Bible Student movement.

Other groups originating in the 19th century

Bible Students (Jehovah's Witnesses)


In the 1870s, a Bible study group led by Charles Taze Russell formed into what was eventually called the Bible Student movement. Russell's congregations did not consider him to be the founder of a new religion,Jehovah's Witnesses – Proclaimers of God's Kingdom. chap. 31 p. 707 "A biography of Russell, published shortly after his death, explained: "He was not the founder of a new religion, and never made such claim. He revived the great truths taught by Jesus and the Apostles," but that he helped in restoring true Christianity from the apostasy that Jesus and the Apostle Paul foretold. They believed that other Churches departed in a Great Apostasy from the original faith on major points, and that the original faith could be restored through a generally literal interpretation of the Bible and a sincere commitment to follow its teachings. They focused on several key doctrinal points that they considered a return to "primitive Christianity", active proselytization; strict neutrality in political affairs;"Militarism and Navalism - How Long?" by Charles Taze Russell, Watch Tower, January 1, 1916, page 5, "We see wrongs perpetrated in every direction; Divine Laws entirely set aside by these so-called Christian nations--Christendom. ... Its members cannot be loyal to the prince of this world Satan, and to the Prince of Glory, both. ... It should be our desire to be neutral as between these contending factions of Satan's empire. ... Let us be just toward all, kind, generous. Let us avoid as far as possible any discussion of these matters with those who would not be able to understand and appreciate our position."addedRetrieved 2010-12-20 abstinence from warfare;"Bible Students and the Future", Watch Tower, April 1, 1915, page 101, "In all the Continental Armies our Brethren, known as Bible Students, are to be found--not willingly, but by conscription. ... We have reasons for believing that these suggestions are being followed... We have exhorted the brethren to strict neutrality so far as the combatants are concerned, whatever might be their natural inclination through accident of birth or association."Retrieved 2010-12-20 and a belief in the imminent manifestation of the Kingdom of God (or World to Come) on Earth.
Jehovah's Witnesses emerged as a distinct religious organization, maintaining control of Russell's Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society and other corporations. They continued to develop doctrines that they considered to be an improved restoration of first century Christianity, including increased emphasis on the use of Jehovah as God's personal name. This has contributed to worldwide ignorance regarding the divine name."

Plymouth Brethren

The Plymouth Brethren is a conservative, Evangelical, restorationist movement whose origin can be traced to Dublin, Ireland, in 1827. The title, "The Brethren", is one that many of their number are comfortable with, in that the Bible designates all believers as "brethren".
The first English assembly was in Plymouth in 1831
It was organised primarily by George Wigram, Benjamin Wills Newton and John Nelson Darby. They became known as "the brethren from Plymouth", and were soon simply called "Plymouth Brethren."
By 1848, divergence of practice and belief led to the development of two separate branches. The rift was caused primarily by a difference of opinions between John Nelson Darby and Benjamin Wills Newton in regards to eschatology. Despite more divisions, assemblies are still often generalized into two main categories: "Open Brethren" and "Exclusive Brethren".
John Duncan criticized the Brethren movement saying "To end sectarianism, the Plymouth Brethren began by making a new sect, and that sect, of all sects, the most sectarian".

20th-century and contemporary groups

Charismatic Movement

=British New Church Movement=

During the Charismatic Movement of the 1960s and 1970s, which focused on the transformation of the individual, some leaders formed what has become known as the Charismatic Restorationist Movement. These leaders, of whom Arthur Wallis, David Lillie and Cecil Cousen were at the forefront, focused on the nature of the church and shared a distinctive view that authentic church order was being restored to the whole church. This authentic church order centred on what is referred to as the "fivefold ministries", as listed in Ephesians 4:11: Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Teachers and Pastors. Although the Charismatic Movement brought the Pentecostal gifts to the denominational churches, these restorationists considered denominationalism unbiblical, and shared a conviction that God would cause the church to be directly organized and empowered by the holy spirit.
The movement has thousands of adherents worldwide, and notable church networks include Newfrontiers led by Terry Virgo, Salt and Light Ministries International led by Barney Coombs and Ichthus Christian Fellowship led by Faith and Roger Forster.

=Shepherding Movement=

The British leaders of charismatic restorationism mutually recognised a parallel movement in the United States, centered on the Fort Lauderdale Five; Derek Prince, Don Basham, Bob Mumford, Charles Simpson and Ern Baxter. This movement became known as the Shepherding Movement and was the subject of significant controversy in the mid-1970s. The movement left a significant legacy through its influence on contemporary ministries International Churches of Christ, Maranatha Campus Ministries and Great Commission International.

=Apostolic-Prophetic Movement=

More recently another form of charismatic restorationism with a similar recognition of the apostolic office has emerged in the form of the Apostolic-Prophetic Movement, centered on the Kansas City Prophets. Leading proponents of the movement include C. Peter Wagner, Rick Joyner, Mike Bickle and Lou Engle.

Church of God (Restoration)

The Church of God (Restoration) is a Christian denomination that was founded in the 1980s by Daniel (Danny) Layne. Layne was originally raised in the Church of God (Anderson), where his father was a minister. Layne began preaching in the Church of God (Guthrie, OK) after his conversion.
One tenet of this group is that they are ordained by both prophecy and divine command to restore the church of God as it was in the Book of Acts. This teaching is upheld by the official eschatology, which is a form of church historicism. This Church of God (Restoration)The Church of God, Official Website of The Church of God teaches that the 7th Trumpet in the book of the Revelation began to sound around the year 1980 when Daniel Layne was saved, alleging that there was a general discontent among many of its current adherents that were in various Churches of God at that time. A variation of this "Seventh Seal message" had been taught in other Churches of God for approximately 50 years prior to this point.

Iglesia ni Cristo

Iglesia ni Cristo began in the Philippines and was incorporated by Felix Y. Manalo on July 27, 1914., "An Appraisal of the Iglesia ni Cristo," in Studies in Philippine Church History, ed. Anderson, Gerald H. (Cornell University Press, 1969)Tipon, Emmanuel (Jul 28, 2004)."Iglesia Ni Cristo celebrates 90th anniversary". PhilippineNews. Retrieved August 19, 2005 The church professes to be the reestablishment of the original church founded by Jesus Christ and teaches that the original church was apostatized. It does not teach the doctrine of the Trinity or the divinity of Jesus.. Retrieved July 6, 2005. Iglesia ni Cristo does not subscribe to the term Restoration or claim to be a part of the Restoration Movement.

Members Church of God International

The Members of the Church of God International began in the Philippines and was incorporated by Br. Eli Soriano on March 30, 1977. The church professes to be the continuation of the church founded by Jesus Christ in Jerusalem. They reject the doctrine of the Trinity and various "added" doctrines.

Local churches

The local churches are a Christian movement influenced by the teachings of Watchman Nee and Witness Lee and associated with the Living Stream Ministry publishing house. Its members see themselves as separate from other Christian groups, denominations, and movements, part of what they sometimes call "the Lord's recovery". One of the defining features of the local churches is their adherence to the principle that all Christians in a city or locality are automatically members of the one church in that locality. Another defining feature is the lack of an official organization or official name for the movement. Those in the local churches believe that to take a name would divide them from other believers. Thus, they often say they meet with "the church in name" with the understanding that they are not the only church but belong to the same church as every believer in their city.

Jesuism

Jesuism is the personal philosophy encompassing the teachings of Jesus of Nazareth and commitment or adherence to those teachings. The Call of the Carpenter. USA: Doubleday, Page & Company, 1911. p.314. Jesuism is distinct from and sometimes opposed to mainstream Christianity, the organized religion based on the Christian Bible. Flanagan. The Really Hard Problem: Meaning in a Material World. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2007. p.36 In particular, Jesusism is distinguished from the writings attributed to Paul of Tarsus and from modern Church doctrine. Paul the Stranger. Abilene: Voice of Jesus, 2003 (online transcription). Del Tondo. Jesus' Words Only. San Diego: Infinity Publishing, 2006. p.19 Jesusism is not necessarily critical of the Christian Bible or Church doctrine, but rather it does not affirm their authority over the teachings of Jesus. As a philosophy, Jesusism is characterized as naturalistic and rationalist, rejecting the conflict between faith and science. Flanagan. The Really Hard Problem: Meaning in a Material World. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2007. p.263

Heavenly Faith

Heavenly Faith is a Restorationist denomination that acknowledges the Holy Bible as the chief authority in matters of Christian doctrine, practice, and behavior. It questions the authority of Christian writings written after the second century. Heavenly Faith shares characteristics with a variety of other denominations, such as Eastern Orthodoxy, Wesleyanism, Pentecostalism, Universalism, and Messianic Judaism.Heavenly Faith



Early Christian church

17th century

American Stone-Campbell Restoration Movement

Mormonism (Latter Day Saint movement)

Millerites

Other



Further reading




