[[Joe Rogan]]

CATEGORIES: 1967 births, Living people, Male actors from New Jersey, American cannabis activists, American color commentators, American comedians, American people of Irish descent, American game show hosts, American podcasters, American social commentators, American stand-up comedians, American male television actors, Former Roman Catholics, Mixed martial arts broadcasters, People from Newark, New Jersey, Psychedelic drug advocates, Religious skeptics, American people of Italian descent, American practitioners of Brazilian jiu-jitsu, American judoka, American Muay Thai practitioners, American taekwondo practitioners, Mixed martial arts people, Pantheists

Joseph James "Joe" Rogan (born August 11, 1967) is an American stand-up comedian, actor, writer, color commentator, entrepreneur, and trained martial artist.

Early life

Rogan was born in Newark, New Jersey. He was raised in Newton Upper Falls, Massachusetts until age 7,

Career

Acting

In 1994, he co-starred on the Fox comedy Hardball as Frank Valente, the young, ego-centric star player on a fictional professional baseball team. The Complete Directory to Prime Time Network and Cable TV Shows, 1946–Present. Random House Digital, ISBN 978-0-345-49773-4 From 1995 to 1999, he co-starred on the comedy NewsRadio. He portrayed Joe Garrelli, the electrician at WNYX, a news radio station in New York City.Gonzalez, Erika (April 5, 2002). Now 'Fear' This: Joe Rogan uncensored. Rocky Mountain News In 2011, Rogan played his first major character in a movie in the Kevin James movie Zookeeper.O'Connell, Sean (July 8, 2011). If he could talk to the animals. Washington Post  He played himself in Here Comes the Boom, an action-comedy starring Kevin James released in 2012. Charice filming 2nd Hollywood movie with Salma Hayek? ABS-CBN News and Current Affairs

Color commentary

Rogan began working for the UFC in 1997, making his debut interviewing fighters at UFC 12: Judgement Day in Dothan, Alabama, before eventually becoming a color commentator for the promotion. He won the Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards in two occasions as Best Television Announcer. He was also named "MMA Personality of the Year" in the 2011 World MMA Awards.(February 22, 2012).

Stand-up comedy

Rogan has toured as a stand-up comedian and recorded several albums and specials, including Shiny Happy Jihad, Joe Rogan: Talking Monkeys in Space, and Joe Rogan Live from the Tabernacle.
In 2007, Rogan confronted comedian Carlos Mencia on stage, accusing him of joke thievery. The Vigilantes of Comedy. New York Times A video of the incident included evidence and supporting comments from other comedians, including George Lopez, Reverend Bob Levy, Bobby Lee and Ari Shaffir.Joe Rogan and Carlos Mencia face off at comedy club. Times-Herald Record

Hosting

Rogan worked on the TV series Fear Factor, as a host of the United States version of the show. He hosted from June 11, 2001 through September 12, 2006. Rogan returned as the host of Fear Factor in the rebooted edition of the show, which aired December 12, 2011 through July 16, 2012 on NBC.
In 2003, Rogan and Doug Stanhope replaced Jimmy Kimmel and Adam Carolla as co-hosts of The Man Show. The Man Show. Entertainment Weekly They continued through the end of the show's run in 2004.
In December 2009, Rogan began hosting a regular podcast with concurrent live Ustream availability.

Personal life

In 2007, Rogan and his girlfriend had a baby girl.(Comic Joe Rogan gets into fatherhood, Zen, ultimate fighting. Orange County Register They married the following year.
Regarding his religious beliefs, Rogan has stated that he is not completely opposed to the concept of a "higher power" such as a god. However, Rogan stated in September 2010, during a guest appearance on the Alex Jones radio show, that he does not follow any organized religions.
One of the recurring themes in his work and life is the use and support of entheogens, such as cannabis, psilocybin mushrooms and DMT, toward the exploration and enhancement of consciousness. Rogan supports the medical and recreational use of cannabis."Joe Rogan – Cure for Life", Youtube."Joe Rogan flotation tank", YouTube, Aug 3, 2006 Rogan was featured in the History Channel documentary, Marijuana: A Chronic History, as an advocate of legalized medical use of marijuana. He is also the presenter of the 2010 documentary DMT: The Spirit Molecule.imdb.com/title/tt1340425/
Another reoccurring theme is his interest in the usage of  sensory deprivation and the isolation tank.
Rogan is a practitioner of Brazilian jiu-jitsu and is a black belt in Eddie Bravo's 10th Planet Jiu-Jitsu, a style of no-gi Brazilian Jiu Jitsu,"Joe Rogan gets his 10th Planet black belt", Youtube.Today, UFC commentator Joe Rogan received his black belt in Brazilian Jiu Jitsu from Jean Jacques.... BloodyElbow. September 17, 2012. Retrieved on 2013-07-16.
Rogan endorsed Ron Paul in the 2012 presidential campaign.

Comedy recordings

Awards and recognition

World MMA Awards








