[[Reading Rainbow]]

CATEGORIES: 1983 American television series debuts, 2006 American television series endings, 1980s American television series, 1980s American animated television series, 1990s American television series, 1990s American animated television series, 2000s American television series, 2000s American animated television series, American children's television series, English-language television programming, PBS network shows, Reading and literacy television series

Reading Rainbow is an American children's television series that aired on PBS from June 6, 1983, until November 10, 2006, that encouraged reading by children. As of 2012, it is an iPad and Kindle Fire educational interactive book reading and video field trip app.
The public television series garnered over 200 broadcast awards, including a Peabody Award and 26 Emmy Awards, 11 of which were in the "Outstanding Children's Series" category. The series was created under the leadership of Cecily Truett Lancit and Larry Lancit, at Lancit Media Productions in New York. The concept of a reading series for children originated with Twila Liggett, Ph.D., and Paul Schupbach (director), of the Great Plains National Instructional Television Library at the University of Nebraska–Lincoln; and Tony Buttino, of WNED-TV Buffalo, New York. The original team included Lynne Brenner Ganek, Ellen Schecter, and host LeVar Burton.
Each episode centered on a theme from a book, or other children's literature, which was explored through a number of segments or stories. The show also recommended books for kids to look for when they went to the library. It is the third-longest running children's series in PBS history, after Mister Rogers' Neighborhood and Sesame Street.  It was also one of the first PBS shows to be broadcast in stereo.
After cancellation on November 10, 2006, reruns aired until May 29, 2009, when it was pulled from the schedule.org/schedules/listings. Built from the ground up by LeVar Burton and his company, RRKIDZ, the app allows children to read unlimited books, explore video field trips starring Burton, and earn rewards for reading.
The week of June 11, 2013, Reading Rainbow celebrated its 30th anniversary.

Show details

Reading Rainbow was hosted by actor and executive producer LeVar Burton, who is also known for his roles in Roots and Star Trek: The Next Generation. It was produced by Lancit Media Entertainment from 1983 until 2000, and by On-Screen Entertainment from 2000 through 2006.
A regular feature was a children's book narrated by a celebrity. Celebrity readers included Philip Bosco (Barbara Bash's Desert Giant: The World of the Saguaro Cactus), Michael Ansara (Paul Goble's The Gift of the Sacred Dog, Sheila MacGill Callahan's And Still the Turtle Watched), Josie de Guzman (Leyla Torres's Saturday Sancocho), Jason Robards (Francine Jacobs' Sam the Sea Cow), Bill Cosby (Marc Brown's Arthur's Eyes), Eartha Kitt (Megan McDonald's Is This a House for Hermit Crab?) and Charles Kimbrough (David Wiesner's June 29, 1999). Another segment featured Burton in diverse places talking to people about their work and other contributions, focusing on the theme of each episode. (In one episode, Burton took the show behind-the-scenes on the set of Star Trek: The Next Generation.) The final segment of each show, called Book Reviews, began with Burton's introductory phrase, "But you don't have to take my word for it," and featured children giving capsule reviews of books they liked. Burton ended every show with, "I'll see you next time."
The series' pilot, which aired as the show's eighth episode in 1983, featured the book Gila Monsters Meet You at the Airport by Marjorie Weinman Sharmat, and was narrated by Doug Parvin. It was created and produced in 1981.  Burton hosted the program.
Its theme song was written by Steve Horelick, Dennis Neil Kleinman, and Janet Weir; Horelick also served as the series' music director and composer and received an EMMY nomination in 2007 for his work on the series. The original theme was sung by Tina Fabrique and featured one of the first uses of the Buchla synthesizer in a TV theme song. The original opening, which depicted a cartoon butterfly transforming the surroundings of young children reading books into cartoon fantasy lands, was used until 1999. Later episodes used a new opening, a live-action sequence in a space-themed environment, with the same theme song performed by R&B artist Chaka Khan. It was also used for reruns of older episodes until Labor Day of 2008, when PBS stopped airing reruns.
The daughters of producer Larry Lancit, Shaune and Caitlin Lancit, were often featured in the series, notably as the children thanking the sponsors at the beginning and end of the show.

Reading Rainbows last years

Original production was to have ended after April 4, 2005, with the show continuing to air in reruns, but host LeVar Burton said on February 7, 2006 that five new episodes of the show would be shot in 2006 despite the continuing financial troubles of PBS.Burton Talks Drama, Diversity, Respect & 'Reading Rainbow'

Relaunch as an App; 2012 to Present

Former executive producer LeVar Burton announced on his Twitter feed on March 19, 2010, that "Reading Rainbow 2.0 is in the works."Twitter Announcement of Reading Rainbow 2.0 On March 4, 2012, he announced that it was the "last day of shooting before launch!"Twitter Announcement of Last Day of Shooting of Reading Rainbow 2.0
On June 13, 2012, in a special presentation at Apple Inc's annual World Wide Developers Conference, Burton and his business partner, Mark Wolfe, introduced the new Reading Rainbow iPad App. In January 2014, the Reading Rainbow App surpassed 10M books read and video field trips watched by children in 18 months. Consistently the #1 Educational and overall Kids App for iPads, the Reading Rainbow App continues to inspire new generations of readers in children throughout the world. 
Just Childrens Books: Reading Rainbow Relaunched as an App

Accolades

Television and film

Reading Rainbow and  LeVar Burton, have appeared in many works of popular culture.

Animation producers

Feature Book filming

The photographing of the Feature Book segments was by:

Guest readers and contributors

Writing and illustrating contest

In 1995, the creators launched the first contest called Reading Rainbow Young Writers and Illustrators Contest. The annual writing and illustrating competition for children grades K through 3 continued until 2009 when it was relaunched as PBS Kids Go! Writers Contest.






