[[Sky Tower (Auckland)]]

CATEGORIES: Towers completed in 1997, Observation towers, Visitor attractions in Auckland, Buildings and structures in Auckland, Towers in New Zealand, Buildings and structures with revolving restaurants, Communication towers, Lookouts in Auckland

The Sky Tower is an observation and telecommunications tower located on the corner of Victoria and Federal Streets in the Auckland CBD, Auckland City, New Zealand. It is  tall, as measured from ground level to the top of the mast,Sky Tower Official page - Retrieved 2009-07-04 making it the tallest free-standing structure in the Southern Hemisphere. Due to its shape and height, especially when compared to the next tallest structures, it has become an iconic structure in Auckland's skyline.

Uses

The tower is part of the SKYCITY Auckland casino complex, originally built for Harrah's Entertainment. The tower attracts an average of 1,450 visitors per day (over 500,000 per year). Accessed 2008-03-04.)
The upper portion of the tower contains two restaurants and a cafe — including New Zealand's only revolving restaurant, located  in the distance.Skytower facts page Retrieved 4 June 2009
The tower also features the 'SkyJump', a  heights) are also possible for tour groups, as is a walk around the exterior.co. Accessed 2009-05-27.)
The tower is also used for telecommunications and broadcasting with the Auckland Peering Exchange (APE) being located on Level 48. These include television, wireless internet, RT, and weather measurement services.
The tower is Auckland's primary FM radio transmitter, and is one of four infill terrestrial television transmitters in Auckland, serving areas not covered by the main transmitter at Waiatarua in the Waitakere Ranges. A total of twenty-three FM radio stations and six digital terrestrial television multiplexes broadcast from the tower.
The tower was also used for a Fast Forward on the thirteenth season of The Amazing Race. Their task was for teams (Ken & Tina in particular) to use tower's maintenance ladders to climb from the sky deck to red light at the top to get a friend, the Travelocity gnome. It also appeared on 1st season of Asian Version of the show for a RoadBlock task. One member from each team has to complete the "SkyJump" before continuing the race.

Transmission frequencies

The following table contains television and radio frequencies currently operating from the Sky Tower:

Construction

Project history

Fletcher Construction was the contracted builder for the project while engineering firm Beca Group provided the design management and coordination, structural, geotechnical, civil, mechanical, electrical, plumbing, lighting and fire engineering services. Harrison Grierson provided surveying services. It was designed by Gordon Moller of Craig Craig Moller architects and has received a New Zealand Institute of Architects National Award as well as regional awards. Retrieved 2007-12-01.)
Taking two years and 9 months to construct, the tower was opened on 3 August 1997, six months ahead of schedule.Sky Tower (from 'Feature Projects', Beca Group website)

Project team

Project Architect: Les Dykstra "Aqua House", Editorial Review by Tony van Raat.

Facts and figures

The tower is constructed of high-performance reinforced concrete. Its  deep into the local sandstone. Retrieved 2007-12-02.) The main shaft was built using climbing formwork.
The upper levels were constructed from composite materials, structural steel, precast concrete and reinforced concrete, and the observation decks clad in aluminium with blue/green reflective glass. A structural steel framework supports the upper mast structure. During construction . To then remove the crane, another crane had to be constructed attached to the upper part of the Sky Tower structure, which dismantled the big crane, and was in turn dismantled into pieces small enough to fit into the elevator.

Emergencies

The tower is designed to withstand wind in excess of  away, is not expected to collapse the tower. As an additional safeguard against emergencies, fireproof rooms on the lower levels of the observation deck would provide refuge in the unlikely event of a conflagration, while the stairwell itself is also fire-safety rated.
The Sky Tower has so far been closed at least once for weather-related reasons, during a storm in November 2006, when the structure started to sway noticeably in winds of up to , which are expected to occur only once in 1,000 years on average.

Lighting

The Sky Tower features prominently on the Auckland skyline at night due to its extensive illumination and SkyCity uses this lighting of the tower to promote various causes using a number of colours or mix of colours. A few examples are:

Energy efficient lighting

Over the week ending 29 May 2009 the previous metal halide floodlights, which had been used since the Sky Tower's construction in 1997, were replaced with LED lights to reduce energy usage. The project began in October 2007. The previous lights were difficult to modify, repair or change colours due to the building's height.blogspan. Accessed 4 July 2009) The new lighting system produces more lumens per watt and uses 66% less energy compared to the previous floodlights, with a longer working life. They also produce less heat, remaining cooler. The LEDs can produce millions of different colours and be controlled from a laptop, compared to the previous method of manually installing filters to change light colours. On this day a rainbow display was shown to the public at night, after the LED lights were successfully trialled the night before.skycityentertainmentgroup.html (29 May 2009 Media Release - Skycity Entertainment Group. Accessed 4 July 2009)

Energy conservation initiatives

During the winter months, electricity consumption in New Zealand increases dramatically. As much of the power reserve in the country depends on the water level of the hydro-lakes, various power-saving schemes are  introduced to prevent blackouts. In an effort to promote power saving, SkyCity turned off the tower lighting in Winter 2008, retaining only the flashing red aviation lights. SkyCity is also minimising façade flood lighting across its complex. Simon Jamieson, General Manager SKYCITY Auckland Hotels Group, said: "Like every New Zealander, we are concerned about the country's electricity supply, and we believe it is our responsibility to make this move to assist with the power saving request."SKYCITY Auckland switches off the Sky Tower (from a SKYCITY Entertainment Group Limited press release. 10/06/2008. Accessed 2008-09-14.) The tower was reilluminated on 4 August in support of New Zealand athletes competing at the Beijing Olympics. 04/08/2008. Accessed 2008-09-14.)
The SkyTower also use wall lights for different events, for example, they had a LED Santa on the 2007 Christmas.








