[[Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky International Airport]]

CATEGORIES: Airports in Kentucky, Airports established in 1944, Buildings and structures in Boone County, Kentucky, Transportation in Cincinnati, Ohio, Airfields of the United States Army Air Forces in Kentucky, Airfields of the United States Army Air Forces Technical Service Command

Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky International Airport  It is the busiest airport in Kentucky.

History

President Franklin D. Roosevelt approved preliminary funds for site development of the Greater Cincinnati Airport February 11, 1942. This was part of the Army Air Corps program to establish training facilities during World War II. At the time, air traffic in the area centered around Lunken Airport just southeast of central Cincinnati.
A coalition of officials from Boone, Kenton and Campbell Counties in Kentucky took advantage of Cincinnati's short-sightedness and lobbied Congress to build an airfield there.wordpress. In October 1942, Congress provided $2 million to construct four runways.
The field officially opened August 12, 1944, with the first B-17 bombers beginning practice runs on August 15. As the tide of the war had already turned, the Air Corps only used the field until 1945 before it was declared surplus. On October 27, 1946, a small wooden terminal building opened and the airport prepared for commercial service.
The first airplane, an American Airlines DC-3 from Cleveland, Ohio, landed at the airport January 10, 1947, at 9:53 am. A Delta Air Lines flight followed moments later. runways at 45-degree angles, the north–south runway eventually being extended into today's runway 18C/36C.

Jet age

On December 16, 1960, the jet age arrived in Cincinnati when a Delta Air Lines Convair 880 from Miami completed the first scheduled jet flight. The airport needed to expand and build more modern terminals and other facilities; the original Terminal A was expanded and renovated. The north–south runway was extended  and provide nine gates for TWA, American, and Delta. A new east–west runway crossing the longer north–south runway was constructed in 1971 south of the older east–west runway. In the mid-1980s, Delta created a hub in Cincinnati and constructed Terminal 3 with its three midfield concourses. This hub eventually grew to be Delta's second largest, handling over 600 Delta and Delta Connection flights in 2005.

Delta hub cuts

In 2008, Delta merged with Northwest Airlines and cut flight capacity from the Cincinnati hub by 22 percent with an additional 17 percent reduction in 2009. In June 2011, Delta announced that it would cut another 10% of the CVG hub capacity that summer, offering between 145–165 daily flights.

Comair ends service

In July 2012, Delta announced their wholly owned and CVG-based subsidiary, Comair, would cease all operations by October of the same year. However, it said "the discontinuation of Comair's operations will not result in any significant changes to Delta's network, which has enough flexibility to accommodate these changes". Comair is now defunct, leaving all Delta Connection flights operated exclusively by third party regional carriers.

Facilities

The airport's terminal/remote-concourse configuration, combined with simultaneous triple landing/takeoff capabilities, makes CVG a particularly efficient airport for flight operations. CVG is the smallest domestic hub of Delta Air Lines, and was the central hub of Delta's wholly owned subsidiary airline, Comair, which provided regional jet service under the Delta Connection banner.  As such, the airport serves an important role in Delta's Midwest hub-and-spoke system. In recent years, Delta Air Lines has considerably pared the number of flights out of the Cincinnati hub and in August 2008 announced it would be moving all of its Comair flights to Concourses A and B and closed all operations in Concourse C in January 2009.  In February 2010, Delta announced it would close Concourse A in May and further consolidate operations in the remaining concourse.
The airport has three terminals, though only one in use. Since January 2007, Terminal 1 houses only airport administrative offices. It is the original terminal and was built in 1960 and renovated in 1974. Designed by Heery & Heery, Terminals 2 and 3 were built in 1974 when additional expansion necessitated more gates.  Concourses B and C were completed in December 1994 as part of a $500 million expansion designed by Thompson, Hancock, Witte & Associates.  Concourse C was reachable only by shuttle bus.  Concourse B is served by Delta and its regional affiliates. Terminal 3 houses the airport's only US Customs and Border Protection facilities in Concourse B. All international arrivals except, U.S. border preclearance are processed in the Mezzanine Level of Concourse B.
Concourse B in Terminal 3 is well known for its open spaces, high ceilings, large windows with views of the airfield, and natural lighting during the day. All Delta and Delta Connection flights operate from Concourse B.
In May 2012, Terminal 2 was officially closed and all non-Delta operations were consolidated in a newly renovated Concourse A. The renovation was in response to civic and business leader's concerns about the loss of flights to and from the airport. Terminal 2 will be demolished at a date that has not been set yet.
The airport currently operates four paved runways:

Employment

In addition to hundreds of ground staff employees, Delta has a flight attendant base and a pilot base for the McDonnell Douglas MD-88, and Boeing 737–800. In total, over 1,000 people are employed at Cincinnati Northern Kentucky International Airport.

SkyClub

Delta operates one SkyClub in Concourse B and also operated a Business Elite lounge near Gate B14 until summer of 2008. Delta formerly operated a SkyClub in Concourse A. Though the lounge was closed, the furniture and space are now used as a lounge for pilots.

Main Terminal (formerly called Terminal 3)

Concourse A

Operated by Delta Air Lines until 2010, Concourse A underwent an extensive renovation before re-opening on May 15, 2012, to serve passengers on Air Canada, Allegiant Airlines, American Airlines, Frontier Airlines, United Airlines, and US Airways, most of which formerly used Terminal 2, which is now closed. As such, ticketing, security screening and baggage claim for all airlines now take place in the newly renamed Main Terminal (Terminal 3).cvgairport.html

Concourse B

Concourse B is, like all concourses of Terminal 3, designed and originally purposed for Delta and its affiliates, including Cincinnati based Delta subsidiary, Comair. The concourse now houses all Delta and Delta Connection flights with a total of 39 gates. Also, U.S. Customs and Border Protection are contained in Concourse B.

Concourse C

Concourse C, which once housed all Delta Connection flights, opened in September 1994 Concourse C is an island and was only accessible by passengers from other terminals and ticketing facilities via buses. Delta has a lease on the concourse until 2025.

Security Checkpoint

The main terminal security checkpoint is on the ticketing level. This new, expandable checkpoint opened in November 2009. After clearing security, passengers can take escalators or elevators down to the Cincinnati Airport People Mover that departs to all gates. Arriving passengers exit the terminal by elevator or escalator up to the baggage claim level and ground transportation.

Airlines and destinations

Top destinations

Cargo carriers and destinations

Other facilities

Delta Private Jets is headquartered on the grounds of the airport.
Comair has its headquarters in the Comair General Office Building, at 82 Comair Boulevard."Recruiting Events:" Comair. "Most career events are conducted at the Comair General Office Building (82 Comair Boulevard, Erlanger, Ky.) ..."
77 Comair Boulevard formerly served as the corporate headquarters of Comair."CVG board approves lease deal for Southern Air." Business Courier. Tuesday July 17, 2012. The building, with  of space in 77 Comair Boulevard. For the first period, the rent would be $9.95 per square foot. This would increase to $12 per square foot for the second period and $15 per square foot for the third period. The airport plans to spend $500,000 in capital improvements on 77 Comair Boulevard.

Ground transportation

TANK provides bus service from the airport to Downtown Cincinnati via Route 2X. Car rental services are provided by Alamo, Avis, Budget, Dollar, Enterprise, Hertz, National and Thrifty. The Main Terminal has Short Term Parking Garages. The Short Term Parking areas are designated by fruit names: Level 1- Orange, Level 2- Lemon, Level 3- Lime, Level 4- Cherry, and Level 5- Grape. Long Term Parking is remote from the terminal, so passengers must use a shuttle bus between the terminals and Long Term Parking lot.

Based aircraft

Jet Aircraft – 9
Single Engine – 2
Multi-Engine – 2
Total – 9
(Data as of 2009)

Other

Statistics

Pricing

CVG consistently ranks among the most expensive major airports in the United States. Delta maintains that its pricing is reasonable, considering the increased connectivity and non-stop flights that a hub airport offers a market the size of Cincinnati.
According to a study commissioned by CVG, 18% of Cincinnati-area residents use one of five nearby airports – Dayton, Louisville, Port Columbus, Indianapolis, or Blue Grass (Lexington) – instead of CVG because passengers can find fares up to 50% lower at these nearby airports.
In a bid to boost local ridership and make CVG more competitive with surrounding airports, Delta Air Lines announced a large-scale fare reduction on February 6, 2009.

Industrial murals

The airport is home to 14 large Art Deco murals created for the train concourse building at Cincinnati Union Terminal during the station's construction in 1932. Mosaic murals depicting people at work in local Cincinnati workplaces were incorporated into the interior design of the railroad station by Winold Reiss, a German-born artist with a reputation in interior design.
When the train concourse building was designated for demolition in 1972, a "Save the Terminal Committee" raised funds to remove and transport the 14 murals in the concourse to new locations in the Airport. They were placed in Terminal 1, and in Terminals 2 and 3, which were then being constructed as part of a major airport expansion and renovation.
The murals were also featured in a scene in the film Rain Man starring Dustin Hoffman and Tom Cruise. In addition, a walkway to one of the terminals at CVG was featured in the scene in the film when Hoffman's character, Raymond, refused to fly on a plane.

Incidents and accidents








