[[Burmese alphabet]]

CATEGORIES: Brahmic scripts, Burmese script, Writing systems without word boundaries, Burmese language

The Burmese script () is an abugida in the Brahmic family, used for writing Burmese.  It is an adaptation of the Old Mon scriptHarvey (1925): 307 or the Pyu script.  In recent decades, other alphabets using the Mon script, including Shan and Mon itself, have been restructured according to the standard of the now-dominant Burmese alphabet.  Besides the Burmese language, the Burmese alphabet is also used for the liturgical languages of Pali and Sanskrit.
The characters are rounded in appearance because the traditional palm leaves used for writing on with a stylus would have been ripped by straight lines.
The earliest evidence of the Burmese alphabet is dated to 1035, while a casting made in the 18th century of an old stone inscription points to 984. The alphabet has undergone considerable modification to suit the evolving phonology of the Burmese language. 
There are several systems of transliteration into the Latin alphabet; for this article, the MLC Transcription System is used.

Alphabet

Arrangement

As with other Brahmic scripts, the Burmese alphabet is arranged into groups of five letters for stop consonants called wek (, lit. "without group"), as they are not arranged in any particular pattern.

Letters

A syllable onset is the consonant or consonant cluster that appears before the vowel of a syllable. The Burmese script has 33 letters to indicate the initial consonant of a syllable and four diacritics to indicate additional consonants in the onset. Like other abugidas, including the other members of the Brahmic family, vowels are indicated in Burmese script by diacritics, which are placed above, below, before or after the consonant character. A consonant letter with no vowel diacritic has the inherent vowel  when another syllable follows in the same word).
The following table provides the letter, the syllable onset in IPA, and the way the letter is referred to in Burmese, which may be either a descriptive name or just the sound of the letter, arranged in the traditional order:
Consonant letters may be modified by one or more medial diacritics (three at most), indicating an additional consonant before the vowel. These diacritics are:
A few Burmese dialects use an extra diacritic to indicate the /l/ medial, which has merged to /y/ in standard Burmese:
All the possible diacritic combinations are listed below:

Syllable rhymes

Syllable rhymes (i.e. vowels and any consonants that may follow them within the same syllable) are indicated in Burmese by a combination of diacritic marks and consonant letters marked with the virama character ), which means nonexistence (see Sat (Sanskrit)).

Diacritics and symbols

One or more of these accents can be added to a consonant to change its sound. In addition, other modifying symbols are used to differentiate tone and sound, but are not considered diacritics.

History

La hswe ( combination, introduced in 1638. The standard tone markings found in modern Burmese can be traced to the 19th century.

Stacked consonants

Certain sequences of consonants are written one atop the other, or stacked.  A pair of stacked consonants indicates that no vowel is pronounced between them, as for example the m-bh in . (Consonants not found in a row beginning with k, c, t, or p can only be doubled – that is, stacked with themselves.) 
When stacked, the first consonant (the final of the preceding syllable, in this case m) is written as usual, while the second consonant (the onset of the following syllable, in this case bh) is subscripted beneath it. 
Stacked consonants are mostly confined to loan words from languages like Pali, Sanskrit, and occasionally English. For instance, the Burmese word for "paper" (a Pali loan) is spelt .

Digits

A decimal numbering system is used, and numbers are written in the same order as Hindu-Arabic numerals.
The digits from zero to nine are: . Separators, such as commas, are not used to group numbers.

Punctuation

There are two primary break characters in Burmese, drawn as one or two downward strokes: ), which respectively act as a comma and a full stop . Other abbreviations used in literary Burmese are:

Unicode

Mon/Burmese script was added to the Unicode Standard in September, 1999 with the release of version 3.0.  It was extended in October, 2009 with the release of version 5.2.
Until 2005, most Burmese language websites used an image-based dynamically generated method to display Burmese characters, often in GIF or JPEG. At the end of 2005, the Burmese NLP Research Lab announced a Myanmar OpenType font named Myanmar1. This font contains not only Unicode code points and glyphs but also the OpenType Layout (OTL) logic and rules. Their research center is based in Myanmar ICT Park, Yangon. Padauk, which was produced by SIL International, is Unicode compliant. Initially, it required a Graphite engine, though now OpenType tables for Windows are in the current version of this font. Since the release of the Unicode 5.1 Standard on 4 April 2008, three Unicode 5.1 compliant fonts have been available under public license, including Myanmar3, Padauk and Parabaik.ORG Developer site
Many Burmese font makers have created Burmese fonts including Win Innwa, CE Font, Myazedi, Zawgyi, Ponnya, Mandalay. It is important to note that these Burmese fonts are not Unicode compliant, because they use unallocated code points (including those for the Latin script) in the Burmese block to manually deal with shaping that would normally be done by the Uniscribe engine and they are not yet supported by Microsoft and other major software vendors. However, there are few Burmese language websites that have switched to Unicode rendering, with many websites continuing to use a pseudo-Unicode font called Zawgyi (which uses codepoints allocated for minority languages and does not intelligently render diacritics, such as the size of ya-yit) or the GIF/JPG display method.

Burmese Support in Microsoft Windows 8

The Microsoft Windows 8 operating system includes a Unicode-compliant Burmese font named "Myanmar Text".  Windows 8 also includes a Burmese keyboard layout.  To install this keyboard layout, open Desktop, then Control Panel, then open the "Language" control panel.  Click "Add language".  Type "Burmese" into the search box in the upper-right (if you skip this step, Burmese fails to appear in the language list).  After using the search box, Burmese appears and you can double-click it to choose it.



Notes



url= | accessdate=2012-07-24}}



Fonts supporting Burmese characters


