[[Barrow's Goldeneye]]

CATEGORIES: Bucephala, Ducks, Birds of Europe, Birds of Iceland, Birds of Greenland, Birds of North America, Native birds of Western Canada, Native birds of Alaska, Native birds of the Northwestern United States

Barrow's Goldeneye (Bucephala islandica) is a medium-sized sea duck of the genus Bucephala, the goldeneyes. This bird was named after Sir John Barrow.
Adults are similar in appearance to the Common Goldeneye. Adult males have a dark head with a purplish gloss and a white crescent at the front of the face. Adult females have a mostly yellow bill. The male Barrow's Goldeneye differs from the male common goldeneye in the fact that the common goldeneye has a round white patches on the face, less black on the back of the bird, and a larger bill. For the females, the common goldeneye has a less rounded head, and a bill in which only the tip is yellow. (n.d.) Barrow's goldeneye. All About Birds. 
Their breeding habitat is wooded lakes and ponds primarily in northwestern North America but also in scattered locations in eastern Canada and Iceland. Females return to the same breeding sites year after year and also tend to use the same nesting sites. the males stay with their mate through the winter and defend their territory during the breeding season, then leave for molting site. Mating pairs often staying intact even though the make and female are apart for long periods of time over the summer during molting times. The pair then reunites at wintering areas. L. (1985). Evidence of long-term pair bonds in barrow's goldeneye (bucephala islandica). The Auk, 102(2), 389-391
In Icelandic the bird is known as húsönd (house-duck); it is a common species of the Lake Mývatn in the north of the country.
They are migratory and most winter in protected coastal waters or open inland waters. In winter, they migrate to the coast. Barrow's Goldeneye, along with many other species of sea ducks, rely on urbanized, coastal estuaries as important places on their migration patterns. These estuaries provide excellent wintering and stopping places during the ducks migration. (2014) Resource selection and space use by sea ducks during the non-breeding season: Implications for habitat conservation planning in urbanized estuaries. Biological Conservation. 169. 68-78 It is an extremely rare vagrant to western Europe and to southern North America.
These diving birds forage underwater. They eat aquatic insects, crustaceans and pond vegetation. The main staples of the bird's diet are Gammarus oceanicus and Calliopus laeviusculus which are both marine crustaceans. A large part of their diet also consists of mussels and gastropods. (2007). Distribution, diet and dive behavior of barrow's and common goldeneyes during spring and autumn in the st. lawrence estuary. Waterbirds: The International Journal of Waterbird Biology, 30(2), 230-240.   
The Barrow's Goldeneye is considered an arboreal bird species due to the fact that much of its nesting is done in cavities found in mature trees. The birds will also nest in burrows or protected sites on the ground. Selected birds of the boreal forests of north america barrow's goldeneye.  Barrow's Goldeneye tend to be territorial towards other birds venturing into their domain. this is especially true among the drakes. Confrontations may occur in the form a fighting. Drakes often do a form of territorial display along the boundaries of their territory. This is both true for on land and in the water. These territorial displays average about 6 minutes in length and often trigger other males to perform their own show. L. (1984). Territorial behaviour of common goldeneye, barrow's goldeneye and bufflehead in areas of sympatry. Ornis Scandinavia, 15(4), 211-216.
Very little is known about the breeding sites and patterns of the Barrow's Goldeneye. After the breeding season, the birds migrate to specific molting sites to undergo molting, the loss and regeneration of feathers which causes them to be flightless for anywhere from 20-40 days. These molting sites are often wetlands that are more drought resistant and plentiful in food, along with being less influenced by humans and predators. (2011). Discovery of important post breeding sites for barrow's goldeneye in the boreal transition zone o alberta. Waterbirds, 34(3), 261-268
The Barrow's Goldeneye was greatly affected by the Exxon Valdez oil spill in 1989. The spill greatly impacted the bird's wintering areas, and numbers of the birds in these areas decreased after the spill. The birds exposure to the oil spill mainly occurred in the shallow water mussel beds along the coast. H. (2003). Long-term ecosystem response to exxon valdez oil spill. Science, 302(5653), 2082-2086
The Barrow's Goldeneye is a relatively quiet birds that generally only makes vocalizations during the breeding season and courtship. these can include low volume squeaks, grunts and croaks. During flights the fast movement of the birds wings creates a low whistling sound. (n.d.). Barrow's goldeneye. About. 
Average Weight: Male 2.13 lbs., Female 1.31 lbs.
Average Length: Male 19.2", Female 17"Ducks Unlimited. (n.d.) Barrow's goldeneye. 		goldeneye#ad-image-0

Gallery

Image:Barrow's Goldeneyes.jpg|Rideau River, Ottawa
Image:Barrow's Goldeneye RWD3.jpg|male
Image:Barrow's Goldeneye RWD2.jpg|male
Image:Barrow's Goldeneye RWD1.jpg|female






