[[Epic Records]]

CATEGORIES: American record labels, Epic Records, Rhythm and blues record labels, Jazz record labels, Record labels established in 1953, Sony Music Entertainment, IFPI members

Epic Records is an American record label owned by Sony Music Entertainment. Originally conceived as a jazz imprint in 1953, it has since expanded to represent various genres. Today, the company is one of three main flagship labels for Sony Music, with the other two being Columbia Records and RCA Records.

History

Beginnings

Epic Records was launched in 1953 by CBS Records for the purpose of marketing jazz, pop and classical music that did not fit the theme of its more mainstream Columbia Records label. Initial classical music releases were from Philips Records which distributed Columbia product in EuropeBillboard - Google Books. Books.com (1953-09-19). Retrieved on 2013-07-16.  Pop talent on co-owned Okeh Records were transferred to Epic which made Okeh a rhythm and blues label. Epic's bright-yellow, black, and blue logo became a familiar trademark for many jazz and classical releases.  This has included such notables as the Berlin Philharmonic, Charles Rosen, the Juilliard String Quartet, Antal Doráti conducting the Hague Philharmonic and George Szell conducting the Cleveland Orchestra.

Expansion of genres and mainstream success

By 1960, the label's musical base had been expanded to include all genres.  This was done in part to prevent the roster of Columbia Records (which, at the time, had a reputation for releasing material by more established acts) from being overstuffed with newer artists.  Subsequently, Epic became better known for its signing of newer, fledgling acts.  By the end of the 1960s, Epic earned its first gold records and had evolved into a formidable hit-making force in rock and roll, R&B and country music.  Among its many acts, it included Roy Hamilton, Bobby Vinton, The Dave Clark Five, The Hollies, Tammy Wynette, Donovan, The Yardbirds, Lulu, July, Helen Shapiro and Jeff Beck.  Several of the British artists on the Epic roster during the 1960s were the result of CBS's Epic/Okeh units' international distribution deal with EMI; Epic recordings were issued by EMI on the Columbia label.
Also during the 1960s, Epic oversaw the smaller subsidiary CBS labels including: Okeh Records and Date Records. In 1968, the Epic imprint was added in the UK and distributed by CBS after the distribution deal with EMI expired that year.
Epic's commercial success continued to grow in the 1970s with releases from ABBA in the UK, Boston, Cheap Trick, The Clash, Charlie Daniels, Gabriel, Heart, Heatwave, The Isley Brothers, The Jacksons, George Jones, Labelle, Meat Loaf, Johnny Nash, Ted Nugent, REO Speedwagon, Minnie Riperton, Pegasus, Charlie Rich, Sly & the Family Stone, Steve Vai, and Edgar Winter.  Also contributing to the labels success was its distribution of Philadelphia International Records, which produced additional hit records by acts such as The Three Degrees and McFadden and Whitehead.
Its 1980s and 1990s mainstream success were fueled by its signing and releasing of albums by notable acts such as Michael Jackson, Shakin' Stevens, Culture Club, Gloria Estefan and the Miami Sound Machine, Adam Ant, Living Colour, Prong, Dead or Alive, Europe, Cyndi Lauper, Ozzy Osbourne, Pearl Jam, Sade, Luther Vandross, Stevie Ray Vaughan, and Céline Dion among others. The label's greatest pay-dirt achievement came with the release Thriller, the 1982 album by Michael Jackson, which went on to achieve approximately 51-65 million million in worldwide sales, becoming the biggest selling album in history.archive.guinnessworldrecords.asp?recordid=50890
More recently, other successful acts on the label have included Anastacia, Lana del Rey, Jennifer Lopez, The Fray, Shakira, Korn, Fiona Apple, Ozzy Osbourne, Nate Storm, Modest Mouse, Chevelle, JLS, Mandy Moore, and Rage Against the Machine.

1980s-2000s

Sony bought CBS Records in 1987, and the company was renamed Sony Music in 1991. In 2004, Sony merged with another powerhouse music distributor, BMG, bringing labels such as RCA, Arista, Columbia, Epic, Jive, and many others under one parent company, Sony BMG. In February 2009, singer/songwriter Amanda Ghost was appointed president of Epic Records.  Later in the year, Sony BMG Music (during a reconsolidation of labels) merged Epic and Columbia's operations, and subsequently formed the Columbia/Epic Label Group — but both labels continue to operate as separate brands. Sony BMG's Legacy Recordings reissues the company's classic and catalog titles.
In addition, in the 1990s, European operations of Sony Music was integrated into two separate labels, Epic and Columbia. It was followed by Australian and New Zealand operation of Sony Music in 1997.
The Japanese operation is called Epic Records Japan Inc..

2010s: Epic under L.A. Reid and Sylvia Rhone

In July 2011, L.A. Reid became the CEO of the Epic Records which also includes various former Jive Records artists. Epic also signs the winners of The X Factor.'X Factor' Has Glitzy Premiere, Complete With Simon-Paula Bickering. Billboard (2011-09-15). Retrieved on 2013-07-16.
It was confirmed in February 2012 that Sylvia Rhone, former president of Universal Motown, would be launching a new record label through Epic Records.It's Official: Sylvia Rhone to Run New Label Through Epic
As of April 2014, Epic Records was home to 51 artists.Artists
L.A. Reid was reportedly interested into signing Macklemore and Ryan Lewis, but both turned down Epic, saying that they were happy releasing material independently.billboard.com/articles/columns/the-juice/474314/is-la-reid-looking-to-sign-macklemore-to-epic-records
On March 18, 2014, it was reported that Sylvia Rhone would be president of Epic Records accompanying CEO L.A. Reid. Rhone was formerly CEO of Universal Motown Records until 2011.

Imprint labels

The following is a list of labels Epic Records has distributed:

Current

Former

Epic Records artists

Current artists

Logos in use

Image:Epicrecords. Still used on Japanese operations. This logo was used on Pearl Jam's Vitalogy in 1994, No Code in 1996 and Yield in February 1998.
Image:Epicrecords-logo.
Image:Epic Records logo 1991.
Image:Epic Records 2011.svg|Red print logo, used from 2012 to present








