[[Minneapolis–Saint Paul International Airport]]

CATEGORIES: Airports in Minnesota, Facilities of the United States Air National Guard, Transportation in Hennepin County, Minnesota, Airfields of the United States Army Air Forces Air Transport Command in North America, Airfields of the United States Army Air Forces in Minnesota, Buildings and structures in Hennepin County, Minnesota

Minneapolis–Saint Paul International Airport  within ten miles (16 km) of both downtown Minneapolis and downtown Saint Paul, it is the largest and busiest airport in the six-state upper Midwest region of Minnesota, Iowa, Nebraska, North Dakota, South Dakota, and Wisconsin.



In terms of passengers, Minneapolis–Saint Paul International Airport is the 17th busiest airport in the United States (2012) and 41st busiest airport in the world in 2012. A joint civil-military airport, MSP is also home to the Minneapolis–Saint Paul International Airport Joint Air Reserve Station, supporting both Air Force Reserve Command and Air National Guard flight operations. Airlines out of Minneapolis–Saint Paul International Airport serve 135 nonstop markets from MSP, including 120 domestic and 15 international markets. Compared to other large metropolitan areas in the United States, only Atlanta and Denver serve more non-stop markets per capita.
The airport, including both passenger terminal buildings, is mostly located in the Census-designated place of Fort Snelling in an unincorporated part of Hennepin County. Small sections of the airport are within the city limits of Minneapolis. The airport is across the Mississippi River from St. Paul. The terminal exits of the airport are minutes away from Mall of America; careful flight pattern planning ensures that aircraft never fly over the mall at low altitude.
It is the third-largest hub airport for Delta Air Lines and Delta Connection partners Compass Airlines and Endeavor Air (with Compass and Endeavor having their headquarters nearby). It also serves as the home airport for Sun Country Airlines. Champion Air was based at the Minneapolis–Saint Paul International Airport until the airline ceased operations in May 2008. Northwest Airlines was based near the airport until its 2010 merger with Delta Air Lines and Delta Connection partner Mesaba Airlines was also headquartered nearby until December 2011 as it completed its merger with Pinnacle Airlines. Delta Air Lines accounts for more than 80% of the airport's passenger traffic. The airport is operated by the Metropolitan Airports Commission, which also handles operation of six smaller airports in the region.
Pinnacle Airlines relocated its headquarters from Memphis International Airport to Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport in May 2013 and has renamed itself Endeavor Air
The airport's police department is recognized as having one of the best trained K-9 units in the United States. At a national competition in 2013, two MSP Airport Police dogs, "Ollie" and "Lana", took first and second place in explosives detection.

History

The airport came into being when several local groups came together to take control of the former bankrupt Twin City Speedway race track, giving the airport its original name, Speedway Field. Soon after, in 1921, the airport was renamed "Wold–Chamberlain Field" for the World War I pilots Ernest Groves Wold and Cyrus Foss Chamberlain. Howard Hughes briefly stopped at Wold–Chamberlain Field on his round the world flight in 1938. In 1944 the site was renamed to "Minneapolis–St. Paul Metropolitan Airport/Wold-Chamberlain Field", with "International" replacing "Metropolitan" four years later. Today it is rare to see the Wold–Chamberlain portion of the name used anywhere.
MSP was the main base for Northwest Airlines starting in 1926 and became the main base of regional carrier North Central Airlines in 1952. North Central merged with Southern Airways to form Republic Airlines in 1979; Republic then merged with Northwest in 1986. The combined carrier came to control 79% of traffic at the airport, and merged into Delta Air Lines in 2010.
Due in part to the impact of aircraft noise on south Minneapolis and surrounding suburbs, Northwest Airlines and others had proposed moving out of MSP and building a new airport on the fringes of the Twin Cities metro area to handle more large jets and more international traffic. Minneapolis and other neighboring cities were concerned that such a move would have a negative economic impact, so an arrangement was made where the Metropolitan Airports Commission would outfit many homes in the vicinity of the airport with sound insulation and air conditioning so that indoor noise could be reduced. A citizen group named ROAR (Residents Opposed to Airport Racket) was created in 1998 and helped push the MAC to make these concessions. Later, in 2004, the MAC voted to reduce funding for the soundproofing projects, stating in part that the economic climate had turned in the wake of the September 11, 2001 attacks. Minneapolis Mayor R. T. Rybak, who had been a founding member of ROAR, promised that the city would challenge the funding changes.
Ground was broken for the current Charles Lindbergh terminal building on October 26, 1958. Piers A and D (formerly the Green and Gold Concourses, now Concourse C and Concourse G respectively) were built as an expansion of the terminal designed by Cerny Associates in 1970. This project also involved rebuilding the existing concourses into bi-level structures equipped with holding rooms and jet bridges. It handles all international flights and airlines such as Delta, United, and others. The Gold Concourse was expanded in 1986 and included the airport's first moving walkway.
The 1970 disaster film Airport was partially filmed at MSP, filling in for a fictional Lincoln airport. It was followed by several sequels and was a prototype for many disaster films that followed. The airport used colors as the method for naming different concourses for many years, a convention that was duplicated in the movie.
Starting in 2000, MSP switched to lettered concourses, which has become standard practice at airports around the world. The color names still survive as the names for the Lindbergh Terminal parking ramp wings.
The Hubert H. Humphrey Terminal was built in 2001. It is used mostly for charter airlines and low cost carriers, including Sun Country, AirTran, and Southwest.
Concourses A and B opened on June 1, 2002 as part of a $250 million terminal expansion designed by Minneapolis-based Architectural Alliance.
Icelandair started service to Minneapolis-St. Paul from Reykjavik in 1998. Northwest operated flights from Minneapolis-St. Paul to Hong Kong and Osaka in 1998 using 747-400 aircraft, but were dropped in the same year. Northwest also operated Minneapolis-St. Paul to Oslo and Frankfurt service using DC-10 aircraft, but they too were dropped. From the early 1990s and to 2000s (decade), KLM operated 747 and MD-11 service from Amsterdam to Minneapolis-St. Paul. In part because of the Delta/KLM joint venture, KLM has not served Minneapolis-St. Paul with its own aircraft since 2004. Beginning in the summer of 2013 Air France commenced non-stop seasonal flights from Paris Charles de Gaulle International Airport to Minneapolis-St. Paul using Airbus A340-300 aircraft. The service will resume in the summer of 2014. Condor Airlines will also begin non-stop seasonal service to Minneapolis-St. Paul from Frankfurt in the summer of 2014. At one time Swiss International Airlines offered non-stop flights to Zurich.
By May 2012 Great Lakes Airlines was adding services to small communities that had been ended by the legacy carriers earlier in the airport's history. Hub status was removed February 1, 2014 due to the lack of qualified pilots.

Description

Minneapolis–Saint Paul International Airport has two terminals, both of which were named for famous Minnesotans: the Lindbergh Terminal 1 (named after the aviator Charles Lindbergh) and the smaller Humphrey Terminal 2 (named for former US Vice President Hubert Humphrey). Lindbergh Terminal 1 officially has seven concourses, lettered A–G, with the Humphrey Terminal 2 labeled as Concourse H. The old Humphrey Terminal 2, built in 1986, was rebuilt in 2001 to expand capacity and give passengers a more seamless experience.
Like many other airports, MSP interconnects with several other forms of transportation. Several large parking ramps are available for cars. Most other connections are made at the Hub Building and adjacent Transit Center, which has city and shuttle bus, taxi, light-rail, and rental car service. Two trams (people movers) are at the airport. One carries passengers from the main section of Lindbergh Terminal 1 to the Hub Building, and another runs along Concourse C in that terminal.
The airport is near Fort Snelling, the site of one of the earliest United States government settlements in the area. Both the Mississippi and Minnesota rivers flow nearby. Minnesota State Highway 5 provides the closest entrance to the Lindbergh Terminal 1, just a short distance from Interstate 494. The Humphrey Terminal 2 is accessed via the 34th Avenue exit from I-494, which runs past Fort Snelling National Cemetery. Delta Air Lines has hangars arranged along I-494 and 34th Avenue, so it's possible to see airliners undergoing maintenance while driving past.
The METRO light rail Blue Line
The airport has three airline lounges, all located in the Lindbergh Terminal 1: two Delta Air Lines Sky Clubs (one in the Airport Mall and another in Concourse C) and one United Airlines United Club in Concourse E.

MSP by the numbers

MSP 2020 Vision

In 2004, Northwest Airlines, which is now Delta Air Lines, proposed expanding the Lindbergh Terminal 1 to accommodate growing flight operations in a plan known as the MSP 2020 Vision. The proposed expansion included moving all airlines other than Northwest and its SkyTeam alliance partners to the Humphrey Terminal 2. This caused increased concern about Northwest Airlines' control of the Minneapolis–St. Paul commercial air service market with some claiming that Northwest was using its market position to inflate airfares. While AirTran Airways voiced opposition to the plan, American Airlines and United Airlines remained neutral on the move since both had exclusive terminals at their own main hubs. Despite the merger between Northwest and Delta Air Lines, Delta still plans to carry out the expansions. In May 2005, the MAC approved the plan with the following conditions:
In September 2012, MAC released a draft of the MSP 2020 Vision, expanding both the terminals to meet growing flights operations. The estimated $1.5 billion plan will include:

Airlines and destinations

Top international destinations

Top domestic destinations

Airline stats

Terminal stats

Year by year stats

Airport stats

Cargo operations

Military facilities

The Minneapolis–Saint Paul International Airport Joint Air Reserve Station at MSP is home to the 934th Airlift Wing (934 AW), an Air Force Reserve Command (AFRC) unit, and the 133d Airlift Wing (133 AW) of the Minnesota Air National Guard. Both units fly the C-130 Hercules and are operationally-gained by the Air Mobility Command (AMC). The 934th consists of over 1,300 military personnel, of which approximately 250 are full-time Active Guard and Reserve (AGR) and Air Reserve Technician (ART) personnel. The 133rd is similarly manned, making for a total military presence of over 2,600 full-time and part-time personnel.
The 934 AW serves as the "host" wing for the installation, which also includes lodging/billeting, officers club, Base Exchange (BX) and other morale, welfare and recreation (MWR) facilities for active, reserve/national guard and retired military personnel and their families.

Other buildings

Delta Air Lines Building C is located on the property of Minneapolis–St. Paul International Airport and in Fort Snelling. Metropolitan Airports Commission. Retrieved January 19, 2012. "Location: MSP Airport-Delta Building C, North Side near Compass Airlines Entrance"Fort Snelling UT, Hennepin county, Minnesota. (Archive) U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved December 19, 2009.
In 2009, as Northwest Airlines and Delta Air Lines merged, Delta removed all employees from Building A, the previous headquarters of Northwest in Eagan, and all employees who remained in Minneapolis were moved to Building C, which was renovated, and Building J.
Prior to its disestablishment, Republic Airlines (1979–1986) had its headquarters in Building C. Page 111. March 30, 1985. The Regional Elite Airline Services headquarters were in Building C.

Runways

Minneapolis–Saint Paul International Airport has four runways:
Runway 17/35 opened in October 2005. Prior to that time, a number of buildings (including several hangars and the City of Richfield's Rich Acres Golf Course) were demolished to make way for the runway protection zone of the new runway. Similarly, plans for expansion at Mall of America have been delayed by its construction. Aircraft approaching Runway 35 fly slightly east of the Mall of America, overfly Interstate 494, and land seconds later. Due to noise concerns from south Minneapolis, between 13 August 2007 and 18 October 2007, Runway 17/35 was used regularly during construction on Runway 12R/30L.

Links






