[[Jacques Barzun]]

CATEGORIES: 1907 births, 20th-century philosophers, 21st-century philosophers, American centenarians, American philosophers, American historians, Members of the American Academy of Arts and Letters, Chevaliers of the Légion d'honneur, Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients, Guggenheim Fellows, Columbia University alumni, Columbia University faculty, Edgar Award winners, French centenarians, Fellows of Churchill College, Cambridge, Fellows of the Royal Society of Literature, National Humanities Medal recipients, Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, French emigrants to the United States, 2012 deaths

Jacques Martin Barzun (November 30, 1907 He wrote on a range of topics as broad as baseball and classical music, but is perhaps best known as a philosopher of education.
Barzun's Teacher in America (1945) was an important influence on post-WWII training of schoolteachers in the United States.  He published over 40 books, won the American Presidential Medal of Freedom, and was knighted into the French Legion of Honor. His New York Times best-selling magnum opus, From Dawn to Decadence: 500 Years of Western Cultural Life, 1500 to the Present, was published in 2000, when he was 93 years of age.

Life

Barzun was born in Créteil, France to Henri-Martin and Anna-Rose Barzun. He spent his childhood in Paris and Grenoble. His father was a member of the Abbaye de Créteil group of artists and writers and also worked in the French Ministry of Labor. His parents' Paris home was frequented by many "modernist" artists of belle epoque France, such as poet Guillaume Apollinaire, Cubist painters Albert Gleizes and Marcel Duchamp, composer Edgard Varèse, and writers Richard Aldington and Stefan Zweig. While on a diplomatic mission to the United States during the First World War, Barzun's father so liked what he saw that he decided that his son should have an American university education. Thus, Barzun was sent to the United States at age 12, first to attend a preparatory school, then Columbia University, where he obtained a broad liberal education.
As an undergraduate at Columbia College, Barzun was drama critic for the Columbia Daily Spectator, a prize-winning president of the Philolexian Society, the Columbia literary and debate club, and valedictorian of the class of 1927. From 1955 to 1968, he served as Dean of the Graduate School, Dean of Faculties, and Provost, while also being an Extraordinary Fellow of Churchill College at the University of Cambridge. From 1968 until his 1975 retirement, he was University Professor at Columbia. From 1951 to 1963 Barzun was one of the managing editors of The Readers' Subscription Book Club, and its successor the Mid-Century Book Society, (the other managing editors being W. H. Auden and Lionel Trilling), and afterwards was Literary Adviser to Charles Scribner's Sons, 1975 to 1993.
In 1936, Barzun married Mariana Lowell, a violinist from a  prominent Boston family. They had three children: James, Roger, and Isabel. He attended in a wheelchair and delivered a brief address to the crowd.
Barzun died peacefully at his home in San Antonio, Texas on October 25, 2012, aged 104.  The New York Times, which compared him with such scholars as Sidney Hook, Daniel Bell, and Lionel Trilling, called him a "distinguished historian, essayist, cultural gadfly and educator who helped establish the modern discipline of cultural history".

Career

Over seven decades, Barzun wrote and edited more than forty books touching on an unusually broad range of subjects, including science and medicine, psychiatry from Robert Burton through William James to modern methods, and art, and classical music; he was one of the all-time authorities on Hector Berlioz. Some of his books—particularly Teacher in America and The House of Intellect—enjoyed a substantial lay readership and influenced debate about culture and education far beyond the realm of academic history. Barzun had a strong interest in the tools and mechanics of writing and research. He undertook the task of completing, from a manuscript almost two-thirds of which was in first draft at the author's death, and editing (with the help of six other people), the first edition (published 1966) of Follett's Modern American Usage. Barzun was also the author of books on literary style (Simple and Direct, 1975), on the crafts of editing and publishing (On Writing, Editing, and Publishing, 1971), and on research methods in history and the other humanities (The Modern Researcher, which has seen at least six editions).
Barzun did not disdain popular culture: his varied interests included detective fiction and baseball. Barzun was also an advocate
of supernatural fiction, and wrote the introduction to The Penguin Encyclopedia of Horror and the Supernatural. [ref] "Author and teacher Jacques Barzun has written an authorative introduction". B. Williams, "A Complete Guide for all lovers
of horror" (Review of The Penguin Encyclopedia of Horror and the Supernatural. The Courier-Mail, January 31st, 1987. [/ref]  Barzun was a proponent of the theatre critic and diarist James Agate, whom he compared in stature to Samuel Pepys.  Barzun edited Agate's last two diaries into a new edition in 1951 and wrote an informative introductory essay, "Agate and His Nine Egos". Consisting of Ego 8 and Ego 9. Introduction and notes by Jacques Barzun, Jacques Barzun, Crown Publishers, Inc., New York, 1951.
Jacques Barzun continued to write on education and cultural history after retiring from Columbia. At 84 years of age, he began writing his swan song, to which he devoted the better part of the 1990s. The resulting book of more than 800 pages, From Dawn to Decadence: 500 Years of Western Cultural Life, 1500 to the Present, reveals a vast erudition and brilliance undimmed by advanced age. Historians, literary critics, and popular reviewers all lauded From Dawn to Decadence as a sweeping and powerful survey of modern Western history, and it became a New York Times bestseller. With this work he gained an international reputation. L'historien Jacques Barzun, auteur de "From dawn to decandence", est mort
Créé le 26-10-2012 à 07h10, 
The book introduces several novel typographic devices that aid an unusually rich system of cross-referencing and help keep many strands of thought in the book under organized control. Most pages feature a sidebar containing a pithy quotation, usually little known, and often surprising or humorous, from some author or historical figure. In 2007, Barzun commented that "Old age is like learning a new profession. And not one of your own choosing."Age of Reason by Arthur Krystal in The New Yorker, October 22, 2007, p. 103
In his philosophy of writing history, Barzun emphasized the role of storytelling over the use of academic jargon and detached analysis. He concluded in From Dawn to Decadence that "history cannot be a science; it is the very opposite, in that its interest resides in the particulars."From Dawn to Decadence, pp 654–656

Recognition

Barzun was appointed a Chevalier of the National Order of the Legion of Honour." The New Yorker, October 22, 2007 In 2003, he was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President George W. Bush.
On October 18, 2007, he received the 59th Great Teacher Award of the Society of Columbia Graduates in absentia.
On March 2, 2011, Barzun was awarded the 2010 National Humanities Medal by President Barack Obama, although he was not expected to be in attendance. On April 16, 2011, he received the Philolexian Award for Distinguished Literary Achievement in absentia.
The American Philosophical Society honors Barzun with its Jacques Barzun Prize in Cultural History, awarded annually since 1993 to the author of a recent distinguished work of cultural history. He also received the Gold Medal for Criticism from the American Academy of Arts and Letters, of which he was twice president.

Bibliography





Further reading




