[[Loch Lomond]]

CATEGORIES: Lochs of West Dunbartonshire, National Nature Reserves in Scotland, National Scenic Areas in Scotland, Ramsar sites in Scotland, Protected areas of West Dunbartonshire, Protected areas of Argyll and Bute, Protected areas of Stirling (council area), Freshwater lochs of Scotland, Scottish lochs with reported cryptids, Lochs of Argyll and Bute, Lochs of Stirling (council area), Highland Boundary Fault

Loch Lomond ( Loch Lomond is a popular leisure destination and is featured in song.

Geography

Loch Lomond is a freshwater loch lying on the Highland Boundary Fault, often considered the boundary between the lowlands of Central Scotland and the Highlands. It is . Of all lochs and lakes in Great Britain, it is the largest by surface area, and the second largest (after Loch Ness) by water volume."Scotland's Water Environment Review 2000-2006" SEPA. Retrieved 11 October 2008. Within the United Kingdom, it is surpassed only by Lough Neagh and Lower Lough Erne in Northern IrelandWhitaker's Almanack (1991) London. J. Whitaker and Sons. p. 127. and regarding the Isles as a whole there are also several larger loughs in the Republic of Ireland.
Traditionally a boundary between Stirlingshire and Dunbartonshire, Loch Lomond is currently split between the council areas of Stirling, Argyll and Bute, and West Dunbartonshire. Its southern shores are about  north of Glasgow, Scotland's largest city.
Loch Lomond is now part of Loch Lomond and the Trossachs National Park. Ben Lomond is on the eastern shore: 974 m (3,195 ft) in height and the most southerly of the Scottish Munro peaks. A 2005 poll of Radio Times readers voted Loch Lomond as the 6th greatest natural wonder in Britain."Caves win 'natural wonder' vote" BBC.co.
The main arterial route along the loch is the A82 road which runs the length of its western shore. For a long time this was a notorious bottleneck, with the route clogged with tourists during the summer months. It was upgraded in the 1980s and 1990s, although the stretch north of Tarbet remains unimproved.

Islands

The loch contains thirty or more other islands. depending on the water level. Several of them are large by the standards of British bodies of freshwater. Inchmurrin, for example, is the largest island in a body of freshwater in the British Isles. As in Loch Tay, several of the islands appear to be crannogs, artificial islands built in prehistoric periods.
English travel writer, H.V. Morton wrote:
One of the loch's islands, Inchconnachan, is home to a colony of wallabies.Scottish Daily Record, 06/06/2009 Colony of Wallabies set for cull

Leisure activities

The Loch Lomond Golf Club is situated on the south western shore. It has hosted many international events including the Scottish Open. Another golf club, "The Carrick" has opened on the banks of the Loch adjacent to the Loch Lomond Club."The Carrick Visit Scotland. Retrieved 10 October 2008.
The West Highland Way runs along the eastern bank of the loch. The West Loch Lomond Cycle Path runs from Arrochar and Tarbet railway station, at the upper end of the loch, to Balloch railway station, at the south end. The  long cycle path runs along the west bank.
At the south end of the loch near Balloch is a large visitor and shopping complex named Loch Lomond Shores.  This will be the venue for the Great Scottish Swim in 2013.

Boating and watersports

Loch Lomond is one of Scotland's premier boating and watersports venues and the scenery draws people from all over Scotland and beyond. The loch is open to every kind of watercraft including kayaks, canoes, wind-surfers, jetskis, speedboats and cruisers and they are all very well represented. Loch Lomond Rescue Boat provides 24-hour safety cover on the loch. The Rescue Boat is a Volunteer Organisation and a Registered Charity. The National Park Authority also have other boats on the Loch such as The Brigadier. Strathclyde Police also operate on the Loch using RIBs and Jet Skis and work in conjunction with the National Park Authority.
The National Park Authority has tried to achieve a balance between land-based tourists and loch users, with environmentally sensitive areas subject to a strictly enforced 10 km per hour speed limit, but the rest of the loch open to speeds of up to 90 km per hour.
Other leisure activities on the loch include cruises from the town of Balloch, operated by Sweeney's Cruises.
The Maid of the Loch was the last paddle steamer built in Britain. Built on the Clyde in 1953, she operated on Loch Lomond for 29 years. She is now being restored at Balloch pier by the Loch Lomond Steamship Company, a charitable organisation, supported by Dumbarton District Council.
Guided canoeing and canoe hire is available through some small companies such as S D Adventures

Air crash

On 22 April 1940 a British Overseas Airways Corporation Lockheed Model 14 Super Electra (Registration: G-AFKD named Loch Invar) flying from Perth Airport (Scotland) to Heston Aerodrome in London crashed at Loch Lomond, killing all five passengers and crew.baaa-acro.htm

Popular culture

The song

The loch is featured in a well-known song which was first published around 1841. Fuld, The Book of World-Famous Music: Classical, Popular and Folk, p. 336. The chorus is:
The song has been recorded by many performers over the years, including jazz singer Maxine Sullivan (for whom it was a career-defining hit), the Mudmen, Scottish-Canadian punk band The Real McKenzies.  Within this theory, it is possible that the soldier awaiting death may have been writing either to a friend who was allowed to live and return home, or to a lover back in Scotland.

Other popular culture



References and footnotes




