[[Feluda]]

CATEGORIES: Kolkata culture, Fictional private investigators, Indian crime television series, Fictional Indian people, Characters created by Satyajit Ray

Feluda (
Feluda is most of the times accompanied by his cousin Tapesh (affectionately called Topshe by Feluda), who serves as the narrator of the stories. From the sixth story, Sonar Kella (The Golden Fortress), the duo are joined by a popular thriller writer Jatayu (Lalmohon Ganguli).
Feluda has had been filmed at times, with the character been played by Soumitra Chatterjee, Sabyasachi Chakrabarty and Shashi Kapoor. Satyajit Ray directed two Feluda movies— Sonar Kella (1974) and Joy Baba Felunath (1978). Sandip Ray made a series of telefilms and serials on Feulda's adventures. He also made few full-length Bengali films on the character.

Character development of Feluda

Inspiration of Sherlock Holmes

Satyajit Ray had deep interests in crime fiction and he read all Sherlock Holmes fictions in his school days. And when Ray himself  started writing crime fictions, unsurprisingly, the character Sherlock Holmes inspired his writings. Feluda's character resembles to Sherlock Holmes and Tapesh/Topseh's character resembles to Dr. Watson. In the stories of Feluda, he is displayed as a big admirer of Sherlock Holmes which he mention multiple times. In Kailash Choudharyr Pathar he praises the way Holmes used to draw large conclusions from observations. In Londone Feluda, when Feluda goes to Baker Street, he openly considers Holmes as the "master" (Bengali: guru) of all private detectives.

Personality of Feluda

Prodosh Chandra Mitra, popularly known by his nickname Feluda, first appeared in the eponymous Bengali short story Feludar Goyendagiri (Feluda's Investigation) in 1965. The story, written by Satyajit Ray, was published in Sandesh, a children's periodical founded by Ray's grandfather, Upendrakishore Ray Chowdhury and edited by Ray himself. In the Feluda series that followed, he was portrayed as a man of around 27 with a tall (6' 2"), athletic figure. Despite being a strongly built man adept in martial arts, Feluda relies mostly upon his superb analytical ability and observation skill (jokingly referred to as the Magajastra or brain-weapon) to solve cases instead of using physical strength or weapons. He is very choosy about taking up cases and prefers cases that require cerebral effort. He possesses a .32 Colt revolver, but the weapon is used very infrequently and mostly for non-violent purposes. However, contemporary (2000s) movies based on Feluda stories feature scenes of violence uncharacteristic of the series, where Feluda demonstrates his martial art powers. Feluda is known to be a good sleight-of-hand, and he put that skill to use for solving couple of cases. He is also good at disguises. Feluda often calls a meeting while solving the mystery. The most popular stories of Feluda are- Kailashe Kelenkari, Chinnamastar Abhishap, Darjeeling Jomjomat etc.

Feluda' personal life

In his personal life, Feluda is a common Bengali youth who has been brought up by his father's younger brother (Tapesh/Topshe's father) after his parent's death when he was only 9. His father, the late Jaykrishna Mitra, used to teach Mathematics and Sanskrit at Dhaka Collegiate School. Feluda, too, taught in a school before his detective career. Feluda was student of Scottish Church College. He enjoys delivering classroom-like lectures, a carry-over from that profession. He finds an avid listener in his cousin Tapesh. Also, he often uses his oratory skill at the climactic scenes to cajole the culprit in confessing his crime. He is an early riser and is often shown starting his day with yoga.
Contrary to his otherwise healthy lifestyle, Feluda enjoys smoking cigarettes and chewing betel leaves. His favourite brand of cigarettes is Charminar. He is a connoisseur of delicious foods, popular music and movies, and books. He has a great appreciation for Sherlock Holmes and, according to the film Tintorettor Jishu, Bruce Lee. Like Sherlock Holmes, he has an omnivorous reading habit (reflecting that of Ray's own), which add up to his enormous general knowledge. This know-how often comes handy while socialising with people and unravelling mysteries. He always reads about the place he is visiting. He says it comes in handy sometimes.

Other characters

Tapesh Ranjan Mitra

Feluda's cousin, who is fondly referred to as Topshe, is based on Arthur Conan Doyle's conception of John Watson. Just like the former army surgeon, Topshe is the quintessential accomplice and faithfully records each of Prodosh Mitra's exploits accurately. Though Feluda often teases his young cousin, he is extremely fond and very protective of him. Feluda lives with Topshe's family. Topshe's father is the younger brother of Feluda's father, and therefore his uncle, and they all reside at 27, Rajani Sen Road, Kolkata-700029. Although there really is a 'Rajani Sen Road' in Kolkata, the house number is missing. In films and TV serials the character has been played by Siddahartha Chattopadhyay, Saswata Chattopadhyaya, and Parambrata Chattopadhyay at different times. He is a teenager. The new Topshe is played by Saheb Bhattacharjee, son of footballer Subrato Bhattacharjee.
But now in the new film of Sandip Ray-- "Badshahi Angti" Actor Sourav Das will play the role.

Lalmohon Ganguli or Jatayu


Lalmohon Ganguli is a close friend of Prodosh Chandra Mitra, and is described as the author of a series of Bengali crime thrillers written under the pseudonym 'Jatayu'. His crime stories novels are usually derided as unbelievable, considering that his main character is always the superhero Prakhar Rudra, and in his words, Height:6 ft 3 1/2 inches, waist:36, chest:46, shoulders:22 and wrist:8 1/2. Though all his novels seem to have become best-sellers, he often tends to make extremely silly mistakes such as spelling igloos as 'ilgoos'. In Baksho Rahasya or Mystery of a Box, he confuses hippos with walruses — a tendency that Feluda often tries to correct. He sometimes serves as a perfect foil to the group and in Ray's own words provides 'dollops of humour', although he sometimes does some brave acts not expected of him. He owns a 'Madrasi green' Ambassador car. Jatayu makes his first appearance in Sonar Kella joining Feluda and Topshe in the train at Kanpur, on their way to Jodhpur. In the first two films on Feluda, which were directed by Ray himself, the character was played by Santosh Dutta, and after the first one, Ray modified the literary character to some extent, making him look and behave quite like  Dutta himself. Jatayu lives at Garpar in Kolkata, and it may be recalled that Satyajit Ray himself passed his childhood at 100, Garpar.

Sidhu Jyatha

Sidhu Jyatha's formal name is Shiddeshwar Basu. He is an aged character who has described himself to be like Sherlock Holmes's brother Mycroft, living on Sardar Sankar Road, Lake Market, Kolkata. He is a bibliophile, and has an extensive base of general knowledge, current and historical affairs. He is a close friend of Feluda's father, being neighbours in their ancestral village at Bangladesh. Feluda's jyatha (that is, uncle) is said to have a 'photographic memory', and is a vast source of information which comes in handy when Feluda is in need of some. His vast knowledge comes from his collection of varied kinds of newspaper clippings which he has accumulated over the years. The role was played by Harindranath Chattopadhyay in Sonar Kella and by Haradhan Banerjee in Kailashe Kelenkari and in "Gorosthaney Sabdhan". Following recent Feluda films made by Sandip Ray, Satyajit Ray's son, there have been questions over Sidhu Jyatha's continued relevance in the stories considering technologies such as the internet offer a faster, wider and more effective knowledge base than a well-read person.

Haripada

Haripada is the driver of Lalmohon Ganguli's second-hand green Mark II Ambassador car. He is a loyal, intelligent and reliable person and is of great help when needed. He played a crucial role in Gorosthaney Sabhdhan where he saved the lives of Feluda, Lalmohon, and Topshe. In Ambar Sen Ontordhan Rohossho, Haripad is seen carrying the ransom to the kidnapper. He also has a minor role in Boshpukery Khunkharapi, where he takes part in a surveillance mission with the rest of the Feluda gang in disguise.

Maganlal Meghraj

Meghraj is a villainous character who appears in several of Feluda's stories, including Joy Baba Felunath, Jato Kando Kathmandute, and Golapi Mukta Rahasyao. He has been compared to Professor Moriarty of the Sherlock Holmes-series. Utpal Dutta immortalised this character in one Feluda movie Joi Baba Felunath, which Satyajit Ray directed.

Pulak Ghoshal

Ghoshal is a Mumbai-based popular Hindi film director hailing from Kolkata. His original home in Kolkata is in the neighbourhood of Lalmohonbabu's in northern Kolkata's Garpar. He has directed two films based on Lalmohonbabu's stories . During the shooting of both these films, dangerous events took place, resulting in arrest of a producer in one film (Bombaiyer Bombete) and arrest of an actor in another film (Darjeeling Jamjomat).

Minor characters

Feluda series

The list is chronologically arranged.

Color key

Feluda in other media

Films

Satyajit Ray directed Sonar Kella and Joi Baba Felunath into movies in Bengali, starring actor Soumitra Chatterjee as Feluda, Santosh Dutta as Jatayu and Siddhartha Chatterjee as Topshe.
Until 2011, Sandip Ray has directed six Feluda feature length films:  

Telefilms

In addition to the feature films, many of the Feluda stories have been filmed by Sandip Ray as telefilms under the names/packages:
In the Hindi telefilms, Feluda was played by Shashi Kapoor, Jatayu by Mohan Agashe and Magan Lal Meghraj once again by Utpal Dutt. Feluda was played by Soumitra Chatterjee in a few of the Bengali telefilms made in the 1990s while Sabyasachi Chakrabarty played that role in most of the telefilms made later. Jatayu was played sometimes by Rabi Ghosh, sometimes by Anup Kumar and finally by Bibhu Bhattacharya after the death of Santosh Dutta.

TV

Radio

Comics

Some of the Feluda stories have been made into comic strips by artists and authors. These have been published by Ananda Publishers. English versions of comics have appeared in The Telegraph.
Penguin Books has released comic book versions of around 35 Feluda mysteries. Art has been drawn by Tapas Guha and script is by Subhadra Sen Gupta.Penguin Books listing of Feluda Books 

Music

In a collaborative album brought out in 1996 by HMV, Kabir Suman sings a 'Feludar Gaan' (Feluda's song). The song written by Kabir Suman was first publicised at Sandesh magazine on the special Feluda 30 issue released in December 1995 on the completion of 30 years of Feluda stories. Later in  a collaborative album by HMV Choto Boro Miley (1996) the song was composed and performed by three-legend singer-songwriter Kabir Suman, Nachiketa Chakraborty and Anjan Dutt.
Later many of Bengali songs have references and symbols of Feluda franchise including "Calcium" by Anjan Dutt from the album Purono Guitar (1995).

Feluda in Pujabarshiki

Nearly every Feluda story was published annually in the Pujabarshiki Desh (the edition of Desh commemorating the Durgapuja published every year). Thereafter the stories were published as hard-back editions by Ananda Publishers. Some of the stories were published originally in Sandesh, a children's magazine co-edited by Satyajit Ray.








