[[Tony Hadley]]

CATEGORIES: English male singers, English New Wave musicians, English pop singers, English soul singers, British synthpop new wave musicians, People from Islington, People from Muswell Hill, Virgin Radio (UK), Reality singing competition winners, English male film actors, Blue-eyed soul singers, Sophisti-pop musicians, Spandau Ballet members, 1960 births, Living people

Anthony Patrick "Tony" Hadley (born 2 June 1960) is an English pop singer-songwriter, occasional stage actor and radio presenter who first rose to fame in the 1980s as the lead vocalist of the New Romantic band Spandau Ballet. Hadley is recognisable for his powerful blue-eyed soul voice.

Early life

Anthony Patrick Hadley, the eldest of three children (he has a sister, Lee, and a brother, Steve) was born at Royal Free Hospital in the Hampstead area of Inner London. Originally intending to pursue a medical career, he decided to join friends in their band.

Spandau Ballet

The group disbanded in 1989, after their final studio album, Heart Like a Sky, failed to live up to the critical and commercial success of their earlier albums, such as True and Parade. Heart Like a Sky was not released in the United States. In April 1999, Hadley along with fellow band members Steve Norman and John Keeble failed in their attempt to sue Gary Kemp for a share of his royalties,Spandau Ballet in court over royalties BBC News, 27 January 1999, retrieved 10 May 2009Spandau court bid fails BBC News, 30 April 1999, retrieved 10 May 2009Spandau three drop royalties appeal BBC News, 15 October 1999, retrieved 10 May 2009 as the band's principal songwriter. However, in recent years Norman is again on good terms with Gary and his brother, Martin Kemp, who used to play bass guitar in the band. In early 2009, newspaper reports claimed that Spandau Ballet was set to reform later that year.

Solo career

After Spandau Ballet disbanded, Hadley pursued a solo career, signing to EMI and recording his first album, The State of Play, in 1992. After leaving EMI, Hadley formed his own record company, SlipStream Records, and his first release was to be the single "Build Me Up", from the film "When Saturday Comes". Shortly after that, in December 1996, Hadley embarked on an orchestral tour of Europe, along with Joe Cocker, Paul Michiels, Dani Klein and Guo Yue, playing to 500,000 concertgoers in six weeks.
On his return from that tour, Hadley signed a joint deal with PolyGram TV, and released his next eponymous solo album, Tony Hadley, in 1997, which included covers and songs that were chosen to match his voice. The album also featured some of his own self-penned songs, such as "She", which he wrote for daughter Toni.
To plug the gap between studio albums, Hadley also released Obsession (later re-released as Obsession Live), a live album recorded, in just one night, in 2001, at the club Ronnie Scott's, in Birmingham.
He also collaborated, in the past and present, with various dance acts and DJs, such as Tin Tin Out, Eddie Lock, Marc et Claude, Regi Penxten (Milk Inc.) and the Disco Bros, and played alongside people such as Alice Cooper, Paul Young, Jon Anderson, and Brian May. Hadley's permanent band line up nowadays features John Keeble (drums), Phil Taylor (keyboards), Phil Williams (bass guitar), Richie Barrett (guitar), and Dawn Joseph on backing vocals. His early band, with whom he realised his debut album, included instead, besides himself and Keeble, Spandau Ballet's regular keyboard player, Toby Chapman, Jerry Stevenson (guitar), and Kevin Miller (bass guitar).
Hadley was also the subject of some newfound respect in the 2000s, rooted in an "ironic" appreciation for his old group Spandau Ballet; John Darnielle of the indie folk rock group The Mountain Goats wrote about his admiration for Hadley's vocal strengths. In 2000, his solo greatest hits album was issued, entitled Debut, made up of some early solo songs.
In 2003, Hadley was the winner of the ITV reality television series, Reborn in the USA, appearing alongside other singers, such as Elkie Brooks, Peter Cox from Go West and Leee John from Imagination. Capitalizing on his victory of the American reality show, his Debut compilation was re-issued, and his second collection was also released in the same year, True Ballads, including some of his solo tracks, most of the cover songs which were already contained in his second studio album, and historical hits from the Spandau Ballet period.
Hadley has continued with a busy performing schedule, and also toured with both Peter Cox from Go West and Martin Fry from the band ABC. He released a jazz-swing album (music) 2006, entitled Passing Strangers, and travelled on a "by request" tour from March to May 2006. This was followed by a big band tour in late the same year.
In January 2007, Hadley performed in the West End musical Chicago as crooked lawyer Billy Flynn, at the Cambridge Theatre. He said: "Three months was long enough, I didn't want to out-stay my welcome. I got a phone call offering me the part. I went to see the show, which I thought was great. While I was in it, I got great reviews. Chicago tied in with my swing album, Passing Strangers, so the whole thing worked well."
Hadley performed a set with other 1980s acts, at Retro Fest, on 1 September 2007, at Culzean Castle, in Ayrshire, Scotland. This appearance included a rendition of "Addicted to Love", with Martin Fry of ABC and Peter Cox of Go West.
In February 2008, he took part in the Italian Sanremo Festival, where he dueted in both English and Italian with contestant Paolo Meneguzzi on Meneguzzi's song, "Grande" ('Big'), during the third day of the contest (where all contestants re-interpreted their songs with guest artists). On 22 February 2008, he performed as an interval act at the semi-final of Dora 2008, the selection of the Croatian entry for the Eurovision Song Contest.com, 22 February 2008
In 2013, Hadley and his 1980s chart peers Kim Wilde, Bananarama and Go West set a new world record for Comic Relief when they performed the highest ever gig, singing on a Boeing 767 aeroplane at 43,000 ft (13,000m).
In 2014 he took part in the prime-time Rai TV show La Pista as teamleader of the Tacco 10 female dance troupe. Other well known singer-contestants taking part in the weekly show included Amii Stewart and Sabrina Salerno.

Other work

Hadley worked as a radio presenter with Virgin Radio, taking over the "Friday Night Virgin Party Classics" show from Suggs (of the band Madness), in August 2007. In January 2008, he was given the Saturday Night Virgin Party Classics show as well. He left both shows in September 2008.
Hadley appeared, sang and gave advice in Pinoy Dream Academy, a singing reality show in the Philippines. He also appeared in RocKwiz, an Australian TV programme that aired in November 2008.
Hadley also appears in the British short movie Shoot The DJ, in which he plays Eddie Richards. The film also featured Hadley's daughter, Toni.This Morning – Tony Hadley  StarNow, retrieved 10 May 2009

Personal life

Hadley is the father of five children: Thomas, Toni, and Mackenzie by his first wife, Leonie Lawson, and Zara (born 21 December 2006) by Alison Evers, whom he married in July 2009 at Cliveden House, Berkshire. His fifth child Genevieve was born 6 February 2012.co.
Hadley is also an Arsenal fan and plays for the Arsenal ex-Professional and Celebrity XI team. Hadley also runs and enjoys skiing. He lives in Buckinghamshire, and is a regular act in The East Festival.
Hadley stated on the television show Loose Women (22 February 2007) that he is .
Hadley is patron of the UK Huntington's Disease Association.UK Huntington's Disease Association

Political affiliations

Hadley is a supporter of the Conservative Party and an admirer of former Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Margaret Thatcher. He has said:
 "The fabric of society is torn. I walked through Blackpool and there were gangs walking the back streets and 16-year-old pregnant women everywhere. What we need is for David Cameron to be like Thatcher, to say, "Enough is enough, things have gone too far". Five-year mandatory sentences for carrying a knife and 10 years for carrying a gun. We will build however many prisons we need." 
He reaffirmed his support for the party at the 2010 general election.

Discography

Studio albums

Live albums

Compilation albums

Singles

| first= David
| last= Roberts
| year= 2006
| title= British Hit Singles & Albums
| edition= 19th
| publisher= Guinness World Records Limited
| location= London
| isbn= 1-904994-10-5
| page= 239}}[/ref]

Literature






