[[Christie Brinkley]]

CATEGORIES: 1954 births, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, Actresses from Los Angeles, California, Actresses from Michigan, American female models, American film actresses, American humanitarians, American television actresses, Anti-nuclear movement in the United States, Billy Joel, Living people, New York Democrats, People from Long Island, People from Monroe, Michigan

Christie Brinkley (born  Christie Lee Hudson; February 2, 1954) is an American model and actress.  Brinkley gained worldwide fame beginning in the late 1970s with three consecutive Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue covers through 1981. She spent twenty five years as the face of CoverGirl (the longest running cosmetics contract of any model in history), has appeared on over 500 magazine covers, and has signed contracts with major brands—both fashion and non-fashion.
Brinkley went on to work as a film actress, illustrator, television personality, photographer, writer, and designer, and as an activist for human and animal rights and the environment.
Brinkley has been married four times, most notably to musician Billy Joel, several of whose music videos she appeared in. Her fourth marriage, to architect Peter Cook, ended in a much-publicized 2008 divorce.
With a career spanning more than three decades, magazines such as Allure, Playboy, and Men's Health have named Brinkley one of the most attractive women of all time. Her financial holdings in 2008 were worth an estimated USD $80 million, primarily as the owner of real estate. In February 2012 she was ranked third in the Daily Mail list "World's 20 richest models."

Early life

Brinkley was born Christie Lee Hudson in Monroe, Michigan,

Career

Brinkley was discovered in 1973 by American photographer Errol Sawyer in a post office in Paris. who called Eileen Ford and told her about Christie, she returned to California, and by the end of a lunch meeting with Nina Blanchard (Eileen Ford affiliate in Los Angeles) she had been booked for three national ad campaigns.
Multiple appearances on the cover of Glamour soon followed, along with a record 25-year contract with cosmetics brand CoverGirl, one of the longest modeling contracts in history.  In 2005, CoverGirl again signed Brinkley, using her in ads in magazines and TV commercials for mature skin products.

Brinkley appeared on three consecutive Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue Edition covers (1979, – the first time that had happened — and appeared in the publication's annual swimsuit issues and television specials for years to follow.
Brinkley was featured exclusively in the first Sports Illustrated Calendar and also released two of her own exclusive calendars to unparalleled success.
As an editorial model, Brinkley has appeared on over 500 magazine covers, including US, Vogue, Newsweek, Rolling Stone, Esquire, Harper's Bazaar, Cosmopolitan, Glamour and the best-selling issue of LIFE ever. She has held major contracts with Chanel No. 19, Prell, MasterCard, Breck, Diet Coke, Anheuser-Busch, Got Milk?, Healthy Choice, Max Factor, Nissan, Noxema, Revlon, Clairol, Borghese Cosmetics, Danskin, Nu Skin, Yardley of London, Halston, Vogue Patterns, Gottex and Black Velvet, among others. Brinkley has been photographed in 6 continents in more than 30 countries.
Brinkley played her first role as an actress in the 1983 film National Lampoon's Vacation as "The girl in the red Ferrari" opposite Chevy Chase; she reprised that role in the 1997 sequel Vegas Vacation. and later spoofed it in a 2008 DirecTV commercial interspliced with footage from Vacation. In 2011, she appeared as herself in the documentary, King of the Hamptons, which was produced by filmmaker, Dennis Michael Lynch. The film premiered at the 2010 Hamptons International Film Festival.
On April 8, 2011, in New York, Brinkley made her stage debut as Roxie Hart in the long-running musical Chicago.
In August, she completed a one month engagement in the London's production at Cambridge Theatre and reprised the role on Broadway and continued with 182 total performances with the National Touring Company of Chicag in cities including Los Angeles, San Diego, Boston and Hartford.
Brinkley's appearance on NBC's Mad About You was the broadcaster's highest rated half-hour episode since the finale of The Cosby Show. She hosted Celebrity Weddings InStyle, the highest rated special in Lifetime's history.
Brinkley appeared on the Today Show in 1983 in a four-part segment featuring beauty tips and, in 1992, began her own television series Living in the 90's — With Christie Brinkley, a daily half-hour show on CNN.
Brinkley made further television appearances, including Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue Specials
Brinkley appears with Chuck Norris in a long-running series of cable TV infomercials promoting Total Gym home fitness equipment. In 2008, Brinkley and Dr. Carlon Colker promoted National Family Fitness Day with Xbox 360 at the Boy's and Girl's Club. Retrieved 6/4/2009
In 1983, Brinkley wrote and illustrated a book on health and beauty titled Christie Brinkley's Outdoor Beauty and Fitness Book, which topped the New York Times best seller list.
In 1990 Brinkley was, along with Cheryl Tiegs and Beverly Johnson, one of the three models featured as dolls produced by Matchbox Toys called The Real Model Collection.
Brinkley illustrated the cover art for Billy Joel's 1993 triple platinum album River of Dreams. For this, Rolling Stone awarded her the honor of "Best album cover of the year".
Brinkley has designed clothing patterns for Simplicity Pattern and in March, 1994 helped design, for brand Nouveau Eyewear, her line of prescription glasses and sunglasses called Christie Brinkley Perspectives with worldwide sales.
In Spring 1998 released her own signature fragrance, Believe. Her jewelry collection is manufactured by Swank.
In 1991 Brinkley was considered to have the ideal, all-American look with her blonde hair, blue eyes, slim figure, and soft features, when Allure first conducted a survey taking the pulse of the average American (men and women) searching for their beauty perceptions and preferences.
In 1998 Playboy readers voted Brinkley one of the 100 Sexiest Women of the 20th century. 25, 1998) Brinkley is ranked third in the AskMen.Top 10 Supermodels Of All Time In 2011, Men's Health named her one of the "100 Hottest Women of All-Time", ranking her at No. 16.
Brinkley had a guest role in December 2012 on the hit comedy sitcom Parks and Recreation. In the episode "Ron and Diane" she played Gayle Gergich, wife of Jerry Gergich played by Jim O'Heir.
In December 2012, Brinkley co-hosted Anderson Cooper Live with Anderson Cooper is a now-famous show where Cooper discussed his temporary blindness.  She also danced with DWTS alumnus Gilles Marini during the show.
Brinkley's financial holdings were worth an estimated USD $80 million in 2008, primarily as the owner of real estate, much of it in the Hamptons.

Personal life

In 1982, Brinkley had a romantic relationship with Olivier Chandon de Brailles, heir to the Moët-Chandon Champagne fortune. The two met at Studio 54 in New York City at a party promoting a calendar in which Brinkley appeared. Chandon died a year later in an auto-race car crash during a private pre-season practice session.com

Marriages

Christie Brinkley and Peter Cook sign divorce settlement | location=New York | work=Daily News | first1=Henrick | last1=Karoliszyn | first2=Christina | last2=Boyle | date=October 13, 2009}}[/ref] In July 2008, a court-appointed psychiatrist, speaking during child custody proceedings in Brinkley's fourth divorce, testified that while he believed Brinkley should gain custody of her and Cook's children, both she and Cook needed therapy.

Family

Brinkley and her children are fans of the New York Islanders ice hockey team. Brinkley began doing promotions for the team after being noticed at games.com and filming a commercial.
Brinkley has one brother named Gregory Donald Brinkley, a nutritionist and father of one son and one daughter: Ian Amadeo Brinkley (born January 15, 1990) and Elliott Marie Brinkley (born January 5, 1997).
Brinkley became a vegetarian when she was 13 years old and then got her entire family to become vegetarians.
Brinkley's parents, Marjorie and Don Brinkley, died in Sag Harbor, NY in the summer of 2012 within seven weeks of each other, after a 50-plus year marriage. Both suffered from long-term illnesses. TV writer and producer Don died in July, and Marjorie in September.

Interests

Brinkley helped found a club for cutting, an equestrian sport in which a rider has two and one half minutes to cut as many cattle from a herd as they can.
Since 1998, Brinkley has given nearly $100,000 to organizations and candidates of the Democratic Party of the United States, including Hillary Clinton, Barack Obama, Democratic National Committee, Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, America Coming Together and Moveon. In the New York delegation, Brinkley served as a delegate on the 2000 Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles.New York Times-September 1, 2000
Brinkley supports animal rights, most notably through the organization PETA, having previously spoken out against the Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey Circus.[ref]
[/ref] She has also been involved in anti-nuclear activities and campaigned against the restarting of the High Flux Beam Reactor (HFBR) located at the Brookhaven National Laboratory. Stud. Phys. Bio. Sci, 31, 41, 2000[ref]
Physics World; Governing Science[/ref]

Awards and achievements






