[[Killer whale]]

CATEGORIES: Animals described in 1758, Arctic cetaceans, Cetaceans of Australia, Fauna of the Atlantic Ocean, Fauna of the Crozet Islands, Fauna of the Pacific Ocean, Killer whales, Mammals of Western Sahara, Marine mammals of Hawaii, Megafauna of Africa, Megafauna of Australia, Megafauna of Eurasia, Megafauna of North America, Megafauna of South America, Oceanic dolphins, Predators

The killer whale (Orcinus orca), also referred to as the orca whale or orca, and less commonly as the blackfish, is a toothed whale belonging to the oceanic dolphin family. Killer whales are found in all oceans, from the frigid Arctic and Antarctic regions to tropical seas. Killer whales as a species have a diverse diet, although individual populations often specialize in particular types of prey. Some feed exclusively on fish, while others hunt marine mammals like pinnipeds, and even large whales. Killer whales are regarded as apex predators, lacking natural predators.
Killer whales are highly social; some populations are composed of matrilineal family groups which are the most stable of any animal species. Their sophisticated hunting techniques and vocal behaviors, which are often specific to a particular group and passed across generations, have been described as manifestations of culture.
The IUCN currently assesses the orca's conservation status as data deficient because of the likelihood that two or more killer whale types are separate species. Some local populations are considered threatened or endangered due to prey depletion, habitat loss, pollution (by PCBs), capture for marine mammal parks, and conflicts with fisheries. In late 2005, the "southern resident" population of killer whales that inhabits British Columbia and Washington state waters were placed on the U.S. Endangered Species list.
Wild killer whales are not considered a threat to humans, Killer whales feature strongly in the mythologies of indigenous cultures, with their reputation ranging from being the souls of humans to merciless killers.

Taxonomy and evolution

Orcinus orca is the only recognized extant species in the genus Orcinus, one of many animal species originally described by Linnaeus in 1758 in Systema Naturae. Konrad Gessner wrote the first scientific description of a killer whale in his "Fish book" of 1558, based on examination of a dead stranded animal in the Bay of Greifswald that had attracted a great deal of local interest. St. Mary's Church, Greifswald. Retrieved 2010-02-16
The killer whale is one of 35 species in the oceanic dolphin family, which first appeared about 11 million years ago. The killer whale lineage probably branched off shortly thereafter. Although it has morphological similarities with the pygmy killer whale, the false killer whale and the pilot whales, a study of cytochrome b gene sequences by Richard LeDuc indicated that its closest extant relatives are the snubfin dolphins of the genus Orcaella.

Common names

English-speaking scientists most often use the term "killer whale", although the term "orca" is increasingly used. Killer whale advocates point out it has a long heritage. Indeed, the genus name Orcinus means "of the kingdom of the dead", or "belonging to Orcus". Scientific Classification, Seaworld.
Ancient Romans originally applied orca (plural orcae) to these animals, possibly borrowing it from the Greek , which referred (among other things) to a whale species. Since the 1960s, orca has steadily grown in popularity; both names are now used. The term orca is preferred by some to avoid the negative connotations of "killer",Olsen, Ken. Orcas on the Edge – Killer: It's a Name, Not an Accusation. National Wildlife Federation. 10 January 2006. Retrieved 2010-01-26. and because, being part of the family Delphinidae, the species is more closely related to other dolphins than to whales.B. 2007 Whales and Dolphins of the Southern African Subregion ISBN 978-0-521-89710-5
According to some authors, the name killer whale would be a mistranslation of the 18th century Spanish name asesina ballenas which means literally whale killer.com - visited 23-October-2013 Basque whalers would have given it such name after observing pods of orcas hunting their own prey.
They are sometimes referred to as blackfish, a name used for some whale species, as well. Grampus is a former name for the species, but is now seldom used. This meaning of grampus should not be confused with the Grampus genus, whose only member is Risso's dolphin. Hobbs (1988). Whales, dolphins, and porpoises of the eastern North Pacific and adjacent Arctic waters: a guide to their identification, p. 118. Courier Dover Publications. ISBN 0-486-25651-0 Retrieved 2010-01-28.

Types

The three to five types of killer whales may be distinct enough to be considered different races, research off the west coast of Canada and the United States in the 1970s and 1980s identified the following three types:
Transients and residents live in the same areas, but avoid each other.W., and Dill, L.M. 1995. Occurrence and behaviour of transient killer whales: seasonal and pod-specific variability, foraging behaviour, and prey handling. Canadian Journal Zoolology 73:1300– 1311. 2001. Population structure and genetic variability in northeastern Pacific killer whales: Towards an assessment of population viability. Canadian Science Advisory Secretariat, Ottawa, Canada. Genetic data indicate the types have not interbred in the wild for up to 10,000 years.
Other populations have not been as well studied, although specialized fish-eating and mammal-eating killer whales have been distinguished elsewhere. Separate populations of fish-eating and mammal-eating killer whales have been identified around the United Kingdom.[ref]
Bourton, Jody. Two killer whale types found in UK waters, Earth News, BBC, 5 January 2010. Retrieved 2010-02-23.[/ref]
Three types have been documented in the Antarctic. Two dwarf species, named Orcinus nanus and Orcinus glacialis, were described during the 1980s by Soviet researchers, but most cetacean researchers are skeptical about their status, and linking these directly to the types described below is difficult.
Evans, W. E.; Yablokov, A. V. and Bowles, A. E. (1982). Geographic Variation in the Color Pattern of Killer Whales (Orcinus orca), Reports of the International Whaling Commission 32: 687–694. Retrieved 2010-02-16.[/ref] stretching back from its forehead to just behind its dorsal fin. The white areas are stained slightly yellow. It feeds mostly on seals.
Types B and C live close to the ice pack, and diatoms in these waters may be responsible for the yellowish coloring of both types.[ref]
Gorter, Uko. Newsletter of the Puget Sound Chapter of the American Cetacean Society, Spring 2004. Retrieved 2010-02-16.[/ref] Mitochondrial DNA sequences support the theory that these are recently diverged separate species.
Mammal-eating killer whales were long thought likely to be closely related to other mammal-eating killer whales from different regions, but genetic testing refuted this hypothesis.
The identified seven ecotypes in isolated ecological niches. Of three orca ecotypes in the Antarctic, one preys on minke whales, the second on seals and penguins and the third on fish. Another ecotype lives in the eastern North Atlantic, while the three Northeast Pacific ecotypes are labeled the transient, resident and offshore populations. The research supported a proposal to reclassify the Antarctic seal- and fish-eating populations and the North Pacific transients, should be recognized as distinct species, leaving the remaining ecotypes as subspecies. The first split in the orca population, between the North Pacific transients and the rest, occurred an estimated 700,000 years ago. Such a designation would enable/require that each new species be subject to separate conservation assessments.
Appearance and morphology== 
A typical killer whale distinctively bears a black back, white chest and sides, and a white patch above and behind the eye. Calves are born with a yellowish or orange tint, which fades to white. It has a heavy and robust bodyPoncelet, Eric. Killer whale biology: Morphology. Retrieved 2010-02-16 with a large dorsal fin up to 
Killer whales are the largest extant members of the dolphin family. Males typically range from 
Killer whale pectoral fins are large and rounded, resembling paddles. Males have significantly larger pectoral fins than females. At about 
An individual killer whale can often be identified from its dorsal fin and saddle patch. Variations such as nicks, scratches, and tears on the dorsal fin and the pattern of white or grey in the saddle patch are unique. Published directories contain identifying photographs and names for hundreds of North Pacific animals. Photographic identification has enabled the local population of killer whales to be counted each year rather than estimated, and has enabled great insight into lifecycles and social structures.
White killer whales occur sporadically but rarely among normal killer whales; they have been spotted in the northern Bering Sea and around St. Lawrence Island, and near the Russian coast. In February 2008, a white killer whale was photographed  off Kanaga Volcano in the Aleutian Islands.[ref]
Rare White Killer Whale Spotted in Alaskan Waters From NOAA Ship Oscar Dyson, news release, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 6 March 2008. Retrieved 2010-03-20[/ref][ref]
Mary Pemberton. Rare white killer whale spotted in Alaska, MSNBC, 7 March 2008[/ref]
Killer whales have good eyesight above and below the water, excellent hearing, and a good sense of touch. They have exceptionally sophisticated echolocation abilities, detecting the location and characteristics of prey and other objects in their environments by emitting clicks and listening for echoes.
The mean body temperature of the orca is 36.0 to 38 °C.N. W. Kasting, S. A. L. Adderly, T. Safford, K. G. Hewlett (1989). Thermoregulation in Beluga( Delphinapterus luecas) and Killer (Orcinus osrca) Whales Like most marine mammals, orcas have a layer of insulating blubber (7.6 to 10 cm thick) beneath its skin.
The heart beats at a rate of about 60 beats/min when the orca is at the surface, dropping to 30 beats/min when submerged.M. P. Spencer , T. A. Gornall, 3rd , and T. C. Poulter (1967). Respiratory and cardiac activity of killer whales.

Life cycle

Female killer whales mature at around age 15. They then have periods of polyestrous cycling with noncycling periods of between three and 16 months. Gestation varies from 15 to 18 months. Mothers calve, with usually a single offspring, about once every five years. In resident pods, births occur at any time of year, although winter is the most common. Mortality is extremely high during the first six to seven months of life, when 37–50% of all calves die.
Females breed until age 40, meaning on average they raise five offspring. The lifespans of wild females average 50 years, with a maximum of 80–90 years. Captive Orcas 'Dying to Entertain You'. Whale and Dolphin Conservation Society. Retrieved 2010-02-16

Range and habitat

Killer whales are found in all oceans and most seas. Due to their enormous range, numbers, and density, distributional estimates are difficult to compare,
Systematic surveys indicate the highest densities of killer whales (>0.40 individuals per 100 km²) in the northeast Atlantic around the Norwegian coast, in the north Pacific along the Aleutian Islands, the Gulf of Alaska and in the Southern Ocean off much of the coast of Antarctica. They are considered "common" (0.20–0.40 individuals per 100 km²) in the eastern Pacific along the coasts of British Columbia, Washington and Oregon, in the North Atlantic Ocean around Iceland and the Faroe Islands. High densities have also been reported but not quantified in the western North Pacific around the Sea of Japan (in very limited areas), Shiretoko Peninsula and off Kushiro (Resident and Transient groups began colonizing in these areas possibly after in 2000s), Sea of Okhotsk, Kuril Islands, Kamchatka and the Commander Islands and in the Southern Hemisphere off the coasts of South Australia, Patagonia, off the coast of southern Brazil and the tip of southern Africa. They are reported as seasonally common in the Canadian Arctic, including Baffin Bay between Greenland and Nunavut, and around Tasmania and Macquarie Island. Information for offshore regions and tropical waters is more scarce, but widespread, if not frequent, sightings indicate the killer whale can survive in most water temperatures. They have been sighted, for example, in the Mediterranean, the Arabian Sea, the Gulf of Mexico and the Indian Ocean around the Seychelles. A distinct population may exist in Papua New Guinea.I., Killer whales in Papua New Guinea waters,  Orca Research Trust
Probably the largest population lives in Antarctic waters, where they range up to the edge of the pack ice and are believed to venture into the denser pack ice, finding open leads much like beluga whales in the Arctic. In contrast, killer whales are seasonal summer visitors to Arctic waters, where they do not approach the ice pack. With the rapid Arctic sea ice decline in the Hudson Strait, their range now extends deep into the northwest Atlantic.[ref]
Kwan, Jennifer. Canada Finds Killer Whales Drawn to Warmer Arctic, Reuters, 22 January 2007. Retrieved 2010-01-26[/ref] Various areas in coastal New Zealand are home to many friendly, ray-hunting Orcas.
Migration patterns are poorly understood. Each summer, the same individuals appear off the coasts of British Columbia and Washington. Despite decades of research, where these animals go for the rest of the year remains unknown. Transient pods have been sighted from southern Alaska to central California..
Occasionally, killer whales swim into freshwater rivers. They have been documented [ref]
Southern Resident Killer Whale Research – October 2003, Northwest Fisheries Science Center. Updated 2007-02-14. Retrieved 2010-01-26[/ref] They have also been found in the Fraser River in Canada and the Horikawa River in Japan.

Population

Worldwide population estimates are uncertain, but recent consensus suggests an absolute minimum of 50,000. Retrieved 2010-03-14 Local estimates include roughly 25,000 in the Antarctic, 8,500 in the tropical Pacific, 2,250–2,700 off the cooler northeast Pacific and 500–1,500 off Norway. Japan's Fisheries Agency estimated 2,321 killer whales were in the seas around Japan.jp. Retrieved 2010-02-17[ref]
Ten Years after Taiji Orca Capture, 28 January 2007. Iruka (dolphin) and Kujira (whale) Action Network (IKAN): Iruma, Saitama Prefecture, Japan. Retrieved 2010-02-17[/ref]

Feeding

Killer whales hunt varied prey; however, different populations or species tend to specialize and some can have a dramatic impact on certain prey species.
Killer whales are apex predators, meaning that they themselves have no natural predators. They are sometimes called the wolves of the sea, because they hunt in groups like wolf packs.
Each population seems to prefer one kind of prey. Those that feed on whales may not even recognize fish as food. This specialization in diet and hunting, combined with small differences in markings, suggest that they might be different species, rather than populations. Advanced methods that sequenced the entire mitochondrial genome revealed systematic differences in DNA between different populations.

Fish, reptiles and invertebrates

Fish-eating killer whales prey on around 30 species of fish, particularly salmon, herring, and tuna. In New Zealand, rays are killer whales' most frequent prey,[ref]
Visser, Ingrid N. (2001). Mysteries of the Orca
While salmon are usually hunted by an individual or a small group of individuals, herring are often caught using carousel feeding; the killer whales force the herring into a tight ball by releasing bursts of bubbles or flashing their white undersides. They then slap the ball with their tail flukes, either stunning or killing up to 10–15 fish at a time. The herring are then eaten one at a time. Carousel feeding has only been documented in the Norwegian killer whale population and with some oceanic dolphin species.
Killer whales can induce tonic immobility in sharks and rays by holding them upside down, rendering them helpless and incapable of injuring the whale. Some sharks suffocate within about 15 minutes while the whale holds them still, because these sharks need to move to breathe. In one incident filmed near the Farallon Islands in October 1997, a  apparently after swimming with it upside-down in her mouth and inducing tonic immobility in it. She and another pod member ate the shark's liver and allowed the rest of the carcass to sink.[ref]
"Wild: The Whale That Ate Jaws." National Geographic Channel. 25 November \2011. Retrieved 2010-01-03[/ref] Interspecific competition between the two species is probable in regions where dietary preferences overlap.
In July 1992, two killer whales attacked, killed and fed on an 

Mammals and birds

Killer whales are very sophisticated and effective predators. Thirty-two cetacean species have been recorded as killer whale prey, from examining either stomach contents, scarring on the prey's body, or feeding activity. Groups even attack larger cetaceans such as minke whales, gray whales, and rarely sperm whales or blue whales.
Hunting large whales usually takes several hours. Killer whales generally choose to attack young or weak animals, instead. However, a group of five or more may attack a healthy adult. When hunting a young whale, a group chases it and its mother until they wear out. Eventually, they separate the pair and surround the calf, preventing it from surfacing to breathe, drowning it. Pods of female sperm whales sometimes protect themselves by forming a protective circle around their calves with their flukes facing outwards, using them to repel the attackers.
Other marine mammal prey species include nearly 20 species of seal, sea lion and fur seal. Walruses and sea otters are less frequently taken. Often, to avoid injury, killer whales disable their prey before killing and eating it. This may involve throwing it in the air, slapping it with their tails, ramming it, or breaching and landing on it.
In steeply banked beaches off Península Valdés, Argentina, and the Crozet Islands, killer whales feed on South American sea lions and southern elephant seals in shallow water, even beaching temporarily to grab prey before wriggling back to the sea. Beaching, usually fatal to cetaceans, is not an instinctive behavior, and can require years of practice for the young.
Killer whales have also been observed preying on terrestrial mammals, such as deer and moose swimming between islands off the northwest coast of North America.
Killer whales in many areas may also prey on cormorants and gulls.

Behavior

Day-to-day killer whale behavior generally consists of foraging, travelling, resting and socializing. Killer whales are frequently active at the surface, engaging in acrobatic behaviors such as breaching, spyhopping, and tail-slapping. These activities may have a variety of purposes, such as courtship, communication, dislodging parasites, or play. Spyhopping, a behaviour in which a whale holds its head above water, helps the animal view its surroundings.
Resident killer whales swim with porpoises, other dolphins, seals, and sea lions, which are common prey for transient killer whales.

Social structure

Killer whales are notable for their complex societies. Only elephants and higher primates, such as humans, live in comparably complex social structures.
Because females can reach age 90, as many as four generations travel together. These matrilineal groups are highly stable. Individuals separate for only a few hours at a time, to mate or forage. With one exception, the killer whale named Luna, no permanent separation of an individual from a resident matriline has been recorded.
Closely related matrilines form loose aggregations called pods, usually consisting of one to four matrilines. Unlike matrilines, pods may separate for weeks or months at a time.
Clans, the next level of resident social structure, are composed of pods with similar dialects, and common but older maternal heritage. Clan ranges overlap, mingling pods from different clans.
The final association layer, perhaps more arbitrarily defined than the familial groupings, is called the community, and is defined as a set of clans that regularly commingle. Clans within a community do not share vocal patterns.
Transient pods are smaller than resident pods, typically consisting of an adult female and one or two of her offspring. Males typically maintain stronger relationships with their mothers than other females. These bonds can extend well into adulthood. Unlike residents, extended or permanent separation of transient offspring from natal matrilines is common, with juveniles and adults of both sexes participating. Some males become "rovers" and do not form long-term associations, occasionally joining groups that contain reproductive females.

Vocalizations

 
 
Like all cetaceans, killer whales depend heavily on underwater sound for orientation, feeding, and communication. They produce three categories of sounds: clicks, whistles, and pulsed calls. Clicks are believed to be used primarily for navigation and discriminating prey and other objects in the surrounding environment, but are also commonly heard during social interactions.
Northeast Pacific resident groups tend to be much more vocal than transient groups in the same waters. They sometimes use a single click (called a cryptic click) rather than the long train of clicks observed in other populations. Residents are only silent when resting.
All members of a resident pod use similar calls, known collectively as a dialect. Dialects are composed of specific numbers and types of discrete, repetitive calls. They are complex and stable over time. 
Dialects of killer whales not only distinguish them between pods, but also between types. Resident dialects contain seven to 17 (mean = 11) distinctive call types. All members of the North American west coast transient community express the same basic dialect, although minor regional variation in call types is evident. Preliminary research indicates offshore killer whales have group-specific dialects unlike those of residents and transients.
The vocalizations of killer whales in other parts of the world have also been studied. Norwegian and Icelandic herring-eating orcas appear to have different vocalizations for activities like hunting and traveling.

Intelligence

Killer whales have the second-heaviest brains among marine mammals[ref]
Spear, Kevin. Killer whales: How smart are they? Orlando Sentinel, 7 March 2010. Retrieved 2010-03-07[/ref] (after Sperm whales, which have the largest brain of any animal). They can be trained in captivity and are often described as intelligent,
Killer whales imitate others, and seem to deliberately teach skills to their kin. Off the Crozet Islands, mothers push their calves onto the beach, waiting to pull the youngster back if needed.
People who have interacted closely with killer whales offer numerous anecdotes demonstrating the whales' curiosity, playfulness, and ability to solve problems. Alaskan killer whales have not only learned how to steal fish from longlines, but also have overcome a variety of techniques designed to stop them, such as the use of unbaited lines as decoys. Once, fishermen placed their boats several miles apart, taking turns retrieving small amounts of their catch, in the hope that the whales would not have enough time to move between boats to steal the catch as it was being retrieved. A researcher described what happened next:

In other anecdotes, researchers describe incidents in which wild killer whales playfully tease humans by repeatedly moving objects the humans are trying to reach, or suddenly start to toss around a chunk of ice after a human throws a snowball.[ref]
Pitman, Robert L. Scientist Has 'Snowball Fight' With a Killer Whale. Live Science, 6 February 2009. Retrieved 2010-03-07[/ref]
The killer whale's use of dialects and the passing of other learned behaviours from generation to generation have been described as a form of animal culture.


Conservation

In 2008, the IUCN changed its assessment of the killer whale's conservation status from conservation dependent to data deficient, recognizing that one or more killer whale types may actually be separate, endangered species. Depletion of prey species, pollution, large-scale oil spills, and habitat disturbance caused by noise and conflicts with boats are currently the most significant worldwide threats.
Like other animals at the highest trophic levels, the killer whale is particularly at risk of poisoning from accumulation of toxins, including polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). Blubber samples in the Norwegian Arctic show higher levels of PCBs, pesticides and brominated flame-retardants than in polar bears. When food is scarce, killer whales metabolize blubber for energy, which increases pollutant concentrations.
In the Pacific Northwest, wild salmon stocks, a main resident food source, have declined dramatically in recent years. On the west coast of Alaska and the Aleutian Islands, seal and sea lion populations have also substantially declined.
In 2005, the United States government listed the southern resident community as an endangered population under the Endangered Species Act. This community comprises three pods which live mostly in the Georgia and Haro Straits and Puget Sound in British Columbia and Washington. They do not breed outside of their community, which was once estimated at around 200 animals and later shrank to around 90.M. L. Lyke, Granny's Struggle: When Granny is gone, will her story be the last chapter?, Seattle Post Intelligencer, 14 October 2006 In October 2008, the annual survey revealed seven were missing and presumed dead, reducing the count to 83. This is potentially the largest decline in the population in the past ten years. These deaths can be attributed to declines in Chinook salmon. Researchers: 7 Orcas Missing from Puget Sound, Associated Press. USA Today, 25 October 2008
Scientist Ken Balcomb has extensively studied killer whales since 1976; he is the research biologist responsible for discovering U.S. Navy sonar may harm killer whales. He studied killer whales from the Center for Whale Research, located in Friday Harbor, Washington. He was also able to study killer whales from "his home porch perched above Puget Sound, where the animals hunt and play in summer months". In May 2003, Balcomb (along with other whale watchers near the Puget Sound coastline) noticed uncharacteristic behavior displayed by the killer whales. The whales seemed "agitated and were moving haphazardly, attempting to lift their heads free of the water" to escape the sound of the sonars. "Balcomb confirmed at the time that strange underwater pinging noises detected with underwater microphones were sonar. The sound originated from a U.S. Navy frigate 12 miles (19 kilometers) distant, Balcomb said." The impact of sonar waves on killer whales is potentially life-threatening. Three years prior to Balcomb's discovery, research in the Bahamas showed 14 beaked whales washed up on the shore. These whales were beached on the exact day U.S. Navy destroyers were activated into sonar exercise. Of the 14 whales beached, six of them died. These six dead whales were studied, and CAT scans of the two of the whale heads showed hemorrhaging around the brain and the ears, which is consistent with decompression sickness.
Another conservation concern was made public in September 2008 when the Canadian government decided it was not necessary to enforce further protections (including the Species at Risk Act in place to protect endangered animals along their habitats) for killer whales aside from the laws already in place. In response to this decision, six environmental groups sued the federal government in Vancouver, Canada, claiming killer whales were facing many threats on the British Columbia Coast and the federal government did nothing to protect them from these threats. A legal and scientific nonprofit organization, Ecojustice, led the lawsuit and represented the David Suzuki Foundation, Environmental Defence, Greenpeace Canada, International Fund for Animal Welfare, the Raincoast Conservation Foundation, and the Wilderness Committee. Many scientists involved in this lawsuit, including Bill Wareham, a marine scientist with the David Suzuki Foundation, noted increased boat traffic, water toxic wastes, and low salmon population as major threats, putting approximately 87 killer whales on the British Columbia Coast in danger.
Noise from shipping, drilling, and other human activities is a significant concern in some key killer whale habitats, including Johnstone Strait and Haro Strait. In the mid-1990s, loud underwater noises from salmon farms were used to deter seals. Killer whales also avoided the surrounding waters.[ref]
Research on Orcas, Raincoast Research Society. Retrieved 2010-02-18[/ref] High-intensity sonar used by the Navy disturbs killer whales along with other marine mammals. Killer whales are popular with whale watchers, which may stress the whales and alter their behavior, particularly if boats approach too closely or block their lines of travel.
The Exxon Valdez oil spill adversely affected killer whales in Prince William Sound and Alaska's Kenai Fjords region. Eleven members (about half) of one resident pod disappeared in the following year. The spill damaged salmon and other prey populations, which in turn damaged local killer whales. By 2009, scientists estimated the AT1 transient population (considered part of a larger population of 346 transients), numbered only seven individuals and had not reproduced since the spill. This population is expected to die out.

Relationship with humans

Indigenous cultures

The indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest Coast feature killer whales throughout their history, art, spirituality and religion. The Haida regarded killer whales as the most powerful animals in the ocean, and their mythology tells of killer whales living in houses and towns under the sea. According to these myths, they took on human form when submerged, and humans who drowned went to live with them.
The Maritime Archaic people of Newfoundland also had great respect for killer whales, as evidenced by stone carvings found in a 4,000-year-old burial site at the Port au Choix National Historic Site. Religion in Newfoundland and Labrador, Newfoundland and Labrador Heritage, Memorial University of Newfoundland. Retrieved 2010-01-26
In the tales and beliefs of the Siberian Yupik people, killer whales are said to appear as wolves in winter, and wolves as killer whales in summer. 156 in Rubcova, E. S. (1954). Materials on the Language and Folklore of the Eskimoes, Vol. I, Chaplino Dialect. Leningrad: Academy of Sciences of the USSR. Original data: Е.С. Рубцова: Материалы по языку и фольклору эскимосов (чаплинский диалект). Академия Наук СССР. Москва-Ленинград, 1954Menovshchikov, G. A. (1962). Grammar of the language of Asian Eskimos. Vol. I., pp. 439, 441. Moscow and Leningrad: Academy of Sciences of the USSR. Original data: Г. А. Меновщиков: Грамматиκа языка азиатских эскимосов. Часть первая. Академия Наук СССР. Москва-Ленинград, 1962Духовная культура (Spiritual culture), subsection of Support for Siberian Indigenous Peoples Rights (Поддержка прав коренных народов Сибири) — see the section on Eskimos A radio interview with Russian scientists about man and animal, examples taken especially from Asian Eskimos Reverence is expressed in several forms: the boat represents the animal, and a wooden carving hung from the hunter's belt.Духовная культура (Spirit culture), subsection of Support for Siberian Indigenous Peoples Rights (Поддержка прав коренных народов Сибири) — see the section on Eskimos Small sacrifices such as tobacco are strewn into the sea for them. Killer whales were believed to have helped the hunters even when in wolf guise, by forcing reindeer to allow themselves to be killed.

"Killer" stereotype

In Western cultures, killer whales were historically feared as dangerous, savage predators. The first written description of a killer whale was given by Pliny the Elder circa AD 70, who wrote, "Orcas (the appearance of which no image can express, other than an enormous mass of savage flesh with teeth) are the enemy of whales... they charge and pierce them like warships ramming."Gaius Plinius Secundus. Historia Naturalis 9.5.12 (Latin), in Bill Thayer's LacusCurtius: Into the Roman World. (See also an English translation by John Bostock and Henry Thomas Riley, 1855.) Retrieved 2010-02-19.
Of the very few confirmed attacks on humans by wild killer whales, none have been fatal. The sled dogs' barking is speculated to have sounded enough like seal calls to trigger the killer whale's hunting curiosity. In the 1970s, a surfer in California was bitten, and in 2005, a boy in Alaska who was splashing in a region frequented by harbor seals was bumped by a killer whale that apparently misidentified him as prey.[ref]
The Associated Press. "Boy survives bump from killer whale." The Seattle Times, 18 August 2005. Retrieved 2010-01-03[/ref] Unlike wild killer whales, captive killer whales are reported to have made nearly two dozen attacks on humans since the 1970s, some of which have been fatal.SeaWorld trainer killed by killer whale", CNN, 25 February 2010, Retrieved 2010-09-09
Competition with fishermen also led to killer whales being regarded as pests. In the waters of the Pacific Northwest and Iceland, the shooting of killer whales was accepted and even encouraged by governments.

Modern Western attitudes

Western attitudes towards killer whales have changed dramatically in recent decades. In the mid-1960s and early 1970s, killer whales came to much greater public and scientific awareness, starting with the first live-capture and display of a killer whale known as Moby Doll, a resident harpooned off Saturna Island in 1964.
Between 1964 and 1976, 50 killer whales from the Pacific Northwest were captured for display in aquaria, and public interest in the animals grew. In the 1970s, research pioneered by Michael Bigg led to the discovery of the species' complex social structure, its use of vocal communication, and its extraordinarily stable mother-offspring bonds. Through photo-identification techniques, individuals were named and tracked over decades.
Bigg's techniques also revealed the Pacific Northwest population was in the low hundreds rather than the thousands that had been previously assumed. In the Pacific Northwest, the species that had unthinkingly been targeted became a cultural icon within a few decades.
The public's growing appreciation also led to growing opposition to whale–keeping in aquaria. Only one whale has been taken in North American waters since 1976. In recent years, the extent of the public's interest in killer whales has manifested itself in several high-profile efforts surrounding individuals. Following the success of the 1993 film Free Willy, the movie's captive star Keiko was returned to the coast of his native Iceland in 1998. The director of the International Marine Mammal Project for the Earth Island Institute, David Phillips, led the efforts to return Keiko to the Iceland waters.

Whaling

The first records of commercial hunting of killer whales date to the 18th century in Japan. During the 19th and early 20th centuries, the global whaling industry caught immense numbers of baleen and sperm whales, but largely ignored killer whales because of their limited amounts of recoverable oil, their smaller populations, and the difficulty of taking them. Over 3,000 killer whales were taken by Soviet whalers,[ref]
Killer Whale, Bergen Museum. Retrieved 2010-01-26[/ref] including an Antarctic catch of 916 in 1979–80 alone, prompting the International Whaling Commission to recommend a ban on commercial hunting of the species pending further research.
Killer whales have helped humans hunting other whales. One well-known example was in Eden, Australia, including the male known as Old Tom. Whalers more often considered them a nuisance, however, as they would gather to scavenge meat from the whalers' catch. Some populations, such as in Alaska's Prince William Sound, may have been reduced significantly by whalers shooting them in retaliation.

Captivity

The killer whale's intelligence, trainability, striking appearance, playfulness in captivity and sheer size have made it a popular exhibit at aquaria and aquatic theme parks. From 1976 to 1997, 55 whales were taken from the wild in Iceland, 19 from Japan, and three from Argentina. These figures exclude animals that died during capture. Live captures fell dramatically in the 1990s, and by 1999, about 40% of the 48 animals on display in the world were captive-born.
Organizations such as the World Society for the Protection of Animals and the Whale and Dolphin Conservation Society campaign against the practice of keeping them in captivity. In captivity, they often develop pathologies, such as the dorsal fin collapse seen in 60–90% of captive males. Captives have vastly reduced life expectancies, on average only living into their 20s. each day, and critics say the animals are too big and intelligent to be suitable for captivity.[ref]
Associated Press. Whale Attack Renews Captive Animal Debate CBS News, 1 March 2010. Retrieved 2010-03-07[/ref] Captives occasionally act aggressively towards themselves, their tankmates, or humans, which critics say is a result of stress. Between 1991 and 2010, the bull orca known as Tilikum killed three people, and was featured in the critically acclaimed 2013 film, Blackfish. Tilikum has lived at SeaWorld since 1992.



Notes



|last1=Baird |first1=Robin W.
|title=Killer Whales of the World
|publisher=Voyageur Press
|location=Stillwater, MN.
|url=
|year=2002
|ref=harv
|isbn=0-7603-2654-1}}
|last=Carwardine |first=Mark
|year=2001
|title=Killer Whales
|location=London
|publisher=BBC Worldwide Ltd
|isbn=0-7894-8266-5
|ref=harv}}
|last1=Ford |first1=John K. B. |last2=Ellis |first2=Graeme M.
|year=2006
|url=
|page=185
|title=Selective foraging by fish-eating killer whales Orcinus orca in British Columbia
|journal=Marine Ecology Progress Series
|volume=316
|doi=10.3354/meps316185
|ref=harv}}
|last1=Heimlich |first1=Sara |last2=Boran |first2=James
|year=2001
|title=Killer Whales
|location=Stillwater, MN
|publisher=Voyageur Press
|url=
|ref=harv
|isbn=0-89658-545-X}}
|publisher=National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) Northwest Regional Office
|author=NMFS
|year=2005
|format=PDF
|url=
|title=Conservation Plan for Southern Resident Killer Whales (Orcinus orca)
|location=Seattle, U.S.A.
|accessdate=2009-01-02
|ref=harv| archiveurl = //web.org/web/20080626121719/ archivedate = 26 June 2008}}
|title=Guardians of the Whales: The Quest to Study Whales in the Wild |editor=Elaine Jones |publisher=Whitecap Books |location=North Vancouver, British Columbia |year=1992 |ref=harv}}

Further reading




