[[Women's sports]]

CATEGORIES: Women's sports

Women's sports include amateur and professional competitions in virtually all sports. Female participation in sports rose dramatically in the twentieth century, especially in the last quarter, reflecting changes in modern societies that emphasized gender parity. Although the level of participation and performance still varies greatly by country and by sport, women's sports have broad acceptance throughout the world, and in a few instances, such as figure skating, rival or exceed their male counterparts in popularity. An important aspect about women's sports is that women usually do not compete on equal terms against men.sportsscientists.html

History

Ancient civilizations

Before each ancient Olympic Games there was a separate women's athletic event, the Heraean Games, dedicated to the goddess Hera and held at the same stadium at Olympia. Myth held that the Heraea was founded by Hippodameia the wife of the king who founded the Olympics.
Although married women were excluded from the Olympics even as spectators, Cynisca won an Olympic game as owner of a chariot (champions of chariot races were owners not riders), as did Euruleonis, Belistiche, Timareta, Theodota, and Cassia.
After the classical period, there was some participation by women in men's athletic festivals.

Early modern

During the Song, Yuan, and Ming dynasties, women played in professional Cuju teams 
thumb|Chinese ladies playing cuju, by the Ming Dynasty painter Du Jin The first Olympic games in the modern era, which were in 1896 were not open to women, but since then the number of women who have participated in the Olympic games have incresed dramatically. 

19th and early 20th centuries

The educational committees of the French Revolution (1789) included intellectual, moral, and physical education for girls and boys alike. With the victory of Napoleon less than twenty years later, physical education was reduced to military preparedness for boys and men. In Germany, the physical education of GutsMuths (1793) included girl's education. This included the measurement of performances of girls. This led to women's sport being more actively pursued in Germany than in most other countries. Arnd Krüger (2003): Germany, in: James Riordan & Arnd Krüger (eds.): European Cultures in Sport. Examining the Nations and Regions. Bristol: Intellect 2003, pp. 57 – 88.  When the Fédération Sportive Féminine Internationale was formed as an all women's international organization it had a German male vice-president, and German international success in elite sports.
Women's sports in the late 1800s focused on correct posture, facial and bodily beauty, muscles, and health.
Few women competed in sports in Europe and North America until the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, as social changes favored increased female participation in society as equals with men. Although women were technically permitted to participate in many sports, relatively few did. There was often disapproval of those who did.
"Bicycling has done more to emancipate women than anything else in the world." Susan B. Anthony said "I stand and rejoice every time I see a woman ride on a wheel. It gives women a feeling of freedom and self-reliance."
The modern Olympics had female competitors from 1900 onward, though women at first participated in considerably fewer events than men. As of the IOC-Congress in Paris 1914 a woman's medal had formally the same weight as a man's in the official medal table. This left the decisions about women's participation to the individual international sports federations. Arnd Krüger: Forgotton Decisions. The IOC on the Eve of World War I, in: Olympika 6 (1997), 85 – 98. (  Thus netball was developed out of basketball and softball out of baseball. In response to the lack of support for women's international sport the Fédération Sportive Féminine Internationale was founded in France. This organization initiated the Women's World Games, which attracted participation of nearly 20 countries and was held four times between 1922 and 1934.  The International Olympic Committee began to incorporate greater participation of women at the Olympics in response. The number of Olympic women athletes increased over five-fold in the period, going from 65 at the 1920 Summer Olympics to 331 at the 1936 Summer Olympics. IOC. Retrieved on 2014-01-11. IOC. Retrieved on 2014-01-11.
Most early women's professional sports leagues foundered.  This is often attributed to a lack of spectator support.  Amateur competitions became the primary venue for women's sports. Throughout the mid-twentieth century, Communist countries dominated many Olympic sports, including women's sports, due to state-sponsored athletic programs that were technically regarded as amateur.  The legacy of these programs endured, as former Communist countries continue to produce many of the top female athletes. Germany and Scandinavia also developed strong women's athletic programs in this period.
During the later years of the 20th century the government decided to change the way that women were treated in schools based on their gender. They implimented Title IX, which is a law stating that any federally funded program cannot dicriminate anyone based on their sex.

File:Bw 1920 competition medals.
File:1912 Fraulein Kussin Mrs Edwards boxing. Edwards boxing, 1912.
File:1910 to 1920 Sibyl Marston holding foil.
Image:Time Cover in 1924-08-25.

Women's rights in sports are very important because even though women today enjoy their freedom playing sports, there were women that worked hard to gain that freedom for women who have a passion for sports now. There are many examples of the restrictions women had for playing sports during the 1900s. One example is when Senda Berenson, a gymnastics instructor and P.E. teacher at an all-girls school,that wanted to allow her girls to play basketball, since it was a newly created sport. Senda wondered about this at the time that women could only play certain sports if they were in clubs.
The rise of women playing sports began during World War I and World War II. This issue impacted the society at the time because most people believed that women should not take part in any type of sport or physical activity, because women were portrayed as inferior to men. But even though many people were against it at the time; women gained the right to play more physical sports.

=Canada=

Sports are high priority in Canadian culture, but women were long relegated to second-class status. There were regional differences as well, with the eastern provinces emphasizing a more feminine "girls rule" game of basketball, while the Western provinces preferred identical rules.  Girls' and women's sport has traditionally been slowed down by a series of factors: girls and women historically have low levels of interest and participation; there were very few women in leadership positions in academic administration, student affairs or athletics; there were few women coaches; the media strongly emphasized men's sports as a demonstration of masculinity, suggesting that women seriously interested in sports were crossing gender lines; the male sports establishment was actively hostile. Staunch feminists dismissed sports as unworthy of their support. Women's of progress was uphill; they first had to counter the widespread notion that women's bodies were so restricted and delicate that vigorous physical activity was dangerous. These notions where first challenged by the "new woman" around 1900. These women started with bicycling; they rode into new gender spaces in education, work, and suffrage. The 1920s marked a breakthrough for women, including working-class young women in addition to the pioneering middle class sportswomen.M. Ann Hall, The Girl and the Game: A History of Women's Sport in Canada (Broadview Press, 2002)

United States: Title IX

Implementation and Regulation

In 1972 women's sports in the United States got a boost when the Congress passed the Title IX legislation. The United States Congress passed this law as a part of the additional Amendment Act to the 1964 Civil Rights Act.    In practice, the difficulty with Title IX is making sure schools are compliant with the law. In 1979, there was a policy interpretation that offered three ways in which schools could be compliant with Title IX; it became known as the "three-part test". 
Although schools only have to be compliant with one of the three prongs, many schools have not managed to achieve equity. Many schools attempt to achieve compliance through the first prong, however, in order to achieve that compliance schools cut men's programs which is not the way the OCR wanted compliance achieved.

Effect on women's sports

The main objective of Title IX is to avoid the discrimination of anyone due to their sex in a federally funded program. It was also used to provide protection to those who are being descrminated due to their gender. This is not to say that all women who are successful later on in life played sports, but it is saying that women who did participate in athletics received benefits in their education and employment later on in life.

The battle for equality

Today, the battle for equality between men's and women's sports rages on.  Women make up 54% of enrollment at 832 schools that responded to an NCAA gender equity study in 2000, however, females at these institutions only account for 41% of the athletes. Before Title IX 90% of women's collage athletic programs we run by women, but by 1992 the number dropped to 42% since Title IX requires that there are equal opportunities for both genders. In 1972, women administered 90 percent of women's athletic programs, in 2004 this fell to 19 percent and also in 2004 18 percent of all women's programs had no women administrators. In 2004 there were 3356 administrative jobs in NCAA women's athletic programs and of those jobs women held 35 percent of them.
The 2012 London Olympics were the first games of their kind in which women competed in every sport.channel4.com/news/london-2012-is-this-the-womens-olympics

Women's sports today

Girls' and boys' participation rates in sports varies by country and region.  In the United States today, nearly all schools require student participation in sports, guaranteeing that all girls were exposed to athletics at an early age, which was generally not the case in Western Europe and Latin America.
Tennis was the most-popular professional female sport from the 1970s onward,
Women's professional team sports achieved popularity for the first time in the 1990s, particularly in basketball and football (soccer).
Today, women compete professionally and as amateurs in virtually every major sport, though the level of participation typically decreases when it comes to the more violent contact sports;  few schools have women's programs in American football, boxing or wrestling.
Modern sports have seen the development of a higher profile for female athletes in other historically male sports, such as golf, marathons or ice hockey.
As of 2013, the only sports that men but not women play professionally in the United States are football, baseball, ice hockey, and Ultimate Frisbee.
Recently there has been much more crossover as to which sports males and females participate in, although there are still some differences. For example, at the 1992 Winter Olympics, both genders were allowed to participate in the sport of figure skating, previously a female-only sporting event. However, the programs for the event required men to perform three triple jumps, and women only one.

File:UCSD Female Striker 02.
File:Meseret Defar Valencia 2008.
File:1 patti 060123 1Ds 7037.
File:Ellen van Dijk, Time Trial Olympic Summer Games 2012.
File:Fernanda BRITO 5962.
File:Collage of Italian sportswomen.jpg|A collage of Italian international sportswomen

Further reading








