[[Tokyo Imperial Palace]]

CATEGORIES: Tokyo Imperial Palace, Palaces in Tokyo, Gardens in Tokyo

, the private residences of the imperial family, an archive, museum and administrative offices.
It is built on the site of the old Edo castle. The total area including the gardens is 

History

Edo castle

After the capitulation of the Shogunate and the Meiji Restoration, the inhabitants, including the Shogun Tokugawa Yoshinobu, were required to vacate the premises of the Edo Castle. Leaving Kyoto Imperial Palace, on 26 November 1868 the emperor arrived at Edo castle, made it to his new residence and renamed it to .wdic.org/w/CUL/%E7%9A%87%E5%B1%85
Previous fires had destroyed the Honmaru area containing the old donjon (which itself burned in the 1657 Meireki fire). On the night of 5 May 1873, a fire consumed the Nishinomaru Palace (formerly the shogun's residence), and the new imperial  was constructed on the site in 1888.
A non-profit "Rebuilding Edo-jo Association" (NPO江戸城再建) was founded in 2004 with the aim of a historically correct reconstruction of at least the main donjon. In March 2013 Naotaka Kotake, head of the group, said that "The capital city needs a symbolic building," and that the group planned to collect donations and signatures on a petition in support of rebuilding the tower. A reconstruction blueprint had been made based on old documents. The Imperial Household Agency at the time had not indicated whether it would support the project. Daily Yomiuri NPO wants to restore Edo Castle glory March 21, 2013 

Old palace

In the Meiji era, most structures from Edo Castle disappeared.  Some were cleared to make way for other buildings while others were destroyed by earthquakes and fire. For example, the wooden  over the moat were replaced with stone and iron bridges. The buildings of the Imperial Palace constructed in the Meiji era were constructed of wood.  Their design employed traditional Japanese architecture in their exterior appearance while the interiors were an eclectic mixture of then-fashionable Japanese and European elements. The ceilings of the grand chambers were coffered with Japanese elements; however, Western chairs, tables, and heavy curtains furnished the spaces. The floors of the public rooms had parquets or carpets while the residential spaces used traditional tatami mats.
The main audience hall was the central part of the palace. It was the largest building in the compound. Guests were received there for public events. The floor space was more than 223 tsubo or approximately . In the interior, the coffered ceiling was traditional Japanese-style, while the floor was parquetry. The roof was styled similarly to the Kyoto Imperial Palace, but was covered with (fireproof) copper plates rather than Japanese cypress shingles.
In the late Taisho and early Showa eras, more concrete buildings were added, such as the headquarters of the Imperial Household Ministry and the Privy Council. These structures exhibited only token Japanese elements.
From 1888 to 1948, the compound was called  and became a public park in 1968.
Interior images of the old Meiji-era palace that was destroyed during World War II

File:Higashidamari-no-Ma of Meiji Palace.JPG|Higashidamari-no-Ma
File:Chigusa-no-Ma of Meiji Palace.JPG|Chigusa-no-Ma
File:Houmei-Den of Meiji Palace.JPG|Hōmei-Den
File:Kiri-no-Ma of Meiji Palace.JPG|Kiri-no-Ma
File:Nishidamari-no-Ma of Meiji Palace.JPG|Nishidamari-no-Ma

Present palace

The present Imperial Palace encompasses the retrenchments of the former Edo Castle. The modern palace  for various imperial court functions is located in the old Nishinomaru, while the residence of the emperor and empress is located in the Fukiage Gardens. 
Except for Imperial Household Agency and the East Gardens, the palace is generally closed to the public. Each New Year (January 2) and Emperor's Birthday, the public is permitted to enter through the Nakamon (inner gate) where they gather in the Kyuden Totei Plaza in front of the Chowaden Hall. The imperial family appears on the balcony before the jubilant crowd and the emperor normally gives a short speech greeting and thanking the visitors and wishing them good health and blessings.
Every year a poetry convention called Utakai Hajime is held at the palace on January 1. 
The old Honmaru, Ninomaru, and Sannomaru compounds now comprise the East Gardens, an area with public access containing administrative and other public buildings.
The Kitanomaru Park is located to the north and is the former northern enceinte of Edo Castle. It is a public park and is the site of Nippon Budokan Hall. To the south are the outer gardens of the Imperial Palace (Kōkyo-gaien), which are also a public park.

Grounds

Kyūden

The Imperial Palace (
The main buildings of the palace grounds, including the () main palace, home of the liaison conference of the Imperial General Headquarters, were severely damaged by the fire of May 1945. Today's palace consists of multiple modern structures that are interconnected. The palace complex was finished in 1968 and was constructed of steel-framed reinforced concrete structures produced domestically, with two stories above ground and one story below. The buildings of the Imperial Palace were constructed by the Takenaka Corporation in a modernist style with clear Japanese architectural references such as the large, gabled hipped roof, columns and beams.
The complex consists of seven wings, including:
Halls include the Minami-Damari, Nami-no-Ma, multiple Kairo, Kita-Kurumayose, Kita-Damari, Syakkyo-no-Ma, Shunju-no-Ma, Seiden-Sugitoe (Kaede), Seiden-Sugitoe (Sakura), Take-no-Ma, Ume-no-Ma and Matsu-no-Ma.
The () is used for both receiving state guests and holding official state ceremonies and functions. The Matsu-no-Ma (Pine Chamber) is the throne room, the emperor gives audiences to the prime minister here as well as to newly appointed or departing ambassadors.

Fukiage Garden

The Fukiage Garden has carried the name since the Edo period and is used as the residential area for the imperial family.
The 
The palace precincts include the Three Palace Sanctuaries (Kyūchū-sanden, 宮中三殿). Parts of the Imperial Regalia of Japan are kept here and the sanctuary plays a religious role in imperial coronations and weddings.

East Garden

The East Garden is where most of the administrative buildings for the palace are located and encompasses the former Honmaru and Ninomaru areas of Edo Castle, a total of . Located on the grounds of the East Garden is the Imperial Tokagakudo Music Hall, the Music Department of the Board of Ceremonies of the Imperial Household, the Archives and Mausolea Department Imperial Household Agency, structures for the guards such as the Saineikan dojo, and the Museum of the Imperial Collections. 
Several structures that were added since the Meiji period were removed over time to allow construction of the East Garden. In 1932, the kuretake-ryō was built as a dormitory for imperial princesses, however this building was removed prior to the construction of the present gardens. Other buildings such as stables and housing were removed to create the East Garden in its present configuration. 
Construction work began in 1961 with a new pond in the Ninomaru, as well as the repair and restoration of various keeps and structures from the Edo period. On 30 May 1963, the area was declared by the Japanese government a "Special Historic Relic" under the Cultural Properties Protection Law.

Tōkagakudō (Music Hall)

The Tōkagakudō (Peach Blossom Music Hall,桃華楽堂) is located to the east of the former main donjon of Edo Castle in the Honmaru. This music hall was built in commemoration of the 60th birthday of Empress Kojun on 6 March 1963. The ferro-concrete building covers a total area of . The hall is octahedron-shaped and each of its eight outer walls is decorated with differently designed mosaic tiles. Construction began in August 1964 and was completed in February 1966.

Ninomaru Garden

Symbolic trees representing each prefecture in Japan are planted in the northwestern corner of Ninomaru enceinte. Such trees have been donated from each prefecture and there are total of 260, covering 30 varieties.

Suwa no Chaya

The Suwa no Chaya is a teahouse that was located in the Fukiage Garden during the Edo period. It was moved to the Akasaka Detached Palace after the Meiji restoration but was reconstructed in its original location in 1912. It was moved to the present location with the construction of the East Garden.

Kitanomaru

The Kitanomaru Park is located to the north and is the former northern enceinte of Edo Castle. It is a public park and is the site of Nippon Budokan Hall.

Kōkyo-gaien

To the south are the large outer gardens of the Imperial Palace, which are also a public park and contain a bronze monument to .

Gallery

Image:The Imperial Family and Visit of the General Public to the Palace for the New Year Greeting(2012.JPG|The Imperial Family and the new year greeting 2012 at the Chōwaden Reception Hall
Image:Seimon Ishibashi.JPG|Seimon Ishibashi bridge leading to the main gate over the moats
Image:Imperial Palace Tokyo Ambassador on Kyuden Totei Plaza. Although the carriage is not as comfortable as the modern limousine, most choose the carriage.
Image:Imperial Palace Tokyo Imperial Household Agency.JPG|Building of the Imperial Household Agency, constructed in 1930s, located next to the Kyuden
Image:Saineikan at the Imperial Palace in Tokyo.JPG|Saineikan dojo for the guards
Image:Imperial Palace Tokyo Former Privy council.JPG|Building of the former Privy Council in the East Garden area, one of the few western-style buildings from the pre-war Showa era
Image:Music Department of the Board of Ceremonies of the Imperial Household Agency.JPG|Music Department of the Board of Ceremonies
Image:Sannomaru-Shozokan.JPG|Museum of the Imperial Collections, constructed in 1990s
Image:Archives and Mausolea Department Imperial Household Agency.JPG|Archives and Mausolea Department
Image:Japan Emperor Akihito 20th anniversary 2.jpg|Palace grounds during Nov 12, 2009 celebration of anniversary of Akihito's ascension to the throne
Image:Tokyo Imperial Palace East Gate.JPG|A view of guard tower and East Gate to the Imperial Palace
Image:Hasuikebori lotus moat edo.jpg|Hasuikebori lotus moat
Image:Laura Bush Asia Trip 2002 01.S. President George W. Bush
Image:Fujimi-yagura 1.jpg|Fujimi-yagura (Mt Fuji-view keep), guard building within the inner grounds of the Imperial Palace
Image:EastGardenPanorama.jpg| Pond in the East Garden at the Imperial Palace
Image:Imperial Palace Tokyo Tokagakudo Music Hall.jpg|Tōkagakudō (Music Hall)
Image:Kokyo0097.jpg|Suwa no chaya teahouse in the Ninomaru Garden
Image:Imperial Palace Tokyo Kyuden c.jpg|Front entrance of the Chōwaden Reception Hall






