[[Lapland (Finland)]]

CATEGORIES: Lapland (Finland), Lapland, Regions of Finland, Provinces of Finland (1917–1997), Provinces of Finland (1997–2009), States and territories established in 1936, 1936 establishments in Finland

Lapland () is the largest and northernmost of the regions of Finland. The municipalities in the region cooperate in a Regional Council. Lapland borders the Region of North Ostrobothnia in the south. It also borders the Gulf of Bothnia, Norrbotten County in Sweden, Finnmark County and Troms County in Norway, and Murmansk Oblast in Russia.

History

The area of Lapland was split between two counties of the Swedish Realm from 1634 to 1809. The northern and western areas were part of Västerbotten County, while the southern areas were part of Ostrobothnia County (after 1755 Oulu County). The northern and western areas were transferred in 1809 to Oulu County, which became Oulu Province. Under the royalist constitution of Finland during the first half of 1918, Lapland was to become a Grand Principality and part of the inheritance of the proposed king of Finland. Lapland Province was separated from Oulu Province in 1938.
During the Interim Peace and beginning of the Continuation War the government of Finland allowed the German Army to station itself in Lapland as a part of Operation Barbarossa. After Finland made a separate peace with the Soviet Union in 1944, the Soviet Union demanded that Finland expel the German army from her soil. The result was the Lapland War, during which almost the whole civilian population of Lapland was evacuated. The Germans used scorched earth tactics in Lapland, before they withdrew to Norway. 40 to 47% of the dwellings in Lapland were destroyed, 417 km of railroads were destroyed and 9,500 km of roadways were mined, destroyed or were unusable, 675 bridges and 3,700 km of telephone lines were destroyed. 90% of Rovaniemi, the capital of Lapland, was burned to the ground, with only few a pre-war buildings surviving the destruction.
After the Second World War, Petsamo municipality and part of Salla municipality were ceded to the Soviet Union. The decades following the war were a period of rebuilding, industrialization and fast economic growth. Large hydroelectric plants and mines were established and cities, roads and bridges were rebuilt from the destruction of the war. In the late 20th century the economy of Lapland started to decline, mines and factories turned more unprofitable and the population started to decline rapidly across most of the region.
The provinces of Finland were abolished on January 1, 2010, but Lapland was reorganised as one of the new regions that replaced them.

Economy

Population

Lapland is the home of about 3.4% of Finland's population, and is by far the least densely populated area in the country. The biggest towns in Lapland are Rovaniemi (the regional capital), Tornio, and Kemi. In 2011, Lapland had a population of 183,484 of whom 177,950 spoke Finnish, 1,526 spoke Sami, 387 spoke Swedish and 3,467 spoke some other languages as their mother language.
Lapland's population has been in decline since 1990.

Regional Council

The 21 municipalities of Lapland are organised into a single Region, where they cooperate in the Lapland Regional Council, Lapin liitto or Lapplands förbund.

Politics

Results of the Finnish parliamentary election, 2011 in Lapland:

Sami Domicile Area

The northernmost municipalities of Lapland where the Sami people are the most numerous, form the Sami Domicile Area. Sami organization exists in parallel with the provincial one.

Municipalities

 

Heraldry

The Regional Council of Lapland uses the Finnish variation of the coat of arms for Laponia. The coat of arms for the Province of Lapland was composed out of the coats of arms of Laponia and Ostrobothnia.

Lapland impact on Finnish numismatics

Most of the gold used to mint Finnish gold coins comes from Lapland.  Lapland itself has been the main motif for a recent commemorative coin, the Finish First Finnish gold euro commemorative coin, minted in 2002. On the reverse side, the midnight sun above a lake in Lapland can be observed.

Gallery

File:Skiing at Riisitunturi National Park.JPG|Riisitunturi National Park in southern Lapland is renowned for its crown snow trees
File:Katximatxis5.PNG|Saana fell in Enontekiö with Lake Kilpisjärvi in northwesternmost Finland; one of the most recognized landscapes in Finland
File:Inari Siida ulkoilmamuseo.JPG|A traditional Lapponian timber house in Siida museum
File:Center of Rovaniemi.jpg|Rovaniemi, the capital of Lapland, during wintertime
File:Rovaniemi pajakyla 2.jpg|Santa Claus Village in Rovaniemi; tourism is crucial to Lapland's economy
File:Rovaniemi in autumn.jpg|Rovaniemi in autumn
File:Sami family-easter.jpg|Sámi people celebrating Easter
File:PanoTorne.jpg|River Tornio near Tornio town
File:Sámi leavga.jpg|Flag of Sámi
File:Levi hiihtokeskus 2003.jpg|Levi, a ski resort in Kittilä
File:Sodankylä 1944.jpg|Lapland was burnt down almost totally in World War II (Sodankylä)
File:Enontekiö kirkko.JPG|Enontekiö Church, a typical after-World War II-erected church
File:Käsivarsi porot 2.JPG|Reindeer in Enontekiö
File:Utsjoki kirkko ja kirkkotuvat.JPG|Utsjoki Church and church cabins; the northernmost church in Finland
File:Tornio Hallituskatu puutalo.JPG|Tornio Town Hall
Image:Termisvaaralta Käsivarren Erämaa.jpg|Wilderness in Enontekiö
File:Lake Inari.jpg|A view towards Lake Inari
File:Meripuistokatu Kemi 20090608.JPG|A general view of Kemi town centre with Gulf of Bothnia in the background
File:Pyhäkero, Pallastunturi - evening.JPG|Pallastunturi Fell in Muonio in wintertime twilight
File:Inari Pielpajärven erämaakirkko.JPG|Pielpajärvi Wilderness Church from 1760 managed to avoid getting burnt in WWII
File:Centre of Kemijärvi.JPG|Kemijärvi town centre
File:Giants kettle aholanvaara1.jpg|A giant's kettle in Salla, one of the largest in the world
File:Porosaivontie.jpg|A bilingual (Finnish and Sámi) street sign
File:View from saana.JPG|A view from Saana fell
File:Kemi Sauvosaarenkatu 2007 08 08.JPG|Architecture in Kemi
File:Keminmaa Church 20090608.JPG|Keminmaa Church
File:Another View to lake Iso-Vietonen from Liinankivaara Mountainside.jpg|Lake Iso-Vietonen, Ylitornio
File:Kevo river.jpg|River Kevo in Utsjoki
File:Sami boots - Arctic Museum.jpg|Sami boots in a museum in Rovaniemi
File:Laanila Prospektor.jpg|An old gold mine in Inari
File:Livojärvi.JPG|Lake Livojärvi, Posio
File:Kolari VR station.JPG|Kolari Railway Station, the northernmost in Finland
File:Pihtsusköngäsgo ur jauzia.jpg|Pihtsusköngäs Waterfall, Enontekiö
File:Lappia-talo.JPG|Lappia House in Rovaniemi, a culture venue designed by Alvar Aalto
File:Church of Ranua.jpg|Ranua Church
File:Isokuru.JPG|Isokuru Canyon, Pelkosenniemi
File:Kukkolankoski buildings May2008.jpg|Traditional North-Osthrobothnian house in Tornio
File:Peltojarvi.jpg|Lake Peltojärvi in Inari
File:Eisenbahnbrücke-Torne-älv6041090.jpg|A view from Haparanda, Sweden to Tornio; the two towns are located so close, divided only by a river, that they're called a twin-town
File:LumiLinna 2008 4.jpg|A view from the annual Snow Castle in Kemi
File:Sámi mythology shaman drum Samisk mytologi schamantrumma 104.png|A Sámi shaman drum mask
File:Polar bear 8.JPG|A polar bear in Ranua; though in a zoo

Notes





.

