[[Taiwan Taoyuan International Airport]]

CATEGORIES: Taiwan Taoyuan International Airport, Buildings and structures in Taoyuan County, Taiwan, Airports in Taiwan, Airports established in 1979

Taiwan Taoyuan International Airport  It is the main international hub for China Airlines and EVA Air.
The airport opened for commercial operations in 1979 and is an important regional trans-shipment center, passenger hub, and gateway for destinations in China and the rest of Asia.  The airport was formerly known as Chiang Kai-shek International Airport (CKS International Airport) until the name was changed in 2006 to its current name.
Taiwan Taoyuan International Airport is one of two airports that serves Taipei and northern Taiwan; the other, Taipei Songshan Airport, is located within Taipei City limits and served Taipei as its international airport until 1979. Songshan now mainly serves chartered flights, most of which are to and from mainland China (see cross-strait charter), domestic flights, and some international flights.
Taiwan Taoyuan handled a total of 30,701,987 passengers and 1,571,814,300 kg of freight in 2013. The airport is the 13th busiest airport worldwide in terms of international passengers number and 10th busiest in terms of international freight traffic. 

Origin of the name

The airport, originally planned as Taoyuan International Airport, bore the name of late President Chiang Kai-shek until 2006. In Chinese, its former name was literally "Chung-Cheng (Zhongzheng) International Airport", where Chung-Cheng is the legal given name which Chiang Kai-shek had used since the 1910s.
The Executive Yuan of then-President Chen Shui-bian's administration officially approved the name Taiwan Taoyuan International Airport for the hub on September 6, 2006. Despite the name change, the airport is still known as Chiang Kai-Shek (CKS) International Airport in all official records of IATA.

History

In the 1970s, the original airport in Taipei City — Taipei Songshan Airport — had become overcrowded and could not be expanded due to space limitations. Thus, a new airport was planned to alleviate congestion. The new airport opened (with Terminal 1) on February 26, 1979, as part of the Ten Major Construction Projects pursued by the government in the 1970s. The airport was originally planned under the name Taoyuan International Airport but was later changed to Chiang Kai-shek International Airport in memory of former President Chiang Kai-shek.
The airport is the main hub of China Airlines, the ROC's flag carrier, as well as EVA Air, a private airline established in 1989. Overcrowding of the airport in recent years prompted the construction of Terminal 2, which was opened on July 29, 2000, with half of its gates operational; EVA Air was the first airline to move into Terminal 2. The remaining gates opened on January 21, 2005 for China Airlines. (Making China Airlines the only airline to operate from both terminals.) There are plans for the construction of a third terminal, which will be built to alleviate congestion in Terminals 1 and 2.
In January 2006, a Foreign Laborers' Service Center was set up to provide airport pick-up services and serve the needs of migrant workers. There are service desks in the Arrival lobby of Terminal 1 and Terminal 2, and in the Departure lobby of Terminal 1. Service hotlines in Vietnamese, Thai, English, and Indonesian are provided.

Terminals

Taiwan Taoyuan International Airport currently has two terminals which are connected by two, short people movers. A third terminal is planned, and a rapid transit system currently under construction will link the terminals together underground.

Terminal 1

Terminal 1 is the original passenger terminal of the Taiwan Taoyuan International Airport. The design of the building is based on the main terminal of Washington Dulles International Airport. All international flights were moved to the airport following the completion of this terminal. Terminal 1 featured 22 gates. A row of 11 gates are located on the north end of the airfield facing the north runway and another row of 11 gates are located on the south end airfield facing the south runway. The two concourses that contained the airplane gates are linked together by a main building that contained the check-in areas, baggage claim, passport immigration areas, and security checkpoint areas. Together they form a giant "H". All gates are equipped with jetways. Gates located at the end of the concourses have one jetway and gates not located at the end of the concourses have two jetways. The terminal used to be very white in color when it first opened. As the years gradually passed, the façade and color has become more tan and yellow colored due to air pollution in Taipei.
After the completion of Terminal 2, some gates from Terminal 1 were removed to make space for Terminal 2. Currently Terminal 1 has 18 gates. Alphabetical letters were introduced when Terminal 2 was completed. The north concourse is now Concourse A and the south concourse is now Concourse B. Before Terminal 2, gates were numbered from 1 to 22. China Airlines uses Concourse A for the majority of its flights in Terminal 1, while the third largest carrier of the airport, Cathay Pacific, operates most of its flights at Concourse B.

=Terminal 1 renovation=

Terminal 1 is also currently undergoing a $57.4 million renovation consisting of an exterior facelift (designed by Japanese architect Norihiko Dan) and a renovated interior. It will also include construction of dividing walls on the east and west sides of the terminal, renovation of the arrival and departure halls, and construction of new parking garages. It will double its floor area, expand the number of check-in counters, and have enlarged shopping areas. It is expected to increase Terminal 1's capacity from 12 million to 15 million passengers per year when completed. The renovation will take place during late hours to avoid congestion during peak hours. It is scheduled to be completed in second quarter 2012.

Terminal 2

Terminal 2 opened in 2000 to reduce congestion in the aging Terminal 1. Only the South Concourse had been completed by the time the terminal opened. The South Concourse alone has 10 gates, each with 2 jetways and their own security checkpoints. The North Concourse opened later in 2005, bringing the total number of gates for Terminal 2 to 20 gates; the security checkpoints were moved to a central location in front of the passport control. The 318,000-m2 facility is capable of handling 17 million passengers per year.
The Southern and Northern Concourses are also known as Concourse C and Concourse D, respectively. Terminals 1 and 2 are connected by two short people mover lines, with one from Concourse A to D, and the other from B to C. China Airlines uses Concourse D for the majority of its flights in Terminal 2 while EVA Air uses Concourse C for most of its operations.
Terminal 2 is also currently undergoing a small-scale renovation and is expected to be completed by the end of 2012.

Airlines and destinations

Passenger airlines

Notes
: This flight continues from Taipei to Manila. However, KLM does not have fifth freedom rights to carry revenue traffic solely between TPE and MNL.

=Passenger Destinations Map=

Cargo airlines

Operations

The airport is operated by the Taoyuan International Airport Corporation, a company wholly owned by the Government of Taiwan. The Civil Aeronautics Administration (CAA) is responsible for the provision of air traffic control services, certification of Taiwan registered aircraft, and the regulation of general civil aviation activities.
The airport has two parallel runways, with one 3660 meters in length and another 3350 meters in length and both 60 meters wide, enabling them to cater to the next generation of aircraft. The south runway has been given a Category I Precision Approach, while the north runway has the higher Category II Precision Approach, which allows pilots to land in only 350 metre visibility. The two runways have an ultimate capacity of over 60 aircraft movements an hour. The Airport is upgrading ATC and runways.
There are 41 frontal stands at the main passenger concourse, 15 remote stands and 25 cargo stands. The airport was the seventh busiest for passenger traffic in Asia in 2010, and the world's fourteenth busiest for cargo traffic in 2008.
The operation of scheduled air services to and from Taoyuan is facilitated by air services agreements between Taiwan and other countries. Since the opening of RCTP, the Taiwan Government has implemented a policy of progressive liberalisation of air services with the intention of promoting consumer choice and competition. Many low-cost airlines have started various regional routes to compete head-on with full-service carriers on trunk routes.
The airport's long term expansion opportunities are subject to variables. An NTD 300 billion proposal to build a third runway and a third terminal has been under feasibility study and consultation. However, building a new runway would be very expensive as it would involve a huge compensation for acquiring land.

Airport Facilities

Passenger Facilities

Transportation between Terminal 1 and 2 is provided by the TTIA Skytrain, a driverless people mover system. The train transports both passengers who have cleared security and those who have not through separate train cars.
Airport Business Center
Taiwan Taoyuan International Airport recently finished developing the airports business travel center in late 2011. The facility is a three-story building located between the first and second terminals. Business travelers paying to use the travel center can drive into the airports restricted zone and park their cars directly in front of the building. This allows business travelers to arrive at the airport much closer to the actual departure time versus arriving two hours before departure time like most regular international passengers are required to do. The business center is equipped with over 15 isolated areas allowing travelers to eat their meals without any distractions or disruptions. The facility also includes a spa, sauna, and gymnasium that are available for use by travelers. However, all of these luxuries come with a one-time price tag of $8,000. Travelers who wish to use the facility must make reservations at least three days in advance. Statistics showed that 376 private jets landed and departed the airport through a six month timeframe in 2011; this is a 100 percent increase from the same time frame in 2010

Huan Yu VIP Terminal

Huan Yu VIP Terminal, also known as the Taoyuan Business Aviation Centre (TYBAC), has began service in September 2011 and was officially opened in mid-October 2011. The three-story facility will have its own terminal and facilities separate from the public terminals. It will provide a multimedia conference room, passenger lounge, private rooms and showers, spa, sauna, gym, and business centre facilities. Other services that will be provided include ground handling, baggage handling, fuelling, security, customs and flight planning. Passengers planning to utilize TYBAC must sign up (to the Taiwanese immigration service) 3 days before use.

Baggage and cargo facilities

The handling and transportation of mail, passenger baggage, cargo, and the operation of aerobridges and passenger stairways in Taoyuan Airport is provided by Taoyuan International Airport Services Limited (TIAS) and Evergreen Airline Services (EGAS).
TTIA currently handles over 1.5 million tonnes of cargo annually. There are two air cargo terminals in the airport: one operated by Taiwan Air Cargo Terminals Limited and the other operated by Evergreen Air Cargo Services.

Aircraft maintenance services

China Airlines Engineering and Maintenance Organization (CALEMO) and Evergreen Aviation Technologies (EGAT) both offers maintenance services at the airport. With its huge base, CALEMO, with a market share of over 75%, can offer maintenance service of 5 huge airliners, ex. Boeing 747, at a time or 3 Boeing 747s and another Airbus A330 at a time.

Ground transportation

Bus

Frequent buses link the airport to Taipei, Bus terminals are present at both terminals.

Rail

The Taoyuan International Airport Access MRT System is scheduled to begin service in December 2015 and will link both terminals to Taipei and Zhongli, Taoyuan. Express services will allow for travel to Taipei Station in 35 minutes. The Taiwan High Speed Rail Taoyuan Station is about  away and is accessible by shuttle bus. When the Airport Access MRT System is completed, the station will also be accessible by rail.

Taxi

Taxi queues are outside the arrival halls of both terminals and are available 24 hours a day. They are metered and subject to a 15-percent surcharge.

Car rental

Car rentals are available at both terminals. The airport is served by National Highway No. 2.

Other facilities

CAL Park

China Airlines has its headquarters, CAL Park (),"「華航園區新建工程」1月31日隆重舉行開工動土典禮2009年底完工 將成為台灣桃園國際機場地標." China Airlines. "「華航園區」預定2009年底前完工營運， ...") on the grounds of Taiwan Taoyuan International Airport. CAL Park, located at the airport entrance forms a straight line with Terminal 1, Terminal 2, and the future Terminal 3."China Airlines Inaugurates CAL Park at Taoyuan Airport." China Airlines. March 26, 2010.

Airport Hotels

Located adjacent to the Aviation Museum and the convention center is the Novotel Taipei Taoyuan International Airport, which opened in November 2009.  The 360-room hotel is equipped with restaurants, recreation and fitness centers, and a hair salon and spa.

Aviation museum

The Chung Cheng Aviation Museum (

Awards

Future developments

In addition to the remodeling of the aging Terminal 1 (scheduled for completion by September 2011), the runways and taxiways are set to be expanded by 2014 to accommodate large planes (including the Airbus A380) at a cost of NT$10.7 billion.
As part of the "Taoyuan Aerotropolis" plan (scheduled for completion in 2019/2020), existing terminals will be expanded, a new terminal will be constructed, an aerospace industrial part will be established, and special zones for cargo, passenger and logistic services will be developed. The Taoyuan Airport MRT System is scheduled to open in 2015, and will link the airport to Taipei and Taoyuan County by rail.

Terminal 3

A third terminal is being planned and is expected to handle 43 million passengers per year when completed. A satellite terminal for check-in and additional buildings for auxiliary facilities are planned as well.

Accidents and incidents








