[[Phil LaMarr]]

CATEGORIES: 1967 births, African-American male actors, African-American comedians, American male television actors, American male film actors, American male voice actors, American male video game actors, The Groundlings, IO Theater, Living people, Male actors from Los Angeles, California, Second City alumni, Yale University alumni

Phillip "Phil" LaMarr (born January 24, 1967) is an American actor and comedian. He was one of the original cast members on the sketch comedy series MADtv, and has had an extensive voice acting career, with major roles spanning animated series Justice League/Justice League Unlimited, Futurama, Samurai Jack, Static Shock, and Foster's Home For Imaginary Friends, and video games Metal Gear Solid 2 and 4, and Metal Gear Rising: Revengeance, the Jak and Daxter series, Darksiders, Final Fantasy XII, inFAMOUS, Dead Island and the Mercenaries series. He also played small but vital role of Marvin in Pulp Fiction.  

Early life

LaMarr was born in Los Angeles, California. He is a graduate of Harvard High School in North Hollywood, and Yale University, where he helped found the improv comedy group Purple Crayon. One of his biggest roles at Yale was the title character in the British comedy Trevor. After graduating in 1989, LaMarr became a member of the award-winning sketch and improv comedy group The Groundlings. He also studied improv at The Second City and at the ImprovOlympic in Chicago with Del Close. He has also improvised with Cold Tofu and Off the Wall.
His early film jobs arose from connections from his improv and college years. For example, LaMarr appeared in the film It's Pat (1994), written by friends from the Groundlings, and he appeared in Bio-Dome because the director was a friend from college.

Career

MADtv

LaMarr, unlike most of the other original nine cast members of MADtv, had extensive television and film jobs experience when he joined the show. Even before college, he had voiced a character on the Mister T cartoon show.
Some of the recurring characters LaMarr performed on MADtv were Desperation Lee ("Funky Walker Dirty Talker"), Jaq the UBS Guy, "sexy player" Rick, talentless R&B singer Savante and Rocket Revengers star Lieutenant Abraham Jefferson (a.k.a. Lincoln Willis). 
LaMarr has done impressions of celebrities such as
He has done impressions of Moe Howard from The Three Stooges while playing an African-American version of the character.
LaMarr left MADtv at the end of the fifth season (2000).
Sometimes, LaMarr fills in for Greg Proops on the Odd News small, 4 minute section on Yahoo. It features odd, but true recent news.

Voice acting work

LaMarr's voiceover credits include a starring role on Justice League/Justice League Unlimited as Green Lantern, a major role as Hermes Conrad and various other characters on Futurama, and the title roles on Samurai Jack and Static Shock. LaMarr reprised his role as Hermes Conrad in the Futurama movies Bender's Big Score, The Beast with a Billion Backs, Bender's Game, Into the Wild Green Yonder, and upon the series return in 2010. He also voices Wilt and other recurring characters in Foster's Home for Imaginary Friends, Carver Descartes on The Weekenders, and he portrayed the character Osmosis Jones in the television series Ozzy & Drix. He additionally voices Jazz, Omega Supreme, Oil Slick, and Jetstorm on Transformers Animated. LaMarr portrayed Nautolan Jedi Master Kit Fisto in Star Wars : The Clone Wars on Cartoon Network; he also played Amit Noloff, a one time character, and a Tactical Droid. He also had a major role in Class of 3000 as Philly Phil. He portrayed Aquaman, and voiced other characters in Young Justice; he is the voice of Baxter Stockman in the new Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, and voices JARVIS and Wonder Man in The Avengers: Earth's Mightiest Heroes.

Film and theatre projects

LaMarr's stage credits include The Tempest, As You Like It, Guys and Dolls, Asylum, South Coast Repertory's Make the Break and the Sacred Fools Theater Company's inaugural production of The Fatty Arbuckle Spookhouse Revue.
On the big screen, LaMarr is most well known as Marvin from Pulp Fiction. He has appeared in Kill the Man, Free Enterprise, Cherish, and Manna from Heaven.  He appeared in Speaking of Sex with Bill Murray and Catherine O'Hara, and Back by Midnight with Kirstie Alley, Rodney Dangerfield, and Randy Quaid.
LaMarr's recent film appearances include Fronterz (2004) and Choose Your Own Adventure: The Abominable Snowman (2005). As of April 2006, LaMarr is filming Cook-Off!, in which he will appear as Rev. Thaddeus Briggs, Esq.
LaMarr made a cameo appearance in the Will Ferrell film Step Brothers in which he is viewing a house for sale with his wife.
LaMarr also was in the Yum Corp Sexual Harassment training videos.
LaMarr is playing Cowboy Curtis in the Broadway production of The Pee-wee Herman Show which begins performances Oct. 26th at the newly named Stephen Sondheim Theater. He played the role when the show was recently revived in Los Angeles.  The character was originally portrayed on television by Laurence Fishburne.  The Broadway production of The Pee-wee Herman Show was recently taped for special to be aired on HBO in April.
LaMarr also appeared in  Spider-Man 2 as one of the riders standing behind Spidey, as he was trying to save the subway train.

Video game voiceover work

LaMarr performed the English voice over work for Vamp, a villain of Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of Liberty and Metal Gear Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots. Additionally, LaMarr voiced the characters Reddas from Square Enix's Final Fantasy XII as well as Ramza in the PSP version of Final Fantasy Tactics: The War of the Lions. He also did several voices, including Skelter, for Vampire: The Masquerade – Bloodlines.
He also did the English voice acting for the parts of Sig and Count Veger in the Jak and Daxter video game series as well as voicing several characters in the game Marvel: Ultimate Alliance, as well as the voice of Gadon Thek in Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic.
As well as a featuring in the Sega CD game Make My Video C+C Music Factory, he also was the voice of Chris Jacobs in both Mercenaries: Playground of Destruction and its sequel, Mercenaries 2: World in Flames. He plays the character John White/The Beast in the PS3 titles Infamous 1 and 2. Also, he plays the character Dr. Ragland in the game Prototype.
He also was the voice of the grumpy Kane in the game The Legend of Spyro: A New Beginning,  and Marty in the video game tie-in of Madagascar.
LaMarr also recently voiced the merchant "Vulgrim" in the new action/adventure hybrid Darksiders.
He played the role of "Mr. Sunshine" in the 2008 crime game Saints Row 2, and reprised his role in Saints Row IV in 2013.
He reprised his role as Kit Fisto for the video game: Star Wars: The Clone Wars - Republic Heroes. LaMarr voiced Rick Grimes in the animation film of The Walking Dead.
He also voiced Sam B, one of the playable characters in Dead Island, and recently made his debut in the Kingdom Hearts series in Kingdom Hearts 3D: Dream Drop Distance as Phoebus, a character originally from The Hunchback of Notre Dame and voiced by Kevin Kline.
He recently returned to the Metal Gear franchise as the voice of Kevin Washington in Metal Gear Rising: Revengeance.

Webisode projects

LaMarr is set to appear as a regular character in the forthcoming major webisode series Naught for Hire produced by Jeffrey Berman and Farscape's Ben Browder. His character, Mark One, is described to be that of an elevator with mood-swings. It is unclear whether or not he will be solely the voice of this character or if he will appear in person similarly to that of Max Headroom, a concept which Browder has pulled from before when writing for Farscape episode John Quixote, which used an elevator displaying a talking human interface on a screen within.naughtforhire.html A date has not yet been set for the series' release.

Selected filmography






