[[Krillin]]

CATEGORIES: Dragon Ball characters, Comics characters introduced in 1985, Anime and manga characters who can move at superhuman speeds, Anime and manga characters with superhuman strength, Anime and manga martial artists, Anime and manga sidekicks, Child characters in anime and manga, Child superheroes, Fictional Buddhist monks, Male characters in anime and manga

 
 first published in Weekly Shōnen Jump on June 3, 1985. Although he is often depicted as the comic relief, he is the strongest human in Dragon Ball. He eventually starts a relationship with Android #18 and has a daughter named Marron.

Design and appearance

Toriyama originally created Kuririn along with the Tenka'ichi Budōkai as a method to help add depth to the story, as his editor Kazuhiko Torishima had stated that the series' protagonist, Goku, was too plain. Like most characters in the series, the name Krillin is a pun. In his case, its Japanese source, Kuririn, is made up of two parts. The first two syllables come from 栗 (kuri), which means "chestnut" in reference to his shaved head (the "chestnut" pun is also carried over to his daughter Marron). The second part of his name comes from 少林 (Shōrin; "Shaolin" in Chinese), as his early character designs were closely modeled on Shaolin monks. Other beliefs are that his name comes from kuri-kuri/kurin-kurin (an onomatopoeia for something cute and round), kuri-kuri shita me (meaning "big round eyes"), or the words kurikuri (which can mean "bald") and rin (a word added to the end of a name to make it sound cute). During the Namek Saga, Krillin's name appears as Akira Toriyama spells it: Krillin is seen wearing a cap with "Kamesen" on it (an abbreviated form of Master Roshi's alternate name Kame-Sen'nin) with his Romaji name, Kulilin, right underneath it. He is also seen wearing a cap with the Japanese name for turtle, "KAME", on it.
Kuririn's appearance stays relatively the same for the majority of the series. He is first introduced at age 13, with a shaved head and still dressed in the yellow-and-orange clothing worn at the monastery at which he had been training. He does not possess a nose, and has six spots of moxibustion burns on his forehead, a reference to the practice of Shaolin monks. Toriyama once stated, seemingly humorously, that Kuririn's lack of a nose is because he has a "physical idiosyncrasy" that allows him to breath through the pores of his skin. Later, he wears the orange gi uniform that is presented to both himself and Goku by Kame-Sen'nin in honor of their first martial arts competition.Dragon Ball Z anime, episode 1 During the Freeza arc, he wears Saiyan armor provided by Vegeta,Dragon Ball Z manga, volume 9, chapter ? but during the Cell arc he returns to wearing the orange gi, accompanied by a blue short-sleeved undershirt and boots.Dragon Ball Z manga, vol. 20, chapter 232 When he settles down with his family, Kuririn is shown wearing a workout outfit consisting of a red short-sleeved shirt and brown drawstring pants.Dragon Ball Z manga, volume 20, chapter ? 

Personality

Originally a monk of the Orin Temple, after training there for eight years, Krillin came to Master Roshi and became a student of the Turtle School in his first appearance in the series. Originally a jealous and selfish person, Krillin did not respect rules when confronted with Roshi's training. After a short arch-rivalry between the two (Krillin even admitting that he hated Goku at first), he becomes Goku's best friend and his selfish and jealous personality becomes more kind-hearted and a lot more generous (although he still has slight selfish and jealous traits after his reform). Krillin is often used as comic relief or cannon fodder by the author, and has been killed the most amount of times in the Dragon Ball series. As the most prominent full-blooded human character in the Dragon Ball series, Krillin also represents a sense of normalcy to Goku and Gohan, as well as often being the most identifiable. Often when things in the Dragon World turn bizarre, it is left to Krillin to shake his head in disbelief and crack a joke. 
Krillin is brave, loyal and resourceful, and the audience identifies him as a good-natured underdog. Along with Yamcha, Krillin has also, arguably, adjusted to a relatively normal life better than many of his friends by seeking women in his life. He is among the more "normal" human of his friends, as he can be seen wearing normal clothes on days where he's not fighting, other than his typical martial arts dōgi, as well as engaging in other normal every-day activities such as watching TV, going to the beach, etc. In his role as the protagonist Goku's best friend, Krillin was among the only humans to remain a main character for the majority of the series, even as Master Roshi, Yamcha, Tien Shinhan, Chiaotzu, Yajirobe, Chi-Chi and others faded into the background.

Plot overview

Kuririn first appears arriving at Kame-Sen'nin's island to become his apprentice,Dragon Ball manga, volume 2, chapter ? meeting Goku, and the two become rivals. However, after doing the hardships that Kame-Sen'nin assigns, the two become friends. After finishing their training, Kame-Sen'nin has Kuririn and Goku compete in the 21st Tenka'ichi Budōkai. Kuririn beats the odored fighter Bacterian, who uses his stench as a weapon, and makes it to the semi-finals. However, he is defeated by Jackie Chun, who is really Kame-Sen'nin in disguise preventing his students from becoming arrogant with too many victories. Kuririn continues to train with Kame-Sen'nin and helps Goku to collect the Dragon Balls by fighting against General Blue and participating in Baba Uranai's tournament. However, he is quickly defeated by Dracula Man, who bites down on his head, causing blood to pour out. Three years later, Kuririn enters the 22nd Tenka'ichi Budōkai. Soon after, Kuririn is killed by a henchman of Piccolo Daimao, who wanted to steal Goku's Dragon Ball. Another 3 years later, Kuririn enters the 23rd Tenka'ichi Budōkai.
Several years later, Kuririn confronts the Saiyan invaders Vegeta and Nappa along with his friends and is one of the few survivors from the fight, aside from Goku and Gohan. He then travels with Gohan and Bulma to planet Namek to use the Namekian Dragon Balls to revive their dead friends, since the Earth's Dragon Balls vanished due to Piccolo's death. After a few close encounters with Vegeta, Kuririn and Gohan are forced to team up with him in order to fight Freeza's strongest warriors, the Ginyu Force. They are overpowered by them until Goku arrives and defeats the Force. After a long fight between Goku and Freeza, the latter detonates Kuririn from the inside, killing him instantly, which triggers Goku's transformation into a Super Saiyan. After Freeza's defeat, Kuririn is revived by the Namekian Dragon Balls.
Kuririn trains for three years to confront Dr. Gero who tries to use his androids to kill Goku. When the Androids, #16, #17 and #18 are released, he becomes infatuated with the female #18 which causes him to resist deactivating her with a controller Bulma created. Because of this, regardless of his efforts, the artificial life form Cell absorbs her and achieves his perfect form.Dragon Ball Z manga, volume 19, chapter ? After Cell's death, Kuririn uses the second wish from the Dragon Balls to remove the bombs from #17 and #18.
Seven years later, Kuririn has quit fighting, settled down with #18, with whom he has a daughter named . This left Goku confused, until Kuririn explained that Android 18 is a cyborg (meaning she is human still), and she was able to have a baby with him. However, after learning of Goku's return from the afterlife to compete in the 25th Tenka'ichi Budōkai, he decides to also participate, after being encouraged to do so for the money by #18. After the Kaiō-shin enlists them to help him defeat the wizard Bobbidi, Kuririn joins them, but he later evacuates Earth after Majin Boo's awakening. When Boo has transformed, he finds Kuririn's groups and kills them. During Goku and Vegeta's fight against Boo, Kuririn is brought back to life by the Namekian Dragon Balls and gives his energy to Goku's Genki-Dama attack, which is used to destroy Boo.Dragon Ball Z manga, volume 26, chapter ?

Voice actors

Kuririn is voiced by Mayumi Tanaka in the original Japanese anime and in all related media. Toriyama chose Tanaka after hearing her portrayal of the protagonist Giovanni in the film Night on the Galactic Railroad. When Dragon Ball received a short-lived English dub by Saban Entertainment, Funimation Entertainment, and Ocean Productions in the mid 1990s, Krillin would be voiced by Terry Klassen. He would reprise his role in the Ocean dub of the latter half of the series produced by AB Groupe for European and Canadian markets. In the Blue Water 2003 re-dub of Dragon Ball, he is voiced by Mike Thiessen. Dan Gascon voiced him in the Blue Water dub of Dragon Ball GT. When the series' full production was taken over by Funimation in the US, Krillin would be voiced by Laurie Steele as a child in Dragon Ball and Sonny Strait as an adult in all media released to the US.

Abilities

Kuririn has many abilities including, super-strength, super-speed, and the ability to fly using his ki energy, known as , where he puts a hand in the air to create an electric floating disc, using it to slice through his enemies. Lacking the other protagonists' "advantage" of getting better every time he is injured, Kuririn is however recognized as having great technique by Vegeta (a rather impressive fact considering how the said character respects none but himself) and of being the strongest human on Earth by Yamcha, though he does say this to Krillin's daughter Marron.

Appearances in other media

In Dragon Ball GT, Kuririn is killed by Android #17 but is revived by Shenlong after the defeat of Omega Shenron and has a match with Goku, who decided to leave Earth. He is shown in GT sporting a moustache, wearing grey pants, shirt and tie with a cardigan in his few appearances.
Kuririn appears in multiple Dragon Ball-related video games, sometimes as a playable character. He also appears in the crossover game Jump Superstars.
In June 1988, Kuririn along with other Dragon Ball characters were featured in two public safety announcement shorts. The first was entitled  where he along with Kame-Sen'nin, Yamcha, and later Goku become volunteer fire fighters.
Kuririn also appears in the Dragon Ball and One Piece crossover manga Cross Epoch crossover manga Cross Epoch where he and Tony Tony Chopper run the Kuri-Chopa Marine Train Coster. In 2003, He would appear in the interactive feature entitled 
Kuririn has performed many songs throughout the years. These songs feature his voice actor Mayumi Tanaka in character singing cheerfully about certain thing pertaining to Kuririn. First with the song "Asa - Hiru - Yoru - Kimi - Boku" from the album Dragon Ball Z Hit Song Collection IV: Character Special released in 1990.

Reception

Kuririn is a popular character in the series, in 2004 Japanese fans voted him the seventh most popular character.




