[[Thursday (band)]]

CATEGORIES: American emo musical groups, American screamo musical groups, American post-hardcore musical groups, Musical groups established in 1997, Musical groups from New Jersey, Musical sextets, Victory Records artists, Epitaph Records artists, Island Records artists, American indie rock groups

Thursday is an American post-hardcore band from New Brunswick, New Jersey. Formed in 1997, Thursday has been noted as "a major player in the post-hardcore scene of the 21st century," and is credited as one of the key bands to bring a darker version of the emo sound to new prominence at the dawn of the new millennium. The group is composed of Geoff Rickly, Tom Keeley, Tim Payne, Tucker Rule, Steve Pedulla, and Andrew Everding. They have released six studio albums, their most recent being No Devolución, which was released in April 2011 on Epitaph Records. Every year, Thursday has held a performance on or within days of New Year's Eve, as a tradition for local New Jersey fans.
Thursday announced its hiatus in 2011. Rickly is currently the frontman for United Nations, a hardcore group co-founded with Glassjaw vocalist Daryl Palumbo.

History

Formation and Waiting

Thursday, heavily influenced by Joy Division, formed in 1997 by vocalist Geoff Rickly, guitarist Tom Keeley, guitarist Bill Henderson, bassist Tim Payne, and drummer Tucker Rule. The band began playing basement shows in New Brunswick and surrounding New Jersey and New York areas. They played their first official show on December 31, 1998 in Rickly's basement alongside Midtown, Saves the Day and Poison the Well. Geoff originally planned on becoming a National pie eating champion but quickly realized his ability to consume large amounts of food wasn't his forte, so pursued music with the band instead.
They recorded demos to hand out at shows, and in the summer of 1999, teamed up with MP3. The album was released on December 6, 1999 on northern New Jersey-based Eyeball Records without any singles or support from television or radio.

Full Collapse

Hesitant to join a larger label, but with full support from Eyeball Records, Thursday signed to Chicago-based label Victory Records and released Full Collapse on April 10, 2001, without much radio or television support, but in a way that the band had not originally intended. Victory originally wanted to remove the lyrics from the packaging against the band's wishes in order to cut costs, but the released LP has all lyrics and minimal artwork, a rare thing for the band.
Thursday toured in support of the album, including a tour with Saves the Day that caught the attention of Victory Records. Victory filmed a music video for "Understanding in a Car Crash" consisting of live footage of the band and marketed the song as the band's first single, without the band's authorization. The video for this song received heavy airplay on both MTV2 and Muchmusic. The song gained the band a large underground following. A second single, "Cross Out the Eyes", would follow, but it received much less attention.
Thursday was routinely upset at Victory Records over the use of the band's image and promotion, including the label's attempts to distribute Thursday-themed whoopie cushions. a time during which the band almost broke up. "Jet Black New Year", the only studio track on Five Stories Falling, showed a darker side of the band that was only hinted at on Full Collapse.

War All the Time

Having parted ways with Victory Records and joining Island Records, Thursday issued their major label debut, the critically acclaimed War All the Time on September 16, 2003. The entire writing and recording process took only six months; the band has claimed they almost forced themselves into a contained sound on the album. War All the Time features Andrew Everding on keyboards, though he would not become an official member of the band until December 26, 2004, when he was officially welcomed into the band at the band's Christmas holiday shows held at Starland Ballroom in Sayreville, New Jersey.
War All the Time spawned two singles, "Signals Over the Air" and "War All the Time", though the latter received considerably less attention due to MTV banning the video for controversial material involving a fake news feed that appeared to be real and teenagers being weapon targets.
Thursday toured extensively to support War All the Time through many dates with acts such as AFI, Thrice, and Coheed and Cambria. On these tours, Thursday performed many in-store acoustic sessions at various Tower Records stores and other record stores. The band also recorded a live acoustic session for Y100 Sonic Sessions, a radio program on the now defunct Philadelphia-based radio station, Y100. The live acoustic version of single "Signals Over the Air" was used on Y100 Sonic Sessions Volume 8.
Following War All the Time, the band released two EPs. The first was Live from the SoHo & Santa Monica Stores Split EP and sold exclusively on iTunes; the second was a promotion found in Revolver, called Live in Detroit EP.
The band went on an indefinite hiatus in 2004. The band cited label pressure, extensive touring, and health problems as the sources of their newly discovered fatigue. However, Thursday returned once again for a charitable cause to save New York City's CBGB, on August 25, 2005. This performance was streamed live through the CBGB's website.

A City by the Light Divided

In fall 2005, five Thursday demo songs were stolen from My American Heart's tour manager's iPod. Rickly had recently collaborated with My American Heart for the track "We Are the Fabrication". The band issued a statement on their official website stating that they were disappointed the unfinished products leaked, but that they were glad that people take that much interest in their music. The band confirmed the title of one demo, "At This Velocity" and promised it would make their upcoming album. Three other songs ("The Other Side of the Crash/Over and Out (Of Control)", "Telegraph Avenue Kiss", and "Autumn Leaves Revisited") would also make the album. The remaining demo would later become the song "Last Call" on their fifth studio album, Common Existence.
Thursday originally toyed with the idea of a double album to follow up War All the Time, but scrapped that idea, reporting on their website that not even The Beatles could properly fill two discs with enough worthy material.
Dave Fridmann-produced A City by the Light Divided, Thursday's first full-length album not produced by Sal Villanueva. The title is influenced by a poem from Octavio Paz – Rickly combined two lines from one of his poems ("Sunstone") to create the title. The album was officially previewed on the band's MySpace on April 18, 2006, and officially released May 2 on Island Records in America and Hassle Records in the UK.
A City by the Light Divided was generally received well by critics, and spawned two singles, "Counting 5-4-3-2-1" and "At This Velocity", though the latter received considerably less attention.

Kill the House Lights

The band parted ways with Island Records in early 2007.

Split album with Envy

Thursday announced on April 2, 2008 via a MySpace bulletin and their official website a new split album with Japanese post-hardcore band, Envy.

The band debuted a song from the album live in Poughkeepsie on April 24, 2008.
The album was released on Temporary Residence Limited on November 4.

Common Existence

The band announced on September 30, 2008 that they had signed with Epitaph Records.  Regarding their new label, the band said the following: "It's a great feeling to have a label encourage you to be more socially conscious and politically active." "Thursday sign to Epitaph."  punknews.  September 30, 2008.
Thursday finished recording and mixing their full-length album entitled Common Existence which was released on February 17, 2009 under Epitaph Records. In a March 2009 interview, Rickly explained the album's title refers to humanity's shared experience, and that many of the songs were influenced by the words of his favorite poets and authors.

Cormac McCarthy has also influenced Rickly.
Thursday headlined the 2009 Taste of Chaos Tour with support from Bring Me the Horizon, Four Year Strong, Pierce The Veil, Cancer Bats and a local act.

No Devolución

Thursday entered the studio to record No Devolución in July 2010. Their second release for Epitaph Records was recorded at Tarbox Road Studios in Fredonia, New York with Dave Fridmann, who previously produced A City by the Light Divided and Common Existence with the group.

"Indefinite hiatus"

On Tuesday November 22, 2011, Thursday posted a statement on their webpage and a tweet reading "Thanks & Love" 
The following is excerpted from the article:

Characteristics

Genre and musical style

Thursday has been credited as one of the bands most responsible for the mainstream of emo and post-hardcore alongside bands such as Sunny Day Real Estate, which has been stated to be one of the main influences for Thursday's sound.

Logo

Thursday uses the dove logo on their albums and merchandise. The dove is believed to have been conceived by Tom Keeley on a tour bus sometime before Full Collapse was recorded.
Lyrics from "Cross Out the Eyes" find the band referencing the dove:

As well as:
It is unknown whether these lyrics were inspired by the dove art or vice-versa. Since the dove's conception, however, it appears on every disc that Thursday has released in some form, though it is not mentioned lyrically aside from "Cross Out the Eyes". There is also a dove present in the "Cross Out the Eyes" video, which Darren Doane, in the commentary for XDOANEX, said was the hardest prop he's ever had to procure for a music video.
The band also has adopted a new logo – a red bullseye with a small chevron below it – for A City by the Light Divided. This logo appeared on merchandise related to the album, and is seen faded in the background of the cover for Kill the House Lights.
Additionally, Shepard Fairey (Creator of OBEY) created artwork for the band with a dove logo. This same dove has been used on other works by Shepard.merchdirect.com/Thursday/Tshirts/ShepardFairyDoveonKellyGreen/?productid=3227

Band members

Discography






