[[Tadanobu Asano]]

CATEGORIES: 1973 births, Living people, People from Yokohama, Japanese male film actors, Japanese people of American descent, Japanese people of Dutch descent, Japanese people of Norwegian descent, 20th-century Japanese male actors, 21st-century Japanese male actors

, is a Japanese actor.
He is known for his roles as Dragon Eye Morrison in Electric Dragon 80.000 V, Kakihara in Ichi the Killer, Mamoru Arita in Bright Future, Hattori Genosuke in Zatoichi, Kenji in Last Life in the Universe, Aman in Survive Style 5+, Ayano in The Taste of Tea, Temudjin in Mongol, and Hogun in the film Thor, based on the Marvel Comics character.

Early life

Asano was born in the Honmoku area who is a musician and a partner in Anore Inc., a talent agency Asano and their father Yukihisa Satō founded.

Career

His father, an actors' agent, suggested he take on his first acting role in the TV show Kinpachi Sensei at the age of 16. His film debut was in the 1990 Swimming Upstream (Bataashi Kingyo), though his first major critical success was in Shunji Iwai's Fried Dragon Fish (1993). His first critical success internationally was Hirokazu Koreeda's Maboroshi no Hikari (1995), in which he played a man who inexplicably throws himself in front of a train, widowing his wife and orphaning his infant son. He also worked with Koreeda in the pseudo-documentary Distance in 2001. His best known works internationally are the samurai films Taboo (1999) and Zatoichi (2003), as well as the critically acclaimed film Bright Future.
He acted in Katsuhito Ishii's 2003 film The Taste of Tea, which premiered at the 2004 Cannes Film Festival. He appeared as the lead actor in Last Life in the Universe (2003) by Thai director Pen-Ek Ratanaruang and starred in a follow-up film by Pen-Ek, Invisible Waves, in 2006. In 2007 he starred as the young Genghis Khan in Sergei Bodrov's Oscar-nominated film Mongol..
In addition to his acting career, Asano directed commercial TV spots for his then-wife, Chara. He is an artist and a model, most notably for Japanese fashion designers Jun Takahashi and Takeo Kikuchi, for whom he filmed a series of commercial spots directed by Wong Kar-wai: one released under the name "wkw/tk/1996@7'55"hk.
Asano and his father run the actor's agency Anore Inc. which represents Japanese actors like Ryō Kase and Rinko Kikuchi.

Personal life

Asano met J-Pop idol Chara on the set of Iwai's Picnic (1994). They were married in March 1995 and Chara became pregnant with their first child, Sumire, who was born on July 4.archive.sonymusic.co.html In 1999, they also had a son. In July 2009, Chara announced on her website that the two would be getting an amicable divorce. She received custody of both their children.

Awards

He won the Most Popular Performer award at the 1997 Japanese Academy Awards for Acri and was nominated in the Best Supporting Actor category in 2004 for his performance in Zatôichi. He also received the Upstream Prize for Best Actor at the 2003 Venice Film Festival for his role in Last Life in the Universe.

Filmography



Bibliography




