[[Frylock]]

CATEGORIES: Aqua Teen Hunger Force, Fictional characters introduced in 2000, Fictional food characters, Fictional tubers, Fictional characters from New Jersey, Fictional characters from Washington (state), Fictional inventors, Fictional scientists

Frylock is a fictional character on the Adult Swim animated television series Aqua Teen Hunger Force (also known by various alternative titles). Frylock is a smart, rational, and responsible giant anthropomorphic floating box of french fries, who frequently serves as a protective father figure to Meatwad, and saves the rest of the main cast from various dangers. His floating ability comes from a blue diamond on his back which also gives him the "Power of a Thousand Suns". Frylock was created and designed by series creators Dave Willis and Matt Maiellaro, and voiced by Carey Means.
Like the other main characters, Meatwad and Master Shake, Frylock originally appeared in the Space Ghost Coast to Coast episode "Baffler Meal", and then made his first official appearance in the show's first episode, "Rabbot". Frylock was originally voiced by Matt Maiellaro in "Baffler Meal" and was performed as a live action person by T-Pain in the season six episode "Last Last One Forever and Ever". Frylock has appeared in several video games and albums relating to the series including the 2007 film Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie Film for Theaters. Frylock has also made cameos in promotional material and other media outside of the series.

Production

Frylock was created and designed by series creators Dave Willis and Matt Maiellaro. Like the other main characters of the series, Master Shake and Meatwad, Frylock first made a rough-cut appearance in the Space Ghost Coast to Coast season eight episode "Baffle Meal"
. Frylock along with Master Shake, Meatwad, and Carl Brutananadilewski, made his first official appearance on the pilot episode of Aqua Teen Hunger Force, "Rabbot", which premiered unannounced on December 30, 2000, along with the original "stealth pilot" of Harvey Birdman, Attorney at Law and two episodes of Sealab 2021.
Frylock has appeared in almost every episode of the series. He does not appear in the season five episode "Sirens" or the season ten episode "Spacecadunce", and only makes a brief speaking cameo in the season five episode "Robots Everywhere".

Design

Frylock is a floating red box full of french fries with a scar under his left eye. Frylock has a goatee, braces, and a blue gem on his back which gives him "The Power of A Thousand Suns" and contacts which give him the power to shoot lasers out of his eyes, as demonstrated in "Laser Lenses". He is able to use a variety of lasers though, his most commonly used are lightning (which all of the group members were able to use in the episode "Laser Lenses") which are also able to move/transport objects/people a very short distance without initially injuring them, not counting where they land that was only shown in the pilot episode "Rabbot" and "Laser Lenses", two small red bullet like lasers that can stun, blow up, or singe/ignite an object or person they touch. He is also able to use a freeze ray that encases objects in solid ice for up to 67 years, used on Carl and shown only in the episode "The Clowning", and a blue fire extinguisher/foam ray that was only shown in the episode "Dusty Gazongas". It was also shown in the episode "Laser Lenses" that he at one point had a pair of glasses capable of doing the same thing as well as a monocle which were both destroyed, which he then had eye corrective surgery that is assumed to have given him the same powers but in breast sized eyes that disappear after the episode.
Both of Frylock's arms are french fries, with no fingers. Frylock does have french fry legs, which appeared only near the end of "Rabbot Redux." However, his normal means of movement is to float in the air with no visible means of support, bobbing gently and slowly up and down when he is stationary.
Frylock had robotic legs attached in the episode "Fry Legs" in an attempt to seduce the computer repair woman. Frylock also does not have ears or hair. Like Meatwad and Master Shake, Frylock occasionally wears clothing, but does not on a regular basis.
In "Last Last One Forever and Ever" Frylock is shown as a live action person by T-Pain, who wears a yellow top hat and a red track suit with a black stripe going down the sleeves, two golden amulets of the mooninites, and a felt version of Frylock's beard on his track suit. In "Baffler Meal," he has no beard, a definitive crinkle-cut arms and legs, and instead of a diamond he wears a chained amulet which he uses to "sense hungry teens". The writers wanted to still have a wizard aspect to his character, and then finally incorporated the laser eyes seen on the modern version. At the end of Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie Film for Theaters, Frylock appears as a woman, with breasts, a mole, and eyelashes, his fries have been styled to resemble pigtails, his goatee is blonde, and he is wearing lipstick, eyeliner, and does not have a scar.

Role in Aqua Teen Hunger Force

From 2000 until 2010, Frylock, along with Master Shake and Meatwad have lived in a suburban neighborhood in Seattle, New Jersey, next door to Carl Brutananadilewski. They have since moved to an identical neighborhood in Seattle, Washington.
Frylock is often seen as calm and tolerant, until something goes wrong. Of all the main characters on the show, Frylock is often depicted as the smartest and most mature. Frylock often acts like a father figure to Meatwad, by protecting him from Master Shake's pranks. Frylock often protects Carl, Shake and Meatwad from doing things that could harm themselves or others as well. This is especially apparent in the season two episode, "The", when Frylock leaves Carl, Meatwad and Master Shake alone, and they are unable to live properly alone.  Because of this, Frylock is the only Aquateen whom Carl ever shows compassion to, and is not consistently hostile toward.
Similar to Master Shake's "Shake Power" and Meatwad's ability to shape shift, Frylock has  "Frydar", a circling fry that protrudes out farther than all the other fries in his container. He uses his Frydar to find scents and brain activity. Frylock has the ability to shoot his fries out of his head that regrow afterwards. This power was never used on the show outside of the opening sequence, however, he eventually uses this power in the movie while first fighting a giant poodle and then Dr. Weird towards the end of the movie.
It is strongly implied that Frylock is responsible for the financial support for himself, Meatwad and Master Shake. Just like Master Shake and Meatwad, Frylock was a detective for the first three episodes of the series, until the concept was dropped. In "Total Re-Carl" it is revealed that Frylock is a scientist, when he receives a letter addressed as "Doctor". In "Der Inflatable Fuhrer" it is implied that Frylock supports himself, Master Shake and Meatwad by doing free-lancing scientific work.
Like Master Shake and Meatwad, Frylock does not have an official gender but he is strongly depicted as a male. Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie Film for Theaters claims that Frylock is actually a woman trapped inside of a man's body, and that she is a lesbian. This claim has not yet been confirmed or denied.
In the series Frylock does not appear to have a family, but in The Movie it is claimed that he, along with Meatwad and Master Shake, are creations of Dr. Weird. The movie also claims their father is a watermelon, and their mother is a nine-layer bean burrito. In 2010 during the "Aqua Teen Hunger Force Live" tour, series creator Dave Willis confirmed that Dr. Weird is indeed the creator of Master Shake, Frylock, Meatwad, and Chicken Bittle, making them all brothers.
Frylock's age is never officially determined. In "Rabbot Redux" it is mentioned that Master Shake is "almost forty" and Meatwad is thirty-eight. It is assumed that Frylock is roughly the same age as Master Shake and Meatwad, as they were all created by Dr Weird around the same time. Frylock is not typically depicted as being religious, but in the episode "Bad Replicant," he claims to want to join the church up the street while having Meatwad and Master Shake sing hymns with him. Also, in the episode "A PE Christmas" Frylock is seen in church meaning he does belong to a religion. It is further clarified in the Aqua Unit Patrol Squad 1 episode "Intervention", that Frylock has a personal faith in Jesus Christ when introducing Christianity to Carl to help him overcome his constant drinking problem  However, the exact religion Frylock belongs to is still not officially determined, for his religion needs more clarification with more episodes.

Merchandise

A plush toy of Frylock has been made available.com. Frylock has also been featured in merchandise for the series alongside other main characters on various products including T-shirts, caps, wristbands, patches, buttons, and a car decal featuring characters in the series.com. A Frylock belt buckle is also available.com.

In other media

Frylock serves as a protagonist in Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie Film for Theaters, a 2007 feature film based on the series. Frylock's voice also appears in the 2009 series album Have Yourself a Meaty Little Christmas. Frylock is also a playable figure in the video game Aqua Teen Hunger Force Zombie Ninja Pro-Am.
Aside from his appearances in everything related to Aqua Teen Hunger Force and "Baffler Meal", Frylock, along with Master Shake and Meatwad, made a very brief appearance on "Predator", an episode of Sealab 2021. While commenting about the 2007 Boston bomb scare, late night talk show host, Stephen Colbert briefly mentioned Frylock, during the February 1, 2007 episode of The Colbert Report.Stephen Colbert comments on the 2007 Boston bomb scare on the February 1, 2007 episode of The Colbert Report
In 2011 a brief clip from the series, featuring Frylock, was featured in a commercial for the Samsung Galaxy S II.








