[[Kalmia latifolia]]

CATEGORIES: Kalmia, Trees of the Northeastern United States, Trees of the Southeastern United States, Symbols of Connecticut, Symbols of Pennsylvania, Natural history of the Great Smoky Mountains, Medicinal plants, Poisonous plants, Garden plants of North America, Trees of the Great Lakes region (North America), Plants described in 1753

Kalmia latifolia, commonly called mountain-laurel,
calico-bush, or spoonwood, is a species of flowering plant in the blueberry family, Ericaceae, that is native to the eastern United States. Its range stretches from southern Maine south to northern Florida, and west to Indiana and Louisiana. Mountain-laurel is the state flower of Connecticut and Pennsylvania. It is the namesake of the city of Laurel, Mississippi (founded 1882).

Growth

It is an evergreen shrub growing to 3–9 m tall. The leaves are 3–12 cm long and 1–4 cm wide. Its flowers are round, ranging from light pink to white, and occurring in clusters. There are several named cultivars today that have darker shades of pink, near red and maroon pigment. It blooms in May and June. All parts of the plant are poisonous.  Roots are fibrous and matted.[ref]
</ref>
The plant is naturally found on rocky slopes and mountainous forest areas. It thrives in acidic soil, preferring a soil pH in the 4.5 to 5.5 range. The plant often grows in large thickets, covering great areas of forest floor.  In North America it can become tree sized on undeveloped mountains of the Carolinas but is a shrub farther north. The species is a frequent component of oak-heath forests.3), Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation, 2010Schafale, M. P. and A. S. Weakley. 1990. Classification of the natural communities of North Carolina: third approximation. North Carolina Natural Heritage Program, North Carolina Division of Parks and Recreation.

Etymology

It is also known as Ivybush, Spoonwood (because native Americans used to make their spoons out of it), Sheep Laurel, Lambkill and Clamoun.
The plant was first recorded in America in 1624, but it was named after Pehr Kalm, who sent samples to Linnaeus in the 18th century.

Cultivation

The plant was originally brought to Europe as an ornamental plant during the 18th century. It is still widely grown for its attractive flowers. Numerous cultivars have been selected with varying flower color. Many of the cultivars have originated from the Connecticut Experiment Station in Hamden and from the plant breeding of Dr. Richard Jaynes. Jaynes has numerous named varieties that he has created and is considered the world's authority on Kalmia latifolia.
The cultivar 'Pink Charm' has gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit.

Wood

The wood of the mountain laurel is heavy and strong but brittle, with a close, straight grain. It can be used for handrails or guard rails.

Toxicity

Mountain laurel is poisonous to several different animals due to grayanotoxin Symptoms include irregular or difficulty breathing, anorexia, repeated swallowing, profuse salivation, watering of the eyes and nose, cardiac distress, incoordination, depression, vomiting, frequent defecation, weakness, convulsions, paralysis, coma, and eventually death. Autopsy will show  gastrointestinal irritation and hemorrhage.

Gallery

File:Mountain Laurel Kalmia latifolia 'Olympic Wedding' Leaves and Buds 2575px. latifolia leaves and early buds
File:Buberel unknown flower 12.jpg|Flower buds
File:Kalmia latifolia species.jpg|Beginning to bloom
File:Mountain Loral Flowers.jpg|Full bloom
File:Mountain Laurel Kalmia latifolia 'Olympic Wedding' Young Old Flowers 3264px.jpg|Blooming and wilted flowers on the same flower head








