[[Kaohsiung]]

CATEGORIES: Kaohsiung, Populated coastal places in Taiwan, Port cities and towns in Taiwan, Populated places established in 1662

Kaohsiung City (
The Kaohsiung International Airport serving the city is the third largest airport in Taiwan. The Port of Kaohsiung is the largest harbor in Taiwan, but not officially part of Kaohsiung City. The southern terminal of the Sun Yat-sen Freeway is in Kaohsiung. For north-south travel on railway, the city is served by the Taiwan Railway Administration stations of Western Line and Pingtung Line. The Taiwan High Speed Rail also provides fast and frequent railway connection to Taipei City. The Kaohsiung Mass Rapid Transit, the city's subway system, launched in early 2008. Kaohsiung was the host city of the 2009 World Games, a multi-sport event primarily composed of sports not featured in the Olympic Games. The city is also home to the Republic of China Navy fleet headquarters and academy.

History

Founded near the end of the 17th century, the first written records of the region was written in 1603 by Chen Di, a member of Ming admiral Shen You-rong's expedition group when the crew was given orders to rid the waters around Taiwan and Penghu of pirates, in the report of the "Eastern Barbarian Land", Chen Di noted the following, where "Takau Isle" is what is now known as Kaohsiung city:
Kaohsiung was once known as Takau () in 1664. The name was restored to Takau in the late 1670s, when the town expanded dramatically with immigrants from mainland China.

Qing Dynasty

In 1684 the Qing Dynasty annexed Taiwan and renamed the town Fengshan County (), considering it a part of Taiwan Prefecture. It was first opened as a port during the 1680s.

Empire of Japan

In 1895, Taiwan was ceded to Japan as part of the Treaty of Shimonoseki. It was during this period that the city's name was changed from  (romaji: Takao) and administered under Takao Prefecture. While the sound remained more or less the same when pronounced in Japanese, the literal meaning of the name changed from "Beating Dog" to "High Hero". The Japanese developed Takao, especially the harbour. An important military base and industry center, the city was heavily bombed by Task Force 38 and FEAF during 1944–1945.

Republic of China

After control of Taiwan was handed to the government of the Republic of China in 1945, the official romanization of the city name came to be "Kao-hsiung", based on the Wade–Giles romanization of the Mandarin reading of the kanji name. XXVI No. 19 May 15, 2009 "....." Kaohsiung was upgraded from a provincial city to special municipality on July 1, 1979, by the Executive Yuan, which approved this proposal on November 19, 1978. The Kaohsiung Incident took place in Kaohsiung on December 10, 1979. On December 25, 2010, it merged with Kaohsiung County of Taiwan Province to form a larger special municipality.[ref]


Geography

The city sits on the southwestern coast of Taiwan facing the Taiwan Strait, bordering Tainan City to the North, Chiayi and Nantou County to the North-west, Taitung County to its North-east and Pingtung County to the South and South-east. The downtown areas are centered around Kaohsiung Harbor with the island of Qijin on the other side of the harbor acting as a natural breakwater. The Love River (or Ai River) flows into the harbor through the Old City and downtown. Zuoying Military Harbor lies to the north of Kaohsiung Harbor and the city center. Kaohsiung's natural landmarks include the coral mountains Ape Hill, Shoushan and Banpingshan.

Climate

Kaohsiung is located just over a degree to the south of the Tropic of Cancer. The climate is tropical, specifically a tropical savanna climate (Köppen Aw), with monthly mean temperatures in the range of between , and relative humidity between 71 and 81%.
Besides being located on an island off the south-eastern coast of China, Kaohsiung's warm climate is very much dictated to its location with a year round warm sea temperature with the Kuroshio Current passing by the coasts of southern Taiwan,, focused primarily from June to August. At more than 2210 hours of bright sunshine, the city is one of the sunniest areas in Taiwan.
The sea temperature remains above 22 °C year-round at Kaohsiung Harbor, Notably, Kaohsiung is the only global city, or any city with significant economic activies in political East Asia that has a tropical climate.

Cityscape

Demographics

As of October 2013, Kaohsiung city has a population of 2,779,427, the second highest of Taiwan after Taipei city and a population density of 942.77 people per square kilometer. Within the city, Fengshan district is the most populated with a population of 351,355, while Xinxin district is the most densely populated district with a population density of 27074 people per square kilometer.

Ethnic groups

=Han Chinese=

As of most Taiwanese cities or counties, the majority population are of Han Chinese descendants. the Hans are then divided into 3 subgroups, Hoklo (福佬), Hakka (客家人) and Waishengren (外省人). The Hoklo and Waishengren mostly lives in flatland townships and the city centre, while the majority of the Hakka population lives in the suburbs or rural townships of the northeastern hills.

=Taiwanese Aborigines=

The Taiwanese Aborigines of Kaohsiung, which consists of various ethnic groups whom speaks different languages that all belongs to the Austronesian language family similar/related to those of Maritime Southeast Asia and Oceania, mostly lives in the mountain townships such as Taoyuan or Namasia. The major aboriginal groups living within the city includes the Bunun, Rukai, Tsou and the Kanakanavus.

=New residents (新住民)=

As of December 2010, Kaohsiung city consists of around 21,000 foreign spouses. Within around 12,353 are Mainland Chinese, 4244 are Vietnamese, around 800 Japanese and Indonesians and around 4000 other Asians or foreigners from Europe or the Americas.

Religion

The religious population of Kaohsiung is mainly divided into five main religious groups, Buddhist, Taoist, Muslim and Christian (Catholicism and Protestantism). As of 2002, Kaohsiung city consists of 1720 temples and churches, the most within the country, and a total number of over 320,000 residents claims to belief in some sort of religion.

Buddhism

Buddhism is one of the major religion in Taiwan, with over 35% of Taiwan's population are Buddhist. The same applies to Kaohsiung city. Kaohsiung city also consists of the largest Buddhist temple of Taiwan, the Foguangshan Temple. 

Taoism

Around 33% of the Taiwanese population are Taoist, making it the second largest religion of Taiwan. Most people who believes in Taoism believes in Buddhism in the same time, as the differences and boundaries between the two religions are not always clearly stated within the Taiwanese culture. As Kaohsiung city was once a fishing port, many residents of the area worships the sea goddess of Mazu, a Taoist goddess, praying for the safety of the fisherman. The Qijin Mazu Temple of Kaohsiung is the oldest Mazu temple within the country with a history of over 300 years.

Islam

Besides the majority population of Buddhist and Taoist, Kaohsiung city also consists of rather small population of Muslims. During the Chinese Civil War, some 20,000 Muslims, mostly soldiers and civil servants, fled mainland China with the Kuomintang to Taiwan. While during the 1980s, another few thousands of Muslims from Myanmar and Thailand, whom are mostly descendants of Nationalist soldiers who fled Yunnan as a result of the communist takeover, migrated to Taiwan in search of a better life, resulting in an increase of Muslim population within the country. More recently, with the rise of Indonesian workers working in Taiwan, an estimated number of 88,000 Indonesian Muslims currently lives in the countryGIO.tw, in addition to the existing 53,000 Taiwanese Muslims. Combining all demographics, Taiwan consists around 140,000 Muslim population, with around 25,000 living in Kaohsiung. Kaohsiung Mosque is the largest mosque in Kaohsiung and the main gathering site of Muslims within the city.

Politics

Government

Kaohsiung is sometimes seen as the political mirror image of Taipei. While northern Taiwan leans towards the Pan-Blue Coalition in the state-level elections, southern Taiwan leaned towards the Pan-Green Coalition since late 1990s, and Kaohsiung is no exception. Frank Hsieh of the Democratic Progressive Party was reelected twice as Mayor of Kaohsiung, where he was widely credited for transforming the city from an industrial sprawl into an attractive modern metropolis. Hsieh resigned from the office of mayor to take up the office of Premier of the Republic of China in 2005. The last municipal election, held on December 9, 2006, resulted in a victory for the Democratic Progressive Party's candidate Chen Chu, the first elected female mayor of special municipality in Taiwan, defeating her Kuomintang rival and former deputy mayor, Huang Chun-ying.

Subdivisions

Kaohsiung is directly divided into 38 districts (區), each district is divided into villages (里), there are 651 villages, each village is subdivided into neighborhoods (鄰), there are 18,584 neighborhoods, within the divisions, Lingya and Fengshan Districts are the administrative centers of the city while Lingya and Xinxin Districts are the two most densely populated districts of the city. Kaohsiung has the most numbers of districts among other special municipalities in Taiwan.
|valign=top| 450px|Kaohsiung City administrative divisions map 450px|A map of Kaohsiung's population density
 
|}
Part of South China Sea Islands are administered by Kaohsiung City as parts of Qijin District:

Economy

Intensive settlement began in earnest in the late 17th century, when the place was known as Ch'i-hou. Opened in 1863 as a treaty port, subsidiary to the port of Anping farther north on the coast, Kaohsiung became a customs station in 1864 and then gradually became an important port for the southern Taiwan coastal plain.
Kaohsiung's real economic and strategic importance began under the Japanese occupation (1895–1945). The Japanese needed a good port in southern Taiwan to serve those designated areas that were to become a major source of raw materials and food for Japan, and Kaohsiung was chosen. It became the southern terminus of the main north-south railway line, and from 1904 to 1907 extensive harbor works were undertaken. In 1920 the port was given the name Takao and the area became a municipality in 1920.
Before and during World War II it handled a growing share of Taiwan's agricultural exports to Japan, and was also a major base for Japan's campaigns in Southeast Asia and the Pacific, and extremely ambitious plans for the construction of a massive modern port were drawn up. Toward the end of the war, too, the Japanese promoted some industrial development at Kaohsiung, establishing an aluminum industry based on the abundant hydroelectric power produced by the Jih-Yueh Lake project in the mountains.
After it came under Chinese Nationalist administration in 1945, Kaohsiung developed rapidly. The port, badly damaged in World War II, was restored. It also became a fishing port for boats sailing to Philippine and Indonesian waters. Largely because of its climate, Kaohsiung has overtaken Keelung as Taiwan's major port.
Today as a major international port and industrial city in the southwest of the country, Kaohsiung is the most rapidly developing urban center of Taiwan. With an area of 2,946  km2, it has a large natural harbor, with the entrance in recent years being expanded, rock-excavated, and dredged.
As an exporting center, Kaohsiung serves the rich agricultural interior of southern Taiwan, as well as the mountains of the southeast. Major raw material exports include rice, sugar, bananas, pineapples, peanuts (groundnuts), and citrus fruits. The 2,200 hectare Linhai Industrial Park, on the waterfront, was completed in the mid-1970s and includes a steel mill, shipyard, petrochemical complex, and other industries. The city has an oil refinery, aluminum and cement works, fertilizer factories, sugar refineries, brick and tile works, and salt-manufacturing and papermaking plants. Designated an export-processing zone in the late 1970s, Kaohsiung has succeeded in attracting foreign investment to process locally purchased raw materials for export. There is also a large canning industry that processes both fruit and fish.
The ongoing Nansing Project is an ambitious plan to reclaim 250 hectares of land along the coast by 2011. The Kaohsiung Harbor Bureau plans to buy 49 hectares of the reclaimed land to establish a solar energy industrial district which would be in the harbor's free trade zone.
The GDP in nominal terms of the city of Kaohsiung is estimated to be around $45 billion US, and $90 billion for the metropolitan region. As of 2008, the GDP per capita in nominal terms of the city of Kaohsiung is approximately US$ 24,000.

Transportation

Port of Kaohsiung

A major port, through which pass most of Taiwan's marine imports and exports, is located at the city but is not managed by the city government. Ferries play a key role in everyday transportation, and often play the role that buses do in other cities, especially for transportation across the harbour. With five terminals and 23 berths, the Port of Kaohsiung is Taiwan's largest container port and the 6th largest in the world. by 2013.
The Port of Kaohsiung is not officially a part of Kaohsiung City, instead it is administrated by Kaohsiung Port Authority, under Ministry of Transportation. There is a push for Kaohsiung City to annex the Port of Kaohsiung in order to facilitate better regional planning.
Kaohsiung is one of the biggest ports in the world for importing shark fins, sold at high prices in the restaurants and shops of Taiwan and China. They are brought in from overseas and are placed out to dry in the sun on residential rooftops near the port.

Kaohsiung International Airport

Kaohsiung City is also home to Taiwan's second largest airport, the Kaohsiung International Airport, which is located in the Siaogang District in southern Kaohsiung City.

Rapid Transit

Kaohsiung Mass Rapid Transit opened for revenue service in March 2008. A light rail line (Circular Line) that circles central Kaohsiung City is under construction and will open in 2015.
Notably, two of Kaohsiung's MRT stations, Formosa Boulevard Station and Central Park Station, were ranked among the top 50 most beautiful subway systems in the world by Metrobits.

Railway

The city is served by the Taiwan Railway Administration's Western Line and Pingtung Line. Taiwan High Speed Rail also serves Kaohsiung City via its Bew Zuoying Station in northern Kaohsiung City. The station is an underground station, replacing the old ground level station. Additionally, these two stations are also be served by Red line of Kaohsiung Rapid Transit System when the line opened for revenue service in early 2008.

Attractions

Main landmarks of Kaohsiung city includes the Tuntex Sky Tower, the ferris wheel of the Kaohsiung Dream Mall, the Kaohsiung Arena and the Kaohsiung Harbor. The newly developed city is also well known for having a large number of shopping streets, organized night markets and newly developed leisure parks such as the Pier-2 Art Center or the E-DA Theme Park.
Natural attractions of the city includes Shoushan (Monkey mountain), the Love River, Qijin, the bay of Xiziwan, the Dapingding Tropical Botanical Garden and the Yushan National Park at the northeastern tip of the city. The city also consists of various historical attractions such as the Old City of Zuoying, a historical town built during the early 17th century, the Former British Consulate at Takao built during the late 19th century or various sugar and crop factories built during the Japanese occupation of Taiwan.

Natural attractions

Kaohsiung city consists of wide range of varieties of natural attractions due to its large size with geographical differences in different parts of the city, as it is bordered by the Central mountain range in the northeast and the warm South China Sea to the west and southwest. The year-round warm climate allows coral reefs to grow along the coasts around Kaohsiung harbor, with Shoushan mountain being a small mountain completely made up of coral reefs and calcium carbonate, while the mountainous districts in the northeast consists of one of the highest mountains in East Asia, Mount Yushan.

Historical sites

A large number of historical sites and monuments were left in the city after the colonization of the Dutch in the 17th century, the Qing dynasty during the 18th and 19th century and the Japanese empire from the late 19th century to the mid 20th century, the city government has been protecting the various sites and monuments from further damage and large amounts of the historical monuments were opened to the public since the early 1980s. 

Leisure Parks and Zoos

Being the largest municipality in Taiwan, Kaohsiung has a number of mostly newly built leisure areas/parks. This includes parks, zoos, pavilions and a number of wharfs and piers.

Museums

As a rather newly developed city, comparing to it's neighbor Tainan, Kaohsiung city consists of some of the widest roads within the country and the most organized usage of space, since the development of the city mostly occurred during the Japanese occupation of Taiwan. The large space therefore enabled the new government to build large amounts of museums of all sorts, from astronomical museums to history museums, arts museums, or science and technology museums.
This is a strong contradiction to Kaohsiung city's northern neighbor Tainan, as Tainan city consists of some of the smallest roads and least number of modern architectures in the country although it is considered as one of the five special municipalities of Taiwan, due to Tainan city's long history which therefore fixed the shape of the city centre.

Others

Kaohsiung is well known of having numerous amounts of large and organized night markets, as well as having the biggest night market in Taiwan, the Kaisyuan Night Market which opened in late 2013. Other attractions includes the Dome of Light of Kaohsiung MRT's Formosa Boulevard Station, the Kaohsiung Mosque and the Tower of Light of Sanmin District.
(Note: The lists above are not complete, they are examples of other notable attractions besides the ones mentioned in the description paragraph)

Culture and art

Languages

The majority population of Kaohsiung can communicate in both Taiwanese Hokkien and Mandarin Chinese, some elders whom grew up during the Japanese colonization of Taiwan can communicate in Japanese, while most of the younger population has basic English skills.
Since the spread of Mandarin Chinese after the Nationalist Government retreated to Taiwan in 1949, Hakka and various Formosan languages are gradually no longer spoken within the new generation and many Formosan languages are therefore classified as moribund or endangered languages by the United Nation. Nowadays, only elder Hakka people living in Meinong, Liouguei, Shanlin and Jiaxian districts can communicate in the Hakka language and elder Taiwanese aborigines living mostly in the rural districts of Namasia and Taoyuan can communicate with the aboriginal languages. Therefore recently the Taiwanese government established Special affairs committee for both the Aboriginals (原住民事務委員會) and the Hakkas (客家事務委員會) to protect the language, culture and the rights of the two minorities.

Arts

Kaohsiung has rich resources of the ocean, mountains and forests, take shape a diverse combination and different communities, the formation of a very active and multi-faceted nature of art and culture in the streets of Kaohsiung,  everywhere you can see the beauty and grace of its public infrastructure, public art and city architecture. Unique design from MRT station to the city's public works of art, city space into an art gallery. "Dome light" in the concourse of Formosa Boulevard Station of Kaohsiung MRT is one of the world's largest public glass works of art, and it is the public art chanticleer representative works in Kaohsiung. The city also has the Urban Spotlight Arcade spanning along the street in Cianjin District.

Sports

Kaohsiung has Southern Taiwan region's most comprehensive sports facilities, as well as the country's largest stadium. Kaohsiung National Stadium (the Main Stadium of 2009 World Games) and Kaohsiung Arena as the representative of sports facilities in Kaohsiung. National Stadium is Taiwan's largest international-class stadium, maximum capacity is 55,000 seats.
Kaohsiung hosted the 2009 World Games. Nearly 6,000 athletes, officials, coaches, referees and others from 103 countries participated in the 2009 Kaohsiung World Games. Kaohsiung in 2007, 2009 and 2011 for three consecutive years, the number of gold medals and total medals of the National Games were the first place in the country.

Education

Kaohsiung has a number of colleges and junior colleges offering training in commerce, education, maritime technology, medicine, modern languages, nursing, and technology.
Universities
High Schools and Junior High Schools
(Note: The lists above are not complete lists)

Conferences and Events

The Kaohsiung Exhibition Center, built by the Kaohsiung City Government, was opened on 14 April 2014. It includes an exhibition space for 1,500 booths, and a convention hall for 2,000 pax. The center will host the first Taiwan International Boat Show in 2014. Another conference and event-related venue is the newly renovated International Convention Center Kaohsiung in 2013.

Sister cities and twin towns

Kaohsiung is twinned with the following locations.

Relative location








