[[Kellogg–Briand Pact]]

CATEGORIES: Treaties concluded in 1928, Treaties entered into force in 1929, Laws of war, Nuremberg trials, History of the United States (1918–45), Crime of aggression, Interwar period treaties, Peace treaties, Presidency of Calvin Coolidge, Treaties of the Kingdom of Afghanistan, Treaties of the Albanian Republic, Treaties of Australia, Treaties of the First Austrian Republic, Treaties of Barbados, Treaties of Belgium, Treaties of the Kingdom of Bulgaria, Treaties of Canada, Treaties of Chile, Treaties of the Republic of China (1912–49), Treaties of Costa Rica, Treaties of Cuba, Treaties of Czechoslovakia, Treaties of the Free City of Danzig, Treaties of Denmark, Treaties of the Dominican Republic, Treaties of the Kingdom of Egypt, Treaties of Estonia, Treaties of the Ethiopian Empire, Treaties of Finland, Treaties of the French Third Republic, Treaties of the Second Hellenic Republic, Treaties of the Weimar Republic, Treaties of Guatemala, Treaties of Honduras, Treaties of the Kingdom of Hungary (1920–46), Treaties of Iceland, Treaties of British India, Treaties of the Pahlavi dynasty, Treaties of the Irish Free State, Treaties of the Kingdom of Italy (1861–1946), Treaties of the Empire of Japan, Treaties of Latvia, Treaties of Liberia, Treaties of Lithuania, Treaties of Luxembourg, Treaties of the Netherlands, Treaties of New Zealand, Treaties of Nicaragua, Treaties of Norway, Treaties of Panama, Treaties of Peru, Treaties of the Second Polish Republic, Treaties of the Ditadura Nacional, Treaties of the Kingdom of Romania, Treaties of the Soviet Union, Treaties of the Union of South Africa, Treaties of Spain under the Restoration, Treaties of Sweden, Treaties of Thailand, Treaties of Turkey, Treaties of the United Kingdom, Treaties of the United States, Treaties of Venezuela, Treaties of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, 1928 in France

The Kellogg–Briand Pact (or Pact of Paris, officially General Treaty for Renunciation of War as an Instrument of National PolicySee Certified true copy of the text of the treaty in League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 94, p. 57 (No. 2137)) is a 1928 international agreement in which signatory states promised not to use war to resolve "disputes or conflicts of whatever nature or of whatever origin they may be, which may arise among them".  It is named after its authors, United States Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg and French foreign minister Aristide Briand.

Signatories and adherents

After negotiations, the pact was signed in Paris at the French Foreign Ministry by the representatives from Australia, Belgium, Canada, Czechoslovakia, France, Germany, British India, the Irish Free State, Italy, Japan, New Zealand, Poland, South Africa, the United Kingdom.) for a total of 62 signatories. In 1971, Barbados declared its succession to the treaty.un.aspx?objid=0800000280168041
In the United States, the Senate approved the treaty overwhelmingly, 85–1, with only Wisconsin Republican John J. Blaine voting against."John James Blaine".  Dictionary of Wisconsin History.  Accessed Nov. 11, 2008. While the U.S. Senate did not add any reservation to the treaty, it did pass a measure "interpreting" the treaty which included the statement that the treaty must not infringe upon America's right of self defense and that the United States was not obliged to enforce the treaty by taking action against those who violated it.

Effect and legacy

The 1928 Kellogg–Briand Pact was concluded outside the League of Nations, and remains a binding treaty under international law.  One month following its conclusion, a similar agreement, General Act for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes, was concluded in Geneva, which obliged its signatory parties to establish conciliation commissions in any case of dispute. 93, pp. 344–363.
As a practical matter, the Kellogg–Briand Pact did not live up to its aim of ending war, and in this sense it made no immediate contribution to international peace and proved to be ineffective in the years to come. Moreover, the pact erased the legal distinction between war and peace since the signatories, having renounced the use of war began to wage wars without declaring them as in the Japanese invasion of Manchuria in 1931, the Italian invasion of Abyssinia in 1935, the Soviet invasion of Finland in 1939, the German and Soviet Union invasions of Poland.  Nevertheless, the pact is an important multilateral treaty because, in addition to binding the particular nations that signed it, it has also served as one of the legal bases establishing the international norms that the threatArticle 2, Budapest Articles of Interpretation (see under footnotes), 1934 or use of military force in contravention of international law, as well as the territorial acquisitions resulting from it,Article 5, Budapest Articles of Interpretation (see under footnotes), 1934 are unlawful.
Notably, the pact served as the legal basis for the creation of the notion of crime against peace – it was for committing this crime that the Nuremberg Tribunal and Tokyo Tribunal sentenced a number of people responsible for starting World War II.
The interdiction of aggressive war was confirmed and broadened by the United Nations Charter, which provides in article 2, paragraph 4, that "All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the United Nations." One legal consequence of this is that it is clearly unlawful to annex territory by force. However, neither this, nor the original treaty have prevented the subsequent use of annexation.  More broadly, there is a strong presumption against the legality of using, or threatening, military force against another country. Nations that have resorted to the use of force since the Charter came into effect have typically invoked self-defense or the right of collective defense.





