[[Cough medicine]]

CATEGORIES: Antitussives

A cough medicine or cough and cold medicine, also known as linctus when in syrup form, is a medicinal drug used in those with coughing and related conditions. There is no good evidence for or against the use of over-the-counter cough medications in those with a cough.

Examples

There are a large number of different cough and cold medications. Some include: Benilyn, Sudafed, Robitussin and Vicks among others. Most contain a number of active ingredients. These may include combinations of: antihistamines, antitussives (cough suppressants), expectorants, decongestants and antipyretics.

Effectiveness

The efficacy of cough medication is questionable, particularly in children.medsafe.nz/hot/alerts/CoughandCold/Minutes2CoughandCold. Some cough medicines may be no more effective than placebos for acute coughs in adults, including coughs related to upper respiratory tract infections.

Pharmaceuticals

Alternative medicine

Honey may be a minimally effective cough treatment.
Many alternative treatments are used to treat the common cold. However, a 2007 review states that, "Complementary and alternative therapies (i.e., Echinacea, vitamin C, and zinc) are not recommended for treating common cold symptoms; however, ... Vitamin C prophylaxis may modestly reduce the duration and severity of the common cold in the general population and may reduce the incidence of the illness in persons exposed to physical and environmental stresses."
A 2009 review found that the evidence supporting the effectiveness of zinc is mixed with respect to cough, and a 2011 Cochrane review concluded that zinc "administered within 24 hours of onset of symptoms reduces the duration and severity of the common cold in healthy people".
While a number of plants and Chinese herbs have been purported to ease cold symptoms, including ginger, garlic, hyssop, mullein, and others, studies have either not been done or have been found inconclusive.

Adverse effects

A number of accidental overdoses and well-documented adverse effects suggested caution in children. "Cough and cold remedies for children". Australian Prescriber, Vol. 32. pp 122-124. Available at

Society and culture

Economics

In the United States several billion dollars were spent on over the counter products a year.

Poisoning

According to the New York Times, at least eight mass poisonings have occurred as a result of counterfeit cough syrup, substituting inexpensive diethylene glycol in place of glycerin. In May 2007, 365 deaths were reported in Panama, which were associated with cough syrup containing diethylene glycol.








