[[Excel Saga]]

CATEGORIES: Excel Saga, 1999 anime television series, Absurdist fiction, ADV Films, Adventure anime and manga, Black comedy, Funimation Entertainment, J.C.Staff, Obscenity controversies, Parody anime and manga, Science fiction anime and manga, Seinen manga, Viz Media manga, Ecchi anime and manga

 is a manga series written and illustrated by Rikdo Koshi. It has been serialized in Young King OURs since 1995, and its individual chapters were collected and published in tankōbon volumes by Shōnen Gahosha. The series follows the attempts of Across, a "secret ideological organization," to conquer the city of Fukuoka as a first step towards world domination. The titular character of the series, Excel, is a key member of the group working towards this goal, while the city is defended by a shadowy government agency led by Dr. Kabapu.
The manga was adapted into an anime television series by Victor Entertainment, which was taglined . Directed by Shinichi Watanabe and featuring animation from J.C. TV Tokyo only aired twenty-five of the series' twenty-six episodes, with the finale having been intentionally made too violent and obscene for public broadcast. As such, it was only included in the DVD release of the series, although it has since been broadcast in other markets.
The series has enjoyed some critical success coupled with respectable sales.

Plot

Believing the World to be corrupt, the secret organization Across plans to conquer the world. The first step in the plan for world domination is to begin by focusing on one city in order to minimize setbacks. Across consists of the leader of the organization, Il Palazzo, and officers Excel and Hyatt. Excel and Hyatt live in an apartment building in the city, along with their pet dog Menchi, who is also their emergency food supply, and are later joined by Elgala, another Across officer. Living in the neighboring apartment are three guys:  Iwata, Sumiyoshi and Watanabe, and other building dwellers such as co-worker Matsuya, and later Ropponmatsu, who all work for the Department of City Security under Dr. Kabapu, who intends to stop Across. Eventually the members of Across begin making appeals directly to the City's citizens before Il Palazzo publicly declares the existence of Across and its intentions to the public. Hyatt is captured and Excel and Elgala are later held in an immigrant detention center before being rescued by Il Palazzo, who begins the new phase of his plans.

Production

The series was created by Rikdo Koshi and based on a dojinshi he had previously created while in high school named 
Victor Entertainment contacted Shōnen Gahosha about adapting Excel Saga into an anime, and the two companies approached Rikdo. Shinichi Watanabe was chosen as director. Watanabe added his own alter ego, Nabeshin, and expanded several elements. He says that the Great Will in the manga was "conveyed just as words," and he himself developed its appearance, eventually settling on the "swirling, talking cosmos." He also increased Pedro's role in the story from a single frame in the manga. Watanabe says he was pleased with that aspect of his work, noting that "Pedro's situation was considered unsuitable for broadcast in Japan". Kotono Mitsuishi was chosen to play the role of Excel, and Watanabe was impressed with Mitsuishi's rapid delivery of her lines, saying that "she really pushed herself to the limit and beyond." He also says, "at times she was too fast, and there was plenty of time left to match the lip-synch". In such cases, either he would add new material or Mitsuishi would ad-lib. At first Rikdo felt stunned and uncomfortable at hearing Excel speak, but he called the casting "amazing" and was pleased to hear his favourite voice actors read lines from his work.

Media

Manga

The series began serialisation in Japan in 1996 in the monthly anthology Young King OURs and finished in August 2011.
Viz Media licensed Excel Saga for an English language release in North America and he first volume was released on August 13, 2003 with volume 27 released on January 14, 2014.

Anime

An anime adaption was produced by J.C. Twenty five episodes were broadcast on TV Tokyo between October 7, 1999 and March 30, 2000.
A twenty-sixth episode, Going Too Far was included a s a DVD bonus but was not broadcast. The episode was deliberately created to be too violent and obscene for broadcast in Japan and was instead included as a DVD bonus. Watanabe commented that it "felt good to go past the limits of a TV series", although he thinks it "is not something that you should do too often". In Japan the series was released on 12 DVDs between March 1, 2000 and January 24, 2001.
The series was licensed for an English language release in North America and the United Kingdom by ADV Films and in Australia and New Zealand by Madman Entertainment. The English adaptation initially starred Jessica Calvello, with Larissa Wolcott taking over the role after episode thirteen after Calvello had damaged her voice during production.
On October 30, 2010, Excel Saga was re-licensed in North America by Funimation Entertainment, who re-released the complete series to DVD on May 17, 2011.

Soundtracks

Several albums were released featuring music from the anime. ( A North American release followed on November 1, 2005.

Reception

Since its August 2003 release in North America, the manga has been among the 50 top-selling graphic novels on three occasions. 
The English-language reviews of the Excel Saga anime were broadly positive and enthusiastic. Mike Crandol of Anime News Network puts it in the same class as Airplane!, National Lampoon, Tex Avery, and Monty Python, adding that the "combination of character-based humor, outrageous slapstick farce, and a plot that is engaging if only for how weird it is make for a thoroughly enjoyable comedic experience".
Reviewers also agree that the series suffers from too much filler in its later episodes, with Crandol describing the show as spinning its wheels.
The series generally receives high marks for technical aspects. Cunningham feels the animation is flat-out gorgeous, but Crandol considers it merely above average. In the latter's opinion, its quality wanes as the series progresses and increasingly relies on super-deforming the characters for comedic effect. ADV's release earned praise for the quality of the video transfer and the DVD extras (particularly the Vid-Notes). Reviewers especially appreciated the English voice acting: Crandol calls it brilliant, and several note that Calvello and Wolcott were each able to capture Mitsuishi's Excel. Pearce, in contrast, found the English cast to be pretty bad and its Excel to be "dental drill shrill".
Akadot's reviewer of the manga writes that "some of the strange events go on a little too long and do not have the impact that they do animated," but that Rikdo's Excel Saga is "graced with fantastic visuals and a hilarious story," and that the English edition is "a masterpiece of the translator's skill."






