[[John C. Lilly]]

CATEGORIES: 1915 births, 2001 deaths, American memoirists, American neuroscientists, American animal care and training writers, American psychology writers, American relationships and sexuality writers, American science writers, California Institute of Technology alumni, Cetologists, Consciousness researchers and theorists, Geisel School of Medicine alumni, Psychedelic drug advocates, Psychedelic researchers, Mystics, Writers from Hawaii, Writers from Minnesota

John Cunningham Lilly (January 6, 1915 – September 30, 2001) was an American physician, neuroscientist, psychoanalyst, psychonaut, philosopher, writer and inventor.
He was a researcher of the nature of consciousness using mainly isolation tanks, dolphin communication, and psychedelic drugs, sometimes in combination.

Early life and education

John Lilly was born to a wealthy family on January 6, 1915, in Saint Paul, Minnesota. His father was Richard Coyle Lilly, president of the First National Bank of St. Paul. His mother was Rachel Lenor Cunningham, whose family owned the Cunninham & Haas Company, a large stockyards company in St. Paul. Lilly had an older brother, Richard Lilly Jr., and a younger brother, David Maher Lilly. A fourth child, Mary Catherine Lilly, died in infancy.
John showed an interest in science at an early age. At 13, he was an avid chemistry hobbyist, supplementing his make-shift basement laboratory with chemicals given to him by a pharmacist friend. Students at his parochial Catholic grade school referred to him as "Einstein Jr." At age 14 he enrolled at St. Paul Academy, a college preparatory academy for boys, where his teachers encouraged him to pursue science further and conduct his own experiments in the school laboratory after hours.
While at St. Paul, John also further developed his interest in Philosophy. He studied the works of many of the great philosophers, finding himself especially attracted to the subjective idealism of Anglo-Irish theologian and philosopher George Berkley.
Despite his father's wishes for John to go to an eastern Ivy-league college to become a banker, John accepted a scholarship at the California Institute of Technology to study science. He enrolled in 1933 and began studying physics under such notable scientists as Robert Andrews Millikan, Paul Dirac, and Carl David Anderson. After his first year, the faculty at Cal Tech caught on that John was from a wealthy family and cancelled his scholarship, forcing John to go to his father for help. Dick Lilly set up a trust fund to pay for John's tuition and eventually became a benefactor of the college. John would continue to draw on his family wealth as a means to fund his scientific pursuits throughout the course of his life.
In 1934, John read Aldous Huxley's Brave New World. Reading about the pharmacological control methods of the Huxley's dystopia and the links between physical chemical processes of the brain and subjective experiences of the mind helped inspire Lilly to give up his study of physics and pursue biology, eventually focusing on neurophysiology.
John Lilly became engaged to his first wife, Mary Crouch, at the beginning of his junior year at Caltech. Month's before their wedding, John took a job with a lumber company in the Northwest to soothe a bout of "nervous exhaustion" that had been brought on by the pressures of academia and his upcoming marriage to Mary. While cutting brush, John buried an axe in his foot, sending him to a hospital trauma ward. It was an eye-opening experience that further inspired John to become a doctor of medicine.
In the Summer of 1937, while John was looking for a good medical school, the wealthy and well-connected Dick Lilly set up a meeting between his son and Dr. Will Mayo, the eponymous head of the Mayo Clinic of Rochester, Minnesota. Mayo's advice John applied and was accepted to the medical school at Dartmouth College, where he would end up becoming good friends with Will Mayo's son Charles William Mayo. John graduated from Caltech with a Bachelors of Science on June 10, 1938 and enrolled in Dartmouth's Medical School the following September.
At Dartmouth, John launched into the study of anatomy, performing dissections on 32 cadavers during the course of his time there. He once stretched out an entire intestinal tract across the length of a room to determine its actual length with certainty, causing much consternation in one of his professors who happened by.
During the summer following his freshman year at Dartmouth, John returned to Pasadena, California to participate in an experiment with his former biochemistry professor from Caltech, Henry Borsook. The purpose of the experiment was to study the creation of glycocyamine, a major source of muscle power in the human body. The experiment involved putting John on a completely protein free diet while administering measured doses of glycine and arginine solution, the two amino acids that Borsook hypothesized were involved in the creation of glycocyamine. The experiments pushed John Lilly to extreme physical and mental limits, he became increasingly weak and delirious as the weeks went on. The results of the experiment confirmed Borsook's hypothesis and John Lilly's name was included among the authors, making it the first published research paper of his career. It would also be one of the first instances of a life long pattern of experimenting on his own body to the point of endangering his health.
After 2 years at Dartmouth, John decided that he wanted to pursue a career in medical research, rather than therapeutic practice as was standard for Dartmouth Medical Students at that time. He decided to transfer to the medical school at the University of Pennsylvania which would provide him with better opportunities for conducting research.
At the University of Pennsylvania, John met a professor named Dr. H. Cuthbert Bazett, a protege of British physiologist J.B.S. Haldane. Bazett introduced John to Haldane's view that a scientist should never conduct an experiment or procedure on another person that they hadn't first conducted on themselves, a view that John would wholeheartedly embrace and exemplify throughout his career. Bazett took a liking to the young, enthusiastic grad student, and set John up with his own research laboratory. While working under Bazett, John created his first invention, the electrical capacitance diaphragm manometer, a device for measuring blood pressure.
He graduated with a medical degree from the University of Pennsylvania in 1942.

Career overview

Lilly was a physician and psychoanalyst. He made contributions in the fields of biophysics, neurophysiology, electronics, computer science, and neuroanatomy. He invented and promoted the use of an isolation tank as a means of sensory deprivation. He also attempted interspecies communication between humans and dolphins.
Lilly's eclectic career began as a conventional scientist doing research for universities and government. Gradually, however, he began researching unconventional topics. He published several books and had two Hollywood movies based partly on his work. He also developed theories for flotation.
Lilly published 19 books, including The Center of the Cyclone, which describes his own LSD experiences, Man and Dolphin, and The Mind of the Dolphin which describe his work with dolphins.
In the 1980s Lilly directed a project which attempted to teach dolphins a computer-synthesised language. Lilly designed a future "communications laboratory" that would be a floating living room where humans and dolphins could chat as equals and where they would develop a common language.
Lilly envisioned a time when all killing of whales and dolphins would cease, "not from a law being passed, but from each human understanding innately that these are ancient, sentient earth residents, with tremendous intelligence and enormous life force. Not someone to kill, but someone to learn from."John C. Lilly Dies at 86. Written as a message to visitors on John Lilly's personal website (www.com), and quoted in the New York Times Obituary by Andrew C. Revkin October 7, 2001. Retrieved October 2007.
In the 1990s Lilly moved to the island of Maui in Hawaii, where he lived most of the remainder of his life.
Lilly's literary rights and scientific discoveries were owned by Human Software, Inc., while his philanthropic endeavors were owned by the Human Dolphin Foundation. The John C. Lilly Research Institute, Inc. continues to research topics of interest to Lilly.

Research

During World War II, Lilly researched the physiology of high-altitude flying and invented instruments for measuring gas pressure. After the war he trained in psychoanalysis at the University of Pennsylvania, where he began researching the physical structures of the brain and consciousness. In 1951 he published a paper showing how he could display patterns of brain electrical activity on a cathode ray display screen using electrodes he devised specially for insertion into a living brain. Furthermore, Lilly's work

Development of the sensory deprivation tank

In 1953, Lilly began a job studying neurophysiology with the US Public Health Service Commissioned Officers Corps. At the NIMH in 1954,
Lilly later studied other large-brained mammals and during the late 1950s he established a facility devoted to fostering human-dolphin communication: the Communication Research Institute on St. Thomas in the Virgin Islands. During the early 1960s, Lilly and co-workers published several papers reporting that dolphins could mimic human speech patterns.

SETI

Lilly was interested in the Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence (SETI) project. In 1961 a group of scientists including Lilly gathered at the Green Bank Observatory to discuss the possibility of using the techniques of radio astronomy to detect evidence of intelligent life outside our Solar System. They called themselves The Order of the Dolphin after Lilly's work with dolphins. They discussed the Drake equation, used to estimate the number of communicative extraterrestrial civilizations in our galaxy.

Exploration of human consciousness

In the early 1960s, Lilly was introduced to psychedelic drugs such as LSD and (later) ketamine and began a series of experiments in which he ingested a psychedelic drug either in an isolation tank or in the company of dolphins. These events are described in his books Programming and Metaprogramming in the Human Biocomputer: Theory and Experiments and The Center of the Cyclone, both published in 1972. Following advice from Ram Dass, Lilly studied Patanjali's system of yoga (finding I. K. Taimni's Science of Yoga, a modernized interpretation of the Sanskrit text, most suited to his goals). He also paid special attention to Self-enquiry meditation advocated by Ramana Maharshi, and was reformulating the principles of this exercise with reference to his human biocomputer paradigm (described in Programming and Metaprogramming in the Human Biocomputer: Theory and Experiments and The Center of the Cyclone).
Lilly later traveled to Chile and trained with the spiritual leader Oscar Ichazo (whose attitude to metaphysical consciousness exploration Lilly characterized as "empirical" in his book The Center of the Cyclone). Lilly claimed to have achieved the maximum degree of satori-samādhi consciousness during his training.
Lilly's maxim: "In the province of the mind what one believes to be true, either is true or becomes true within certain limits. These limits are to be found experimentally and experientially. When so found these limits turn out to be further beliefs to be transcended. In the province of the mind there are no limits. However, in the province of the body there are definite limits not to be transcended."John C Lilly - The Human Biocomputer (1974) 

Solid State Intelligence

Solid State Intelligence (SSI) is a malevolent entity described by Lilly (see The Scientist). According to Lilly, the network of computation-capable solid state systems (electronics) engineered by humans will eventually develop (or has already developed) into an autonomous life-form. Since the optimal survival conditions for this life-form (low-temperature vacuum) are drastically different from those needed by humans (room temperature aerial atmosphere and adequate water supply), Lilly predicted (or "prophesised", based on his ketamine-induced visions) a dramatic conflict between the two forms of intelligence. 

Earth Coincidence Control Office (ECCO)

In 1974 Lilly's research using various psychoactive drugs led him to believe in the existence of a certain hierarchical group of cosmic entities, the lowest of which he later dubbed Earth Coincidence Control Office (ECCO) in an autobiography published jointly with his wife Antonietta (often referred to as Toni). To elaborate, "There exists a Cosmic Coincidence Control Center (CCCC) with a Galactic substation called Galactic Coincidence Control (GCC). Within GCC is the Solar System Control Unit (SSCU), within which is the Earth Coincidence Control Office (ECCO). Lilly The Dyadic Cyclone: The autobiography of a couple. with Antonietta Lilly (1st ed.). Simon and Schuster. (1976) p20 This conclusion had been predicted in his past works having stated that, "For the first time I began to consider that God really, existed in me and that there is a guiding intelligence in the universe." John C. Lilly The Center of the Cyclone: An Autobiography of Inner Space (1st ed.). Julian Press. (1972) p91
He also states that there exist nine conditions which should be followed by humans who seek to control coincidences in their own lives.

Death

Lilly died at the age of 86 in Los Angeles, California on September 30, 2001, due to heart failure. His remains were cremated. Lilly - NNDBErowid John Lilly Vault : Obituary - Erowid

In popular culture

Lilly's work, with dolphins and the development of the sensory deprivation tank, has been referenced in movies, music and television productions. Dolphin Island: A Story of the People of the Sea is a 1963 novel by Arthur C. Clarke set in a strange and fascinating research community where a brilliant professor tries to communicate with dolphins. In the 1972 novel The Listeners, Lilly and the other scientists who were members of the Order of the Dolphin are mentioned as pioneers by the book the Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence.
The 1980 movie Altered States, based on Paddy Chayefsky's novel of the same name, features actor William Hurt regressing to a simian form by the combination of ingesting psychoactive substances and then experiencing the effects of prolonged occupation of a sensory deprivation chamber.
Episode 9 of the 1998 Japanese animation series Serial Experiments Lain makes reference to E.C.C.O. and Lilly's work with dolphins. The episode deals with the development of internet protocol 7, which is expected to network all humans without the need of a device. The result will be that the earth's consciousness will awaken as humans become linked nodes in its neural network. This is compared to Lilly's view that the dolphins communication is a form of long distance networking.


Bibliography



Notes



Further reading




