[[Kent State University]]

CATEGORIES: Kent State University, Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities, Education in Portage County, Ohio, Universities and colleges in Ohio, Kent, Ohio, North Central Association of Colleges and Schools, Buildings and structures in Portage County, Ohio, Visitor attractions in Portage County, Ohio, Public universities in Ohio, Educational institutions established in 1910, 1910 establishments in Ohio

Kent State University (also known as Kent, Kent State, and KSU) is a public research university located in Kent, Ohio, United States.  The university has eight campuses around the Northeast Ohio region with the main campus in Kent being the largest.  Other campuses are located in Ashtabula, Burton, East Liverpool, Jackson Township, New Philadelphia, Salem, and Warren, Ohio.
As of September 2012, Kent State is one of the largest universities in Ohio with an enrollment of 41,891 students in the eight-campus system and 28,998 students at the main campus in Kent. which include such notable programs as nursing, business, history, library science, aeronautics, journalism, fashion design and the Liquid Crystal Institute.
The university was established in 1910 as the Kent State Normal School as a teacher-training school.  The first classes were held in 1912 at various locations and in temporary buildings in Kent.  Since then, the university has grown to include many additional baccalaureate and graduate programs of study in the arts and sciences, research opportunities, as well as over  and 119 buildings on the Kent campus.  During the late 1960s and early 1970s, the university was known internationally for its student activism in opposition to US involvement in the Vietnam war, due mainly to the events of May 4, 1970.

History

Early history

Kent State University was established in 1910 as an institution for training public school teachers.  It was part of the Lowry Bill which also created a sister school in Bowling Green, Ohio – now known as Bowling Green State University. It was initially known under the working name of the Ohio State Normal College At Kent,[ref]
[/ref] but was named Kent State Normal School in 1911 in honor of William S. Kent (son of Kent, Ohio, namesake Marvin Kent), who donated the 
McGilvrey's vision for Kent was not shared by many others outside the school, particularly at the state level and at other state schools.  His efforts to have the state funding formula changed created opposition, particularly from Ohio State University and its president William Oxley Thompson.  This resulted in a 1923 "credit war" where Ohio State refused Kent transfer credits and spread to several other schools taking similar action. It was this development – along with several other factors – which led to the firing of McGilvrey in January 1926.  McGilvrey was succeeded first by David Allen Anderson (1926–1928) and James Ozro Engleman from 1928 to 1938, though he continued to be involved with the school for several years as president emeritus and as head of alumni relations from 1934 to 1945.  He was present in Columbus on May 17, 1935, when Kent native Governor Martin L. Davey signed a bill that allowed Kent State and Bowling Green to add schools of business administration and graduate programs, giving them each university status.

1940s-1960s

Beginning in 1944, the University was led by President George Bowman, who led until 1963.  During his tenure, the student senate, faculty senate and graduate council were organized.  Although it had served Stark County from the 1920s, in 1946, the University's first regional campus, the Stark Campus, was established in Canton, Ohio.  In the fall of 1947, Bowman appointed Oscar W. Ritchie as a full-time faculty member. Ritchie's appointment to the faculty made him the first African American to serve on the faculty at Kent State and also made him the first African American professor to serve on the faculty of any state university in Ohio. In 1977, the former Student Union, which had been built in 1949, was rededicated as Oscar Ritchie Hall in his honor.
The 1950s and 1960s saw continued growth in both enrollment and in the physical size of the campus.  Several new dorms and academic buildings were built during this time, including the establishment of additional regional campuses in Warren (1954), Ashtabula (1957), New Philadelphia (1962), Salem (1962), Burton (1964), and East Liverpool, Ohio (1965). 267-270 In 1961, grounds superintendent Larry Wooddell and Biff Staples of the Davey Tree Expert Company released ten cages of black squirrels obtained from Victoria Park in London, Ontario, Canada, onto the Kent State campus.  By 1964 their estimated population was around 150 and today they have spread in and around Kent and have become unofficial mascots of both the city and university.  Since 1981, the annual Black Squirrel Festival is held every fall on campus. 258
In 1965, chemistry professor Glenn H. Brown established the Liquid Crystal Institute,
In 1967, Kent State became the first university to run an independent, student-operated Campus Bus Service. It was unique in that it provided jobs for students, receiving funding from student fees rather than bus fares.  Campus Bus Service was the largest such operation in the country until it merged with the Portage Area Regional Transportation Authority in 2004.  1969 saw the opening of a new Memorial Stadium on the far eastern edge of campus and the closure and dismantling of the old Memorial Stadium.

Kent State shootings

Kent State gained international attention on May 4, 1970, when an Ohio Army National Guard unit fired at students during an anti-war protest on campus, killing four and wounding nine. The Guard had been called into Kent after several protests in and around campus had become violent, including a riot in downtown Kent and the burning of the ROTC building. The main cause of the protests was the United States' invasion of Cambodia during the Vietnam War. 165-166  The shootings caused an immediate closure of the campus with students and faculty given just 60 minutes to pack belongings.  Around the country, many college campuses canceled classes or closed for fear of similar violent protests. and Conflict Resolution and is one of the earliest such programs in the United States.  In response to, and protest of, this incident Neil Young wrote and composed the song "Ohio" which was performed by the folk rock group Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young.

1970s-1980s

Also in 1970, the university opened its 12-story library, moving from the previous home of Rockwell Hall to the tallest building in Portage County.
Kent State was again in the national spotlight in 1977 when construction was set to begin on the Memorial Gym Annex, adjacent to the area where the Kent State shootings had occurred in 1970. Protesters organized a tent city in May, which lasted into July. Several attempts were made to block construction even after the end of the tent city, including an appeal to the United States Congress and the Department of the Interior to have the area declared a National Historic Landmark, which ended up being unsuccessful. Additional rallies were held that year, including one attended by Joan Baez on August 20.  After several additional unsuccessful legal challenges, construction finally began on September 19 and was finished in 1979.

1990s-Present

In March 1991, Kent State once again made history by appointing Carol Cartwright as president of the University, the first female to hold such a position at any state university in Ohio.

Campuses

Kent State University is an eight-campus system in northeastern Ohio, with the main administrative center in Kent.  Within the Kent State University system, the main campus is officially referred to as the "Kent Campus". Kent State University Airport in Stow.

Regional campuses

In addition to the Kent Campus, there are seven regional campuses. The system is one of the largest and oldest regional campus systems in the United States. The regional campuses provide a small, liberal-arts college feel as opposed to the large university feel of the Kent Campus.  Students at the regional campuses can begin any of Kent State's majors at their respective campus and each campus offers its own unique programs and opportunities that may or may not be available in Kent.  Regional campuses include:

=Ashtabula=

The Ashtabula Campus is made up of three buildings: Main Hall, a library, and a technology and art building. It is on a  site along the shores of Lake Erie in Ashtabula, Ohio. Kent State-Ashtabula is noted locally for its nursing program.  Seventy-five percent (75%) of registered nurses working in Ashtabula County graduated with an Associate's degree in nursing from Kent State-Ashtabula.  On July 17, 2007, ground was broken for a new Health and Science building, which is being constructed for use mainly by the growing nursing and allied health programs.

=East Liverpool=

The East Liverpool Campus occupies a downtown site overlooking the Ohio River. It is composed of the Main Building, Memorial Auditorium, Mary Patterson Building, and a Commons area.

=Geauga=

Located in Burton, Ohio, Kent State's Geauga Campus is at the heart of Ohio's maple syrup country in Geauga County. The campus provides easy access to urban, suburban and rural areas. The Geauga Campus also includes the Twinsburg Center, a small extension located in Twinsburg, Ohio.

=Salem=

Kent State's Salem Campus is located just south of the city. It features a lake, a  outdoor classroom, and nature walk. In addition to the Salem Campus, Kent State University Salem owns and operates the old Salem Middle School called the "City Center" in which administrative offices, classes, and student services are located.

=Stark=

The Stark Campus is the largest regional campus of Kent State University, serving around 10,300 students each year (5,300 in academic programs, 5,000 in executive and graduate education). It is located on 

=Trumbull=

Kent State's Trumbull Campus is located in Warren, Ohio just north of the SR 5 bypass on SR 45. It offers programs in 170 majors at the freshman and sophomore level, as well as 18 certificates and 15 associate degree programs. In addition, there is upper division coursework for baccalaureate degree completion in nursing, justice studies, technology, business management, and English, as well as general studies and psychology degrees. In 2004 the campus opened a  Technology Building that includes the Workforce Development and Continuing Studies Center.

=Tuscarawas=

The Tuscarawas Campus in New Philadelphia, Ohio offers 19 associate degrees, six bachelor's degrees, and the Master of Technology Degree. Bachelor's degrees are offered in business management, general studies, justice studies, industrial technology, nursing and technology 2+2. The Science and Advanced Technology Center provides , $13.5 million Fine and Performing Arts center that will enable the campus to expand academic and cultural programming.

Additional facilities

In addition to the eight campuses in northeast Ohio, Kent State operates facilities for study-abroad programs in Florence, Italy; New York City; Cleveland, Ohio; and Shanghai, China.

=Florence Center=

KSU-Florence opened its doors to International Studies Abroad in a collaboration that grants students the opportunity to study in historic Florence at its newly renovated Palazzo dei Cerchi. Palazzo dei Cerchi is a prestigious and ancient building located in the heart of Florence, at the corner of Via della Condotta and Vicolo dei Cerchi, next to the famous Piazza della Signoria and the birthplace of literary genius Dante Alighieri. Kent State acquired this facility in 2003 and undertook its complete renovation. The original exterior was maintained and reflects Florence as it was in the 13th century. The restoration carefully preserved the original structure while creating an efficient space for academic purposes, with an interior that houses state-of-the-art classrooms.

=New York City Studio=

The New York City Studio is located in the heart of New York City's Garment District. Surrounded by fabric and accessory shops, fashion showrooms, and designer studios; one-third of all clothing manufactured in the USA is designed and produced in this neighborhood. The District is home to America's world-renowned fashion designers, including Oscar de la Renta, Calvin Klein, Donna Karan, Liz Claiborne, and Nicole Miller. The facility is a state-of-the-art,  space and includes a 50-person lecture room, 12-station computer lab with instructor station, and a fashion design studio fully outfitted with professional equipment. The NYC studio gives Kent State students the advantage of working within the heart of the fashion, dance and theater industry.

=Cleveland Urban Design Center=

Kent State's Cleveland Urban Design Center is located at 1309 Euclid Ave in the downtown Cleveland Theater District neighborhood, just off of East 14th Street. The Urban Design Center was created in 1983 under the sponsorship of the Urban University Program, which supports the outreach and community service efforts of Ohio's state universities working in urban areas. Under its founding director, Foster Armstrong, the Center expanded on the existing outreach and public service activities of Kent State's architecture school, focusing primarily on historic preservation and the problems of Northeast Ohio's smaller towns and cities. In 2003, the CUDC began a collaboration with the Dresden University of Technology, Kent State's sister university in Germany, with a joint vision on the revitalization of the lower Cuyahoga Valley in Cleveland. Since then, there have been a number of faculty exchanges as the two universities seek to pool their expertise both to enhance students' experiences and to better serve their respective regions.

Academic divisions

Kent State has colleges of:
The university has an Honors College and interdisciplinary programs in Biomedical Sciences, Financial Engineering, and Information Architecture and Knowledge Management.

Notable programs

Student life

The university offers a large number of opportunities for student involvement at all its campuses, including student and professional associations, service organizations, performing ensembles, student publications, student government, and intramural and club athletics.

Greek life

Greek life at Kent State is overseen by the Center for Student Involvement located in the Kent Student Center. Sorority houses are primarily located on Fraternity Drive located across the street from the main library and fraternity houses are located throughout the city of Kent. Recently, the university has set aside land for the development of a fraternity Greek village.edu Sigma Nu recently has built a new chapter house on this land located near the Student Recreation and Wellness Center, but is now property of the Kappa Sigma fraternity.com Kent State's Greek life claims numerous famous and well-known figures in society including Lou Holtz, a brother of the Kent Delta Upsilon chapter and Drew Carey, a brother of the Kent Delta Tau Delta chapter.

Performing arts

Through the Hugh A. Glauser School of Music and the School of Theatre and Dance, the university offers numerous performance opportunities in the performing arts, including three concert bands (Wind Ensemble, Concert Band,and Communiversity Band), Athletic Bands (Marching Golden Flashes and Flasher Brass), three jazz ensembles (Jazz Ensemble I, Jazz Ensemble II, and Jazz Lab Band), six choral ensembles (Kent Chorus, KSU Chorale, Women's Chorus, Men's Chorus, Gospel Choir, and Nova Jazz Singers), one orchestra (KSU Orchestra), World Music Ensembles, as well as theater and dance opportunities.  Each regional campus also offers their own performing arts opportunities.

Student events and programming

Kent State Student Center Programming offers a variety of programs and events that are free for students across campus. The Black Squirrel Festival, Rock the Runway, Jack Hanna's Animals are just a few of the larger events that take place throughout the year. Karaoke is held every Thursday in the Rathskeller and various tournaments (8-ball, Euchre, Poker) are held at various times throughout the semester.

Student government

The Undergraduate Student Government of Kent State University represents approximately 26,000 students on Kent State's Kent Campus and has been in some form of operation since 1924.  The current 25 person governing body was formed after the merger of the All-Campus Programming Board (ACPB) and the Undergraduate Student Senate (USS).  USG is led by an executive director and is composed of eight directors, ten college senators, one senator for residence hall students, one senator for commuter and off-campus students, one senator for undergraduate studies, and 3 senators-at-large.  USG oversees the USG Programming Board which hosts various concerts, comedians, and performers, as well as the USG Allocations Committee which disburses conference and programming funds to the over 250 registered student organizations on the Kent Campus.  Elections for USG are held annually in March, and officers are typically inaugurated in late April.

Student media

Campus living

Kent State operates twenty-five on-campus residence halls and a nine-building apartment complex, all of which are located on the main campus in Kent. Each hall is a part of a larger group, usually bound by a common name or a common central area.  They are:
Dining halls are in Eastway, Tri-Towers, and Prentice, as well as multiple locations in the Student Center. Each of the residence hall dining locations also houses small grocery stores where students may use their board plan.

=Learning communities=

Within the halls are 11 Learning Communities based on area of study:

Athletics

Kent State's athletic teams are called the Golden Flashes. Their colors are Navy Blue and Gold. They compete in the NCAA's Division I (Bowl Subdivision for football), and the Mid-American Conference East division. Kent State fields 16 varsity athletic teams and one club team.
The Flashes had success in the Mid-American Conference, earned the Mid-American Conference's Reese Cup for best men's athletic program in 2000, 2002 and 2006 and the Jacoby Cup for best women's athletic program in 1989, 1996, 1997, 1999, 2004 and 2005.kentstatesports.dbml?DB_OEM_ID=11400&ATCLID=919608. In 2002 the Men's Basketball team advanced to NCAA "Elite Eight", while the baseball team, women's basketball, gymnastics, men's golf, and women's golf teams have won numerous MAC titles and advanced to NCAA tournament play. Some notable athletic alumni include: Missouri Tigers head football coach Gary Pinkel, 2003 British Open Champion and current PGA member Ben Curtis, former New York Yankees catcher Thurman Munson, Thomas Jefferson (athlete) 1984 200m Olympic bronze medalist, former Pittsburgh Steelers linebacker Jack Lambert, Pittsburgh Steelers linebacker James Harrison, ESPN Analyst and former college football coach Lou Holtz, San Diego Chargers tight end Antonio Gates (who played basketball at KSU, not football), New York Jets return specialist Joshua Cribbs, former San Diego Padres pitcher Dustin Hermanson, Tampa Bay Rays pitcher Andy Sonnanstine, Los Angeles Dodgers pitcher Matt Guerrier, and Alabama Crimson Tide head football coach Nick Saban, New England Patriots Wide Receiver Julian Edelman, European Pro Basketball Player Chris Evans who plays in Tricela, Greece, and The World's Sexiest Man Competition Winner Liam "Sexy Boss" Leonard.
The Golden Flashes compete in the following sports:
*=the golf teams' season begins in the fall, but continues through most of the school year, culminating in the league and NCAA tournaments in the spring.

University Press

The Kent State University Press is the publishing arm of Kent State University. Their mission is "to advance knowledge through publishing" and is controlled by an Editorial Board of Kent faculty. As a member of the Association of American University Presses, it is included in the select group of more than 100 university-sponsored scholarly presses, whose outstanding programs make them an important segment of the publishing and academic community.
The Press began in 1965 under the direction of Howard Allen and published in the University faculty strengths in literary criticism. In 1972 Paul Rohmann became the Press's second director and expanded the Press's publishing program to include regional studies and ethnomusicology. In 1985 historian John Hubbell assumed the directorship and for fifteen years saw the staff and publishing program grow to include widely regarded lists in Civil War history and Ohio history. Today, under director Will Underwood, the Press publishes 30 to 35 titles a year and reaches a large and appreciative audience.

Notable alumni

Kent State counts 196,000 alumni as of 2010.  It has produced a number of individuals in the entertainment industry including comedian and current Price is Right host Drew Carey, comedian and talk show host Arsenio Hall, actors John de Lancie, Michael Keaton, and Ray Wise, actresses Alaina Reed Hall and Alice Ripley, Phenomenon star Angela Funovits, boxing promoter Don King, 30 Rock producer Jeff Richmond, and That 70s Show creator Bonnie Turner.  Musicians from Kent State include several members of the band Devo, which was formed at Kent State in 1973, including Mark Mothersbaugh, Bob Lewis, and Gerald Casale.  Additional musicians include singers Chrissie Hynde, Jeff Timmons of 98 Degrees, and Debra Byrd of American Idol, guitarist Joe Walsh, and drummer Chris Vrenna.
In politics and government, several politicians in Ohio attended Kent State including former judge and United States Representative Robert E. Cook, former minority leader C.J. Prentiss, current United State House of Representatives member Betty Sutton, former representative and Lieutenant Governor Nancy Hollister, and Supreme Court of Ohio justice Terrence O'Donnell.  Other politicians include Allen Buckley of Georgia, Jeffrey Dean former State Representative and member State Board of Education of Ohio, Pennsylvania state representative Allen Kukovich, and George Petak of Wisconsin.  Politician activists from Kent State include anti-war activist Alan Canfora and former Students for a Democratic Society leaders Ken Hammond and Carl Oglesby.
Literary and journalism alumni include Funky Winkerbean and Crankshaft writer Tom Batiuk, Captain Underpants author Dav Pilkey, Pulitzer Prize-winning columnist Connie Schultz, and Pulitzer Prize nominated columnist Regina Brett.  Television journalism alumni include CNN anchor Carol Costello, Cleveland news anchors Ted Henry, Wayne Dawson and Catherine Bosley, and sportscasters Jeff Phelps and ESPN Dream Job winner Dave Holmes.
A number of professional athletes are Kent State alumni including current WWE wrestler and two-time World Heavyweight Champion Dolph Ziggler, National Football League players such as two-time Super Bowl winner James Harrison,  Pro Bowl selections Josh Cribbs & Antonio Gates, and Usama Young.  Former NFL players include Don Nottingham, Pro Football Hall of Fame member Jack Lambert along with Canadian Football League standouts Jay McNeil, Tony Martino, and Canadian Football Hall of Fame and former Kent State football head coach Jim Corrigall.  
College football coaches such as four-time National Champion Nick Saban of the University of Alabama, Gary Pinkel of the University of Missouri, and former National Championship winning coach and current ESPN analyst Lou Holtz are also Kent State alumni.
Major League Baseball players to come from Kent State include current players Emmanuel Burriss, Matt Guerrier, Andy Sonnanstine and Dirk Hayhurst.  Past MLB players include Gene Michael, Rich Rollins, Dustin Hermanson, Cy Young Award winner Steve Stone, and Rookie of the Year, and Most Valuable Player winner Thurman Munson.  Additional athletic alumni include Canadian professional golfers Jon Mills and Ryan Yip as well as American and 2003 British Open champion Ben Curtis, and Olympians Betty-Jean Maycock in gymnastics and Gerald Tinker in track and field.



Further reading




