[[United Nations Security Council Resolution 940]]

CATEGORIES: 1994 United Nations Security Council resolutions, 1994 in Haiti, United Nations Security Council resolutions concerning Haiti

United Nations Security Council resolution 940, adopted on 31 July 1994, after recalling resolutions 841 (1993), 861 (1993), 862 (1993), 867 (1993), 873 (1993), 875 (1993), 905 (1994), 917 (1994) and 933 (1994), the Council affirmed the goal of the international community to restore democracy in Haiti and authorised a United States-led multinational force under unified command and control to restore the legitimately elected President Jean-Bertrand Aristide and authorities of the Government of Haiti, and extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH) for an additional six months.

Resolution

The Council began by condemning the illegal military regime in Haiti after it had ignored agreements and refused to co-operate with the United Nations and Organization of American States (OAS). Concern was expressed at the deteriorating humanitarian situation in the country, violations of civil liberties and expulsion of staff from the International Civilian Mission.
The resolution recognised the extraordinary situation in Haiti, which required an exceptional response. It was determined that the regime in Haiti had failed to comply with Security Council resolutions and with the Governors Island peace agreement. The Council then authorised, under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, for Member States to form a multinational force under a joint command to facilitate the departure of the military leaders from Haiti, and for those elected to return to a secure and stable environment in which the peace agreement could be implemented. An advance team of no more than 60 personnel was established in order to co-ordinate and observe the multinational operations, requesting the Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali to report back on developments relating to the advance team within 30 days.
Once the multinational force had completed its mission, UNMIH would take over its functions when a stable environment had been secured. After extending UNMIH's mandate for six months, it was decided to increase the size of the mission to 6,000 troops with the aim of completing it by February 1996. The safety of United Nations personnel and those from diplomatic missions and international humanitarian organisations would be guaranteed. Finally, international sanctions imposed on Haiti would be lifted once Aristide had been returned to power.
Resolution 940 was adopted by 12 votes to none, with two abstentions from Brazil and China, while Rwanda was not present when voting took place.

Reaction

The vote was the first time the United Nations sanctioned the use of an invading force to "restore democracy." It was also the first time the US has sought and gained UN approval for a military intervention in the Americas.
Many Latin American countries were opposed to the resolution. Mexico's UN ambassador, Víctor Flores Olea, spoke out against the resolution, saying that "it sets an extremely dangerous precedent in the field of international relations" because the crisis "does not constitute a threat to peace and international security." Cuban Foreign Minister Roberto Robaina said that the resolution furthers "the repeated attempts by the Security Council to amplify its powers beyond those which were granted it by the Charter."
Brazilian President Itamar Franco strongly opposed the UN decision, saying "The Security Council's special powers should not be invoked in an indiscriminate manner in the name of a 'search for more rapid means' to respond to attacks on democracy, because it violates the basic principles of peaceful co-existence between nations and normal UN legal procedures." After a visit to Brazil from U.S. Under Secretary of State Peter Tarnoff the week before the vote, Brazil's decision to abstain instead of oppose the resolution can clearly be seen to be the result of enormous U.S. pressure.
Pointing out that the situation in Haiti posed no threat to world peace and security, Uruguay's UN representative Ramiro Piriz Ballon said his country "will not support any military intervention, unilateral or multilateral."
Argentina initially offered to send four marine and infantry companies to join the U.S.-led invasion forces. However, after popular discontent over the decision, President Carlos Menem was forced to back down on the offer.
On 17 January 1995, UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali issued a 17-page report on the result of the intervention: the report noted the ongoing repression in Haiti, the complete lack of justice for victims of the September 1991 coup d'état, the deteriorating economic situation, and the growing impatience of the Haitian people. It also pointed out however that Haiti was as a consequence a much safer place and that the President now controlled the island with the assistance of U.S. troops.








