[[The Franklin Mint]]

CATEGORIES: Coin mints, Model manufacturers, Companies established in 1964, 1964 establishments in Pennsylvania, Publishing companies established in 1973, Defunct book publishing companies of the United States, Companies based in Manhattan, Companies based in Pennsylvania, Companies based in Chester County, Pennsylvania, Coin retailers, Mints of the United States

The Franklin Mint is a private mint founded by Joseph Segel in 1964 in Wawa, Pennsylvania. The company is currently owned by Sequential Brands Group headquartered in New York City, New York.  The previous owners have a license to complete some programming. The Franklin Mint manufactured and marketed coins, jewelry, diecast vehicles, dolls, sculpture and other collectibles. The Franklin Mint has one fulfillment center located in Coatesville, Pennsylvania.

History

For five decades The Franklin Mint produced and marketed  "collectibles". Their product line began with manufacturing and marketing privately minted gold and silver commemorative rounds and medallions.[ref]TY  - BOOK
T1  - Numismatic Issues of the Franklin Mint, Covering the Years 1965-1969
UR  - 
Y1  - 1970
PB  - Franklin Mint
ER  - 
[/ref] Besides coins, other offerings included dolls, plates and diecast vehicles. Often emphasized in these media were influential historical figures or famous actors.

The Franklin Library

The Franklin Library, produced public domain classic books from its founding in 1973 until closing in 2000.

Vehicles

In 1983, after Warner Communications had purchased the Franklin Mint, the company entered the diecast vehicle market introducing a 1935 Mercedes Benz 500K Roadster. Usually the cars were labeled as Franklin Mint Precision Models. In the following years, Franklin Mint produced more than 600 different issues of motorcycles, trucks and tractors besides automobiles.

Changes in ownership

In 1980, Warner Communications (now part of Time Warner) purchased The Franklin Mint for about $225 million.  The combination was short lived: Warner sold The Franklin Mint in 1985 to American Protection Industries Inc. (API) for $167.5 million.  However, Warner retained Eastern Mountain Sports, a retailer that The Franklin Mint had acquired in the 1970s, as well as The Franklin Mint Center, which it leased back to API.

Diana, Princess of Wales Memorial Fund vs Franklin Mint

Following the death of Diana, Princess of Wales, the Diana, Princess of Wales Memorial Fund was granted intellectual property rights over her image.  In addition to this, the Diana, Princess of Wales Memorial Fund had spent a total of close to £4 million (US $6.5 million) in costs and fees relating to this litigation, and as a result froze grants allocated to a number of charities.






