[[Sid and Nancy]]

CATEGORIES: 1986 films, 1980s drama films, 1980s musical films, Biographical films about musicians, British films, British biographical films, British drama films, British independent films, British musical films, English-language films, Films directed by Alex Cox, Films about heroin addiction, Films set in the 1970s, Mental illness in fiction, Musical drama films, Musical films based on actual events, Punk films, Sex Pistols, Films shot in New Jersey

Sid and Nancy (also known as Sid and Nancy: Love Kills) is a 1986 British biopic directed by Alex Cox. The film portrays the life of Sid Vicious (Gary Oldman), bassist of the seminal punk rock band the Sex Pistols, and his relationship with girlfriend Nancy Spungen (Chloe Webb).

Plot

The film opens with several police officers dragging Sid Vicious (Gary Oldman) out of the Hotel Chelsea following the death of his girlfriend, Nancy Spungen (Chloe Webb). Vicious is soon driven to a police station and upon arrival is asked to describe what happened.
A few months earlier in 1978, Vicious and Johnny Rotten (Andrew Schofield) meet Spungen, a groupie who has come to London to bed the Sex Pistols. Vicious dismisses her at first, but starts dating her after she sells him heroin; it is implied that she introduces him to the drug. The two fall deeply in love, but their self-destructive, drug-fueled relationship frays Vicious' relationship with the rest of the band, which eventually breaks up in the midst of a disastrous American tour.
Vicious attempts to start a solo career with Spungen as his manager, only to be dismissed as a has-been. By now, both he and Spungen are heavily addicted to heroin, and Spungen has spiraled into a deep depression. It ends tragically one night when, during an argument in which Vicious announces his plans to stop using heroin and return to England, a suicidal Spungen begs him to kill her. They fight in a drug-induced haze, and he stabs her, although whether or not it was intentional is left to interpretation. They fall asleep and later Spungen awakes and stumbles into the bathroom, where she collapses and dies.
Vicious is released on bail. After getting a pizza, some kids convince him to dance with them. In the meanwhile, a taxi with Nancy riding in the back seat picks Vicious up and drives away as Sid and Nancy embrace. The postscript then says that Vicious died of a heroin overdose: "Nancy and Sid R.I.P."

Cast

Production

The film, originally titled Love Kills,
Some of the supporting characters are composites, invented to streamline the plot.
Courtney Love recorded an infamous video audition in which she exclaimed, "I am Nancy Spungen." Cox was impressed by Love's audition, but has said the film's investors insisted on an experienced actress for the co-leading role. Therefore, instead, Love was cast in the relatively minor role of Gretchen (a part that Cox wrote specifically for her benefit), one of Sid and Nancy's New York junkie friends.
In his 2007 autobiography, Guns N' Roses guitarist Slash revealed that the casting director hired all five members of Guns N' Roses as extras for a club scene, having coincidentally scouted them in different locations without their knowledge. He said "all of us showed up to the first day of casting, like 'Hey...
Webb and Oldman improvised the dialogue heard in the scene leading up to Spungen's death but based it on interviews and other materials available to them.
The original music is by Pray for Rain, Joe Strummer, and The Pogues. A track by Tears For Fears ("Swords and Knives") was also recorded for the film but was rejected by the filmmakers for not being "punk" enough.
The film was rated R in the US for "drug use, language, violence, sexuality, and nudity".

Release

Reception and legacy

Sid and Nancy received generally positive reviews from critics. From the reviews collected from notable publications by popular review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an overall approval rating of 91%, with the consensus, "Visceral, energetic, and often very sad, Sid & Nancy is also a surprisingly touching love story, and Gary Oldman is outstanding as the late punk rock icon Sid Vicious."Sid & Nancy Movie Reviews, Pictures - Rotten Tomatoes Roger Ebert gave Sid and Nancy four-out-of-four in his review for The Chicago Sun-Times, writing that Cox and his crew "pull off the neat trick of creating a movie full of noise and fury, and telling a meticulous story right in the middle of it."Sid & NancyRoger Ebert's Four Star Movie Guide by Roger Ebert. (1988, Andrews & McMeel) p.280. In a subsequent article on Gary Oldman, Ebert referred to the movie's titular couple as "Punk Rock's Romeo and Juliet."Roger Ebert's Four Star Movie Guide by Roger Ebert. (1988, Andrews & McMeel) p.383.
In his book Sid Vicious: Rock N' Roll Star, Malcolm Butt describes Webb's performance as Spungen as "intense, powerful, and most important of all, believable." Oldman's portrayal of Vicious was ranked #62 in Premiere magazine's "100 Greatest Performances of All Time"." In 2011, Total Film said of the performance, "It's an early high point in Oldman's varied career that showed just what the young actor was made of. Playing the part of an icon known and beloved by many comes with its own demands and risks, but Oldman more than rises to the challenge, completely transforming into the troubled punk bassist." The magazine described Oldman's rendition of "My Way" as "fantastic – might even be better than Sid's original version."Winning, Josh. Best Movies: The film chameleon's greatest moments. Total Film. 11 April 2011. Retrieved 4 October 2011.
Not all reviews of the film were positive. Leslie Halliwell had little praise for the movie: "Some have said stimulating, most have preferred revolting. Consensus, an example of the dregs to which cinema has been reduced." He also cited a line from a review that appeared in Sight & Sound: "Relentlessly whingeing performances and a lengthy slide into drugs, degradation and death make this a solemnly off-putting moral tract."Halliwell's Film Guide: 11th Edition by Leslie Halliwell, edited by John Walker. (1995, HarperCollins) p.1033.
Andrew Schofield was ranked #1 in Uncut magazine's "10 Worst actors in rockin' roles", who described his performance as Sex Pistols lead singer Johnny Rotten (real name John Lydon) as a "short-arse Scouse Bleasdale regular never once looking like he means it". Paul Simonon of The Clash also criticised the movie for portraying Lydon as "some sort of fat, bean-slurping idiot."3am Interview: AN INTERVIEW WITH PAUL SIMONON
Although not a box office success, generating $2,826,523 on a $4 million budget, Sid and Nancy has since come to be regarded as a cult classic. Yahoo! Movies. Retrieved 11 July 2012. OVGuide. Retrieved 11 July 2012.

John Lydon's reaction

Lydon commented on the film in his 1994 autobiography, Rotten: No Irish, No Blacks, No Dogs:

Strummer claimed to have met with Alex Cox for the first time after the completion of the film, at a wrap party,DEATH OF A PUNK - JOE STRUMMER (1952-2002) Clash co-founder dies of heart attack. :: hightimes. The wrap party was actually the conclusion of the London phase of the filming, which was followed by filming in Los Angeles and New York City, performed by a largely different crew. The pair's meeting involved discussion over soundtrack work for the film, not the film's script.
In a later interview, Lydon was asked the question, "Did the movie get anything right?" to which he replied: "Maybe the name Sid."Rotten to the Core: An Interview With John Lydon Cox's attitude toward his subjects was indeed unapologetically negative, writing that "Sid had sold out, contributed nothing of value, died an idiot." He acknowledged that Lydon's hatred of the movie was "understandable, given that it was based on incidents from his life and centered around one of his friends."Alex Cox - SID & NANCY The other remaining Pistols have been far less outspoken about the movie than Lydon, although Lydon claimed that Paul Cook was more upset over the movie than he was.Fodderstompf | Press Archives | Cut Magazine, November 1987
According to Cox, both he and Andrew Schofield (who played Lydon in the film) did meet with Lydon before the filming. According to Cox, Lydon noticed that Schofield was, like Cox, a Liverpudlian, rather than a Londoner like Lydon, and encouraged him to play the part as a Scouser rather than a Londoner. Cox took this as a sign that both of them agreed that it would be better to portray a more fictionalized version of the characters rather than a cold re-telling of facts. Cox claims that Lydon drank heavily at these meetings, which may explain why Lydon did not recall them. Cox stated in a book that contrary to Lydon's claims, his meeting with Schofield was not after the film's completion, but rather before Schofield had even been given the part. He was offered the part the next day.

Awards and nominations

Awards

Nominations

Soundtrack

The official soundtrack contains no songs sung by either the Sex Pistols or Sid Vicious. Much of the actual film's soundtrack (as opposed to soundtrack album) was composed by Joe Strummer, who was contractually limited to contribute only two songs. Nevertheless, he continued to contribute more (unpaid) work because of his interest in the project and composing for film in general. This additional material was credited to fictitious bands in the credits, so as to keep Strummer's label, Epic Records, from knowing what he had done. Another large portion of the music was composed by The Pogues.

DVD

Sid and Nancy was first released on DVD by The Criterion Collection in the late 1990s;






