[[List of newspapers in Hong Kong]]

CATEGORIES: Lists of newspapers by country, Newspapers published in Hong Kong, Lists of Hong Kong media

This is a list of newspapers in Hong Kong. Hong Kong is home to many of Asia's biggest English and Chinese language newspapers. The territory has one of the world's largest press industries and is a major centre for print journalism.



Popularity

The Chinese language newspapers, Headline Daily, Oriental Daily News, Apple Daily and Sun Daily have the highest shares in the Hong Kong newspaper market, while the Hong Kong Economic Times is the best-selling financial newspaper. The Standard, a free tabloid with a mass market strategy, is the most widely circulated English newspaper by a significant margin. Its rival, South China Morning Post, has the most paid subscribers among English-language papers in Hong Kong. According to independent surveys conducted by The Chinese University of Hong Kong, South China Morning Post and Ming Pao are the most trusted newspapers in Hong Kong (see below).

Paparazzi

The fact that Apple Daily and The Sun are among those with the highest circulation can be explained by their approach. Both use an informal style, concentrating on celebrity gossip and paparazzi photography, and written to some degree in colloquial Cantonese phrases. This style of writing, as in other markets, is popular with a large section of the public. The content is often exaggerated or outright fabricated to claim "exclusives". Although the subjects of these alleged falsehoods have tried to express their dissatisfaction through actions such as refusing interviews or even suing the reporters, they have not succeeded in stopping the papers' activities.

Number and price

The number of newspapers in the market has been stable for a long time. There are occasional attempts at establishing new types of newspaper and theme-oriented papers, but most of these new papers cannot compete with the more mainstream papers. However, the entry into the market of free newspapers Metropolis Daily, Headline Daily, am730, and The Epoch Times has spurred competition. In September 2007, The Standard changed its business model from a traditional daily into a free-sheet, distributed in commercial districts like Central and Admiralty.Standard to become free newspaper – RTHK, 3 September 2007
Most papers sell at the cover price of HK$6, except South China Morning Post (HK$8, while the Sunday edition, Sunday Morning Post, costs HK$10). The economic recession brought about by SARS in 2003 led to some resellers pricing at $1 below the recommended price. According to the HK Newspaper Hawkers Association, the situation has lasted through to 2008, and some 10% of sellers maintain the cut price despite the change in the prevailing economic climate. The Association urges a return to resale price maintenance.

Chinese-language newspapers

Newspapers in Hong Kong are known to follow a particular political stance, with most being either Pro-Beijing or Pro-Democracy. Some newspapers are completely neutral, or are oriented towards finance or religion.
A few papers, such as Oriental Daily, Apple Daily, and The Sun are known for their sensational style, such as publishing gory pictures (e.g., of road accidents or murder scenes), and engaging in borderline obscene coverage (including "prostitution guides") on a regular basis.

Pro-Beijing Leftist

Pro-Beijing Leftist

Liberal

Pro-democracy

Financial

Religious

English-language newspapers

South China Morning Post and The Standard are both regarded as 'quality press', and generally considered as neutral towards the government, though with the Post more "establishment-leaning" and The Standard a little more liberal in its editorial stance. The Standard now presents itself as a business paper, but also carries general news. From 10 September 2007, it switched to free, advertising-supported distribution.
The regional English-language newspaper, The Wall Street Journal Asia, is also published in Hong Kong; the Asian editions of the International Herald Tribune and Financial Times are also available in the city.

Free tabloids

Free district posts

Other Languages' posts

Relative credibility

In a 2010 survey, the Center for Communication Research at the School of Journalism and Communication of the Chinese University of Hong Kong asked Hong Kong residents to score the credibility of media sources on a scale of 1 to 10 (10 being very high credibility). A random sample of 1206 Cantonese-speaking adults was reached by telephone with a 65% response rate, and the scores were weighted by age and sex to reflect Hong Kong's population. The South China Morning Post was the most credible (score: 6.85), while Ming Pao was the most credible Chinese-language paper (score: 6.77). The Sun was the least credible (score: 4.99), and Apple Daily was slightly better (score: 5.27). Oriental Daily News was the median (score: 5.75).

Defunct newspapers

More are listed in the catalogue of the British Library's Newspaper Library.






