[[Jerry O'Connell]]

CATEGORIES: 1974 births, Male actors from New York City, American male child actors, American male film actors, American people of Irish descent, American people of Italian descent, American people of Polish descent, American male television actors, Living people, People from Manhattan, New York University alumni

Jeremiah "Jerry" O'Connell (born February 17, 1974) is an American actor, best known for his roles as Quinn Mallory in the TV series Sliders, Andrew Clements in My Secret Identity, Vern Tessio in the film Stand by Me, Derek in Scream 2, Charlie Carbone in Kangaroo Jack, and Detective Woody Hoyt on the drama Crossing Jordan. He starred as Pete Kaczmarek in the CBS TV series The Defenders until its cancellation in 2011. He also had a starring role in the comedy horror film Piranha 3D.

Early life and education

O'Connell was born in New York City, the son of Linda (née Witkowski), an American art teacher of Polish and Italian descent, and Michael O'Connell, a British-Irish advertising agency art director.com His maternal grandfather, Charles S. Witkowski, was mayor of Jersey City, New Jersey. majoring in film. While there, he studied screen writing and competed on the NYU fencing team, serving a stint as captain of the sabre squad. He graduated in 1995.O'Connell reference, NYU News, October 2, 2013.

Career

O'Connell began his acting career at a young age. As a child, he did commercial work for Duncan Hines cookies. Shortly after at the age of eleven, he landed his first feature film role as the character Vern Tessio in Stephen King's Stand by Me. 
O'Connell starred in the Canadian science fiction sitcom My Secret Identity from 1988 to 1991 as the teen hero who develops superhuman traits. During a summer break from NYU, Jerry starred in the feature film Calendar Girl alongside Jason Priestley and Gabriel Olds. He also appeared in the short-lived ABC sitcom, Camp Wilder with Jay Mohr and Hilary Swank in 1992. In his Junior year, O'Connell auditioned for the TV pilot Sliders (also filmed in Canada). He was offered the role of Quinn Mallory in the series, which ran for three seasons on Fox and two seasons on the Sci-Fi Channel. He served as producer during his fourth and final season, and is credited with writing and directing several episodes.
O'Connell has since gone on to star in such movies as Jerry Maguire, Body Shots, Mission to Mars, Tomcats, Scream 2, and Kangaroo Jack. O'Connell has also tried his hand at screenwriting and sold his first screenplay, for First Daughter, to New Regency in 1999. The film was released in 2004 by 20th Century Fox-based Davis Entertainment. O'Connell served as executive producer on the film, which starred Katie Holmes and Michael Keaton.
O'Connell starred as Detective Woody Hoyt on the NBC crime drama Crossing Jordan (2001) until its cancellation in May 2007, and was engaged to actress Rebecca Romijn. He starred opposite her in the Ugly Betty episode "Derailed". O'Connell played Hoyt in several episodes of Las Vegas. In 2004, he wore a diaper on Last Call with Carson Daly, during a mock commercial skit for the GoodNites bedwetting product.
In 2005, O'Connell guest-starred in one episode of the animated series Justice League Unlimited.  In the episode, titled "Clash", he played Captain Marvel. He reprised the role of Captain Marvel in the "DC Universe Animated Original Movies" short film, Superman/Shazam!: The Return of Black Adam alongside George Newbern, who reprised the role of Superman, having done the voice for the animated series. Jerry's younger brother, Charlie has appeared in several productions in which his brother starred, such as in Sliders and Crossing Jordan. In 2007–08 O'Connell starred in ABC's Carpoolers, which ran from October 2, 2007 to March 4, 2008. In early 2008, O'Connell participated in a widely circulated Internet video parody of the leaked Tom Cruise video on Scientology. Cruise was O'Connell's co-star in Jerry Maguire.Jerry Connell Parody of Tom Cruise Scientology Video
O'Connell co-wrote and appeared in a video parody called "Young Hillary Clinton", satirizing Hillary Clinton's 2008 primary campaign.minnesotamonitor.do?diaryId=4116 Campaign satire: 'Young Hillary Clinton' explains HRC campaign to us as if we were  10 years old] On February 2, 2008, O'Connell hosted VH1's Pepsi Smash Super Bowl Bash, which aired the night before Super Bowl XLII and featured musical guests Maroon 5 and Mary J. Blige.comLive Review: Pepsi Smash Super Bowl Bash with Mary J. Blige, Maroon 5, LiveDaily. In late 2008 O'Connell starred in Fox's Do Not Disturb, co-starring Niecy Nash, but Fox cancelled the show after only three episodes.fox.htmCancellation of Do Not Disturb
O'Connell appeared in the 2009 thriller film Obsessed as "Ben", the best friend and co-worker of the film's protagonist Derek Charles (Idris Elba). He appeared in Eastwick on ABC, on which his wife, Rebecca Romijn. starred in the series.
O'Connell co-starred with David Tennant in the pilot for legal drama Rex Is Not Your Lawyer, which was not picked up for production. In 2010, O'Connell starred with Jim Belushi in the CBS comedy-drama The Defenders, which was cancelled on May 15, 2011 after one season.
O'Connell appeared on Broadway at the Golden Theatre in Seminar, written by Theresa Rebeck. The play, directed by Sam Gold, opened on November 20, 2011, starring Alan Rickman, Lily Rabe, Hamish Linklater and Hettienne Park. On June 4, 2012, it was announced that O'Connell would play Herman Munster in a reboot of The Munsters, titled Mockingbird Lane; the remake series was never picked up for production. On May 15,
2013, it was announced that O'Connell would play Stuart Strickland on We Are Men, alongside Tony Shalhoub.

Personal life

On July 14, 2007, O'Connell married actress and former model Rebecca Romijn.Mayor Charles Witkowski of Jersey City pictures from history photos on webshotsThe Political Graveyard profile of O'Connell's maternal grandfather, Charles Witkowski, a mayor of Jersey City, New Jersey
After weeks of officially stating that the couple were "trying" to get pregnant, a publicist for the pair confirmed that Romijn was pregnant with twin girls. When talking about having children, O'Connell said "I am excited I am having girls. I know guys are supposed to say, 'I want a boy. I want to play baseball,' but I think I'm going to be good raising girls...I can't wait. They're going to be tough chicks. They're only having sex when I'm dead. If they don't date boys at all and just want them to be infatuated with their father, that's what I'm really going for."
O'Connell enrolled in Southwestern Law School in Los Angeles in August 2009. He later dropped out to return to acting full time.com/2010/10/31/jerry-oconnell-quits-law-school-to-play-vegas-defender/

Filmography

Film

Television

Producer

Director

Writer

Music videos






