[[Envoy Air]]

CATEGORIES: Companies based in Fort Worth, Texas, American Airlines, Regional Airline Association members, Oneworld affiliate members, Airlines established in 1984, Regional airlines of the United States, Airlines based in Texas, Airlines of the United States

Envoy Air Inc. (formerly American Eagle Airlines) is an air carrier based in Fort Worth, Texas. It is a wholly owned subsidiary of American Airlines Group that, along with several carriers outside the group, feeds the American Airlines route network under the American Eagle brand. Envoy is an affiliate member of the Oneworld airline alliance.
Until April 11, 2012, the carrier also had a code share agreement with Delta Air Lines on California routes.
The name "American Eagle Airlines" was also used between April 1980 and April 1981 by an unrelated air charter service that suspended operations and filed bankruptcy before flying any scheduled operations.

History

Envoy began as a collection of regional carriers with contracts to carry the American Eagle brand name.  The first American Eagle flight was operated by Metroflight Airlines, which was a wholly owned subsidiary of Metro Airlines (formerly Houston Metro Airlines), on November 1, 1984, from Fayetteville, Arkansas to Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport.  Metroflight utilized Convair 580 turboprop aircraft that had been formerly operated by Frontier Airlines.  Other carriers that have flown in American Eagle (airline brand) livery include Executive Airlines, Command Airways, Air Virginia, Simmons Airlines, Chaparral Airlines and Wings West Airlines. Among other aircraft in its fleet, Chaparral flew Grumman I-C turboprops which were stretched, 37 passenger regional airliner versions of Grumman's successful propjet business aircraft and was one of only a few air carriers to ever operate the type in scheduled passenger service.
Until 1987 these third-party carriers flew under contract with American Airlines to provide regional feed to its hubs.  During 1987 and 1988 AMR Corp. acquired its regional carriers, starting with Simmons Airlines.  AMR's final airline d/b/a American Eagle acquisition was Executive Airlines in 1989.
By mid-1991 AMR had consolidated the number of carriers to four.  The May 15, 1998, merger of Wings West and Flagship into Simmons (and the name change of Simmons Airlines to American Eagle Airlines) reduced the number of carriers flying as American Eagle under separate operating certificates to two:  American Eagle Airlines, Inc. and Executive Airlines, Inc.
During 2007, AMR began studying ways to spin American Eagle Airlines off into a separate company, including, but not limited to, the possibilities of selling the company to either stockholders or to an unaffiliated third party.  In 2008, AMR said any plans had been put on hold until the airline industry stabilized after the worldwide financial crisis.  In July 2011, AMR announced the spin-off of American Eagle Airlines but those plans were again put on hold when Parent AMR Corp. filed for bankruptcy in November 2011. In 2014 the company changed its name to Envoy Air Inc.

Codeshare agreements with other airlines

For a brief period American Eagle Airlines cooperated with Trans World Airlines by allowing the placement of the TW two letter IATA code upon American Eagle Airlines flights feeding into Los Angeles and later New York's JFK Airports. These services were known as the Trans World Connection.
These American Eagle Airlines/Trans World agreements were forged prior to and well in advance of AMR Corporation's route and asset acquisition of TWA in 2001.

Hubs

Envoy operates from four hubs at Chicago-O'Hare, Dallas-Fort Worth, Miami, New York (at both Kennedy and LaGuardia airports). Former hubs include Boston, Nashville, San Jose, San Juan, Los Angeles, and Raleigh/Durham, with former focus cities being St. Louis and Washington.
Envoy also operates maintenance stations in Abilene, Texas; Columbus, Ohio; Springfield-Branson National Airport in Springfield, Missouri; Sawyer International Airport in Marquette, Michigan; and Northwest Arkansas Regional Airport in Bentonville, Arkansas.

American Eagle Airlines rebranding as Envoy Air

On January 14, 2014, American Airlines Group officially announced the rebranding of its American Eagle subsidiary as Envoy. Planes operated by American Eagle will continue to operate under the current American Eagle branding, but an "Operated by Envoy Air" label will be added, as is the case when contractors fly American Eagle aircraft. The Dallas Morning News. Retrieved on 2014-01-14.

Destinations

Envoy Air fleet

The Envoy Air fleet consists of the following aircraft (as of January 2014):
At October 2010, the average age of the Envoy Air fleet was 9.7 years.
In September 2009, AMR Corporation announced plans to add a First Class cabin to its fleet of 25 Bombardier CRJ700 regional jets and also signed a letter of intent with Bombardier, Inc. to exercise options for the purchase of 22 additional CRJ700 SRS 702ER aircraft for delivery beginning in the middle of 2010.
In January 2014, American Eagle's pilots union reached an agreement with the regional carrier's management that guarantees 60 of the new Embraer 175 aircraft that American Airlines ordered in December to be used with Eagle. The deal includes options for 90 other aircraft to be operated by the regional carrier. Delivery of the aircraft would begin in the first quarter of 2015. This deal was voted down by the pilots' union ALPA.

Historical turboprop fleet

The American Eagle brand via its various regional and commuter airline partners operated a variety of twin turboprop aircraft over the years including the ATR-42, ATR-72, Beech 99, British Aerospace BAe Jetstream 31 and 32 models, CASA 212, Convair 580, Fairchild Swearingen Metroliner, Grumman Gulfstream I (stretched G-IC model), Nihon YS-11, Short 330, and Short 360.  Currently, no turboprop aircraft are flown on any American Eagle branded passenger services as all flights are operated with regional jets.

On-board service

On domestic flights in North America and areas in the Caribbean, American Eagle Airlines offers a buy on board program offering snacks for purchase.

Incidents and accidents

Executive Airlines

Envoy Air Inc. predecessors








