[[Roberta Williams]]

CATEGORIES: 1953 births, American video game actresses, American video game designers, Living people, Women in technology

Roberta Williams (born February 16, 1953) is an American video game designer, writer and a co-founder of Sierra On-Line (later known as Sierra Entertainment),  originally from Simi Valley, California. She is most famous for her pioneering work in the field of graphic adventure games with titles such as Mystery House, the King's Quest series, and Phantasmagoria. She is married to Ken Williams and retired from her career in 1999. Roberta Williams is considered one of the most influential PC game designers of the eighties and nineties, and has been credited with creating the graphic adventure genre.

Career

In the 1980s and 1990s, Roberta and her husband, Ken Williams, were leading figures in the development of graphical adventure games.
Ars Technica stated that Roberta Williams was "one of the more iconic figures in adventure gaming". GameSpot once named her as the number ten in their list of "the most influential people in computer gaming of all time" for "pushing the envelope of graphic adventures" and being "especially proactive in creating games from a woman's point of view, and titles that appealed to the mainstream market, all the while integrating the latest technologies in graphics and sound wherever possible."GamesSpot In 1997, Computer Gaming World ranked her as number 10 on the list of the most influential people of all time in computer gaming for adventure game design."
Since her retirement in 1999, she has stayed away from the public eye and rarely gives interviews to talk about her past with Sierra On-Line. However, in a 2006 interview, she admitted that her favorite game she created was Phantasmagoria and not King's Quest: "If I could only pick one game, I would pick Phantasmagoria, as I enjoyed working on it immensely and it was so very challenging (and I love to be challenged!). However, in my heart, I will always love the King's Quest series and, especially, King's Quest I, since it was the game that really 'made' Sierra On-Line."
In a 2006 interview, Williams said that designing computer games was in the past for her then and that she intended to write a historical novel. However, in 2011, the video game website Gamezebo reported that Roberta Williams was working on a social network game Odd Manor.

Personal life

Roberta and Ken married on November 4, 1972 when she was 19, and Ken just turned 18. They have two children, D.J. (born 1973) and Chris (born 1979). The Williams family has homes in Seattle, France and Mexico.

Games






