[[Kemerovo]]

CATEGORIES: Kemerovo

Kemerovo (

Geography

The city is located  east of Moscow at the confluence of the Iskitim and Tom Rivers.

History

Kemerovo is an amalgamation of, and successor to, several older Russian settlements. A waypoint named Verkhotomsky ostrog was established nearby in 1657 on a road from Tomsk to Kuznetsk fortress. In 1701, the settlement of Shcheglovo was founded on the left bank of the Tom; soon it became a village. By 1859, seven villages existed where modern Kemerovo is now: Shcheglovka (or Ust-Iskitimskoye), Kemerovo (named in 1734), Yevseyevo, Krasny Yar, Kur-Iskitim (Pleshki), Davydovo (Ishanovo), and Borovaya. In 1721, coal was discovered in the area. The first coal mines were established in 1907, later a chemical plant was established in 1916. By 1917, the population of Shcheglovo had grown to around 4,000 people.
The area's further development was boosted by the construction a railway between Yurga and Kolchugino (now Leninsk-Kuznetsky) with a connection between Topki and Shcheglovo. Shcheglovo was granted town status in 1918, which is now considered to be the date of Kemerovo's founding. In 1932, Shcheglovsk was renamed Kemerovo and became the administrative center of Kemerovo Oblast in 1943.

Administrative and municipal status

Kemerovo is the administrative center of the oblast and, within the framework of administrative divisions, it also serves as the administrative center of Kemerovsky District, even though it is not a part of it. As a municipal division, Kemerovo City Under Oblast Jurisdiction is incorporated as Kemerovsky Urban Okrug.Law #104-OZ

Economy

The industrialisation of Kemerovo was driven and underpinned by coal mining and by the heavy industry based on the availability of coal.  It remains an important industrial city, built up during the Soviet period, with important steel, aluminum and machinery based manufacturing plants along with chemical, fertilizer, and other manufacturing industries. Since the disintegration of the Soviet Union, the city's industries have experienced a severe decline, creating high levels of unemployment. Major companies based in the city include Siberian Business Union.

Transportation

Kemerovo is linked to western Russia by a branch of the Trans-Siberian Railway. The city is served by the Kemerovo International Airport.

Education

Five higher education institutions are located in Kemerovo: Kemerovo State University, Kuzbass State Technical University, Kemerovo State Medical Academy, Kemerovo State Art Institute, Kemerovo Agricultural Institute and Kuzbass Economy and Justice Institute.

Sports

The public interest for bandy is widespread in Russia. 26,000 watched the opening game of the 2011-2012 Russian Bandy League against Dynamo Moscow and Kuzbass is among the very best in the Russian Bandy League.youtube. Female bandy only exists in a few places in Russia. Now Kemerovo is about to start it up.bandynet.yahoo.bandynet. Kuzbass plays the matches in the league at Khimik Stadium because of the big public interest. That arena has a capacity of 32000.google.co.rusbandy.rusbandy.ru/stadium/12/%26hl%3Den%26tbo%3Dd%26biw%3D1024%26bih%3D545&sa=X&ei=FZ27UPSAIcf34QSqjYGoAg&ved=0CDMQ7gEwAA

Climate

Kemerovo's position gives it a continental climate with average temperatures varying between  annually.

Yeti claims

In October 2011, Kemerovo administrators announced that they had "indisputable proof" that mountains in the region were inhabited by Yeti.nzherald.co.cfm?c_id=2&objectid=10758193

Notable people

Honorable citizens

International relations

Twin towns and sister cities

Kemerovo is twinned with:



Notes

Sources




