[[Apple Daily]]

CATEGORIES: Newspapers published in Hong Kong, Next Media, Publications established in 1995, Chinese-language newspapers (Traditional Chinese), 1995 establishments in Hong Kong

Apple Daily is a Hong-Kong-based tabloid-style newspaper founded in 1995 by Jimmy Lai Chee Ying and is published by its company, Next Media. A sister publication carrying the same name is published in Taiwan, Republic of China under a joint venture between Next Media and other Taiwanese companies. Apple Daily tends to favor the pan-democracy camp in its editorials and commentaries.
Apple Daily's main sections include "Local News", "Foreign News", "Finance", "Entertainment", "Sports" and "Others"—including technology, travel, eating, cooking, fashion and more provocative material generating much of its popularity and controversy. Apple Daily's popularity as Hong Kong's second best selling newspaper, according to AC Nielsen, is derived from its concentration on celebrity coverage, brash news style, sensationalist news reportage and its anti-government political positions.
Its founder brainstormed the name of this newspaper, stating that "if Adam and Eve didn't eat the apple, there would be no evil or wrongdoings in this world, which made news a non-existing term".

History

Apple Daily was founded by Jimmy Lai Chee Ying on June 20, 1995. Unlike newspapers at that time, it used colour printing on all pages of the newspaper and did not allow advertisements covering the complete front page. Since then, it has attracted a large readership. Other newspapers followed suit, and a few were forced to close due to intense competition from Apple Daily. Techniques used by Apple Daily to gain readership included price warring,
The newspaper uncovered many political scandals, including a former member of the Legislative Council not reporting conflict of interest in 2000, a former Financial Secretary Antony Leung for tax evasion on a Lexus LS 430 which saved him HK$50,000 (USD $6,400), and many others, leading to the convictions or forced resignations of those individuals.
Apple Daily often criticizes the Central Government of China and pro-China governments in Hong Kong. Just prior to July 1, 2003, the newspaper encouraged people to take to the street and protest against the government. On that day of protest, it prepared banners and newspaper front pages for the public to carry and protest. The 2003 protest drew 500,000 citizens (the third largest protest ever seen in Hong Kong) to the Hong Kong July 1 marches. Since then, it has been viewed as the newspaper that helped carry the message of protest against the government.
In 2000, an Apple Daily reporter was sentenced to 10 months in jail for bribing police officers for information concerning criminal cases.people.cn/GB/channel4/992/20000608/94367.on.html

Others

David Tang, bon vivant and founder of Shanghai Tang writes a weekly column for Apple Daily in English, a selection which were published in book as An Apple a Week.
In September, 2003, veteran columnist To Kit () at the newspaper.
Popular food critic, travel writer and former movie producer Chua Lam writes a regular column for the newspaper.
Popular writer/doctor Au Lok Man also writes articles for the newspaper's leisure section on Thursdays, Fridays and Saturdays.








