[[University of Oulu]]

CATEGORIES: University of Oulu, Universities in Finland, Educational institutions established in 1958, Buildings and structures in Oulu

The University of Oulu (

History

Education

Campuses

There are four campus areas:
The University has a number of research stations and shared locations, most notably:

Faculties

The University of Oulu is divided into six faculties (from the biggest to the smallest when measured by the number of students):

=Faculty of Technology=

=Faculty of Science=

=Faculty of Humanities=

Degree programmes:

=Faculty of Medicine=

Institute of Biomedicine
Institute of Diagnostics
Institute of Dentistry
Institute of Clinical Medicine
Institute of Health Sciences

=Faculty of Education=

Degree programmes:

=Oulu Business School=

International Cooperation

University of Oulu aims to promote mobility among its students. It takes part in a number of international exchange programmes, such as Erasmus Programme (Europe), Nordplus (Nordic Countries), FIRST (Russia), ISEP and International to International ISEP (USA, South America, Asia), UNC-EP (USA), north2north (USA, Canada, Russia, Nordic Countries), North-South-South (Africa). Besides, University of Oulu has about 50 bilateral agreements with partner universities around the world.

International Master's degree programmes

The official language of teaching is Finnish. There are also 18 international Master's degree programmes which are offered fully in English:
The application procedure to the Master's programmes varies according to the programme. There is only one application period per academic year. The university uses an online application system and the application period is open for two to three months.
Each Master's programme has its own specific admissions requirements. In general, to apply for Master's level studies in the University of Oulu applicants are required to hold a Bachelor's level degree with good or excellent merits from a higher education
institution which entitles you to apply for Master's level studies in their home country and have a good command of English.

Research

University works in 70 research areas.
New initiatives involve advanced steel research, international business, mining and mineral engineering and science-based education.
The University of Oulu is known among hackers as the home of the Internet Relay Chat and for the File Transfer Protocol server x2ftp, named after the basement / blast shelter area in which it was physically located. x2ftp gained its reputation among video game developers and members of the demoscene for containing a very good archive of information pertaining to low-level graphics programming.

Notable alumni

University of Oulu alumni body is over 40,000. The University of Oulu alumni can meet and stay in contact with their alma mater at the alumni network

Student's life

Student union

Student Union of the University of OuluStudent Union of the University of Oulu (; YTHS) traveling discounts in trains and buses, student meals reduction etc.

Student guilds

There is a number of students organizations or so called student guilds presented within the university. They cover a variety of interests. Guilds arrange various info events, gettogethers, parties, trips, sports events and often have their own room in the university where students can have coffee, use computers, meet people, play video games or watch TV etc. Each student guild also has its own overalls, with their specific colour. Students usually wear overalls for various parties and outside activities to create a certain feeling of togetherness.

Student housing

Student Housing Foundation of Northern FinlandStudent Housing Foundation of Northern Finland (; PSOAS) is the leading provider of student accommodation in Oulu. The organization operates on a foundation basis which ensures affordable rents for students. Following its mission, PSOAS offers housing services for people studying in Oulu as cheaply as possible. The residents of PSOAS houses in different areas around the city elect tenant committee for that area, which e.g. organises different activities, maintains club rooms and does other related issues, depending on the active members.psoas.php
The new international student house, named Aurora, was built next to PSOAS housing office in downtown Oulu. The building was finished during the spring of 2013. The house is supposed to be accommodated both by international degree students and Finnish students. The main purpose of the new building is to support the internationalization of Oulu and give the international students a better access to Finnish culture and local people. The premises will also support these efforts: More space is dedicated for casual get-togethers, as there is a lounge space on every floor and a café of high level will be serving both Finnish and foreign customers on the ground floor.psoas.php








