[[Clifford A. Pickover]]

CATEGORIES: 1957 births, Living people, American science writers, American science fiction writers, American columnists, Franklin & Marshall College alumni, IBM employees, Mathematics writers, Recreational mathematicians, Recreational cryptographers, Writers from New York, Visualization experts, Yale University alumni, Academic journal editors, Fellows of the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry, 20th-century American writers, 21st-century American writers

Clifford Alan Pickover (born 15 August 1957) is an American author, editor, and columnist in the fields of science, mathematics, and science fiction, and is employed at the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center in Yorktown, New York.

Biography

Pickover was elected as a Fellow for the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry for his "significant contributions to the general public's understanding of science, reason, and critical inquiry through their scholarship, writing, and work in the media." Skeptical Inquirer News, 2012 Other Fellows have included Carl Sagan and Isaac Asimov.  He has been awarded over one hundred seventy United States patents, Pickover. Neumann Prize
He received his Ph.D. in 1982 from Yale University's Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, where he conducted research on X-ray scattering and protein structure. Pickover graduated first in his class from Franklin and Marshall College, after completing the four-year undergraduate program in three years. Pickover - Biographical Sketch. Retrieved 8 July 2008.
He joined IBM at the Thomas J. Watson Research Center in 1982, as a member of the speech synthesis group and later worked on the design-automation workstations. Pickover (1986). "DNA vectorgrams". In: IBM J. RES. DEVELOP Vol 31 no 1, January 1987. For much of his career, Pickover has published technical articles in the areas of scientific visualization, computer art, and recreational mathematics. Pickover is still employed at the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, where he is the editor of the IBM Journal of Research and Development.
He is currently an associate editor for the scientific journal Computers and Graphics and is an editorial board member for Odyssey and Leonardo. He is also the Brain-Strain columnist for Odyssey magazine, and, for many years, he was the Brain-Boggler columnist for Discover magazine.
Pickover has received more than 100 IBM invention achievement awards, three research division awards, and four external honor awards.

Work

Pickover's primary interest is in finding new ways to expand creativity by melding art, science, mathematics, and other seemingly disparate areas of human endeavor. "Clifford Pickover". Retrieved 8 July 2008.
In The Math Book and his companion book The Physics Book, Pickover explains that both mathematics and physics "cultivate a perpetual state of wonder about the limits of thoughts, the workings of the universe, and our place in the vast space-time landscape that we call home."
Pickover, Clifford A. (2011). The Physics Book: From the Big Bang to Quantum Resurrection. Sterling. ISBN 1-4027-7861-9
Pickover is an inventor with over 170 patents, the author of puzzle calendars, and puzzle contributor to magazines geared to children and adults. His Neoreality and Heaven Virus science-fiction series explores the fabric of reality and religion.
Pickover is author of hundreds of technical papers in diverse fields, ranging from the creative visualizations of fossil seashells,"Generating irregularly oscillating fossil seashells". Retrieved 19 August 2008. genetic sequences,"DNA Vectorgrams: representation of cancer gene sequences as movements along a 2-D cellular lattice". Retrieved 19 August 2008."DNA and protein tetragrams: biological sequences as tetrahedral movements". Retrieved 19 August 2008. cardiac"A note on the visualization of heart sounds" (published in Leonardo and pictured here). Retrieved 19 August 2008. and speech sounds, and virtual caverns"Cavern genesis as a self-organizing system". Retrieved 19 August 2008. and lava lamps,"Lava lamps in the 21st century". Retrieved 19 August 2008. to fractal and mathematically based studies."A note on geometric representations of Gaussian rational numbers". Retrieved 19 August 2008."Random number generators: pretty good ones are easy to find". Retrieved 19 August 2008."Is the fractal Golden Curlicue cold?". Retrieved 19 August 2008."Generating extraterrestrial terrain". Retrieved 19 August 2008. He also has published articles in the areas of skepticism (e.g. ESP and Nostradamus), psychology (e.g. temporal lobe epilepsy and genius), and technical speculation (e.g. "What if scientists had found a computer in 1900?" and "An informal survey on the scientific and social impact of a soda can-sized super-super computer")."Pickover Publications". Retrieved 14 August 2008. Additional visualization work includes topics that involve breathing motions of proteins,"Spectrographic representations of globular protein breathing motions". Retrieved 19 August 2008. snow-flake like patterns for speech sounds,"On the use of symmetrized dot patterns for the visual characterization of speech waveforms and other sampled data". Retrieved 19 August 2008. cartoon-face representations of data,"On the educational uses of computer-generated cartoon faces". Retrieved 19 August 2008. and biomorphs."Computer displays of biological forms generated from mathematical feedback loops". Retrieved 19 August 2008.
Pickover has also written extensively on the reported experiences of people on the psychotropic compound DMT.physics.edu/pickover/pc/dmt.physics.edu/pickover/pc/dmtinsect.html Such apparent entities as Machine Elves being described as well as "Insects From A Parallel Universe" 
On November 4, 2006, he began Wikidumper.

Pickover stalks

Pickover stalks are certain kinds of details that are empirically found in the Mandelbrot set in the study of fractal geometry. In the 1980s, Pickover proposed that experimental mathematicians and computer artists examine the behavior of orbit trajectories for the Mandelbrot in order to study how closely the orbits of interior points come to the x and y axes in the complex plane. In some renditions of this behavior, the closer that the point approaches, the higher up the color scale, with red denoting the closest approach. The logarithm of the distance is taken to accentuate the details. This work grew from his earlier work with Julia sets and "Pickover biomorphs," the latter of which often resembled microbes. "Interior Sketchbook Diary". Retrieved 8 July 2008."Images of Biormorphs". Retrieved 17 August 2008.

Frontiers of Scientific Visualization

In "Frontiers of Scientific Visualization" (1994) Pickover explored "the art and science of making the unseen workings of nature visible". The books contains contributions on "Fluid flow, fractals, plant growth, genetic sequencing, the configuration of distant galaxies, virtual reality to artistic inspiration", and focuses on use of computers as tools for simulation, art and discovery.C.A. Pickover and S. Tewksbury (ed.) (1994). "Frontiers of Scientific Visualization", Wiley, March 1, 1994.

Visualizing Biological Information

In "Visualizing Biological Information" (1995) Pickover considered "biological data of all kinds, which is proliferating at an incredible rate". According to Pickover, "if humans attempt to read such data in the form of numbers and letters, they will take in the information at a snail's pace. If the information is rendered graphically, however, human analysts can assimilate it and gain insight much faster. The emphasis of this work is on the novel graphical and musical representation of information containing sequences, such as DNA and amino acid sequences, to help us find hidden pattern and meaning".C.A. Pickover, C. (1995). Visualizing Biological Information. World Scientific.

Vampire numbers and other mathematical highlights

In mathematics, a vampire number or true vampire number is a composite natural number v, with an even number of digits n, that can be factored into two integers x and y each with n/2 digits and not both with trailing zeroes, where v contains all the digits from x and from y, in any order. x and y are called the fangs.
As an example, 1260 is a vampire number because it can be expressed as 21 × 60 = 1260.
Note that the digits of the factors 21 and 60 can be found, in some scrambled order, in 1260.
Similarly, 136,948 is a vampire because 136,948 = 146 × 938.
Vampire numbers first appeared in a 1994 post by Clifford A. Pickover to the Usenet group sci.Pickover, Clifford A. (1995). Keys to Infinity. Wiley. ISBN 0-471-19334-8
In addition to "Vampire numbers","Vampire Number". Retrieved 14 August 2008.
a term Pickover actually coined, he has coined the following terms in the area of mathematics:
Leviathan number, factorion,"Factorion". Retrieved 14 August 2008.
Carotid-Kundalini function and fractal,"Carotid-Kundalini Fractal". Retrieved 14 August 2008. batrachion,"Batrachion". Retrieved 14 August 2008. Juggler sequence,"Juggler Sequence". Retrieved 14 August 2008. and Legion's number,"Legion's number". Retrieved 14 August 2008. among others.  For characterizing noisy data, he has used Truchet tiles and Noise spheres,"Noise Spheres". Retrieved 14 August 2008. the later of which is a term he coined for a particular mapping, and visualization, of noisy data to spherical coordinates.
In 1990, he asked "Is There a Double Smoothly Undulating Integer?","Undulating Number". Retrieved 14 August 2008. and he computed "All Known Replicating Fibonacci Digits Less than One Billion"."Keith Numbers". Retrieved 14 August 2008.  With his colleague John R. Hendricks, he was the first to compute the smallest perfect (nasik) magic tesseract."Magic Tesseracts". Retrieved 14 August 2008. The "Pickover sequence" dealing with e and pi was named after him,"Pickover Sequence". Retrieved 14 August 2008. as was the "Cliff random number generator""Cliff Random Numbers". Retrieved 14 August 2008. and the Pickover attractor, sometimes also referred to as the Clifford Attractor."Pickover Attractor". Retrieved 14 August 2008."Clifford Attractor". Retrieved 14 August 2008.

Culture, religion, belief

Starting in about 2001, Pickover's books sometimes began to include topics beyond his traditional focus on science and mathematics. For example, Dreaming the Future discusses various methods of divination that humans have used since stone-age times.  The Paradox of God deals with topics in religion. Perhaps the most obvious departure from his earlier works includes Sex, Drugs, Einstein, and Elves: Sushi, Psychedelics, Parallel Universes, and the Quest for Transcendence, which explores the "borderlands of science" and is "part memoir and part surrealist perspective on culture."., Sex, Drugs, Einstein, and Elves: Sushi, Psychedelics, Parallel Universes, and the Quest for Transcendence, 2005 Pickover follows-up his "quest for transcendence" and examination of popular culture with A Beginner's Guide to Immortality: Extraordinary People, Alien Brains, and Quantum Resurrection.

Prophetic Vision of the Flying Spaghetti Monster

An article on Pickover's computer graphics appeared in the January, 1991 issue of Omni (magazine).  The featured image is a likeness of the Flying Spaghetti Monster (FSM).  This vision, titled "I Have Dreams at Night" predates the advent of the FSM by fourteen years.

History of science and mathematics

Starting in 2008, Pickover's books began to focus on the history of science and mathematics, with such titles as Archimedes to Hawking, as well as The Math Book, The Physics Book, and The Medical Book—a trilogy of more than 1,500 pages that presents various historical milestones, breakthroughs, and curiosities.

WikiDumper.org

Wikidumper. WikiDumper was launched on November 4, 2006, and accepts user submissions. Although the site doesn't specify its criteria for inclusion, many of its articles don't cite their sources. The site has been criticized as likely to be less accurate than Wikipedia.

Publications

Pickover is author of over forty books on such topics as computers and creativity, art, mathematics, black holes, human behavior and intelligence, time travel, alien life, Einstein, religion, dimethyltryptamine elves, parallel universes, the nature of genius, and science fiction."Cliff Pickover's home page". Retrieved 12 August 2008.

Books

Neoreality science fiction series

Edited collections








