[[Creflo Dollar]]

CATEGORIES: 1962 births, Living people, American Pentecostal pastors, American television evangelists, Oral Roberts University people, People from College Park, Georgia, University of West Georgia alumni

Creflo Augustus Dollar, Jr.  is an American televangelist, pastor, and the founder of the non-denominational World Changers Church International based in Fulton County, Georgia,"Contact Us." World Changers Church International. Creflo Dollar Ministerial Association (formerly called International Covenant Ministries), Creflo Dollar Ministries, and Arrow Records. Each of these enterprises is overseen by Dollar and his wife, Taffi Dollar.

Biography

In 1984, Dollar received a Bachelor of Science degree in education from West Georgia College in Carrollton, Georgia."2/10 Creflo Dollar – Winning the War in your Mind ." Download Christian. N.p., n.d. Web. 23 Jun 2010. .  He was awarded an honorary Doctor of Divinity from Oral Roberts University in 1998."Creflo Dollar." Creflo Dollar. N.p., n.d. Web. 23 Jun 2010. .
Dollar claims to have received the vision for World Changers Ministries Christian Center in 1986. He held the church's first worship service in the cafeteria of Kathleen Mitchell Elementary School in College Park, Georgia, with only eight people in attendance and successfully receiving over $100 in contributions from those present. Over the years the ministry has grown rapidly and was renamed World Changers Church International (WCCI). 
As of 2007, the congregation has grown to 30,000 members with $69 million in revenue (gross cash collections) for 2006. The congregation moved from its original cafeteria location to a modest-sized chapel, adding a weekly radio broadcast and four services each Sunday. On December 24, 1995, WCCI moved into its present location, the 8,500-seat sanctuary known as the World Dome. At a cost of nearly $18 million, it is claimed that the World Dome was built without any bank financing."Dr. Dollar Biography." World Changers Church-New York. N.p., n.d. Web. 22 Jun 2010.
Dollar is also the publisher of CHANGE magazine, a quarterly international publication with nearly 100,000 subscribers and The Max, a bimonthly resource newsletter for ministers and ministry leaders. "Real Life. Practical Solutions. CHANGE Magazine. A Creflo Dollar Ministries Publication." Real Life. Practical Solutions. CHANGE Magazine. A Creflo Dollar Ministries Publication. Creflo Dollar Ministries, 2000-2008. Web. 23 June 2010. .
Creflo Dollar also frequently speaks at conferences and is a best selling author.

Outreach

In October 2012, Creflo Dollar Ministries purchased a new Church location in the Bronx, New York. According to the New York Daily News, Loews Paradise Theater, now a historical landmark, is now home to World Changers Church of New York.
Creflo Dollar has also made efforts to relieve the stress endured by the family of Greg McDowell after his fatal shooting October 24, 2012. He challenged church members to give by making online donations, and donating to a special fund the church set up with the hopes of acquiring $234,000, money which would then be handed over to the McDowell family.
On March 15, 2013,  Creflo Dollar embarked on his 2013 Change Conventions. These conventions were created as a way of celebrating the anniversary of his World Changers church by hosting free events in six cities, including Pittsburg, Orlando and Hartford, in which attendees would be encouraged to worship, learn, and bond. As a part of the Change Experience,  Creflo Dollar and his ministry spotlighted a local organization in every city and made a donation in support of its service and dedication to strengthening the community.
Every year for the past 5 years,  Creflo Dollar and his ministry have provided Thanksgiving dinners to up to 3000 families around the Atlanta area in time for the holiday.

Controversy

Dollar is known for his controversial teachings regarding prosperity theology. He has long been criticized for living a lavish lifestyle; he owns two Rolls-Royces, a private jet, and real estate such as a million dollar home in Atlanta, a $2.5m million home in Demarest, N.J., and a $2.5m home in Manhattan,   Dollar has refused to disclose his salary and Creflo Dollar Ministries received a grade of "F" for financial transparency by the organization MinistryWatch.ministrywatch.aspx
On June 8, 2012, The Fayette County Sheriff's Office filed a report claiming Dollar committed acts of simple assault/battery and cruelty toward a child.  The report stated that his then 15-year-old daughter reported she was choked and hit by her father, Dollar. Dollar informed deputies that he was only trying to restrain his daughter, whom he claimed was acting disrespectfully after he forbade her from attending a party. He stated that while he was holding his daughter, she began to hit him. He stated he wrestled her to the floor, spanked her and sent her to her room, according to the report.11alive.pdf Fayette County Sheriff's Office Deputy Report  Dollar released a statement after the charges were filed, denying that he assaulted his daughter.washingtontimes. Fayette County Solicitor General James Inagawa said Dollar paid about $1,000 in court fees as part of a pretrial intervention program and had complied with all the conditions placed on him to resolve the case. Inagawa noted that the wishes of Dollar's daughter were taken into account before prosecutors allowed the pastor to participate in the pretrial intervention program.huffingtonpost.html Reuters: Creflo Dollar Abuse Charge Dropped After Pastor Seeks Anger Management






