[[Independence Air]]

CATEGORIES: Airlines established in 1989, Airlines disestablished in 2006, Companies based in Dulles, Virginia, Defunct airlines of the United States, Defunct companies based in Virginia, Defunct low-cost airlines

 Independence Air was a low-cost airline, owned by FLYi, Inc., headquartered in the Loudoun Gateway Corporate Center in Dulles, unincorporated Loudoun County, Virginia, United States (near Washington, D.C.) that operated from 1989 until 2006. Its route network focused on the East Coast of the United States, but it also extended to the West Coast. The route network was based at Washington Dulles International Airport.
It ceased all operations at 8:24 p.m. UTC-5 on January 5, 2006. The airline had been in Chapter 11 Bankruptcy since November 7, 2005, and there had been discussion of a last-minute deal that could save the airline, but that did not happen.

History

Independence Air started life as Atlantic Coast Airlines on December 15, 1989, operating feeder services as United Express for United Airlines and Delta Connection for Delta Air Lines. The airline was also credited with helping to reduce fares to and from the airport.

Criticism

From the beginning, the airline faced criticism. Some

Promotional activities

On May 20, 2004, even prior to its inaugural flight, Independence Air signed a deal Upon paying $250, the customer would be able to fly at no cost (after paying taxes & airport fees) from May 1-Aug 31, on Tuesdays, Wednesdays & Saturdays. This move was meant not to bring in revenue, but to try to fill seats that otherwise would have flown empty. This promotional tool was not enough to prevent trouble, due in part to the airline losing almost $150 million in its two years of operation.
Independence Air became quickly known for the humorous touches it added to the flying experience, such as replacing the flight attendant safety announcements with prerecorded versions of the warnings by celebrities such as James Carville and Mary Matalin.
Independence Air also invested in a fleet of 20 promotional vehicles, dubbed "Jet Trucks". Modified pickup trucks were painted in the airline's livery and featured an aircraft tail attached to the truck's bed. Jet Trucks were featured at all promotional events and activities, where employees would handout information and branded giveaways. Rather than having these vehicles sit in the headquarters office parking lot between events, 10 trucks were allocated for employee use to increase public exposure.

Corporate affairs

Headquarters

Independence Air had its headquarters in Loudoun Gateway III in the Loudoun Gateway Corporate Center in Dulles, unincorporated Loudoun County, Virginia."ANNUAL REPORT TO STOCKHOLDERS For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2004." Independence Air. "45200 Business Court, Dulles, Virginia (Address of principal executive offices)""Loudoun Gateway III." The Alter Group. "Loudoun Gateway III 45200 Business Court Loudoun Gateway Corporate Center Dulles, VA." The facility is located at the intersection of Virginia Route 28 and Virginia Route 606,  of the building to Atlantic Coast Airlines."FCC delays decision on who can wire buildings." The Washington Times. September 18, 2000. "Grubb & Ellis has leased 76982 square feet of office space to Atlantic Coast Airlines Holdings Inc in the Loudoun Gateway III complex in Dulles..."

Fleet

From the airline's beginning, its fleet mix was cited as one of the causes of its financial troubles.

Decline

After its emergence as an independent brand name, Independence Air became known for offering very low airfares: as little as $29 one-way to Florida from Washington Dulles International Airport. However, the company never overcame a series of financial problems during its transition, and its decline started only six months after its launch.
In February 2005, one of its aircraft was repossessed after the company missed a lease payment,
In the intervening months between FLY I's declaration of bankruptcy and Independence Air's cessation of operations, a number of airlines expressed an interest in acquiring the airline's assets including: Mesa Air Group, United Airlines and Richard Branson.
Not finding a suitable buyer in time to keep the planes flying, Independence Air announced on January 2, 2006, that it would cease operations at 7:26 p.m. UTC-5 on January 5, 2006 following a flight from Westchester County Airport in New York. When the airline ceased operations, it employed more than 2,500 staff,

On March 10, 2006, Northwest Airlines bought the operating certificate of Independence Air for $2 million to establish a new regional airline. On March 29, 2006, Northwest reported that Independence Air would be renamed Compass Airlines. The first flight route would be a twice daily service between Washington Dulles International Airport and Minneapolis-Saint Paul International Airport beginning in early June 2006.

Destinations

At the time of its shutdown on January 5, 2006, Independence operated 200 daily departures to 37 destinations throughout the United States,






