[[Karaganda]]

CATEGORIES: Karaganda, Populated places in Karagandy Province, Cities in Central Asia, Populated places established in 1931

Karagandy ( In the 1940s up to 70% of the city's inhabitants were ethnic Germans. Most of the ethnic Germans are descendants of Soviet Volga Germans who were collectively deported to Siberia and Kazakhstan on Stalin's order when Hitler invaded Soviet-annexed eastern Poland and the Soviet Union proper in 1941. Until the 1950s, many were interned in labor camps, often merely because they were Germans. The population of Karaganda fell by 14% from 1989-1999; it was once Kazakhstan's second largest city after Almaty.  One hundred thousand people have since emigrated to Germany. There is also a smaller concentration of ethnic Poles.
It is the home city of Kazakh World War II hero Nurken Abdirov. A statue in Abdirov's honor is located in the center of the city.

History

The name "Karagandy" is derived from a "caragana" bushes (Caragana arborescens, Caragana frutex) which are abundant in the area.
The original site of Karaganda is now labeled on city maps as the "Old Town," but almost nothing remains on that site. In exploiting the rich coal deposits, the Soviets undermined the entire city, and the town had to be abandoned completely and moved several miles to the south.  
In the early 1990s, Karaganda was briefly considered as a candidate for the capital of the (then) recently independent Republic of Kazakhstan, but its bid was turned down in favour of Astana.

Climate

Karaganda has a humid continental climate (Köppen climate classification Dfb) with warm summers and very cold winters. Precipitation is moderately low throughout the year, although slightly heavier from May to July. Snow is frequent, though light, in winter. The lowest temperature on record is , recorded in 2002.
 
 

Industry

Karaganda is an industrial city, built to exploit nearby coal mines using the slave work of prisoners of labour camps. Flora Leipman, a British citizen, spent several years unlawfully detained in a number of other nearby camps, and described her experiences in the book "The Long Journey Home" (published 1987).   Commercial extraction of coal continues to be an important activity in the region even today.
Since local water resources are not sufficient for the needs of a major industrial city, the Irtysh–Karaganda Canal was constructed in the 1960s, to supply the Karaganda metropolitan area with water from the Irtysh River more than 400 km away.

Culture

Theater

The Miners Palace of Culture is a major landmark in Karagandy.

Sports

FC Shakhter Karagandy is a football club based in Shakhtyor Stadium. They are the current champions of the Kazakhstan Premier League. The city sent a bandy team to the Spartakiade 2009.ucoz.ru/photo/9-1-0-0-2
The popularity of winter sports is growing each year and multi-sports winter games are organised for the Karagandy Province.Winter Sports Tournaments begin in Karaganda

Other

Religion

The city is the seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Karaganda.

Other

Karagandy was often used as the punchline in a popular joke in the former Soviet Union. Karagandy is fairly isolated in a vast area of uninhabited steppe, and is thought by many to be "the middle of nowhere". When used in the locative case (Караганде), the final syllable rhymes with the Russian word for "where" (где), as well as with a Russian obscenity used to answer to an unwanted question "Where?". Thus the exchange: "Где?" — "В Караганде!" ("Where is it?" — "In Karagandy!")

Transport

Sary-Arka Airport is located 20 kilometers south-east of the city.

Notable residents

EMP

Karagandy suffered the most severe electromagnetic pulse effects ever observed when its electrical power plant was set on fire by currents induced in a  long power cable between Aqmola (now called Astana) and Almaty, firing circuit breakers and setting the Karaganda power plant on fire 

Sister cities








