[[Tamar (Genesis)]]

CATEGORIES: Hebrew Bible people, Torah people, Judaism and sexuality, Women in the Bible

In the Book of Genesis, Tamar (

Genesis narrative

In , Tamar is first described as marrying Judah's eldest son, Er.
Because of his wickedness, Er was killed by God. The Divine Drama: the Old Testament as Literature, ISBN 978-0-7188-2987-2, 2002, p. 92 By way of a Levirate union,)

Tamar and Judah

At the time Shelah grew up, Judah became a widower. After Judah mourned the death of his wife, he planned on going to Timnah to shear his sheep. Upon hearing this news, Tamar disguised herself as a prostitute and immediately went to Enaim which was en route to Judah's destination. Upon arriving at Enaim, Judah saw the woman but did not recognize her as Tamar because of the veil she wore over her face. Thinking she was a prostitute, he requested her services. Tamar's plan was to become pregnant by this ruse in order to bear a child in Judah's line, because Judah had not given her to his son Shelah. So she played the part of a prostitute and struck a deal with Judah for a goat with a security deposit of his staff, seal, and cord. When Judah was able to have a goat sent to Enaim, in order to collect his staff and seal, the woman was nowhere to be found and no one knew of any prostitute in Enaim. ()
Three months later, Tamar was accused of prostitution on account of her pregnancy. Upon hearing this news, Judah ordered that she be burned to death. Tamar sent the staff, seal, and cord to Judah with a message declaring that the owner of these items was the man who had made her pregnant. Upon recognizing his security deposit, Judah released Tamar from her sentence and accordingly she was able to give birth to twins, Perez and Zerah. Perez is said to be the ancestor of King David. The Genesis narrative also makes a note that Judah did not have further sexual relations with Tamar. ()
According to Ethiopic tradition, Perez became the king of Persia.

Narrative criticism

Literary critics have focused on the relationship between the Judah story in chapter 38, and the Joseph story in chapters 37 and 39. Victor Hamilton notes some "intentional literary parallels" between the chapters, such as the exhortation to "identify" (38:25-26 and 37:32-33). Victor P. Hamilton, The Book of Genesis, Chapters 18-50 (NICOT; Eerdmans, 1995), 431-432. John Emerton regards the connections as evidence for including chapter 38 in the J corpus, and suggests that the J writer dovetailed the Joseph and Judah traditions.J. A. Emerton, "Some problems," 349. Emerton also suggests (p. 360) that in J, this story "never stood anywhere but between the accounts of the selling of Joseph into slavery and the doings of Joseph in Egypt." Derek Kidner points out that the insertion of chapter 38 "creates suspense for the reader ,"Derek Kidner, Genesis: An Introduction and Commentary (IVP, 2008 ), 187. but Robert Alter goes further and suggests it is a result of the "brilliant splicing of sources by a literary artist." He notes that the same verb "identify" will play "a crucial thematic role in the dénouement of the Joseph story when he confronts his brothers in Egypt, he recognizing them, they failing to recognize him."Robert Alter, The Art of Biblical Narrative (Basic Books, 1981), 10.
J. A. Emerton also suggests that the Judah and Tamar narrative contains "aetiological motifs concerned with the eponymous ancestors of the clans of Judah."J. A. Emerton, "Judah and Tamar," Vetus Testamentum 29  1979, 405. Emerton notes that Dillman and Noth considered the account of the deaths of Er and Onan to "reflect the dying out of two clans of Judah bearing their names, or at least of their failure to maintain a separate existence." However, this view was "trenchantly criticized" by Thomas L. Thompson.

Jewish views

According to the Talmud, Judah's confession of guilt itself atoned for some of his prior faults, and resulted in his being divinely rewarded by a share in the future world. Sotah 7b The Talmud also suggests that Tamar's actions were for the purpose of avoiding Judah's humiliation,Berakot 43a Sotah 12b although the Genesis Rabbah portrays her as boastful and unashamed in regard to the pregnancy itself.Genesis Rabbah 85:11
Both the Genesis Rabbah and Talmud state that Tamar was an Israelite,Genesis Rabbah 85:9Sotah 10a and that Judah ended up marrying her and had further sexual liaisons with her as a result.Sotah 10b

Christian views

According to the Gospel of Matthew, Judah and Tamar are ancestors of Jesus through their son Perez. ()

Chronological issues

Together with the brief preceding narrative of the birth of Er, Onan, and Shelah, and the subsequent narrative of the birth of Perez's children, the passage is often regarded as presenting a significant chronological issue, since it is surrounded by a narrative concerning Joseph; before the passage occurs, Joseph is described as being 17 years old,
The gap, a maximum of 22 years, is somewhat small to contain within it Judah's first marriage, the birth of Er and Onan, Er's marriage to Tamar, Tamar's subsequent pregnancy by Judah, and the birth of Judah's grandchildren/children (Judah was the father and his daughter-in-law, Tamar, was the mother); the passage is also widely regarded as an abrupt change to the surrounding narrative Joseph story. According to some textual scholars, the reason for these features is that the passage derives from the Jahwist source, while the immediately surrounding narrative is from the Elohist, the two being spliced together at a later date.Cheyne and Black, Encyclopedia BiblicaJewish EncyclopediaRichard Elliott Friedman, Who wrote the Bible?



Notes and citations




