[[John Goodman]]

CATEGORIES: 1952 births, 20th-century American male actors, 21st-century American male actors, Male actors from Missouri, American people of English descent, American people of German descent, American people of Irish descent, American people of Welsh descent, American male film actors, American male stage actors, American male television actors, American male voice actors, Best Musical or Comedy Actor Golden Globe (television) winners, The Blues Brothers members, Primetime Emmy Award winners, Living people, Missouri State Bears football players, Male actors from New Orleans, Louisiana, People from St. Louis County, Missouri, Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture Screen Actors Guild Award winners

John Stephen Goodman (born June 20, 1952) is an American film and television actor, voice artist, and comedian, known for his role as Dan Conner on the television series Roseanne (1988–1997), for which he won a Best Actor Golden Globe Award in 1993, and his regular collaborations with the Coen brothers on such films as Barton Fink (1991), The Big Lebowski (1998), O Brother, Where Art Thou? (2000), and Inside Llewyn Davis (2013). He also provided the voice of Sulley in Monsters, Inc. (2001) and Monsters University (2013); other prominent roles include supporting roles in Argo, Flight (both 2012), and The Hangover Part III (2013) and a regular role on the first season of HBO's Treme. John Heilpern of Vanity Fair calls him "among our very finest actors."

Early life and education

Goodman was born in St. Louis, Missouri on June 20, 1952. His father, Leslie Francis Goodman, was a postal worker who died of a heart attack when Goodman was 2 years old; his mother, Virginia Roos (née Loosmore), was a retail store associate and waitress at Jack and Phil's Bar-B-Que and took in laundry to support the family. He is of Irish, English, Welsh, and German ancestry.
Goodman went to Affton High School, where he played football and dabbled in theater. He earned a football scholarship to Missouri State University (then-called Southwest Missouri State University, or, "SMS") in Springfield, Missouri. He discovered the drama program, and studied there with future Hollywood stars Kathleen Turner and Tess Harper. He remains close to his school friends.

Early career

After an injury ended his college football career, he decided to become a professional actor and left Missouri for New York City in 1975. With a small bankroll from his brother, Goodman found an apartment on Ninth Avenue and 51st Street, near Manhattan's Theater District, and unsuccessfully tried to make money as a bartender and waiter. He eventually found modest success, however, in plays, commercials, and voiceovers. He was the person who slapped himself (uttering the famous tagline, "Thanks ... I needed that!") in an iconic TV ad for Skin Bracer by Mennen. Goodman also performed off-Broadway and in dinner theatres, before landing 'character roles' in films during the early-1980s.

Career

In 1985, Goodman originated the role of Pap Finn in the Broadway musical Big River. For his role, he received a Drama Desk nomination for Best Featured Actor in a Musical; he also is featured on the Original Broadway Cast Recording. He had a long history of appearances on late night comedy shows, and was the first guest on Late Night with Conan O'Brien, which won him the show's "First Guest Medal" (Goodman joked that he would pawn the medal for a bottle of cheap Scotch).
In 1982, Goodman started landing movie roles, beginning with a small role in Eddie Macon's Run. During this period he continued to work on the stage, starring in the Tony-winning Broadway musical Big River from 1985 to 1987. Before landing his big break into movies in 1986, with a significant comedic role in the David Byrne absurdist comedy/musical True Stories,John Goodman Biography – Yahoo! Movies. Movies.com. he had a brief cameo as Otis - in the Patsy Cline biopic Sweet Dreams. In the former film, his character Louis Fyne memorably utters the line: "I'm 6' 3" and maintain a consistent panda bear shape", establishing his trademark size as an important part of many characters he would later play on film and stage - and in the latter film, he plays the `guy who sold Patsy's husband the car' he would destroy in the Demolition Derby.
He is also known for his role as the head football coach for Adams College in the movie Revenge of the Nerds. In 1997, John Goodman was added to the St. Louis Walk of Fame.
He first worked with the Coen Brothers on Raising Arizona (1987). He would go on to appear in their films Barton Fink (1991), The Big Lebowski (1998), and O Brother, Where Art Thou? (2000). In 2011, it was announced he would return to working with them on Inside Llewyn Davis—his fifth film with them and his first for a decade. Only Steve Buscemi has appeared in more Coen works (six films), though Frances McDormand and Jon Polito have also appeared in five of their films.
Goodman is most famous for his role as Dan Conner on the American sitcom Roseanne, which aired on ABC from 1988 to 1997.
Goodman had guest roles on the Aaron Sorkin television dramas The West Wing and Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip. In the former he appeared in four episodes, playing Speaker of the House and eventual acting president Glen Allen Walken. In the latter, he appeared as Pahrump, Nevada Judge Robert Bebe, earning a 2007 Emmy
He voiced Robot Santa in the character's first appearance on Futurama. Beginning in 2007, Goodman has been the voiceover in Dunkin' Donuts commercials. In 2000, Goodman provided the voice of Pacha in the Disney film The Emperor's New Groove and, a year later, the voice of Sulley in the Disney/Pixar film Monsters, Inc. In 2009, Goodman voiced "Big Daddy" La Bouff in Disney's The Princess and the Frog. Goodman's voice can also be heard on an automated message system at Lambert St. Louis International airport. (April 22, 2010) Another tasty TLC entree – Entertainment News, TV News, Media. Variety.
In theater, Goodman played the Ghost of Christmas Present in the 2008 Kodak Theatre production of A Christmas Carol, starring Christopher Lloyd as Ebenezer Scrooge. He played the role of Pozzo in a Studio 54 revival of the play Waiting for Godot, opposite Bill Irwin and Nathan Lane. John Heilpern of Vanity Fair called it "the greatest Pozzo I've ever seen."
In 2011, Goodman was a guest star on the third season of NBC's Community. He also voiced a character in id Software's game RAGE voicing Dan Hagar, and played movie studio chief Al Zimmer in the Academy Award–winning live action film The Artist, as well as Best Picture nominee Extremely Loud and Incredibly Close the same year. In February 2012, it was reported that Goodman would reunite with Roseanne Barr for a new NBC pilot titled Downwardly Mobile. The show would have had Goodman portray a bachelor mechanic and all around clown as a resident in a trailer park, and would have used the standard multiple-camera setup traditionally found in sitcoms, however the series' option was not picked up by the network. Other prominent roles in recent years include performances in Flight (2012) and The Monuments Men (2014). With his well-received supporting roles in The Artist (2012) and Argo (2013), Goodman accomplished the rare feat of appearing in back-to-back winners of the Academy Award for Best Picture.
Goodman was inducted as a Disney Legend on August 10, 2013.

Charity work

Goodman has long resided in New Orleans, Louisiana. Since Hurricane Katrina, Goodman has appeared on several recovery commercials aired in Louisiana.
Goodman was cast in In the Electric Mist (2009) as Julie "Baby Feet" Balboni, which is set in post–Hurricane Katrina Louisiana. Goodman was at one time slated to play the role of Ignatius Reilly, the main character of A Confederacy of Dunces by John Kennedy Toole. The story takes place almost entirely in New Orleans. However, the movie was never put into production. The movie The Princess and the Frog where he lent his voice as Eli "Big Daddy" La Bouff also takes place in New Orleans. Goodman was featured in the HBO series Treme. Treme focuses on a group of interconnected people trying to rebuild their lives in post–Hurricane Katrina New Orleans. Goodman played Creighton Bernette, a Tulane English professor.
In 2010, Goodman appeared in a commercial to raise awareness for the Deepwater Horizon oil spill. Also starring in the commercial were Sandra Bullock, Peyton Manning, Eli Manning, Jack Del Rio, Drew Brees, Emeril Lagasse, James Carville, and Blake Lively.

Personal life

Goodman and his wife, Anna Beth, live in New Orleans. As of October 2012, their daughter, Molly, is 22 and in film school.
In a 2009 interview, Goodman was open about his alcoholism, saying, "I don't know how much the old Jackie Daniel's franchise ruined my memory, which is going anyway, because of my advancing decrepitude. I had a 30-year run, and at the end I didn't care about anything. I was just fed up with myself. I didn't even want to be an actor anymore."

Personal style

Artie's Delicatessen on New York's Upper West Side is one of his favorite haunts when he's in the city. He eschews the life of a Hollywood movie star, saying in 2014 "I just don't want to dwell on myself," and about celebrity culture, "There's just too much celebrity culture. It's worthless coin."

Filmography

Film

Television

Video games

Discography

Guest Appearance

Awards and nominations






