[[Kelsey Grammer]]

CATEGORIES: 1955 births, American people of English descent, American people of United States Virgin Islands descent, American male film actors, American male television actors, American television directors, American television producers, American male voice actors, Best Drama Actor Golden Globe (television) winners, Best Musical or Comedy Actor Golden Globe (television) winners, California Republicans, Juilliard School alumni, New York Republicans, Outstanding Performance by a Lead Actor in a Comedy Series Primetime Emmy Award winners, American people convicted of drug offenses, United States Virgin Islands male actors, People from Saint Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands, People from Manhattan, Male actors from New York City, Male actors from Beverly Hills, California, Living people

Allen Kelsey Grammer (born February 21, 1955) is an American actor, voice actor, comedian, producer, director, writer and singer. Grammer is known for his two-decade portrayal of psychiatrist Dr. Frasier Crane on the NBC sitcoms Cheers and Frasier. He has won five Emmy Awards and three Golden Globes, and has also worked as a television producer, director, writer, and as a voice artist on The Simpsons as Sideshow Bob. Grammer has been married four times and has five children.

Early life and family

Grammer was born on February 21, 1955 in Saint Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands, the son of Sally (née Cranmer; 1928–2008),
Many of Grammer's family and close friends were killed in violent or accidental manners. In 1968, his father, whom he had seen only twice since his parents' divorce, was shot dead, while in 1975, his younger sister, Karen, was abducted, raped, and murdered by spree killer Freddie Glenn.

Career

Stage

After leaving Juilliard, he had a three-year internship with the Old Globe Theatre in San Diego in the late 1970s before a stint in 1980 at the Guthrie Theater in Minneapolis, Minnesota. He made his Broadway debut in 1981 as "Lennox", in Macbeth taking the lead role when Philip Anglim withdrew after receiving negative reviews. Grammer then played Michael Cassio in a Broadway revival of Othello, with James Earl Jones and Christopher Plummer. In 1983 he performed on the demo of the Stephen Sondheim–James Lapine production Sunday in the Park with George, starring Mandy Patinkin. In 2000, Grammer again played Macbeth on Broadway.
On April 18, 2010, Grammer made his Broadway musical debut playing the role of Georges in a revival of the Jerry Herman/Harvey Fierstein musical La Cage aux Folles, for which he was nominated for a Tony Award for Best Performance by a Leading Actor in a Musical.

Television

His television career began in the early 1980s when he portrayed Stephen Smith in the NBC miniseries Kennedy.

=Cheers and Frasier=

Grammer came to broader public attention as Dr. Frasier Crane in the NBC sitcom Cheers. Grammer's former Juilliard classmate and Broadway co-star Patinkin suggested Grammer to the New York casting director, and he got what was supposed to be a six-episode job, but ended up as a regular cast member. Movies.com. Retrieved May 2, 2012.
The character became the center of the spin-off Frasier, one of the most successful spin-offs in TV history. In addition to starring, he also directed more than 30 episodes, especially during the second half of the series, and sang the closing theme "Tossed Salads and Scrambled Eggs." Frasier won and was nominated for many awards during its 11-year run.
In 2001, he negotiated a US$700,000-per-episode salary for Frasier. His 20-year run playing Dr. Frasier Crane ties a length set by James Arness in playing Marshal Matt Dillon on Gunsmoke from 1955 to 1975TV Guide: Kelsey Grammer. Online.com. Retrieved May 2, 2012. and Richard Belzer in playing Det. John Munch on Homicide: Life on the Street and Law & Order: Special Victims Unit since 1993.

=Post-Frasier=

In 2005, Grammer returned to television. He produced and appeared in an American adaptation of the British show The Sketch Show, which aired on Fox. The main cast consisted of Malcolm Barrett, Kaitlin Olson, Mary Lynn Rajskub and Paul F. Tompkins, as well as Lee Mack from the British version of the show. Grammer appeared in only short opening and closing segments in each episode. Many of the sketches from the British version were re-created, such as the "California Dreamin'", "English Course", and "Sign Language" sketches. Only six episodes of the show were made, and it was canceled after only four of them had aired.
In 2007, Grammer starred with Patricia Heaton in the American sitcom Back to You. It was canceled by Fox after its first season.
His next attempt, ABC's Hank, fared even worse. It was canceled after only five episodes had aired. Grammer later commented, "Honestly, it just wasn't very funny."
In 2011 and 2012, Grammer starred in the Starz drama series Boss as a fictional mayor of Chicago in the mold of Richard J. Daley which premiered in October 2011.
In May 2013, it was announced that Grammer would play a villain in the Paramount's Transformers movies fourth installment Transformers: Age of Extinction starring Mark Wahlberg. Grammer and comedian and actor Martin Lawrence are considering pairing up to star in the upcoming comedy The Partnership for Lionsgate TV. The Lionsgate-produced show will be written and executive produced by Robert L. Boyett and Robert Horn, known for writing hit shows like, Family Matters, Living Single, Full House, Designing Women, and Perfect Strangers.

Other appearances

In addition to being producer, he guest-starred as the Angel of Death on Medium, and Captain Morgan Bateson in the Star Trek: The Next Generation episode "Cause and Effect".

Voice work

Grammer's well-known voice and Mid-Atlantic accent make him popular for voiceover work. He has provided the voice of Sideshow Bob on The Simpsons, winning an Emmy Award for his work in the episode "The Italian Bob", his fifth Emmy win."It's Evening in America". Vanity Fair. May 2012. Page 157. He has appeared in thirteen episodes since the show's inception in 1989, the most recent being "At Long Last Leave" that aired in February 2012, in which his character makes a cameo speaking appearance. Grammer supplied the voices for "Stinky Pete the Prospector" in 1999 Disney/Pixar film Toy Story 2, Vladimir in the Fox animated movie Anastasia, Rothbart in Barbie of Swan Lake, Zozi the Bear in the subsequently produced sequel Bartok the Magnificent, and the title character in the short-lived animated series Gary the Rat. He provided the opening speech and piano in The Vandals' song "Phone Machine" from the album Fear of a Punk Planet, and sang a rewritten version of the "grinch" on an episode of Just Shoot Me!. He was the voice of the mad scientist, Dr. Frankenollie, in the Mickey Mouse short Runaway Brain. He was also the narrator of "Mickey Mouse – Once Upon a Christmas".
Grammer's voice has been featured in many commercials. One of the earliest was a 1998 commercial for Honey Nut Cheerios, where he played the voice of the wolf in Little Red Riding Hood. Since 2006, Grammer has provided the voice for television commercials advertising Hyundai. In 2008, Grammer reprised his role of Dr. Frasier Crane in a commercial for Dr Pepper.

Production work

His production company, Grammnet Productions, produces the CW sitcoms Girlfriends and The Game (now on BET), the NBC drama Medium, and many other projects.

Other work

In 1996, he starred in the feature comedy Down Periscope. Also, in the 1990s, he did several commercials for Snapper Mowers. Additionally his film work includes the role of Dr. Hank McCoy (also known as the Beast) in X-Men: The Last Stand, and he was the voice of Snowball in the live-action film adaptation of the George Orwell book Animal Farm. Grammer co-starred in the movie Swing Vote, playing the Republican incumbent. He played General George S. Patton in An American Carol. In 2010, he starred in The Kelsey Grammer Bill Zucker Comedy Hour.The Kelsey Grammer Bill Zucker Comedy Hour from Vimeo

Personal life

Family

Grammer has been married four times and has five children and one grandchild 
After his divorce from Alderman, Grammer had a daughter, Kandace Greer Grammer ("Greer Grammer"; born February 15, 1992), with hair and makeup stylist Barrie Buckner. Greer is currently a cast member on MTV's hit show Awkward..
His second marriage, to former exotic dancer Leigh-Anne Csuhany in September 1992, lasted one year. Grammer filed for an annulment when Csuhany was three months pregnant and evicted her from their home."Kelsey Grammer". Shatner's Raw Nerve, December 16, 2008.
In 1994, he met 28-year-old Tammy Baliszewski, also known as Tammy Alexander, at a bar in Manhattan Beach, California. In December 1994, the two of them appeared on the cover of People magazine, announcing their engagement and Grammer's substance abuse problems.
In August 1997, Grammer married Camille Donatacci, a former Playboy model. They met on a blind date in 1996. Grammer and Donatacci's divorce was finalized on February 10, 2011."Judge grants Kelsey Grammer divorce in LA". Apnews.com. Retrieved May 2, 2012.
On August 12, 2010, Grammer announced that he was going to be a father for the fifth time with girlfriend Kayte Walsh, a British flight attendant who is 25 years his junior.

Murder of Karen Grammer

Shortly after Grammer left Julliard, his younger sister Karen was abducted, raped, and murdered by Freddie Glenn. Her murderer was up for parole in June of 2009.  In a letter to the parole board upon Glenn's hearing, Grammer (who was unable to attend the hearing as planned due to inclement weather delaying his flight) wrote:
 
His oldest daughter,  Spencer Karen Grammer, was named in part for her aunt.

Sex tape lawsuit

In 1998, Grammer filed a lawsuit against Internet Entertainment Group, which Grammer claimed had stolen from his home a videotape of him having sex with a woman. IEG countersued Grammer, denying they were in possession of such a tape, and Grammer's suit was eventually dropped.

Substance abuse and legal issues

Grammer allegedly began drinking alcohol at the age of nine;

In 1995, Grammer was sued by ex-girlfriend Cerlette Lamme for defamation of character and invasion of privacy over content he included in his autobiography So Far. In September 1996, he crashed his Dodge Viper while intoxicated, and subsequently checked into the Betty Ford Center (an alcohol rehabilitation clinic) for 30 days.
In August 2008, Bradley Blakeman, a former aide to George W. Bush, filed a copyright lawsuit in federal court on Long Island over Grammer's movie Swing Vote, claiming that parts of its plot and marketing had been stolen from him. The lawsuit claimed that Blakeman had given a copyrighted screenplay called Go November to Grammer in 2006, and that Grammer agreed to develop the project and star as a Republican president but instead ended up playing a similar role in Swing Vote, which was released on August 1, 2008. Grammer's spokesman dismissed the claims as "frivolous" and a "waste of time". The lawsuit claims that Blakeman's copyrighted screenplay had the same basic plot as Swing Vote.

Health problems

On May 31, 2008, while paddleboarding with his then-wife Camille in Hawaii, Grammer experienced symptoms of a heart attack. After being hospitalized, it was confirmed that he had experienced a heart attack.
On June 28, 2008, Grammer checked into an undisclosed Manhattan hospital after complaints of feeling faint. Other reports said Grammer was hospitalized for an irregular heartbeat.

Politics

Grammer is a member of the Republican Party and has expressed an interest in someday running for United States Congress. Fox News. Retrieved May 2, 2012. He is also interested in running for Mayor of New York. Bush's first inauguration. (March 21, 2010) New York Magazine, March 21, 2010. Nymag. Retrieved December 5, 2013. Grammer endorsed Rudy Giuliani in the 2008 presidential primary and later campaigned for John McCain in the general election. Newsmeat. Retrieved May 2, 2012.

Awards

He won a number of Emmys, Screen Actors Guild Award, and Golden Globes for his work on Frasier. He was the first American actor ever to be nominated for multiple Emmy awards for portraying the same character on three different television shows (Cheers, Frasier, and Wings).
Grammer has received at least 45 nominations for major awards and has won on 18 occasions. In 2010, Grammer enjoyed his first Tony Award nomination for La Cage Aux Folles as Best Leading Actor in a Musical.
The following table gives a selection of the awards he has won.

Filmography

Film

Television

Video games

Theme park

As executive producer



Further reading




