[[Daniel J. Evans]]

CATEGORIES: 1925 births, Living people, Washington (state) Republicans, People from Seattle, Washington, University of Washington alumni, University of Washington regents, American Congregationalists, American people of Welsh descent, Governors of Washington (state), United States Senators from Washington (state), Members of the Washington House of Representatives, Distinguished Eagle Scouts, Appointed United States Senators, Republican Party United States Senators, Presidents of The Evergreen State College

Daniel Jackson Evans (born October 16, 1925) served three terms as the 16th Governor of the state of Washington from 1965 to 1977, and represented the state in the United States Senate from 1983 to 1989.
Evans was seriously considered for the Republican vice presidential nomination on the ticket with Gerald Ford in 1976 (but lost out to Bob Dole); Richard Nixon in 1968 had also hinted at a possible Evans nomination for the vice presidency. At the 1968 Republican National Convention (where he gave the keynote address) Evans refused to endorse Nixon for the presidential nomination, remaining a supporter of the unsuccessful candidacy of Nelson Rockefeller. 24–25.

Early life

Evans was born in Seattle, Washington (where he lives ), descended from a family that had first arrived in the Washington Territory in 1859; his grandfather had served in one of Washington's first state senates. He grew up in the Laurelhurst neighborhood and attended Roosevelt High School. 24.
As a young man, Evans was an Eagle Scout,McHenry 2007, p.25. and served as a staff member and Hike Master at Camp Parsons, a well known Boy Scout camp in Washington State. As an adult, he was awarded the Distinguished Eagle Scout Award from the Boy Scouts of America.
After high school, he served in the United States Navy 1943–1946. He first entered the V-12 Navy College Training Program and was stationed at the University of Washington (UW), but was transferred eight months later to an ROTC program at University of California, Berkeley. He did not see combat; he was deployed to the Pacific shortly after the end of World War II as a commissioned ensign on a succession of aircraft carriers, before returning to UW in 1946.
Evans graduated from the University of Washington with degrees in civil engineering (BS, 1948, MS, 1949); the UW later (in 2007) gave him the distinction of Alumnus Summa Laude Dignitatus, the highest distinction the university confers on its graduates. He returned to the United States Navy (1951–1953) before working as a structural engineer (1953–1956); in the latter capacity, he helped draw up the plans for the Alaskan Way Viaduct.

Political career

Having attended Toastmasters to improve his initially abysmal public speaking style, Evans served in the Washington State House of Representatives from 1956 to 1965 before being elected governor.
Despite being a Republican and a self-styled conservative, Evans became known for his administration's liberal policies on environmental protection (he founded the country's first state-level Department of Ecology, which became Nixon's blueprint for the federal EPA) and strong support of the state's higher education system, including founding Washington's system of community colleges. He fought unsuccessfully for a state income tax.
Evans served as governor from 1965 until 1977, still the only governor to serve three four-year consecutive terms and the second to be elected to three terms following Arthur B. Langlie in Washington state history. A 1981 University of Michigan study named him one of the ten outstanding American governors of the 20th century.  He declined to run for a fourth term.
Serial killer Ted Bundy served as a campaign aide for Evans and maintained a close relationship with the Governor. During the 1972 campaign, Bundy followed Evans' Democratic opponent around the state, tape recording his speeches and reported back to Evans personally. A minor scandal later followed when the Democrats found out about Bundy, who had been posing as a college student.
From 1977 to 1983 Evans served as the second president of The Evergreen State College in Olympia, which Evans had created in 1967 by signing a legislative act authorizing the formation of the college. The largest building on the Evergreen campus is named the Daniel J. Evans Library in his honor.evergreen.html In 1983, Governor John Spellman appointed Evans to the United States Senate to fill a seat left vacant by the death of longtime senator Henry M. "Scoop" Jackson. Evans won a special election later that year against Mike Lowry and filled the remainder of Jackson's unexpired term, retiring from politics after the 1988 elections. He was not happy as a U.S. Senator; he wrote an April 1988 piece in The New York Times Magazine, "Why I'm Quitting the Senate", in which he complained of "bickering and protracted paralysis".

Later life

After leaving the Senate in 1989, Evans founded his own consulting firm, Daniel J. Evans Associates. Governor Mike Lowry appointed him to the Board of Regents of the University of Washington in 1993; Evans served as the board's president from 1996 to 1997, and in 1999 the Daniel J. Evans School of Public Affairs at the University was named for him. Evans also went on to work in media doing an editorial weekly on the KIRO-TV newscasts from the early to mid 1990s. Late in 1969 Evans also said the quote, "Pain is weakness leaving the body," at a seminar in Kentucky.

Elections

The following are the vote tallies from Evans' statewide elections:
The following are the results of his State Legislative races for the office of 43rd District representative:

Notes






