[[Arachidonic acid]]

CATEGORIES: Fatty acids

Arachidonic acid (AA, sometimes ARA) is a polyunsaturated omega-6 fatty acid 20:4(ω-6).  It is the counterpart to the saturated arachidic acid found in peanut oil, (L. arachis – peanut.)[ref]
</ref>

Chemistry

In chemical structure, arachidonic acid is a carboxylic acid with a 20-carbon chain and four cis-double bonds; the first double bond is located at the sixth carbon from the omega end.
Some chemistry sources define 'arachidonic acid' to designate any of the eicosatetraenoic acids.  However, almost all writings in biology, medicine and nutrition limit the term  to all-cis-5,8,11,14-eicosatetraenoic acid.

Biology

Arachidonic acid is a polyunsaturated fatty acid present in the phospholipids (especially phosphatidylethanolamine, phosphatidylcholine, and phosphatidylinositides) of membranes of the body's cells, and is abundant in the brain, muscles, and liver.
In addition to being involved in cellular signaling as a lipid second messenger involved in the regulation of signaling enzymes, such as PLC-γ, PLC-δ, and PKC-α, -β, and -γ isoforms, arachidonic acid is a key inflammatory intermediate and can also act as a vasodilator. (Note separate synthetic pathways, as described in section below.)

Essential fatty acid

Arachidonic acid is not one of the essential fatty acids. However, it does become essential if there is a deficiency in linoleic acid or if there is an inability to convert linoleic acid to arachidonic acid, which is required by most mammals. Some mammals lack the ability to—or have a very limited capacity to—convert linoleic acid into arachidonic acid, making it an essential part of their diets. Since little or no arachidonic acid is found in common plants, such animals are obligate carnivores; the cat is a common example. A commercial source of arachidonic acid has been derived, however, from the fungus Mortierella alpina.lifesdha.com/

Synthesis and cascade

Arachidonic acid is freed from a phospholipid molecule by the enzyme phospholipase A2 (PLA2), which cleaves off the fatty acid, but can also be generated from  DAG by diacylglycerol lipase.
Arachidonic acid generated for signaling purposes appears to be derived by the action of a phosphatidylcholine-specific cytosolic phospholipase A2 (cPLA2, 85 kDa), whereas inflammatory arachidonic acid is generated by the action of a low-molecular-weight secretory PLA2 (sPLA2, 14-18 kDa).
Arachidonic acid is a precursor in the production of eicosanoids:
The production of these derivatives and their action in the body are collectively known as the "arachidonic acid cascade"; see essential fatty acid interactions for more details.

PLA2 activation

PLA2, in turn, is activated by ligand binding to receptors, including:
Furthermore, any agent increasing intracellular calcium may cause activation of some forms of PLA2.

PLC activation

Alternatively, arachidonic acid may be cleaved from phospholipids by phospholipase C (PLC), yielding diacylglycerol (DAG), which subsequently is cleaved by DAG lipase to yield arachidonic acid.
Receptors that activate this pathway include:
PLC may also be activated by MAP kinase. Activators of this pathway include PDGF and FGF.

Arachidonic acid in the body

Muscle growth

Through its conversion to active components such as the prostaglandin PGF2alpha and PGE2 after physical exercise, arachidonic acid is necessary for the repair and growth of skeletal muscle tissue.

Brain

Arachidonic acid is one of the most abundant fatty acids in the brain, and is present in similar quantities to docosahexaenoic acid (DHA). The two account for approximately 20% of its fatty acid content.
Arachidonic acid is also involved in early neurological development. In one study funded by the U.S. National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, infants (18 months) given supplemental arachidonic acid for 17 weeks demonstrated significant improvements in intelligence, as measured by the Mental Development Index. This effect is further enhanced by the simultaneous supplementation of ARA with DHA.
In adults, the disturbed metabolism of ARA contributes to neurological disorders such as Alzheimer's disease and Bipolar disorder. This involves significant alterations in the conversion of arachidonic acid to other bioactive molecules (overexpression or disturbances in the ARA enzyme cascade).

Alzheimer's disease

Studies on arachidonic acid and the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease is mixed with one study of AA and its metabolites suggests they are associated with the onset of Alzheimer's disease,

Bodybuilding supplement

Arachidonic acid is marketed as an anabolic bodybuilding supplement in a variety of products. The first clinical study concerning the use of arachidonic acid as a sport supplement found that arachidonic acid has a possible enhancement of anaerobic capacity. A significant group–time interaction effect was observed in Wingate relative peak power (AA: 1.2 ± 0.5; P: -0.2 ± 0.2 W•kg-1, p=0.015). Statistical trends were also seen in bench press 1RM (AA: 11.0 ± 6.2; P: 8.0 ± 8.0 kg, p=0.20), Wingate average power (AA:37.9 ± 10.0; P: 17.0 ± 24.0 W, p=0.16), and Wingate total work (AA: 1292 ± 1206; P: 510 ± 1249 J, p=0.087). AA supplementation during resistance-training promoted significant increases in relative peak power with other performance related variables approaching, but not reaching, significance. These findings provide some preliminary evidence to support the use of AA as an ergogenic.

Dietary arachidonic acid and inflammation

Under normal metabolic conditions, slightly increased consumption of arachidonic acid is unlikely to cause excessive inflammation. ARA is metabolized to both proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory molecules. This may result in a reduction in systemic inflammation.
Arachidonic acid does still play a central role in inflammation related to injury and many diseased states. How it is metabolized in the body dictates its inflammatory or anti-inflammatory activity. Individuals suffering from joint pains or active inflammatory disease may find that increased arachidonic acid consumption exacerbates symptoms, presumably because it is being more readily converted to inflammatory compounds. Likewise, high arachidonic acid consumption is not advised for individuals with a history of inflammatory disease, or who are in compromised health. Of note, while ARA supplementation does not appear to have proinflammatory effects in healthy individuals, it may counter the anti-inflammatory effects of omega-3 fatty acid supplementation.

Health effects of arachidonic acid supplementation

Arachidonic acid (AA), a type of omega-6 fatty acid found in meat and fish, is concentrated in the bone marrow and known to promote the spread of prostate cancer.manchestereveningnews.co.uk/news/health/prostate-cancer-statins-scientists-make-6993526
Arachidonic acid supplementation in daily dosages of 1,000–1,500 mg for 50 days has been well tolerated during several clinical studies, with no significant side effects reported. All common markers of health, including kidney and liver function, serum lipids, Arachidonic acid supplementation of the diets of healthy adults appears to offer no toxicity or significant safety risk.
A scientific advisory from the American Heart Association has favorably evaluated the health impact of dietary omega-6 fats, including arachidonic acid. The group does not recommend limiting this essential fatty acid. In fact, the paper recommends individuals follow a diet that consists of at least 5–10% of calories coming from omega-6 fats, including arachidonic acid. Dietary ARA is not a risk factor for heart disease, and may play a role in maintaining optimal metabolism and reduced heart disease risk. It is, therefore, recommended to maintain sufficient intake levels of both omega-3 and omega-6 essential fatty acids for optimal health.
Arachidonic acid is not carcinogenic, and studies show dietary level is not associated (positively or negatively) with risk of cancers. ARA remains integral to the inflammatory and cell growth process, however, which is disturbed in many types of disease including cancer. Therefore, the safety of arachidonic acid supplementation in patients suffering from cancer, inflammatory, or other diseased states is unknown, and supplementation is not recommended.








