[[Mike Schmidt]]

CATEGORIES: 1949 births, Living people, American people of German descent, Baseball players from Ohio, Eugene Emeralds players, Gold Glove Award winners, Major League Baseball announcers, Major League Baseball players with retired numbers, Major League Baseball third basemen, Major League Baseball World Series Most Valuable Player award winners, Minor league baseball managers, National Baseball Hall of Fame inductees, National League All-Stars, National League home run champions, National League Most Valuable Player Award winners, National League RBI champions, Ohio Bobcats baseball players, Philadelphia Phillies broadcasters, Philadelphia Phillies players, Reading Phillies players, Sportspeople from Dayton, Ohio, Cancer survivors

Michael Jack Schmidt (born September 27, 1949) is a Hall of Fame third baseman, widely considered as the greatest at the position in the history of Major League Baseball.
Schmidt had an unusual batting stance, turning his back somewhat to the pitcher and shaking his rear end while waiting for the pitch. By standing far back in the batter's box, he made it impossible to jam him by pitching inside. Schmidt was one of the best athletes of his time; teammate Pete Rose once said, "To have his body, I'd trade him mine and my wife's, and I'd throw in some cash."

Early days

Upon graduation from Fairview High School in Dayton, Ohio in  and was drafted by the Phillies in the second round of the 1971 Major League Baseball Draft with the 30th overall pick.
On June 11,  Along with shortstop and third base, Schmidt also played some second base in the minors.
Schmidt spent two seasons in the Phillies' farm system, where he batted .263 with 34 home runs and 122 runs batted in. He received a September call-up to the Phillies in 

Philadelphia Phillies

Following the 1972 season, the Phillies dealt third baseman Don Money to the Milwaukee Brewers to open a spot for Schmidt on their infield. While Schmidt batted only .196 with 136 strikeouts his first full season, he demonstrated his power potential with 18 home runs.
Schmidt's batting average climbed to .282 in the next year, 1974, and he won the first of his twelve All-Star nods.. His 404 assists in 1974 remain a record for third basemen. He also filled in at shortstop and first base.
Schmidt's batting average hovered below .200 through the month of May .
The Phillies captured the NL east crown three years in a row, however, they were swept by Cincinnati's "Big Red Machine" in 1976, and lost to the Los Angeles Dodgers in .

National League MVP

On October 3,  National League MVP Ryan Howard hit 58 in 2006). Coupled with a league leading 121 RBIs, Schmidt was a unanimous choice for the National League's Most Valuable Player Award.
The Phillies defeated the Houston Astros in the 1980 National League Championship Series World Series, hitting two homers and driving in seven runs against the Kansas City Royals to earn him the World Series MVP Award. Following the World Series, Schmidt and four of his Phillies teammates appeared on Family Feud for one week in 1980. He, Larry Bowa, Garry Maddox, Dick Ruthven and Del Unser took on five members of the Kansas City Royals: Dennis Leonard, Dan Quisenberry, Paul Splittorff, John Wathan and Willie Wilson.
Schmidt's best season may have been the strike shortened  season. His 31 home runs were seven more than anyone else in the league. He also led the NL in runs scored, RBIs, total bases and walks, and set personal highs in batting average, on-base average and slugging average. He won his second consecutive MVP award, this time with 96% of the vote.
The Phillies led the NL East by 3.5 games when the 1981 Major League Baseball strike hit. As a result, the Phillies were named NL East champions for the first half of the season, however, they lost to the second half champion Montreal Expos in the 1981 National League Division Series.
In , in celebration of the team's 100th anniversary, Schmidt was voted by fans the greatest player in the history of the franchise. That year, he led the league in home runs for the sixth time in his career to lead the Phillies back to the post season. Schmidt led his team with a .467 batting average and scored five runs as they defeated the Los Angeles Dodgers in the 1983 National League Championship Series. It was, however, a much different story against the Baltimore Orioles in the 1983 World Series. The Phillies were held to a .195 team batting average; Schmidt went just 1-for-20 with a single.
Following the 1983 season, the Phillies dealt Pete Rose to the Montreal Expos. Tim Corcoran and Len Matuszek platooned at first in , Schmidt was moved to first base from late May through the end of the season with Rick Schu assuming third base duties. The Phillies finished with a record below .500 for the first time since 1974.
In  with a league leading 37 home runs and 119 RBIs.

Retirement

Trailing the Pittsburgh Pirates 6-5 at Three Rivers Stadium on April 18, 
Injuries to Schmidt's rotator cuff caused him to miss the last month and a half of the 
Despite his poor start and subsequent retirement, fans again voted Schmidt to the NL All-Star team. He decided not to play, but he did participate in the game's opening ceremony.

Career stats

 
 
Over his career Schmidt set a vast array of hitting and fielding records. In addition to his MVP Awards, Schmidt won ten Gold Gloves, led the league in home runs eight times, in RBIs four times, OPS five times, and walks four times. He was named to twelve All-Star teams. He is the Phillies all-time leader in games played, at-bats, plate appearances, runs scored, hits, home runs, RBI, walks, strikeouts, total bases, runs created, sacrifice flies, outs, Adj. Batting Runs, Adj. Batting Wins, Extra Base Hits, Times On Base, and Power-Speed number.
Schmidt's 548 home runs are the most ever hit by a player who spent his entire career with just one team.

Post playing career

Schmidt opted, at first, to pursue a more private lifestyle after his career, rather than to become a manager or coach. He has written a number of articles on baseball for CBS and regularly participates in charity golf tournaments. 
His uniform number 20 was retired by the Phillies in 1990.
In 1991, he and Nolan Ryan were inducted into the Peter J. McGovern Little League Museum's Hall of Excellence (established in 1988), thereby becoming only the second and third MLB players inducted into the Hall.
In 1995, Schmidt was elected into the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum with what was then the fourth highest percentage ever, 96.52%.).
In 1999, he ranked number 28 on The Sporting News's list of the 100 Greatest Baseball Players, the highest-ranking third baseman, and the highest-ranking player whose career began after 1967. Later that year, he was elected to the Major League Baseball All-Century Team. 
Schmidt was honored with a statue outside the third-base gate at Citizens Bank Park in 2004.
Schmidt has publicly expressed his thoughts on various baseball controversies. He has been a vocal advocate for the reinstatement of Pete Rose to baseball. In July 2005, he appeared on Bob Costas' HBO show Costas Now to discuss steroids, and said, "Let me go out on a limb and say that if I had played during that era I would have taken steroids... We all have these things we deal with in life, and I'm surely not going to sit here and say to you guys, 'I wouldn't have done that.'"
In his 2006 book, Clearing the Bases: Juiced Players, Monster Salaries, Sham Records, and a Hall of Famer's Search for the Soul of Baseball, he somewhat recanted that statement, saying that he understood the desire to get a competitive advantage even though he could not condone breaking the rules to do so.

Coaching

In 2002, Schmidt was hired by the Phillies to work for several weeks as a hitting coach each Spring training. In October 2003, Schmidt was named the manager of the Phillies' Single A Florida State League affiliate, the Clearwater Threshers. He managed them for just the 2004 season, then resigned. In 2009, he served as third base coach for Team USA in the World Baseball Classic.

Philanthropy

In 
In 2008, Schmidt released a charity wine called Mike Schmidt 548 Zinfandel, a reference to his 548 career home runs, with proceeds also going to the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.

Broadcasting

Schmidt spent one season (1990) as a color analyst with the Phillies broadcast team on the now-defunct PRISM network, where he was known as a very candid and honest broadcaster despite his limited experience in the area. In 2014, it was announced that Schmidt would serve as an analyst for the Phillies' Sunday home games on Comcast SportsNet Philadelphia.

Cancer

On March 16, 2014, Schmidt disclosed that he battled stage-3 melanoma cancer during the summer of 2013, but that he is now cancer-free. 



Further reading





, or BaseballLibrary.com


