[[Republicanism in the United Kingdom]]

CATEGORIES: Republicanism in the United Kingdom, Republicanism by country

Republicanism in the United Kingdom is a movement which seeks to remove the British monarchy and replace it with a republic that has a non-hereditary head of state. The method by which the head of state should be chosen is not agreed upon, with some favouring an elected president, some an appointed head of state with little power, and others supporting the idea of leaving the political system as it is but without a monarch.
A republican government was briefly established in the mid-17th century, after the Parliamentarian victory in the English Civil War. The main lobby group in the United Kingdom that campaigns for the abolition of monarchy is Republic, but support for the monarchy remains high. Peaceful expression of republican views is legal in the United Kingdom.

Context

Within Great Britain, republican sentiment has largely focused on the abolition of the British monarch, rather than the dissolution of the British Union or independence for its constituent countries.
In Northern Ireland, the term "republican" is usually used in the sense of Irish republicanism. While also against monarchical forms of government, Irish republicans are against the presence of the British state in any form in Ireland and advocate creating a united, all-island state, comprising the whole of Ireland. While this may be confusing, unionists who support a British republic also exist.
There are republican members of the Scottish National Party (SNP) in Scotland and Plaid Cymru in Wales who advocate independence for those countries as republics. The SNP's official policy is that the British monarch would remain head of state of an independent Scotland, unless the people of Scotland decided otherwise. Plaid Cymru have a similar view for Wales. The Scottish Socialist Party supports an independent Scottish republic.

History

Cromwellian republic

The countries that now make up the United Kingdom, together with the present Republic of Ireland, were briefly ruled as a republic in the 17th century, first under the Commonwealth consisting of the Rump Parliament and the Council of State (1649–53) and then under the Protectorate of Oliver Cromwell (1653–58). The Commonwealth Parliament represented itself as a Republic on the classical model, with John Milton writing Latin justifications for use as propaganda on Continental Europe.  Cromwell's Protectorate was less ideologically republican and was seen by Cromwell as restoring the mixed constitution of monarchy, aristocracy and democracy found in classical literature and English common law discourse.
First the Kingdom of England was declared to be the Commonwealth of England and then Scotland and Ireland were briefly forced into union with England by the army. This decision was later reversed when the monarchy was restored in 1660. In 1707 the Act of Union between England and Scotland was signed; the two countries' parliaments became one, and in return Scotland was granted access to the English colonies.
Many of Cromwell's actions upon gaining power were decried as "harsh, unwise, and tyrannical".
Much of Cromwell's power was due to the Rump Parliament, a Parliament purged of opposition to grandees in the New Model Army. Whereas Charles I had been in part restrained by a Parliament that would not always do as he wished (the cause of the Civil War), Cromwell was able to wield much more power as only loyalists were allowed to become MPs, turning the chamber into a rubber-stamping organisation. This was ironic given his complaints about Charles I acting without heeding the "wishes" of the people. But even so he found it almost impossible to get his Parliaments to follow all his wishes. His executive decisions were often thwarted – most famously in the ending of the rule of the regional major generals appointed by himself.
In 1657 Cromwell was offered the crown by Parliament, presenting him with a dilemma since he had played a great role in abolishing the monarchy. After two months of deliberation, he rejected the offer. Instead, he was ceremonially re-installed as "Lord Protector", with greater powers than he had previously held. It is often suggested that offering Cromwell the Crown was an effort to curb his power: as a King he would be obliged to honour agreements such as Magna Carta, but under the arrangement he had designed he had no such restraints. This allowed him to preserve and enhance his power and the army's while decreasing Parliament's control over him, probably to enable him to maintain a well-funded army which Parliament could not be depended upon to provide.
The office of Lord Protector was not formally hereditary, though Cromwell was able to nominate his own successor in his son, Richard.

Restoration of the monarchy

Although England, Ireland and Scotland became constitutional monarchies, after the reigns of Charles II and his brother James II & VII, and with the ascension of William and Mary to the English, Irish and Scottish thrones as a result of the Glorious Revolution of 1688, there have been movements throughout the last few centuries whose aims were to remove the monarchy and establish a republican system. A notable period was the time in the late 18th century and early 19th century when many Radicals such as the minister Joseph Fawcett were openly republican. (2006). Early Romanticism and religious dissent. Cambridge University Press, p. 93 ISBN 978-0-521-85895-3
During the later years of Queen Victoria's reign, there was considerable criticism of her decision to withdraw from public life following the death of her husband, Prince Albert. However this did not translate into clear support for republicanism. Most of the criticism was dismissed when she came out of mourning and returned to public life. During the 1870s, calls for Britain to become a republic on the American
or French model were made by the politicians Charles Dilke,Thomas M. Costa, "Dilke, Charles Wentworth" in Historical Dictionary of the British Empire edited by James S. Olson and Robert Shadle. Greenwood Press, 1996 ISBN 0-313-27917-9 and Charles Bradlaugh, as well as journalist George W. M. Reynolds. Cambridge University Press, 2007. ISBN 0521844614, (p. 190).
Some members of the Labour Party, such as Keir Hardie, also held republican views. (1978) Keir Hardie: the making of a socialist. Croom Helm, .

Prohibition of republican advocacy

Parliament passed the Treason Felony Act in 1848. This act made advocacy of republicanism punishable by transportation to Australia, later life imprisonment. The Law Lords ruled in 2003 that this law does not prohibit peaceful advocacy of the abolition of the monarchy.

21st century

The monarchy currently remains relatively secure in the United Kingdom with MORI Polls in the opening years of the 21st century showing support for retaining the monarchy stable at around 80% of people. Politics UK. Pearson Education. . In 2005, during the time of the wedding of Prince Charles and Camilla Parker Bowles, support for the monarchy dipped slightly with one poll showing that 65% of people would support keeping the monarchy if there were a referendum on the issue, with 22% saying they favoured a republic. In 2009 an ICM poll, commission by the BBC, found that 76% of those asked wanted the monarchy to continue after the Queen, against 18% of people who said they would favour Britain becoming a republic and 6% who said they did not know.
In February 2011, a YouGov poll put support for ending the monarchy after the Queen's death at 13%, if Prince Charles becomes King.
The main organisation campaigning for a republic in the United Kingdom is the campaign group Republic. Formed in 1987, Republic is frequently cited by much of the UK media on issues involving the royal family. Retrieved 13 May 2013BBC News, Prince Charles hits out at climate change sceptics, 9 May 2013. Retrieved 13 May 2013

Supporters

Advocates of republicanism in the UK

 
 good reasons to be a Republican  "New Statesman", August 2000.[/ref]
"The Queen Cult", in The Newsletter,6 June 1959.[/ref]
ISBN 0747804354,  (p. 51). [/ref]
The Enchanted Glass by Tom Nairn. Marxism Today, July 1988. (p. 43)[/ref]
Bermondsey Story: The Life of Alfred Salter. Allen and Unwin, 1949 (p. 14).[/ref]
iUniverse, 2012. ISBN 1475917503 (p. 338) [/ref] 

Political parties

At present, none of the three major British political parties has an official policy of republicanism. However, there are a number of individual politicians who favour abolition of the monarchy (see above). Tony Benn of the Labour Party introduced a Commonwealth of Britain Bill in Parliament in 1991.

Lobby groups

The largest lobby group in favour of republicanism in the United Kingdom is the Republic campaign group, founded in 1983. The group has benefited from negative publicity about the Royal Family, and Republic has reported a large rise in membership since the wedding of Prince Charles and Camilla Parker-Bowles. In June 2006 the group handed in a petition of over 3,000 names to 10 Downing Street calling for a serious national debate about the future of the monarchy.  Since then Republic has lobbied on changes to the parliamentary oath of allegiance, royal finances and changes to the Freedom of Information Act relating to the monarchy, none of which have produced any change. However, Republic has been invited to Parliament to talk as witnesses on certain issues related to the monarchy such as conduct of the honours system in the country.
In 2009 Republic made newsPrince Charles's architecture foundation could face investigation by reporting Prince Charles's architecture charity to the Charity Commission (the Commission declined to take the matter further) and has previously broken stories about royals using the Freedom of Information Act.  The organisation is regularly called up to comment and provide quotes for the press, national and local radio and national TV programmes, with much criticism as to the portrayal of the monarchy by the BBC which has been accused of celebrating the monarchy rather than keeping its politically neutral stance on issues related to it.

Media

The Guardian, Observer and Independent newspapers have all advocated the abolition of monarchy.

Arguments in favour of a republic

The benefits of a republic

Republicans suggest that republicanism is a constitutional step which answers a number of key issues.
The advocacy group Republic argues: {{cquote2|The monarchy is not only an unaccountable and expensive institution, unrepresentative of modern Britain, it also gives politicians almost limitless power.
It does this is in a variety of ways:
Republicans also want to see a constitution that they claim will inspire aspiration (by allowing anyone to become head of state) and political responsibility (by introducing popular sovereignty, the notion that the people are 'in charge'). They also claim that they want what's 'best for Britain', which includes the best democracy.

Arguments against monarchy

Republicans assert that hereditary monarchy is unfair and elitist. They claim that in a modern and democratic society no one should be expected to defer to another simply because of their birth. Such a system, they assert, does not make for a society which is at ease with itself, and it encourages attitudes which are more suited to a bygone age of imperialism than to a "modern nation". Some claim that maintaining a privileged royal family diminishes a society and encourages a feeling of dependency in many people who should instead have confidence in themselves and their fellow citizens.
Further, republicans argue that 'the people', not the members of one family, should be sovereign.
Succession to the crown is decided by male primogeniture, which has meant that the crown has been inherited by the eldest son, and only passed to a daughter if the monarch had no sons. In October 2011 it was announced in the Perth Agreement that succession laws in the UK and in other Commonwealth realms would be changed so that sons of any future monarch would no longer be preferred over daughters. This change was described by Republic as "crass and absurd" on the grounds that, despite being portrayed as greater equality, it did nothing to stop the discrimination "against any man, woman and child who isn't born into the Windsor family".
It is argued by republicans that the way citizens are expected to address members, however junior, of the royal family is part of an attempt to keep subjects 'in their place'. Routledge philosophy guidebook to Rousseau and The social contract. Routledge. p. 160.
The order of succession in a monarchy specifies a person who will become head of state, regardless of qualifications. The highest titular office in the land is not open to "free and fair competition". Although monarchists argue that the position of Prime Minister, the title with real power, is something anyone can aspire to become, the executive and symbolically powerful position of Head of State is not.
Republicans argue that members of the royal family bolster their position with unearned symbols of achievement. Examples in the UK include the Queen's many honorary military titles of colonel-in-chief, regardless of her military experience. Examples here include Prince Andrew, whose presence during the Falklands War was later criticised by the commander of the British Naval Force who stated that "special measures" had to be taken to ensure that the prince did not lose his life, It is seen to some as more of a PR exercise than military service. Members of the royal family are fast-tracked to higher ranks in the army.
Republicans argue that a hereditary system condemns each heir to the throne to an abnormal childhood. This was historically the reason why the anarchist William Godwin opposed the monarchy.  Johann Hari has written a book God Save the Queen? in which he argues that every member of the royal family has suffered psychologically from the system of monarchy.Johann Hari – Archive
Republicans argue that monarchs are not impartial but harbour their own opinions, motives, and wish to protect their interests. Republicans claim that monarchs are not accountable. As an example, republicans argue that Prince Charles has spoken and acted in ways that have widely been interpreted as taking a political stance, citing his commendable refusal to attend, in protest of China's dealings with Tibet, a state dinner hosted by the Queen for the Chinese head of state; his strong stance on GM food; and the contents of certain memos which were leaked to the press regarding how people achieve their positions. BBC News. 25 September 2002. BBC News. 9 February 2000.
Republicans see a lack of important democratic accountability and transparency for such institutions.
Republicans claim that the total costs to taxpayers including hidden elements (e.g., the Royal Protection security bill) of the monarchy are over £100 million per annum.
Republicans argue that the monarchy is to be considered embarrassing: as a concept it is archaic, too reminiscent of medieval feudalism, and while the UK has a hereditary head of state it cannot claim to be a modern nation.

Arguments in favour of constitutional monarchy

Some argue that the current system is still democratic as the Government and MPs of Parliament are elected by universal suffrage and as the Crown acts only on the advice of the Parliament, the people still hold power. Monarchy only refers to how the head of state is chosen and not how the Government is chosen. It is only undemocratic if the monarchy holds meaningful power, which it currently does not as government rests with Parliament. However, it was revealed in October 2011 that both the Queen and Prince Charles do have the power to veto government legislation which affects their private interests.
Some argue that the Monarch's constitutional position (with the little-used power to dissolve or refuse a government) could safeguard against Britain ever becoming a dictatorship however Republic has refuted claims that the monarchy has this sort of power. Examples of this argument being used often include the 1981 April Fool's Day Coup in Thailand and the El Tejerazo coup in Spain when King Bhumibol and King Juan Carlos I respectively stepped in to restore democracy in their countries.
The British constitutional system proscribes limits on Parliament and separates the executive from direct control over the police and courts. Constitutionalists argueBritish Monarchist League,  6 July 2011 that this is because contracts with the monarch such as the Magna Carta, the Declaration of Rights, the Act of Settlement and the Acts of Union place obligations on the state andThe Baronage Press Ltd,  6 July 2011 confirm its citizens as sovereign beings. These obligations are re-affirmed at every monarch's coronation. These obligations, whilst at the same time placing limits on the power of the judiciary and the police, also confirm those rights which are intrinsically part of British and especially English culture House of Commons Library,  6 July 2011 Examples are Common Law, the particular status of ancient practices, jury trials, legal precedent, protection against non-judicial seizure and the right to protest. 
Monarchists argue that a constitutional monarch with limited powers and non-partisan nature can provide a focus for national unity, national awards and honours, national institutions, and allegiance, as opposed to a president affiliated to a political party. (1997). The Monarchy and the Constitution. ch11
Some argue that if there were a republic, the costs incured in regards to the duties of the head of state would remain more or less the same. This includes the upkeep and conservation of the royal palaces and buildings which would still have to be paid for as they belong to the nation as a whole rather than the monarch personally. On top of that, the head of state would require a salary and security, state visits, banquets and ceremonial duties would still go ahead. In 2009, the monarchy claimed to be costing each person an estimated 69 pence a year (not including "a hefty security bill").dailymail.co.html 6 July 2011The Star,  6 July 2011The Press Secretary to the Queen, The British Monarchy website,  6 July 2011 However, the figure of 69p per person has been criticised for having been calculated by dividing the overall figure by approximately 60 million people, rather than by the number of British taxpayers.
Even though no modern republicans advocate a republic modelled on Cromwell's Protectorate, some[ref]David Plant, The Rump Parliament, British Civil Wars and Commonwealth website
 6 July 2011[/ref] point out that a Republican Commonwealth of England, Ireland and Scotland has already been tried when Oliver Cromwell installed it on 30 January 1649. Yet by February 1657 some peopleA group of MPs headed by Lord Broghill, David Plant, Biography of Oliver Cromwell, British Civil Wars and Commonwealth website  6 July 2011 argued that Cromwell should assume the crown as it would stabilise the constitution, limit his powers and restore precedent. Cromwell declined. Within three years of his death the Republic had lost support and the monarchy was restored. Later, during The Glorious Revolution of 1688 caused partially by disillusionment with the absolutist rule of the Scottish James II of England (VII of Scotland), Parliament and othersThe philosopher John Locke, 'John Locke Natural Rights to Life, Liberty, and Property', Jim Powell, senior fellow, Cato Institute,  6 July 2011 argued that James had broken "the original contract" with the state. Far from pressing for a republic, which had been experienced within living memory, they instead argued that the best form of government was a constitutional monarchy with explicitly circumscribed powers.





Further Reading




