[[Sakhnin]]

CATEGORIES: Cities in Israel, Arab localities in Israel, Cities in North District (Israel)

Sakhnin ( is Arab, mostly Muslim with a sizable Christian minority.
Sakhnin is home to the largest population of Sufi Muslims within Israel, with approximately 80 members.

Geography

Sakhnin is built over three hills and is located in a valley surrounded by mountains, the highest one being 602 meters high. Its rural landscape is almost entirely covered by olive and fig groves as well as oregano and sesame shrubs.

Landmarks

In the heart of the old town there is a grave called The Sheikh Ibrahim which is one of the 66 graves in Israel and the Palestinian Territories, who was considered a saint by the locals.
Another important site, which lies in the Christian neighborhood, is the tomb of Rabbi Joshua of Sakhnin. In the past, the local people were scared whenever they passed this grave during the night, while others used to kiss its walls and ask the dead Rabbi to heal them and their relatives because it was believed that the Rabbi used to heal people from certain diseases.
Another famous shrine is al Sheik Obeid's shrine, which is very close to the Shaknin's guesthouse.
Another important site in Sakhnin is called The Cave of the Ten which is carved in the rocks. The shepherds used to use its water for their cattle. It is not clear how this cave got its name. Some people believe that it got its name because of the number of fingers in a person's both hands. Another version says that it got its name because of the Ten Commandments. Another important site, which lies in the southeast of the town, is called The Spring which served as the main source of drinking water for the people of Sakhnin decades ago.

History

Settlement at Sakhnin dates back 3,500 years to its first mention in 1479 BCE by Thutmose II, whose ancient Egyptian records mention it as a centre for production of indigo dye. Sargon II also makes mention of it as Suginin.
It was mentioned as Sogane, a town fortified in 66, by Josephus.
Known as Sikhnin or Sikhni, meaning "home of the labourers" in Aramaic, and Sukhsikha, meaning "produces oil" in Hebrew, the town was known for Jewish scholars like the rabbi Joshua of Sakhnin in the periods of the Mishna and Gemara. His grave is known in Arabic as Nabi as-Sideiq, and was a focus of pilgrimage from the Middle Ages through the present. The town continued to flourish as Hellenist Sogne into the period of Roman conquest.
Annexed to the Ummayad Caliphate after the Battle of Yarmouk, it came under brief crusader rule as Zakkanin until retaken by Saladin and the Ayyubid Dynasty following the Battle of Hattin where it remained in Muslim hands under the Mamluks, Dhaher al-Omar, and the Ottomans, until Ottoman Syria was occupied by the British Empire after World War I.
In 1596, Sakhnin appeared in Ottoman tax registers as being in the Nahiya of Akka of the Liwa of Tabariyya.  It had a population of 66 Muslim households and 8 bachelors.  It paid taxes on wheat, barley, olives, cotton, and a water mill.
In the late 1870s, Conder and Kitchener described Sakhnin as follows. "A large village of stone and mud, amid fine olive-groves, with a small mosque. The water supply is from a large pool about half a mile to the south-east. The inhabitants are Moslems and Christians, and in 1859 numbered 1,100, and cultivated 100 feddans, according to Consul Rogers." 
At the time of the 1931 census, Sakhnin had 400 occupied houses and a population of 1688 Muslims, 202 Christians, and 1 Jew.
During the 1948 Arab-Israeli war, Sakhnin surrendered to Israeli forces on July 18, 1948, during Operation Dekel, but was re-captured by Arab forces shortly afterwards. It finally fell without battle during Operation Hiram, 29–31 October 1948. Many of the inhabitants fled north but some stayed and were not expelled by the Israeli soldiers. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-33028-9. p.226 The town remained under Martial Law until 1966.
In 1976, it became the site of the first Land Day marches, in which six Israeli Arabs were killed by Israeli forces during violent protests of government confiscation of  of Arab-owned land near Sakhnin. And in 1976 three more civilians were killed during clashes with the police, and in Jerusalem and the Aqsa Intifada in 2000 two men were killed.

Sports

In 2003, the town's football club, Bnei Sakhnin, became one of the first Arab teams to play in the Israeli Premier League, the top tier of Israeli football. The team received a new home with the 2005 opening of Doha Stadium, funded by the Israeli government and the Qatar National Olympic Committee, whose capital it is named after. The stadium has a capacity of 5,000.
Sakhnin is also the hometown of Abbas Suan, an Israeli international footballer who previously played for Bnei Sakhnin.
The town and their soccer team are the subject of the 2010 documentary film After The Cup: Sons of Sakhnin United
In 19 September 2008, Bnei Sakhnin played a game with the Spanish team Deportivo de La Coruña.








