[[Mahonia aquifolium]]

CATEGORIES: Bird food plants, Butterfly food plants, Drought-tolerant plants, Flora of British Columbia, Flora of California, Flora of Idaho, Flora of North America, Flora of Oregon, Flora of the Northwestern United States, Flora of the West Coast of the United States, Garden plants of North America, Mahonia, Berberis, Plants used in Native American cuisine, Plants used in traditional Native American medicine, Symbols of Oregon

Mahonia aquifolium (Oregon-grape or Oregon grape) is a species of flowering plant in the family Berberidaceae, native to western North America. It is an evergreen shrub growing to 

Etymology

The specific epithet aquifolium means "holly-leaved", referring to the spiny foliage. The common name is often (always in the UK) left un-hyphenated as Oregon grape, though doing so invites confusion with the true grapes. Some writers avoid this confusion by using "Oregon grape-holly", or "Oregon holly-grape" as a vernacular name for any species of mahonia. It also occasionally appears in print as Oregongrape. There are several common species of Oregon-grape, many with numerous cultivated varieties (cultivars). Among these are tall Oregon grape (Mahonia aquifolium), cascade, low, or dwarf Oregon grape, (M. nervosa), creeping Oregon grape (M. repens).

Description

M. aquifolium grows to 

Taxonomy

Some authors place Mahonia in the barberry genus, Berberis. Flora of North America, vol 3Loconte, H., & J. R. Estes. 1989. Phylogenetic systematics of Berberidaceae and Ranunculales (Magnoliidae). Systematic Botany 14:565-579., & Joseph E. Laferrière. 1997. Transfer of specific and infraspecific taxa from Mahonia to Berberis. Journal of the Arizona-Nevada Academy of Science 30(1):53-55. 1997. Transfer of specific and infraspecific taxa from Mahonia to Berberis. Bot. Zhurn. 82(9):96-99. The Oregon-grape is not related to true grapes, but gets its name from the purple clusters of berries whose color and slightly dusted appearance are reminiscent of grapes. .

Distribution

Mahonia aquifolium is a native plant in the North American West from Southeast Alaska to Northern California, and eastern Alberta to southern Colorado, often occurring in the understory of Douglas-fir forests (although other forest types contain the species) and in brushlands in the Cascades, Rockies, and northern Sierras.
In some areas outside its native range, M. aquifolium has been classified as an invasive exotic species that may displace native vegetation.Introduced Shrubs of Birmingham and the Black CountryNorth Carolina Botanical Garden / Conservation / Plants to Avoid in the Southeastern United StatesPlants to Avoid in the Southeastern United States Tennessee Invasive Exotic Plant ListTN Invasive Exotic Plant List

Cultivation

M. aquifolium is a popular subject in shady or woodland plantings. It is valued for its striking foliage and flowers, which often appear before those of other shrubs. It is resistant to summer drought, tolerates poor soils, and does not create excessive leaf litter. Its berries attract birds.
Numerous cultivars and hybrids have been developed, of which the following have gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit:-

Other Uses

The small purplish-black fruits, which are quite tart and contain large seeds, are included in smaller quantities in the traditional diets of Pacific Northwest aboriginal peoples, mixed with Salal or another sweeter fruit. Today they are sometimes used to make jelly, alone or mixed with salal. As the leaves of Oregon-grape are holly-like and resist wilting, the foliage is sometimes used by florists for greenery and a small gathering industry has been established in the Pacific Northwest.

Medicinal use

Some Plateau Indian tribes used Oregon-grape to treat dyspepsia.
Certain extracts from Mahonia aquifolium may be useful in the treatment of inflammatory skin diseases such as eczema and psoriasis, although side effects include rash and a burning sensation when applied.
Recent studies indicate that M. aquifolium contains a specific multidrug resistance pump inhibitor (MDR inhibitor) named 5'-methoxyhydnocarpin (5'-MHC) which works to decrease bacterial resistance to antibiotics and antibacterial agents.

Culture

Oregon grape is the state flower of Oregon.





Medicinal use


