[[NoHo, Manhattan]]

CATEGORIES: Neighborhoods in Manhattan, Lower Manhattan

NoHo, for North of Houston Street (as contrasted with SoHo, South of Houston) is a neighborhood in the New York City borough of Manhattan. It is bounded by Mercer Street to the west and the Bowery to the east, from East Ninth Street to East Houston Street. NoHo is primarily made up of loft apartments, which in turn makes it one of the most expensive and desirable neighborhoods in Manhattan. Its small size and central location also contributes to a high demand, again keeping prices high.
The Landmarks Preservation Commission has declared most of it a 125-building historic district, divided into the NoHo Historic District and the NoHo East Historic District, created in 2003.

History

When Lafayette Street was opened in the 1820s, it was one of the most fashionable streets in New York: the only survivor of that era is half of the original Colonnade Row, 1833, perhaps designed by Alexander Jackson Davis for speculative builder Seth Geer. Across from it is  The Public Theater. When it was a light manufacturing and warehouse district, Robert Mapplethorpe's loft was in NoHo.

Preservation

From the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission 1999 designation report:

The NoHo Historic District was designated by the LPC in 1999 and expanded in 2008. Additionally, another district in the neighborhood, the NoHo East Historic District, was created in 2003. The designations followed considerable effort by and strong support from numerous local community and preservation groups, including the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, and together, they form a contiguous area of landmarked buildings over 21 city blocks.
The 2008 extension is bounded on the west by Lafayette Street, on the east by the Bowery, on the north by East Fourth Street and on the south by Bond Street. It includes 56 buildings and a midblock parking lot to the south and east of the existing Noho Historic District. Historically, this area was an enclave for well-to-do families.
Some individual landmarks in the NoHo Historic District include: the Astor Library, the Bayard-Condict Building, the Bouwerie Lane Theater, the DeVinne Press Building, and the Old Merchant's House. Even two subway stations, Astor Place and Bleecker Street, are landmarked.

Gallery

File:330 Bowery bank-theater-store.jpg|The Bouwerie Lane Theater's facade on The Bowery (2010)
File:SullivanNY1.jpg|Facade of Louis Sullivan's Bayard-Condict Building (built 1897-1899) at 65 Bleecker Street between Broadway and Lafayette Street
File:687-691 Broadway.A. Wood and built from 1885-1888
File:Bleecker6sta.JPG|Bleecker Street station and Noho Star restaurant






