[[Ibn Warraq]]

CATEGORIES: 1946 births, Alumni of the University of Edinburgh, Pakistani agnostics, Living people, Pakistani humanists, Pakistani skeptics, Critics of Islam, Pakistani former Muslims, Pseudonymous writers, Pakistani expatriates in the United Kingdom, Muhajir people

Ibn Warraq is the pen name of an author most famous for his criticism of Islam. He is the founder of the Institute for the Secularisation of Islamic Society (ISIS) and is formerly a senior research fellow at the Center for Inquiry, while others praise it as well-researched. Writing a polemic against Islam, especially for an author of Muslim birth, is an act so incendiary that the author must write under a pseudonym; not to do so would be an act of suicide. And what does Ibn Warraq have to show for this act of unheard-of defiance? A well-researched and quite brilliant, if somewhat disorganized, indictment of one of the world's great religions. While the author disclaims any pretence to originality, he has read widely enough to write an essay that offers a startlingly novel rendering of the faith he left."Why Are Western Intellectuals so fearful of critisizing Islam? National Review Book Services (NRBS)
Warraq gathered world notice through his historiographies of the early centuries of the Islamic timeline and has published works which question mainstream conceptions of the period.  The pen name "Ibn Warraq" (, most literally "son of a papermaker") is used due to his concerns for his personal safety; Warraq stated, "I had fear to become the second Salman Rushdie."Der Spiegel August 2007 Interview with Ibn Warraq.  It is a name that has been adopted by dissident authors throughout the history of Islam. 
[/ref] The name refers to 9th century skeptical scholar Muhammad al Warraq.[ref]Der Spiegel August 2007 Interview with Ibn Warraq
There were several reasons, which are still valid. I had begun 1993 to write my book "why I am not Muslim " when it appeared 1995, was I professor for British and American culture at the University of Toulouse. I had fear to become the second Salman Rushdie I did not want not to die and I had my family to protect. My brother and its family do not know until today that I wrote the book. I do not want that they must suffer on my account.[/ref]
He is the author of nine books, including Why I Am Not a Muslim (1995), The Origins of the Koran (1998), The Quest for the Historical Muhammad (2000), What the Koran Really Says: Language, Text and Commentary (2002), Defending the West: A Critique of Edward Said's Orientalism (2007), Which Koran?: Variants, Manuscripts, and the Influence of Pre-Islamic Poetry  (2008), Why the West is Best: A Muslim Apostate's Defense of Liberal Democracy (2011) and Sir Walter Scott's Crusades & Other Fantasies (2013). He addressed the United Nations "Victims of Jihad" conference organized by the International Humanist and Ethical Union, alongside such speakers as Bat Ye'or, Ayaan Hirsi Ali, and Simon Deng.Ibn Warraq 61st session of the UN Commission on Human Rights

Early life and education

Warraq was born in India  and his family migrated to the newly independent Pakistan in 1947. He believes that the great Islamic civilisations of the past were established in spite of the Koran, not because of it, and that only a secularised Islam can deliver Muslim states from fundamentalist madness.''  His mother died when he was an infant.  He stated in an interview that he "studied Arabic and read the Qur'an as a young man in hope of becoming a follower of the Islamic faith."Der Spiegel:Islamkirtiker Ibn Warraq "Dieser Kalte Krieg kann 100 Jahre dauern", accessed on 6 June 2009. The quote in German as printed in Der Spiegel is:"Ich bin nicht mit Religion indoktriniert worden"  His father decided to send him to a boarding school in England partly to circumvent a grandmother's effort to push an exclusively religious education on his son at the local Madrasah.  After his arrival in Britain, he only saw his father once more, when he was 14. His father died two years later. Warraq claims to have been "shy" for most of his youth.
By 19 he had moved to Scotland to pursue his education at the University of Edinburgh, where he studied philosophy and Arabic with Islamic studies scholar W. Montgomery Watt. 22, No. 22, June 16, 2007 (accessed January 1, 2014; archive available at World Magazine "Dissident Voices")

Writing and works

After graduating, Warraq was a primary school teacher in London for five years and moved to France with his wife in 1982, opening an Indian restaurant. He worked as a courier for a travel agent until the Rushdie affair took place. Because of this, Warraq began to write for Free Inquiry Magazine, the American secular humanist publication, on topics such as "Why I am not Muslim."
Ibn Warraq continued writing with several works examining the historiography of the Qur'an and Muhammad, raising a great deal of controversy that allowed certain Islamic leaders to arouse animosity in their communities in the process. Other books treated the topic of secular humanist values among Muslims.  In The Origins of The Koran: Classic Essays on Islam's Holy Book Ibn Warraq includes some of Theodor Nöldeke's studies.
In 2005, Warraq spent several months working with Christoph Luxenberg, who wrote about Syriac vs. Arabic interpretation of Koranic verse. Qu'ranic scholar Christoph Luxenberg has tried to demonstrate that many of the obscurities of the Qu'ran disappear if we read certain words as being Syriac and not Arabic. This would include, for example, reinterpreting the promise of virgins in the afterlife as a promise for chilled drinks and good food. Luxenberg's work has been well received among Islamic scholars, and the esteemed critic Ibn Warraq regards it as the most important book ever written on the Qu'ran. In a series of three lectures, Warraq, who has spent several months working with Luxenberg, will give a summary of Luxenberg's research.
In February 2006, he participated with several other specialists at the Pim Fortuyn Memorial Conference on Islam in The Hague (17–19 February 2006).Pim Fortuyn Memorial Conference on Islam in The Hague on The Brussels Journal.
In March 2006, a letter he co-signed entitled MANIFESTO: Together facing the new totalitarianism with eleven other individuals (most notably Salman Rushdie) was published in response to violent and deadly protests in the Islamic world surrounding the Jyllands-Posten Muhammad cartoons controversy.
Although not a member of any religion, he has a higher opinion of humanism than of monotheism.116-123  He is the founder of the Institute for the Secularisation of Islamic Society.  Despite his criticisms of Islam, he does not take the view that it cannot be reformed; and he works with liberal Muslims in his group.  He has described himself as an atheistDer Spiegel:Islamkirtiker Ibn Warraq "Dieser Kalte Krieg kann 100 Jahre dauern", accessed on 6 June 2009. The quote in German as printed in Der Spiegel is:"Heute bin ich ein Atheist." or an agnostic.
In 2007, he participated in St Petersburg Secular Islam Summit along with other thinkers and self-proclaimed "reformers of Islam" such as Ayaan Hirsi Ali, Wafa Sultan, and Irshad Manji. Petersburg Declaration The group released the St Petersburg Declaration, which urges world governments to, among other things, reject Sharia law, fatwa courts, clerical rule, and state-sanctioned religion in all their forms; and to oppose all penalties for blasphemy and apostasy, which they believe to be in violation of Article 18 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Warraq's op-ed pieces have appeared in The Wall Street Journal and The Guardian in London, and he has addressed governmental bodies all over the world, including the United Nations in Geneva.
In October 2007, Warraq participated in the IQ2 debates in London with Douglas Murray, David Aaronovitch, Tariq Ramadan, William Dalrymple, and Charles Glass
Ibn Warraq at the IQ2 debates with Douglas Murray, David Aaronovitch, Tariq Ramadan, William Dalrymple and Charles Glass.
AUDIO Podcast of the IQ2 Debates in London with Ibn Warraq.

Seclusion

Prior to 2007, Ibn Warraq refused to show his face in public.  This was due to fears for his personal safety and also due to his desire to travel to see his family in Pakistan without being denied access to Muslim countries.  His face was blacked out on the ISIS website.Mentioned at the start of this interview.  However, his presence normally requires extensive policing.

Reception

Praise

In 2007, Douglas Murray described Ibn Warraq as "the great Islamic scholar ... one of the great heroes of our time. Personally endangered, yet unremittingly vocal, Ibn Warraq leads a trend. Like a growing number of people, he refuses to accept the idea that all cultures are equal. Were Ibn Warraq to live in Pakistan or Saudi Arabia, he would not be able to write. Or if he did, he would not be allowed to live. Among his work is criticism of the sources of the Qur'an. In Islamic states this constitutes apostasy. It is people like him, who know how things could be, who understand why Western values are not just another way to live, but the only way to live—the only system in human history in which the individual is genuinely free (in the immortal words of Thomas Jefferson) to 'pursue happiness'."Douglas Murray, "I am not afraid to say the West's values are better," The Spectator, 3 October 2007
In a 1996 review of Why I Am Not a Muslim, Daniel Pipes notes that "with few exceptions, he Warraq relies almost entirely on the Western tradition of Islamic studies" but concludes that "despite his anger, 'Ibn Warraq' has written a serious and thought-provoking book" calling for "an equally compelling response from a believing Muslim."Daniel Pipes, "Why I Am Not a Muslim," Middle East Quarterly, Vol. III, Num. 1, March 1996  Pipes also described Why I am not a Muslim (1995) as "well-researched and quite brilliant." David Pryce-Jones said that it was "a scrupulously documented examination of the life and teaching of the Prophet Muhammad, of the Qur'an and its sources, and the resulting culture."David Pryce-Jones "Enough Said," The New Criterion, January 2008  Christopher Hitchens described Why I Am Not a Muslim as "my favorite book on Islam."Christopher Hitchens, "Holy Writ," The Atlantic,  April 1, 2003.  
In a 2008 review of Ibn Warraq's book, Defending the West: A Critique of Edward Said's Orientalism,  political scientist Peter Berkowitz describes Warraq as a "worthy critic" for Edward Said.  Berkowitz says that "with a rare combination of polemical zest and prodigious learning, it the West is the first critique to address and refute Said's arguments 'against the background of a more general presentation of salient aspects of Western civilization.'"Peter Berkowitz, "Answering Edward Said: Peter Berkowitz on Defending the West: A Critique of Edward Said's Orientalism by Ibn Warraq," Policy Review number 149, June 2, 2008.  In a 2009 review of Defending the West A. J. Caschetta concluded that "Ibn Warraq's critique of Said's thought and work is thorough and convincing, indeed devastating to anyone depending on Saidism. It should do to Orientalism what Mary Lefkowitz's Not Out of Africa did to Martin Bernal's Black Athena."A. J. Caschetta, "Defending the West: A Critique of Edward Said's Orientalism," Middle East Quarterly'', Vol. XVI, Num. 1, Winter 2009  Pryce-Jones says that it "demolishes in close detail the Saidian 'narrative.'"
In a 2012 review of Ibn Warraq's book, Virgins? What Virgins, Rice University Islamicist David Cook writes: "As a scholar of Islam myself, I find Ibn Warraq's attitude to be very refreshing, and his scholarship for the most part to be accurate and devastating in pinpointing the weaknesses in Muslim orthodoxy." The book's third essay, Cook continues, "could almost serve as a history of our field, and of its systematic failure to critique the foundational texts of Islam as those of other faiths have been critiqued."David Cook, "Ibn Warraq. Virgins? What Virgins? and Other Essays" in Reason Papers: A Journal of Interdisciplinary Normative Studies, vol. 34, no. 2 (October 2012), p. 235

Criticism

In reviewing Ibn Warraq's compilation The Origins of the Koran, religious studies professor Herbert Berg has labelled him as "polemical and inconsistent" in his writing.  Berg lauded the inclusion of the essay by Theodor Nöldeke, but panned the inclusion of William St. Clair Tisdall's as "not a particularly scholarly essay". He concluded "it seems that Ibn Warraq has included some of the essays not on the basis of their scholarly value or their status as 'classics', but rather on the basis of their hostility to Islam.  This does not necessarily diminish the value of the collection, but the reader should be aware that this collection does not fully represent classic scholarship on the Quran."
His work, "The Origins of the Koran," is itself based on a polemic by St. Clair Tisdall "The original sources of the Qur'an" which was described by François de Blois as a "decidedly shoddy piece of missionary propaganda". 88.
François de Blois in reviewing The origins of the Koran, states that "it is surprising that the editor, who in his Why I am not a Muslim took a very high posture as a critical rationalist and opponent of all forms of obscurantism, now relies so heavily on writings by Christian polemicists from the nineteenth century".

Works








