[[John McLeod Campbell]]

CATEGORIES: 1800 births, 1872 deaths, Scottish theologians, Alumni of the University of Glasgow, Alumni of the University of Edinburgh

John McLeod Campbell (May 4, 1800 – February 27, 1872) was a nineteenth-century Scottish minister and Reformed theologian. In the opinion of one German church historian, contemporaneous with Campbell, his theology was a highpoint of British theology during that century., New York, New York, 1890, p. 382.  "I regard their (Thomas Erskine of Linlathen's and John Mcleod Campbell's) ideas as the best contribution to dogmatics which British theology has produced in the present century." James B. Torrance ranked him highly on the doctrine of the atonement, placing Campbell alongside Athanasius of Alexandria and Anselm of Canterbury. Torrance, Scottish Journal of Theology, #26, 1973, p. 295. Campbell took his cue from his close reading of the early church fathers, the historic Reformed confessions and catechisms, John Calvin, Martin Luther's commentary on Galatians, and Jonathan Edwards' works..., shows how widely read Campbell really was, particularly with regard to Reformed theology outside of the Westminster Standards. That he continued reading widely may be seen in his dialogue in On the Nature of the Atonement with past theologians like Martin Luther, John Owen, Jonathan Edwards, and contemporary theologians like Pye Smith, George Payne, Thomas Jenkyns, Thomas Chalmers, and others. 

Early life

Campbell was born on 4 May 1800 in Argyllshire, Scotland, the oldest child of the Rev. Donald Campbell. His mother died when Campbell was only 6, in 1806.  Educated chiefly at home by his father, Campbell was already a good Latin scholar when he went to the University of Glasgow in 1811. Finishing his course in 1817, he became a student at the Divinity Hall, where he gained some reputation as a Hebraist. 
After further training at the University of Edinburgh Campbell was licensed as a preacher by the presbytery of Lorne in 1821. In 1825 he was appointed to the parish of Row (now Rhu) on the Gareloch and the Clyde coast. There drunkenness was frequent, fights common, and smuggling ordinary; religion was conceived only as offering safety from the anger of God. and so prayers and worship rang hollow and were often hypocritical. There was little joy in their Christianity. 43''.
Campbell preached universal atonement; and the presbytery in 1829 reviewed the orthodoxy of his preaching and teaching.  At issue was the theology of Campbell in his sermons and its relationship and uniformity with the Westminster Standards which all Scottish ministers agreed to preach and teach at their ordination.  A first petition was withdrawn; but a subsequent appeal in March 1830 led to a presbyterial visitation, and an accusation of heresy. Campbell clearly disagreed with the Westminster Confession of Faith's view of a limited atonement, and he was removed from the ministry. The General Assembly, by which the charge was ultimately considered, found Campbell guilty of teaching heretical doctrines and deprived him of his living. 281.  MacGregor states that there were five levels of ecclesiastical discipline available to the Assembly in dealing with Campbell.  (1.) Admonition, (2.) Rebuke, (3.) Suspension, (4.) Deposition, and (5.) Excommunciation.  As MacGregor points out "deposition was a ferocious penalty..." p. 281. On Campbell's breadth of education and reading, MacGregor is most instructive. See page 289 where he states that Campbell was better read in the Church fathers, and in Reformation theology than most of his colleagues who judged him so harshly. Several issues came into play, not least that Campbell did not support either of the theological parties in the Assembly, the Moderates or the Evangelicals.J. H. Leckie, The Expository Times: Books that Have Influenced our Epoch, #40 (1929), p. 199. "When his trial came he was without influential friends." Declining an invitation to join Edward Irving in the Catholic Apostolic Church, he worked for two years as an evangelist in the Scottish Highlands.

In Glasgow

Returning to Glasgow in 1833, Campbell was minister for sixteen years in a large chapel specially built for him by close friends.  In 1859 his health gave way, and he advised his congregation to join the Barony church, where Norman McLeod was pastor.

Later years

In 1868 he received the degree of D.D. from Glasgow University for his theological work and writing. He and his friends took it to be a reaching out on the part of the Scottish church towards him so long after his deposition from the ministry. In 1870 he moved to Roseneath, and there began his Reminiscences and Reflections, an unfinished work published after his death by his son. 
Campbell had a close circle of friends, which included Thomas Erskine, Norman McLeod, Alexander Ewing, Frederick Maurice and C. J. Vaughan. In 1871 a testimonial, dinner and address were presented to him by representatives of most of the religious bodies in Scotland. He died in early 1872 from prostate cancer.  He was buried in Roseneath churchyard.

Works

Jonathan Edward's question regarding the atonement, one of the prompts for Campbell's work, was: "Could God be satisfied by Christ's earnest and honest repentance on behalf of humanity, or was his death necessary for satisfaction, forgiveness, and atonement to occur?" Asked in another way, did Christ have to die to effect atonement, or was there another way for atonement to take place? Campbell also was pastorally sensitive to the attitude of his parishioners in living as Christians.  He discovered that their Christianity was essentially joyless and depressing.
Campbell's influence may be seen particularly in the work of Hugh Ross Mackintosh, Donald Baillie, and most notably in Thomas F. Torrance and James B. Torrance. Later Scottish theology affirmed Campbell's influence in its departure from the strict reading of Westminster's Standards. Campbell, through the influence of the Torrance brothers, has begun to be appreciated as a pastoral theologian. 
In 1856 Campbell published The Nature of the Atonement, which profoundly influenced Scottish theology.  Campbell's theological aim was to view the Atonement in the light of the Incarnation. In the Atonement, one may not separate the birth, person, work, and death of Jesus Christ. As one looks more closely at Christ, one may discover that the divine mind in Christ is the mind of perfect obedient sonship towards God and perfect brotherhood towards men. Jesus Christ in his person fulfills the law to love God wholeheartedly and to love neighbor selflessly. By the light of this divine fact of the Incarnation, Christ's life as atonement, vicariously lived in humanity's place, is seen to develop itself naturally and necessarily as a perfect and complete reconciliation; the penal element in the sufferings of Christ is but one aspect or facet of the atonement. 
Campbell has been rightly accused of denying the penal substitutionary theory of the atonement with his alternate view. He believed that rather than bearing the sin of humanity, Christ confessed humanity's sin on their behalf. This is also known as the vicarious confession view. Subsequent critics have argued that Campbell's position was not self-consistent in the place assigned to the penal and expiatory element in the sufferings of Christ, nor adequate in its recognition of the principle that the obedience of Christ perfectly affirms all righteousness and so satisfies the holiness of God, thus effecting a peace and reconciliation between God and humanity—a true atonement. 
In 1862 Campbell published Thoughts on Revelation and a few years later (1869) he published a revised version of his 1851 book: Christ the Bread of Life.

Family

Campbell married Mary Campbell, daughter of John Campbell of Ardnahua, Kilninver; among their children was James Macnabb Campbell. There were four sons and two daughters;Dictionary of National Biography, Campbell, Sir James Macnabb (1846–1903), Indian official and compiler of the 'Bombay Gazetteer,', by F. H. Brown. Published 1912. one of the daughters married William, son of Walter Crum.us.org/stream/memorialsofjohnm02camp#page/188/mode/2up



Further reading


