[[Katanga Province]]

CATEGORIES: Katanga Province

Katanga is one of the provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Between 1971 and 1997 (during the rule of Mobutu Sese Seko when Congo was known as Zaire), its official name was Shaba Province. 
Katanga's area is 497,000 km², larger than California and 16 times larger than Belgium. Farming and ranching are carried out on the Katanga Plateau.  The eastern part of the province is a rich mining region, which supplies cobalt, copper, tin, radium, uranium, and diamonds.  The region's capital, Lubumbashi, is the second largest city in the Congo.
Moïse Katumbi Chapwe, a businessman, is the governor of Katanga province.  He took office on 24 February 2007.

Economy

Copper mining is an important part of the economy of Katanga province.  There are a number of reasons cited for the discrepancy between the vast mineral wealth of the province and the failure of the wealth to increase the overall standard of living. The local provincial budget was $440 million in 2011.

Mining

Lubumbashi, the mining capital of the Democratic Republic of Congo, is a hub for many of the country's biggest mining companies. The Democratic Republic of Congo produces "more than 3 percent of the world's copper and half its cobalt, most of which comes from Katanga".
Major mining concessions include Tilwezembe, Kalukundi. 

Mining companies

[/ref] Katanga Mining Ltd is majority-owned by Swiss commodity trader Glencore DCC A joint venture of Katanga Mining (75%) and Gécamines (25%) began mining Tilwezembe, an open-pit copper and cobalt mine, in 2007.[ref]
</ref>

Geography

The province forms the Congolese border with Angola and Zambia.  The province also borders Tanzania - although Katanga province and Tanzania do not share a land border - but the border is within Lake Tanganyika.
Katanga has a wet and dry season.  Rainfall is about 49 inches per year (120 cm).Katanga, or Shaba (province, Democratic Republic of the Congo) - Britannica Online Encyclopedia

Education and medical care

The University of Lubumbashi, located in the northern part of Lubumbashi city, is the largest university in the province and one of the largest in the country. A number of other university-level institutions exist in Lubumbashi, some public, some private: Institut Supérieur de Statistique, Institut Supérieur Pédagogique, Institut Supérieur des Études Sociales, Institut Supérieur de Commerce, Institut Supérieur des Techniques Médicales (all state-run), Université Protestante de Lubumbashi (Korean Presbyterian), Institut Supérieur Maria Malkia (Catholic), Institut Supérieur de Développement Mgr Mulolwa (Catholique), Theologicum St François de Sales (Salesian seminary), Institut Supérieur de Théologie Évangélique de Lubumbashi (Pentecostal/Anglican/Brethren), etc. Université Méthodiste au Katanga, the oldest private university-level institution in the province, is located at Mulungwishi (between Likasi and Kolwezi) but organizes its Masters in Leadership courses in Lubumbashi. The University of Kamina, the University of Kolwezi and the University of Likasi are former branches of the University of Lubumbashi, which continues to have branches in some locations such as Kalemie. 
TESOL, the English Language School of Lubumbashi, is a secondary school that serves the expatriate community. It was founded in 1987 on the grounds of the French School, Lycée Français Blaise Pascal, which suspended operations in 1991 with a new French School starting in 2009.
There are French, Belgian and Greek schools in Lubumbashi sponsored by the respective embassies.
The Jason Sendwe Hospital is the largest hospital in the province, located in Lubumbashi. The Afia (Don Bosco) and Vie & Santé hospitals are among the best-equipped and staffed. The University of Lubumbashi maintains a small teaching hospital in the center of Lubumbashi.
Katanga province has the highest rate of infant mortality in the world, with 184 of 1000 babies born expected to die before the age of five.

Transportation

The Congo Railway provides Katanga Province with limited railway service centered around Lubumbashi.  Reliability is limited.  The area also has an airport called Luano Airport which is located northeast of Lubumbashi.  In April 2014, a train derailment killed 63 people.>

Media

Katanga province is served by television broadcasts.  Radio-Télévision Nationale Congolaise (RTNC) has a transmitter in Lubumbashi that re-transmits the signal from Kinshasa.  In 2005, new television broadcasts by Radio Mwangaza began in Lubumbashi.

Notable Katangese








