[[Hamza Yusuf]]

CATEGORIES: 1960 births, Living people, Malikis, Maliki fiqh scholars, American Muslims, Muslim reformers, Muslim scholars of Islam, Muslim writers, Muslim scholars, Sunni Muslim scholars, American people of Greek descent, Converts to Islam, American former Christians, Former Greek Orthodox Christians, Converts to Islam from Eastern Orthodoxy, Writers from the San Francisco Bay Area, People from Hayward, California, People from Walla Walla, Washington, San Jose State University alumni

Hamza Yusuf is an American Islamic scholar, and is co-founder of Zaytuna College. Curtis, The Columbia Sourcebook of Muslims in the United States, p. 405Z. Grewal, Islam Is a Foreign Country: American Muslims and the Global Crisis of Authority, p 377 He is one of the leading proponents of classical learning in Islam and has promoted Islamic sciences and classical teaching methodologies throughout the world.Jocelyne Cesari, Encyclopedia of Islam in the United States, p 643
He is an advisor to Stanford University's Program in Islamic Studies and the Center for Islamic Studies at Berkeley's Graduate Theological Union. In addition, he serves as vice-president for the Global Center for Guidance and Renewal, which was founded and is currently presided over by Abdallah bin Bayyah.Introducing global center for renewal and guidance « Bin BayyahIntroducing global center for renewal and guidance | Islam | Saudi Gazette
He is one of the signatoriesSignatories | A Common Word Between Us and You of A Common Word Between Us and You, an open letter by Islamic scholars to Christian leaders, calling for peace and understanding. The Guardian newspaper in the United Kingdom reported that   "Hamza Yusuf is arguably the west's most influential Islamic scholar."

Early life

Yusuf was born as Mark Hanson to two academics  in Washington State and raised in Northern California. He grew up a practicing Greek Orthodox Christian and attended prep schools on both the east and west coasts. In 1977, after a near-death experience and reading the Qur'an, he converted to Islam from Chrisitanity (he seemed destined for the Greek Orthodox priesthood at his early age).

Education

Soon after converting, Yusuf moved to England, Spain, and eventually Al Ain in the United Arab Emirates to pursue serious study of Islam. There he was introduced to Mauritanian scholars and began more serious study of various Islamic disciplines including Maliki fiqh. This eventually led him to travel to Mauritania itself in order to study directly with the renowned scholar and sage of the land, Sidi Muhammad ould Fahfu al-Massumi, more famously known as Murabit al-Hajj.Z. Grewal, Islam Is a Foreign Country: American Muslims and the Global Crisis of Authority, p 161 During his intermittent stays there, Yusuf both lived and studied directly with Murabit al-Hajj.Another Mother of the Believers | AE

Career

Zaytuna

He and his colleagues Zaid Shakir and Hatem Bazian founded the Zaytuna Institute in Berkeley, California, United States, in 1996, dedicated to the revival of traditional study methods and the sciences of Islam.S Engagement, p 367 Eventually, in the fall of 2010 it would open its doors as Zaytuna College, a four-year Muslim liberal arts college, the first of its kind in the United States. It aims to "educate and prepare morally committed professional, intellectual, and spiritual leaders."ZAYTUNA COLLEGE | About > Our Mission

Views

Yusuf has taken a stance against religious justifications for terrorist attacks. Cohen, Ronald L. Numbers, Gods in America: Religious Pluralism in the United States, p 186 He described the 9/11 attacks as "an act of 'mass murder, pure and simple'". Condemning the attacks, he has also stated "Islam was hijacked  ... on that plane as an innocent victim".

Influence

Jordan's Royal Islamic Strategic Studies Centre currently places him 42nd on its list of the top 500 most influential Muslims in the world."Elmhurst College: Modern Lessons from an Ancient Faith Recently, Hamza Yusuf was ranked as "the Western world's most influential Islamic scholar" by The 500 Most Influential Muslims, edited by John Esposito and Ibrahim Kalin (2009).

Publications

Books and pamphlets authored
Books with forewords and notes
Book edited with Zaid Shakir
Papers








