[[Margo MacDonald]]

CATEGORIES: 1943 births, 2014 deaths, Critics of the European Union, Deaths from Parkinson's disease, Disease-related deaths in Scotland, Euthanasia in the United Kingdom, Independent MSPs, Members of the Scottish Parliament 1999–2003, Members of the Scottish Parliament 2003–07, Members of the Scottish Parliament 2007–11, Members of the Scottish Parliament 2011–, Members of the United Kingdom Parliament for Glasgow constituencies, People educated at Hamilton Academy, Politicians from Hamilton, South Lanarkshire, Politicians with physical disabilities, Scottish columnists, Scottish journalists, Scottish National Party MPs, Scottish National Party MSPs, Scottish republicans, Scottish schoolteachers, Scottish television presenters, UK MPs 1970–74

Margo MacDonald (née Aitken; 19 April 1943 – 4 April 2014) was a Scottish politician; she was a Scottish National Party (SNP) Member of Parliament (MP) and one-time Deputy Leader, and later an Independent Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) for the Lothian region.

Background

Margo Aitken was born in Hamilton, South Lanarkshire, and grew up in and around East Kilbride, one of three siblings.co. Her mother, Jean, was a nurse, and her father, Robert,

Family

She married her first husband, Peter MacDonald, in 1965, and they ran a Blantyre pub, the Barnhill Tavern (known locally as The Hoolet's Nest), together. The MacDonalds had two daughters, Petra and Zoe, before the marriage ended in divorce. Her second marriage was to former politician and columnist Jim Sillars, whom she married in 1981. Sillars went on to win the 1988 Glasgow Govan by-election for the SNP. Her daughter Petra is married to Craig Reid of the Proclaimers; they have four children.

Parliamentary career

A committed and vocal supporter of Scottish independence, MacDonald entered parliamentary politics by winning the Glasgow Govan by-election, 1973 as an SNP candidate at 30 years old. There were "scenes of near-hysteria by supporters" as she was declared the winner in what had, until then, been a Labour stronghold. Her election, during the last months of the Conservative Heath government, "overturned the theory that the SNP can thrive only ... when a Labour Government is in office".
She has alleged that her election to the House of Commons was followed by KGB and CIA agents taking her for lunch while posing as journalists, and believed the SNP was infiltrated during the 1970s by MI5 agents worried booming North Sea oil revenues could lead to independence.
She failed to retain her seat in the following general election of February 1974, but became Deputy Leader of the SNP that year. At a December 1974 National Council meeting, Margo criticised the SNP for failing to win seats from Labour in industrial Scotland and urged the party to move to the left in order to compete. She had already been selected as the SNP candidate in Hamilton when the death of the MP led to the Hamilton by-election, 1978, which she lost. At the 1979 general election she was an unsuccessful candidate in Glasgow Shettleston.
A staunch left-winger, she was one of three prominent spokespersons for the socialist 79 Group, which ultimately resulted in her failure to be re-elected as Deputy Leader at the party's 1979 conference. In 1982, Margo resigned from the SNP in protest of the 79 Group's proscription. She began to establish herself as a forceful and respected presenter of various radio and television programmes, regularly to Scottish newspapers including the Edinburgh Evening News near the end of her life.
By the mid-1990s, she had returned to the SNP and in 1999 she was elected to the Scottish Parliament, representing the Lothians. She earned a high media profile by her outspoken views on a number of issues, including sex workers' rights and MSPs' salaries. 
In response, there were a spate of resignations from the party,
Her diagnosis with Parkinson's Disease became public knowledge at this time, ostensibly in an effort to diminish her electoral prospects. MacDonald, who had known about the diagnosis for six years,
She was re-elected as an independent MSP at the 2003 Scottish Parliament election, and again in 2007 and 2011. After her 2007 re-election MacDonald stood to become Presiding Officer, but lost the ballot to Alex Fergusson. During her time in parliament as an independent politician, she championed controversial causes, including the legalisation of assisted suicide. 
In the run-up to the Scottish independence referendum, 2014, MacDonald asked the UK's Security Service for assurances they would not interfere in the referendum process, suggesting that the security services "have people in the SNP".

Death

MacDonald died at her home in Edinburgh on 5 April 2014, aged 70.co. As she was elected as an independent regional MSP, according to the provisions of the Scotland Act 1998, her seat will be left vacant until the Scottish Parliament general election, 2016.

My Right to Die

In July 2008, MacDonald co-operated with BBC Scotland in the making of a documentary about assisted dying. As a Parkinson's sufferer, MacDonald had long been a campaigner for assisted dying, saying that  "As someone with a degenerative condition - Parkinson's - this debate is not a theory with me. The possibility of having the worst form of the disease at the end of life has made me think about unpleasant things. I feel strongly that, in the event of losing my dignity or being faced with the prospect of a painful or protracted death, I should have the right to choose to curtail my own, and my family's, suffering." 
In the programme, MacDonald travelled around Scotland and met with fellow sufferers and investigated the pros and cons of assisted dying, later stating that  "Online, euthanasia campaigners show viewers how to make an 'exit hood' to end your life, and I know people with terminal illnesses now make the awful trip to Mexico to buy lethal doses of drugs to take their own lives, all because of our current laws. I am in no doubt that our legal system must change." 







Obituaries


