[[Hong Kong University of Science and Technology]]

CATEGORIES: Science and technology in Hong Kong, Technical universities and colleges, Tai Po Tsai, Sai Kung District, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Educational institutions established in 1991

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST) is a public research university in Hong Kong. 
It currently consists of five Schools, namely Business & Management, Sciences, Engineering, Humanities & Social Science, and the Fok Ying Tung Graduate School.
[/ref]

History

Established in 1991 under Chapter 1141 of the Laws of Hong Kong (The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology Ordinance), HKUST is one of the nine universities in Hong Kong.
In the late 1980s the Hong Kong Government anticipated a strong demand for university graduates to fuel an economy increasingly based on services.  Sir Chung Sze Yuen and the then Governor of Hong Kong, Sir Edward Youde, conceived the idea of another university in addition to the pre-existing two universities (HKU and CUHK).
Planning for the Third University, named The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology later, began in 1986.  Construction began at the Kohima Camp site in Tai Po Tsai on the Clear Water Bay Peninsula. The site was earmarked for the construction of a new British Army garrison, but plans for the construction of the garrison were shelved after the Sino-British Joint Declaration was signed in 1984.
Originally scheduled to finish in 1994,The Hong Kong University of Science & Technology the death of Sir Edward in 1986 led to increased effort and allowed UST to open its doors early — in 1991. Several leading scientists and researchers took up positions at the new university in its early years, including physicist Leroy Chang who arrived in 1993 as Dean of Science and went on to become Vice-President for Academic Affairs.
The project was criticized for surpassing the budget set forth by the Hong Kong Government and Royal Hong Kong Jockey Club.  However, under the fund-raising efforts of its vice-chancellor, Woo Chia-wei, the first students enrolled in October 1991.  By 1992, accommodation and athletic facilities were expanded to support about 7,000 students.
Several more expansion projects such as the construction of The Hong Kong Jockey Club Enterprise Center have since been completed. The library extension building, Lee Shau Kee Business Building (LSK), South Bus Station and Undergraduate Halls VIII and IX are the latest additions to the campus.

Campus

The university is situated at the northern part of Clear Water Bay Peninsula in Sai Kung District, New Territories, Hong Kong, occupying a site overlooking Port Shelter in Tai Po Tsai. The campus occupies a 58-hectare site which is divided into a several sections: the Academic Building, S.H. Ho Sports Hall, student halls, outdoor sports facilities, the University Centre, apartments, staff quarters and the President's Lodge.  Constructed along the slope of the surrounding hills, Port Shelter is visible from virtually every building on campus.  Arranged in cascades, the buildings are connected by walkways and balconies that offer a spectacular view of the South China Sea.

The Academic Building

The Academic Building contains 10 lecture theaters (A-H, J-K) as well as a multitude of classrooms, laboratories and administrative offices. The lecture theaters can accommodate classes of up to 450 students and offer audiovisual equipment.
Lee Shau Kee Business Building (LSK), completed in 2013 and named after entrepreneur Lee Shau Kee, houses offices and classrooms of the School of Business and Management (SBM). Before LSK went into operation, offices and classrooms used by all of the 4 schools were grouped under the same roof in the Academic Building.

The University Library

The HKUST Library, part of the Hong Kong Academic Library Link (HKALL), occupies a central location of the campus.  Connected to the Academic Building, it is accessible directly from the Hong Kong Jockey Club Atrium.  It spans five floors with over 12,350 sq mIntroduction to the HKUST Lee Shau Kee Library of floor space, providing 3,100 seats as well as computing facilities.  It offers a wide array of information resources, both local and remote.  In addition to over 700,000 print volumes and a large collection of media resources, it provides access to more than 34,000 periodical titles, a large number of e-books, databases, and other digital information resources.
The library owns a collection of old maps of China and the rest of Asia, produced by Chinese and Western cartographers over the last 500 years.
Unlike other university libraries in Hong Kong where access is limited to persons affiliated to the institutions, HKUST Library is open to the public except during examinations.

Health services

Located on LG1, next to the Sports Hall entrance, the Health Center consists of a medical clinic, a student dental clinic as well as a staff dental clinic.  The medical clinic provides free outpatient service to all full-time students and staff.  Specialist services in Allergy, Dermatology, ENT, Internal Medicine, Obstetrics & Gynaecology, Ophthalmology, Pulmonology, Surgery and Physiotherapy are available subject to a charge.

Safety and Environment

It is important that a research university be in compliance with relevant safety and environmentally friendly manner to conduct all its teaching, research and other operations.  Heads of all campus units have the responsibility to implement the University safety policy and to ensure a safe and environmentally healthy workplace.  All members of the campus community must follow safety and environmental procedures and watch out for the safety and health of one another.  The Health, Safety and Environment Office (HSEO) was established to develop and help implement safety and environmental policies and procedures, and to provide necessary services to facilitate the realization of this commitment.  The Office also provides leadership in the promotion of safety and environmental protection culture and awareness.

Reputation and rankings

In 2013/14, the QS World University Rankings placed it at 34th in the world and 4th in Asia, being the second in Hong Kong. It has been ranked Asia's number one by the independent regional QS Asian University Rankings for the third straight year since 2011.
Meanwhile, the Times Higher Education World University Rankings (2013–14) put it at 57th in the world and 9th in Asia when its World Reputation Rankings considered it among 61st-70th,
Further, it was at a position among 201st-300th globally and 2nd-3rd in Hong Kong in the ARWU of 2013.
Apart from the overall rankings, the institutions above also provide university rankings by disciplines. See list of subject rankings of Hong Kong tertiary institutions for some major subject rankings.
Besides, it was ranked the third in the HKU Public Opinion Programme (2012).
Moreover, HKUST is particularly famous for its education in business field. Specific rankings on such field of tertiary education include the Financial Times EMBA rankings which have been topped by its Kellogg-HKUST Executive MBA (EMBA) program for fifth consecutive years (2009—2013),

Academic Organizations

The overall academic organization structure is as follows:

School of Science

A broad spectrum of programs in the biological science, physics, chemistry and mathematics are available for undergraduates  
The School of Science emphasizes the whole-person development and international exposure of students. Its undergraduate exchange program provides science students with as many international learning opportunities as it can throughout their studies. The School has teamed up with over 60 exchange partners from regions including Australia, United Kingdom, United States, Mainland China, and Japan.

School of Engineering

Computer science, industrial engineering, logistics management, mechanical engineering, civil and environmental engineering, electronic and computer engineering, and Hong Kong's only chemical engineering department are all undertaken at HKUST.
Notable facilities include the world's first Geotechnical Centrifuge Facility equipped with biaxial shaking table and a Huawei-HKUST Innovative Laboratory established to explore telecom networks, wireless technologies and other relevant emerging technologies. The School is also home to the Ministry of Education/Microsoft Research Asia Information Technology Key Laboratory, a model for collaboration between university, industry, and government. Another exciting advance is the Center for Engineering Education Innovation (E²I), now helping to propel the School to the forefront of engineering education and student development.
The School of Engineering has student exchange programs with over 90 reputable overseas and Mainland China universities, including Cornell University, Georgia Institute of Technology, ETH Zurich, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Purdue University, University of Pennsylvania, University College London, University of Bristol, Technical University of Munich, University of California, etc. The School also offers summer study programs as an alternative to the exchange programs in regular semesters. The study programs enable the students to be exposed to a foreign culture while studying in a new learning environment.

School of Business and Management

HKUST's School of Business and Management (SBM), branded HKUST Business School, is consistently ranked among the best in the world. It was the first business school in Asia to be awarded accreditation by both the US-based Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB International) and European Quality Improvement System (EQUIS). is set to enable the School to develop further, offering state-of-the-art facilities and a cohesive environment from which to generate the business pioneers of the future.
The School of Business and Management has one of the largest undergraduate exchange programs in Asia, with more than 110 partner schools worldwide.   Its partners consist of universities in Asia, New Zealand, Australia, Europe, North America and South America.  Every year close to 400 undergraduates, over half of the School's BBA/BSc student population, spend a semester at business schools overseas. Some students can be selected for two semester exchanges at different universities in two continents.

School of Humanities and Social Science

The School of Humanities and Social Science supports interdisciplinary academic training and research in fields including anthropology, economics, geography, history, innovation studies, languages, linguistics, literature, music, philosophy, political science, psychology, sociology, and visual art. Its geographic focus on China, including Hong Kong, and its disciplinary emphases on the comparative, the interdisciplinary, and the quantitative are reflected in its graduate training programs as well as by its new undergraduate major on Global China Studies.

Research Studies

=HKUST Fok Ying Tung Graduate School=

On 25 January 2007, the HKUST officially named its graduate school in Nansha as HKUST Fok Ying Tung Graduate School in a ceremony that combined the official opening of the graduate school and the ground-breaking of its Nansha campus.

=HKUST Jockey Club Institute for Advanced Study=

HKUST Jockey Club Institute for Advanced Study (IAS)  at HKUST champions collaborative projects across disciplines and institutions.  It forges relationships with academic, business, community, and government leaders.  The IAS organised its inaugural lecture by noted scientist Prof. Stephen Hawking in June 2006.

=Research Institutes and Centers=

Student life

Students' residence

All full-time registered UG students, in-time full-time HKUST research postgraduate students (RPgs) and full-time HKUST taught postgraduate students (TPgs) of the University are eligible to apply for student housing.  International as well as exchange students are generally guaranteed on-campus housing.  The on-campus residential halls provide a total of 2,976 places in double or triple rooms for UG students and 356 places in single or double rooms for UG students.  There will be 701 places scheduled to be completed by Spring 2013.  120 places in single rooms for Taught Postgraduate Students (TPgs) and Visiting Interns.  854 places in single or double rooms for Research Postgraduate Students (RPgs).  Two more undergraduate halls, namely UG Hall VIII and UG Hall IX, were completed in early 2013, providing another 700 hall places.
There are also off-campus accommodations available.  20 apartments in Tai Po Tsai Village (Royal Garden and Wan's Lodge) and 6 apartments in Sam Long Village (SL Apartments) are rented by the University to accommodate 156 TPgs.  In 2012/2013, 232 bed spaces in Hong Kong Adventist College (HKAC) are arranged for UGs.  Housing fees are relatively low as compared to off-campus accommodation, and there are several halls.
On 27 April 2012, research postgraduate students organized a sit-down strike to raise the voice of the voiceless and reiterate the concerns of the RPg

Students' Union

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology Students' Union (HKUSTSU) consists of four independent statutory bodies, namely the Executive Committee, the Council, the Editorial Board and the Court.  Apart of the "sponsored student groups" sponsored by the university's Student Affairs Office (SAO), all student societies recognized by the university authority are affiliated under the Students' Union.

=Executive Committee=

The Executive Committee (幹事會) is the executive branch of the SU. It consists of standing committees to take care of issues regarding the Union and its members such as Academic Affairs, External and Current Affairs, International Affairs, Public Relations, Publication, Social Activities, Orientation Affairs, University Affairs, and Welfare Matters.

=Council=

The Council (評議會) acts as the legislature branch, which is responsible for legislation and regulation of finance and operations of Union.  Its duties include:
To practice the above duties, the Council has four standing committees: Affiliated Societies Committee, Constitution Committee, Election Committee and Finance Committee.

=Editorial Board=

The Editorial Board (編輯委員會) is responsible for maintaining WINGS (振翅) and WINGS, High Fly Post (振翅之高飛報), the official publications of Union, as well as promoting literary development on campus.  Its main functions are:

=Court=

The Court (仲裁委員會) is the judiciary body of HKUSTSU.  Its main duties are:

=Affiliated societies=

The application of Students' Societies in HKUST are approved by the Students' Union Council.  They are the affiliated societies of the Students' Union.  There are five types of affiliated societies of Students' Union in HKUST:

==Independent Clubs Association and Independent Clubs==

Independent Clubs Association and Independent Clubs are the interest club for the students, such as the Yo-hoo Club, AIESEC-LC-HKUST, The Band Society, the Film Society, the Drama Society, the Magic Club and People's Campus Radio.  There are around 48 independent clubs.

==Sports Association and Sports Clubs==

Sports Association and Sports Clubs are the students' societies that promote sports activities to students.

==House Students' Association==

House Students' Association (House SA) is the students' society of the undergraduate student hall.  Each undergraduate student hall would have its own House which is responsible to organize extra-circular activities for the House Association's members. 
House SAs are formed in the five older undergraduate halls (UG Hall I-IV, PG Hall II). The newer UG Halls VI-IX do not have their own House SA, and the Living Learning Communities (LLCs) system is implemented in Halls VI and VII to connect hall residents; activities in Halls VIII and IX are organized by an Organizing Team, members of which are elected by the whole resident community. Neither LLCs and organizing teams are affiliated with the SU.

==School Societies==

Students from each of the four schools as well as those pursuing Interdisciplinary Programs have their own students' society, namely The Business Students' Union, HKUSTSU (BSU), The Engineering Students' Union (ESU), The Humanities and Social Science Students' Union (HSSU), Science Students' Union (SSU) and Interdisciplinary Programs Students' Union (IPSU).
The school unions would be responsible to serve all students in the school and organize extra-circular activities for them.

==Departmental Societies==

Each department in HKUST would have its own departmental society,for example, Mechanical Engineering Students' Association (MESA) and Mathematics Students' Society (MATHS).  The departmental societies would organize different activities to their departments' students.
Providing activities to students, departmental societies are also responsible for promoting their corresponding department on information day which is for giving information of the university to high school students. 



Notes






