[[Woolworth Building]]

CATEGORIES: Cass Gilbert buildings, Commercial buildings on the National Register of Historic Places in Manhattan, F. W. Woolworth Company buildings and structures, Fordham University, Former world's tallest buildings, Gothic Revival architecture in New York, Gothic Revival skyscrapers, National Historic Landmarks in New York City, Office buildings in Manhattan, Retail company headquarters in the United States, Skyscrapers between 200 and 249 meters, Skyscrapers in Manhattan, Terracotta, 1913 establishments in New York, Office buildings completed in 1913, Lower Manhattan, World Digital Library related

The Woolworth Building, at 233 Broadway, Manhattan, New York City, designed by architect Cass Gilbert and completed in 1913, is an early US skyscraper. The original site for the building was purchased by F. W. Woolworth and his real estate agent Edward J. Hogan by April 15, 1910, from the Trenor Luther Park Estate and other owners for $1.65 million.  By January 18, 1911, Woolworth and Hogan had acquired the final site for the project, totaling $4.5 million.  More than a century after the start of its construction, it remains, at , p. 25.

Architecture

The Woolworth Building was designed in the neo-Gothic style by the architect Cass Gilbert, who Frank Woolworth commissioned in 1910 to design a 20-story office building  as the F. W. Woolworth Company's new corporate headquarters on Broadway, between Park Place and Barclay Street in Lower Manhattan, opposite City Hall. Originally designed to be .  With Irving National Exchange Bank Woolworth set up the Broadway-Park Place Company to finance the building, but by May 1914, had purchased all of the shares from the bank, thus owning the building outright.  On completion, the Woolworth building topped the record set by the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company Tower as the world's tallest building.
The building opened on April 24, 1913. President Woodrow Wilson turned the lights on by way of a button in Washington, D.C. that evening.
Given its resemblance to European Gothic cathedrals, the structure was called "The Cathedral of Commerce" by the Reverend S. Parkes Cadman in a booklet of the same title published in 1916.  It remained the tallest building in the world until the construction of 40 Wall Street and the Chrysler Building, also in New York City, in 1930; an observation deck on the 57th floor attracted visitors until 1941.
The building's tower, flush with the main frontage on Broadway, joins an office block base with a narrow interior court for light. The exterior decoration was cast in limestone-colored, glazed architectural terra-cotta panels. Strongly articulated piers, carried—without interrupting cornices—right to the pyramidal cap, give the building its upward thrust. The Gothic detailing concentrated at the highly visible crown is over scaled, able to be read from the street level several hundred feet below.
Engineers Gunvald Aus and Kort Berle designed the steel frame, supported on massive caissons that penetrate to the bedrock. The high-speed elevators were innovative, and the building's high office-to-elevator ratio made the structure profitable.
The ornate, cruciform lobby, is "one of the most spectacular of the early 20th century in New York City". It is covered in Skyros veined marble, has a vaulted ceiling, mosaics, a stained-glass ceiling light and bronze fittings. Over the balconies of the mezzanine are the murals Labor and Commerce.  Corbel sculptures include Gilbert with a model of the building, Aus taking a girder's measurements, and Woolworth counting nickels.  Woolworth's private office, revetted in marble in the French Empire style, has been preserved.
The building's facade was restored between 1977 and 1981 by the Ehrenkrantz Group,, p. 67. during which much of the terra-cotta was replaced with cast stone and Gothic ornament was removed.

Tenants

At the building's completion, the F. W. Woolworth Company occupied only one and a half floors of the building, but, as the owner, profited from renting space out to others, including the Irving National Exchange Bank and Columbia Records. Columbia Records had moved into the building in 1913 and housed a recording studio in it. Cf. p. 212, article on "Columbia (Label)". In 1917, Columbia made a recording of a dixieland band, the Original Dixieland Jass Band in this studio. ISBN 0-8118-3394-1. Cf. chapter on Columbia Studios."The Woolworth Building", NYC Architecture

Recent history

The building was owned by the Woolworth company for 85 years until 1998, when the Venator Group (formerly the F. W. Woolworth Company) sold it to the Witkoff Group for $155 million.com - The Times Herald-Record, serving New York's Hudson Valley and the Catskills Until recently, that company kept a presence in the building through a Foot Locker store (Foot Locker is the successor to the Woolworth Company).
Prior to its 2001 destruction, the World Trade Center was often photographed in such a way that the Woolworth Building could be seen between 1 and 2 World Trade Center.
The structure has a long association with higher education, housing a number of Fordham University schools in the early 20th century. Today, the building houses, among other tenants, TTA Inc., Control Group Inc. and the New York University School of Continuing and Professional Studies' Center for Global Affairs.
In August 2012, The New York Times reported that an investment group led by Alchemy Properties, a New York developer, bought the top 30 floors of the landmark on July 31 for $68 million from the Witkoff Group and Cammeby's International. The firm plans to renovate the space into luxury apartments and convert the penthouse into a five-level living space. The lower 28 floors are still owned by the Witkoff Group and Cammeby International, who plan to lease them as office space.
The project will cost approximately $150 million, according to the article, including its $68 million purchase price. Although apartment prices have not been set, they may sell for as much as $3,000 a square foot, said Howard Lorber, chairman of the brokerage firm Prudential Douglas Elliman. That could mean $7.5 million for a 2,500-square-foot unit.

In popular culture





Notes
Bibliography




