[[Banknotes of the pound sterling]]

CATEGORIES: Banknotes of British Overseas Territories, Currencies of British Overseas Territories, Currencies of the British Crown Dependencies, Currencies of the United Kingdom, Currencies with multiple banknote issuers, Pound sterling

Sterling banknotes are the banknotes in circulation in the British Islands (encompassing the United Kingdom and the British Crown dependencies), denominated in pounds sterling (symbol: £; ISO 4217 currency code GBP). One pound is equivalent to 100 pence.
The pound is the official currency of the United Kingdom and the Crown dependencies of Britain. Three British Overseas Territories also have currencies called pounds which are at par with the pound sterling.
In most countries of the world the issue of banknotes is handled exclusively by a single central bank or government, but in the United Kingdom seven retail banks have the right to print their own banknotes in addition to the Bank of England; sterling banknote issue is thus not automatically tied in with one national identity or the activity of the state. The arrangements in the UK are unusual, but comparable systems are used in Hong Kong and Macao, where three and two banks respectively issue their own banknotes in addition to their respective governments.
The Bank of England does act as a central bank in that it has a monopoly on issuing banknotes in England and Wales, and regulates the issues of banks in Scotland and Northern Ireland.  Pounds issued by Crown Dependencies and other areas are regulated only by local governments and not the Bank of England.

History

Until the middle of the 19th century, privately owned banks in Great Britain and Ireland were free to issue their own banknotes. Paper currency issued by a wide range of provincial and town banking companies in England, circulated freely as a means of payment.
As gold shortages affected the supply of money, note-issuing powers of the banks were gradually restricted by various Acts of Parliament, until the Bank Charter Act 1844 gave exclusive note-issuing powers to the central Bank of England. Under the Act, no new banks could start issuing notes and note-issuing banks gradually vanished through mergers and closures. The last private English banknotes were issued in 1921 by Fox, Fowler and Company, a Somerset bank.
However, some of the monopoly provisions of the Bank Charter Act only applied to England and Wales.
The Bank Notes (Scotland) Act was passed the following year, and to this day, three retail banks retain the right to issue their own sterling banknotes in Scotland, and four in Northern Ireland.
Notes issued in excess of the value of notes outstanding in 1844 (1845 in Scotland) must be backed up by an equivalent value of Bank of England notes.
Following the partition of Ireland, the Irish Free State created an Irish pound in 1928; the new currency  was pegged to sterling until 1979.  The issue of banknotes for the Irish pound fell under the authority of the Currency Commission of Ireland, who set about replacing the private banknotes with a single Consolidated Banknote Issue in 1928. In 1928 a Westminster act of parliament reduced the fiduciary limit for Irish banknotes circulating in Northern Ireland to take account of the reduced size of the territory concerned.

Key dates

The following events and Acts of Parliament affected the course of banknote history in Great Britain and Ireland:

Everyday use and acceptance

The wide variety of sterling notes in circulation means that acceptance of different pound sterling banknotes varies. Their acceptance may depend on the experience and understanding of individual retailers, and it is important to understand the idea of "legal tender", which is often misunderstood (see section below). Misunderstanding that all bills are legitimate and of equal value, and can be accepted by merchants anywhere, has become a tourism headache in some parts of the UK.
In summary, the various banknotes are used as follows:

The question of legal tender

The concept of "legal tender" is a narrow technical definition that refers to the settlement of debt, and it has little practical meaning in everyday transactions such as buying goods in shops (but does apply, for example, to the settling of a restaurant bill, where the food has been eaten prior to demand for payment and so a debt exists). Essentially, any two parties can agree to any item of value as a medium for exchange when making a purchase (in that sense, all money is ultimately an extended form of barter). If a debt exists that is legally enforceable and the debtor party offers to pay with some item that is not "legal tender," the creditor may refuse such payment and declare that the debtor is in default of payment; if the debtor offers payment in legal tender, the creditor is required to accept it or else the creditor is in breach of contract. Thus, if in England party A owes party B 1,000 pounds sterling and offers to pay in Northern Ireland banknotes, party B may refuse and sue party A for nonpayments; if party A provides Bank of England notes, party B must acknowledge the debt as legally paid even if party B would prefer some other form of payment.
Banknotes do not have to be classed as legal tender to be acceptable for trade; millions of retail transactions are carried out each day in the UK using cheques, bitcoin, or debit or credit cards, none of which is a payment using legal tender. Equally, traders may choose to accept payment in foreign currency, such as Euro, Yen or US Dollar. Acceptability as a means of payment is essentially a matter for agreement between the parties involved.
Millions of pounds' worth of sterling banknotes in circulation are not legal tender, but that does not mean that they are illegal or of lesser value; their status is of "legal currency" (that is to say that their issue is approved by the parliament of the UK) and they are backed up by Bank of England securities.
Bank of England notes are the only banknotes that are legal tender in England and Wales. Scottish and Northern Ireland banknotes are not legal tender anywhere, and Jersey, Guernsey and Manx banknotes are only legal tender in their respective jurisdictions. The fact that these banknotes are not legal tender in the UK does not however mean that they are illegal under English law, and creditors and traders may accept them if they so choose. Traders may, on the other hand, choose not to accept banknotes as payment as contract law across the United Kingdom allows parties not to engage in a transaction at the point of payment if they choose not to.
In Scotland and Northern Ireland, no banknotes, not even ones issued in those countries, are legal tender. They have a similar legal standing to cheques or debit cards, in that their acceptability as a means of payment is essentially a matter for agreement between the parties involved, although Scots law requires any reasonable offer for settlement of a debt to be accepted.
Until 1988, the Bank of England issued one pound notes, and these notes did have legal tender status in Scotland and Northern Ireland while they existed. The Currency and Bank Notes Act 1954 defined Bank of England notes of less than £5 in value as legal tender in Scotland.
Most of the notes issued by the note-issuing banks in Scotland and Northern Ireland have to be backed by Bank of England notes held by the issuing bank. The combined size of these banknote issues is well over a billion pounds. To make it possible for the note-issuing banks to hold equivalent values in Bank of England notes, the Bank of England issues special notes with denominations of one million pounds ("Giants") and one hundred million pounds ("Titans") for internal use by the other banks.
Bank notes are no longer redeemable in gold and the Bank of England will only redeem sterling banknotes for more sterling banknotes or coins. The contemporary sterling is a fiat currency which is backed only by securities; in essence IOUs from the Treasury that represent future income from the taxation of the population. Some economists term this "currency by trust", as sterling relies on the faith of the user rather than any physical specie.

Issuing banks and authorities

The following table lays out the various banks or authorities which are authorised to print pound sterling banknotes, organised by territory:

England and Wales

Bank of England notes

In 1921, the Bank of England gained a legal monopoly on the issue of banknotes in England and Wales, a process that started with the Bank Charter Act of 1844 when the ability of other banks to issue notes was restricted.
The bank issued its first banknotes in 1694, although before 1745 they were written for irregular amounts, rather than predefined multiples of a pound. It tended to be times of war, which put inflationary pressure on the British economy, that led to greater note issue.  In 1759, during the Seven Years' War, when the lowest-value note issued by the Bank was £20, a £10 note was issued for the first time. In 1793, during the war with revolutionary France, the Bank issued the first £5 note.  Four years later, £1 and £2 notes appeared, although not on a permanent basis. Notes did not become entirely machine-printed and payable to the bearer until 1855.
At the start of the First World War, the government issued £1 and 10-shilling Treasury notes to supplant the sovereign and half-sovereign gold coins. The first coloured banknotes were issued in 1928, and were also the first notes to be printed on both sides. The Second World War saw a reversal in the trend of warfare creating more notes when, in order to combat forgery, higher denomination notes (at the time as high as £1,000) were removed from circulation.
All Bank of England notes issued since Series C in 1960 depict Queen Elizabeth II on the obverse side, in full view facing left; her image also appears as a hidden watermark, facing right; recent issues have the EURion constellation around.
The custom of depicting historical figures on the reverse began with William Shakespeare on the Series D £20 note in 1970. Since then, many other figures have featured on successive issues.

=Current issue=

As of May 2014 the Bank of England banknotes in circulation are from two distinct series, with the two smaller denominations coming from the revised Series E (5 pound first issued in 2002, 10 pound first issued in 2000). The two larger denominations are from Series F (20 pound first issued in 2007, 50 pound first issued in 2011).
The notes currently in circulation are as follows:

=Series F=

The launch of the new Series F banknotes was announced on 29 October 2006 by the Governor of the Bank of England. The first of these new notes, a £20 note, drew some commentary because it features the Scottish economist, Adam Smith, the first Scot to appear on an English note. Smith also features on £50 notes issued by the Clydesdale Bank. Previous issues of Bank of England £20 notes were known to have suffered from a higher incidence of counterfeiting (276,000 out of 290,000 cases detected in 2007) than any other denominations. Retrieved 16 June 2008. The note, which also includes enhanced security features entered circulation on 13 March 2007.
The next new Series F banknote, the £50 note, entered circulation on 2 November 2011. It is the first Bank of England banknote to feature two Britons on the reverse – James Watt and Matthew Boulton.
All the Series F £20 notes are signed by the Chief Cashier, Andrew Bailey and the Series F £50 notes are signed by Chris Salmon.
In April 2013, the Bank of England announced that its next planned new note issue, intended to be the £5 note from 2016, will feature the former British Prime Minister Winston Churchill.

=Polymer notes=

In September 2013 the Bank of England opened a period of public consultation about the introduction of polymer or plastic banknotes, which would be introduced into circulation from 2016 if the proposals were supported.Understanding polymer notes Bank of EnglandPlastic banknotes ready for 2016, says Bank of England BBC NewsBank Of England Could Introduce Polymer Banknotes, Replacing Paper Huffington Post
In December 2013, the Bank confirmed the introduction of plastic or polymer notes would commence in 2016.Plastic banknotes: the implications for security, dealers and magicians Guardian

=Previous issues=

The Bank of England Series D one pound note was discontinued in 1984, having been replaced by a pound coin the year before, and was officially withdrawn from circulation in 1988. Nonetheless, all banknotes, regardless of when they were withdrawn from circulation may be presented at the Bank of England where they will be exchanged for current banknotes. Other banks may also decide to exchange old banknotes, but they are under no obligation to do so.

=High-value notes=

Higher-value notes are used within the banks – particularly the £1 million and £100 million notes used to maintain parity with Scottish and Northern Irish notes. Banknotes issued by Scottish and Northern Irish banks have to be backed pound for pound by Bank of England notes (other than a small amount representing the currency in circulation in 1845), and special million pound notes are used for this purpose. These resemble simple IOUs and bear no aesthetic design features.

=Wales=

There are no Welsh banknotes in circulation; Bank of England notes are used throughout Wales. The last Welsh banknotes were withdrawn in 1908 upon the closure of the last Welsh bank, the North and South Wales Bank. An attempt was made in 1969 by a Welsh banker to revive Welsh banknotes, but the venture was short-lived and the notes did not enter general circulation, surviving today only as a collectors' curiosity.com.au. Retrieved on 2014-03-07

Scotland and Northern Ireland

While provincial banks in England and Wales lost the right to issue paper currency altogether, the practice of private banknote issue has continued in Scotland and Northern Ireland. The right of Scottish banks to issue notes is popularly attributed to the author Sir Walter Scott, who in 1826 waged a campaign to retain Scottish banknotes under the pseudonym Malachi Malagrowther. Scott feared that the limitation on private banknotes proposed with the Bankers (Scotland) Act 1826 would be have adverse economic consequences if enacted in Scotland because gold and silver were scarce and Scottish commerce relied on small notes as the principal medium of circulating money. His action eventually halted the abolition of private banknotes in Scotland.
Scottish and Northern Irish banknotes are unusual, firstly because they are issued by retail banks, not central banks, and secondly, as they are  not legal tender anywhere in the UK – not even in Scotland or Northern Ireland – they are in fact promissory notes.
Seven retail banks have the authority of HM Treasury to issue sterling banknotes as currency.
In 2000, the European Central Bank indicated that, should the United Kingdom join the euro, Scottish banks (and, by extension, Northern Ireland banks) would have to cease banknote issue. During the Financial crisis of 2007–2008, the future of private banknotes in the United Kingdom was uncertain. 
After the financial crisis of 2007–08, a number of banks were rescued from collapse by the United Kingdom government. The Banking Act 2009 was passed to improve protection for holders of banknotes issued by the authorised banks, so that the notes would have the same level of guaranteed value to that of Bank of England notes.
During the public debate leading up to the 2014 Scottish independence referendum, the question of Scotland's future currency was discussed. While the SNP have advocated a currency union between an independent Scotland and the remnant of the United Kingdom,

Scotland

The issuing of retail-bank banknotes in Scotland is subject to the Bank Charter Act 1844, Banknotes (Scotland) Act 1845, the Currency and Bank Notes Act 1928, and the Coinage Act 1971. Pursuant to some of these statutes, the Commissioners for Revenue and Customs publishes an account of "the Amount of Notes authorised by Law to be issued by the several Banks of Issue in Scotland, and the Average Amount of Notes in Circulation, and of Bank of England Notes and Coin held" in the London Gazette. See for example Gazette Issue 58254 published 21 February 2007 at page 2544.

=Bank of Scotland notes=

The most recent issue of Bank of Scotland notes is the Bridges of Scotland series which was introduced on 17 September 2007. Notes of this series depict famous Scottish bridges on the reverse side. As of late 2007, the Tercentenary Series, introduced at the time of the Bank of Scotland's 300th anniversary in 1995, remains in circulation, but will be withdrawn as their physical condition deteriorates and will be replaced by the new Bridges series.
All Bank of Scotland notes bear a portrait of Sir Walter Scott on the front in commemoration of his 1826 Malachi Malagrowther campaign for  Scottish banks to retain the right to issue their own notes.
Following the announcement that HBOS (Bank of Scotland's parent company) would be taken over by Lloyds TSB in September 2008, it was confirmed that the new banking company would continue to print bank notes under the Bank of Scotland name.

=Royal Bank of Scotland notes=

The current series of Royal Bank of Scotland notes was originally issued in 1987. On the front of each note is a picture of Lord Ilay (1682–1761), the first governor of the bank, based on a portrait painted in 1744 by the Edinburgh artist Allan Ramsay.
On the back of the notes are images of Scottish castles, with a different castle for each denomination:
Occasionally the Royal Bank of Scotland issues commemorative banknotes. Examples include the £1 note issued to mark the 150th Anniversary of the birth of Alexander Graham Bell in 1997, the £20 note for the 100th birthday of Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother in 2000, the £5 note honouring veteran golfer Jack Nicklaus in his last competitive Open Championship at St Andrews in 2005. and the £10 note issued in commemoration of HM Queen Elizabeth II's Diamond Jubilee in 2012.  These notes are much sought-after by collectors and they rarely remain long in circulation.

=Clydesdale Bank notes=

Clydesdale Bank has two series of banknotes in circulation at present. Banknotes of the Famous Scots Series portray notable Scottish historical people along with items and locations associated with them.
The new World Heritage Series of banknotes was introduced in autumn 2009. The new notes each depict a different notable Scot on the front and on the reverse bear an illustration of one of Scotland's UNESCO World Heritage Sites. The new series will eventually replace the Famous Scots Series when old notes are gradually removed from circulation.
The Clydesdale Bank also occasionally issues special edition banknotes, such as a 10 pound note celebrating the bank's sponsorship of the Scotland team at the 2006 Commonwealth Games.

Northern Ireland

In Northern Ireland, four retail banks exercise their right to issue pound sterling notes: Bank of Ireland, First Trust Bank, Danske Bank (formerly Northern Bank) and Ulster Bank. Northern Bank and Ulster Bank are the only two banks that have issued special commemorative notes so far.

=Bank of Ireland notes=

Like other Northern Ireland banks, Bank of Ireland retains its note-issuing rights from before the partition of Ireland; while Bank of Ireland is headquartered in Dublin, it issues sterling notes within the United Kingdom. In spite of its name, Bank of Ireland is not, and never has been, a central bank; it is a retail  bank. Its sterling notes should not be confused with banknotes of the former Irish pound which were in use in the Republic of Ireland before the adoption of the Euro in 1999.
Banknotes issued by Bank of Ireland are of a uniform design, with denominations of £5, £10 £20, £50 and £100 each differentiated by colour. The notes all feature an illustration of a seated woman, Hibernia, and the heraldic shields of the Six Counties of Northern Ireland.

=First Trust Bank=

First Trust Bank issues notes in denominations of £10, £20, £50 and £100. The notes bear portraits of generic Northern Irish people on the front with varied illustrations on the reverse. Until 1993 the bank issued notes under its former trading name, Allied Irish Banks.

=Danske Bank=

In 2012 Northern Bank adopted the name of its Copenhagen-based parent company Danske Bank Group and rebranded its retail banking operation. In spite of the Danish name on the new notes, banknotes issued by Danske Bank are sterling notes and should not be confused with banknotes of the Danish Krone issued by the Danish National Bank.
Danske Bank does not issue £5 notes, but a special commemorative £5 note was issued by the Northern Bank to mark the Year 2000; uniquely among sterling notes, it was a polymer banknote, printed on synthetic polymer instead of paper. It is the only one of the bank's pre-2004 notes still in circulation; all others were recalled following the £26.5 million pound robbery at its Belfast headquarters in 2004.

=Ulster Bank=

Ulster Bank notes all feature a vignette of three Northern Ireland views: the Mourne Mountains, the Queen Elizabeth Bridge and the Giant's Causeway. Notes issued from 1 January 2007 feature the Royal Bank of Scotland Group logo.
In November 2006 Ulster Bank issued its first commemorative banknote – an issue of one million £5 notes commemorating the first anniversary of the death of Northern Irish footballer, George Best.

Channel Islands

The Channel Islands are grouped for administrative purposes into the Bailiwicks of Jersey and Guernsey. The islands are not part of the United Kingdom but are dependencies of the British Crown and in currency union with the UK. Both Jersey and Guernsey issue their own banknotes. These notes circulate freely between the two territories, so Jersey notes are commonly used in Guernsey, and vice versa. Private banknotes are no longer in circulation in the Channel Islands. These pounds are sterling pounds but the word "sterling" is omitted as with the English notes. These notes are legal tender in their jurisdictions but are not legal tender in the UK.The Question of Legal Tender
The Government of Alderney (a part of the Bailiwick of Guernsey) is also licensed to issue its own currency, the Alderney pound, but only mints special commemorative sterling coins and does not issue banknotes.

Jersey Pound

The current series of notes entered circulation on 29 April 2010. On June 1, 2012, a £100 note was issued to commemorate the Diamond Jubilee of Queen Elizabeth II.com, Retrieved 2011-08-15.
The previous series, gradually being withdrawn from circulation in 2010, depict Queen Elizabeth II on the front and various landmarks of Jersey or incidents in Jersey history on the reverse.

States of Guernsey notes

The Guernsey Pound is legal tender in Guernsey, but also circulates freely in Jersey. These pounds are sterling pounds but the word "sterling" is omitted on banknotes such as the English ones. It is also accepted elsewhere in the UK. These notes can also be exchanged in banks and in bureaux de change although it has been reported that British banks no longer accept one pound Guernsey banknotes because they no longer have the facility for handling one pound (UK) banknotes. In addition to coins, the following banknotes are used:

Isle of Man

The Isle of Man Government issues its own banknotes and coinage, which are legal tender on the Isle of Man. Manx pounds are a local issue of the pound sterling. These pounds are sterling but the word "sterling" is omitted on banknotes. Manx pounds can be used in shops throughout the UK. These notes can be exchanged in banks and in bureaux de change.
The front of all Manx banknotes feature images of Queen Elizabeth II (not wearing a crown : she is only "Lord" on the island) and the Triskeles (three legs emblem). Each denomination features a different scene of the Island on its reverse side:

British overseas territories

Three British overseas territories use their own separate currencies called pounds which are at par with the pound sterling. The governments of these territories print their own banknotes which in general may only be used within their territory of origin. Bank of England notes usually circulate alongside the local note issues and are accepted as legal currency.

Gibraltar

In Gibraltar, banknotes are issued by the Government of Gibraltar. The pound was made sole legal tender in 1898 and Gibraltar has issued its own banknotes since 1934. The notes bear an image of the British monarch on the obverse and the wording "pounds sterling", meaning that more retailers in the UK will accept them.

Falkland Islands

The Falkland Islands pound is the currency of the Falkland Islands. Banknotes are issued by the Falkland Islands Government. The illustrations on all notes are the same, featuring the British monarch, wildlife and local scenes; denominations are distinguished by the size and colour of the notes.

Saint Helena

The territory of Saint Helena, which includes the dependencies of Ascension Island and Tristan da Cunha, uses the Saint Helena pound. Banknotes in these areas are issued by the Saint Helena Government and bear the image of the British monarch.

Counterfeiting

According to the central banks, the ratio of counterfeited bank notes is about 10 in one million of real bank notes for the Swiss franc, of 50 in one million for the Euro, of 100 in one million for United States dollar and of 300 in one million for Pound sterling. Michel Beuret, "Les mystères de la fausse monnaie", Allez savoir !, no. 50, May 2011.

The monarch on banknotes

Elizabeth II was not the first British monarch to have her face on UK banknotes. George II, George III and George IV appeared on early Royal Bank of Scotland notes and George V appeared on 10 shilling and 1 pound notes issued by the British Treasury between 1914 and 1928. However, prior to the issue of its Series C banknotes in 1960, Bank of England banknotes generally did not depict the monarch. Today, notes issued by Scottish and Northern Irish banks do not depict the monarch.
The monarch is depicted on banknotes issued by the Crown dependencies and on some of those issued by overseas territories.



Commonwealth

States within the Commonwealth of Nations issue their own banknotes which are separate currencies:






