[[Lowest temperature recorded on Earth]]

CATEGORIES: Extreme points of Earth, Weather extremes of Earth, Climatology

The lowest natural temperature ever directly recorded at ground level on Earth is , also in Antarctica, on August 10, 2010; however, this has not been confirmed by ground measurements. Both readings are lower than the sublimation point of carbon dioxide (dry ice). 
Lower temperatures have been achieved in laboratories, including a record low temperature of 100 pK, or 1.0 × 10−10 K in 1999.

Historical progression

The first lowest temperature on Earth was reported on January 21, 1838 by the Russian merchant Neverov in Yakutsk, at  was noted in Verkhoyansk.
The next reliable measurement was made during the 1957 season at the Amundsen–Scott South Pole Station in Antarctica, yielding  This remains the record for a directly recorded temperature.
A 2009 study estimated that under exceptional climate conditions similar to those recorded at Vostok in 1983, temperatures higher on the plateau around Dome Argus could potentially drop as low as 
The value may not be listed as the record coldest temperature as it was measured by remote sensing satellites and not by ground-based thermometers, unlike the 1983 record. The temperature announced reflects that of the ice surface, while the Vostok readings measured the air above the ice, and so the two are not directly comparable; however, it is clear that the real temperature at the site is lower than that recorded at Vostok in 1983.

Laboratory cooling

Early

In 1904 Dutch scientist Heike Kamerlingh Onnes created a special lab in Leiden with the aim of producing liquid helium. In 1908 he managed to lower the temperature to less than four degrees above absolute zero, to less than −269 °C (4 Kelvin). Only in this exceptionally cold state will helium liquefy, the boiling point of helium being at −268.94 °C. Kamerlingh Onnes received a Nobel Prize for his achievement.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/1913/
Onnes' method relied upon depressurising the subject gases, causing them to cool. This follows from the first law of thermodynamics;
where U = internal energy, Q = heat added to the system, W = work done by the system.
Consider a gas in a box of set volume. If the pressure in the box is higher than atmospheric pressure, then upon opening the box our gas will do work on the surrounding atmosphere to expand. As this expansion is adiabatic and the gas has done work
Now as the internal energy has decreased so has the temperature.

Modern

As of November 2000, nuclear spin temperatures below 100 pK were reported for an experiment at the Aalto University's Low Temperature Lab.  However, this was the temperature of one particular type of motion—a quantum property called nuclear spin—not the overall average thermodynamic temperature for all possible degrees of freedom. Knuuttila's D.Sc. thesis which can be accessed from Aaltodoc. The university's press release on its achievement is here At such low temperatures, the concept of "temperature" becomes multifaceted since molecular motion cannot be assumed to average out across degrees of freedom.
The current apparatus for achieving low temperatures has two stages. The first utilizes a helium dilution refrigerator to get to temperatures of millikelvins, then the next stage uses adiabatic nuclear demagnetisation to reach picokelvins.






