[[Karađorđević dynasty]]

CATEGORIES: Karađorđević dynasty, Serbian royal families, European royal families, History of modern Serbia

The House of Karađorđević  is a Serbian and European Dynastic Family, founded by Karađorđe Petrović, the Veliki Vožd ("Grand Leader") of Serbia in the early 1800s during the First Serbian Uprising.  The Dynasty name Karađorđević is derived from the name of the founder, Đorđe "Karađorđe" Petrović (Karadjorde = "Black George" and Petrovic = "Peter's Son"), and is typically spelled "Karadjordjevic" while pronunciation is roughly anglicized as "Karageorgevitch." and was in previous times rendered also as Kara-Georgevitch.
The relatively short-lived dynasty had an ongoing blood feud  The two Houses subsequently traded the throne for several generations.
In 1903, the Serbian Parliament chose Karađorđe's grandson, Peter Karađorđe, then living in exile, for the throne of the Kingdom of Serbia.  He was duly crowned as King Peter I, and shortly before the end of World War I, representatives of the three peoples proclaimed a Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes with Peter I as sovereign.  In 1929, the Kingdom was renamed Yugoslavia, under Alexander I, the son of Peter I.  In November 1945, the throne was permanently lost (as of Feb 2014) when the League of Communists of Yugoslavia seized power, during the reign of Peter II.

Ancestry

According to some researchers, Karađorđe's paternal ancestors most likely migrated from the Herzegovina-Montenegro hills to Šumadija, during the Second Great Serb Migration in 1737–1739 under the leadership of Patriarch Šakabenta, as a result of the Austrian-Turkish War (in which Serbs took part).novosti.119.html:276201-Pastir-u-najmu
After arriving in Šumadija, there is some conjecture about where the family ended up. According to Radoš Ljušić, Karađorđe's ancestors most likely hailed from Vasojevići, but he has said there is no certain historical information on Karađorđe's ancestors or where they came from, folklore being the only real source.  Most likely, Karađorđe's ancestors hailed from Vasojevići.
Additional origin theories include France, Herzegovina, Kuči, and Klimenti.  Grigorije Božović (1880–1945) claimed that the family were Srbljaci (natives) in Vasojevići territory; Montenegrin historian Miomir Dašić claimed that Karađorđe's family originated from the Gurešići from Podgorica;  folklorist Dragutin Vuković  believed that Tripko Knežević "Guriš" needed was Karađorđe's great-grandfather;  In the surroundings of Podgorica, there is a local claim that Karađorđe's ancestors were initially from Vranj;Vukićević 1907, p. 5: "околини Подгорице и у селу Врању. А да је Карађорђе старинбм из села Врања, чуо је у Црној Гори још 1875 године г."  a 2006 book by journalist Milorad Bošnjak and machine engineer Slobodan Jakovljević (a direct descendant of Jakov Obrenović, half-brother of Miloš Obrenović), it was claimed that Karađorđe's ancestor was an Albanian Catholic from Kelmend called Đin Maraš Klimenta;"Karađorđevići - sakrivena istorija": Teorija o albanskom poreklu porodice

Monarchs

The ruling members of the family were:

Current claims to the throne

The Karađorđevićs are active in Serbian society in various ways. Politically, they support the view that constitutional parliamentary monarchy would be the ultimate solution for stability, unity and continuity. In addition, they support Serbia as a democratic country with a future in the European Union.
The last crown prince of Yugoslavia, Alexander, has been living in Belgrade in the Dedinje Royal Palace since 2001. As the only son of the last king, Peter II, who never abdicated, and the last official heir of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia he claims to be the rightful heir to the Serbian throne in the event of restoration. Prior to the fall of Slobodan Milosevic, he personally united the parliamentary opposition in several major congresses. In the palace, he regularly receives religious leaders and strives, as opportunity permits, to demonstrate his commitment to human rights and to democracy.
The Karađorđevićs are much engaged in humanitarian work. Crown Princess Katherine has a humanitarian foundation while Crown Prince Alexander heads the Foundation for Culture and Education, whose activities include student scholarships, summer camps for children, etc. The Karađorđevics are also prominent in national sports activities.

Serbia and Yugoslavia

The Karadjordjević family initially was a Serbian Royal House, then the Royal House of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes and then the Royal House of Yugoslavia. When they last reigned they were called the Royal House of Yugoslavia.
Crown Prince Alexander II was born in London but on property temporarily recognised by the United Kingdom's government as subject to the sovereignty of the Yugoslav crown, on which occasion it was publicly declared that the Crown Prince had been born on the native soil of the land he was expected to eventually rule.
In 2006 Yugoslavia disintegrated geo-politically in such a way that Serbia re-emerged as the national state, on which devolved rights and obligations of the former state of Yugoslavia. Crown Prince Alexander, previously "of Yugoslavia", now also claims the throne of Serbia as the senior patrilineal great-grandson of the last King of Serbia prior to its inclusion in Yugoslavia. However, his use of the title of the Crown Prince of Serbia has been questioned because he was born Crown Prince of Yugoslavia and held that title until the monarchy was abolished, while the current nation of Serbia is a republic. Nonetheless, as is customary among former dynasties, Alexander is accorded the title he claims by his kinsmen, the reigning monarchs of Europe, and their courts.

Heraldry

File:Royal Coat of arms of Serbia (1882–1918).svg|Coat of arms of Serbia
File:Coat of arms of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia.svg|Coat of arms of Yugoslavia

Royal Standards of Yugoslavia

File:Royal Standard of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia (variant), 1920s to 1937.svg|Royal Standard of the King (1922–1937)
File:Royal Standard of the King of Yugoslavia (1937–1941).svg|Royal Standard of the King (1937–1941)
File:Royal Standard of the Queen of Yugoslavia (1937–1941).svg|Royal Standard of the Queen (1937–1941)
File:Royal Standard of the Prince Regent of Yugoslavia (1937–1941).svg|Royal Standard of the Prince Regent (1937–1941)
File:Royal Standard of the Crown Prince of Yugoslavia (1937–1941).svg|Royal Standard of the Crown Prince (1937–1941)
File:Royal Standard of a Member of the Royal House of Yugoslavia (1937–1941).svg|Royal Standard of a Member of the Royal House (1937–1941)

Family tree








