[[Gumbel distribution]]

CATEGORIES: Continuous distributions, Extreme value data, Probability distributions

In probability theory and statistics, the Gumbel distribution is used to model the distribution of the maximum (or the minimum) of a number of samples of various distributions.
Such a distribution might be used to represent the distribution of the maximum level of a river in a particular year if there was a list of maximum values for the past ten years. It is useful in predicting the chance that an extreme earthquake, flood or other natural disaster will occur.
The potential applicability of the Gumbel distribution to represent the distribution of maxima relates to extreme value theory which indicates that it is likely to be useful if the distribution of the underlying sample data is of the normal or exponential type.
The Gumbel distribution is a particular case of the generalized extreme value distribution (also known as the Fisher-Tippett distribution). It is also known as the log-Weibull distribution and the double exponential distribution (a term that is alternatively sometimes used to refer to the Laplace distribution). It is related to the  Gompertz distribution: when its density is first reflected about the origin and then restricted to the positive half line, a Gompertz function is obtained.
In the latent variable formulation of the multinomial logit model — common in discrete choice theory — the errors of the latent variables follow a Gumbel distribution.  This is useful because the difference of two Gumbel-distributed random variables has a logistic distribution.
The Gumbel distribution is named after Emil Julius Gumbel (1891–1966), based on his original papers describing the distribution.J. (1941). The return period of ﬂood ﬂows. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 12, 163–190

Properties

The cumulative distribution function of the Gumbel distribution is

Standard Gumbel distribution

and probability density function  

Quantile function and generating Gumbel variates

Related distributions

Theory related to the generalized multivariate log-gamma distribution provides a multivariate version of the Gumbel distribution.

Graphic paper

Application

Gumbel has shown that the maximum value (or last order statistic) in a sample of a random variable following an exponential distribution approaches the Gumbel distribution closer with increasing sample size.
In hydrology, therefore, the Gumbel distribution is used to analyze such variables as monthly and annual maximum values of daily rainfall and river discharge volumes,
Gumbel has also shown that the estimator r / (n+1) for the probability of an event - where r is the rank number of the observed value in the data series and n is the total number of observations - is an unbiased estimator of the cumulative probability around the mode of the distribution. Therefore, this estimator is often used as a plotting position.
The blue picture illustrates an example of fitting the Gumbel distribution to ranked maximum one-day October rainfalls showing also the 90% confidence band based on the binomial distribution. The rainfall data are represented by the plotting position r / (n+1) as part of the cumulative frequency analysis.
In number theory, the Gumbel distribution approximates the number of terms in a partition of an integer Article 13.5.2.








