[[M.U.L.E.]]

CATEGORIES: Articles with inconsistent citation formats, Atari 8-bit family games, Commodore 64 games, Danielle Bunten Berry games, Nintendo Entertainment System games, 1983 video games, Electronic Arts games, NEC PC-8801 games, IOS games, Business simulation games, Sharp X1 games, MSX games, Ozark Softscape games

M.U.L.E. is a seminal multiplayer video game by Ozark Softscape. It was published in 1983 by Electronic Arts. It was originally written for the Atari 400/800 and was later ported to the Commodore 64, the Nintendo Entertainment System, and the IBM PCjr  While it plays like a strategy game, it incorporates aspects that simulate economics.

Gameplay

Set on the fictional planet Irata (which is Atari backwards), the game is an exercise in supply and demand economics involving competition among four players, with computer opponents automatically filling in for any missing players. Players are provided with several different choices for the race of their colonist, providing different advantages and disadvantages that can be paired to their respective strategies. To win, players not only compete against each other to amass the largest amount of wealth, but must also cooperate for the survival of the colony.
Central to the game is the acquisition and use of "M.U.L.E."s (Multiple Use Labor Element) to develop and harvest resources from the player's real estate. Depending on how it is outfitted, a M.U.L.E. can be configured to harvest Energy, Food, Smithore (from which M.U.L.E.s are constructed), and Crystite (a valuable mineral available only at the "Tournament" level). Players must balance supply and demand of these elements, buying what they need, and selling what they don't. Players may also exploit or create shortages by refusing to sell to other players or to the "store," which raises the price of the resource on the following turns. Scheming between players is encouraged by allowing collusion, which initiates a mode allowing a private transaction. Crystite is the one commodity that is not influenced by supply and demand considerations, being deemed to be sold 'off world,' so the strategy with this resource is somewhat different—a player may attempt to maximize production without fear of having too much supply for the demand.
Each resource is required to do certain things on each turn. For instance, if a player is short on Food, there will be less time to take one's turn.  Similarly, if a player is short on Energy, some land plots won't produce any output, while a shortage of Smithore will raise the price of M.U.L.E.s in the store and prevent the store from manufacturing new M.U.L.E.s to make use of one's land.
Players must also deal with periodic random events such as run-away M.U.L.E.s, sunspot activity, theft by space pirates and a meteorite, with potentially destructive and beneficial effects. The players also can hunt the mountain wampus for a cash reward. The game features a balancing system for random events that impact only a single player, such that favorable events never happen to the player currently in first place, while unfavorable events never happen to the player in last place. This same "leveling of the playfield" is applied whenever a tie happens in the game (e.g. when two players want to buy a resource at the same price); the player in the losing position automatically wins the tie.

Development

According to Jim Rushing (one of the four original partners in Ozark Softscape), M.U.L.E. was initially called Planet Pioneers during development.  Additional game features, such as claim jumping, loans, crystite depletion, were discarded for adding complexity without enhancing gameplay.
The setting was inspired by Robert A. Heinlein's Time Enough for Love, wherein galactic colonization is in the style of the American Old West: A few pioneers with drive and primitive tools. The M.U.L.E. itself is based on the idea of the genetically modified animal in Heinlein's novel, and given the appearance of a Star Wars Imperial Walker. Another Heinlein novel, The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress, provided the decision to not have any government or external authority. All land was originally sold by auction but this caused a feedback loop in which the wealthiest player had the most land and thus made the most money; thus, the developers created the "land authority" that gives each player a free plot of land each turn.
Ozark Softscape developed the game for the Atari 8-bit first because of its policy of developing for the most advanced computers then porting them to other platforms, removing or altering features such as sprites as necessary. Bunten stated that Ozark did not port the game to the Apple II series because "M.U.L.E. can't be done for an Apple". The PC port of M.U.L.E was developed by K-Byte Software, an affiliate of Electronic Arts, and published by IBM as part of their venture into the home market with the PCjr, but it sold poorly due to being released in 1985 after the latter had been discontinued (although the game did not have any actual PCjr support). No copies existed on the Internet and it was considered "lost" until 2012 when Vince Bray found an original disk which was then archived by Jeff Leyda and Jim Leonard.

Influences

M.U.L.E. was unusual in the ease with which it allowed multiplayer interaction through a single game computer console.  Though this failed as a trend-setter at the time, the game is still heralded as the first game to make effective use of the multiplayer game concept.
Although not a bestselling title, the game is a favorite of retrogaming enthusiasts. Several clones for various computers exist including the versions Subtrade and Traders. A modern version of the game entitled Space HoRSE was developed in 2004 by Gilligames and distributed by Shrapnel Games.
Bunten was working on an Internet version of the game until her death in 1998.  In 2005, a netplay component called Kaillera was integrated into the Atari800WinPlus emulator, enabling the original game to be played over the Internet.
Many game designers cite the game as one of the most revolutionary ever and an inspiration for many of their games. Will Wright dedicated his game The Sims to the memory of Bunten. The M.U.L.E. theme song was included in Wright's later game, Spore, as an Easter egg in the space level. The song, by Roy Glover, has been covered by remix groups.
An ability in Starcraft II allows Terran players to "call down" multiple robotic workers called M.U.L.E.s.
Super Mario Bros. creator Shigeru Miyamoto cited M.U.L.E. as an influence on the Pikmin series.4gamer.html

Reception

M.U.L.E. was widely lauded by playersM.U.L.E. player review, GameSpot player reviews, 9.2 out of 10, "excellent".''M.U.L.E. player reviews, 4 out of 5, from MobyGames. and reviewers.U.L.E., Hi-Res Magazine May/June 1984, p. 14.
With a score of 7.44 out of 10, in 1988 M.U.L.E. was among the first members of the Computer Gaming World Hall of Fame, honoring those games rated highly over time by readers.

Legacy

Comma 8 Studios has acquired the mobile M.U.L.E. license and is developing a new mobile game called M.U.L.E. Returns for iOS. It is scheduled for release on November 25, 2013.M.U.L.E. Returns at Comma 8 Studios website








