[[President of the Philippines]]

CATEGORIES: Articles with inconsistent citation formats, Presidents of the Philippines, Philippine Heads of State and Government, Unofficial Presidents of the Philippines, Government of the Philippines, Political office-holders in the Philippines, Articles which contain graphical timelines

The President of the Philippines () is the head of state and head of government of the Philippines. The President leads the executive branch of the Philippine government and is the commander-in-chief of the Armed Forces of the Philippines. The President of the Philippines in Filipino is referred to as Ang Pangulo or informally by the Spanish title, Presidente.

History

Early Republics

=Bonifacio's Tagalog Republic=

Depending on the definition chosen for these terms, a number of persons could alternatively be considered the inaugural holder of the office. Andrés Bonifacio is the de facto first President of a united Philippines. He was the third Supreme President (Spanish: Presidente Supremo; Tagalog: Kataás-taasang Pangulo)  of the Katipunan, a secret revolutionary society. Its Supreme Council, led by the Supreme President, coordinated provincial and district councils. When the Katipunan went into open revolt in August 1896, Bonifacio had transformed it into a de facto revolutionary government with him as its head. While the term Katipunan remained, Bonifacio's government was also known as the Tagalog Republic (Spanish: República Tagala). Although the word Tagalog refers to a specific ethno-linguistic group, Bonifacio used it to denote all indigenous peoples of the Philippines in place of Filipino, which had colonial origins. In place of the Spanish Filipinas he coined the Tagalog title, Haring Bayang Katagalugan ("Sovereign Tagalog Nation") for the new state.[ref]);

^ , "Formation of a revolutionary government";

^ .[ref]
.[/ref][ref]*
.[/ref][ref]*
.[/ref] Some historians contend that including Bonifacio as a past president would imply that Macario Sacay and Miguel Malvar should also be included.

=Aguinaldo's Government and the First Republic=

In March 1897, Emilio Aguinaldo was elected president of a revolutionary government at the Tejeros Convention.[ref]
.[/ref] The new government was meant to replace the Katipunan as a government, though the latter was not formally abolished until 1899. Aguinaldo was again elected President at Biak-na-Bato in November, leading the Biak-na-Bato Republic. Exiled in Hong Kong after the Pact of Biak-na-Bato, with the advent of the Spanish-American War he returned to the Philippines to renew revolutionary activities and formed a dictatorial government on May 24, 1898. Revolutionary forces under his command declared independence on June 12, 1898. On June 23, 1898, Aguinaldo transformed his dictatorial government into a revolutionary government. On January 23, 1899, he was then elected President of the Philippine Republic (Spanish: República Filipina), a government constituted by the Malolos Congress. Thus, this government is also called the Malolos Republic. Sovereignty over the Philippines passed from Spain to the United States with the Treaty of Paris, which ended the Spanish-American War. Aguinaldo's government effectively ceased to exist on April 1, 1901, when he pledged allegiance to the United States after being captured by U.S. forces in March. The current Philippine government, formally called the Republic of the Philippines, considers Emilio Aguinaldo to be the second President of the Philippines and the Malolos Republic as the "First" Philippine Republic.

=Other claimants=

Miguel Malvar continued Aguinaldo's leadership of the Philippine Republic after the latter's capture until his own capture in 1902, while Macario Sakay founded a Tagalog Republic in 1902 as a continuing state of Bonifacio's Katipunan. They are both considered by some scholars as "unofficial presidents", and along with Bonifacio, are not recognised as Presidents by the government.net, Lawmaker: History wrong on Gen. Malvar

American Occupation

Between 1901 and 1935, executive power in the Philippines was exercised by a succession of four American military Governors-General and eleven civil Governors-General.

Philippine Commonwealth

In October 1935, Manuel L. Quezon was elected the first President of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, which had been established, still under United States sovereignty, under a constitution ratified on 14 May of that year. During its first five years, the President could serve for an unrenewable six-year term. It was later amended in 1940 to limit a President to serving no more than two four-year terms. When President Quezon exiled himself to the United States after the Philippines fell to the Empire of Japan in World War II, he appointed Chief Justice José Abad Santos as Acting President. Abad Santos was subsequently executed by the Imperial Japanese Army on May 2, 1942.

The Second Republic under the Japanese

On October 14, 1943, José P. Laurel became President under a constitution imposed by the Japanese occupation. Laurel, an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the Philippines, had been instructed to remain in the City of Manila by President Quezon, who withdrew to Corregidor and then to the United States to establish a government in exile in the United States.
After the combined American and Filipino forces liberated the islands in 1945, Laurel officially dissolved the republic on August 17, 1945.

After World War II

The 1935 Constitution was restored after the Japanese surrender ended World War II, with Vice-President Sergio Osmeña becoming President due to Quezon's death on August 1, 1944. It remained in effect after the United States recognized the sovereignty of the Republic of the Philippines as a separate self-governing nation on July 4, 1946.

1973 Constitution

A new Constitution ratified on January 17, 1973 under the rule of Ferdinand E. Marcos introduced a parliamentary-style government. Marcos instituted himself as the Prime Minister while serving as President in 1978. He later appointed a new Prime Minister in 1981.
This Constitution was in effect until the People Power Revolution of 1986 toppled Marcos' 21-year authoritarian regime and replaced him with Corazon C. Aquino.

Fifth Republic

Using reserve powers, President Aquino herself promulgated Presidential Proclamation № 3 on March 25, 1986, which was provisional in nature and abolished many provisions of the 1973 Constitution that were associated with the Marcos Era, including the abolition of the office of the Prime Minister. This was superseded on February 2, 1987 by the present Constitution.

Other issues

Both Bonifacio and Aguinaldo might be considered to have been an inaugural president of an insurgent government. Quezon was the inaugural president of a predecessor state to the current one, while Aquino, mère, was the inaugural president of the currently-constituted government.
The government considers Aguinaldo to have been the first President of the Philippines, followed by Quezon and his successors. Despite the differences in constitutions and government, the line of presidents is considered to be continuous. For instance, the current president, Benigno S. Aquino III, is considered to be the 15th president.
While the government may consider Aguinaldo as the first president, the First Republic fell under the United States' jurisdiction due to the 1898 Treaty of Paris which ended the Spanish-American War; the United States thus does not consider his tenure to have been legitimate.S. Library of Congress. Manuel L. Quezon is considered to be the first president by the United States and the first to win an election.

=Laurel's position=

As with many other Axis-occupied countries in World War II, the Philippines had at one point two presidents heading two governments. One was Quezon and the Commonwealth government-in-exile in Washington, D.C. (considered de jure), and the other was Manila-based Laurel heading the Japanese-sponsored Second Republic (considered de facto). Notably, Laurel was himself instructed to remain in Manila by President Quezón. Laurel was not formally recognised as a President until the rule of Diosdado Macapagal, and this is still the case today. His inclusion in the official list coincided with the movement of Independence Day from July 4 (commemorating sovereignty in 1946) to June 12 (anniversary of the proclamation of the First Republic).
The inclusion of Laurel thus causes some problems in determining the order of Presidents. It is inaccurate to call Laurel as Osmeña's successor or vice-versa, as Laurel's Second Republic was formally rejected after World War II, and none of its actions were considered legal or binding. Quezon, Osmeña, and Roxas were three in a contiguous line according to the 1935 Constitution, while Laurel was the only President of the Second Republic (which had a separate charter). Thus, Laurel has neither predecessor nor successor, while Osmeña succeeded Quezon after the latter's death, and was in turn succeeded by Roxas as President of the Third Republic.

Timeline

ImageSize = width:800 height:auto barincrement:12
PlotArea  = top:10 bottom:90 right:130 left:20
AlignBars = late
DateFormat = mm/dd/yyyy
Period     = from:01/01/1896 till:06/30/2016
TimeAxis   = orientation:horizontal
ScaleMajor = unit:year increment:10 start:1900
Colors =
  id:canvas            value:gray(0.9)
  id:Katipunan         value:claret      legend:Katipunan
  id:NP                value:yellowgreen legend:Nacionalista
  id:Japan             value:black    legend:Kalibapi_(Japanese-sponsored)
  id:LP                value:dullyellow    legend:Liberal
  id:KBL               value:red           legend:KBL
  id:PDP-Laban    value:yelloworange        legend:PDP-Laban
  id:Lakas             value:skyblue          legend:Lakas-CMD/Lakas-Kampi-CMD
  id:LAMP              value:orange  legend:PMP
  id:linemark    value:gray(0.8)
  id:linemark2   value:gray(0.9)
Legend  = columns:3 left:20 top:65 columnwidth:200
BarData =
  Barset:others
  Barset:Marcos
  Barset:others1
PlotData=
  width:5 align:left fontsize:S shift:(5,-4) anchor:till
  barset:others
    from:03/22/1897 till:04/01/1901 text:"Emilio Aguinaldo" color:Katipunan
    from:11/15/1935 till:08/01/1944 text:"Manuel L. Quezón" color:NP
    from:10/14/1943 till:08/14/1945 text:"José P. Laurel" color:Japan
    from:08/01/1944 till:05/28/1946 text:"Sergio Osmeña" color:NP
    from:05/28/1946 till:04/15/1948 text:"Manuel Roxas" color:LP
    from:04/17/1948 till:12/30/1953 text:"Elpidio Quirino" color:LP
    from:12/30/1953 till:03/17/1957 text:"Ramón Magsaysay" color:NP
    from:03/18/1957 till:12/30/1961 text:"Carlos P. Garcia" color:NP
    from:12/30/1961 till:12/30/1965 text:"Diosdado Macapagal" color:LP
  barset:Marcos
    from:12/30/1965 till:04/09/1978 color:NP
  barset:break
    from:04/09/1978 till:02/25/1986 text:"Ferdinand Marcos" color:KBL
  barset:others1
    from:02/25/1986 till:06/30/1992 text:"Corazon Aquino" color:PDP-Laban
    from:06/30/1992 till:06/30/1998 text:"Fidel V. Ramos" color:Lakas
    from:06/30/1998 till:01/20/2001 text:"Joseph Estrada" color:LAMP
    from:01/20/2001 till:06/30/2010 text:"Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo" color:Lakas
    from:06/30/2010 till:01/06/2014 text:"Benigno Aquino III" color:LP

Powers and duties

Chief Executive

Under Article 7, Section 1 of the 1987 Constitution, the President heads the Executive branch of the government, which includes the Cabinet and all executive departments. The executive power, as such, is vested on the President alone.
Section 19 gives the President power to grant reprieves, commutations, and pardons, and remit fines and forfeitures, after conviction by final judgment, except when the President is under impeachment.
Section 20 provides the President to contract or guarantee foreign loans on behalf of the Republic of the Philippines with the prior concurrence of the Monetary Board, and subject to such limitations as may be provided by law.
The President exercises general supervision over local government units.

Commander-in-Chief

Article 7 Section 18 of the Constitution: "the President is also Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Philippines. As Commander-in-Chief, the President can call out such armed forces to prevent or suppress lawless violence, invasion or rebellion. In case of invasion or rebellion, when the public safety requires it, he or she may, for a period not exceeding sixty days, suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus or place the Philippines or any part thereof under martial law.

Power of appointment

The Constitution (Article VII Section 16) empowers the President to appoint, with the consent of the Commission on Appointments, the heads of executive departments, ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls, officers of the armed forces above the rank of colonel (Army) and captain (Navy), and other officials. The president also appoints those required by law that he appoint, or those whose appointments are not provided for under any other law. The members of the Supreme Court are also appointed by the President, based on a list prepared by the Judicial and Bar Council. Judicial appointments do not need the approval of the Commission on Appointments.

Government agencies

The Office of the President also has attached government agencies under it. It includes agencies such as the Film Development Council of the Philippines, the Metropolitan Manila Development Authority and the Securities and Exchange Commission (Philippines). These agencies are not under the different cabinet departments and are under the direct supervision of the President.

Selection process

Eligibility

Under Article 7, Section 2 of the Constitution of the Philippines, in order to serve as President, one must be:
A person who meets the above qualifications is still disqualified from holding the office of president under any of the following conditions:

Election

Under Article 6, Section 8 of the Constitution mandates that election of the President be done by direct vote every second Monday of May, unless otherwise provided by law.
The returns of every election for President and Vice-President, duly certified by the board of canvassers of each province or city, shall be transmitted to Congress, directed to the President of the Senate. Upon receipt of the certificates of canvass, the President of the Senate shall open all the certificates in the presence of a joint public session of Congress not later than 30 days after election day. Congress then canvasses the votes upon determining that the polls are authenticity and were done in the manner provided by law.
The person with the highest number of votes is declared the winner, but in case two or more have the highest number of votes, the President is elected by a majority of all members of both Houses, voting separately on each.

Inauguration

The President of the Philippines usually takes the Oath of Office at noon of June 30 following the Presidential election
Traditionally, the Vice-President takes the Oath first, a little before noon. This is for two reasons: first, according to protocol, no one follows the President (who is last due to his supremacy), and second, to establish a constitutionally valid successor before the President-elect accedes. During the Quezon inauguration, however, the Vice-President and the Legislature were sworn in after the President, to symbolise a new start.
As soon as the President takes the Oath of Office, a 21-gun salute is fired to salute the new Philippine head of state, and the Presidential Anthem Mabuhay is played. The President delivers the Inaugural Address, and then proceeds to Malacañang Palace to climb the Grand Staircase, a ritual which symbolises the formal possession of the Palace. The President then inducts the newly formed Cabinet into office in one of the state rooms.
Custom has enshrined three places as the traditional venue for the Inauguration: Barasoain Church in Malolos City, Bulacan; in front of the old Legislative Building (now part of the National Museum) in Manila; or at Quirino Grandstand, where most have been held. In 2004, Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo delivered her pre-Inaugural address at Quirino Grandstand, took the Oath of Office in Cebu City before Chief Justice Hilario Davide Jr., and the next day held the first Cabinet meeting in Butuan City. She broke with precedent, reasoning that she wanted to celebrate her Inauguration in each of the three main island groups of the Philippines: Luzon, Visayas, and Mindanao. Her first Inauguration also broke precedent as she was sworn in at the EDSA Shrine on January 20, 2001, during the EDSA Revolution of 2001 that removed Joseph Estrada from the Palace.
In the past, elections were held in November and the President's inauguration was held on December 30 (Rizal Day). This ensured that when the Inauguration was usually held at Quirino Grandstand, the new President could see the Rizal Monument  on the day of his death anniversary. Ferdinand Marcos transferred the dates of both the elections and the Inauguration to May and June, respectively, and it remains so to this day.
The dress code at the modern Inaugural is traditional, formal Filipino clothing, which is otherwise loosely termed Filipiniana. Ladies must wear terno, baro't saya (the formal wear of other indigenous groups is permissible), while men don the Barong Tagalog. Non-FIlipinos at the ceremony may wear their respective versions of formal dress, but foreign diplomats have often been seen donning Filipiniana as a mark of cultural respect.

Oath of Office

Under Article VII, Section 5 of the Constitution, before the President-Elect and Vice-President-Elect enter into the execution of their offices, the President shall take the following Oath or affirmation:
case of affirmation, last sentence will be omitted.1987 Constitution
The Filipino text of the Oath was used for the inaugurations of Presidents Fidel V. Ramos, Joseph Estrada and Benigno Aquino III reads:

(Kapag pagpapatotoo, ang huling pangungusap ay kakaltasin.)

Impeachment

Impeachment in the Philippines follows procedures similar to the United States. Under Sections 2 and 3, Article XI, Constitution of the Philippines, the House of Representatives of the Philippines has the exclusive power to initiate all cases of impeachment against the President, Vice President, members of the Supreme Court, members of the Constitutional Commissions (Commission on Elections,Civil Service Commission Commission on Audit), and the Ombudsman. When a third of its membership has endorsed the impeachment articles, it is then transmitted to the Senate of the Philippines which tries and decide, as impeachment tribunal, the impeachment case. A main difference from US proceedings however is that only 1/3 of House members are required to approve the motion to impeach the President (as opposed to 50%+1 members in their US counterpart). In the Senate, selected members of the House of Representatives act as the prosecutors and the Senators act as judges with the Senate President and Chief Justice of the Supreme Court jointly presiding over the proceedings. Like the United States, to convict the official in question requires that a minimum of 2/3 (i.e., 16 of 24 members) of the senate vote in favour of conviction. If an impeachment attempt is unsuccessful or the official is acquitted, no new cases can be filed against that impeachable official for at least one full year.

Impeachable offenses and officials

The 1987 Philippine Constitution says the grounds for impeachment include culpable violation of the Constitution, bribery, graft and corruption, and betrayal of public trust. These offenses are considered "high crimes and misdemeanors" under the Philippine Constitution.
The President, Vice President, Supreme Court justices, and members of the Constitutional Commission and Ombudsman are all considered impeachable officials under the Constitution.

Impeachment proceedings and attempts

Joseph Estrada was the first Philippine president impeached by the House in 2000, but the trial ended prematurely due to outrage over a vote to open an envelope where that motion was narrowly defeated by his allies.
In 2005, 2006, 2007, and 2008, impeachment complaints were filed against President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, but none of the cases reached the required endorsement of 1/3 of the members for transmittal to, and trial by, the Senate.

Official title

The official title of the president is "President of the Philippines." The title in Filipino is "Pangulo"  The honorific for the President of the Philippines is "Your Excellency" or "His/Her Excellency", adopted from the title of the Governor-General of the Philippines during Spanish and American occupation. The term "President of the Republic of the Philippines", used under Japanese occupation of the Philippines distinguished the government of then-President José P. Laurel from the  Commonwealth government in exile under President Manuel L. Quezon.The 1935 Constitution The 1973 constitution, though generally referring to the president as "President of the Philippines" did, in Article XVII, Section 12, once used the term, "President of the Republic."The 1973 Constitution President Ferdinand E. Marcos proclaimed martial law in his Proclamation No. 1081 and consistently used the term "President of the Philippines."PROCLAMATION No. 1081 (September 21, 1972), PROCLAIMING A STATE OF MARTIAL LAW IN THE PHILIPPINES, Lawphil.

State of the nation address

