[[Hong Kong Baptist University]]

CATEGORIES: Hong Kong Baptist University, Educational institutions established in 1956, Christian colleges in China, Association of Christian Universities and Colleges in Asia

Hong Kong Baptist University (HKBU) () is a publicly funded tertiary institution with a Christian education heritage.
It was established as Hong Kong Baptist College with the support of American Baptists, who provided both operating and construction funds and personnel to the school in its early years.
It became Hong Kong Baptist University in 1994 during the presidency of Dr. Daniel Tse Chi-wai, LLD, GBS, CBE, JP, who succeeded the Founding President, Dr. Lam Chi-fung, as the second president of the University in 1971. After 30 years of services to the University, Dr. Daniel Tse Chi-wai retired in 2001 and Prof. Ng Ching-fai, GBS, was appointed as the third president of the University. In 2010, Prof. Albert Chan Sun-chi assumed office as the fourth president of HKBU.
HKBU has five main campuses: Ho Sin Hang Campus (1966), Shaw Campus (1995), Baptist University Road Campus (1998), "Kai Tak Campus" (2005), and Shek Mun Campus (2006) for the College of International Education and the Hong Kong Baptist University Affiliated School Wong Kam Fai Secondary and Primary School. The first three campuses are located in the urban heart of Kowloon Tong, while the Kai Tak Campus is on Kwun Tong Road and the Shek Mun Campus in Shatin.
In 2005, the University established the Beijing Normal University - Hong Kong Baptist University United International College (UIC) in Zhuhai, China. The College is the first and only tertiary education institution founded through collaboration between a Mainland university and a Hong Kong university. It sets a new model for liberal education in China, aiming to nurture graduates with an international perspective.

University identities

Emblem

The emblem of Hong Kong Baptist University consists of three pictorial elements: the Bible, waves and knots. The Bible symbolizes the unique quality of Christian education which includes moral and spiritual training in addition to academic education. The waves, on the other hand, symbolize both Hong Kong's geographic nature as an island while echoing Confucius' dictum that "the wise love water" and the University's continuing effort to improve its educational quality. The knots, the final symbol, illustrate that within God's embrace, Christians are harmoniously linked and loved.

Logo

The logo, embodying a book and water motifs, was adopted after the institution was granted its university status in 1994. The acronym "BU" coupled with the outlined book on the logo resembles the Chinese characters of welcome (迎) and progress (進), conceptualizing the merging of eastern and western cultures. The design of the logo was commended at a design competition held in October 1996. The Hong Kong Designers Association awarded a Certificate of Merit at the Design 96 Show to Kan & Lau Design Consultants for creating the logo.

Academic Organisations

Faculties and Schools

Major Facilities

Academic Community Hall

The Academic Community Hall (AC Hall) is an auditorium located in the university. It was opened in May, 1978 with a seating capacity of 1,346. Originally, the first President and co-founder of the University, Dr. Lam Chi-fung, conceived the idea of building a hall for University functions. In 1970, on the occasion of their Golden Wedding Anniversary, Dr. and Mrs. Lam donated half a million dollars towards the construction of the auditorium. A local architect, Eric Cumine, took charge of the project. However, Dr. Lam died the following year before the project got underway. The Board of Governors decided to honour Dr. Lam by expanding the planned auditorium into a much larger scale project - the development of the Lam Chi-fung Memorial Building. As a part of the project, the Academic Community Hall would serve as a cultural centre for the University and its surrounding community, thus providing a direct link between town and gown.

Library

The Hong Kong Baptist University Library is made up by a Main Library and a number of branches. The Main Library is located in Au Shue Hung Memorial Library Building and has a gross floor area of 6,900 m² with a seating capacity of about 850. The library is fully automated with integrated library systems and house a comprehensive collection of Chinese and Western books, periodicals, non-print materials and newspaper clippings. Of particular importance are the Archives on the History of Christianity in China and the Contemporary China Research Collection, as well as a lantern slide and glass plate negative collection entitled "China Through The Eyes of CIM Missionaries."
Dr. Stephen Riady Chinese Medicine Library is located on the second floor of the Jockey Club of School of Chinese Medicine Building. It aims to meet the growing demand in the development of Chinese medicine in Hong Kong. The European Documentation Centre is located in the Academic and Administrative Building and is open to the public. It provides an important study and research base for European Studies. The Shek Mun Campus Library is a branch of the Hong Kong Baptist University Library. It is established to provide quality information resources and services in support of teaching and learning activities of the College of International Education in Shek Mun Campus.
After investigation, the library decided to abandon the practice of binding the majority of its western language periodical collection from 2007 onwards, substituting it with magazine boxes and possibly shrink wrapping.

Students' Residence

The Student Residence Halls of HKBU are located at the Baptist University Road campus:

Notable scholars

Notable scholars in Science, Engineering and Medicine
Notable scholars in Humanities, Business and Social Sciences 








