[[Ted Stevens Anchorage International Airport]]

CATEGORIES: 1951 establishments in Alaska, Airports established in 1951, Airports in Anchorage, Alaska, Buildings and structures in Anchorage, Alaska, Economy of Anchorage, Alaska

Ted Stevens Anchorage International Airport Great Circle Mapper: ANC / PANC - Anchorage, Alaska is a major airport in the U.S. state of Alaska located 4 nautical miles (7.4 km) southwest of downtown Anchorage. The airport is named in honor of Ted Stevens, the U.S. Senator from Alaska serving from 1968 to 2009.

Background

Built in 1951 as Anchorage International Airport, the airport was served in the 1950s by Alaska Airlines, Northwest Orient, Pacific Northern Airlines and Reeve Aleutian Airways, using aircraft ranging from Douglas DC-3s to Boeing 377s,Airport diagram for April 1956 and was also a refueling stop for Canadian Pacific Air Lines service to the Far East (one such aircraft being involved in a 1951 disappearance). From 1955 to 2011, the eastern end of the airport's southernmost runway connected to the Kulis Air National Guard Base, which was located on land leased by the airport.
Anchorage was a common stopover for passengers flying to East Asia until the 1980s because Chinese and Soviet airspace were off-limits and because the first generation of jets and widebody airliners did not have the range to fly non-stop across the Pacific Ocean. Carriers using Anchorage for his purpose included:
Most scheduled passenger service from Anchorage to Europe and Asia ceased in the early 1990s following the end of the Cold War. Korean Air continued to serve Anchorage on a scheduled basis until the early 2000s. China Airlines, the last Asian carrier to serve Anchorage on a regular basis, used Anchorage as an intermediate stop on its Taipei-New York route until 2011, when it rerouted these flights to stop in Osaka. While a few charter passenger aircraft still stop at Anchorage on flights between Asia and the eastern United States, scheduled cargo carriers — which benefit from more volume and thus shorter route segments — continue to use Anchorage frequently.
In the 1990s, Alaska Airlines and Aeroflot operated service from Anchorage to several destinations in the Russian Far East, including Khabarovsk, Magadan, Petropavlovsk, Vladivostok and Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk. 
The airport was renamed in 2000 by the Alaska Legislature to honor former long-standing U.S. Senator Ted Stevens.

Passenger traffic

Ted Stevens Anchorage International Airport's passenger traffic has hovered around the five million mark for the last 10 years, apart from in 2002 when the airport suffered a 13% drop in traffic. Fairbanks and Juneau are the next busiest airports though neither managed more than half a million passengers last year. Anchorage traffic peaks in June, July and August when passenger numbers are twice as high as between October and April. Most major U.S. passenger carriers serve ANC, with the majority of passenger flight operations by Alaska Airlines to and from Seattle (an average of 20 flights per day) and Fairbanks (an average of 13 flights per day).
Anchorage is also envisioned as a future connecting point for air traffic to the Russian Far East. During the summer season 2008, there was one weekly flight to Russia by Vladivostok Air. Yakutia Airlines resumed summer seasonal service to Russia in 2012. Many of Alaska's North Slope workers live either in Anchorage or elsewhere in the Lower 48 states and fly through the airport to their jobs in Prudhoe Bay.

International cargo hub

Ted Stevens Anchorage International Airport is also a major cargo hub.  As of 2010, it ranked as the fifth busiest airport in the world by cargo traffic, after Hong Kong, Memphis, Shanghai, and Seoul.
FedEx Express and UPS Airlines operate major hubs at Anchorage International for cargo heading to and from the Far East.  NWA Cargo used to operate a major hub at the airport until December 28, 2009 when it closed all operations for Northwest Cargo at all airports.  FedEx Express is the airport's largest cargo facility and can handle as many as 13,400 packages per hour, employing more than 1,200 people and providing a full customs clearance system. United Parcel Service's hub handles about 5,000 parcels per hour. Both companies forecast a large growth in traffic over the next several years as trade with China and other Far East countries increases and plan to expand their Anchorage facilities comparatively. The United States Postal Service also operates a large sectional center facility (SCF) for the 995xx ZIP codes. It processes mail and parcels headed to and from all Alaska cities.

Facilities and aircraft

Ted Stevens Anchorage International Airport covers  and has three asphalt paved runways: 7L/25R measuring 10,600 x 150 ft (3,231 x 46 m), 7R/25L at 12,400 x 200 ft (3,780 x 61 m) and 15/33 at 11,584 x 150 ft (3,531 x 46 m).
For 12-month period ending December 14, 2006, the airport had 289,472 aircraft operations, an average of 793 per day: 37% scheduled commercial, 35% general aviation, 27% air taxi and 1% military. There are 169 aircraft based at this airport: 59% multi-engine, 27% helicopters, 11% military and 3% jet aircraft.
The FAA has forecast total operations for the year 2011 to be 261,375. By the year 2030 this number is expected to rise to 334,279 or 918.882 operations per day.FAA Terminal Area Forecast
For 12-month period ending December 31, 2009, the airport had a total of 2,102,088 enplaned passengers go through the terminals.Bureau of Transportation Statistics

Terminals

South Terminal (domestic)

The South Terminal serves Air Canada, Alaska Airlines, American Airlines, Condor (Departures), Delta Air Lines, Frontier Airlines, JetBlue, Sun Country, United Airlines, US Airways and Virgin America.  All regional intrastate carriers also use the South Terminal.
The terminal contains 3 concourses: Concourse A, Concourse B, and Concourse C. Concourse C was completely rebuilt in 2004 while Concourses A and B were built in 1985 and 1969 respectively and renovated in 2009.2008 Ted Stevens Anchorage International Airport Master Plan Study Report Update  Architects HNTB and RIM Architects performed the architectural work for these projects.Terminal Makeover Finally a Reality at Anchorage Int'l

North Terminal (international)

The North Terminal serves Condor, Japan Airlines, Korean Air, Icelandair, Yakutia Airlines, all international seasonal charter flights and military flights. In addition to these airlines, a few cargo airlines use the north side of the terminal for parking while their aircraft have small problems need maintenance for a day or so. This terminal was built in 1982.

Airlines and destinations

US mainline carriers operate a combination of year-round and seasonal service to the lower 48 states and Hawaii. Foreign carriers operate seasonal flights and seasonal charters to Asia and Europe, sold as bundled services. China Airlines terminated ANC-TPE service, due to availability of longer range aircraft (reducing the need for an incidental stop), compounded by $2.5 million levy by the TSA.alaskadispatch.com/article/china-airlines-cutting-nonstop-flights-anc-asia

Top Airlines

Top destinations

Scheduled cargo airlines

 
 

Ground transport

Inter-terminal

A shuttle bus runs approximately every 15 minutes between the North and South terminals and the employee and long-term parking lots. A land-side inter-terminal walkway was completed in 2009. Air-side connections between the sterile areas of each terminal are not available.

To/from airport

Route 7A of the Anchorage People Mover bus system serves the airport's North and South terminals once every hour in each direction, connecting it with the downtown Transit Center and the Dimond Center mall.
Taxi queues are available in front of each terminal. Courtesy vans and other ground transportation options pick up from designated areas in front of each terminal.
Major national rental car chains are represented in an on-site consolidated rental car facility attached to the South terminal.
There is a rail station for the Alaska Railroad. It is only available during summer season for cruise ship service only.

Renovations

Renovations began on the A and B concourses in fall 2006.  These renovations are designed to bring the older portions into compliance with current seismic, heating, ventilation, electrical and safety codes, and also include new baggage handling systems and renovations to the interior of the concourses.

Commissioned art pieces

The piece consists of nine towers of glass, collectively adding up to 42 meters (130 ft) of in span and reaching to 8 meters (26 ft) at its highest point. The series of panels are inspired by Alaska's immensely rugged landscape of glaciers and mountains.  The ambiguous images embedded within the sculpture address Alaska's continual balancing of the forces of technology with the vast powers of the natural world.

Programs

The airport features an innovative customer service program, which partners with most on-site (and some nearby) vendors and concessionaires and aims to promote a positive image of the airport and the State of Alaska in the minds of travelers. This volunteer, self-funded committee mystery shops at partnering companies and provides awards of cash, free covered parking, and donated prizes to winning employees.page 3

Accidents and incidents





 

