[[Atlanta Flames]]

CATEGORIES: 1972 establishments in the United States, 1980 disestablishments in the United States, Atlanta Flames, Defunct National Hockey League teams, Ice hockey teams in Georgia (U.S. state), Sports in Atlanta, Georgia, Sports clubs established in 1972, Sports clubs disestablished in 1980, National Hockey League in Atlanta, Georgia

The Atlanta Flames were a professional ice hockey team based in Atlanta, Georgia, USA from 1972 until 1980. They were members of the West and later Patrick divisions of the National Hockey League (NHL).  The team was created as part of the NHL's conflict with the rival World Hockey Association (WHA) in a bid to keep the latter league out of the Omni Coliseum.  The team enjoyed modest success on the ice, qualifying for the post-season in six of its eight seasons, but failed to win a playoff series. Off the ice, the franchise struggled to draw fans and, after averaging only 10,000 per game in 1979–80, was sold and relocated to Canada to become the Calgary Flames.

History

Formation

The National Hockey League (NHL), which had grown from six teams in 1966 to fourteen in 1970, had not planned further expansion until at least 1973.  The formation of a rival major league, the World Hockey Association (WHA), in 1971 altered the NHL's plans and resulted in the two leagues battling for players and markets. The team cost $6 million. Cousins named the franchise the Flames in homage to the burning of Atlanta by U.S. Army general William Sherman during the American Civil War.
The Flames hired Cliff Fletcher, formerly of the St. Louis Blues, to serve as the team's general manager.

1972–1975

The Flames made their NHL debut in Long Island against their expansion cousins, the New York Islanders, on October 7, 1972.  They won the game 3–2, while Morris Stefaniw scored the first goal in franchise history.
Tom Lysiak, selected second overall at the 1973 NHL Amateur Draft, joined the Flames for the 1973–74 season and made an immediate impact.
The NHL's expansion to 18 teams in 1974–75 resulted in realignment.  The league moved to a four division format, placing the Flames in the Patrick Division.

1975–1980

Creighton produced a consistent but not outstanding team as the Flames finished third in the Patrick for the following three seasons and won a couple games more than they lost each year. 
Seeking to improve his team's fortunes, Fletcher made several moves over the following seasons to rework the Flames roster. His goaltending tandem of Bouchard and Myre had begun to feud with each other by the 1977–78 season as both sought more playing time. Fletcher responded by naming Bouchard his number one goaltender and trading Myre to the St. Louis Blues for three players. They made it into the playoffs again but were the only team to fall to a team with fewer points than them, the Detroit Red Wings, in a best-of-three series, 2 games to 0. 
Buoyed by a franchise record ten-game winning streak in October 1978, the 1978–79 Flames posted the best record in their Atlanta years at 41–31–8. Bob MacMillan, acquired in the Myre deal, became the first Flame other than Lysiak to lead the team in scoring in six years and, along with Guy Chouinard, was one of the first two Flames' players to score 100 points in one season.  In the playoffs against the Toronto Maple Leafs but lost in a best of three series 2 games to 0.
As the team stagnated on the ice, the Flames struggled at the gate. They peaked at an average of 14,161 fans per game in their second season, 1973–74, but fell to 12,258 three years later and then 10,500 in 1977–78.  Concerns that low attendance could result in the relocation of the team surfaced by 1976, prompting politicians and the players themselves to purchase tickets in a bid to stabilize the franchise.
Fletcher made other moves throughout the season. Al MacNeil replaced Creighton as head coach prior to the season,  Attendance fell to an average of 10,024.

Relocation

Cousins announced that he was seeking to sell the club following the Flames' exit from the playoffs. He claimed to have suffered significant financial losses on the team while low viewership hampered his ability to sign a television contract for the team. 
The Seaman brothers, Daryl and Byron, had made an offer of $14 million while the City of Calgary prepared to build a new arena for the team.
The last active Atlanta Flames player in the NHL was Kent Nilsson, who played his last NHL game in 1995. Several former players of the team returned to Atlanta once their careers ended. and Willi Plett operated a sports theme park and golf course.

Season-by-season record

''Note: GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses, T = Ties, Pts = Points, GF = Goals for, GA = Goals against, PIM = Penalties in minutes''

Career leaders

Notable players

Team captains

First round draft picks

Note: This list does not include selections as the Calgary Flames.

Scoring leaders

These are the top ten scorers for the franchise during its time in Atlanta.
''Note: GP = Games played, G = Goals, A = Assists, Pts = Points, PIM = Penalties in minutes''

Records






