[[Indianapolis International Airport]]

CATEGORIES: Airports in Indiana, Transportation in Indianapolis, Indiana, Buildings and structures in Indianapolis, Indiana

Indianapolis International Airport 
FedEx Express opened their Indianapolis hub in 1988. IND is the eighth largest cargo center in the U.S., the 22nd busiest airport in the world by cargo traffic. More than 2.2 billion pounds (1.0 billion kg) of cargo were managed at IND in 2010.

History

Indianapolis Municipal Airport opened in 1931; in 1944 it was renamed Weir-Cook Municipal Airport, after Col. Harvey Weir-Cook
of Wilkinson, Indiana, who was a US Army Air Forces pilot in World War I and World War II, where he was killed flying a P-39 over New Caledonia.  He became a flying ace during WWI, with seven victories.  Since 1962 it has been owned and operated by the Indianapolis Airport Authority (IAA), an eight-member board with members appointed by the Mayor of Indianapolis and other officials from Marion, Hendricks and Hamilton counties in central Indiana. The present name was bestowed by the IAA in 1976.  In summer of 2008 the IAA's board approved a resolution retaining the current airport name but designating the new main passenger facility as the Col. H. Weir Cook Terminal. The new entrance road was given the name of Col. H. Weir Cook Memorial Drive.
From 1957 to 2008 the passenger terminal was on the east side of the airfield off High School Road. This now-closed facility was renovated and expanded many times, notably in 1968 (Concourses A & B), 1972 (Concourse D), and 1987 (Concourse C and the attached Parking Garage). This complex, along with the International Arrivals Terminal (opened in 1976) on the north side of the airfield (off Pierson Drive), was replaced by the Col. H. Weir Cook Terminal on November 12, 2008. The Indianapolis Airport Authority maintains some offices in the old structure, but most of the old terminal is expected to eventually be demolished.
The April 1957 OAG shows 82 weekday departures: 24 Eastern, 22 TWA, 15 Delta, 11 American, 9 Lake Central and one Ozark. Eastern had a nonstop to Atlanta and one to Birmingham and TWA had two to La Guardia; no other nonstops reached beyond Chicago, St Louis, Memphis, Louisville and Pittsburgh. (Westward nonstops didn't reach beyond St Louis until 1967; TWA started a JFK-IND-LAX 707 that year.) The first jets were TWA 880s in 1961.
During the late 1980s and early 1990s USAir (now US Airways) had a secondary hub in Indianapolis with non-stop jets to the west coast, east coast, and Florida and turboprop flights to cities around the Midwest. USAir peaked at 146 daily departures (including its prop affiliates), with 49% of all seats. USAir ended the hub in the late 1990s.
In the late 1990s and early 2000s Indianapolis was a hub for then locally based ATA Airlines and its regional affiliate, Chicago Express/ATA Connection. After that airline entered Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in late 2004 operations at IND were cut, then eliminated in 2006.
ATA's demise gave Northwest Airlines an opportunity to expand operations, making Indianapolis a focus city. (Northwest became a subsidiary of Delta Air Lines in late 2008.)
In 1994 BAA was awarded a 10-year contract to manage the Indianapolis International Airport. The contract was extended three years but was later cut a year short at the request of the BAA. Private management ended on December 31, 2007 and control reverted to IAA.BAA Limited and Indianapolis Airport Authority Agree To Conclude Management Contract EarlyCase Study: United States
In the same year (1994) United Airlines finished building Indianapolis Maintenance Center, United later moved their maintenance operations to its sole maintenance hub located at San Francisco International Airport.
In 2009 Republic Airways announced they would retain their maintenance hub and HQ in Indianapolis even though they acquired the much larger Frontier Airlines in Denver.

Colonel H. Weir Cook Terminal

A new  Syska Hennessy was the mechanical, electrical, & plumbing engineer.
The new terminal, named in honor of Col. Harvey Weir-Cook, has room for 44 domestic gates and 2 international gates (which can function as domestic gates).
Not all gate positions were used upon opening of the facility, to allow for future expansion by the airlines. The two gate concourse structures were built to allow for future expansion on their southwestern ends (which is why gates A1-A2 and B1-B2 do not yet exist).
For the first time at Indianapolis, international arrivals can be processed through customs in the main passenger terminal. Passengers arriving at gates A4 and A5 go to the U.S. Customs and Federal Inspection Station on the arrivals level via a dedicated and secured stairway, escalator, or elevator.  After clearing customs, they exit into the south end of the main terminal's domestic baggage claim area.
The A concourse has a Delta Sky Club, the first airline lounge at Indianapolis International Airport since US Air closed their lounge after the closure of their hub.  The opening date was November 15, 2010.
Eight rental car operations and the Ground Transportation Center (where information about limousine, shuttle bus, hotel courtesy vehicles and other transportation services such as IndyGo bus service can be obtained) are located on the first floor of the attached parking garage. All pick-ups and drop-offs of rental vehicles also occur here, eliminating the need for shuttling customers to and from individual companies' remote processing facilities. The five-floor parking garage covers 
The airport's master plan calls for a fourth (third parallel) runway to be built southeast of I-70 sometime in the future.

Airport management

The Indianapolis International Airport is owned and operated by the Indianapolis Airport Authority (IAA) which was created in 1962.

Incidents

On September 9, 1969 Allegheny Airlines Flight 853 on a Boston - Baltimore - Cincinnati - Indianapolis - St. Louis route, collided in midair with a Piper Cherokee during its descent over Fairland, Indiana in Shelby County.  The McDonnell Douglas DC-9-31 crashed into a cornfield near London, Indiana, killing the 78 passengers and 4 crew members on board. The student pilot who was flying the Cherokee was also killed.
On October 20, 1987 a United States Air Force A-7D Corsair II crashed into a Ramada Inn near the airport after the pilot was forced to eject due to an engine malfunction. Ten people were killed, nine of them hotel employees.
On October 31, 1994, American Eagle Flight 4184, which was flying from Indianapolis to Chicago, Illinois's O'Hare International Airport, crashed into a soybean field near the northwestern Indiana town of Roselawn, killing all 68 on board.

Other cities served

Indianapolis International Airport serves many nearby small and mid-sized cities, including the locations of Indiana's largest universities. Cities for which Indianapolis International Airport is the nearest major commercial airport include: 

Airlines and destinations

Top destinations

Cargo airlines

Based aircraft

The Airport has 61 based aircraft.  Of these 61, eleven of them are single engine aircraft, 18 of them are multi engine aircraft, and 32 are jets.

Public transportation

GO Express Travel operates the Green Line Downtown/Airport Express daily from 8am to 11pm with shuttle service picking up passengers every 30 minutes.  The express service costs $10 per passenger one-way. The boarding/debarking point for this service at the airport is located at the northwest end of the Ground Transportation Center, which is found on level 1 of the parking garage. The terminal was built with a Light Rail System in mind that in the future could serve this airport.
IndyGo's Route 8 also connects the airport with downtown Indianapolis. Unlike the Green Line Express, Route 8 bus is a slower and cheaper bus route that makes frequent stops along Washington Street. The fare for Route 8 is currently $1.75 for single ride, same as other IndyGo buses.
Lafayette Limo, Bloomington Shuttle Service and Star of America, operate regular (every two hours) shuttle service between Indianapolis International Airport and several cities in central Indiana, namely Bloomington, Muncie, Anderson, and Lafayette.
During the annual running of the Indianapolis 500 and Brickyard 400 auto races, the Indianapolis Airport serves as one of several staging points around the Indianapolis area for shuttle buses that transport race fans to and from the Indianapolis Motor Speedway.

Accolades






