[[Richard Garriott]]

CATEGORIES: 1961 births, Amateur radio people, American astronauts, American people of English descent, American video game designers, Living people, People from Austin, Texas, People from Cambridge, People from Houston, Texas, Space tourists, Ultima, University of Texas at Austin alumni, Video game producers, Video game programmers

Richard Garriott de Cayeux (born Richard Allen Garriott on July 4, 1961) is a video game developer and entrepreneur.
He is also known as his alter egos Lord British in Ultima and General British in Tabula Rasa. A well-known figure in the video game industry, Garriott was originally a game designer and programmer and now engages in various aspects of computer game development and business. He is also known for being one of the first space tourists.
On October 12, 2008, Garriott launched aboard Soyuz TMA-13 to the International Space Station as a self-funded tourist, returning 12 days later aboard Soyuz TMA-12. With his trip, he became the second person, and first American, to be a second-generation space traveler.
Garriott founded a new video game development company in 2009, called Portalarium.
In 2011 he was married and changed his name to Richard Garriott de Cayeux. Richard and wife Laetitia, had their first child, Kinga, on June 30, 2012.com

Biography

Early life

Richard Garriott was born in Cambridge, England to American parents, and was raised in Nassau Bay, Texas, United States. He is the son of scientist Owen K. Garriott, who became an astronaut and flew with Skylab 3 and Space Shuttle mission STS-9.
What Garriott later described as "my first real exposure to computers" occurred in 1975, during his freshman year of high school at Clear Creek High School. As he wanted more experience beyond the single one-semester BASIC class the school offered, and as a fan of The Lord of the Rings and Dungeons & Dragons, Garriott convinced the school to let him create a self-directed course in programming, in which he created fantasy computer games on the school's teletype machine.Official Book of Ultima by Shay Addams, page 3-5
In the summer of 1977, Garriott's parents sent him to the University of Oklahoma for a seven-week computer camp. Shortly after he arrived, some of the other boys attending the camp introduced themselves. When Garriott replied to their greeting of "Hi" with "Hello" they decided he sounded like he was from Britain, and gave him the nickname "British". Garriott uses the name to this day for his various gaming characters, including Ultima character Lord British and Tabula Rasa character General British;

Game design career

In summer 1979, Garriott worked at a ComputerLand store where he had his first encounter with Apple computers. Inspired by their color graphics, he began to add perspective view to his own games. After creating Akalabeth for fun, the owner of the store convinced him it might sell.  He spent US$200 getting a manual and a cover sheet drawn by his mother printed out, and put them in Ziploc bags to sell around the store.  Although he sold less than a dozen copies at the store, one of them made it to California Pacific, who signed a deal with him. He sold over 30,000 copies, receiving $5 for each game sold. In the fall, he entered the University of Texas at Austin, joined the school's fencing team and later joined the Society for Creative Anachronism.
Steve Jackson Games (SJG) maintained a good relationship with Garriott, and when he stopped by the SJG office one day, he ended up commissioning Denis Loubet to paint the cover of Ultima I (1980), and many other covers for Garriott's games thereafter.
In the early 1980s, Garriott developed the Ultima computer game series, eventually leaving the university to make the games his full-time job. Originally programmed for the Apple II, the first was published by California Pacific Computers and sold in Ziploc plastic bags to interested parties. The second part was published by Sierra On-Line, as they were the only company that agreed to publish it in a box together with a printed cloth map. By the time he developed his third installment, the games had such a large following that Garriott (along with his brother, Robert, amongst others) established Origin Systems, their own video game publisher to handle the publishing and distribution of his title, now available on several platforms.
Garriott sold Origin to Electronic Arts in September 1992.  In 1997, he coined the term massively multiplayer online role-playing game (MMORPG), giving a new identity to the nascent genre previously known as graphical MUDs. In 1999 and 2000, EA canceled all of Origin's new development projects, including Privateer Online, and Harry Potter Online. In the midst of these events, Garriott resigned from the company and returned to the industry by forming Destination Games in April 2000 with his brother and Starr Long (the producer of Ultima Online). Once Garriott's non-compete agreement with EA expired a year later, Destination partnered with NCsoft where he acted as a producer and designer of MMORPGs. After that, he became the CEO of NCsoft Austin, also known as NC Interactive.
Tabula Rasa failed to be a commercial success despite its seven-year development period. On November 11, 2008, in an open letter on the Tabula Rasa website, Garriott announced his plans to leave NCsoft to pursue new interests sparked by his spaceflight experiences. Later, however, Garriott claimed that the letter was forged as a means of forcing him out of his position and that he had had no intention of leaving.libsyn.pdf?nvb=20090509051652&nva=20090510052652&t=049ea4934066248c20f32
In July 2010, an Austin District Court awarded Garriott USD$28 million in his lawsuit against NCsoft, finding that the company did not appropriately handle his departure in 2008. In October 2011, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit affirmed the judgment.
Garriott founded the company Portalarium in 2009. The company is developing Shroud of the Avatar: Forsaken Virtues, a massively multiplayer spiritual successor to the Ultima series, with Garriott having remarked that had they been able to secure the rights to the Ultima intellectual property from Electronic Arts, the game could literally have became Ultima Online 2 in name."Garriott's Ultimate RPG 'clearly the spiritual successor' to Ultima" from Joystiq"Garriott's Ultimate RPG could become Ultima Online 2" from Eurogamer"LOGIN 2011 Keynote: Richard Garriott - The Next Big Games" from YouTube"Lord British shall walk the streets of Britannia again! " from YouTube On March 8, 2013, Portalarium launched a Kickstarter campaign

Spaceflight

The income from the success of Garriott's video game career allowed him to pursue his interest in spaceflight, and the sale of Origin Systems allowed him to invest in Space Adventures and purchase the ticket to become the first private citizen to fly into space. However, Garriott suffered financial setbacks in 2001 after the dot-com bubble burst, and he was forced to sell his seat to Dennis Tito.
He then says he got back into making games, to make money, and once he had enough, put down a non-refundable deposit to go into space.  During the mandatory medical examination, they found he had a hemangioma on his liver, which could cause potentially fatal internal bleeding if there was a rapid depressurization of a spacecraft.  He was told he had to give up his large deposit, or undergo life threatening surgery, so he decided to have the operation, and now has a 16 inch scar from it.  He spent a year in Russia training before he launched into space.
On September 28, 2007, Space Adventures announced that Garriott would fly to the International Space Station in October 2008 as the sixth space tourist, reportedly paying $30 million USD.
During his spaceflight, Garriott took part in several education outreach efforts. He is an Amateur Radio Operator (callsign W5KWQ), and during his stay on the International Space Station (ISS), communicated with students and other Amateur Radio operators using Amateur Radio.
Garriott also worked with the Windows on Earth project, which provides an interactive, virtual view of Earth as seen from the ISS. Garriott used Windows on Earth software to assist in the selection of locations on Earth to photograph, and the public were able to use the same online tool to track the ISS and see the view Richard was experiencing out an ISS window. Richard's photographs, along with images taken by his astronaut father Owen Garriott in 1973, will be available to the public through Windows on Earth, adding a personal element to studies of Earth and how Earth has changed over time.
Tracy Hickman wrote a screenplay for Garriott, for the first science-fiction film shot in space, Apogee of Fear.
On October 24, Russian cosmonauts of ISS Expedition 17, Sergei Volkov and Oleg Kononenko, along with space tourist Richard Garriott, aboard Soyuz TMA-12 capsule, landed safely (ideal) at 9:37 a.m. (0336GMT, 07:36 Moscow time), 55 miles north of Arkalyk, Kazakhstan. They were lifted to the Kazakhstan Baikonur space center by helicopter, and then flew to Zvezdny Gorodok (Star City), Moscow Region.ap.com, American, Russians return from space stationen.ru/russia, Soyuz capsule safely lands in Kazakhstan - 2itar-tass.com, Cosmonauts examined with special system
On June 3, 2009, the New York Daily News announced that Garriott would officiate at the first wedding to be held in zero gravity. The wedding took place in a specially modified Boeing 727-200 aircraft, G-Force One, operated by Zero Gravity Corp, or ZERO-G, a company offering weightless flight experiences, of which he is the co-founder.reuters.com, Couple floats into zero gravity nuptials
In 2010 he released a documentary Man on a Mission: Richard Garriott's Road to the Stars.imdb.com/title/tt1611990/

Other accomplishments and interests

Garriott bought the Luna 21 lander and the Lunokhod 2 rover (both currently on lunar surface) from the Lavochkin Association for $68,500 in December 1993 at a Sotheby's auction in New YorkThe Bloc on the Block (by Jeffrey Kluger): Discover magazine, April 2004 (although the catalog incorrectly lists lot 68A as Luna 17/Lunokhod 1).Sotheby's Catalogue - Russian Space History, Addendum, Lot 68A, December 11, 1993
Garriott acted as corner man for professional boxer and friend Jesús Chávez in his first title defense against Erik Morales in 2004.Richard Garriott's Space Mission : Austin
He is also an avid magician and magic collector, and appeared on the cover of the January 2008 issue of MUM, the magazine of the Society of American Magicians.Computer Science for Fun - cs4fn: The space game
Garriott built a haunted house/museum at his residence called Britannia Manor in Austin, Texas. He also promotes private space flight as vice-chairman of the board of directors for Space Adventures and as a trustee of the X PRIZE Foundation.
In 2007, he co-founded Planetary Power, Inc. with Eric C. Anderson and Miguel Forbes.

Awards

Games






