[[Dale Murphy]]

CATEGORIES: 1956 births, Living people, American Mormon missionaries in the United States, American people of Irish descent, Atlanta Braves broadcasters, Atlanta Braves players, Colorado Rockies players, Gold Glove Award winners, Greenwood Braves players, Kingsport Braves players, Major League Baseball center fielders, Baseball players from Oregon, Major League Baseball announcers, Major League Baseball players with retired numbers, Mission presidents of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, National League All-Stars, National League home run champions, National League RBI champions, People from Alpine, Utah, Philadelphia Phillies players, Richmond Braves players, Savannah Braves players, 20th-century Mormon missionaries, Converts to Mormonism, Sportspeople from Portland, Oregon, Woodrow Wilson High School (Portland, Oregon) alumni, American leaders of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, National League Most Valuable Player Award winners

Dale Bryan Murphy (born March 12, 1956) is a former Major League Baseball outfielder and first baseman. During an 18-year baseball career, 1976–1993, he played for three different teams, but is noted for his time with the Atlanta Braves. Murphy won consecutive National League Most Valuable Player Awards (1982–1983), the National League's Silver Slugger Award four straight years (1982–1985), and the National League's Gold Glove award five straight years (1982–1986).

Baseball

Playing career

In 1976 Murphy began his major league career with a nineteen game stint catching with the Atlanta Braves. He appeared in only eighteen games the following season. In 1978, Murphy played first base mostly.  At the plate, he slumped to a .226 batting average, though he also showed hints of his future power by hitting 23 home runs.baseball-reference.shtml
Murphy switched to the outfield in 1980, a move that would help initiate a decade of highly productive play in the National League.  Beginning in left field, he soon switched to center field, the position at which he would find his greatest success.  By 1982, the most decorated year of Murphy's career, the former bench-riding catcher had transformed himself into an All-Star MVP outfielder who appeared in each of Atlanta's 162 games. His turnaround as a fielder was equally stark. In 1978, as a first baseman, Murphy had led all National League first-baggers in errors; in 1982, spending time at each of the three outfield positions, he won his first of five consecutive Gold Gloves, as well as the first MVP Award by a Brave since Hank Aaron in 1957 with what were then the Milwaukee Braves.
Playing in the decade before the Braves began their dominance of the National League East, Murphy also made his only postseason appearance in 1982, though the eventual World Series-champion St. Louis Cardinals eliminated the Braves in the first round of the playoffs.  The league's most valuable player failed to translate his regular season preeminence into October success, hitting safely but three times and scoring only one run. Murphy rebounded from the postseason sweep with another MVP award in 1983. The period ultimately proved the high-water era of Murphy's career.  Each year during the four season span from 1982 to 1986 he won a Gold Glove, appeared in the All-Star Game, and placed in the top ten in MVP voting.
In 1988, however, despite being voted to what would be his final All-Star appearance, Murphy's production began an inexorable slide downward.  Never a particularly high average hitter, Murphy saw his batting average free-fall from .295 in 1987 to .226 in 1988. Only once more, in 1991, would Murphy bat above .250. Once a consistent source of power at the plate, he never again hit even 25 home runs in a season.
The Braves traded Murphy after fifteen seasons to the Philadelphia Phillies in 1990.  Murphy's three seasons with the Phillies were mostly uneventful. In 1993, his final season, Murphy took a pay cut of over $2,000,000, down to the major league minimum, to join the Colorado Rockies for their inaugural season. During his last two years in the majors Murphy's batting average lingered well beneath baseball's Mendoza Line.

Career Summary and honors

Murphy finished his career with 398 home runs (19th in MLB history at the time of his retirement) and a .265 lifetime batting average. His MVP awards in 1982 and 1983 make him one of only four outfielders in major league history with consecutive MVP years; at the time, he was the youngest to have accomplished the feat.  His many honors also include seven All-Star appearances, five Gold Gloves, and four Silver Sluggers.  Murphy led the National League in home runs and RBI twice; he also led the major leagues in home runs and runs batted in over the 10-year span from 1981 to 1990.
One of the most productive and decorated players of the 1980s, Murphy led the National League in games, at bats, runs, hits, extra base hits, RBIs, runs created, total bases, and plate appearances during the decade.  He also accomplished a 30-30 (30 home runs with 30 stolen bases) season in 1983.  Murphy played in 740 consecutive games, at the time the 11th longest such streak in baseball history.  His jersey number ("3") was retired by the Atlanta Braves on June 13, 1994, in his honor as opposed to that of even Babe Ruth, who wore Boston Braves number 3 during the partial season with which his career concluded.  In 1997, Murphy was inducted into the Oregon Sports Hall of Fame & MuseumOregon Sports Hall of Fame & Museum

Public persona

Murphy's clean-living habits off the diamond were frequently noted in the media. A devout Latter-day Saint, or Mormon,BYU NewsNet - Dale Murphy: Baseball MVP, mission president, governor? Murphy did not drink alcoholic beverages, would not allow women to be photographed embracing him and paid his teammates' dinner checks as long as alcoholic beverages were not on the tab. He also refused to give television interviews unless he was fully dressed. Murphy had been introduced to the church early in his career by teammate Barry Bonnell.
For several years, the Atlanta Constitution ran a weekly column, wherein Murphy responded to young fans' questions and letters. In 1987, he shared Sports Illustrated magazine's "Sportsmen and Sportswomen of the Year" award with seven others, characterized as "Athletes Who Care", for his work with numerous charities, including the Make-a-Wish Foundation, the Georgia March of Dimes and the American Heart Association.
One of his more memorable incidents was reminiscent of a scene from the classic black-and-white baseball film The Pride of the Yankees:
 
 Before a home game against San Francisco on June 12, 1983, Murphy visited in the stands with Elizabeth Smith, a six-year-old girl who had lost both hands and a leg when she stepped on a live power line. After Murphy gave her a cap and a T shirt, her nurse innocently asked if he could hit a home run for Elizabeth. "I didn't know what to say, so I just sort of mumbled 'Well, O.K.,' " says Murphy. That day he hit two homers and drove in all the Braves' runs in a 3-2 victory.

Hall of Fame candidacy

Dale Murphy first appeared on the writers' ballot for the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1999, the earliest possible year of consideration.  He has failed to gain election, joining late New York Yankees outfielder Roger Maris and recently eligibile Juan Gonzalez as the only three Hall of Fame-eligible recipients of multiple MVP awards not in the Hall.charlotteobserver.html
Baseball writer Rob Neyer feels that the former MVP's candidacy has been hurt by a career that "got a late start and suffered an early end."  Finding "one of baseball's best players in the 1980s" to be "undervalued," Miller nonetheless writes that the Brave great "is typically considered a 'close but no' guy." Bill James, father of sabermetrics, says of Murphy, "It certainly wouldn't offend me to have him in the Hall of Fame. I just wouldn't advocate it." James' "current metric for Hall induction was 300 Win Shares (a complex mathematical equation weighing what players contribute to their team's victories)...." Murphy stands at 253 Win Shares. James ranks eight Hall of Famers below Murphy.)
However, others contend, "Murphy's incredible nine-year run in Atlanta was every bit as good as anyone else during his era."  Some have argued that Murphy's reputation for clean living may encourage voters to "look more favorably on what Murphy did without using performance-enhancing drugs."  (Murphy weighed in on the steroids issue in asserting that career home run leader Barry Bonds "without a doubt" used performance-enhancing drugs.1280 The Zone, Audio of Dale Murphy interview, August 6, 2007)  Sports Illustrated's Joe Posnanski has endorsed Murphy as an "emotional pick . . . a larger-than-life character who signed every autograph, spoke up for every charity and played brilliant baseball every day for mostly doomed teams."
Nonetheless, though he continued to earn the requisite 5% to remain on the ballot, Murphy averaged only 13.6% average over the first twelve years of voting.  (Election to the hall requires 75%.)  In the first decade of his eligibility, he "peaked at 23% in 2000 and fell to 11.5% in 2009."  Noting his low vote totals, Murphy has said, "Since I'm not that close election ... I don't think about it that much." On January 9, 2013, his 15th and final appearance on the Hall of Fame ballot, Murphy secured 18.9% of the vote falling well short of the 75% necessary to enter the Baseball Hall of Fame on the BBWAA ballot.baseball-reference.shtml

Post-baseball life

Murphy served from 1997 to 2000 as president of the Massachusetts Boston Mission of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Murphy was at one point said to be considering a run for Utah governor in 2004, but failed to generate enough interest within the Republican Party.
In 2008, he was appointed to the National Advisory Board for the national children's charity Operation Kids. He currently lives in Alpine, Utah.  Murphy serves as a National Advisor to ASCEND: A Humanitarian Alliance.org/article.php?cmd=view&id=152
In 2005 Murphy started a non-profit organization called the iWontCheat Foundation to promote ethical behavior, and deter steroid use and cheating in youth athletics."Former M.V.P. Takes a Stand Against Cheating," The Associated Press, Sunday, August 15, 2010.
For the 2012 MLB season, Murphy is a part of the Atlanta Braves TV broadcasting crew and is scheduled to participate in the telecast of at least 14 games.foxsportssouth.html?blockID=707256
He will be the 1st base coach for the USA team in the 2013 World Baseball Classic.Torre finalizes USA's World Baseball Classic staff

Author

Murphy has written three books. The first, The Scouting Report on Professional Athletics, elaborates details of the professional athlete's lifestyle. Murphy discusses balancing career and family, working with agents, managing business affairs, serving one's community, and preparing for retirement.  In his second book, an autobiography entitled Murph, he talked about his religious faith. He discussed the struggles of his early baseball career and how he overcame problems.  In 2007 Murphy wrote his third book, The Scouting Report for Youth Athletics, in response to what he saw as the increase in negative behavior in youth sports resulting from poor examples set by professional athletes.  Included with each book is a 50-page insert which includes contributions from, among others, Peyton Manning, Dwyane Wade, Tom Glavine, and Danica Patrick. In a question-and-answer format, they discuss the lessons they learned from youth sports and how they apply the lessons today. There is also a physician-penned section about illegal performance-enhancing drug use in sports.

Personal life

Murphy and his wife, Nancy, have 8 children.   They are sons Chad, Travis, Shawn, Tyson, Taylor, Jake, McKay and daughter, Madison. His son Shawn played  as a Guard in American football for the National Football League. His son Jake currently plays college football at the University Of Utah. His son Tyson Murphy is a Character Artist for Blizzard Entertainment.










