[[Veterans Stadium]]

CATEGORIES: Defunct multi-purpose stadiums in the United States, Army–Navy Game, Defunct Major League Baseball venues, Defunct National Football League venues, Defunct college football venues, Defunct soccer venues in the United States, Defunct sports venues in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Demolished sports venues in Pennsylvania, United States Football League venues, Philadelphia Eagles stadiums, Philadelphia Phillies stadiums, Philadelphia Atoms sports facilities, Temple Owls football venues, Baseball stadiums in Pennsylvania, Sports venues completed in 1971, Sports venues demolished in 2004, 1971 establishments in Pennsylvania, 2004 disestablishments in Pennsylvania, Philadelphia Fury, North American Soccer League (1968–84) stadiums, South Philadelphia

Veterans Stadium (informally called "The Vet") was a professional-sports, multi-purpose stadium, located at the northeast corner of Broad Street and Pattison Avenue, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, as part of the South Philadelphia Sports Complex. The listed seating capacities in 1971 were 62,000 seats for football, and 56,371 for baseball.
It housed the NFL's Philadelphia Eagles from 1971 to January 2003 and the National League's Philadelphia Phillies baseball team from 1971 to 2003. The 1976 and 1996 Major League Baseball All-Star Games were held at the venue. The Vet also hosted the annual Army-Navy football game seventeen times: first in 1980, and last in 2001.
In addition to professional baseball and football, the stadium hosted other amateur and professional sports, large entertainment events, and other civic affairs.

History

Inception, design and construction

As early as 1959, Phillies owner Bob Carpenter proposed building a new ballpark for the Phillies on 
The American League's Philadelphia Athletics had moved to Kansas City, Missouri after the 1954 season, and Philadelphians weren't about to lose another professional sports franchise. In 1964, Philadelphia voters approved a US$25-million-bond issue for a new stadium to serve as the home of both the Eagles (who played at the University of Pennsylvania's Franklin Field) and the Phillies.  Because of cost overruns, the voters had to go to the polls again in 1967 to approve another $13 million.  At a total cost of $50 million, it was one of the most-expensive ballparks to date.
The stadium was named by the Philadelphia City Council, in 1968, for the veterans of all wars. As early as December 1969, the Phillies expected that they would play the first month of the 1970 season at Connie Mack Stadium before moving to the new venue. However, the opening was delayed a year because of a combination of bad weather and cost overruns.
The stadium's design was nearly circular, and was known as an "octorad" design, which attempted to facilitate both football and baseball. Qualcomm Stadium in San Diego had been similarly designed. As was the case with other cities where this dual approach was tried (other examples include RFK Stadium in Washington, D.C.; Shea Stadium in New York City, the Astrodome in Houston; Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium in Atlanta; Busch Memorial Stadium in St. Louis; Riverfront Stadium in Cincinnati; and Three Rivers Stadium in Pittsburgh), the fundamentally different sizes and shapes of the playing fields made the stadium inadequate to the needs of either sport.

First game

The Phillies played their first game at the stadium on Saturday, April 10, 1971, beating the Montreal Expos, 4–1, before an audience of 55,352.  Jim Bunning (named to the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1996) was the winning pitcher while Bill Stoneman took the loss. Entertainer Mike Douglas, whose daily talk show was taped in Philadelphia, sang The Star-Spangled Banner before the game. The emcee for the opening ceremonies was newly arrived Harry Kalas.  Boots Day opened the game by grounding out to Bunning. Larry Bowa had the stadium's first hit and Don Money slugged the first home run.

Final games

As the stadium aged, its condition deteriorated. A hole in the wall allowed visiting teams' players to peep into the Eagles Cheerleaders dressing room. So many mice infested the stadium that the security force employed cats as mousers.
The final game ever played at the stadium was the afternoon of September 28, 2003, during which the Phillies lost to the Atlanta Braves. The last publicly broadcast words uttered in the park were by Harry Kalas — a veteran announcer who helped open the facility on April 10, 1971 — who paraphrased his trademark home run call: "And now, Veterans Stadium is like a 3-1 pitch to Jim Thome or Mike Schmidt. It's on a looooooong drive...'IT'S OUTTA HERE!!!'" The team moved into Citizens Bank Park in 2004, with the first game being played there on April 12, 2004.

Demolition and commemoration

On March 21, 2004, the 32-year-old stadium was imploded in 62 seconds.  Frank Bardonaro, President of Philadelphia-based AmQuip Crane Rental Company pressed the "charge" button and then he and  Nick Peetros, Project Manager for Driscoll/Hunt Construction Company simultaneously pressed the "fire" button to trigger the implosion  A parking lot for the current sporting facilities was constructed in 2004 and 2005 at the site.
On June 6, 2005, the anniversary of World War II's D-Day, a plaque and monument to commemorate the spot where the stadium stood and a memorial for all veterans was dedicated by the Phillies before their game against the Arizona Diamondbacks. On September 28, 2005, the second anniversary of the stadium's final game, a historical marker commemorating where the ballpark once stood was dedicated. In April 2006, granite spaces marking the former locations of home plate, the pitcher's mound, and the three bases for baseball, as well as the goalpost placements for football, were added in Western Parking Lot U.

Seating capacity

Baseball

 
 
Football

 
 
Stadium features

The stadium was a complicated structure with its seating layered in seven separate levels. The lowest, or "100 Level", extended only part way around the structure, between roughly the 25-yard lines for football games and near the two dugouts for baseball. The "200 Level" comprised field-level boxes, and the "300 Level" housed what were labeled "Terrace Boxes".  These three levels collectively made up the "Lower Stands".  The "400 Level" was reserved for the press and dignitaries; the upper level began with "500 Level" (or "loge boxes"), the "600 Level" (upper reserved, or individual seats), and finally, the 700 Level (general admission for baseball). Originally, the seats were in shades of brown, terra cotta, orange and yellow, to look like an autumn day, but in 1995 and 1996, blue seats replaced the fall-hued ones.
At one time, the stadium could seat over 71,000 people for football, but restructuring in the late 1980s brought capacity down to around 66,000.
The stadium was harshly criticized by baseball purists. Even by multi-purpose-stadium standards, the upper deck was exceptionally high, and many of the seats in that area were so far from the field that it was difficult to see the game without binoculars.  Like most of its contemporaries, foul territory was quite roomy. Approximately 70 percent of the seats were in foul territory, adding to the stadium's cavernous feel.  There was no dirt in the infield except for sliding pits around the bases. In the autumn, the football markings were clearly visible in the spacious outfield area.  Although the stadium's size enabled the Phillies to shatter previous attendance records, during the years the Phillies were not doing as well even crowds of 35,000 looked sparse.
The stadium had been known for providing both the Eagles and the Phillies with great home-field advantage. In particular, the acoustics greatly enhanced the crowd noise on the field, making it nearly impossible for opposing teams to hear one another.

700 Level

The "700 Level" was well known for being home to the rowdiest fans at Philadelphia Eagles games, and to a lesser extent, Philadelphia Phillies games. In his book If Football's a Religion, Why Don't We Have a Prayer?, Jereé Longman described the 700 Level as having a reputation for "hostile taunting, fighting, public urination and general strangeness."  Due to an improvement in facilities, there is no equivalent in either Lincoln Financial Field or Citizens Bank Park.  The name has also been the inspiration for websites relating to Philadelphia sports, as well as a weekly "Letters to the Editor" section in the Sunday Sports pages of The Philadelphia Inquirer.

Playing surface

The field's surface, originally composed of AstroTurf, contained many gaps and uneven patches. In several places, seams were clearly visible, giving it the nickname "Field of Seams". It perennially drew the ranking of the "NFL's worst field" in player surveys conducted by the NFL Players Association, and visiting players often fell prey to the treacherous conditions resulting in numerous injuries. The NFLPA reportedly threatened to sue the city for the poor conditions, and many sports agents told the Eagles not to even consider signing or drafting their clients. The Eagles, for their part, complained to the city on numerous occasions about the conditions at the stadium. Baseball players also complained about the surface. It was much harder than other AstroTurf surfaces, and the shock of running on it often caused back pain.
Two of the most-publicized injuries blamed on the playing surface occurred exactly six years apart. On October 10, 1993, Bears receiver Wendell Davis had his cleat get caught in a seam while running a simple pass route. He tore both of his patella tendons, ending his career. On October 10, 1999, Michael Irvin suffered a neck injury that led to his premature retirement. (The previously winless Eagles rallied from a 10–0 deficit and won 13–10.)
In 2001, the original AstroTurf was eventually replaced by a new surface, NexTurf. It was far softer, and reportedly much easier on the knees. However, the city crew that installed the new turf reportedly did not install it properly, resulting in seams being visible in several places.
The first football game on the new turf was scheduled to take place on August 13, 2001, when the Eagles were to play the Baltimore Ravens in a preseason game. However, Ravens coach Brian Billick refused to let the Ravens take the field for warm-ups when he discovered a trench around an area where third base was covered up by a NexTurf cutout. City crews unsuccessfully tried to fix the problem, forcing the game to be canceled. Later, players from both teams reported that they sank into the turf in locations near the infield cutouts. Team president Joe Banner was irate after the game, calling the stadium's conditions "absolutely unacceptable" and "an embarrassment to the city of Philadelphia." City officials, however, promised that the stadium would be suitable for play when the regular season started.
The problem was caused by heavy rain over the weekend prior to the game, which made the dirt in the sliding pits and pitcher's mound so soft that the cutouts covering them in the football configuration became mushy and uneven. Even when new dirt was shoveled on top, it quickly became just as saturated as the old dirt. The problem was solved by using asphalt hot mix, which allowed for a solid, level playing surface, but required a jackhammer for removal whenever the stadium was converted from football back to baseball (between August and October of each year).

Fans

Fans who attended games in the stadium for a football game gained a reputation of being among the most vociferous in sports, especially those in the notorious 700 Level, the highest seating level in the stadium prior to the construction of luxury skyboxes behind that seating area. The stadium became famous for the rowdiness of Eagles fans, although it was not the site of the incident in which fans booed Santa Claus during a halftime show. (The Santa Claus incident occurred on December 15, 1968, at Franklin Field, the Eagles' home stadium at the time.)
One of the more well-known examples of the fans' behavior was during the 1989 season at a follow-up game to what many called the "Bounty Bowl". On Thanksgiving Day, November 23, 1989, the Eagles had defeated the Dallas Cowboys at Texas Stadium, 27-0. led the NFL to rule that seating areas must be cleared of snow within a certain time period before kickoff.
The Eagles fans' behavior during a Monday Night Football loss

Notable games and incidents

Other events at Veterans Stadium

Amateur baseball

The Liberty Bell Classic, Philadelphia Division I college baseball tournament, was played at the stadium from its inception in 1992 through 2003. The original eight schools were:
In the first championship game in 1992, Delaware defeated Villanova 6-2.
The stadium hosted the 1998 Atlantic 10 Conference Baseball Tournament, won by Fordham.

Minor League baseball

In November 1987, the new owners of the Phillies AAA franchise, the Maine Guides, considered playing the 1988 season at the Vet because Lackawanna County Stadium would not be ready until the 1989 season. The team would have had to play 12:35pm day games when the Phillies had night games scheduled at the Vet. Ownership elected to remain in Old Orchard Beach for 1988, renamed the club the 'Maine Phillies', and moved to Moosic, PA in 1989 as the Scranton/Wilkes-Barre Red Barons.
The Eastern League Trenton Thunder played two home games at the stadium in April 1994. The Thunder beat the Canton-Akron Indians, 10 to 9, in front of 483 fans on April 20, 1994, and won 9 to 3 on April 21. Future Phillies broadcaster Tom McCarthy was in the booth for the Thunder during these two games.

Soccer

The stadium was the home field for the Philadelphia Atoms and the Philadelphia Fury, both North American Soccer League teams. The Fury drew 18,191 fans for their April 1, 1978, opener at the stadium which they lost 3-0 to the Washington Diplomats. The Fury averaged 8,279 per-match in 1978 NASL, 5,624 per-match in 1979 NASL, and 4,778 in the 1980 NASL seasons. The club was moved to Montreal in 1981 NASL season.
The stadium hosted an exhibition match on August 2, 1991, between the U.S. National Team and English professional soccer club Sheffield Wednesday. John Harkes played for Wednesday, the first American to play in the English Premier League. 44,261 fans saw the U.S. score two second-half goals to defeat Sheffield Wednesday 2-0.
Philadelphia established a bid committee to host matches for the 1994 World Cup which was to be played in the United States. Phillies president Bill Giles was on the Philadelphia bid committee and hoped to use Veterans Stadium for games. In addition to the challenge of installing a natural grass field for the games, FIFA would have required the Phillies to vacate the stadium for a month to allow for sufficient preparation time prior to the matches. Giles could only offer 17-days. Of the nine venues eventually chosen to host matches, not one was home to a professional baseball club.

High school football

Veterans Stadium hosted Philadelphia's City Title high-school football championship game from 1973 to 1977 and in 1979. The series was suspended in 1980. With the entry of the Philadelphia Catholic League into what is now PIAA District XII (which was formed when the Public League joined the PIAA in 2002), the "City Title Game" was restored in 2008.

Professional wrestling

The only professional wrestling event held in Veterans Stadium was National Wrestling Alliance/Jim Crockett Promotions "Great American Bash" on July 1, 1986, with an attendance of 10,900. The event was the start of a 14 city stop summer tour.

Concerts

The stadium has hosted many stadium concerts, by famous artists of many different genres.

Other events

The venue also played host to religious events including annual Jehovah's Witnesses conventions, which was open to the public each year it took place.   It also played host to a Billy Graham crusade in 1992.

Photo gallery

File:Vet_Homeplatemarker. (2006)
File:Veterans Stadium goalpost marker. (2011)
File:Veterans Stadium pitching mound marker. (2011)
File:Vet_Memorial. (2006)
File:Vethistoricalsign.  (2007)
File:Thevetdedication. (2007)





Further reading

Curtain Up On A Mod New Act|publisher=Sports Illustrated|date=1971-04-19|url=



