[[National Endowment for Democracy]]

CATEGORIES: Non-profit organizations based in the United States, Organizations established in 1983, 1983 establishments in the United States, National Endowment for Democracy

The National Endowment for Democracy (NED) is a U.S. non-profit soft power organization that was founded in 1983 to promote democracy. It is funded primarily through an annual allocation from the U.S. Congress, within the budget of USAID, the U.S. agency for development assistance, which is part of the U.S. State Department. In addition to its grants program, NED also supports and houses the Journal of Democracy, the World Movement for Democracy, the International Forum for Democratic Studies, the Reagan–Fascell Fellowship Program, the Network of Democracy Research Institutes, and the Center for International Media Assistance.

History

Founding

A bill was introduced in April 1967 by Congressman Dante Fascell (D,FL) to create an institute of International Affairs. And although the bill did not pass it led to discussions on Capitol Hill to establish an institution in which democracy efforts abroad would benefit the U.S. as well as countries struggling for freedom and self- government.
In a 1982 speech at the Palace of Westminster, President Ronald Reagan proposed an initiative, before the British Parliament, "to foster the infrastructure of democracy—the system of a free press, unions, political parties, universities." The U.S. government, through USAID (United States Agency for International Development), contracted The American Political Foundation to study democracy promotion, which became known as "The Democracy Program." The Program recommended the creation of a bipartisan, private, non-profit corporation to be known as the National Endowment for Democracy (NED). NED, though non-governmental, would be funded primarily through annual appropriations from the U.S. government and subject to congressional oversight. The State Department and United States Information Agency (USIA) proposed the Endowment to encourage and facilitate exchanges between democratic institutions through private sectors; promote nongovernmental participation in democratic training programs; strengthening democratic electoral processes abroad in cooperation with indigenous democratic forces; fostering cooperation between American private sector groups and those abroad "dedicated to the cultural values, institutions, and organizations of democratic pluralism.", and encouraging democratic development consistent with the interests of both the U.S and the other groups receiving assistance.
In 1983, the House Foreign Affairs Committee proposed legislation to provide initial funding of $31.3 million for NED as part of the State Department Authorization Act (H.R. 2915), because NED was in its beginning stages of development the appropriation was set at $18 million.  Included in the legislation was $13.8 million for the Free Trade Union Institute, an affiliate of the AFL-CIO, $2.5 million for an affiliate of the National Chamber Foundation, and $5 million each for two party institutes, which was later eliminated by a vote of 267–136. The conference report on H.R. 2915 was adopted by the House on November 17, 1983 and the Senate the following day. On November 18, 1983, articles of incorporation were filed in the District of Columbia to establish the National Endowment for Democracy as a nonprofit organization.

Later history

Under the reauthorization of NED several factors were added to the organizations guidelines: the NED Act had to arrange the Board's prohibition on the use of funds for partisan political purposes, including funding for national party operations; mandate that NED consult with the State Department on any overseas programs it funds prior to the commencement of their activities; move the required date of reporting to Congress on all grants from December 31 to February 4, and lastly despite its non-governmental status, comply fully with the requirements of the Freedom of Information Act.



NED is structured to act as a grant-making foundation, distributing funds to private non-governmental organizations for the purpose of promoting democracy abroad. The Endowment serves as the umbrella organization in which half of NED's funding is allocated annually to four main U.S. organizations: the American Center for International Labor Solidarity (ACILS), the Center for International Private Enterprise (CIPE), the National Democratic Institute for International Affairs (NDI), and the International Republican Institute (IRI), formerly known as the National Republican Institute for International Affairs. The other half of NED's funding is awarded annually to hundreds of non-governmental organizations based abroad which apply for support.
The Endowment has come a long way from opposition between both political parties in its earlier stages to widespread bipartisan endorsement on the Hill. And even though the American government has implemented its own democracy promoting capabilities through USAID (United States Agency for International Development), NED's independence plays a key factor in its relevance. The organizations independence gives it an ability to work in situations that official bodies may have to avoid and its non-bureaucratic nature enables it to move quickly in rapidly changing situations. NED has become a universal model and has influenced other nations to create their own institutions for the promotion of democracy.

Source of funding

The NED receives an annual appropriation from the U.S. budget (it is included in the chapter of the Department of State budget destined for the U.S. Agency for International Development-USAID) and is subject to congressional oversight even as a non-governmental organization. In the financial year to the end of September 2009 NED had an income of $135.5 million, nearly all of which came from U.S Government agencies.
From 1984 to 1990 the NED received $15–18m of congressional funding annually, and $25–$30m from 1991 to 1993. At the time the funding came via the United States Information Agency. In 1993 the NED nearly lost its congressional funding, after the House of Representatives initially voted to abolish its funding. The funding (of $35m, a rise from $30m the year before) was only retained after a vigorous campaign by NED supporters. 95 (Summer, 1994), pp. 123–138. 
The NED has received funding from foundations, such as the Smith Richardson Foundation, the John M. Olin Foundation, and others.  The Bradley Foundation supported the Journal of Democracy with $1.5 million during 1990–2008.

Board

NED's long-serving president (since April 30, 1984World Movement for Democracy, Carl Gershman) is Carl Gershman, former Senior Counselor to the United States Representative to the United Nations and former Executive Director of Social Democrats USA.
The Endowment's board includes a wide range of people who have previously held positions in Congress such as former Congressmen Richard Gephardt and Martin Frost; Senator Norm Coleman, and U.S. Representative Gregory Meeks. As well as Professors of Political Science and International Affairs, Andrew Nathan of Columbia University and Francis Fukuyama and Azir Nafisi of Johns Hopkins SAIS. Business tycoons Marilyn Nelson of Carlson and Ken Duberstein of the Duberstien Group also are members of the board.

Activities

The NED has supported programs in countries outside the United States.

Funding of foreign political candidates

NED does not directly fund any political party, as this is forbidden by law. According to NED, it funds election monitoring and also civic education about voting, such as student-led "get-out-the-vote" campaigns.
NED has also supported, provided training, and consulted with groups which approve of democracy, but criticize the United States, in countries such as Indonesia and Ukraine.

Central America

The International Republican Institute (IRI) received about $1.2 million from NED in 2009 in order to support think tanks and advocacy groups to "support initiatives to implement political positions during the campaigns in 2009".ca"

China

=Democracy and human rights advocacy=

Of the 28 Asian NGOs the NED funds, 18 are related to China. Most of these grants go to organizations promoting democracy, human rights, or in the case of Hong Kong, Xinjiang and Tibet, local interests against and independence from China. Democracy organizations funded by the NED that target China as a whole are Human Rights in China, the China Strategic Institute, and the Laogai Research Foundation. The NED also promotes the Republic of China as a "model of democratization".

=Xinjiang=

According to the NED's online Democracy Projects Database it has given funding the following groups for programs relating to China's Xinjiang province and its Uyghur people.
To advance the human rights of Uyghur women and children. The Foundation will maintain an English- and Uyghur-language website on the human rights situation of Uyghur women and children; conduct a civic education seminar for Uyghur women; and conduct advocacy on behalf of the human rights of Uyghurs in China.
To promote freedom of expression for writers working in the Uyghur lan­gauge. The International Uyghur PEN Club will maintain a website that fea­tures banned writings and the works of persecuted poets, historians, jour­nalists, and others, and will conduct international advocacy campaigns on behalf of imprisoned writers.
To raise awareness of Uyghur human rights issues and advance religious freedom and human rights. The UAA's Uyghur Human Rights Project will research, document and bring to interna­tional attention, independent and accurate information about human rights violations affecting the Turkic populations of the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region.
To enhance the ability of Uyghur prodemocracy groups and leaders to implement effective human rights and democracy campaigns. The World Uyghur Congress will organize a conference and training workshop for pro-democracy Uyghur youth, as well as young and mid-career professionals, on the use of new media and social networking technology for advocacy and outreach, Internet secu­rity, and innovative tactics in promot­ing and defending human rights.

Iran

According to the NED's online Democracy Projects Database it has given funding the following groups for programs relating to Iran (1990–2006):
Iranians who have served as fellows at NED include:
In 2002, Mehangiz Kar, an Iranian women activist received the annual Democracy award from then-First Lady Laura Bush.

Latin America and the Caribbean

=Ecuador=

NED supports a wide range of programs in Ecuador including the Asociación de Mujeres Municipalistas del Ecuador (AMUME) which "advocates on behalf of women elected officials during legislative reform efforts by facilitating debate, analysis and women's participation," and Asylum Access which provides legal support for refugee communities.

=Venezuela=

In 2004, Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez publicized documents which purported to show that the NED funded civil associations in the country, including a tripling of funding from about $250,000 to nearly $900,000 between 2000 and 2001.
The National Endowment for Democracy, on their Venezuela page indicate that the National Endowment for Democracy spent $1,752,300 on grants for the following programs in Venezuela (with specific areas indicated) in 2013: 
 Accountability 
$41,500  Building Local Government Capacity in Public Security Policies 
$55,000  Promoting Public Dialogue, Accountability, and Decentralization in Caracas 
Civic Education 
$52,000  Promoting Democratic Values and Leadership among Venezuelan Youth 
$34,145,  Promoting New Leadership at the Community Level 
$58,000 Youth and the Future of the Country 
$20,000 Promoting Youth Leadership 
$37,000 Activists without Censorship 
$75,000 (Supplement: $15,000) Promoting Dialogue and Consensus Building 
Democratic Ideas and Values 
$39,980 Promoting Youth Participation in Local Governance 
$44,000 Promoting Independent Political Research 
$50,000 Political Leadership with a Gender Perspective 
Developing Market Economy 
$149,413 Fostering Entrepreneurship in Defense of Democracy and Free Markets 
Freedom of Association  
$60,000 Promoting a Civic Culture and Democratic Values Among Informal Sector Workers 
Freedom of Information 
$53,000 Assessing Media's Contribution to Democracy in Venezuela 
$63,000 Emerging Leadership, Communications and Social Networks 
$50,872, Monitoring Freedom of Press 
$40,000 Encouraging Participation and Transforming the Electoral Culture 
Human Rights 
$49,990 Protecting Indigenous Human Rights 
$70,000 Promoting Social Cohesion, Democratic Governance and Respect for Human Rights 
$48,000 Protection and Promotion of Human Rights  
$35,000 Promoting Participation and Human Rights 
Political Processes 
$48,000 Training Candidates for the Municipal Elections 
$35,000 Strengthening Democratic Good Governance at the Local Level 
$155,000 (Supplement: $20,000) Promoting Greater Oversight of Elections 
$60,350 Fostering Citizen Participation in Local Elections and Local Governance 
Rule of Law 
$33,000 Providing Legal Assistance 
Strengthening Political Institutions 
$295,050 Improved Training and Communication Skills for Political Activists 

Western Europe

NED also funded political groups in the democracies of Western Europe in the 1980s. The French newspaper Libération published a report which claimed that the U.S. funded the National Inter-University Union. The alleged funding was criticized by the Cato Institute, which stated that:
 "French democracy in the 1980s did not appear to be so fragile that it required financial assistance from American taxpayers to sustain itself. The government of François Mitterrand was duly elected within a democratic system nearly as old as America's. The AFL-CIO, however, determined that France's socialist government was permitting a dangerous rise of communist influence. According to the late Irving Brown, Paris-based director of international relations for the AFL-CIO at the time of the incident: "France . . . is threatened by the Communist apparatus. . . . It is a clear and present danger if the present is thought of as 10 years from now." That mentality has resulted in AFL-CIO support for highly controversial causes. One of the French groups that received funding, the National Inter-University Union, was widely viewed as a cauldron of rightist extremism and xenophobia and rumored also to have ties to terrorists. Surely, the U.S. government did not intend to fund authoritarian groups that work to undermine the government of a stable democratic nation.Loose Cannon: The National Endowment for Democracy, Cato Institute 
More recently, the NED has provided funding to the French NGO Reporters Without Borders (RSF), which promotes freedom of press, particularly in Cuba.

Eastern Europe

During the 1980s and 1990s, NED invested millions of dollars in Eastern Europe.

Ukraine, Georgia, Serbia, Slovakia

The NED played a significant role in the 2004 presidential election in Ukraine. In an article in the Washington Post, NED director Nadia Diuk acknowledged that there was a controversy surrounding the involvement of the NED: "Some have sought to portray the events in Ukraine as orchestrated in the West, a model executed with the support of Western pro-democracy foundations.' Comparing this to similar recent interventions in Slovakia, Serbia and Montenegro and Georgia, she writes, "Some commentators believe that the similarity of their actions proves they are part of a U.S.-sponsored plot, an effort to extend American influence throughout the world." Diuk states that critics are overlooking a genuinely "home-grown" aspect to the "election revolts" in these Eastern European regimes.  She also stated that, "... These strategies were supported by the reports of Western election observers," and that "all these breakthrough elections have been accomplished with the vigorous participation of civic groups that support free and fair elections by monitoring the media, carrying out voter education, publicizing the platforms of candidates in the absence of a free press, training election observers, conducting polls and so on."
The current events in Ukraine are interesting when considered against the background of work done by the National Endowment for Democracy in the Ukraine.  In their 2012 report, NED indicated that it spent US$3,381,824 (from the US federal budget) on the following programs in the Ukraine:   
 
ANGO Resource Center:  $30,086 
Association of Ukrainian Law Enforcement Monitors:  $44,900 
Bakhchisarai Center of Regional Development "Top-Kaya:  $15,526 
Bukovyna Partnership Agency:  $48,295 
Center for International Private Enterprise:  $359,945 
Center for Political Studies and Analysis:  $27,940 
Center for Progressive Young People "Apelsin":  $25,000 
Center for Research on Social Perspectives in the Donbas:  $39,776 
Center for the Study of Social Processes and Humanitarian Issues:  $30,060 
Center UA:  $26,920 
Cherkasy Committee Voters of Ukraine:  $34,993 
Chernihiv Youth Educational Center "Initiative":  $27,930 
Chernivtsi Committee of Voters of Ukraine:  $29,920 
"Civic Space" Information and Analytical Center:  $31,535 
Civil Initiative Support Center:  $48,486 
Democratic Initiatives Foundation:  $73,464 
Dniprovsky Center for Social Research:  $25,000 
Dniprovsky Center for Social Research:  $25,000 (SIC from NED website) 
Donetsk Press Club:  $39,810 
Donetsk Committee of Voters of Ukraine:  $52,930 
East European Democratic Center:  $78,969 
East European Democratic Center:  $41,584 
Foundation for Promotion of Civil Activity:  $27,130 
Garage Gang Collective:  $37,637 
Human Rights Training Center:  $19,370 
Independent Association of Broadcasters:  $39,271 
Independent Center of Political Researchers and Journalists:  $33,611 
Institute for Euro-Atlantic Cooperation:  $48,120 
Institute of Mass Information:  $34,470 
Institute of Political Education:  $47,994 
Institute of the Republic:  $29,990 
International Republican Institute:  $250,000 
International Republican Institute:  $35,000 
International Republican Institute:  $95,000 
Journal Ji Analytical Center:  $34,981 
Kharkiv Human Rights Protection Group:  $47,200 
Kherson Association of Journalists "South":  $31,675 
Kherson Association of Journalists "South":  $39,578 
Kherson Committee of Voters of Ukraine:  $40,890 
Krytyka Journal:  $47,000 
Luhansk Business Club "European Choice":  $32,000 
Lutsk Center for Political Analysis and Electoral Consulting:  $26,523 
"Moloda Cherkaschyna" Coalition of Cherkassy Youth NGOs:  $31,855 
National Democratic Institute for International Affairs:  $345,000 
Odesa Committee of Voters of Ukraine :  $41,851 
Our House - Svatovschina:  $21,945 
Policy Association for an Open Society:  $39,934 
Polissya Foundation for International and Regional Research:  $25,000 
"Postup" Human Rights Center:  $24,030 
Razumkov Center for Economic and Political Research:  $39,990 
School for Policy Analysis of the Kyiv-Mohyla Academy:  $52,750 
Smoloskyp:  $36,294 
Spilnyi Prostir Association:  $50,000 
Sumy Regional Committee of Youth Organizations:  $56,260 
Sumy Regional Organization "Bureau of Political Analysis":  $31,293 
"Tamarisk" Center for Support of Civic and Cultural Initiatives:  $30,890 
Telekritika"  $69,800 
Ukrainian Catholic University:  $35,000 
Ukrainian Center for Independent Political Research:  $56,950 
Ukrainian Helsinki Human Rights Union:  $47,994 
Ukrainian Youth Association of Ukraine:  $42,900 
Vinnitsa Youth Organization "Nashe Podillya":  $52,046 
Volyn Resource Center:  $16,170 
Youth Alternative:  $42,143 

Others

Center for International Media Assistance (CIMA)

The Center for International Media Assistance (CIMA) "works to strengthen the support, raise the visibility, and improve the effectiveness of independent media development throughout the world. The Center provides information, builds networks, conducts research, and highlights the indispensable role independent media play in the creation and development of sustainable democracies." 
"CIMA convenes working groups, commissions research reports, and holds events. The Center distributes a comprehensive list of digital media information and maintains a bibliographic database of international media assistance resources."  
More information can be found at CIMA's website 

Criticisms

Criticism of the organization include a lack of openness and public accountability in its stewardship of millions of dollars a year in taxpayer funds in 1985  It is an organization that uses US tax money to actually subvert democracy, by showering funding on favored political parties or movements overseas. It underwrites color-coded 'people's revolutions' overseas that look more like pages out of Lenin's writings on stealing power than genuine indigenous democratic movements." 





Further reading

|id=Evaluation performed on behalf of the Social Science Research Council (SSRC), at the request of and with funding from the Strategic and Operational Research Agenda (SORA) of USAID (Office of Democracy and Governance in the Bureau for Democracy, Conflict, and Humanitarian Assistance), according to the }}
|first=Committee on Evaluation of USAID Democracy Assistance Programs
|last=National Research Council
|authorlink=United_States_National_Research_Council
|title=Improving democracy assistance: Building knowledge through evaluations and research|editor-first=Jack A|editor-last=Goldstone|editor-link=Jack A. Goldstone|pages=xvi+336|type=6×9 inches, 15×23 cm |year=2008|id=ISBN 0-309-11736-4 |isbn=978-0-309-11736-4 |url= }}




