[[Boz Burrell]]

CATEGORIES: 1946 births, 2006 deaths, English male singers, English rock singers, English bass guitarists, English rock bass guitarists, English rock guitarists, British blues musicians, British blues singers, Blues rock musicians, King Crimson members, Bad Company members, People from Lincoln, England, Deaths from myocardial infarction

Raymond "Boz" Burrell (1 January 1946 – 21 September 2006) was an English musician. Originally a vocalist and guitarist, Burrell is best known for his bass playing and work with the rock bands King Crimson and Bad Company. He died of a heart attack in Spain on 21 September 2006 aged 60.

Career

Early Years

Raymond Burrell was born on New Year's Day of 1946 in Holbeach, Lincolnshire. As a teen in the 50's, he began playing guitar for beat bands in the local area and taking on vocals with bands in the Norfolk area. Boz acquired a passion for jazz and enjoyed acts such as Fats Waller and John Coltrane.
By 1963 Burrell was fronting The Tea Time Four, an R&B/Jazz quartet with a reputation of upstaging the acts for which they opened for. Lineup changes were plentiful but success came with a move to London in 1965 at the suggestion of manager, Jack Barrie. With the addition of Ian McLagan on keyboard and a name change to Boz People, the group secured a contract with EMI's Columbia label.allmusic.allmusic.com/artist/the-tea-time-four-mn0001288190
Burrells' style leant more towards jazz where as McLagan was more blues oriented, this combination of personalities worked well together and this led to four singles being recorded and backing band slots with Kenny Lynch. However with little commercial success McLagan soon left to join The Small Faces.allmusic.com/artist/the-boz-people-mn0001910697
Burrell next enjoyed a short stint in the soul band, Feel For Soul, back in Norwich from 1966 until the following year. During this period he also briefly replaced Roger Daltrey in The Who.allmusic.com/artist/feel-for-soul-mn0001920645
In 1968 Burrell recorded a cover of Bob Dylan's Down in the Flood released as a single simply as 'Boz'. He was joined by organist  Jon Lord, guitarist Ritchie Blackmore and drummer Ian Paice, who formed Deep Purple at the same time, and bassist Chas Hodges, later of Chas and Dave fame. Burrell' later appeared on Centipede's Septober Energy in (1971).

King Crimson

In 1971 Burrell joined King Crimson as the new vocalist, beating off auditions from Bryan Ferry and Elton John. After a last minute let down from new bassist Rick Kemp, Boz was installed as the band's bass player with Robert Fripp and Ian Wallace teaching him to play rather than start the search again.
The band toured and recorded the band's fourth studio album, Islands, a warmer sounding release and the band's only string ensemble experimentation. Tensions began socially on tour and creatively with the direction of the groups latest effort. This led to Peter Sinfield being ousted following the band's next tour. During rehearsals in early 1972 the band fell apart with all members leaving due to creative restrictions imposed by Fripp as a "quality control" measure.
The band members were convinced to rejoin and fulfil their touring commitments for that year with the intention of disbanding thereafter. Recordings from this subsequent tour exist as the live compilation, Earthbound. Although relations improved between both parties leading to an offer from the musicians to continue on in the band, Fripp had already moved on and declined.
In 1973 Burrell, Wallace and Mel Collins reunited with Sinfield for his solo effort, Still. They also went on to form Snape with Collective Consciousness Society's Alexis Korner and Peter Thorup, whom had been on tour with King Crimson in the states the previous year, releasing the studio album, Accidentally Born in  New Orleans, and a live album, Live on Tour in Germany. In 1974 Burrell featured with Chapman Whitney Streetwalkers along with other members of Family and King Crimson.allmusic.com/album/streetwalkers-mw0000862259

Bad Company

Burrell was a founding member of the supergroup, Bad Company, formed in 1973 along with ex Free vocalist Paul Rodgers and drummer Simon Kirke and ex Mott the Hoople guitarist, Mick Ralphs. The band debuted with the self-titled Bad Company in 1974 which eventually went Platinum as did the 1975 follow up, Straight Shooter and 1976's Run With the Pack.
1977's Burnin' Sky proved less successful but the groups fifth release in 1979, Desolation Angels, saw the band once again return to platinum status. The final studio album featuring the original members, released in 1982, was the worst selling album in this incarnation and the band soon after split.
Using the name Bad Company, Ralphs and Kirke continued to play together but it was not until 1998 that Burrell rejoined his band mates along with Rogers for a reunion tour, recording four new songs and releasing the compilation The Original Bad Company Anthology. Burrell left the band in 1999 along with Ralphs.

Later Work

In January 1981, Burrell joined Roger Chapman again for his solo band, The Shortlist, leaving in 1983. He returned in May 1987 but left again the following year in June. In 1982 Burrell contributed to Jon Lord's Solo album, Before I Forget, on the track Hollywood Rock And Roll and in 1984 he joined the short lived Nightfly.freewebs.htm
In the 90's Burrell worked with such acts as Alvin Lee for his Best of British Blues tour of 1996 and Ruby Turner but his main creative outlet was with his partnership with the Scottish blues singer, Tam White. Their collaboration developed into a trio, The Shoe String Band and a big band, the Celtic Groove Connection. White was present at Burrell's apartment in Spain when he suddenly died of a heart attack during rehearsals, on September 21, 2006.


Discography


as Boz People:
solo as Boz:
with Centipede:
with King Crimson:
with Pete Sinfield:
with Snape:
with Bad Company
with Boxer:
with Jon Lord:
with The Shortlist:
with Ken Hensley:
with Ruby Turner:
with Celtic Groove Connection:

Notes






