[[Atom Heart Mother]]

CATEGORIES: 1970 albums, Albums produced by David Gilmour, Albums produced by Nick Mason, Albums produced by Richard Wright (musician), Albums produced by Roger Waters, Albums with cover art by Hipgnosis, Capitol Records albums, EMI Records albums, English-language albums, Harvest Records albums, Mobile Fidelity Sound Lab albums, Pink Floyd albums, Progressive rock albums by British artists, Albums recorded at Abbey Road Studios

Atom Heart Mother is the fifth studio album by the English progressive rock band Pink Floyd.  It was released by Harvest and EMI Records 2 October 1970 in the UK, and by Harvest and Capitol on 10 October 1970 in the US. A remastered CD was released in 1994 in the UK and the United States, and again in 2011. Ron Geesin, who had already influenced and collaborated with Roger Waters, made a notable contribution to the album and received a then-rare outside songwriting credit.
This was the first Pink Floyd album to be specially mixed for four-channel quadraphonic sound as well as conventional two-channel stereo. The SQ quadraphonic mix was released on LP in a matrix format compatible with standard stereo record players. There was also a release of the quadraphonic version in the UK in fully discrete four-channel form on the "Quad-8" format, a four-channel variant of the stereo 8-track tape cartridge.
The cover was, like earlier albums, designed by Hipgnosis, and was significant in that it was the first one to not feature the band's name on the cover, or contain any photographs of the band anywhere. This was a trend that would continue on subsequent covers throughout the 1970s and beyond.
Although it was commercially and critically successful on release, the band, particularly Waters and David Gilmour, have expressed several negative opinions of the album in more recent years.  Nevertheless, it remained popular enough for Gilmour to perform the title track with Geesin in 2008.

Recording

The album came about after the band had completed work on the soundtrack to the film Zabriskie Point in Rome, which had ended somewhat acrimoniously, and headed back to London in early 1970 for rehearsals. A number of out-takes from the Rome sessions were used to assemble new material during these rehearsals, though some of it, such as "The Violent Sequence", later to become "Us and Them", would not be used for some time.

Side one

The title track resulted from a number of instrumental figures the band had composed during these rehearsals, including the chord progression of the main theme, which David Gilmour had called "Theme from an Imaginary Western", The band felt that the live performances developed the piece into a manageable shape. Recording of the track commenced at Abbey Road Studios, and was somewhat cumbersome, as it was the first recording to use a new  eight-track one-inch tape and EMI TG12345 transistorized mixing console (8 track 20 microphone  inputs) in the studio, and, as a result, EMI insisted the band were not allowed to do any splicing of the tape in order to edit pieces together. Consequently, Waters and Nick Mason had little choice but to play the bass and drums respectively for the entire 23 minute piece in one sitting. The other instruments the band played were subsequently overdubbed later. Mason recalled the final backing track's lack of precise timekeeping would cause problems later on.
By March, they had finished recording the track,
The track was originally called "The Amazing Pudding", though Geesin's original score referred to it as "Epic".
The piece as presented on the completed album is a progression from Pink Floyd's earlier instrumental pieces such as "A Saucerful of Secrets" and even earlier, "Interstellar Overdrive". The "Atom Heart Mother" suite takes up all of side one, and is split into six parts, individually named. Geesin chose the opening section name, "Father's Shout" after Earl "Fatha" Hines, while other names such as "Breast Milky" and "Funky Dung" were inspired by the album cover artwork. The orchestral arrangements feature a full brass section, a cello Nevertheless, there are several occasions where Gilmour's electric guitar takes the lead.

Side two

Side two opens with three five-minute songs: one by each of the band's three resident songwriters, and closes with a suite with sound effects primarily conceived by Mason, and was the only track on the album never to be played live in concert.
According to Mason, Gilmour, having had little songwriting experience at that point, was ordered to remain in Abbey Road until he had composed a song suitable for inclusion on the album. He came up with a folk influenced tune, "Fat Old Sun", which he still considers to be a personal favourite. The song was extended in arrangement to fifteen minutes as a key part of the band's live set, and is a staple of Gilmour's various solo tours.
The final track, "Alan's Psychedelic Breakfast", is divided into three segments, each with its own descriptive title, joined by dialogue and sound effects of then-roadie Alan Styles preparing, discussing, and eating breakfast. The idea for the piece came about by Waters experimenting with the rhythm of a dripping tap, which combined sound effects and dialogue recorded by Mason in his kitchen with musical pieces recorded at Abbey Road. A slightly re-worked version was believed to be performed on stage only once on 22 December 1970 at Sheffield City Hall, Sheffield, England with the band members pausing between pieces to eat and drink their breakfast. The original LP ends with the sound of a dripping tap which continues into the inner groove, and thus plays on indefinitely.
While recording sessions for his Barrett album were underway (with help from Gilmour), previous Floyd frontman, Syd Barrett would occasionally observe his old band as they were recording Atom Heart Mother.

Cover art

The original album cover, designed by art collective Hipgnosis, shows a cow standing in a pasture with no text nor any other clue as to what might be on the record.
In the mid-1970s, a bootleg containing rare singles and B-sides entitled The Dark Side of the Moo appeared, with a similar cover. Like Atom Heart Mother, the cover had no writing on it, although in this case it was to protect the bootlegger's anonymity rather than any artistic statement.

Release and reception

Atom Heart Mother was released in the UK

Legacy

Critical reaction to the suite has always been mixed, and all band members have expressed negativity toward it in recent times. For instance, Gilmour has said the album was "a load of rubbish. We were at a real down point ... I think we were scraping the barrel a bit at that period"
The band were initially enthusiastic about performing the suite in the early 1970s. An early performance was taped for the San Francisco based television station KQED, featuring just the band, on 28 April 1970.
Stanley Kubrick wanted to use the album's title track in A Clockwork Orange. The group refused permission, primarily because Kubrick was unsure of exactly which pieces of music he wanted and what he wished to do with them. In retrospect, Waters said "maybe it's just as well it wasn't used after all".
On 14 and 15 June 2008, Geesin performed "Atom Heart Mother" with Italian tribute band Mun Floyd over two nights as part of the Chelsea Festival.
In 2013, Geesin produced a book, The Flaming Cow, which documented his experience with working with Pink Floyd, including the making of this album from his point of view.

Track listing

Personnel

Taken from sleeve notes
(all instrumentation uncredited)

Charts and certifications

Peak positions

Certifications






