[[Artemis Fowl (series)]]

CATEGORIES: Artemis Fowl, Fantasy novel series, Ireland in fiction

Artemis Fowl is a series of eight science fiction fantasy novels written by Irish author Eoin Colfer, featuring the titular character, Artemis Fowl II. A teenage criminal mastermind, Artemis captures a Fairy, Holly Short, in the first book and holds her for ransom to exploit the magical Fairy People and restore his family's fortune. In the sequel, Artemis Fowl: The Arctic Incident, he allies with the Fairies to rescue his father from the Russian Mafia. The series introduces Artemis as an anti-hero and the fairies' enemy, but as the series progresses, he assists the Fairies in resolving conflicts with worldwide ramifications, with Artemis' character developing and changing throughout the chronology. The series concluded with Artemis Fowl: The Last Guardian, released July 2012.
The series has received positive critical reception and generated huge sales. It has also originated graphic novel adaptations, and a film adaptation is currently in the writing process.

Series overview

Main series

=Artemis Fowl=

Artemis Fowl, the main character and anti-hero, and his bodyguard, Butler, kidnap Lower Elements Police Captain Holly Short, a fairy elf, and demand a ransom from the People.
A graphic novel adaptation was released in 2007. A film adaptation was reported to be in the writing stage in mid-2008 with Jim Sheridan directing.

=Artemis Fowl: The Arctic Incident=

Artemis Fowl: The Arctic Incident is the second book of the series. It follows the rescue of Artemis Fowl I from the Russian Mafiya, alongside the battle against the Bwa Kell (Goblins).

=Artemis Fowl: The Eternity Code=

Artemis Fowl: The Eternity Code covers Jon Spiro's theft of the fictional C Cube and its recovery.

=Artemis Fowl: The Opal Deception=

The fourth book, Artemis Fowl: The Opal Deception, covers pixie Opal Koboi's second attempt at world domination, after her first unfruitful attempt in the second novel. Koboi convinces Giovanni Zito, a fictional environmentalist, to send a probe into the ground.

=Artemis Fowl: The Lost Colony=

Artemis Fowl: The Lost Colony involves bringing the demon island Hybras back from "Limbo," with the help of N°1, a powerful demon warlock.

=Artemis Fowl: The Time Paradox=

The sixth book of the series, Artemis Fowl: The Time Paradox, was released in the United Kingdom on 7 August 2008 and in the United States on 15 July 2008. Artemis' mother, Angeline Fowl, becomes ill with Spelltropy, and the only cure lies in the brain fluids of the silky sifaka lemur, the last of which Artemis killed when he was ten. N°1 sends Artemis and Holly to the past, where Artemis must battle his former self to recover the last silky sifaka lemur before the younger Artemis kills it in a business transaction with Damon Kronski, the leader of the Extinctionists.

=Artemis Fowl: The Atlantis Complex=

Artemis contracts Atlantis Complex, the fairy equivalent of a combination of obsessive compulsive disorder, extreme paranoia, and multiple personality disorder.

=Artemis Fowl: The Last Guardian=

The final book of the series, Artemis Fowl: The Last Guardian, was released on 10 July 2012. Opal Koboi opens the Berserker's Gate, a portal located on the Fowl estate, behind which dwell the spirits of Fairy soldiers, the last victims of the Battle of Tallite, the final blow in the war that sent the People underground.

Other works

Artemis Fowl: The Graphic Novel is a graphic novel adaptation of the first book, and was published on 2 October 2007. Artemis Fowl: The Arctic Incident: The Graphic Novel, an adaptation of the second book, was released 11 August 2009.
Published 4 October 2004, The Artemis Fowl Files is a companion book to the series.
Electronic Arts has brought the first six books in the series to the Nintendo DS and Nintendo DSi as parts in its Flips kids' range which was released 4 December 2009.
"Artemis Fowl: The Seventh Dwarf" is a story written for World Book Day set between the first and second books.
The audiobooks were narrated by Nathaniel Parker. Adrian Dunbar and Enn Reitel narrated certain versions from different audiobook companies.

Film adaptation

In 2001 plans were announced for a film adaptation of the series.
On 29 July 2013, Walt Disney Pictures announced that an Artemis Fowl film covering the events of the first and second novels of the series will be produced by Walt Disney Pictures and Harvey Weinstein of The Weinstein Company, with the screenplay developed by Michael Goldenberg (Peter Pan, Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix). Robert De Niro and Jane Rosenthal signed onto the project as executive producers.

Major characters

Artemis Fowl

Artemis Fowl II uses his intelligence to build his family fortune through crime. This stems from his family, who have been criminals for generations. Artemis is cold, cynical, and distant even from his closest friend and bodyguard, Butler. He is very pale with raven black hair and blue eyes.

Butler

Domovoi Butler is the Fowl's loyal manservant and Artemis' bodyguard. Butler accompanies Artemis around the world on his adventures and possesses a wide variety of contacts he uses to aid Artemis. He also has a little sister who appears in a couple of books.

Holly Short

Holly is a determined, forthright elf and the only female member of LEPrecon, the recon division of the LEP. Holly is three feet tall and slender, with nut brown skin and crew-cut style auburn hair. She has often helped Artemis and Butler save the human and fairy worlds.

Foaly

Foaly is a centaur, technical genius, and computer geek. He works for the LEP (Lower Elements Police), the fairy authorities, and is in charge of preventing humankind from discovering the fairy civilization. He designs weaponry, wings, and other technical gadgets that the LEP need. He frequently pokes fun at Commander Julius Root. He is 'hitched' or married to a centaur named Caballine, and apparently has foals.

Opal Koboi

Opal is a deranged pixie whose dream is world-domination and the destruction of the LEP. A prodigy, she built Koboi Laboratories, a technology company, which she used to crush her father's company. Featured in several of the Artemis Fowl books as the main antagonist. She detests Foaly.

Mulch Diggums

Mulch is a kleptomaniac, criminal dwarf who has been involved in crime for about 300 years. When considered with the average Dwarf life span he is not that old, making him nice and spry, a good advantage for a criminal. He once was a mining dwarf, but later decided that stealing from Mud Men (in other words, humans) suited him much better. He insists that humans were stealing from fairy-kind and the earth and that he is simply taking them back or repossessing the items. In the early books, he assisted the LEP or Lower Elements Police against Artemis Fowl, although later, he sides with Artemis Fowl. But eventually, when the fairies and Artemis are on stable ground, he joins forces with The People on many adventures, acting as a LEP helper at the beginning of The Time Paradox.

Julius Root

Julius Root is the Commander of the reconnaissance branch of the LEP. Known for his ruddy face (hence his nickname, "Beetroot") and extremely short temper, he commands Holly Short on many missions until Koboi kills him in The Opal Deception and frames Holly Short.

Themes

Colfer has said in interviews that the series is about Artemis growing up. Themes of greed, trust, and the difference between good and evil are also present in the books.

Critical reception

Colfer summed up the series as "Die Hard with fairies."








