[[Winnipeg Jets (1972–96)]]

CATEGORIES: National Hockey League teams based in Canada, Sports clubs established in 1972, Sports clubs disestablished in 1996, Winnipeg Jets (1972–96)

The Winnipeg Jets were a professional ice hockey team based in Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada. They began play in the World Hockey Association (WHA) in 1972, moving to the National Hockey League (NHL) in 1979 following the collapse of the WHA. Due to mounting financial troubles, in 1996 the franchise moved to Phoenix, Arizona and became the Phoenix Coyotes.

Franchise history

The WHA years (1972–1979)

left|thumb|120px|The original Winnipeg Jets logo in the WHAThe NHL had recently expanded to 16 teams, adding franchises in many hockey-hungry cities (only one in Canada), but also in Atlanta, Oakland and Los Angeles. The WHA brought major professional hockey to Ottawa, Quebec City, Winnipeg, Edmonton, and later Calgary. On December 27, 1971, Winnipeg was granted one of the founding franchises in the WHA, to Ben Hatskin, a local figure who made his wealth in cardboard shipping containers. Pg.58 The team took their name from the Winnipeg Jets of the Western Canada Hockey League .114
The Jets' first signing was Norm Beaudin ("the Original Jet") and the team's first major signing was Bobby Hull. Hull's acquisition, partially financed by the rest of the WHA's teams, gave the league instant credibility and paved the way for several other NHL stars to bolt to the upstart league.
The Jets were further noteworthy in hockey history for being the first North American club seriously to explore Europe as a source of hockey talent. Winnipeg's fortunes were bolstered by acquisitions such as Swedish forwards Anders Hedberg and Ulf Nilsson, who starred with Hull on the WHA's most famous and successful forward line (nicknamed "the Hot Line"), and defenceman Lars-Erik Sjoberg, who would serve as the team's captain and win accolades as the WHA's best defenceman. Behind these players and other European stars such as Willy Lindstrom, Kent Nilsson, Veli-Pekka Ketola, leavened by players such as Peter Sullivan, Norm Beaudin and goaltender Joe Daley, the Jets were the most successful team in the short-lived WHA. The team won the Avco World Trophy three times, including in the league's final season against Wayne Gretzky and the Edmonton Oilers. The Jets made the finals five of the WHA's seven seasons.
Another notable accomplishment was the Jets' 5–3 victory over the Soviet National team on January 5, 1978, making the Jets the first club team ever to defeat the Soviet elite squad.
In the last season in the WHA, Kent Nilsson had 107 points, while Morris Lukowich had 65 goals, and Peter Sullivan had 46 goals and 86 points. The Jets made it to the Avco Cup and Gary Smith gave up the last goal in WHA history to Dave Semenko in a 7–3 Jets win.

=Career leaders (WHA)=

The 1976, 1978 and 1979 Avco Cup winning Winnipeg Jets were inducted into the Manitoba Hockey Hall of Fame in the team category.

The NHL years (1979–1996)

By 1979, the vast majority of the WHA's teams had folded, but the Jets were still going strong and they were absorbed into the NHL along with the Nordiques, Oilers and Hartford Whalers. They had to pay a high price for a berth in the more established league, however.  They had to give up three of their top six scorers – the core of the last WHA champion – in a reclamation draft. They were also forced to draft 18th out of 21 teams. In the draft, they opted to protect defenceman Scott Campbell, who had shown a good deal of promise in the last WHA season.  However, Campbell suffered from chronic asthma that was only exacerbated by Winnipeg's frigid weather.  The asthma drove him out of the league entirely by 1982.
With a decimated roster, the Jets finished dead last in the league for the next two seasons, including a horrendous nine-win season in 1980–81 that still ranks as the worst in Jets/Coyotes history. This stands in marked contrast to the other 1979 Avco Cup finalist, the Oilers, who became one of the most successful teams during the 1980s.
The Jets' first two wretched NHL seasons did net them high draft picks; in the 1981 they drafted future Hall of Fame member Dale Hawerchuk first overall and in the 1981 Dave Babych second overall. The team developed a solid core of players by the mid-1980s, with Hawerchuk, Thomas Steen, Paul MacLean, Randy Carlyle, Laurie Boschman, Doug Smail, and David Ellett providing a strong nucleus.
Led by Hawerchuk, Steen, Babych and Carlyle, the Jets returned to respectability fairly quickly, and made the playoffs 11 times in the next 15 years. However, regular-season success did not transfer over into the playoffs. This was because Winnipeg played in the same division as the Oilers and Calgary Flames – by some accounts, the two best teams in the league during the second half of the 1980s. Due to the way the playoffs were structured at the time, the Jets were all but assured of having to beat either the Oilers or the Flames (or both) to get to the Campbell Conference Finals. For example, in 1984–85, they finished with the fourth-best record in the entire league (behind only Philadelphia, Edmonton and Washington).  They also notched 96 points, which would remain the franchise's best as an NHL team until the 2009–10 Coyotes racked up the franchise's second 100-point season (and first as an NHL team).  While they managed to dispatch the Flames in four games in the best-of-five division semi-final, they were swept by the eventual Stanley Cup champion Oilers in the division final. In fact, Winnipeg and Edmonton played each other in the playoffs six times between 1983 and 1990. The Oilers not only won every series, but held the Jets to only four total victories. Five of those times (1984, 1985, 1987, 1988, and 1990), the Oilers went on to win the Stanley Cup. The Jets would win only one other playoff series, in 1987 (defeating Calgary in the division semi-final before losing to Edmonton in the division final).

=Demise and relocation=

As the NHL expanded in the United States and free agency rules were liberalized, operating costs and salaries grew rapidly - this development hit the league's Canadian teams particularly hard. Moreover, the revised free agency rules gave players the leverage to demand being paid in U.S. dollars - until about the early 1990s, Canadian teams were able to pay most of their players in Canadian dollars. For teams that collected most of their revenue in Canadian dollars, having to pay players in U.S. dollars proved to be serious drain on finances given the declining value of the Canadian dollar.  By 1996, the exchange rate was $1.40 Canadian for each American dollar.  Winnipeg felt the pinch especially hard as it was the league's second-smallest market (becoming the smallest market after the Quebec Nordiques moved to Denver in 1995).  Despite a loyal fan following, serious doubts were raised about whether Winnipeg could support an NHL team in this new environment.  Additionally, their home arena, Winnipeg Arena, was an aging building with no luxury suites and seating with obstructed views.
Various schemes were devised to save the team.  Attempts to find a local buyer were unsuccessful, with league commissioner Gary Bettman saying, "there doesn't seem to be anybody, in a serious fashion, who wants to own the franchise."  Winnipeg was not without hockey for long, however; the American Hockey League's Minnesota Moose moved to Winnipeg as the Manitoba Moose a few months after it was announced that the Jets were leaving town.
During their history, the Jets retired two numbers: Bobby Hull's #9 and Thomas Steen's #25. Both numbers hang in Jobing.  Dale Hawerchuk's No. 10 was added in 2006, in the Coyotes' current sand-red-black scheme. Another tradition that was retained when the franchise moved to Phoenix was the "white-out", in which fans wore all white to home playoff games.  The franchise finally won a playoff series in 2012, their first in 25 years, en route to reaching the Conference Finals for the first time where they were defeated by the eventual champions Los Angeles Kings.
Bobby Hull's No. 9 jersey was temporarily "un-retired" with the acquisition of his son Brett by the Coyotes. Brett wore his father's famous jersey until his own retirement on October 15, 2005, subsequent to which the number was re-retired.  The only former original Jets still with an NHL contract for the  season are Nikolai Khabibulin of the Chicago Blackhawks, Teemu Selanne of the Anaheim Ducks, and current Coyotes captain Shane Doan. Doan is also the last player from the original NHL Jets still with the franchise since its relocation; he joined the team during its last season in Winnipeg. Daniel Briere of the Montreal Canadiens is also an active draft pick of the Jets, however, the team was relocated before he was able to play a game with them. Two former Jets, Deron Quint and Scott Langkow, were active in European leagues as of August 2012.
When the Phoenix Coyotes declared bankruptcy, True North Sports and Entertainment made two bids with the intent of returning the franchise to Winnipeg. True North also considered buying the Nashville Predators, likely to move it to Winnipeg.

The new Winnipeg Jets

In the first decade of the 21st century, a number of factors including a new collective agreement that limited further salary growth and instituted a salary cap, a stronger Canadian dollar and construction of a new arena in downtown Winnipeg combined to make the NHL's presence in Winnipeg a viable business prospect once more.
On May 31, 2011, True North Sports and Entertainment, owners of the AHL Moose, announced it had signed an agreement in principle to purchase the Atlanta Thrashers from Atlanta Spirit, LLC, and to relocate the franchise to Winnipeg. The move was approved by the NHL Board of Governors on June 21, 2011. CKY-TV. Retrieved 2011-05-31. The name and original franchise logos were given or sold to True North by the NHL, which at that time owned the Coyotes.  However, the Coyotes retain the original Jets' history, records, retired numbers, and stats will continue to reside with the Phoenix Coyotes franchise.True North Wouldn't Own Jets' Team History Winnipeg Sun
True North had previously made bids to buy the Coyotes, with the intent of returning the franchise to Winnipeg. Although they were unsuccessful, their approach was praised by Bettman, and so True North received favour from the league when the question of the Thrashers' relocation came up.

Winnipeg White Out

The Winnipeg White Out is a hockey tradition that dates back to 1987 when fans were asked to wear white clothing to home playoff games, creating a very intimidating effect and atmosphere. It was created as a response to the "C of Red" created by fans of the Calgary Flames, who the home town Jets were facing in the first round of the 1987 Stanley Cup Playoffs. respectively.

Season-by-season record

''Note: GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses, T = Ties, Pts = Points, GF = Goals scored for, GA = Goals scored against, PIM = Penalty minutes

WHA era

NHL era

Notable players

Team captains

Note: This list includes Jets captains from both the NHL and WHA.
 
  
 

First round draft picks

Note: This list includes draft picks from both the NHL and WHA.
 
  
 

Hall of Famers

Retired numbers

The Winnipeg Jets retired two numbers in their history. When the Jets relocated to Arizona, the banners of these players also made the move, and these numbers remain retired with the Phoenix Coyotes, now in Coyotes' colours.  After the move to Arizona, number 10 was retired in honor of Dale Hawerchuk, number 7 was retired for Keith Tkachuk, and number 27 was retired for Teppo Numminen.

Franchise scoring leaders

These are the top-ten-point-scorers in Winnipeg Jets history, combining NHL and WHA totals.
''Legend: Pos = Position; GP = Games played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points; P/G = Points per game

Winnipeg Jets individual records





Further reading




