[[Koenigsegg]]

CATEGORIES: Sports car manufacturers, Companies established in 1994, Swedish brands, Car manufacturers of Sweden

Koenigsegg Automotive AB () is a Swedish manufacturer of high-performance sports cars, also known as hyper-cars, based in Ängelholm.

Company

The company was founded in 1994 in Sweden by Christian von Koenigsegg, with the intention of producing a world-class supercar. Many years of development and prototyping led to the company's first street-legal production car delivery in 2002.
Koenigsegg Automotive AB is a non-listed free traded Swedish Public Company. The Company has around 90 shareholders. As the company is free trading the number of shareholders can vary. Christian von Koenigsegg is the CEO and a major shareholder.
In 2006 Koenigsegg began production of the CCX, which uses an engine created in-house especially for that vehicle. The CCX is street-legal in most countries.
Apart from developing, manufacturing and selling the Koenigsegg line of supercars, Koenigsegg is also involved in "green technology" development programmes beginning with the CCXR ("Flower Power") flexfuel supercar and continuing through the present with the Agera R. Koenigsegg is also active in development programs when it comes to plug-in electric cars' systems and next-generation reciprocating engine technologies.
In March 2009 the Koenigsegg CCXR was chosen by Forbes to be one of the ten most beautiful cars in history.
In December 2010 the Koenigsegg Agera won the BBC Top Gear Hypercar of the Year Award.

History

Prototypes and production

The initial design of the Koenigsegg CC was drawn by Christian von Koenigsegg. He then took his sketches to Industrial Designer David Crafoord in order for him to realize the sketches into a 1:5 scale model. David then laid his personal touch to the design brief and finished the model. This model was later scaled up in order to create the base plug for the initial Koenigsegg prototype that was finished in 1996. During the next years the prototype went through extensive testing and several new prototypes were built.
Von Koenigsegg got the idea to build his own car after watching the Norwegian stop-motion animated movie Pinchcliffe Grand Prix in his youth. However, he took his first steps in the world of business in his early 20's running a trading company called Alpraaz in Stockholm, Sweden. Alpraaz exported food from Europe to the developing world. The success of this venture gave von Koenigsegg the necessary financial standing to launch his chosen career as a car manufacturer.
Initially, Koenigsegg Automotive was based in Olofström. In 1997 the company needed larger facilities and moved to Margretetorp, just outside of Ängelholm. However, on 22 February 2003, one of the production facilities caught fire and was badly damaged. From 2003 and on Koenigsegg has converted two large fighter-jet hangars and an office building into a car factory. Since the factory is located on the still-active Ängelholm airport, clients can arrive by private jet next to the factory. Furthermore, Koenigsegg controls and uses the former military runway for shakedown runs of production cars and high speed testing.
The Koenigsegg badge was designed in 1994 by Jacob Låftman, based on the shield of the Koenigsegg family. The shield has been the family's coat-of-arms since the 12th century when a family member was knighted by the German-based Holy Roman Empire. 
The phantom insignia on the Koenigsegg's rear window is a tribute to the first squadron ("Johan Röd") from the now closed Swedish air force wing F 10 Ängelholm, which had the ghost as its emblem.

Attempted purchase of Saab

On June 11, 2009 the media reported that Koenigsegg Group, consisting of Koenigsegg Automotive AB, Christian von Koenigsegg, Bård Eker and a group of investors had signed a letter of intent with Saab to take over the brand from General Motors. General Motors confirmed on June 16 that they had chosen Koenigsegg Group as the buyer of Saab Automobile.
General Motors announced on August 18 that the deal had been signed although certain financing details remained to be completed. On September 9, 2009, Koenigsegg announced that BAIC was going to join as a minority stakeholder in Koenigsegg.
In November 2009 Koenigsegg decided not to finalize the purchase of Saab and therefore left the negotiations. The reason for the withdrawal was that the take over was planned to have been finalized in early Autumn, and at the end of November it was clear that the deal still had some time left before it could be concluded. The timing uncertainty of finalization of the take over was the reason Koenigsegg stated for leaving the deal.

Models

A Koenigsegg CC prototype was first publicized in 1996, while the full carbon fibre production prototype was finally unveiled at the 2000 Paris Motor Show. The first customer took delivery of a red CC8S in 2002 at the Geneva Auto Show and four more cars were built that year. Koenigsegg was established in Asia later that year with a premiere at the Seoul Auto Show. In 2004 the new CCR was unveiled at the Geneva Auto Show; only 14 were ever made.
In 2006 Koenigsegg introduced the CCX, a new model, that was created in order to meet worldwide regulations for road use. This meant the cars had to go through extensive development in order to reach the latest and most stringent safety and emission standards that the world's authorities demanded; Koenigsegg had to, for example, develop their own engines and other related technologies. Furthermore, Koenigsegg is the only supercar and low-volume manufacturer to pass the new European pedestrian impact tests. Just after Koenigsegg passed this test, the test requirement was deemed too complicated for low-volume manufacturers to cope with. So it is now not necessary to meet these regulations if the production volume is less than 10,000 cars annually a single model.
In 2007 Koenigsegg premiered the CCXR, a biofuel/flexfuel version of the CCX. The car features a modified engine, fuel system, and engine management system that enables the car to run on regular gas or ethanol, and in any mixture between these two fuels. Ethanol has a higher octane rating compared to regular fuel and has an internal cooling effect on the combustion chamber, which allows increased performance.
In 2009 Koenigsegg released information about a special edition car called the "Trevita", of which only three will be made. The Trevita, which translates into English as "three whites", has a body made entirely of Koenigsegg's proprietary material consisting of diamond-coated carbon fibre. The Trevita is based on the CCXR, and therefore produces 

In 2010 Koenigsegg released information at the 2010 Geneva Motor Show on a new model called the Agera, which translates into English as "take action/act". The Agera features a Koenigsegg developed 5.0-litre variable geometry twin-turbo V8 engine capable of 

List of models

Records

On 28 February 2005, at 12:08 hrs local time, in Nardò, Italy, the CCR broke the Guinness record for the fastest production car in the world, having attained  circumference), breaking the record previously held by the McLaren F1.bsr.in.com/gallery.aspx?cp-documentid=5157542&page=22
The record was held until September 2005 when the long awaited Bugatti Veyron broke the record again at 
During its review of the CCX, BBC television program Top Gear reported that the Koenigsegg CCR holds the fastest speeding ticket in the United States, which was supposedly for 
When it was first introduced, the Koenigsegg CCXR held the power-to-weight ratio record for production cars, with a power-to-weight ratio of /hp.
In 2008 the German magazine sport auto conducted a 
In September 2011 the Koenigsegg Agera R broke the Guinness World Record - 0-300 km/h with a time of just 14.53 seconds.

Awards






