[[Giuseppe Castiglione (Jesuit)]]

CATEGORIES: 1688 births, 1766 deaths, People from Milan, 18th-century Italian painters, Italian Jesuits, Roman Catholic Religious Brothers, Jesuit China missions, Jesuit missionaries, Italian Roman Catholic missionaries, Roman Catholic missionaries in China, Burials in China, World Digital Library related

Giuseppe Castiglione, S.J. () (July 19, 1688 – July 17, 1766), was an Italian Jesuit lay brother who served as a missionary in China, where he became a painter at the court of the emperor.

Early life

Born in Milan's San Marcellino district, in his early years Castiglione studied painting with Carlo Cornara of the renowned Bottega degli Stampatori painting studio. In 1709 he became a Jesuit. Although a Jesuit, he was never a priest. He was rather a lay brother.

Work in China

The Jesuits in China having asked for a painter to be sent to the imperial court in Beijing, Castiglione volunteered and was accepted. In 1710 on the way to Lisbon he passes through Coimbra where he is kept several years to decorate the chapel of St. Francis Borgia in the Church of the novitiate, today Coimbra's Cathedral, and painted a "circumcision" on the main altar of the same church.monumentos.aspx?id=2809
In 1715, Castiglione arrived in China as a missionary.  While there, Castiglione took the name Lang Shining (郎世寧). His skill as an artist was appreciated by the Emperor Qianlong and Castiglione spent many years in the court painting various subjects, including the portraits of the Emperor and Empress.
Castiglione's work served as the subject for a series of "Battle Copper Prints" commissioned by the Emperor to commemorate his military campaigns. Small-scale copies of his paintings were shipped to Paris and rendered into copperplate intaglio before being returned to China. A series of sixteen prints by Castiglione and his contemporaries Jean-Denis Attiret, Ignatius Sichelbart and Jean-Damascène Sallusti were created in this way.
Castiglione's style was a unique blend of European sensibility with Chinese technique and themes.  The style was however modified according to Chinese taste - strong shadows used in chiaroscuro techniques were unacceptable as Emperor Qianlong thought that shadows looked like dirt, therefore when Castiglione painted the emperor, the intensity of the light was reduced so that there was no shadow on the face, and the features were distinct.
In addition to his demonstrable skill as a painter, he was also in charge of designing the Western-Style Palaces in the imperial gardens of the Old Summer Palace. This prominent Jesuit artist, architect, and missionary died in Beijing.

Influences

Due to Castiglione's work Qing court paintings began to show a clear Western influence.  Other European painters followed and a new school of painting was created that combined Chinese and Western methods.  The influence of Western art on the Qing court paintings is particularly evident in the light, shade, perspective, as well as the priority given to recording contemporary events.
In 2005, Castiglione became the subject of the television series Palace Artist in China, played by famed Canadian-Chinese actor Dashan (Mark Rowswell), and broadcast by China Central Television (CCTV).

Gallery

Image:Qianlong1.jpg|Emperor Qianlong
Image:Kaiserin-Xiaoxian1.jpg|Empress Xiao Xian
Image:Qianlong emperor hunting.jpg|The Qianlong Emperor chasing a deer on a hunting trip
Image:The Pine, Hawk and Glossy Ganoderma.jpg|The Pine, Hawk and Glossy Ganoderma
Image:Qianlong collecting lingzhi.jpg|Qianlong collecting lingzhi
Image:Horse Chaoni'er.
Image:Ayusi Assailing The Rebels with a Lance.jpg|Ayusi assailing the rebels with a lance
Image:Followers in the Vase.jpg|Followers in the Vase







Bibliography

Lang Shining xiaozhuan (Short biography of Lang Shining) in "Gugong bowuyuan yuankan", n. 2, 1988, pp. 3–26, 91-95.
Aimé -Martin, M. L. (ed.) Lettres édifiantes et curieuses concernant l'Asie, l'Afrique et l'Amérique, avec quelques relations nouvelles des missions, et des notes géographiques et historiques, Paris 1838-1843, vol. II,III,IV.
Beurdeley, C. et M., Castiglione, peintre jesuite a la cour de Chine, Fribourg 1971.
Chayet, A., Une description tibétaine de Yuanmingyuan, in Le "Yuanmingyuan". Jeux d'eau et palais européens du XVIIIe siecle a la cour de Chine, Paris 1987.
Cheng, T. K., Chinese Nature Painting, in "Renditions", n. 9, spring 1978, pp. 5–29.
Durand, A., Restitution des palais européens du Yuanmingyuan, in "Arts Asiatiques", vol. XLIII, 1988, pp. 123–133.
Hou Jinlang- Pirazzoli, M., Les chasses d'automne de l'empereur Qianlong à Mulan, in "T'oung Pao", vol. LXV, 1-3, pp. 13–50.
Hucker, C., A Dictionary of Official Titles in Imperial China, Stanford 1985.
Jonathan, P.-Durant, A., La promenade occidentale de l'empereur Qianlong, in Le "Yuanmingyuan". Jeux d'eau et palais européens du XVIIIe siecle a la cour de Chine, Paris 1987, pp. 19–33.
Ju Deyuan-Tian Jieyi-Ding Qiong, Qing gongtong huajia Lang Shining, in "Gugong bowuyuan yuankan", n. 2, 1988, pp. 27–28.
Kao Mayching, M., China's Response to the West Art: 1898-1937, Ann Arbor, Mich. 1972.
Lettres édifiantes et curieuses, écrites des Missions Etrangères, Nouvelle edition, Paris 1781, vol. XXII, XXIII, XXIV.
Liu Pinsan, Huama he Lang Shining "Bajuntu" in "Gugong bowuyuan yuankan", n. 2, 1988, pp. 88–90.
Nie Chongzheng, Lang Shining, Beijing 1984.


