[[General Mitchell International Airport]]

CATEGORIES: Airports in Wisconsin, Buildings and structures in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, Transportation in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, Facilities of the United States Air National Guard, Airfields of the United States Army Air Forces Technical Service Command, Airfields of the United States Army Air Forces in Wisconsin, Airfields of the United States Army Air Forces I Troop Carrier Command

General Mitchell International Airport  is a county-owned, joint civil-military,  public airport located five miles (8 km) south of the central business district of Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
It is named after United States Army Air Service General Billy Mitchell, who was raised in Milwaukee and is often regarded as the father of the United States Air Force. Along with being the primary airport for Milwaukee, Mitchell International has sometimes been described as Chicago's third airport, as many travelers in the suburbs north of Chicago use it as an alternative to Chicago O'Hare and Chicago Midway. It is also used by travellers throughout Wisconsin and Northern Illinois. An Amtrak railway station opened at the airport in 2005; the station is served by Amtrak's Hiawatha Service line running between Chicago and Milwaukee several times daily. The airport's weather station is used as the official point for Milwaukee weather observations and records by the National Weather Service, whose area office is located in Sullivan.

History

The original airfield was established in 1920 as Hamilton Airport by local business owner and aviator Thomas Hamilton. Milwaukee County purchased the land on October 19, 1926, for the Milwaukee County Airport. The first airport terminal there, the Hirschbuehl Farmhouse, opened in July of 1927. That same month, Northwest Airlines, Inc., began air service from Milwaukee to Chicago and Minneapolis/St. Paul. In August of 1927, world-renowned aviator Charles Lindbergh visited the Milwaukee airport. Kohler Aviation Corporation began providing passenger service across Lake Michigan on August 31, 1929. During the late depression years (from 1938 to July 1940), a new two-story passenger terminal building was constructed by the Works Progress Administration. On March 17, 1941, the airport was renamed General Mitchell Field after Milwaukee's military airpower advocate, Brigadier General William "Billy" Mitchell.  The "hammerhead" section of the D concourse was added in 1990. On June 19, 1986, the Milwaukee County Board of Supervisors officially renamed Mitchell Field to General Mitchell International Airport.
The airport is still owned and operated by Milwaukee County; however, some Milwaukee business leaders and politicians have advocated privatization or leasing it to a third party for financial reasons.

Awards and recognition

In October 2008, a Condé Nast Traveler poll ranked Milwaukee County's General Mitchell International Airport fourth in the nation using categories of Location and Access, Design, Customs and Baggage, Perceived Safety and Security, as well as Food, Shops and Amenities.

Expansion

Mitchell International has expanded the runway safety area on their runways after an accident on January 21, 2007, when Northwest Airlines Flight 1726 skidded off the runway after aborting takeoff. According to the FAA, most airports are encouraged to have a runway safety area no shorter than , although many airports do not meet this requirement.
Construction to provide this runway safety area began at the end of the summer of 2009. Work was completed in the fall of 2012.
There is also a "Master Plan" idea to significantly increase terminal area by either stretching the existing terminal (in some cases, to almost double the size) or begin construction of an entirely separate terminal.  Nearly all cases will involve major reconstruction on the airport itself, and will have a huge impact on the airport's future traffic.[ref]
[/ref]

Facilities and operations

General Mitchell International Airport covers an area of  The airport has a wide range of food options and shops.

Airline and Gate(s)

AirTran Airways/Southwest Airlines  -  C14,C15,C18-C25
American Airlines  -  C10,C12
Delta Airlines  -  D43-D49
Frontier Airlines  -  D39,D41
US Airways  -  D52,D56
United Express  |  E61-E63

Airlines and destinations

General Mitchell International Airport has 48 gates and 40 jetbridges on 3 concourses in one terminal. All international arrivals lacking border preclearance must pass through the International Arrivals Building.
Southwest Airlines (including subsidiary AirTran) is the largest carrier at the airport. Delta Air Lines also has a sizable presence.

Cargo carriers

Military presence

The airport also hosts the General Mitchell Air National Guard Base on the eastern area of the airport property, home to the 128th Air Refueling Wing (128 ARW), an Air Mobility Command (AMC)-gained unit of the Wisconsin Air National Guard flying the KC-135R Stratotanker.  The wing performs both Federal and State missions and consists of approximately 1000 Air National Guard personnel, both full-time Active Guard and Reserve (AGR) and Air Reserve Technicians (ART), as well as traditional part-time guardsmen, available for worldwide deployment in support of Air Mobility Command and combatant commander tasking.  The wing also maintains a KC-135 flight simulator, providing training proficiency for its own crews as well as other KC-135 flight crews in other air refueling wings and air mobility wings in the Regular U.S. Air Force, the Air Force Reserve Command and the Air National Guard.
Prior to 2007, a second military installation on the southwestern portion of the airport property was known as "General Mitchell Air Reserve Station" and was home to the 440th Airlift Wing (440 AW), an Air Mobility Command (AMC)-gained unit of the Air Force Reserve Command (AFRC) flying the C-130H Hercules.  While based at General Mitchell ARS, the 440 AW numbered in excess of 1500 full-time AGR, ART and part-time traditional reservists.  Pursuant to Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) 2005 action, the 440 AW relocated to Pope AFB, North Carolina in 2007 and the former AFRC facilities were turned over to the Air National Guard, resulting in the installation's renaming.

Statistics

U.S. Department of Transportation data for 2nd Quarter 2010 (most recent) show that the average airfare out of Milwaukee dropped lower than the average at 93 other U.S. airports. Mitchell's average fare was $93 less than O'Hare's, $78 less than the nation's average and $10 less than Midway's. Out of the nation's top 100 airports, Mitchell was one of only three at which average 2nd Quarter airfares were lower in 2010 than in 2009.
Airports Council International reported that during the 2nd Quarter 2010, Mitchell was the third fastest-growing airport in the world, exceeded only by airports in Istanbul, Turkey and Moscow, Russia. Mitchell was the only U.S. airport among the top 30 fastest growing airports worldwide.
The airport is owned and operated by Milwaukee County. Mitchell's 8 airlines offer over 200 daily departures. Over 50 airports are served nonstop or direct from Mitchell International. It is the largest airport in Wisconsin. The airport terminal is open 24 hours a day.

Top destinations

Ground transportation

Incidents and accidents

 (republished by Hall & Associates)[/ref]



Further reading




