[[Dhammapada]]

CATEGORIES: Khuddaka Nikaya, Pali words and phrases, Pali Buddhist texts

The Dhammapada (Pāli;  Dharmapada) is a collection of sayings of the Buddha in verse form and one of the most widely read and best known Buddhist scriptures. The original version of the Dhammapada is in the Khuddaka Nikaya, a division of the Pali Canon of Theravada Buddhism.
The Buddhist scholar and commentator Buddhaghosa explains that each saying recorded in the collection was made on a different occasion in response to a unique situation that had arisen in the life of the Buddha and his monastic community. His commentary, the Dhammapada Atthakatha, presents the details of these events and is a rich source of legend for the life and times of the Buddha.

Title

The title, Dhammapada, is a compound term composed of dhamma and pada, each word having a number of denotations and connotations.  Generally, dhamma can refer to the Buddha's "doctrine" or an "eternal truth" or "righteousness" or all "phenomena";See, e.g., Rhys Davids & Stede (1921-25), pp. 335-39, entry "Dhamma," retrieved 25 November 2008 from "U. Chicago" at  and, at its root, pada means "foot"  and thus by extension, especially in this context, means either "path" or "verse" (cf. "prosodic foot") or both.g., Rhys Davids & Stede (1921-25), p. 408, entry "Pada," retrieved 25 November 2008 from "U. Chicago" at   English translations of this text's title have used various combinations of these and related words.A.F Rhys David's "Verses on Dhamma," Kalupahana's "The Path of Righteousness," Norman's "The Word of the Doctrine,"  Woodward's "The Buddha's Path of Virtue," and other titles identified below at "English translations". xiii-xiv.  Fronsdal, p. xiv, further comments: "... If we translate the title based on how the term dhammapada is used in the verses Dhp verses 44, 45, 102, it should probably be translated 'Sayings of the Dharma,' 'Verses of the Dharma,' or 'Teachings of the Dharma.'  However, if we construe pada as 'path,' as in verse 21 ..., the title could be 'The Path of the Dharma.'  Ultimately, as many translators clearly concur, it may be best not to translate the title at all."

History

According to tradition, the Dhammapada's verses were spoken by the Buddha on various occasions. 4).  In addition, a number of the Dhammapada's verses are identical with text from other parts of the Pali tipitaka that are directly attributed to the Buddha in the latter texts.  For instance, Dhammapada verses 3, 5, 6, 328-330 can also be found in MN 128 (Ñāamoli & Bodhi, 2001, pp. 1009-1010, 1339 n. 1187).  "By distilling the complex models, theories, rhetorical style and sheer volume of the Buddha's teachings into concise, crystalline verses, the Dhammapada makes the Buddhist way of life available to anyone...C.E. is traceable to the need of the early Buddhist communities in India to laicize the ascetic impetus of the Buddha's original words."Wallis (2004), p. xi. The text is part of the Khuddaka Nikaya of the Sutta Pitaka, although over half of the verses exist in other parts of the Pali Canon. 19, para. 11.2 writes:
 In a similar vein, Hinüber (2000), p. 45, para. 90 remarks: "The contents of the Dhammapada are mainly gnomic verses, many of which have hardly any relation to Buddhism."[/ref]  A 4th or 5th century CE commentary attributed to Buddhaghosa includes 305 stories which give context to the verses.
Although the Pāli edition is the best-known, a number of other versions are known:
Comparing the Pali Dhammapada, the Gandhari Dharmapada and the Udanavarga, Brough (2001) identifies that the texts have in common 330 to 340 verses, 16 chapter headings and an underlying structure.  He suggests that the three texts have a "common ancestor" but underlines that there is no evidence that any one of these three texts might have been the "primitive Dharmapada" from which the other two evolved. 23–30.  After considering the hypothesis that these texts might lack a "common ancestor," Brough (2001), p. 27, conjectures:
He then continues:
The Dhammapada is considered one of the most popular pieces of Theravada literature. 11); and, "one of the most popular texts with Buddhist monks and laypersons" (p. 627).  Harvey (2007), p. 322, writes: "Its popularity is reflected in the many times it has been translated into Western languages"; Brough (2001), p. xvii, writes: "The collection of Pali ethical verses entitled Dhammapada is one of the most widely known of early Buddhist texts."  A critical edition of the Dhammapada was produced by Danish scholar Viggo Fausbøll in 1855, becoming the first Pali text to receive this kind of examination by the European academic community.

Organization

The Pali Dhammapada contains 423 verses in 26 chapters (listed below in English and, in parentheses, Pali).[ref]Brough (2001) orders the chapters of the Gandhari Dharmapada as follows:   question marks are part of Brough's titles.
Cone (1989) orders the chapters of the Patna Dharmapada as follows: [/ref]

Excerpts

The following English translations are from Müller (1881).  The Pali text is from the Sri Lanka Tripitaka Project (SLTP) edition.) starting at 

Literary merits

The literary merits of the Dhammapada are a matter of disagreement.R. Norman notes that some readers have claimed that the Dhammapada is a "masterpiece of Indian literature", but that this assessment is not universally shared.  John Brough, who wrote extensively on the subject of the related Gāndhārī Dharmapada, believed that the text had largely been composed from a patchwork of cliches, and that while it contained a few novel and well-constructed verses, suffered from an "accumulation of insipid mediocrity."  While he believed that the Dhammapada did not warrant the high praise sometimes lavished upon it, Brough did note that it contained "small fragments of excellent poetry", and that the Dhammapada fared well when considered alongside other, similarly composite works.  Several scholars have noted that much of the Dhammapada consists of vague moral aphorisms, many of them not clearly specific to Buddhism at all.[ref]
</ref>

English translations

Musical Settings

Notes

Sources



Translations

Voice recordings


