[[Alexandra of Yugoslavia]]

CATEGORIES: Greek princesses, Danish princesses, Yugoslav queens consort, House of Glücksburg (Greece), People from Athens, 1921 births, 1993 deaths, Karađorđević dynasty, Burials at the Mausoleum of the Royal House of Karađorđević, Oplenac, Burials at Tatoi Palace Royal Cemetery, Recipients of the Order of the Karađorđe's Star, People educated at Heathfield School, Ascot

Queen Alexandra of Yugoslavia (;) (25 March 1921 – 30 January 1993) was the wife of the last King of Yugoslavia, Peter II, and mother of Alexander, Crown Prince of Yugoslavia. She was previously known as Princess Alexandra of Greece and Denmark.

Biography

Birth and inheritance

She was born five months after the death of her father, King Alexander of Greece, to his morganatic widow, Aspasia Manos. His father, King Constantine I, was restored to the Greek throne a month after Alexander's death and returned to Greece from exile. His government officially treated the brief reign of his late son as a regency, which meant that Alexander's marriage, contracted without his father's permission, was technically illegal, the marriage void, and the couple's posthumous daughter, Alexandra, illegitimate.
At the behest of Alexander's mother, Queen Sophia, a law was passed in July 1922 which allowed the King to recognize the validity of marriages of members of the Royal family contracted without the Royal assent, even retroactively, although on a non-dynastic basis. King Constantine then issued a decree, gazetted on 10 September 1922, recognizing Alexander's marriage to Aspasia. Thus Alexandra became legitimate in the eyes of Greek law, but continued to be shunned and lacked the right of succession to the throne that dynastic princesses enjoyed under the monarchist constitution.
Hence, she and her mother were accorded the title "Princess of Greece and Denmark" and the style of Royal Highness. This title was borne by non-reigning members of the Greek Royal Family, who also happened to be members of a cadet branch of the reigning dynasty of Denmark. They moved to Italy, then London, then lived at the Hotel Crillon in Paris.
She was educated at Heathfield School, Ascot, but disliked it so much her mother removed her and sent her to a finishing school in Paris.

Marriage and later life

In 1944, she moved to London, where on 20 March at the Yugoslav Legation she married the King of Yugoslavia, Peter II, whom she had met in 1942. On 17 July 1945 she gave birth to the Crown Prince in Suite 212 of Claridge's Hotel in Brook Street. The British Government ceded sovereignty over the suite to Yugoslavia just for one day, so that the prince would be born in Yugoslav territory, which was to be the only time Queen Alexandra was in Yugoslavia.
The marriage deteriorated after the war and the declaration of a Communist republic in Yugoslavia; in the late 1940s Queen Alexandra left her husband, taking their son with her, after he had sold her jewels and most of their other remaining property. After his death in 1970, she settled in East Sussex, where she died on 30 January 1993 after suffering for several years from cancer.
She was buried in the former private Greek royal residence at Tatoi in Greece. In May 2013, her remains were transferred to Serbia for reburial in the crypt of the Royal Mausoleum at Oplenac. The reburial of HM King Peter II and HM Queen Maria of Yugoslavia also took place at the same time, on 26 May 2013.

Publications

She published an autobiography in 1956

Honours

Ancestry

As daughter of Aspasia and granddaughter of Petros Manos and Maria Argyropoulos, she was the only scion of the Royal Family of Greece to be of recent Greek descent. 
Through her mother she descended from, among others,  Phanariote Greeks from Constantinople. Like most European royal families, the Glücksburg dynasty, to which her husband belonged, was of predominantly German extraction. 

Sources



|-
|-




