[[Greater Scaup]]

CATEGORIES: Aythya, Birds of Asia, Birds of Europe, Birds of Azerbaijan, British Isles coastal fauna, Birds of Canada, Animals described in 1761, Birds of Nepal, Birds of Ukraine

The Greater Scaup (Aythya marila), just Scaup in Europe, or colloquially "Bluebill" in North America for its bright blue bill, is a mid-sized diving duck though it is larger than the closely related Lesser Scaup. It is a circumpolar species, which means that its range circles one of Earth's poles. It spends the summer months breeding in Alaska, northern Canada, Siberia, and the northernmost reaches of Europe. During the winter, it migrates south down the coasts of North America, Europe, and Japan.
Drake Greater Scaup are larger and have more rounded heads than females; they have a bright blue bill and yellow eyes. They have dark heads with a glossy green tint, white undersides and wings with white on the tips. The females are mostly brown, with white bands located on their wingtips. They have a blue bill that is slightly duller then the drake's.
Greater Scaup nest near water, typically on islands in northern lakes or on floating mats of vegetation. They begin breeding at age two, but start building nests in the first year. The drakes have a complex courtship procedure, which takes place on the return migration to the summer breeding grounds and concludes with the formation of monogamous pairs. Females lay a clutch of six to nine olive-buff colored eggs. The eggs hatch in 24 to 28 days. The down-covered ducklings are able to follow their mother in her search for food immediately after hatching.
Greater Scaup eat aquatic mollusks, plants, and insects, which they obtain by diving underwater. They form large groups, called "rafts", that can number in the thousands. Their main threat is human development, although they are preyed upon by owls, skunks, raccoons, foxes, coyotes, and humans. Greater Scaup populations have been declining since the 1980s; however, they are still listed as a species of least concern on the IUCN Red List.

Taxonomy

The genus name Aythya is derived from the Ancient Greek aithuia which refers to a seabird mentioned by Aristotle and others and is thought to refer to a duck, auklet or other seabird. The species name marila is from the Greek word for charcoal embers or coal dust. or from the duck's mating call: "scaup scaup".
A phylogenetic analysis of the diving ducks, examining the skeletal anatomy and skin, found that the Greater and Lesser Scaups are each other's closest relatives, with the Tufted Duck as the next closest relative of the pair.

Description

The adult Greater Scaup is  Distinguishing Greater from Lesser scaups can be extraordinarily difficult in the field, especially in terms of plumage, although (depending on posture) their general shape is slightly different.

Distribution and habitat

The Greater Scaup has a circumpolar distribution, breeding within the Arctic Circle both in the Old World (the Palearctic) and North America (the Nearctic). It spends the summer months in Alaska, Siberia. and the northern parts of Europe. It is also found in Asia, and is present in the Aleutian Islands year round. such as the lakes of Central Europe and the Great Lakes.
In Europe, the Greater Scaup breeds in Iceland, the northern coasts of the Scandinavian peninsula, including much of the northern parts of the Baltic Sea, the higher mountains of Scandinavia and the areas close to the Arctic Sea in Russia. These birds spend the winters in the British Isles, western Norway, the southern tip of Sweden, the coast from Brittany to Poland, including all of Denmark, the Alps, the eastern Adriatic Sea, the northern and western Black sea and the southwestern Caspian Sea.
In North America, the Greater Scaup summers in Newfoundland and Labrador, along with Ungava Bay, the Hudson Bay, Lake Winnipeg, Northern Yukon, Northern Manitoba, and Northern Saskatchewan. It winters in Nova Scotia New Brunswick, and the entire west coast of British Columbia. It will also winter along the entire west coast of North America, including the Baja Peninsula. The Greater Scaup also winters along the shores of the Great Lakes, the Gulf of Mexico and the entire US east coast from Maine to Florida.

Behaviour

Breeding

Greater Scaup breed all the way from Iceland to northern Scandinavia, northern Russia, northern Siberia and the western North American Arctic. They breed in the tundra and the boreal forest; it is estimated that 75% of the North American population breed in Alaska. Greater Scaup typically nest on islands in large northern lakes. Greater Scaup begin breeding when they are two years old, although they may start nesting at age one. Drake Greater Scaup have a soft quick whistle to get the attention of hens during their courtship which takes place from late winter to early spring, on the way back to their northern breeding grounds. Female Greater Scaup have a single pitch, a raspy "arrr-arrr-arrr-arrr-arrr" sounding vocalization. The courtship procedure is complex and results in the formation of monogamous pairs. The vulnerable small chicks follow their mother, who protects them from predators.

Feeding

The Greater Scaup dive to obtain food, which they eat on the surface. They mainly eat mollusks, aquatic plants, and aquatic insects,.
The Greater Scaup forms large flocks, some of which can contain thousands of birds. When flocks are in water, they will face the current, and as the ducks float backwards, some fly to the front of the flock to maintain position.

Threats

Common predators of the Greater Scaup are owls, skunks, raccoons, foxes, coyotes, and humans. Greater Scaup often find themselves entangled in fishing nets, thus large numbers of them drown in nets each year. Greater Scaup can catch avian influenza, so future outbreaks have the potential to threaten Greater Scaup populations.
Although the Greater Scaup faces numerous threats, the most significant challenge to their survival is habitat degradation caused by a mix of human development and runoff. Greater Scaup, when moulting and during the winter, are threatened by escalated levels of organochloride contaminants. Oil and sewage pollution also threaten this duck. Since 80% of the Greater Scaup population winters in the urbanized part of the Atlantic Flyway, these ducks are subject to high levels of organic contaminates, along with increased levels of heavy metals in foods and habitat.
A joint group of American and Canadian scientists researching Scaup migration across the Great Lakes found that 100% of female Greater Scaup, and 77% of female Lesser Scaup, had escalated levels of selenium in their bodies. Selenium is an occurring semimetallic trace element that occurs naturally in some soils and minute amounts are necessary for animal life. However excessive selenium can cause reproductive harm and is highly toxic. On their migration across the Great Lakes, Greater Scaups are at risk of ingesting selenium by eating the invasive zebra mussels, which can render a hen infertile. This sterilization of hens is causing the population to decrease.
In a study of 107 Scaup, they all had traces of iron, zinc, manganese, copper, lead, cadmium, cobalt and nickel in their tissue samples with varying concentrations of metals in different types of tissues. Further analysis revealed that the kidneys had the highest levels of cadmium, the liver had the highest levels of copper and manganese, the liver and the stomach had the highest levels of zinc, and the lungs and liver had the highest levels of iron. There was no difference in concentration when comparing genders.

Conservation

Greater Scaup are rated as a species of least concern by the IUCN Redlist. During aerial population surveys Greater and Lesser Scaup are counted together, because they look almost identical from the air. It was estimated that the Greater Scaup made up about 11% of the continental Scaup population. Since the 1980s, Scaup populations have been steadily decreasing. Some of the primary factors contributing to this decline are habitat loss, contaminants, changes in breeding habitat, and a lower female survival rate. The 2010 American Scaup population survey was 4.2 million Scaup,

Human interactions

Greater Scaup are a popular game bird in North America and Europe. In most countries where Greater Scaup are hunted, a duck stamp is required along with the normal hunting licences that are required to pursue other game. In America and Canada, waterfowl must be hunted with non-toxic shot.



Further reading




