[[Roberto Cofresí]]

CATEGORIES: 1791 births, 1825 deaths, People from Cabo Rojo, Puerto Rico, Puerto Rican pirates, Puerto Rican nationalists, Puerto Rican folklore, People executed by Spain by firing squad, Executed Puerto Rican people, People executed for piracy, 19th-century executions

Roberto Cofresí (June 17, 1791 – March 29, 1825),  better known as "El Pirata Cofresí", was the most renowned pirate in Puerto Rico. He became interested in sailing at a young age, when he acquired his first ship and became acquainted with the Mona Passage. During the late 18th and early 19th centuries there were political and economic difficulties in Puerto Rico, which at the time was a colony of the Spanish Empire. Upon reaching adulthood, Roberto Cofresí decided to abandon a merchant's life and became a pirate. Commanding a crew out of Isla de Mona they navigated between Puerto Rico, the Dominican Republic and Saint Thomas, leading several assaults against cargo and merchant vessels. Historians have speculated that Cofresí may have served as a privateer prior to this, likely aboard the Escipión, a ship owned by one of his cousins named José María Ramírez de Arellano. He established a reputation for being difficult to capture, successfully avoiding the Spanish Armed Forces and United States Navy, and also escaping from a Dominican jail on the first night of his imprisonment. This was accomplished with the help of civil informants and associates - a web so vast that it took 14 years after his death to fully dismantle it.
Cofresí commanded a small and rotating crew, with most contemporary documents and accounts placing its quorum between 10 to 20 men. Though most members were recruited locally, men from the other Antilles and even expatriate Europeans joined the pirates on occasion. His leadership was enhanced by a bold and audacious personality, a trait acknowledged even by those who pursued him. Despite operating during a time where piracy was heavily monitored and most pirates rarely achieved success, Cofresí was confirmed to have plundered at least eight vessels and has been credited with as many as over 70 captures. Throughout his life he commanded at least three different vessels, with the most infamous being a fast six gun schooner named El Mosquito, displaying a preference for speed and maneuverability over firepower. Unlike his predecessors, Cofresí is not known to have operated under any variant of the Pirate code. Despite not admitting to any murder, reports claim that he boasted about his crimes and that the number of persons that died as a consequence of his pillaging ranged between 300 and 400 victims, most of them foreigners.
Cofresí was the dominant pirate of his era in the Caribbean. He shared the Spanish Main with Jean Lafitte until 1823, when he became the sole major threat in the hemisphere until his death, a title that would only be contested by lesser or regional freebooters such as Charles Gibbs, Mansel Alcantra (also spelled Alcántara) or Samuel Hall Lord. On March 5, 1825, El Mosquito engaged a float of ships led by John Slout in battle. After a naval battle that lasted 45 minutes, Cofresí abandoned his ship and tried to escape by land before being captured. After being imprisoned the pirates were sent to San Juan, Puerto Rico, where a brief military trial found them guilty and on March 29, 1825, he and most members of the crew were executed by a firing squad. 
After his execution, Cofresí's life was the inspiration for several stories and myths, most of them highlighting the Robin Hood-like "steal from the rich, give to the poor" philosophy that became associated with him. Through poetry and oral tradition, this portrayal has evolved into legend, being commonly accepted as veridical in Puerto Rico and throughout the rest of the West Indies. Both the historical and mythical accounts of his life have inspired countless songs, poems, plays, books and films. In Puerto Rico several caves, beaches and other places that supposedly functioned as hideouts or the location of buried treasures, have been named after Cofresí. He also serves as namesake for Cofresí, a resort town located near Puerto Plata, in the Dominican Republic. In the mainland U.S. an international moving and hauling company, Agencia Cofresí, is named after him. 

Early years

Cofresí (birth name: Roberto Cofresí y Ramírez de Arellano
Francisco Cofresí met and married María Germana Ramírez de Arellano, whose father was the cousin of Nicolás Ramírez de Arellano, the founder of Cabo Rojo. The couple had four children: a daughter by the name of Juana, and three sons—Juan Francisco, Ignacio, and their youngest, Roberto. He was baptized under the Roman Catholic Church fifteen days after being born. Historian Walter Cardona Bonet believes that he also likely worked in a series of fishing corrals that were located at Boquerón Bay. His first appearance as a sailor in the government's registry was during the following year. Cofresí worked a route between Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic for some time, until a Spanish vessel stole his goods.
An alternative theory blames the British. This one, presented by historian Ramón Ibern Fleytas, claims that Cofresí attempted to sell fish and fruit to the crew of a brigantine. However, since the sailors did not understand Spanish they mocked these intentions and pushed him off the boat, precipitating a fall.

Reigniting piracy in the 19th century

Establishing a presence and reputation

Between 1818 and 1823, Cofresí decided to become a pirate and organized a crew composed of eight to ten men from his hometown. Joaquín Hernández, the second-in-command of the original crew, was known by his nickname "Campechano". It was a common practice then for the Spanish Crown to look the other way when pirates such as the crew of El Mosquito attacked ships that did not carry the Spanish flag, making this venture lucrative. Cofresí's success was an oddity, considering that it came nearly a century after the conclusion of the Golden Age of Piracy. By this time, the joint effort of different governments had eradicated the rampant buccaneering by Anglo-French seamen, mostly based in the adjacent islands of Jamaica and Tortuga, which had turned the Caribbean into a haven for pirates that made a living by attacking the shipments of the Spanish colonies in the region.
Cofresí and his crew targeted all sorts of victims, both local and foreign, creating a rift in the economic stability of the entire region. This situation was complicated due to various factors, most of them related to geopolitics. The Spanish Empire had lost most of her possessions in the New World and her last two possessions, Puerto Rico and Cuba were faced with economic problems and political unrest. Due to their involvement in the Caribbean trade, these actions quickly gathered the attention of the United States Navy, which responded by sending the USS Beagle for the specific purpose of capturing Cofresí and his men. The schooner had been newly commissioned and this was its first voyage, with it serving as an specialized anti-piracy vessel that experienced success in other locations of the Caribbean. The incursion took place in 1823, but several of the pirates were able to elude the crew of the military boat.
The earliest known document directly linking Cofresí to piracy is a letter dated July 5, 1823, and that originated in Aguadilla, Puerto Rico, which was published in the St. Thomas Gazette. His nationality was misreported because he was also confused with another crewmember nicknamed "El Portugúes", who died the following year. Six other pirates were captured and sent to the mainland along the body. Cofresí's purported death was made public and with the gibbeting of his supposed body the case was considered closed. His subsequent reappearance may have influenced the myths that linked his figure to supernatural elements.
In an article published in the May 9, 1936, edition of the Puerto Rico Ilustrado periodical, journalist Eugenio Astol recounts an incident that happened between Cofresí and prominent Puerto Rican doctor and politician, Pedro Gerónimo Goyco. In this column, the author reports that the events took place in 1823. That year, when Goyco was only 15 years old, he was transferred to a school in Santo Domingo to begin his secondary education. The voyage was done in a schooner and he was not accompanied by any relatives. Halfway through the journey, Cofresí intercepted the vessel. After hijacking the schooner, the pirates boarded the ship. Once aboard, Cofresí rounded the passengers and began requesting their names and the identity of their parents. Upon learning that Goyco was among them, the pirate ordered that they change course and landed in a beach near Mayagüez. There, Goyco was allowed to disembarck and go free. Cofresí explained that he knew his father, an influential immigrant from Bocche di Cattaro named Gerónimo Goicovich that settled in Mayagüez, and that allowing his son to go free was actually an act of gratitude. Goyco returned home safely and would later attempt the voyage again. Prior to this encounter, Goicovich had favored members of Cofresí's family, despite the fact that they were associated to a pirate. Goyco grew up to become a militant abolitionist, working along the likes of Ramón Emeterio Betances and Segundo Ruiz Belvis towards this end.
On January 23, 1824, Lieutenant General Miguel Luciano de la Torre y Pando (1822–1837), the Governor of Puerto Rico appointed by Spain, issued several anti-piracy measures based on the economic losses that the Spanish government was sustaining and the political pressure from the United States. Guayama's major, Francisco Brenes, documented how the pirates gathered several friends among the local population who would also protect them. His figure was held with such regard that some members of the higher classes were arrested due to their links with Cofresí. Cofresí was said to exploit this in his favor, creating an underground circle that would share information with him. This group was mostly composed by common citizens, among those linked to it are a teacher and a waitress. He had informants in different parts of Puerto Rico, in places such as Ponce and Mayagüez. The priest of a church in Arecibo is said to have shared information about the moves of the military in the vicinity.

Operating in the Dominican Republic

As the most established pirate in the Caribbean during his time, Cofresí also pillaged the shorelines of Hispaniola with regularity. The presence of the crew was recorded in the littoral zone off the Puerto Plata Province, where they would rest during their voyages. With no visible escape route, Cofresí preferred to order the sinking of his own ship, which sailed into Bahía de Samana before finally coming to rest next to the town of Punta Gorda. This caused enough distraction to allow him to join his crew in a successful escape plan, where they  boarded skiffs and rowed to shore and into adjacent wetlands, where the larger Spanish vessels could not follow them. What remains of the ship, which was reportedly full of plunder, has not yet been found.
Shortly after De la Torre's initiative was enacted, Cofresí and his crew had a confrontation with the Spanish military in Mona. He escaped, but during the course of the battle he lost his ship and six men, along which were "Portugués" and Pepe Cartagena. Cofresí escaped in another of his boats along "Campechano" Hernández, resuming his attacks shortly after the encounter. However, between the days of September 8 and 9, 1824, a hurricane affected southern Puerto Rico and passed directly over the Mona Passage. Cofresí and his reduced crew were caught in the storm, which flinged their ship towards Hispaniola. Aware of this, weeks later the schooner Aurora, property of Nicolás Márquez and a boat named Flor de Mayo belonging to José María Marujo, were commanded by Fajardo's Commander Ramón Aboy and sailed towards the islands of Vieques, Culebra, and the smaller islands of Barlovento in search of the pirates. However, after weeks of search the expedition failed and the fate of Cofresí remained a mystery.
Continuing to drift, Cofresí and his crew were captured after his ship arrived at Santo Domingo, the capital of the Dominican Republic. They were sentenced to six years in prison and sent to a keep named Torre del Homenaje. Cofresí and his men escaped from prison, however they were captured once again and imprisoned. The group decided to escape once more, they broke the locks of their cell doors and climbed down the walls of the prison's courtyard during a stormy night using a rope that was made of their clothes. Another theory suggests that he actually bought Ana from its owner, Toribio Centeno, for twice its price. However, legal documents state that Toribio had been paid to make the ship for Low prior to this. Accompanied by his crew, Cofresí set out to the sea once again aboard this schooner, continuing to attack merchant ships in the Caribbean.

Expansion of Cofresí's fleet

An edition of El Colombiano published a document dated February 18, 1824, that mentions a series of attacks that took place in Cofresí's domain. In this paper, a report to the military explains how, Renato Beliche, the captain of a corvette named Bolívar, rescued the crews of two brigantines, the British Boniton and French Bonne Sopfic, off the west coast of Puerto Rico. The events took place on February 12, 1824, near Puerto Real and in both cases the sailors were left beaten and locked, while their ships were plundered. The Bolívar was unable to capture the pirates, but described the ship as being painted black and armed with a rotating cannon. The crew was identified as being composed of twenty Puerto Rican men, though no individual names were provided. On June 22, 1824, a sailor named Pedro Alacán organized a party of volunteers for an incursion at Mona.
Among the ships that they plundered was a cargo vessel named Neptune. The freighter, with a haul that consisted of fabrics and provisions, was attacked while it was docked. The Neptune belonged to Salvador Pastorisa, who escaped upon being boarded. During this attack, an Italian with residence in Puerto Rico named Pedro Salovi was reported to serve along the pirates. After navigating the boat out of Jobos Port, a harbor located in a bay near the vicinity of Fajardo, Puerto Rico, Cofresí adopted the vessel as a pirate ship.  In February 1825, the Neptune was used to capture a Danish schooner property of W. Furniss, a company based in Saint Thomas, off the coast of Ponce, gaining control of a load of imported merchandise. After the assault, Cofresí and his crew left the ship abandoned in the ocean. The boat was later seen floating with the masts broken and was presumed lost at sea. Some time later, they boarded another vessel owned by the same company and repeated the same action as before. This time, the ship was intercepted at Guayama. Like its predecessor, it was seem close to Caja de Muertos before disappearing. Shortly afterwards, Cofresí continued to use Ana as his main ship. Neptune's final fate remains unknown.
The people on the coasts of Puerto Rico are said to have protected him from the authorities.
The pirates communicated with their informants through a series of coastal signs, where the associates on land would preemptively warn them of any danger. Cofresí's crew continued to assault several ships and on one occasion they attacked eight consecutive ships, including one from the United States. Cofresí's last successful assault took place on March 5, 1825, when he commanded the hijacking of a boat property of Vicente Antoneti in Salinas, Puerto Rico.

Capture and trial

The Spanish government received many complaints from the nations whose ships were being attacked by "El Pirata Cofresí", as he became to be known. By 1825, the crew of El Mosquito remained the last real pirate threat in the Caribbean and the authorities felt compelled to have them pursued and captured. The extent of this interest was such that the local military took the rare step of ignoring diplomatic concerns, requesting help from the anti-piracy task force known as the West Indies Squadron which operated under the flag of the Empire's direct adversary, the United States. The Spanish government recruited the service of three vessels, two of them sloops. These were San José y Las Animas  There are two official accounts of this event, submitted by those involved in it.

Spanish government's version

The Spanish government's version states that on March 2, 1825, the commander of the island's south military division requested the service of three vessels. These most notable boats of this excursion were San José y Las Animas, loaned for the mission, and the Grampus, which belonged to the United States. The mayor of the municipality of Ponce asked Capt. John D. Sloat to command a recon mission with the intention of capturing Cofresí.
The Grampus' crew sent their sailors to look for the pirates by land, while the ships closed the access to the beach. Sloat estimated that Cofresí had lost a third of his crew in the previous exchange, based on the number of bodies on the water surrounding the boat. Aboard Ana, they found a four-pound cannon, several muskets, guns, a type of sword known as alfanje and knifes. The schooner was then sailed towards St. Thomas, arriving there by March 11, 1825. Later that day the mayor of the town of Los Jobos issued a statement which detailed the pirate's entrance into the beach, and he subsequently notified the local authorities about the event. A search operation was launched and during the dusk hours six pirates were captured. The Spanish government then sent military personnel to block all the roads and plains surrounding the area. Two of the search groups believed that the pirates would have to pass through a certain road in order to escape and planned to ambush them there. The pirates reached the location at 10:30 p.m. and tried to escape, but were intercepted.
The pirate captain was identified by a man named Juan Garay, who injured his arm with a blunt object in their confrontation. The names of the known crewmembers are Juan Carlos de Torres and Santiago Díaz. Both men exhibited recent gun wounds, with the former still carrying fifteen Spanish coins, handkerchiefs, two fake pearl necklaces, a list written in English, two earrings, two razors and three bullets, among other things. In the aftermatch, Cofresí and eleven members of his crew were turned over to the Spanish government.

United States Navy's version

The American version states that Commander Sloat solicited permission for the use of two small ships after becoming aware of Cofresí's latest actions. After becoming acquainted with Cofresí, John Low was brought in along the crew. The report claims that Sloat was aware of an evasion strategy that was used by the pirates to escape when using large ships, which consisted of traveling as close to the coast as possible and thereby  avoid being followed. Therefore, he used the small ships in order to pursue them while attempting this strategy. Both vessels were armed and began working in an exploratory manner, traveling through several ports and coastal towns. On the third day while sailing near Ponce, the group located a ship in Boca del Infierno and identified it as El Mosquito (Ana). When Cofresí saw the loaned ship that was sent he confused it with a merchant vessel, since it was not flying its actual colors, and ordered his crew to attack. When El Mosquito approached the ship, the crew revealed that it was a military vessel by hoisting the Navy jack and opened fire.

Military prosecution

Cofresí was assigned a War Council trial, with the possibility of a civil trial being completely discarded. The case was hastened, which was an oddity since other cases that were as serious or more grave often took longer, months or years in some instances. It has been reported that he was judged as an insurgent corsair and listed as such in Spain, in a subsequent explanatory action. This responded to the measures enacted by Miguel de la Torre the year before. It has been theorized that the reason behind these irregularities was that the Spanish Government was under international scrutiny, with several neutral countries filing official complaints about pirate and privateer attacks in Puerto Rican waters. There was additional preassure due to the beginning of David Porter's trial in the United States, after illegally invading the municipality of Fajardo. The ministry took an accelerated pace with the Cofresí trial, denying him and his crew the summoning of defense witnesses or testimony as dictated by the protocol of all military or civil trials. The entire trial was based on the confession of the pirates, with the legitimacy or the circumstances that lead to them not being established.
The other pirates tried were Manuel Aponte Monteverde from Añasco; Vicente del Valle Carbajal from Santo Domingo; Vicente Jiménez from Cumaná; Antonio Delgado from Humacao; Victoriano Saldaña from Juncos; Agustín de Soto from San Germán; Carlos Díaz from Trinidad de Barlovento; Carlos Torres from Fajardo; Juan Manuel Fuentes from La Havana and José Rodríguez from Curaçao. Among those captured, Carlos Torres stood out, since he was an African man and Cofresí's personal slave.
The defendants' social status and association with criminal or otherwise outlaw elements precipitated the expedite course of action. Captain José Madrazo served as judge and prosecturor during the trial, taking place over the course of a single day. It has been speculated that Miguel de la Torre influenced the process, with negotiations possibly taking place between him and Madrazo beforehand. Details of the trials were suppressed, with  only the government's La Gaceta de Puerto Rico (lit. "The Gacette of Puerto Rico") publishing its account. This result was highly suspicious due to the Caribbean press' high interest in piracy, suggesting an media blackout or coverup. Despite this, the United States press quickly acted to propagate its knowledge of the case in order to influence the Porter trial, since he justified his invasion by claiming that Puerto Rico had become a Government-sanctioned pirate's nest. On July 14, 1825, a contemporary congressman named Samuel Smith would expose that Henry Clay, the incumbent United States Secretary of State, pressured the Spanish Governor to execute the pirates.

Aftermath and legacy

Immediately after being captured, the pirates were temporally held at a prison in Guayama, before being transferred to the capital. San Felipe del Morro remains the accepted place of the execution. However, Alejandro Tapia y Rivera, whose father was a member of the Regimiento de Granada, places the event near Convento Dominico in the Baluarte de Santo Domingo, part of modern-day Old San Juan.
According to legend, Cofresí "maldijo" (placed a curse on) Captain Sloat and the USS Grampus before he died. In 1848, the schooner was lost at sea with all hands aboard,DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY -- NAVAL HISTORICAL CENTER, Retrieved April 2, 2008 However, Captain Sloat was not among those who perished, he went on to become the Commander of the Norfolk Navy Yard. They were not buried in the Old San Juan Cemetery (Cementerio Antiguo de San Juan), as believed in the local lore, since they were executed as a criminals and therefore could not be laid to rest in this Catholic cemetery. During this time, defendants were forced to pay for trial expenses and Cofresí's family was charged 643 pieces of eight, two reales and 12 maravedí.
Era documents suggest that Juana Creitoff had little to none support from Cofresí's brothers and sisters, being left with the burden of the debt. His bothers distanced from the trial and the legacy of their brother, with Juan Francisco leaving Cabo Rojo for Humacao. Historical evidence suggests that Ignacio also disassociated himself from Creitoff and her daughter. Due to Cofresí's tendency to hide the treasure gathered through piracy, the only asset that the Spanish government could seize towards covering the debt was that of Carlos Torres. Torres was Cofresí's personal slave and as previously stated, one of the few members of Cofresí's crew who was tried and not executed. He was priced at 108 pesos and 2 reales. The remaining quantity was paid from a loan by a the Mattei family of San Germán. Félix and Miguel Mattei are now presumed to have been anti-establishment smugglers that were related to Henri La Fayette Villaume Ducoudray Holstein and the Ducoudray Holstein Expedition. The loan was likely never paid back, since Juana Creitoff died a year later. Since his contacts extended throughout the west, south and east coasts of Puerto Rico, the authorities continued investigating and arresting people that were considered to have been associates of the pirates. There were so many linked to Cofresí, that this process extended until 1839. To this day, his birth certificate is still conserved at San Miguel Arcángel Church, along those of other notable figures including Ramón Emeterio Betances and Salvador Brau.
One of his most notable successors was Ana González, better known by her abridged marriage name Ana G. Méndez. Colberg made a notable effort to popularize the figure of Cofresí, in particular the heroic legends that followed his death.

Traits and perception

As is the case with other pirates, the actual traits of Cofresí became romanticized and entangled in the mythic aura that surrounds his person long ago. One of the few undisputed facts is his social class, he was known to be a criollo. Cofresí was known to be bold and risky, to the point that Salvador Brau argues in Historia de Puerto Rico that had he lived during the 18th century, he would have even eclipsed the accomplishments of Miguel Henríquez. Cardona Bodet also supports this notion, noting that he acted with "a lot of courage and bravery", with his leadership being further established by his "charisma and intelligence". Cofresí's is said to have possessed a rebellious personality and to have been rather
independent, taking decisions under his own criteria. He also appeared to be very keen, to the point of being capable of causing the ridicule of the authorities that pursued him. During his lifetime, the Spanish authorities made efforts to portray him as a fierce and violent criminal. His nickname, "The Terror of the Caribbean", reflects his position as the unopposed "Pirate Lord" of the region during the early 19th century. As a consequence, following his death there was a sharp decline in piracy. There were still pirates, but none would be notably successful in the Caribbean until "The Rajah" John Boysie Singh in the 20th century.
Cofresí's physical appearance has been idealized, often being described as athletic, muscular, agile, with masculine traits and of medium height.

Modern view

Oral tradition

Cofresí's life and death have inspired several myths and stories. These included those depicting him as a generous figure, who used to share what he stole with the region's poor population. In these myths he is generally described as a benevolent person, with authors writing about his supposed personality. They portray him as a noble gentleman who became a pirate out of necessity; as a generous man, claiming that on one occasion he went as far as saving the life of a baby in a confrontation and providing money for his upbringing and as a brave man, showing disregard for his life on several occasions. The American government fueled this, describing him as a "famous piratical chief" that ran a "bloodthirsty" leadership.
In modern oral tradition, the fact that no other pirate, regardless of nationality, has been said to recurrently share his loot with the poor is emphasized. With time, popular culture has come to grant Cofresí the quality of chivalry, describing him as a gentleman, especially with women. This contrast is further noted when rival pirates are portrayed as ruthless cutthroats, that only want to invade his territory.
Several of these oral stories deviate from the historical account and from each other. One particular aspect that is rarely consistent are the circumstances of his death, which has been described from a peaceful death along his wife in Caja de Muertos to mutiny or being hanged at Ponce or Humacao. Even his background is inconsistent, with him being portrayed as both a member of an influential family and of a working low class family.
Other myths and stories describe Cofresí as an evil or demonic figure. Among them there are myths that claim that during his life he had sold his soul to the devil in order to "defeat men and be loved by women".

Cofresí's treasure

By intercepting merchant vessels that traveled from Europe to the West Indies, Cofresí is said to have gathered a significant amount of loot.
A story claims that after boarding a ship in Aguada, he buried the treasure captured under a palm tree, under which he also buried the body of a comrade that fell during that battle. According to this legend, the spirit of the dead pirate would guard it to this day. Another story elaborates this version, claiming that Cofresí would ask his crew who wanted to guard the loot and if he noticed anyone being particularly enthusiastic, he would bring that person along him when go ashore, murdering his companion and Burying it along the treasure. An alternative presents him as a hoarder, placing everything in a large chest that was bound with chains (sometimes claimed to be made of gold), which he eventually cast into the sea, which still protects it to this day by turning rough when approached. Another version of this account claims that he would throw the chests in the sea along the head of a member of his crew, which as was the case in other myths, would guard them for eternity. If someone is lucky enough to find one of his treasures, it is said that bad luck or madness will follow them for the rest of their life.
Some legends were darker in nature. Among these, one claims that the chest containing the loot was hidden in the water under a Ceiba tree and was only visible while the light of the full moon directly illuminated it. According to this legend, the treasure was guarded by a fish school that would constantly swim around it to keep it disguised under the murky water and were also capable of transforming into sharks, devouring any one that approached it when there was no moonlight and taking their souls to Davy Jones' Locker.
Outside Puerto Rico, there are similar accounts. El Uvero in Mona is supposed to hold a treasure waiting to be discovered. Throughout the Dominican Republic, there are supposedly nearly 30 locations where loot was buried along these medallions, most of which remain undiscovered.

Disruption and exploitation of trade

Popular beliefs state that Cofresí was influenced by the secessionist faction which was supporting Puerto Rico's independence from Spain. According to these accounts, he felt that the Spaniards were oppressing the Puerto Ricans in their own home and then began assaulting Spanish ships, particularly those that were being used to export local resources such as gold, as well as American and English vessels that visited the local ports to trade. Cofresí would do this in order to debilitate the Spanish economy, justifying it by allegedly saying that he "wouldn't allow foreign hands to take a piece of the country that saw his birth". According to these depictions, Cofresí had declared war on all of those that operated under the flag of the United States. He is portrayed displaying a cruel behavior against hostages that were on these vessels, including an interpretation where he ordered that his captives were to be nailed alive to El Mosquito's deck.
In reality, Spain and the United States were experiencing diplomatic and political differences, therefore the administrators of the colonial government would not pursue Cofresí or his crew as long they assaulted American ships. The government would interpret such actions as patriotic, due to the collateral effect of disrupting the trade of its adversary. Local lore claims that among the hideouts used by Cofresí was a fortress located in Quebradillas, Puerto Rico. The small structure was constructed in the 18th century in the Puerto Herminia beach, serving as an storage building for Spanish customs where materials that entered trough the local port were held. According to these legends, the pirates would use the merchant activity to pass unnoticed and use the rivers to go inland, where they hid the pludered treasure inside sewer systems. Employing this tendency for smuggling in his favor, Cofresí supposedly used this fortress as his strategic base and was supported by the local population, which he rewarded for its support. The remains of the stone masonry structure still stand in the coast, having become a tourist attraction due to the mysticism surrounding it.

Tributes and homages

In Puerto Rico, several places are named after Cofresí. Playa Cofi in Vieques was named in his honor, since he was known to frequent the island and sail its waters. Cayo Pirata near Ensenada Honda in Culebra is named after the pirate, having also served as a brief hideout. Supposedly a series of excavations near its vicinity retrieved gold coins (mostly Spanish doubloons) and jewels. Cofresí's Cave is located in a sector of Cabo Rojo called Barrio Pedernales which is just south of Boquerón Bay. According to local legend, after Cofresí shared some of his treasure with his family and friends, he would hide what was left over in this grotto. Throughout the years no one has found any treasure in the cave. The town of Cofresí, 10 km west of Puerto Plata in the Dominican Republic was named after him. Located between Puerto Plata and Maimón, Playa Cofresí was named to serve as a tourist trap, with the intent of attracting foreigners that were interested in the legends despite the fact that no historical accounts place the pirates near its vicinity.
To this day, the municipality of Quebradillas is nicknamed La guarida del pirata (lit. "The pirate's hideout") and several of its sports teams are named after these stories, including its most notable one, the Baloncesto Superior Nacional's Piratas de Quebradillas. In his native Cabo Rojo, he is honored by the Roberto Cofresí Soccer Club (affiliated to the Liga Nacional de Fútbol) and the Roberto Cofresí Cup, both in the discipline of association football. In 1972, the Cofresí Motorcycle Club was also established in this municipality. Other kinds of tributes have been made to commemorate Cofresí both locally and internationally. In Puerto Rico, a monument in his image was built by José Buscaglia Guillermety in Boquerón Bay, a water body located in Cabo Rojo. Despite the fact that tributes within the aviation industry are scarce, the few examples that cite Cofresi's name have been linked to notable events. Puertorriqueña de Aviación, the earliest flag carrier company recorded in Puerto Rico, christened its first seaplane with the cognomen of "Kofresí".


Literature and theater

Cofresí has been the subject of numerous biographical books which include El Marinero, Bandolero, Pirata y Contrabandista Roberto Cofresí by Walter R. Cardona Bonet; El Mito de Cofresí en la Narrativa Antillana by Robert Fernandez Valledor and Roberto Cofresí: El Bravo Pirata de Puerto Rico by Edwin Vázquez. Bienvenido G. Camacho published, El Aguila Negra; ó Roberto Cofresí: intrépido pirata puertorriqueño, el terror de los navegantes., a book that claimed to be a historical account of Cofresí's life, but was actually a fictional novel.
Several short stories detailing legends have been published in compendiums. Defunct newspaper, El Imparcial distributed a series of folkloric accounts, among which was a story titled Cofresí authored by José Luis Vivas Maldonado. This might have fueled the rumors that the pirate still roamed Puerto Rico.
Among the works created by Alejandro Tapia y Rivera, the most notable Puerto Rican playwright of the 19th century, were biographical plays about important figures of the era such as Cofresí and Ramón Power y Giralt. The production was nominated in the "Best Classical Album" category of the Latin Grammy Awards of 2013.

Sociohistorical and subjective analysis

Based on his actions and the political environment of his time, the possibility that Cofresí may have been an insurgent privateer instead of a pirate has also been explored, both by historians and in narratives. El Mosquito is mentioned among several other examples, including Bartholomew Roberts' Little Ranger and several of Edward Low's vessels such as Fancy, Rose Pink and Merry Christmas. In line with the comedic tone of the book, the author questions if this ironic naming was a display of machismo or if it was done intentionally, so that sailors would avoid facing them just to prevent the ridicule of reporting their loss to a ship with an inoffensive name.
In Piracy, Globalization and Marginal Identities: Navigating Gender and Nationality in Contemporary Hispanic Fiction, Alana B. Reid notes how the narratives based on Cofresí differ from the mainstream format seen in other Spanish work. To this end, he has also been depicted wielding the machete, a weapon commonly associated with Puerto Rican nationalism and resistance.

Miscellaneous

Outside his reputation as a pirate, Cofresí has also been directly linked to the creation of what later became the official beverage of Puerto Rico, the piña colada. According to this account, when the crew's morale was low, he would mix them a beverage that contained coconut, pineapple and white rum. Furthermore, countless businesses have used the pirate's reputation to attract customers. There are bakeries, small inns, hotels, grocery stores, bars and villas bearing his name. The name holds such notoriety, that Enrique Laguerre once considered writing a book based on his life but intended to rename the protagonist "Roberto Caribe", to avoid exploiting Cofresí's reputation. The author immediately noticed how the work lost its merchantability. In the earliest effort to introduce pirate's myth to the commercial music industry, Italian singer Tony Croatto compossed an eponymous song, where he offers a concise summary of the fictionalized version of his life and death.
The very first cinematographic company was Cine Puerto Rico established in 1912, which produced films until going bankrupt in 1917. After this organization closed, renowned poet Luis Llorens Torres purchased its production materials and created his own entity, Cine Tropical. After his first film was a success, Llorens programmed a series of projects. The first scheluded was Los misterios de Cofresí, also known as El Tesoro de Cofresí, which was meant to be released in the chapter play format. However, the filming was stopped in mid-production when the lead actor, Aquiles Zorda, suddenly left Puerto Rico and did not return. The onset of World War I prevented the continuation of Cine Tropical, which was now unable to import materials, and the movie was never finished. In 1919, Juan Emilio Viguié began filming another production titled La Vida de Cofresí. The municipality of Ponce served as setting, but like its predecessor the film could not be completed. Another attempt was made in 1973 when Boquerón Films, Inc. employed several actors and began a study of the myths in Cabo Rojo. Conversations were recorded in order to prepare a script.

Flags of Cofresí

thumb|100px|The flags of Spain (top) and Colombia (bottom).





Notes
Citations
Bibliography
Further reading




