[[Human hair color]]

CATEGORIES: Hair color, Biological anthropology

Hair color is the pigmentation of hair follicles due to two types of melanin: eumelanin and pheomelanin. Generally, if more eumelanin is present, the color of the hair is darker; if less eumelanin is present, the hair is lighter. Levels of melanin can vary over time causing a person's hair color to change, and it is possible to have hair follicles of more than one color.
Particular hair colors are associated with  ethnic groups.   The shades of human hair color are assessed using the Fischer–Saller scale. The Fischer–Saller scale, named after Eugen Fischer and Karl Saller, is used in physical anthropology and medicine to determine the shades of hair color. The scale uses the following designations: A (light blond), B to E (blond), F to L (blond), M to O (dark blond), P to T (brown), U to Y (dark brown/black) and Roman numerals I to IV (red) and V to VI (red blond). See also the Martin–Schultz scale for eye color.

Genetics and biochemistry of hair color

Two types of pigment give hair its color: eumelanin and pheomelanin. Pheomelanin colors hair orange and yellow. All humans have some pheomelanin in their hair. Eumelanin, which has two subtypes of black or brown, determines the darkness of the hair color. A low concentration of brown eumelanin results in blond hair, whereas a higher concentration of brown eumelanin will color the hair brown. High amounts of black eumelanin result in black hair, while low concentrations give gray hair.
Pheomelanin is more chemically stable than black eumelanin, but less chemically stable than brown eumelanin, so it breaks down more slowly when oxidized.  This is why bleach gives darker hair a reddish tinge during the artificial coloring process.  As the pheomelanin continues to break down, the hair will gradually become orange, then yellow, and finally white.
The genetics of hair colors are not yet firmly established. According to one theory, at least two gene pairs control human hair color.
One phenotype (brown/blond) has a dominant brown allele and a recessive blond allele. A person with a brown allele will have brown hair; a person with no brown alleles will be blond.  This explains why two brown-haired parents can produce a blond-haired child.
The other gene pair is a non-red/red pair, where the non-red allele (which suppresses production of pheomelanin) is dominant and the allele for red hair is recessive. A person with two copies of the red-haired allele will have red hair.
The two-gene model does not account for all possible shades of brown, blond, or red (for example, platinum blond versus dark blond/light brown), nor does it explain why hair color sometimes darkens as a person ages.  Several gene pairs control the light versus dark hair color in a cumulative effect.  A person's genotype for a multifactorial trait can interact with environment to produce varying phenotypes (see quantitative trait locus).

Natural hair colors

Natural hair color can be black, brown, blond, red, gray or white.

File:Back view of teen boys head - 1.jpeg|Black hair
File:Chinese American girl.jpg|Natural black hair
File:Lymari Nadal.jpg|Deepest brunette hair
File:Sharon Shannon smiling.jpg|Brown hair
File:Training of Seattle Mist Lingerie Football 0074.jpg|Medium brown hair
File:Little girl with brown hair.jpg|Natural brown hair
File:Goofy Boy.jpg|Light brown hair
File:A child of chappargram.JPG|Chestnut brown hair
File:Palestinian_girl_in_Qalqiliya.jpg|Light chestnut brown hair
File:Rotschopf.jpg|Auburn hair
File:נערה ג'ינג'ית.JPG|Copper hair
File:German Woman Portrait - Dutch summer festival of the Redhead Day in Breda, September 2010.jpg|Red hair
Elena Kazantseva 00.jpg|Titian hair
File:Strawberry Blond Girl.jpg|Strawberry blond hair
File:Lucy Merriam.jpg|Light blonde hair
File:Uschi Glas (Berlinale 2012).jpg|Dark blond hair
File:Goldenblonde.JPG|Golden blond hair
File:Blonde girl Vanuatu.jpg|Curly blonde hair
File:TKvamme.jpg|Medium blond hair
File:Kofi Annan.jpg|Grey hair
File:Rapolder uwe 600.jpg|White hair
File:Albinisitic man portrait.jpg|White hair caused by albinism

Black hair

Black hair is the darkest color. It has large amounts of eumelanin and is less dense than other hair colors. It can range from soft black to brown-black,blue-black or jet-black..  Blackish hair is common in almost all world continents, and most second and third world countries have it as the dominant hair color. 

Brown hair

Brown hair is characterized by higher levels of eumelanin and lower levels of pheomelanin. Of the two types of eumelanin (black and brown), brown-haired people have brown eumelanin; they also usually have medium-thick strands of hair. Brown-haired people are often known as brunette.

Blond hair

Blond (or blonde) hair ranges from nearly white (platinum blond, tow-haired) to a dark golden blond. Strawberry blond, a mixture of blond and red hair, is a much rarer type containing the most amounts of pheomelanin. An important thing to note about blond hair is its non-recessive gene behavior. However, this is not to be confused with strawberry blond hair, which is a recessive gene. 
Blond hair can have almost any proportion of pheomelanin and eumelanin, but both only in small amounts. More pheomelanin creates a more golden blond color, and more eumelanin creates an ash blond. Many children born with blond hair develop darker hair as they age, with the majority of natural blonds developing a hair color of a dark "gunmetal" hue by the time they reach middle age. Pregnancy hormones hasten this process. Natural blond hair is rare in adulthood, with some reports that only about 2% of the world's population is naturally blond.

Auburn hair

Auburn hair ranges along a spectrum of light to dark red-brown shades. The chemicals which cause auburn hair are eumelanin (brown) and pheomelanin (red), with a higher proportion of red-causing pheomelanin than is found in average brown hair. It is most commonly found in individuals of Northern and Western European descent.

Chestnut hair

Chestnut hair is a hair color which is a reddish shade of brown hair. In contrast to auburn hair, the reddish shade of chestnut is darker. Chestnut hair is common among the native peoples of Northern, Central, Western, and Eastern Europe.

Red hair

Red hair ranges from light strawberry blond shades to titian, copper and less commonly "true" red. It is caused by a variation in the Mc1r gene and is recessive.    Red hair has the highest amounts of pheomelanin, around 67%, and usually low levels of eumelanin. At 1-2% of the population, it is the least common hair color in the world. It is most prominently found in Scotland and Ireland. Scotland has the highest proportion of redheads; 13 percent of the population has red hair and approximately 40 percent carries the recessive redhead gene.


Gray and white hair

Gray or white hair—sometimes colloquially called "salt and pepper" when it is 'peppered' throughout dark hair—is not caused by a true gray or white pigment, but is due to a lack of pigmentation and melanin. The clear hairs appear as gray or white because of the way light is reflected from the hairs. Gray hair color typically occurs naturally as people age (see "Aging or achromotrichia", below). For some people this can happen at a very young age (for example, at the age of 10). The same is true for white hair. In some cases, gray hair may be caused by thyroid deficiencies, Waardenburg syndrome or a vitamin B12 deficiency.
The Journal of Investigative Dermatology published a study in 2005 which found that Caucasian people will begin to gray in their twenties and early thirties while Asian people begin graying in their late thirties, but most African people can retain their original hair color until their mid-forties. People with albinism may have white hair due to low amounts of melanin.
Often there is a myth that if you pluck a white/grey hair twice as many will come back in their place. A hair can be pulled out from the root with no effect to the root itself except to possibly weaken it. Pulling out a hair will not cause the root to split and produce more than one hair. This myth is perpetuated because when one gray hair is found, others are produced as a result of the acceleration of the graying process - more and more hair roots begin to produce gray hair instead of the former youthful color.

Conditions affecting hair color

Aging or achromotrichia

Children born with some hair colors may find it gradually darkens as they grow. Many blonde, strawberry blond, light brown, or red haired infants experience this. This is caused by genes being turned off and on during early childhood and puberty.
Changes in hair color typically occur naturally as people age, eventually turning the hair gray and then white. This is called achromotrichia. Achromotrichia normally begins in the early to mid-twenties in men and late twenties in women. More than 60 percent of Americans have some gray hair by age 40, but white hair can appear as early as childhood. The age at which graying begins seems almost entirely due to genetics. Sometimes people are born with gray hair because they inherit the trait.
The order in which graying happens is usually: nose hair, hair on the head, beard, body hair, eyebrows.
Two genes appear to be responsible for the process of graying, Bcl2 and Bcl-w It remains unclear why the stem cells of one hair follicle may die well over a decade before those in adjacent follicles less than a millimeter apart.
The anti-cancer drug imatinib has recently been shown to reverse the graying process.
The Journal of the Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology has reported that human gray hair is triggered by the accumulation of hydrogen peroxide. They found low levels of the enzyme catalase, which breaks down hydrogen peroxide and relieves oxidative stress in patients suffering from vitiligo. Since vitiligo can cause eyelashes to turn white, the same process is believed to be involved in hair on the head (and elsewhere) due to aging.[ref]


Stress

Anecdotes report that stress, both chronic and acute, may induce achromotrichia earlier in individuals than it otherwise would have. but no definite link has been established. 

Medical conditions

Albinism is a genetic abnormality in which little or no pigment is found in human hair, eyes, and skin.  The hair is often white or pale blond. However, it can be red, darker blond, light brown, or rarely, even dark brown.
Vitiligo is a patchy loss of hair and skin color that may occur as the result of an auto-immune disease.  In a preliminary 2013 study, researchers treated the buildup of hydrogen peroxide which causes this with a light-activated pseudo-catalase.  This produced significant media coverage that further investigation may someday lead to a general non-dye treatment for grey hair.fileymercury.co.uk/news/health-news/no-evidence-of-cure-to-prevent-hair-going-grey-1-5654448
Malnutrition is also known to cause hair to become lighter, thinner, and more brittle.  Dark hair may turn reddish or blondish due to the decreased production of melanin.  The condition is reversible with proper nutrition.
Werner syndrome and pernicious anemia can also cause premature graying.
A 2005 uncontrolled study demonstrated that people 50–70 years of age with dark eyebrows but gray hair are significantly more likely to have type II diabetes than those with both gray eyebrows and hair.

Artificial factors

A 1996 British Medical Journal study found that tobacco smoking may cause premature graying. Smokers were found to be four times more likely to begin graying prematurely, compared to nonsmokers.
Gray hair may temporarily darken after inflammatory processes, after electron-beam-induced alopecia, and after some chemotherapy regimens. Much remains to be learned about the physiology of human graying.
There are no special diets, nutritional supplements, vitamins, nor proteins that have been proven to slow, stop, or in any way affect the graying process, although many have been marketed over the years. However, French scientists treating leukemia patients with a new cancer drug noted an unexpected side effect: some of the patients' hair color was restored to their pre-gray color.

Changes after death

The hair color of mummies or buried bodies can change. Hair contains a mixture of black-brown-yellow eumelanin and red pheomelanin. Eumelanin is less chemically stable than pheomelanin and breaks down faster when oxidized. It is for this reason that Egyptian mummies have reddish hair.  The color of hair changes faster under extreme conditions.  It changes more slowly under dry oxidizing conditions (such as in burials in sand or in ice) than under wet reducing conditions (such as burials in wood or plaster coffins).

Hair coloring

Hair color can be changed by a chemical process. Hair coloring is classed as "permanent" or "semi-permanent".
Permanent hair color means that the hair's structure has been chemically altered until it is eventually cut away.  This does not mean that the synthetic color will remain permanently.  During the process, the natural color is removed, one or more shades, and synthetic color has been put in its place.   All pigments wash out of the cuticle.  Natural color stays in much longer and artificial will fade the fastest (depending on the color molecules and the form of the dye pigments)
Permanent hair color gives the most flexibility because it can make hair lighter or darker as well as changing tone and color, but there are negatives.  Constant (monthly or six-weekly) maintenance is essential to match new hair growing in to the rest of the hair, and remedy fading.  A one-color permanent dye creates a flat, uniform color across the whole head, which can look unnatural and harsh, especially in a fair shade.  To combat this, the modern trend is to use multiple colors - usually one color as a base with added highlights or lowlights in other shades.
Semi-permanent color washes out over a period of time – typically four to six weeks, so root regrowth is less noticeable. The final color of each strand is affected by its original color and porosity, so there will be subtle variations in color across the head - more natural and less harsh than a permanent dye. However, this means that gray and white hair will not dye to the same color as the rest of the head (in fact, some white hair will not absorb the color at all).  A few gray and white hairs will blend in sufficiently not to be noticeable, but as they become more widespread, there will come a point where a semi-permanent alone will not be enough.  The move to 100% permanent color can be delayed by using a semi-permanent as a base color, with permanent highlights.
Semi-permanent hair color cannot lighten hair.  Hair can only be lightened using chemical lighteners, such as bleach.  Bleaching is always permanent because it removes the natural pigment.
"Rinses" are a form of temporary hair color, usually applied to hair during a shampoo and washed out again the next time the hair is washed.






