[[The Internationale]]

CATEGORIES: Socialist International, Socialism, Anarchist culture, Anthems, Russian Revolution, Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Multilingual songs, Historical national anthems, National symbols of the Soviet Union, Political party songs, Songs of the Spanish Civil War, Protest songs, Anarchist songs, Billy Bragg songs, Songs critical of religion

"The Internationale" (French: "L'Internationale") is a widely sung left-wing anthem. It has been one of the most recognizable and popular songs of the socialist movement since the late 19th century, when the Second International (now the Socialist International) adopted it as its official anthem.  The title arises from the "First International", an alliance of socialist parties formed by Marx and Engels which held a congress in 1864.  The author of the anthem's lyrics, Eugène Pottier, attended this congress.
The original French refrain of the song is C'est la lutte finale / Groupons-nous et demain / L'Internationale / Sera le genre humain. (English: "This is the final struggle / Let us group together and tomorrow / The Internationale / Will be the human race.") "The Internationale" has been translated into many languages. It is often sung with the left hand raised in a clenched fist salute and is sometimes followed (in English-speaking places) with a chant of "The workers united will never be defeated." "The Internationale" has been celebrated by socialists, communists, anarchists, democratic socialists, and some social democrats.

Original lyrics and copyright

The original French words were written in June 1871 by Eugène Pottier (1816–1887, previously a member of the Paris Commune) and became widely used soon after.
In an unsuccessful attempt to save Pierre De Geyter's job as a woodcarver, the 6,000 leaflets printed by Lille printer Bolboduc only mentioned the French version of his family name (Degeyter). In 1904, Pierre's brother Adolphe was induced by the Lille mayor Gustave Delory to claim copyright, so that the income of the song would continue to go to Delory's French Socialist Party. Pierre De Geyter lost the first copyright case in 1914, but after his brother committed suicide and left a note explaining the fraud, Pierre was declared the copyright owner by a court of appeal in 1922.
Pierre De Geyter died in 1932. The duration of copyright in France is 70 years following the end of the year when the author died.  Previously,  for musical works, Siffloter « L'Internationale » peut coûter cher Le Monde, April 9, 2005  This position is inconsistent with a 2007 decision of the Cour de Cassation clarifying the matter.
As the "Internationale" music was published before 1 July 1909 outside the United States of America, it is in the public domain in the United States.

Translations into other languages

The German version, Die Internationale, was adopted by the protesters on the streets of East Berlin in 1953 and again in October 1989, when East Germans taken prisoner by their own police following demonstrations in the wake of Mikhail Gorbachev's visit sang the hymn to embarrass their captors by suggesting they had abandoned the socialist cause they were supposed to serve. Luckhardt's version, the standard German translation, of the final line of the chorus tellingly reads: "Die Internationale erkämpft das Menschenrecht". (The Internationale will win our human rights.) It was coupled with the chant: "Volkspolizei, steh dem Volke bei" (People's police, stand with the people!).
The Internationale in Chinese ( People's Daily: History of Chinese national anthems in a hundred years as well as a rallying song of the students and workers at the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989.Modern History Sourcebook: The Internationale
Versions of the song in Indian languages, particularly Bengali and Malayalam, have existed since the time of colonial rule. It was translated into Bengali by the radical poet Kazi Nazrul Islam and subsequently by Hemanga Biswas. The Malayalam version of the song has also existed since the 1950s with the translation of the song for the people of the Indian state of Kerala by actor and social activist Premji for the united Communist Party of India (CPI). In the 1980s, more translations appeared. Translations by Sachidanandan and Mokeri Ramachandran were sung by the activists of Janakeeya Samskarikavedi, an organisation connected with CPI(Marxist-Leninist) (CPI(ML). Translation by N. P. Chandrasekharan was for Students Federation of India (SFI), the student organisation associated with CPI(Marxist) (CPI(M) and published in the Student Monthly, the organ of SFI.
Nepali translations of the song have also been sung in various parts of Nepal, and Kathmandu and the song has been popularised by the Nepali Maoists.

Russian lyrics

The Russian version was initially translated by Aron Kots (Arkady Yakovlevich Kots) in 1902  and printed in London in Zhizn, a Russian émigré magazine. The first Russian version consisted of three stanzas (as opposed to six stanzas in the original French lyrics, and based on stanzas 1, 2 and 6) and the refrain. After the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia, the text was slightly re-worded to get rid of "now useless" future tenses - particularly the refrain was reworded (the future tense was replaced by the present, and the first person plural possessive pronoun was introduced). In 1918, the chief-editor of Izvestia, Yuri Steklov, appealed to Russian writers to translate the other three stanzas and in the end, the song was expanded into six stanzas. In 1944, the Soviet Union adopted the "Hymn of the Soviet Union" as its national anthem.  Prior to that time, the "Internationale" served as the principal musical expression of allegiance to the ideals of the October Revolution and the Soviet Union. (The "Internationale" continued to be recognized as the official song of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, and the post-1919 Soviet version is still used by the Communist Party of the Russian Federation.) The three stanzas by Kots were as follows:

English Lyrics

The traditional British version of The Internationale is usually sung in three verses, while the American version, written by Charles Hope Kerr with five verses, is usually sung in two..
The English versions are known to be notoriously difficult to sing, as the lyrics may appear sometimes forced and unnatural . British musician Billy Bragg, after talking to the American folk singer and activist Pete Seeger, agreed that the old lyrics were "archaic and unsingable".youtube.Scottish musician Dick Gaughan supports an older British English version  Bragg composed revised verses for the song, based on the British version. The recording was released on his album The Internationale along with reworkings of other socialist songs. A full, six-stanza translation can be found on the Wikisource page on The Internationale.

In popular culture

The Internationale has also featured in numerous examples of popular culture:








