[[Pallas's cat]]

CATEGORIES: Animals described in 1776, Felines, Mammals of Asia, Mammals of Bhutan, Mammals of China, Mammals of India, Mammals of Iran, Mammals of Mongolia, Mammals of Nepal, Mammals of Pakistan, Mammals of Russia, Mammals of Uzbekistan

Pallas's cat (Otocolobus manul), also called the manul, is a small wild cat having a broad but patchy distribution in the grasslands and montane steppe of Central Asia. The species is negatively affected by habitat degradation, prey base decline, and hunting, and has therefore been classified as Near Threatened by IUCN since 2002.
Pallas's cat was named after the German naturalist Peter Simon Pallas, who first described the species in 1776 under the binomial Felis manul. S. (1811). Felis Manul. In: Zoographia Rosso-Asiatica, sistens omnium Animalium in extenso Imperio Rossico et adjacentibus maribus observatorum recensionem, domicillia, mores et descriptiones, anatomen atque icones plurimorum. Petropoli, in officina Caes. Acadamiae scientiarum. Vol. 1 : 20–23.

Characteristics

Pallas's cat is about the size of a domestic cat, its body is 

Distribution and habitat

Pallas's cats are native to the steppe regions of Central Asia, where they inhabit elevations of up to  in the Tibetan Plateau. L. and Dorji, T. (2007). High elevation record for occurrence of the manul or Pallas cat on the northwestern Tibetan plateau, China. Cat News 46: 35. They inhabit Mongolia, Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan, Pakistan, Kazakhstan, Kashmir, and occur across much of western China. They are also found in the Transbaikal regions of Russia, and less frequently in the Altai, Tyva, and Buryatia Republics. In 1997, they were reported for the first time as being present in the eastern Sayan Mountains. (1998). Discovery of manul in eastern Sayan. Cat News 29: 12–13.
Until the early 1970s, only two Pallas's cats were recorded in the Transcaucasus, both encountered near the Araks River in southeastern Armenia, but no records existed from Azerbaijan. G., Sludskii, A. A. (1972). Mlekopitaiuščie Sovetskogo Soiuza. Vysšaia Škola, Moskva (in Russian); English translation: Heptner, V. G., Sludskii, A. A., Komarov, A., Komorov, N.; Hoffmann, R. S. (1992). Mammals of the Soviet Union. Volume II, Part 2: Carnivora (Hyaenas and Cats). Smithsonian Institute and the National Science Foundation, Washington DC. pp. 665–696.
Populations in the Caspian Sea region, in Afghanistan and Pakistan, are thought to be declining and becoming increasingly isolated. V. (1993). Small Felidae of Eastern Europe, Central Asia and Far East. Survey of the state of populations. Lutreola 2: 16. (2003). Mammals of Afghanistan. Zoo Outreach Organisation/ USFWS, Coimbatore, India.
In 2008, an individual was camera-trapped in Iran's Khojir National Park for the first time., Ghoddousi, A., Ghadirian, T., Goljani, R. (2008). First Pallas's Cat Photo-trapped in Khojir National Park, Iran. Cat News 49: 7. In 2012, Pallas' cats were recorded by camera traps in Bhutan's Wangchuck Centennial Park. This is the first report of Pallas' cat occurring in the Eastern Himalayas. Near threatened Pallas' Cat found in WCP. Wangchuck Centennial Park and WWF, 16 October 2012.
In December 2012 and December 2013, Pallas' cats were recorded for the first time in Nepal, viz in the Annapurna Conservation Area above  altitude. 2014. New wild cat species found in ACAP area. República, 12 February 2014. Rare wild cat found in Annapurna region. The Himalayan Times, 12 February 2014.

Distribution of subspecies

Three subspecies are recognized:

Ecology and behaviour

Pallas's cats are solitary. Both males and females scent mark their territory. They spend the day in caves, rock crevices, or marmot burrows, and emerge in the late afternoon to begin hunting. They are not fast runners, and hunt primarily by ambush or stalking, using low vegetation and rocky terrain for cover. They feed largely on diurnally active prey species such as gerbils, pikas, voles and chukar partridges, and sometimes catch young marmots.

Reproduction

The breeding season is relatively short due to the extreme climate in the cat's native range. Oestrus lasts between 26 and 42 hours, which is also shorter than in many other felids. Pallas's cats give birth to a litter of around two to six kittens after a gestation period of 66 to 75 days, typically in April or May. Such large litters may compensate for a high rate of infant mortality in the harsh environment. The young are born in sheltered dens, lined with dried vegetation, feathers, and fur. The kittens weigh around  at birth, and have a thick coat of fuzzy fur, which is replaced by the adult coat after around two months. They are able to begin hunting at four months, and reach adult size at six months. Pallas's cats have been reported to live up to 11 years in captivity.

Threats

The manul has long been hunted for its fur in relatively large numbers in China, Mongolia, and Russia, although international trade in manul pelts has largely ceased since the late 1980s., Jackson, P. (1996) Manul Octobulus manul (Pallas, 1776) In: Wild Cats: status survey and conservation action plan. IUCN/SSC Cat Specialist Group, Gland, Switzerland About 1,000 hunters of Pallas's cats are in Mongolia, with a mean estimated harvest of two cats per year. They are also shot because they can be mistaken for marmots, which are commonly hunted, and trapped incidentally in leghold traps set for wolves and foxes and snares set for marmots and hares. Their fat and organs are used as medicine in Mongolia and Russia, and they are killed by domestic dogs. While Mongolia has not recorded any trophy exports, skin exports have grown since 2000, with 143 reported exported in 2007.

Conservation

Otocolobus manul is listed in CITES Appendix II. Hunting of this felid is prohibited in all range countries except Mongolia, where it has no legal protection despite being classified as Near Threatened in the country. Since 2009, the felid is legally protected in Afghanistan, banning all hunting and trade in its parts within the country.

In captivity

In 2010, there were 47 Pallas's cats in 19 institutions that are members of the Association of Zoos and Aquariums, and four litters were expected. No births and three deaths occurred in 2009. Pallas's cats have the highest percentage of 30-day mortality of any small cat at 44.9%. The seasonality of their reproduction makes it difficult to control reproductive cycles. (2010). Pallas' Cat PMP . Felid TAG Times: 3. Keeping Pallas's cats healthy in captivity is difficult. They breed well, but survival rates are low owing to infections, which are attributed to an underdeveloped immune system. In their natural high-altitude habitat, they would normally not be exposed to viruses causing infection.
In June 2010, five kittens were born in the Red River Zoo in Fargo.
A female was artificially inseminated for the first time at Cincinnati Zoo, and gave birth to three kittens in June 2011.
In May 2013, three kittens were born in the Nordens Ark in Sweden.

Taxonomic history

Pallas's cat was initially placed in the genus Felis. In 1858, the Russian explorer and naturalist Nikolai Severtzov proposed the name Otocolobus for the species. N. (1858). Notice sur la classification multisériale des Carnivores, spécialement des Félidés, et les études de zoologie générale qui s'y rattachent. Revue et Magasin de Zoologie Pure et Appliquée 2e Série, T. X Séptembre 1858: 386. The zoologist Reginald Innes Pocock recognized the taxonomic classification of Otocolobus in 1907, described several skulls in detail, and considered the manul being an aberrant form of Felis. I. (1907). Exhibition of a photograph and the skull of a specimen of the Manul or Pallas' cat (Felis manul) that had recently died in the Society's Menagerie with some remarks on the species. Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London, 1907: 299–306.
Following genetic studies, the monotypic genus Otocolobus has been proposed to be placed with the genera Felis and Prionailurus in the tribe Felini, because of a close phylogenetic relationship. Otocolobus manul is estimated to have diverged from a leopard cat ancestor about 5.19 million years ago.O'Brien, S. J., Johnson, W. E. (2007). The evolution of cats. Scientific American July: 68–75.






