[[Colin Greenwood]]

CATEGORIES: 1969 births, English rock bass guitarists, Grammy Award-winning artists, Ivor Novello Award winners, Living people, People from Oxford, Radiohead members, Alumni of Peterhouse, Cambridge, People educated at Abingdon School

Colin Charles Greenwood (born 26 June 1969), is an English musician, composer, and the bassist for the rock band Radiohead. Apart from bass, Colin plays keyboards and synthesizers and works on sampling on the electronic side of Radiohead. He is the older brother of fellow band member Jonny Greenwood.

Early years

Greenwood, whose father served in the Army,
When Greenwood was 12 years old, he met future band mate Thom Yorke at Abingdon School, an independent school for boys. studying classical guitar with influential teacher Terence Gilmore-James. It was Gilmore-James who introduced him and the other future members of Radiohead to jazz, film scores, post World War II era avant-garde music, and twentieth century classical music. Said Greenwood, "When we started, it was very important that we got support from him, because we weren't getting any from the headmaster. You know, the man once sent us a bill, charging us for the use of school property, because we practiced in one of the music rooms on a Sunday."
According to Greenwood, it was out of necessity that he first picked up a bass, teaching himself by playing along to New Order, Joy Division and Otis Redding. "We were people who picked up their respective instruments because we wanted to play music together, rather than just because we wanted to play that particular instrument. So it was more of a collective angle, and if you could contribute by having someone else play your instrument, then that was really cool. I don't think of myself as a bass player anyway. I'm just in a band with other people."  Among his greatest musical influences are Booker T and the MGs. "I'm really more of a soulboy. Bill Withers and Curtis Mayfield, those are the people who informed me in playing the bass. That combination of rhythm and melody."

Radiohead

Greenwood first teamed up with classmate Thom Yorke in 1986 to start a band, then known as On a Friday; Ed O'Brien was then recruited, and finally, older student Phil Selway was approached to join the band. Later, Greenwood's younger brother Jonny, then 14 years old, also joined the band. Of being in a band with his brother, Colin has said, "... But he's very easy to look after anyway, 'cause he's very well behaved."
While an undergraduate studying English at Peterhouse, Cambridge between 1987 and 1990, Greenwood read modern American literature, including Raymond Carver, John Cheever and other writers "dealing with the tensions of post-war American society." At Peterhouse, Greenwood served as the college's entertainment officer, and helped arrange several gigs on Fridays. Later, whilst working at the music chain store, Our Price, he had a hand in helping the band get off the ground. When Keith Wozencroft, as a sales rep for EMI, entered the store one day, Greenwood said, "You should sign my band," and handed him their demo tape. That got it all started for the band, with EMI. At this time the band renamed themselves Radiohead.
Greenwood plays a number of instruments for Radiohead including electric- and acoustic bass, double bass, keyboards, samplers, and synthesizers, and a variety of percussive instruments. He favours Fender basses.

Work outside Radiohead

Music

In 2003, Colin Greenwood was credited on Jonny Greenwood's debut solo album Bodysong for playing bass on the track "24 Hour Charleston."
In 2008, in his first music project not involving other members of Radiohead, Colin played bass on James Lavino's score to the Alex Karpovsky film "Woodpecker."  The soundtrack also featured performances by Lee Sargent and Tyler Sargent, of the band Clap Your Hands Say Yeah.com article

Other projects

In 1997 Greenwood participated in a marketing campaign for alma mater Cambridge University, posing for a photo with then-current students from both state and private schools for a poster entitled "Put Yourself in the Picture." The poster was "designed to break down some of the stereotypes that deter able students from applying to Cambridge and encourage more state school applicants."
In 2003 Greenwood, an amateur photographer whose images are often posted on Radiohead's website, Dead Air Space, discussed his favourite images in the V&A's photography gallery, a collection "ranging from early daguerreotype and calotype prints through to modern digital prints," as part of their accompanying website's Personal Tours. Greenwood chose images by Frederick Sommer and Harold Edgerton among several others.
In 2004 Greenwood served as a judge for the Next Generation Poets talent contest, sponsored by the Arts Council of England. The same year, he participated on a panel in the annual sixth form conference run by Radley College in collaboration with School of St Helen and St Katharine, speaking on digital-rights management (DRM) from "the views of an artist, someone without whom there would be no music to share in the first place,"

Personal life

In December 1998, Greenwood married Molly McGrann, an American literary critic and novelist.

Gear

Electric basses

Amplifiers / combos used live and in the studio

Effects pedals

Stage technical specs

According to Graham Lees, Radiohead's touring audio engineer, "The Bass guitar is DI-ed and Mic-ed with a Sennheiser 609."

=Monitors=

Lees: "Colin uses Wedges alone, he has never tried in ears up to now, but has expressed an interest in trying them on the next tour. He also has a sub bass unit behind him to add extra weight on the low frequencies, mainly the kick drum and the drum machines. He has a full mix of everything on stage."

Other Instruments

Percussion






