[[Consumer Electronics Show]]

CATEGORIES: Trade shows in the United States, Las Vegas Valley conventions and trade shows, Recurring events established in 1967, Consumer electronics, Computer-related trade shows

International CES, more commonly known as the Consumer Electronics Show (CES), is an internationally renowned electronics and technology trade show, attracting major companies and industry professionals worldwide. The annual show is held each January at the Las Vegas Convention Center in Las Vegas, Nevada, United States.  Not open to the public, the Consumer Electronics Association-sponsored show typically hosts previews of products and new product announcements.  CES rose to prominence after a rival show, COMDEX, was canceled.

History

The first CES was held in June 1967 in New York City. It was a spinoff from the Chicago Music Show, which until then had served as the main event for exhibiting consumer electronics.  The event had 17,500 attendees and over 100 exhibitors; the kickoff speaker was Motorola chairman Bob Galvin.
The winter show was successfully held in Las Vegas in 1995 as planned.  However, since the summer Chicago shows were beginning to lose popularity, the organizers decided to experiment by having the show travel around to different cities starting in 1995 with a planned show in Philadelphia at the Pennsylvania Convention Center.  However, the inaugural E3 gaming show was scheduled to be held on the West Coast that same weekend and many exhibitors protested, causing the Philly Summer CES show to be cancelled.  The 1996 Winter show was again held in Las Vegas in January, followed by a Summer show this time in Orlando, Florida, however only a fraction of the traditional exhibitors participated.  Again, the 1997 Winter show in Las Vegas was very successful.  The next "Summer" show was scheduled to be held in conjunction with Spring COMDEX in Atlanta, however when only two dozen-or-so exhibitors signed on, the CES portion of the show was cancelled.
In 1998, the show changed to a once-a-year format with Las Vegas as the location.  In Las Vegas, the show is one of the largest (the other being CONEXPO-CON/AGG), taking up to 18 days to set up, run and break down."Grandest Gadgets", Las Vegas Review-Journal, Page A1, January 6, 2007.

Products that debuted at CES

Show highlights

2004

The Blu-ray Group held at CES the first U.S. press conference to promote the Blu-ray Disc format.

2005

The 2005 exhibition was from January 6 to January 9, 2005, in Las Vegas, Nevada. The event started off with a twist when the main keynote address by Microsoft chairman Bill Gates went wrong, as his demonstration of Windows Media Center resulted in a Blue Screen of Death, much to the amusement of the onlookers.
Samsung showed off a 
Zimiti Ltd (renamed Boardbug Ltd in 2007) won the "Best of Innovators" award for Personal Electronics. It is the only British company to have won this award.

2006

The 2006 International CES took place on January 5, to January 8, 2006, at the Las Vegas Convention Center, the Sands Convention Center, the Alexis Park Hotel and the Las Vegas Hilton Hotel.  HDTV was a central theme in the Bill Gates keynoteBoutin, P, "Live Coverage of Bill Gates CES keynote". Engadget. January 4, 2006. as well as many of the other manufacturer's speeches. The standards competition between HD DVD and Blu-ray Disc was conspicuous, with some of the first HD movie releasesRicker, T, "Film studios set to release Blu-ray and HD DVD titles today". Engadget. January 4, 2006. and first HD players being announced at the show.  Philips showed a rollable display prototype whose screen can retain an image for several months without electricity. Hillcrest Labs won the "Best Of Innovations" award in the video accessories category for software and hardware that allows a television to be controlled with natural gestures. International CES Honorees. The Loop: The Coolest Remote Ever?
Attendance was over 150,000 individuals in 1.67 million net square feet of space, making it the largest electronics event in the United States.

2007

In a break from recent tradition, the 2007 CES event did not begin on a Thursday, nor span a weekend.  It ran from Monday January 8 to Thursday January 11, 2007. The venues also changed slightly, with the high-performance audio and home theater expo moving from the Alexis Park venue to The Venetian. The remaining venues were the same as previous years: the Las Vegas Convention Center was the center of events, with the adjacent Las Vegas Hilton, and the Sands Expo and Convention Center hosting satellite exhibitions.
The location for the main keynotes was the other major change for 2007.  Previously held at the Las Vegas Hilton's Main Theater, they staged for the first time at The Palazzo Ballroom in The Venetian. Bill Gates gave his ninth pre-show keynote address on the Sunday evening. The opening keynote was presented by Gary Shapiro (President/CEO of the Consumer Electronics Association, which hosts the event), with Ed Zander, Chairman/CEO of Motorola. Other keynote speakers scheduled included Robert Iger from The Walt Disney Company, Michael Dell, founder of Dell Inc., and Leslie Moonves of CBS.
Finally, Industry Insider presentations moved to the Las Vegas Hilton, with contributions from Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo, CEO of Nokia and John Chambers, CEO of Cisco.
In the gaming section for Windows Vista and DirectX 10, there were two games shown: Age of Conan and Crysis.

2008

The 2008 exhibition was from January 7 through January 10, 2008 in Las Vegas with 141,150 attendees. Bill Gates gave the keynote speech, in which he formally announced his retirement from his day-to-day duties at Microsoft. Along with the announcement, he presented a lengthy comedy skit on what his last day with Microsoft would be like, complete with cameos from celebrities including Jay-Z, Steven Spielberg, Barack Obama, Hillary Rodham Clinton and many others. Industry names such as Consumer Priority Service also made an appearance among others in the retail sector.
Panasonic attracted much attention by releasing a 150" Plasma TV, as well as a 50" TV as thin as 0.46 in. (11.6 mm).

2009

The 2009 exhibition, held January 7–10, returned to the previous Thursday–Sunday schedule, and attracted 113,085 attendees.  Among more than 2,700 exhibiting companies were approximately 300 first-time exhibitors.
Several highlights include organic light-emitting diode (OLED) televisions,
The Minoru 3D Webcam, a USB webcam that is billed as the world's first stereoscopic 3D consumer stereo webcam won the "Fans Favorite" award.
The game show Jeopardy! filmed one episode from the celebrity series and the 2009 Tournament of Champions on a new set at the Sony booth.  The set was moved to their main studio at Sony Pictures Studios in Culver City, California starting with the show's 26th season.
CES 2009 suffered 22 percent or more attendance drop, which was attributed to the global financial crisis.

2010

The 2010 exhibition was held January 7–10 and attracted more than 120,000 attendees.
Highlights include the Intel Infoscape, which is run on the Intel Core i7 processor. One computer ran two  Equally impressive, Parrot presented the 1st prototype of Parrot AR.
Sustainable Planet grew by 40% in 2010.com, November 3, 2009

2011

The 2011 exhibition was held from Thursday, January 6 to Sunday, January 9. CESWEB is reporting that their pre-audit numbers show an attendance of 128,949.
Many tablets were introduced in 2011's show, such as the Motorola Xoom tablet, winning Best of Show,Time January 24, 2011, p. 40. which runs Android Honeycomb. Many 4G phones were also unveiled at the show, including the LG Revolution, Samsung Infuse 4G, HTC Thunderbolt, Sony Ericsson Xperia Arc, Motorola CLIQ 2, Motorola Droid Bionic, and Motorola Atrix 4G. In a push towards mobile devices, Microsoft demonstrated an early version of the next release of the Windows operating system, running on ARM-based devices.
3D TVs were introduced by many giants, such as Mitsubishi's 92-inch model of its 2011 line up theater-sized 3D Home Cinema TVs.
3net, a 3DTV channel co-owned by Discovery Communications, Sony, and IMAX, was previewed.CES: Discovery, Sony, IMAX Officially Debut '3net' Multichannel News January 5, 2011

2012

The 2012 exhibition was held from Tuesday, January 8 to Sunday, January 13th. Microsoft released an official statement saying that CES 2012 will be Microsoft's last appearance at the event.
AMTC was demonstrating this 'Tier-2' CE products ('middleware') featuring the Inview Technology platform. Inview claimed that its low processing and memory footprint means connected TV capabilities are available at low-cost,  as the software is provided royalty free. Parrot presented the "world's most advanced headphones" the Parrot ZIK By Starck.
This was also the first year in which the Photo Marketing Association held its annual trade show in conjunction with CES, with the PMA show branded as PMA@CES.

2013

The 2013 International CES was held from Tuesday, January 8 to Friday, January 11th, 2013 in the Las Vegas Convention Center, Las Vegas, Nevada, United States.
Major announcements during this edition were:

2014

The first Li-Fi smartphone prototype was presented at the Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas from January 7–10 in 2014. The phone uses SunPartner's Wysips CONNECT, a technique that converts light waves into usable energy, making the phone capable of receiving and decoding signals without drawing on its battery.An Internet of Light: Going Online with LEDs and the First Li-Fi Smartphone, MOTHERBOARD BETA, 1/9/2013, Brian Merchant 
LG debuted its new 77-inch curved OLED Ultra HD TV.Everything but jetpacks: At CES 2014, the future is now, NBC News, 6 January 2013, Keith Wagstaff
Samsung unveiled its curved TVs with two series of concave TVs.
At CES 2014, ProtectCELL was dedicated to helping its users get protected and stay connected, showcased its comprehensive mobile protection plans for all major devices including the iPhone 5S and 5C, iPad Air and mini and Galaxy S4. With demonstrations such as blending a Blackberry, ProtectCELL proves they will cover any and all damages.CES 2014: ProtectCELL showcases mobile protection plans for consumers by destroying mobile devices, ProtectCELL, 7 January 2014
The AMD presentation mentioned (among others) – the Kaveri CPU of the Steamroller architecture, Heterogenous System Architecture lineup and the intention to build upon that, immersive experience, AMD True Sound.AMD CES 2014 Keynote
In the Intel keynote presentation, its CEO talked about three areas in which technology can improve: living, working, and playing. He also presented Intel Edison, a SoC of the SD card format.Intel CES 2014 Keynote
Laser diodes were unveiled at the CES Show that are going to be used for high beam headlights in Audi vehicles. The high beams will be lasers, though the low beams will be light-emitting diodes. The car maker says that their high beams have a 500-meter range, which is roughly twice the distance of LED high beams. Lasers are expensive though. Lasers are smaller, brighter and more energy efficient than LED headlamps. Their laser headlamps use less than half the energy of LEDs. Laser diodes can emit 170 lumens per watt, while LEDs generate only 100 lumens. Lasers are sensitive to heat but that has not stopped their production for vehicles. Laser technology is not as advanced compared with LEDs, which have been around for decades.BMW, Audi will introduce laser headlamps this year, Automotive News Europe, 7 January 2014, David Sedgwick

"Booth babes" controversy

Part of the press, like the BBC and The Verge, ran stories (in 2012–2014) about the alleged unsuitable presence of "booth babes" (scantily dressed glamor models) at the show.
In a background story in The Wire, Rebecca Greenfield wrote that "booth babes" were initially called "CES Guides" and they "date back to the beginning of the Consumer Electronics Show" (1967) and that "they've been the subject of controversy and nerd fantasy alike". According to Greenfield's research, the first use of the term "booth babe" appeared in a Toronto Star article covering the 1986 CES. She also writes that the "scantily clad" attire "became norm" at CES in the 1970-1980 decade, in synchrony with similar developments in the auto show industry. Greenfield also remarks that complaints about booth babes at CES are not entirely new; she points out for example that Network World "wrote a few separate times that it was flat-out tired of booth babes — not because of the sexism so much as the predictability." For example, in 1999, Network World's Dave Breuger criticized the practice of employing spokesmodels, "most of whom wouldn't know an ATM module if it bit them on their overexposed games." Greenfield notes that other electronics shows like E3 have adopted a similar practice of encouraging "booth babes" in the late 1990s, but abandoned it in 2006 after outcry, with E3 organizers later threatening to fine any exhibitor for "nudity, partial nudity, and bathing-suit bottoms".thewire.com/technology/2013/01/ces-booth-babes-history/60619/






