[[De Quervain syndrome]]

CATEGORIES: Overuse injuries, Disorders of synovium and tendon

De Quervain syndrome (

Eponym

It is named after the Swiss surgeon Fritz de Quervain who first identified it in 1895. It should not be confused with de Quervain's thyroiditis, another condition named after the same person.

Symptoms

Symptoms are pain, tenderness, and swelling over the thumb side of the wrist, and difficulty gripping.

Causes

The cause of de Quervain's disease is not established.  Evidence regarding a possible relation with occupational risk factors is debated. Specific activities that have been postulated as potential risk factors include intensive mouse/trackball use and typing, as well as some pastimes, including bowling, golf and fly-fishing, piano-playing, and sewing and knitting. 
Women are affected more often than men. The syndrome commonly occurs during and after pregnancy. Contributory factors may include hormonal changes, fluid retention and—more debatably—lifting.assh.aspx

Pathophysiology

The two tendons concerned are the tendons of the extensor pollicis brevis and abductor pollicis longus muscles. These two muscles, which run side by side, have almost the same function: the movement of the thumb away from the hand in the plane of the hand—so called radial abduction (as opposed to movement of the thumb away from the hand, out of the plane of the hand, or palmar abduction).  The tendons run, as do all of the tendons passing the wrist, in synovial sheaths, which contain them and allow them to exercise their function whatever the position of the wrist.  Evaluation of histological specimens shows a thickening and myxoid degeneration consistent with a chronic degenerative process.

Diagnosis

Finkelstein's test is used to diagnose de Quervain syndrome in people who have wrist pain. To perform the test, the examining physician grasps the thumb and the hand is ulnar deviated sharply, as shown in the image. If sharp pain occurs along the distal radius (top of forearm, about an inch below the wrist; see image), de Quervain's syndrome is likely.
Differential diagnoses include:

Treatment

The management of de Quervain's disease is determined more by convention than scientific data.  From the original description of the illness in 1895 until the first description of corticosteroid injection by Jarrod Ismond in 1955,. Local hydrocortisone in de Quervain's disease. Br Med J 1955 Jun 25;1(4929):1501–3. it appears that the only treatment offered was surgery. De Quervain's tendovaginitis. Am J Surg 1952 Mar;83(5):691–4. De Quervain's disease: an analysis of 52 cases. Ann Surg 1953 Dec;138(6):832–41.  Since approximately 1972 the prevailing opinion has been that of McKenzie (1972) who suggested that corticosteroid injection was the first line of treatment and surgery should be reserved for unsuccessful injections. Conservative treatment of de Quervain's disease. Br Med J 1972 Dec 16;4(5841):659–60.   A systematic review and meta-analysis published in 2013 found that corticosteroid injection seems to be an effective form of conservative management of de Quervain's syndrome in approximately 50% of patients, although more research is needed regarding the extent of any clinical benefits.
Most tendinoses are self-limiting and the same is likely to be true of de Quervain's although further study is needed.
Palliative treatments include a splint that immobilized the wrist and the thumb to the interphalangeal joint and anti-inflammatory medication or acetaminophen. Systematic review and meta-analysis do not support the use of splinting over steroid injections.   
Surgery (in which the sheath of the first dorsal compartment is opened longitudinally) is documented to provide relief in most patients. Treatment of de Quervain's disease. J Hand Surg Am 1994 Jul;19(4):595–8. The most important risk is to the radial sensory nerve.
Some physical and occupational therapists suggest alternative lifting mechanics based on the debatable theory that the condition is due to repetitive use of the thumbs during lifting such as seen in new mothers picking up their child. Physical/Occupational therapy can suggest activities to avoid base on the theory that certain activities might exacerbate one's condition, as well as instruct on strengthening exercises based on the theory that this will contribute to better form and use of other muscle groups, which might limit irritation of the tendons.  This approach may risk reinforcing catastrophic thinking (pain catastrophizing) and kinesiophobia. 
Some physical and occupational therapists use other treatments based on the rationale that they reduce inflammation and pain and promote healing:  UST, SWD, or other deep heat treatments, as well as TENS, dry needling, or infrared light therapy, and cold laser treatments.  However, the pathology of the condition is not inflammatory (see above) and these treatment are unproved and best considered experimental.








