[[Iran national football team]]

CATEGORIES: AFC Asian Cup-winning countries, Asian national association football teams, Iran national football team, National sports teams of Iran

The Iran national football team (

History

Early years

The very first match that Team Melli played was on August 25, 1941, away at Afghanistan, while Iran's first FIFA international match was on May 28, 1950, away at Turkey.
Iran has won the Asian Cup three consecutive times (1968, 1972, 1976), a championship record to which the team has not been able to add since, although they have finished third four times.

1978 FIFA World Cup in Argentina

In 1978, Iran made her first appearance in the World Cup after defeating Australia in Tehran. Iran lost two of three group stage matches against the Netherlands and Peru.while FIFA World Cup 2006 Iran Team Overview

After the Revolution

After the 1979 Revolution, football was somewhat neglected and cast aside. During the 1980s, the Iranian national team did not feature in World Cup competitions due to the Iran–Iraq War (1980–88) and domestic football suffered the inevitable effects of conflict. The national team withdrew from the Asian qualifiers for the 1982 World Cup, and refused to participate in the qualifiers for the 1986 World Cup because of having to play on neutral ground. The war and political upheavals left Iran without major club competitions until 1989 when the Qods League was established. A year later, the Qods League was renamed the Azadegan League. Despite failing to qualify for either the 1990 or the 1994 World Cups, it was during this period that a number of quality players burst onto the Iranian football scene, laying the foundation for third place in 1996 AFC Asian Cup (memorable victories in that tournament like winning 3-0 against Saudi Arabia and impressive 6-2 victory against South Korea) and their second stab at World Cup glory in 1998.The History of Soccer Football in Iran – Team Melli :: Iran Visitor
Iran could count on new talents such as Ali Daei, Mehdi Mahdavikia, Khodadad Azizi, Karim Bagheri and its goalkeeper, Ahmad Reza Abedzadeh.

1998 FIFA World Cup in France

In November 1997, Iran qualified for the 1998 World Cup after eliminating Australia in a close playoff series. Both games finished undecided, but Iran managed to qualify due to the away goals rule. Iran held Australia to a 1–1 draw at home, and a 2–2 draw in Melbourne; however, since Iran had scored more away goals, they were able to qualify for the Cup.A third half for Iranian football, by Christian Bromberger
At their first game of the Group F at the 1998 FIFA World Cup, Iran played well against Yugoslavia, losing narrowly 1–0, only to a free kick goal by Mihajlović. Iran recorded their first World Cup victory in the second game, beating the United States 2–1, with Estili and Mahdavikia scoring goals for Iran. The Iran vs USA World Cup match was preheated with much excitement because of each country's political stance after the Iranian revolution. However, in an act of defiance against all forms of hatred or politics in sports, both sides presented one another with gifts and flowers and took ceremonial pictures before the match kickoff.World Cup: U.S. eliminated from Cup after 2–1 loss to Iran
Iran played against Germany in the third game. The game was lost 2–0. The goals were scored by Bierhoff and Klinsmann.com – 1998 FIFA World Cup France  The one win and two losses meant Iran became third in the final group standing and failed to make it to the next round.France 1998 World Cup: 1st Round – Day 16 Match Reports

2000 AFC Asian Cup

Iran finished first in the qualifying round. Iran also finished first in the group stage of the tournament, but they lost against South Korea in quarter-final after the extra time goal from Korea Republic.

2002 FIFA World Cup

Iran failed to qualify for World Cup 2002 after an aggregate defeat to the Republic of Ireland, losing 2–0 in Dublin and winning 1–0 in Tehran. The elimination saw manager Miroslav Blažević step down from the top spot to be replaced by his assistant Branko Ivanković, who stepped up from assistant coach.

2004 AFC Asian Cup

After qualifying to the Asian Cup 2004, Iran was drawn with Thailand, Oman, and Japan in the tournament. Iran finished second in this group by winning 3-0 against Thailand, drawing 2-2 with Oman, and goalless draw against Japan. In quarter-final clash against South Korea, Iran won 4-3 in normal time. In semi-final, Iran lost to the host, China, in penalties in a very controversial match in which the Chinese luckily avoided multiple red cards. Iran won against Bahrain 4-2 to finish third place in the tournament.

2006 FIFA World Cup in Germany

On June 8, 2005, Iran together with Japan became the first country to qualify for the 2006 World Cup, making it Iran's 3rd appearance on the world stage of football. The qualification round both in 2001 and 2004–05 resulted in mass celebrations, hysteria and rioting, causing internal chaos and unrest between youth and government officials. The Iran versus Japan leg of the 2006 World Cup Qualifiers in Tehran played on March 24, 2005 was the highest attended qualifying match among all confederations. The match ended in tragedy with 5 fans killed and several others injured as they left the Azadi Stadium at the end of the match.
Iran started their 2006 FIFA World Cup appearance with high expectations from fans and media. Their first match was against Mexico in Group D. The game was level 1–1 at the half-time, but Iran lost at the end because of a defensive mistake. The final score, 3–1, was brought about by goals from Omar Bravo and Zinha for Mexico, with Yahya Golmohammadi scoring the only Iran goal.
Iran played against Portugal in the second game. The game was lost 2–0. The goals were scored by Deco and Cristiano Ronaldo (penalty). The two losses meant Iran was eliminated from the competition, before their third and final game against Angola. Iran drew 1–1 with Angola on the 21st of June 2006, Sohrab Bakhtiarizadeh scoring the Iran goal.

2007 AFC Asian Cup

IRIFF appointed Ghalenoei as head coach of the Iran national football team on July 17, 2006 to succeed Branko Ivanković. After finishing first in the qualifying round 2 points ahead of South Korea and then finishing first in the group stage of the final tournament in Malaysia, Iran lost to South Korea in the penalty shoot-outs of the Quarters Final match and was eliminated from the 2007 Asian Cup. Ghalenoei was heavily criticized by the press. After a period of discussion in the Iranian football federation, his contract was not renewed and Team Melli was left with a caretaker manager for several months.

Temporary suspension

