[[Iraq Dossier]]

CATEGORIES: Political scandals in the United Kingdom, Government reports, Iraq and weapons of mass destruction, 2003 in the United Kingdom, Iraq–United Kingdom relations

Iraq – Its Infrastructure of Concealment, Deception and Intimidation From pages 35–42 of "The Decision to go to War in Iraq: Ninth Report of Session 2002-03" (PDF).) was a 2003 briefing document for the British Prime Minister Tony Blair's Labour Party government. It was issued to journalists on 3 February 2003 by Alastair Campbell, Blair's Director of Communications and Strategy, and concerned Iraq and weapons of mass destruction. Together with the earlier September Dossier, these documents were ultimately used by the government to justify its involvement in the 2003 invasion of Iraq.
The term Dodgy Dossier was first coined by online polemical magazine Spiked in relation to the September Dossier.
Whole sections of Marashi's writings on "Saddam's Special Security Organisation" were repeated verbatim including typographical errors, while certain amendments were made to strengthen the tone of the alleged findings (e.g., "monitoring foreign embassies in Iraq" became "spying on foreign embassies in Iraq", and "aiding opposition groups in hostile regimes" became "supporting terrorist organisations in hostile regimes").
In its opening paragraph the briefing document claimed that it drew "upon a number of sources, including intelligence material." Before the document's release it had been praised by Tony Blair and United States Secretary of State Colin Powell as further intelligence and quality research. The day after Channel 4's exposé, Blair's office issued a statement admitting that a mistake was made in not crediting its sources, but did not concede that the quality of the document's content was affected.
The claims contained in the 'September' and 'Iraq' Dossiers were called into question when weapons of mass destruction (WMD) were not found in Iraq, and the dossiers were encompassed by House of Commons Foreign Affairs Select Committee inquiry. The Committee subsequently reported that the sources should have been credited, and that the dossier should have been checked by ministers before being released. The dossier had only been reviewed by a group of civil servants operating under Alastair Campbell. The committee stated that the publication was "almost wholly counter-productive" and in the event only served to undermine the credibility of the government's case.
The controversy over the Iraq Dossier was mentioned frequently in the government's conflict with the BBC over the claim in the September Dossier that Iraq could deploy biological weapons within 45 minutes of an order to do so, and the controversy surrounding the death of Dr. David Kelly. Andrew Gilligan, the BBC journalist who wrote a report which claimed that the September Dossier had been deliberately exaggerated, stated before the Hutton Inquiry that recalling the February Dossier had led him to file his report based on his interview with Dr. Kelly without seeking confirmation from other sources. Whether or not the September Dossier was inconsistent with the original intelligence, it was altered in ways that made it inconsistent with itself. Based on analysis submitted to the Iraq Inquiry. See: Jones, Brian (2009) "Dossier demolished", Iraq Inquiry Digest website.
The dossier became a point of amusement in British politics. In a Questions to the Prime Minister conflict, Michael Howard (then leader of Her Majesty's Most Loyal Opposition), informed Blair, "I have got a great big dossier on his past and I haven't even had to sex it up."







 (document was removed from number10.uk website)
Other versions of the dossier are available, such as:
Other links:

