[[Calligra Suite]]

CATEGORIES: Calligra Suite, 1998 software, Free graphics software, Open-source office suites, Software forks

Calligra Suite is a graphic art and office suite by KDE forked from KOffice in 2010. It is available for desktop PCs, tablet computers, and smartphones. It contains applications for word processing, spreadsheets, presentation, databases, vector graphics, and digital painting.
Calligra uses the OpenDocument format as its default file format for most applications and can import other formats, such as Microsoft Office formats. Calligra relies on KDE technology and is often used in combination with KDE Plasma Workspaces.

Supported systems

Desktops

Calligra's main platform is desktop PCs running Linux, FreeBSD, OS X, and Windows,
On desktop systems, the whole range of features is available.

Smartphones

Calligra Mobile is a version for smartphone-like formfactors. Its main purpose is to serve as document viewer for devices running Maemo or its successor MeeGo but simple editing features are also available. This version only includes Words, Sheets and Stage.
Development was initiated in summer 2009 and first shown during Akademy / Desktop Summit 2009 by KO GmbH as a simple port of KOffice to Maemo. Later Nokia hired KO to assist them with a full-fledged mobile version, including a touchscreen-friendly user interface which was presented by Nokia during Maemo Conference in October 2009.

Tablets

Calligra Active was launched after the Plasma Active initiative to provide a document viewer similar to Calligra Mobile but for tablet computers. As with Mobile, only Words, Sheets and Stage are included.
Coffice is a version of Calligra for Android. It was released to the Google Play store on 24 March 2013.

History

Calligra was created as a result of a split in the KOffice community in 2010, after disagreements between the core developers.
KOffice 2.3, released 
On  the Calligra team began releasing monthly snapshots while preparing for the release of Calligra 2.4.
The first version of the Calligra Suite for Windows was released on 
The Calligra team originally scheduled to release the final 2.4 version in January 2012

Components

Reception

Initial reception shortly after the 2.4 release was positive. Linux Pro Magazine Online's Bruce Byfield wrote "Calligra needed an impressive first release. Perhaps surprisingly, and to the development team's credit, it has managed one in 2.4", but also noted that "Words in particular is still lacking features". He concluded that Calligra is "worth keeping an eye on".
The German sister publication LinuxUser 10/2012 reviewed Calligra 2.5 on . Its reception was mostly positive. Negative criticism centered around Words' stability: "During our review no Calligra module was completely free of crashes, however Words' crashes reached an amount that we cannot recommend it for general use." The reviewer Thomas Drilling on the other hand praised Calligra's usability, writing: "The consistent work flow, often stunningly intuitive workflows, and clear menu structure are well received." He then concluded: "The individual modules' quality varies: While Words shows weakness, image editor Krita, spreadsheet application Sheets, and presentation program Stage completely won us over. Flowcharting application Flow allures with its wide range of stencils which makes drawing flow charts come easy."
LinuxUser reviewed Calligra 2.6 in issue 3/2013. Reviewer Vincze-Aron Szabo reiterated positive criticism about Calligra's user interface and noted increased stability of Words compared to Calligra 2.5. Szabo's major point for negative criticism was Autor's and Word's handling of long documents, resulting in decreased performance and crashes. The other reviewed components – Plan, Stage, Sheets, and Krita – were praised in terms of stability and intuitiveness.
Calligra 2.7 was reviewed by LinuxUser in its October 2013 issue. Thomas Drilling, the reviewer, drew a positive conclusion overall. Among the positive aspects he pointed out were better . Source for negative criticism was once again Words' stability, although Drilling noted improvements in this regard.

Technical details

Calligra is designed to work with the KDE Platform, using the Qt and KDE libraries. However it is released independently of the KDE Software Compilation. All its components are released under free software licenses and use OpenDocument as their native file format when applicable.
The developers of Calligra plan to share as much infrastructure as possible between applications to reduce bugs and improve the user experience.0 Alpha 5 Release Announcement This is done by common technologies like Flake and Pigment. Flake provides a way to handle shapes, which can contain text, images, formulas (via KFormula), charts (via KChart) or other objects, in a consistent way across all applications. The Calligra team also wants to create an OpenDocument library for use in other KDE applications that will allow developers to easily add support for reading and outputting OpenDocument files to their applications.








