[[Butch Vig]]

CATEGORIES: American rock drummers, American record producers, Garbage (band) members, University of Wisconsin–Madison alumni, People from Madison, Wisconsin, Musicians from Wisconsin, 1955 births, Living people, Grammy Award-winning artists, People from Viroqua, Wisconsin

Bryan David "Butch" Vig (born August 2, 1955) is an American musician and record producer, best known internationally as the drummer of the Madison, Wisconsin-based alternative rock band Garbage and the producer of diamond-selling album Nevermind by Nirvana.
A native of Wisconsin, Vig had been based in Madison for much of his career, from studying at the University of Wisconsin, to performing in local bands Spooner and Fire Town, and then to setting up his own recording studio, Smart Studios, in the town. After becoming well known as a producer, he returned to performing with Garbage, who sold 17 million records over a ten-year period. Vig returned to producing full-time once Garbage was put on hiatus.
Now a resident of the Silverlake district of Los Angeles, Vig is married to his second wife, Beth Halper, a former DreamWorks A & R executive; they have a daughter, Bo Violet.
In 2012 Butch Vig ranked number nine in NME's Top 50 Greatest Producers Ever.nme.com/list/the-50-greatest-producers-ever/262849/page/5

Life and career

Early life

Butch Vig was born Bryan David Vig to Dr. DeVerne and Betty Vig, Vig acquired the nickname Butch as a child, due to the severe crew cut his father gave him. Vig studied piano for six years. After seeing The Who perform on The Smothers Brothers, he swapped his piano for a $60 drum kit.
Moving to Madison, Vig enrolled at the University of Wisconsin to study film direction, where he first met Steve Marker. Vig contributed several electronic music soundtrack pieces to low-budget films, including one song on Slumber Party Massacre, a Hollywood B-movie. This soundtrack work stirred Vig's interest in the manipulation of sound. Vig joined a number of garage pop bands, including Eclipse, and in 1978 formed Spooner with Duke Erikson, Dave Benton, Jeff Walker and Joel Tappero. The following year, Vig helped fellow student Steve Marker to build a home studio in Marker's basement. Marker and Vig also started a small label, Boat Records, to release records of both Spooner - which included their 1979 debut EP, "Cruel School" - and other bands they liked, which lead to around twenty local acts. The self-producing was later described by Vig as "kind of a trial by fire". Sharon M. Hannon. p. 115
In 1984, Vig and Marker founded Smart Studios in Madison, while still performing drums in Spooner at night and driving a taxi cab during the day. When Spooner lost momentum, Vig formed a band called First Person with Marker and Phil Davis and a side-project called Fire Town featuring Davis and Erikson. Fire Town quickly became Vig's priority, and after their first album were signed to Atlantic Records. Atlantic hired producer Michael Frondelli to work with Fire Town on their second album. While the sessions did not do well, and the resulting record sank, Vig learned a lot of production techniques from the process. Vig also briefly worked with metal band Marseille, recording keyboards for their album Touch The Night.marseilleonline.co.

Production career

Vig's first high-profile production work was in 1991, when he produced The Smashing Pumpkins' Gish and Nirvana's Nevermind. Vig incorporated overdubs and vocal doubletracking, whereas Nirvana's previous album, Bleach (produced by Jack Endino) had a more "lo-fi" sound. Kurt Cobain originally refused to double-track his vocals and guitars but Vig reportedly got him to comply by saying "John Lennon double-tracked". Cobain would later criticize Vig for the album's slickness, although this might be due to Andy Wallace's mixing of the album. (1998). Nevermind Nirvana at pg. 96. New York: Schirmer Books. ISBN 0-02-864775-0 Cobain said that "Butch Vig... Billy Corgan welcomed Vig's elaborate production on The Smashing Pumpkins' Siamese Dream. This album met with great commercial and critical reception, also breaking another indie band into the mainstream.  Vig also produced two critically lauded Sonic Youth albums, 1992's Dirty1992 THE BEST & WORST MUSIC, Entertainment Weekly. and 1994's Experimental Jet Set, Trash and No Star.
In 2003, Vig worked with AFI to produce their first major label album with DreamWorks, Sing the Sorrow.  Vig worked with Jimmy Eat World on their sixth album, Chase This Light, released in October 2007. He is also working on soundtracks for two new movies. His first production for an English band was 2008's All or Nothing by The Subways. He also worked with Tom Gabel of Against Me! on his solo EP, Heart Burns. Vig produced the eighth studio album by Green Day, 2009's 21st Century Breakdown, which won the Grammy Award for Best Rock Album. Recently, Vig has been partnered in duties by his engineer and mixer Billy Bush who also worked on Garbage's albums and live tours.
Butch Vig composed and produced the soundtrack for the film The Other Side.
In 2009 Vig recorded two new tracks for the long awaited greatest hits release by the Foo Fighters, most notably the single "Wheels" and ultimately produced their April 2011 follow-up, Wasting Light.
In 2010 Vig produced Muse's single, "Neutron Star Collision (Love Is Forever)," which was featured on the Twilight Saga: Eclipse soundtrack.

Garbage

Vig stated, "One of the reasons I started Garbage with Marker and Erikson was to drift away from all the work I got after Nirvana... I was reading about all these other records that I was getting excited about -- like Public Enemy using a sampler in the studio -- and I just decided I wanted to do a bit of a U-turn." Afterwards, they hired Scottish singer Shirley Manson and began composing together."Garbage: Behind The Music, VH1, aired March 31, 2002"(Retrieved - 2008-02-05)
Garbage released a string of increasingly successful singles in 1995–1996, including "Stupid Girl" and "Only Happy When It Rains". Their debut album, Garbage, was an unexpected smash, selling over 4 million copies and certified double platinum in the UK, United States and Australia. Garbage won the Breakthrough Artist award at the 1996 MTV Europe Music Awards.
Despite being named one of Rolling Stone's Top 10 Albums of The Year,""Breaking Up the Girl" Hits magazine trade ad". Retrieved 2008-02-24 Garbage's 2001 third album Beautiful Garbage failed to match the commercial success achieved by its predecessors."Bleed Like Me press release, published by Geffen Records, dated February 21, 2005. Retrieved 2008-02-24 Garbage quietly disbanded in late 2003, but regrouped to complete fourth album Bleed Like Me in 2005, peaking at a career-high #4 in the U.S. The band got back together in 2010 and began recording their new album, Not Your Kind of People, which was released internationally on May 14, 2012.

Discography

Production career

Butch Vig has remixed songs for the following artists: Against Me!, Ash, Beck, The Cult, Depeche Mode, EMF, Fun Lovin' Criminals, House of Pain, Korn, Limp Bizkit, Alanis Morissette, Nine Inch Nails, Michael Penn, M.O.P and U2, as well as his own band Garbage.






