[[Citroën C3]]

CATEGORIES: Citroën vehicles, Subcompact cars, Euro NCAP superminis, Hatchbacks, 2000s automobiles, 2010s automobiles, Front-wheel-drive vehicles, Vehicles introduced in 2002, Cars of Brazil

The Citroën C3 is a supermini car produced by the French manufacturer Citroën since 2002. It replaced the Citroën Saxo in the model line-up and is currently in its second generation. It is produced in a five-door hatchback body style, with the first generation also being produced in a two-door convertible version, called the C3 Pluriel. A three-door hatchback, with a similar design as the second generation, is available as the DS3.
A mini MPV version of the C3 was announced in July 2008, called the C3 Picasso, and was unveiled at the 2008 Paris Motor Show. In South America, a mini SUV version, called the C3 Aircross, is produced and marketed only locally.

First generation (2002–2009)

The first generation of the C3 was launched at the 2001 Frankfurt Motor Show and began marketing in early 2002, a five-speed semi-automatic transmission with paddle-shifters and manual and automatic modes. The top level was the only version that had the option of a four-speed fully automatic transmission.auto-types.auto-types.com/citroen/citroen-c3-5-doors-hatchback-1198/
In accordance with the PSA Group policy, the C3's chassis was used for the Peugeot 1007 and the Peugeot 207. Many components of the C3 are the same as those of the Peugeot 206.
Some versions of the C3 feature a start-stop system system that can automatically cut the engine when not needed to save fuel, such as in traffic, and restart it briskly to move on again.

Facelift

In 2006, the C3 was given a minor redesign, with the front end featuring a more imposing bumper, wider lower air intake, single air intake slit below the restyled radiator grille and a re-positioned number plate. The rear of the car was also given redesigned light clusters with crystal coloured midsections. The passenger compartment was also enhanced with the fitting of a restyled dashboard with high-quality finish, as well as a newer, more modern instrument cluster making the driver information easier to read. The addition of light metallic grey embellishers around the central section of the fascia and air vents contributed to the updated interior, as did the completely re-designed front and rear door panels and trims. The steering was also improved so that it weights up with speed. Citroën also added a new 1.6 L 16-valve HDi diesel engine to the range, rated at . The Pluriel also received similar interior alterations but was otherwise unchanged.

C3 Pluriel

A new C3 variant was introduced in July 2003, the C3 Pluriel, which can be configured as a full or partial convertible or a closed car, due to its detachable roof bars and folding fabric roof. It was originally offered with a choice of a 1.4 or a 1.6 L petrol engine, and a 1.4 LCatalogue de la Revue Automobile 2006 (ISBN 978-3-905386-06-6 by Buechler Grafino AG Berne CH) diesel engine. The 1.6 L petrol came fitted, as standard, with a semi-automatic gearbox. The Pluriel was withdrawn in early 2010.

Engines

Second generation (2009–present)

The second generation of the C3 was revealed in the media in June 2009, The new C3 builds on the curvy profile of the previous model and has a look in keeping with other Citroën models and the older C3, although it is longer and wider than the old model. The lights at the front, bonnet, dashboard assembly and other components are shared with the DS3. On the new C3, the instrumentation is a mix of analogue dials beneath a styled cowl and a digital display for the fuel and trip computer. There is no temperature gauge (unlike the DS3), but a red and blue warning lamp to show hot or cold engines which come on as required. The drag coefficient is 0.307 Cd.
In engineering terms, the PSA TU powerplants are carried over from the old car and Citroën also announced a new range of small petrol engines which PSA Peugeot Citroën developed in partnership with BMW. These "Prince" engines have double overhead 16-valve camshaft, on demand oil and water pumps and BMW's patent injection and ignition technology.  They are designed for low  engine.
The New C3 was presented at the Frankfurt Motor Show in September 2009. It was launched in November 2009, as a 2010 model.

Facelift

Launched at the Geneva Motor Show in March 2013, the C3 hatchback was revised to featuring updated exterior and interior, and more efficient engines. The C3 facelift comes with updated chevrons and bumper-mounted LED daytime running lights at the front and new tail light clusters combined with new reflectors set underneath the rear bumper.

Variants

There are four trim levels in the C3 range, which range from the entry level VT (which does not have the panoramic windscreen), the mid range VTR+ and eco efficient "Airdream+" (which has lower  emissions)  to the top of the range Exclusive, which has half cloth half alcantara seats, extra chrome outside, alloy wheels, an alarm, folding mirrors and power windows all around. Trim levels are denoted by a small badge on the rear window frame on the VT/VTR+ and Airdream+ and by a small chrome badge on each front door on Exclusive models. Norev have produced a 1:43 scale model of the new Citroën C3 in Botticelli Blue, Metallic Green and black.

Engines and transmissions

Sales and production








