[[Whizzer (comics)]]

CATEGORIES: Comics characters introduced in 1969, Comics characters introduced in 1971, Fictional African-American people, Fictional vigilantes, Marvel Comics characters who can move at superhuman speeds

 
Whizzer is the name of several fictional characters that appear in publications published by Marvel Comics. The first character debuted during the Golden Age in USA Comics #1 (Aug. 1941), and was reintroduced in Giant-Size Avengers #1 (Aug. 1974). A second villainous version debuts during the Silver Age in The Avengers #69 (Oct. 1969), with a third heroic version debuting in The Avengers #85 (Feb. 1971).

Publication history

The first character named the Whizzer first appeared during the Golden Age of comics, and later appeared briefly during the Silver Age. The second, villainous version appears in the final panel of The Avengers #69 (Oct. 1969), the first chapter of a three-issue storyline by writer Roy Thomas and penciller Sal Buscema. The story arc introduced the supervillain team the Squadron Sinister, whose four members were loosely based on heroes in DC Comics' Justice League of America, with the Whizzer based on the Flash. 72 – 73

Fictional character biographies

Golden Age

Silver Age

The Squadron Sinister are created by the cosmic entity the Grandmaster to battle the champions of the time-traveling Kang - the superhero team the Avengers. The Whizzer, James Sanders, battles Avenger Goliath, but the fight is interrupted by hero the Black Knight. The Avengers eventually defeat the Squadron and are they in turn are abandoned by the Grandmaster. - Dec. 1969) The Squadron reappear in the title Defenders, reunited by the alien Nebulon. The villains receive greater power in exchange for the planet Earth, and create a giant laser cannon in the Arctic to melt the polar ice caps, thereby covering the entirety of the Earth's surface in water. The superhero team the Defenders prevent the scheme and defeat the villains (and Nebulon), with Namor the Sub-Mariner humiliating the Whizzer.Defenders #13 - 14 (May - July 1974)
After this defeat the Whizzer and his two remaining teammates are teleported off world by Nebulon, returning with an energy-draining weapon. The Squadron Sinister plan to threaten the Earth again but are defeated once more by the Defenders and the Avenger Yellowjacket.Avengers Annual #8 (1978) The Whizzer disassociates himself from the Squadron Sinister and adopts a new costume and alias, Speed Demon.

Bronze Age

Roy Thomas and penciller John Buscema created an alternate-universe team of heroes called the Squadron Supreme, who debut in Avengers #85 (Feb. 1971). After an initial skirmish with four Avengers, the teams unite to stop a common threat. 1971) The characters including the Whizzer, whose name is Stanley Stewart, were identical in name and appearance to the Squadron Sinister, which caused confusion in Marvel's production department, as the covers of The Avengers #85 and #141 (Nov. 1975) "cover-blurbed" appearances by the Squadron Sinister, when in fact it was the Squadron Supreme that appeared in both issues. 
As a result of exposure to the mutagenic effects of a fogbank of unknown nature, Stanley Stewart possesses superhuman speed, stamina, and reflexes. When moving at subsonic speed, the Stewart Whizzer can create cyclones (by running in circles); run up walls and across water. The character has limited immunity to the effects of friction (Stewart wears goggles to protect his eyes), although still generates normal fatigue poisons. As a result, Stewart must consume large amounts of calories and rest after using his superhuman speed powers extensively.
The heroic Whizzer and the Squadron Supreme have another series of skirmishes with the Avengers engineered by the group the Serpent Cartel, but eventually team together and prevent the use of the artifact the Serpent Crown. 1975 - Feb. 1976) & #147 - 149 (May - July 1976)  The character and his teammates briefly feature in the title Thor, when the evil version of Hyperion attacks the Earth-712 version and then Thunder God Thor. 1979) The Squadron are mind-controlled by the entities the Over-Mind and Null the Living Darkness, but are freed by the Defenders and aid the heroes in defeating the villains. - Dec. 1982)
The character features with the Squadron Supreme in a self-titled 12-issue miniseries (Sept. 1985 - Aug. 1986) by writer Mark Gruenwald. 1985 - Aug. 1986) The series also explains why there are the Squadrons Sinister and Supreme are similar: the Grandmaster creates the Squadron Sinister modelled on the already-existing Squadron Supreme of the Earth-712 universe.Squadron Supreme #8 (May 1986) 
Gruenwald, Ryan, and inker Al Williamson created a graphic-novel sequelSquadron Supreme: Death of a Universe (1989) which maroons the team in the mainstream Marvel universe. The Whizzer and teammates encounter the hero Quasar, and relocate to the government facility Project Pegasus. After another encounter with the Overmind and a visit to the laboratory world of the Stranger;Quasar #13 - 16 (Aug. - Nov. 1990) the Whizzer participates in a "speedster" race organized by Elder of the Universe the Runner Quasar #17 (Dec. 1990) attempts (with the Squadron) to return to their universe Quasar #19 (Feb. 1991) and with fellow members Hyperion and Doctor Spectrum battle the entity Deathurge. 1991)
The entire Squadron Supreme appear in a two-part story with the Avengers that finally returns them to their home universe, where they disband for a time. 1998) The Whizzer rejoins his teammates to aid the interdimensional team the Exiles. 2, #77 - 78 (Apr. - May 2006)

Modern Age

The mature-audience Marvel MAX imprint showcases the adventures of the Earth-31916 version of the Whizzer, the Atlanta Blur. Also named Stanley Stewart, the character is a young African-American man who develops super-speed as a result of exposure to an alien retrovirus. 2004) He initially hides his ability, with the "Atlanta Blur" regarded as an urban legend,Supreme Power #3 (Dec. 2003) but when Hyperion is publicly revealed Stewart also goes public,Supreme Power #4 (Jan. 2004) becoming a celebrity with numerous endorsements. As the Blur, he reluctantly fights crime at the request of Nighthawk. 2004)

Footnotes






