[[Kryptonite]]

CATEGORIES: Superman

Kryptonite (not to be confused with Krypton) is a fictional material from the Superman mythos—the ore form of a radioactive element from Superman's home planet of Krypton. Within the mythos, it is the ultimate natural weakness of Superman and most other Kryptonians. In popular culture the word Kryptonite has since become synonymous with an Achilles' heel—the one weakness of an otherwise invulnerable hero.
Originating in the Superman radio show series, the material is usually shown as having been created from the radioactive remains of Superman's native planet Krypton, and generally has detrimental effects on Superman and other Kryptonians. The name "Kryptonite" covers a variety of forms of the substance, but usually refers to the most common "green" form.

Original versions

A forerunner of the Kryptonite concept was the unpublished 1940 story "The K-Metal from Krypton", by Superman co-creator Jerry Siegel. The K-metal in the story was a piece of Krypton which robbed Superman of his strength while giving humans superhuman powers, a plot point which decades later made its way into the TV series Smallville. Jerry Siegel also stated that the naming of the planet Krypton was taken from the element Krypton due to the common denominators of high density and viscosity between the two.
"Kryptonite" was introduced in June 1943 on the Superman radio series, in the story arc "The Meteor from Krypton". It was used as both a plot device and as a means to allow Superman's actor, Bud Collyer, to take occasional time off. The substance played a part in at least one major plot-line during the course of the program.
It was not until 1949 that comic book writers incorporated Kryptonite into their stories, as both a convenient danger and weakness for Superman and to add an interesting element to his stories. Pioneering female editor Dorothy Woolfolk claims she brought Kryptonite to the comics. She told the Florida newspaper Today in August 1993 that she had found Superman's invulnerability dull, and that DC's flagship hero might be more interesting with an Achilles' heel such as adverse reactions to a fragment of his home planet. "Dorothy Woolfolk, Superman Editor", Daily Press (Hampton, Virginia), December 6, 2000. WebCitation archive.: As related by Tippens, who notes, "although there is no definitive record".
Kryptonite, in its first comic appearance (Superman vol. 1, #61, in 1949), was quite rare. It came to earth inside a single meteorite from the exploded planet Krypton. Superman captured the two small pieces of Kryptonite, one from a fake swami (pretending to "hex" Superman with it) and another he purchased from a jewelry store, and threw them into Metropolis' river. Over time, Kryptonite was depicted as being so abundant that many ordinary criminals kept a supply as a precaution against Superman's interference. In several accounts, it was explained that the explosion of the planet Krypton had opened a "dimensional warp" (similar to a wormhole in modern theoretical physics) which allowed the vehicle carrying the young Kal-El to reach Earth in a relatively brief time, and a large amount of planetary debris had also passed through this "warp" and emerged near Earth at virtually the same time, accounting for the seemingly improbable abundance of Kryptonite material and its availability to Superman's enemies. Science fiction writer Larry Niven has tongue-in-cheek theorized that, based on such abundance, Krypton was actually a Dyson sphere with a surface hundreds of times that of a mere planet. "Man of Steel, Woman of Kleenex," All the Myriad Ways (Ballantine Books, 1971).
Kryptonite is most commonly depicted as green in coloring, with a few exceptions; it was red in its first appearance in Superman #61 (November 1949). When Superman followed the time trail of a piece of red rock that weakened him, he was able to trace his origin back to Krypton for the first time. Other colors of Kryptonite, having different effects, began to show up frequently beginning in late 1950s comics, reaching a peak in appearances in 1960s Superman series. (See below for further detail on Kryptonite variations.)
In an effort to reduce the use of Kryptonite in Superman storylines, all known Kryptonite on Earth was transmuted into "k-iron" in a 1971 storyline titled "The Sandman Saga", though Kryptonite could still be synthetically manufactured by a variety of known and unknown means, and additional material left over from the destruction of Krypton would continue to fall from space.

Forms of Kryptonite

Composition of Kryptonite

The composition of Kryptonite varies depending on the source material.
In the Silver to Bronze Age stories, as well as in the "Green, Green Glow of Home" episode of Lois & Clark New adventures of Superman, Kryptonite is a stable transuranic element (element 126) that finally decays to iron.Greenberger, Robert; Martin Pasko (2010) The Essential Superman Encyclopedia pg 174-177Superman: The Man of Steel Sourcebook (1992)
However in Superman III (1983) it is said that Kryptonite is an alloy made up of 15.08% plutonium, 18.06% tantalum, 27.71% xenon, 24.02% promethium, 10.62% dialium, 3.94% mercury, and 0.57% of an unknown substance. A Post-Crisis story in Action Comics #591 (Aug 87) also made Kryptonite an alloy.

Variations

The various known forms of Kryptonite in the Superman media:

Post-Crisis versions

Upon the John Byrne reboot of the Superman mythos after Crisis on Infinite Earths, Kryptonite was made much rarer in the DC Universe and many of the multicolored varieties were eliminated. In the first issue of The Man of Steel mini-series Jor-El informs Lara that unnatural pressures from a chain reaction in Krypton's core were fusing native elements into a new, radioactive metal (presumably Kryptonite) that was responsible for the "green death" that was inexorably killing the Kryptonian race. The only sample of Kryptonite on Earth was a single fist-sized chunk, caught in the tail of the infant Kal-El's rocket and carried to Earth along with him upon the explosion of Krypton. This sample had been found by the scientist who resurrected John Corben as Metallo, powering the cyborg with the alien matter in a paranoid attempt to save the world from Superman, as a mistranslation of a message from Jor-El caused the scientist to conclude that Superman was the leader of an alien invasion force. Metallo was soon kidnapped and his power source forcibly removed by Lex Luthor who, after discovering its debilitating effects on Kryptonians, created a ring with a Kryptonite gem to keep Superman at bay. This backfired badly on Luthor, as long-term exposure to Kryptonite radiation from the ring gave him cancer, leading to the amputation of his hand and then apparent death (although he was able to have his brain transplanted into a cloned body). Superman took possession of the ring and entrusted it to Batman, stating that he was the only person he could trust with the ability to kill him if necessary;Action Comics #654 (June 1990) Batman subsequently kept the ring available whenever circumstances required him and Superman to work together.
Red Kryptonite made a brief appearance during this era, where it had the effect of rendering Superman permanently powerless. However, the red Kryptonite and resulting powerlessness turned out to be a magical illusion created by Mister Mxyzptlk, with Superman's powers being restored once he learned of Mxyzptlk's involvement in accordance with the imp's usual restrictions. In time, through the use of Batman's notes, Ra's al Ghul was able to fashion a synthetic red Kryptonite, this version turning Superman's skin transparent and leaving him almost exploding with power as the sunlight that gave him his powers was sent directly into his muscles without being filtered by his skin.
The amount of Kryptonite on Earth increased dramatically, carried down to the planet's surface in a meteor shower that accompanied the rocket that brought Kara to Gotham City. Superman-friendly corporations, such as Wayne Enterprises and Kord Industries take it upon themselves to round up this influx of Kryptonite, but much of it goes into illicit circulation or is stolen from holding facilities.Countdown to Infinite Crisis
In the recreated universe, Kryptonite is in such abundance that it again becomes easily available to ordinary criminals and crooks. Following orders issued by Lex Luthor and Lana Lang, LexCorp starts stockpiling and selling it to government facilities and weapon makers. Superman and Batman embark on a mission to rid Earth of Kryptonite, a mission that almost fails when the cornered Lana Lang, attempting to protect LexCorp investments, launches a large number of dirty Kryptonite warheads, tainting the whole Earth atmosphere. Hiro Okamura builds and frees a storm of nanobots devised to capture and deactivate the tiniest fragments of Kryptonite.Superman/Batman #47-48
Once again, as in the 1971 storyline, virtually all Kryptonite is destroyed. The remaining fragments are wrapped in lead and hurled into the sun by Superman himself, except for one fragment, which Superman gives to Batman. It is later revealed that Batman has acquired a fair amount of every variety of the alien material, keeping his samples in the Batcave.Superman/Batman #49
By the events told in the New Krypton storyline however, several Superman villains, like Metallo and Reactron, have acquired some Kryptonite samples to use against the Kryptonians on Earth. Lex Luthor and Sam Lane, working for the government, have a cache of the precious material too.Action Comics #871

The New 52

As of Action Comics #6, the evil 5th-dimensional entity Vndktyvx uses a core of Kryptonite, stolen from the engine of the rocket baby Kal-El was sent to Earth in, in his complex revenge scheme against Superman. Among other things, he empowers three of his agents with innate Kryptonite-derived powers - the powers of green kryptonite, which causes fatal blood poisoning; red kryptonite, which alters Superman's perception; and blue kryptonite, which can destroy a Kryptonian's spirit.
He also discusses creating synthetic variants, such as silver and black kryptonite.
Kryptonite is stated to be harmful not just to Kryptonians, but 'pretty much anyone'.

Simulated Kryptonite

Hoaxes

In the comics and other media, some varieties of Kryptonite that turned out to be hoaxes:

Scientific basis

Under standard chemical naming procedures, the -ite suffix of Kryptonite would denote an oxyanion of the element krypton. However, krypton is a noble gas that forms compounds only with great difficulty, and such an oxyanion is not known. Nevertheless, the University of Leicester presented the Geological Society with krypton difluoride to commemorate the 70th anniversary of Superman.
In virtually all versions of the Superman mythos, Kryptonite is described as having formed through a process of nuclear fusion attendant to the explosion which destroyed the planet Krypton. Some accounts describe the fusion process as a result of the planet-destroying explosion, others as the cause of it, but all agree that the majority of the debris of the planet was converted into Kryptonite and propelled into interstellar space by the force of the explosion, with some ultimately reaching Earth and becoming a threat to Superman—and other Kryptonians. In Krypton's former location there is a cloud of gas-form Kryptonite that is lethal to all beings, Kryptonian or not.
The term Kryptonite instead implies a meteorite from the planet Krypton, as in the Lois & Clark: The New Adventures of Superman episode "The Green, Green Glow of Home," where it is given as "periodic element 126", which in reality corresponds to the still-undiscovered unbihexium/eka-plutonium, the most stable of the elements in the so-called island of stability. Superman: The Man of Steel Sourcebook (1992), while non-canon, concurs, referring to Kryptonite as "the common ore of the super-actinide Kryptonium, an unusually stable transuranic element, whose atomic number is believed to be 126". Kryptonium is given a radioactive half-life of 250,000 years.
In Superman: The Movie, Lex Luthor describes Superman's enhanced Kryptonian physiology as being vulnerable to Kryptonite's particular radioactive "signature". More recently, some issues of Superman indicate the mechanism by which green Kryptonite may hurt Superman. Superman's cells absorb electromagnetic radiation from stars (like Earth's sun). Kryptonite's radioactivity interferes with this semi-photosynthetic process, driving the energy out of his cells in a painful fashion.
Some versions of the adverse effects of Kryptonite describe the radiation as affecting the blood chemistry of the victim, causing accelerated effects similar to sickle cell anemia in terrestrial humans, and also causing the skin of the victim to turn green as exposure time increases.
Long-term exposure to Kryptonite is said to have the same effects on terrestrial human beings as exposure to other radioactive materials; an extended storyline in the comics around 1990 involved Lex Luthor developing cancer from the Kryptonite ring he kept on his finger.

In other media

As noted above, Kryptonite was originally created for the 1940s Superman radio series. Kryptonite has appeared in various forms in the various Superman media spinoffs, however.

Serials

Kryptonite was used in both 15 part movie serials produced by Columbia Pictures. In Superman (1948), the Spider Lady (Carol Forman) and her gang use Kryptonite against the Man of Steel (Kirk Alyn). In Atom Man vs. Superman (1950), Luthor (Lyle Talbot) creates a synthetic form of Kryptonite to use against Superman.

Films

=Superman: The Movie=

In Superman: The Movie, Lex Luthor (Gene Hackman) researches Krypton and deduces that a meteorite found in Addis Ababa is actually a radioactive piece of the exploded planet. Figuring out that Superman would be vulnerable to its radioactive signature, Luthor and his cronies, Eve Teschmacher and Otis (portrayed by Valerie Perrine and Ned Beatty, respectively), murder a guard and steal it from a museum under the cover of night. In this film's usage, the term "Kryptonite" seems to mean simply a "Kryptonian meteorite". After co-opting and launching two missiles for opposite ends of the United States, Luthor places the Kryptonite on a chain around Superman's (Christopher Reeve) neck and drops him into a swimming pool. When Teschmacher learns that one of the missiles is headed for Hackensack, New Jersey (where her mother lives), she rescues Superman from drowning and removes the Kryptonite, after which his strength and powers quickly return.

=Superman III=

In Superman III, billionaire Ross Webster (Robert Vaughn) orders the creation of synthetic Kryptonite after remembering a Daily Planet story about the last original chunk disappearing years earlier after falling to Earth. After scanning the coordinates of Krypton's former location via satellite, computer programmer Gus Gorman (Richard Pryor) determines that Kryptonite is "an intense heat fusion" of: 15.08% plutonium, 18.06% tantalum, 27.71% xenon, 24.02% promethium, 10.62% dialium (which is a plant genus, not an element), 3.94% mercury, with the last 0.57% being an unknown element not found on the periodic table. The substitution of tar (which Gorman used after glancing at a pack of cigarettes) for the crucial, but unknown, component resulted in the synthetic Kryptonite—like black Kryptonite in the comics—turning Superman evil and eventually splitting him into two beings. Retaining Superman's remaining good qualities, Clark Kent fights and defeats the dark Superman, who vanishes. Later in the film, Gorman's creation, the Ultimate Computer, severely weakens Superman with a Kryptonite ray before Gorman has a change of heart and attacks his own machine.

=Superman Returns=

In Superman Returns, Lex Luthor (now portrayed by Kevin Spacey) enters the Metropolis Museum of Natural History and steals the Addis Ababa L9 Pallasite Meteorite. It is described in the exhibit display as "sodium lithium boron silicate hydroxide with fluorine". According to the exhibit display, the meteorite was discovered in 1978 — the year that Superman: The Movie was released.
Incidentally, in 2007, a white and harmless mineral with the above chemical formula (except without fluorine) was discovered by Rio Tinto Group researchers in a mine in Serbia called Jadarite.
Luthor uses the meteorite in his quest to create a new Kryptonite landmass (which is referred to in the novelization as "New Krypton"). In addition, he uses a shard leftover from processing it to create a Kryptonite shiv, which he uses to stab Superman (portrayed by Brandon Routh). After Lois removes the shiv from Superman's back, he flies to the Sun to re-energize himself and lifts the continent into space.

=Justice League: Crisis on Two Earths=

In the animated direct to video movie, Justice League: Crisis on Two Earths, Blue Kryptonite makes a brief appearance. As the heroic Lex Luthor of the parallel universe battles his arch enemy Ultraman (that universe's evil Superman), he is beaten but, gains the upper hand by revealing, and weakening Ultraman with a piece of blue Kryptonite, the only thing he is vulnerable to (mirroring Superman's weakness to the green variety). When confronted by it Ultraman is severely weakened, and claims to have destroyed all the pieces of it left; Lex admits that Ultraman did, but that he himself has been to other universes and gotten more.

=Justice League: Doom=

Green Kryptonite appears in the direct to video movie, Justice League: Doom. In the film, Metallo nearly kills Superman by shooting him in the chest with a bullet made of Green Kryptonite, sending him falling from the roof of the Daily Planet and onto the pavement below. Superman's Kryptonian skin prevents the paramedics at the scene from removing the bullet, but he is ultimately saved after Cyborg uses a makeshift Kryptonite laser to cut an incision in the hero's chest, allowing Martian Manhunter to remove the Kryptonite before it kills him.

Man of Steel

In an interview with Entertainment Weekly, Man of Steel writer David S. Goyer revealed that Kryptonite won't be featured in the reboot.com/superman-man-of-steel-no-kryptonite/ However, a plot point during the film has Superman being weakened while in the presence of Kryptonian matter (due to Superman's abilities being driven from Earth's atmosphere in general, rather than just the solar radiation), and becoming sick and collapsing when exposed to the conditions of Krypton while on Zod's ship, similar to the effects on Kryptonite in previous depictions.

Television

=Adventures of Superman=

Kryptonite was used in several Adventures of Superman episodes. The specific color is not definite, given that it is never mentioned and that the series was initially in black-and-white, but from its effects, it is presumably green Kryptonite in each case:
|title=Panic in the Sky
|series=Adventures of Superman
|serieslink=Adventures of Superman (TV series)
|credits=Jackson Gillis (writer); Thomas Carr (director)
|network=Syndicated
|airdate=December 5, 1953
|season=2
|number=12}}[/ref] Although the scientists in the episode only say the meteor consist of "unknown elements", a fragment of this meteor is later used in "The Deadly Rock", referred to at that time as Kryptonite.
|title=The Defeat of Superman
|series=Adventures of Superman
|serieslink=Adventures of Superman (TV series)
|credits=Jackson Gillis (writer); George Blair (director)
|network=Syndicated
|airdate=October 24, 1953
|season=2
|number=6}}[/ref]
|title=Superman Week
|series=Adventures of Superman
|serieslink=Adventures of Superman (TV series)
|credits=Peggy Chantler Dick (writer); Harry W. Gerstad (director)
|network=Syndicated
|airdate=May 14, 1955
|season=3
|number=4}}[/ref]
|title=The Magic Secret
|series=Adventures of Superman
|serieslink=Adventures of Superman (TV series)
|credits=Robert Leslie Bellem & Whitney Ellsworth (writers); Philip Ford (director)
|network=Syndicated
|airdate=February 10, 1958
|season=6
|number=2}}[/ref]
|title=The Gentle Monster
|series=Adventures of Superman
|serieslink=Adventures of Superman (TV series)
|credits=David T. Chantler (writer); Howard Bretherton (director)
|network=Syndicated
|airdate=March 24, 1958
|season=6
|number=8}}[/ref]
|title=All That Glitters
|series=Adventures of Superman
|serieslink=Adventures of Superman (TV series)
|credits=Robert Leslie Bellem & Whitney Ellsworth (writers); George Reeves (director)
|network=Syndicated
|airdate=April 28, 1958
|season=6
|number=13}}[/ref]

=The Adventures of Superboy=

Kryptonite made frequent appearances in the syndicated "Superboy" TV series, most of it green. It first appeared in the first season episode "Kryptonite Kills" in which Professor Peterson retrieved it from Addis Ababa believing it to be a harmless meteorite and brought it to his gemology class at Shuster University. Superboy in his guise as Clark Kent (played by John Haymes Newton in Season 1, Gerard Christopher in Seasons 2-4), a student in Peterson's science class, collapsed from the radiation and felt its effects for the first time. While attention was focused on Clark, Lex Luthor (played by Scott James Wells), another student in the class, swiped a small piece of the rock for himself, using it as a power source and fashioning it as a necklace for his girlfriend. Superboy later threw most of the Kryptonite into space, except for Lex's piece, which was washed into the sewer. That piece was later discovered by a scientist who used it as a power source for Metallo (Roger Corben) in the second season episode of the same name.
Green Kryptonite made several more appearances throughout the series, used primarily by Lex Luthor (played in these later episodes by Sherman Howard) and Metallo (subsequently portrayed by Michael Callan). In the third season episode "Bride of Bizarro", Luthor sent Bizarro to a military research base to steal a large amount of Kryptonite, which Luthor was seen using on Superboy in later episodes. In the fourth season episode "Kryptonite Kid", a young man named Mike Walker (played by Jay Underwood) working at the same military research base was caught in a Kryptonite explosion while working to find a cure which would make Superboy immune to the radiation. The Kryptonite entered his bloodstream and turned his skin green and he became "living, breathing Kryptonite" able to fire Kryptonite radiation from his hands. However, Superboy foils it with a lead tarp and says that with medical treatment the Kryptonite will be cleansed from Walker's body. In "Obituary for a Super-Hero", Luthor used a Kryptonite bomb planted on a yacht to attempt to kill Superboy.
Red Kryptonite made an appearance in the second season episode "Super Menace". This version of Red K was created at a military research base where scientists were working to neutralize Kryptonite's effect on Superboy while still retaining its radioactive properties so it could be used as a power source. Their experiments turned the Kryptonite red, making it useless as a power source and altering its effect on Superboy. This red Kryptonite turned Superboy evil, much like red Kryptonite would later do in the "Smallville" TV Series, except only a single exposure to it was required, rather than constant exposure. After Superboy wreaked havoc with Metallo, Lana Lang (played by Stacy Haiduk) tricked Superboy into being exposed to another chunk of red Kryptonite which reversed the effects of the first.
The "Superboy" series also introduced a form of white Kryptonite, created by Professor Peterson's duplicating ray in an attempt to create a form of Kryptonite that would kill the molecularly unstable Bizarro. It had an opposite effect, actually stabilizing, curing, and preventing him from eventually exploding as previous Bizarro duplicates had. White Kryptonite made only one appearance in the series in the episode "The Battle With Bizarro". It is referred to again in "The Bride of Bizarro" but it is not seen.

=Lois and Clark: The New Adventures of Superman=

Kryptonite was used throughout the 1990s television series Lois & Clark: The New Adventures of Superman.

=Smallville=

In the 2000s and 2010s television series Smallville, a large quantity of green Kryptonite falls to Earth (in the town of Smallville, Kansas) as a meteor shower in 1989—arriving at the same time as the spaceship containing the infant Kal-El. Additionally, the meteor shower is directly responsible for the loss of Lex Luthor's hair as well as the death of Lana Lang's parents. The element is originally referred to as "meteor rock", rather than "Kryptonite," even by Clark Kent. In the season two episode "Rosetta", Clark learns the name of his home planet for the first time, and the term "Kryptonite" eventually comes into use by those characters who know Clark's secret.
On the show, not only is green Kryptonite harmful to Clark Kent, but it produces bizarre changes in humans, animals, and plants, often bestowing metahuman abilities; these are commonly known by the inhabitants of Smallville as "Meteor Freaks." A side effect is that they have little or no effect upon Clark.
In the television series, the harm inflicted upon Clark by Kryptonite varies. It almost always causes him pain and nausea, and if touched by the substance, turns his veins green. However, on other separate occasions, Clark has held (Jinx) and even ingested (Devoted) Kryptonite (albeit in diluted form) and been merely weakened. When a vial of Clark's blood was held up to Kryptonite to verify its authenticity, the blood began to boil. Higher refined Kryptonite seems to also have a stronger effect and larger effect radius.
In the season eight episode "Power", Lana Lang (in an effort to gain the power necessary to fight crime alongside Clark) acquires an experimental skin-replacing "suit" known as "Project Prometheus". The suit was designed for Lex Luthor and grants Lana superhuman abilities.  Lex also fashions Kryptonite rings with Luthor's family insignia for himself in preparation for his eventual confrontations with Clark. Oliver Queen took one of the rings from Lex after his apparent death.
Red Kryptonite has also been shown in Smallville. Its effect on Clark Kent is to rid him of all inhibitions, making him rebellious and potentially dangerous if exposed to it for too long. Also created for the series was black Kryptonite (first appearing in the episode "Crusade"), which is capable of separating certain entities within individual organisms, e.g., splitting a person's good and evil sides.
Black Kryptonite was formed by heating up green Kryptonite. In the series, after Clark's "reprogramming" by Jor-El in the caves, Martha Kent used black Kryptonite to reveal the two psyches of Clark, the militant Kal-El (not to be confused with the rebellious "Kal" alias caused by red Kryptonite), and normal Clark. In a later episode, Lex Luthor was experimenting with a process to heat up green Kryptonite and irradiate seeds, in order to separate the "weak" genes from the "strong" genes in the seeds. An accident with this process caused Lex to split into a "bad" Lex and a "good" Lex who referred to himself as "Alexander".
Silver Kryptonite makes an appearance in the fifth season episode entitled "Splinter'. Like its previous incarnation in the Pre-Crisis comics continuity (I.E. the aforementioned issue of Superman's Pal, Jimmy Olsen) it is not a true form of the stone. In the episode, Clark pricked his finger on a rock that was black and had silver-metallic clusters, and subsequently became increasingly paranoid, hallucinating that others were conspiring against him. In the episode's final scenes, it was revealed that a splinter of the element entered Clark's bloodstream. It was also shown that silver Kryptonite was created artificially from the liquid metal which forms Brainiac's body.
In the eighth episode of Smallville's 7th Season, blue Kryptonite makes an appearance, stripping Clark of his powers. When Lara, Clark's mother, gives Clark his father's blue ring to wear, without knowing the effect it would have on him. The ring is impossible to remove until Clark returns to the Fortress of Solitude. As in the comics,
In season 9 episode 7, titled "Kandor", Clark's father Jor-El, a prominent scientist on Krypton, is tasked by the Kryptonian high counsel to prepare DNA clones of the planet's finest soldiers during the war with Black Zero. Knowing the powers bestowed by Earth's yellow sun, Jor-El uses blue Kryptonite to prevent the clones from having the powers bestowed upon his son, Kal-El (Clark) should they be unleashed from their transport orb on Earth.
In season 9 episode "Persuasion" a new Kryptonite called Gemstone Kryptonite gives Clark the ability to have others want to fulfill his wishes.
In season 10, "Luthor"'s gold Kryptonite is mentioned by the alternate reality Clark Kent, the evil Clark Luthor/Ultraman. He implies that "gold K" is responsible for a notable scar on his wrist. Gold Kryptonite finally appears in the episode 20, "Prophecy", when Oliver, infected by Darkseid, was digging in a forest and ended up finding a piece of the gold meteor rock. It is later featured as a wedding ring given to Oliver to plant it on Clark, ridding him of his powers, but Oliver overcame Darkseid and crushed the ring.

Animated series

=Super Friends=

The 1970s and 1980s Super Friends animated series featured Kryptonite in various episodes. In the episode "Rest in Peace", Sinestro refers to a form of Kryptonite called "Krypton Steel" as "a harmless form of Kryptonite that only Superman can penetrate". In another episode, "Darkseid's Golden Trap", gold Kryptonite appears, which is stated to have an effective range of 20 ft (6.1 m). Blue Kryptonite also makes an appearance in an episode entitled "Terror From the Phantom Zone"; Superman, aging rapidly from exposure to red Kryptonite, acquires a sample of blue Kryptonite which had been discovered floating in space. Since blue Kryptonite harms Bizarros, Superman reasons that it would help normal Kryptonians, and thus uses it to cure himself. In "Uncle Mxyzptlk", the Wonder Twins find a red, glowing stone and take it to the Hall of Justice. They show it to Superman, who immediately reacts to it. Samurai knocks the red Kryptonite to the floor but the effects of the red Kryptonite cause Superman to decrease in age, becoming a young child. The rest of the Super Friends refer to the kid as 'Super Brat'. In another episode, red Kryptonite is exposed to Superman by Bizarro himself, causing Superman to transform into a gangly, weak klutz. In yet another episode, red Kryptonite causes Superman to grow additional arms and legs. Most of the action takes place at the Fortress of Solitude, where Superman finds some blue Kryptonite hidden away to fight off Bizarro, but unlike the earlier case of curing Superman from his artificial old age, this session of blue Kryptonite didn't heal Superman. (But the first case was a huge meteor, and the latter was just a small chunk.)

=Superman (1988)=

Kryptonite was used in the Ruby-Spears Superman cartoon. Like the comics, Lex Luthor is shown to wear a Kryptonite ring.

=DC Animated Universe=

In the 1990s series, Superman: The Animated Series, one explanation offered for the science of Kryptonite is that Superman feels the detrimental effects of Kryptonite radiation quicker than normal humans because his body absorbs it more readily, as a result of sharing a common point of origin with the element. The effect is so potent that even a tiny shard is enough to painfully affect Superman at a short distance. This makes it impossible for Superman to even touch the substance, as it would be the equivalent of a normal man touching radioactive rods from a nuclear reactor with his bare skin. Only the element lead can block the radiation, and it is therefore Superman's only protection. Fortunately, Professor Hamilton supplies Superman with a distinctive and durable lead protection suit for such situations.
Kryptonite, in the animated series, still has effects on normal humans as well. There are two examples of this. First, the "Jade Dragon" from World's Finest (a three-part crossover episode between The New Batman Adventures and Superman: The Animated Series) is a statue of Kryptonite carved in the form of a Chinese dragon, said to be cursed because all of its owners all died within a few years of acquiring the piece. Second is Lex Luthor's Kryptonite poisoning/cancer as seen in Justice League, attributed to Lex's admitted habit of keeping a fist-sized chunk of Kryptonite in his pocket for years (though Lex Luthor is later cured of this cancer due to Brainiac being inside him). Batman also carries a piece of Kryptonite (possibly the same piece) in his own belt (which he dubs "insurance"), presumably in a lead-lined pouch, as Superman is often seen next to Batman without suffering any ill effects. That piece was later shattered against Superman's chest by Amazo, leaving only a small needle-like piece left. In Batman Beyond, it was revealed in the two-part episode "The Call" that Bruce Wayne kept the needle of Kryptonite for the rest of his life, locked up securely in the Bat Cave.
Green Kryptonite remains the only variety of the substance ever seen in the DC animated universe.

=Krypto the Superdog=

As mentioned above, the Krypto the Superdog episode "Streaky's Cat Tail" features "purple-spotted Kryptonite", which causes Superdog to compulsively chase his tail. However, this was almost certainly a product of Streaky's imagination. Green Kryptonite was also used in the series. Red Kryptonite has appeared and is stated as having weird effects on Kryptonians for a day; it has swapped the minds of Kevin and Krypto, removed Krypto's powers, turned both Krypto and Streaky into fish, and in another episode caused Krypto's tail to become sentient and separated from his body.

=Legion of Super Heroes=

Kryptonite also appears in an episode of the Legion of Super Heroes cartoon, where it is revealed Brainiac 5 has a piece of it, and that the villain Drax, who, despite being an analogue to Superman, is immune to it. In the season 2 episode "Dark Victory", a brainwashed Brainiac 5 not only attacks Superman with a Kryptonite ray, but also produces a band of Kryptonite from within him and places it on the hero's head, the band then tightening around it.

=Batman: The Brave and the Bold=

Green Kryptonite and Red Kryptonite appear in the Batman: The Brave and the Bold episode "The Battle of the Superheroes". The Red Kryptonite exposure causes Superman to turn evil and try to take over Metropolis when the Red Kryptonite was sent to Lois Lane in the form of a necklace causing Batman to work with Krypto to hold off Superman until the effects wore off. Lex Luthor is also shown to have his Kryptonite Ring when he tries to weaken Superman only to discover that Superman is actually Batman in disguise. When Batman finds himself on Zur-En-Arrh, he gains super powers until Rohtul (a villain similar to Luthor) escapes from prison following the last fight he had with the Batmen and uses the quartz within his giant robots on him to the same effect of Kryptonite on Superman. The Batman of Zur-En-Arrh was able to use an antidotic spray to restore Batman to normal.

=Empty Nest=

In the comedy TV series Empty Nest, the pediatrician who is the main protagonist of the show suggests using Kryptonite to treat a boy who admires Spider-Man and dresses up as him. The boy objects that Kryptonite is part of the Superman universe, not the Spider-Man universe. But the doctor is right: Kryptonite would enhance the powers of Spider-Man, or of any Earth human being with powers.

=Young Justice=

In the episode "Auld Acquaintance" of the Young Justice TV series, Robin uses a piece of Kryptonite to defeat the mind controlled Superman. According to him, the piece came from Batman's vault.

Video Games

Music






