[[WLII-DT]]

CATEGORIES: Caguas, Puerto Rico, Univision network affiliates, Television stations in Puerto Rico, Channel 11 digital TV stations in the United States, Channel 11 virtual TV stations in the United States, Television channels and stations established in 1960, Television stations in Ponce, Puerto Rico

WLII-DT, channel 11, is a Univision owned-and-operated television station that is licensed to Caguas, Puerto Rico. The station is owned by Univision Communications, and is sister to independent station WSTE-DT (channel 7) and radio stations WKAQ (580 AM) and WKAQ-FM (104.7);. WLII's studios and transmitter are located in Guaynabo.
WLII operates a satellite station, WSUR-DT (channel 9), in Ponce. Locally-owned WORA-TV (channel 5) in Mayagüez repeats over 95%

History

Telecadena Perez-Perry

In 1960, Rafael Perez Perry received authorization from the government to start WKBM-TV, broadcasting on channel 11, as part of his new Telecadena Perez-Perry chain of television stations. Some of the shows that WKBM-TV aired throughout those years included: Una Hora Contigo and Tira y Tapate with Myrta Silva, Yo Soy el Gallo with José Miguel Class, El Show de Carmita with Carmita Jiménez, El Show de Lissette, El Show de Iris Chacón, El Hit del Momento and El Super Show Goya  with Enrique Maluenda, Lillian Hurst and Luz Odilea Font, Una Chica llamada: Ivonne Coll, Cambia Cambia con Alfred D. Herger, Almorzando and Del Brazo with Ruth Fernández, and Mediodia Circular with Vilma Carbia. At the time, Perez Perry owned one of the most successful radio stations on the island (WKBM). Unfortunately, Perez-Perry died of unknown causes in the late 1970s; his death eventually resulted in WKBM-TV declaring bankruptcy in 1981. Its former competition benefited from its demise – not only from a reduction in competition itself, but also from the availability of many of the stations' former hosts and talent. The station went silent that year.

Tele-Once

In 1986, production company Lorimar-Telepictures (with the Telepictures division now part of Warner Bros. Television) acquired the station from bankruptcy court. The new WLII-TV was branded as "Tele Once" with a new slogan: "Tele Once… Vívelo!" ("Tele Once…Live it!"). Warner Communications (now part of Time Warner) would gain indirect ownership of the stations after it bought Lorimar-Telepictures in 1988. The station became a success around this time by airing popular American programs translated in Spanish, especially The Simpsons. However, its lack of a repeater or rebroadcaster on the western portion of the island continued to put it behind the competition, WKAQ-TV (channel 2) and WAPA-TV (channel 4). That all changed when WNJX-TV (channel 22) in Mayagüez signed an affiliation agreement with the station in the late 1980s. WLII was subsequently sold to Malrite Communications Group in 1991; Malrite merged with Raycom Media in 1998.
On January 1, 1995 at 12 a.m., Tele Once entered into its first marketing agreement with a television station in western Puerto Rico, WORA-TV (channel 5), which at that time had ended an affiliation agreement with WKAQ-TV. In turn, WKAQ-TV switched its affiliation agreement to WOLE-TV (channel 12), which was WAPA-TV's repeater station at the time; this left WAPA-TV out of the western Puerto Rico television market for the first time in 30 years.
Some of the shows that aired on WLII throughout the Tele Once years included En Un Dia, R con R, El Show de Awilda, Dime la Verdad, Ellas al Mediodía, La Noche es Nuestra, Fiesta, A Fuego, Lio, El Super Show, Que Suerte que es Domingo, Anda Pa'l Cará, Entrando por la Cocina, Atácate and El Kiosko Budweiser.
In the late 1980s, actresses Ángela Meyer and Camille Carrión founded a production company named Empresas Meca, which produced some of the last telenovelas in Puerto Rico: La Isla, Ave De Paso (starring Yolandita Monge), Yara Prohibida and La Otra.

Univision

In 2002, Univision entered into a local marketing agreement with Raycom Media to operate WLII and WSUR-TV. At the time, WLII had a longtime local marketing agreement with another Puerto Rican station, WSTE (channel 7), which Univision honored. Both WLII and WSUR-TV were sold to Univision Communications in 2005; Univision bought WSTE at the end of 2007. Although Univision operates a second network, UniMás, in the mainland United States, WSTE remains an independent station. In 2005, WLII relocated from its studios in the Puerta de Tierra borough of San Juan to a new facility in Guaynabo.

WSUR-TV history

WSUR-TV was founded on February 20, 1958. Album Historico de Ponce (1692-1963). Page 409. Ponce, Puerto Rico: Imprenta Fortuno. 1963. In 1963, the station was located on Avenida Tito Castro (Puerto Rico Highway 14) in the La Rambla sector of Barrio Machuelo Abajo; its transmitter tower was located within the municipality of Guayanilla, Puerto Rico, and it was an affiliate of WAPA-TV, but carried two local programs from Ponce. Album Historico de Ponce (1692-1963). Page 409. Ponce, Puerto Rico: Imprenta Fortuno. 1963. The station transmitted its analog signal over VHF channel 9. Album Historico de Ponce (1692-1963). Page 409. Ponce, Puerto Rico: Imprenta Fortuno. 1963. Its tower is now located at Cerro Maravilla in the border between the municipality of Ponce with Jayuya. Satellite View.

Digital television

Digital channel

The station's digital channel is multiplexed:

Analog-to-digital conversion

WLII shut down its analog signal, over VHF channel 11, on June 12, 2009, the official date in which full-power television stations in the United States transitioned from analog to digital broadcasts under federal mandate. The station's digital signal relocated from its pre-transition UHF channel 56 to VHF channel 11, which was among the high band UHF channels (52-69) that were removed from broadcasting use as a result of the transition. WSUR switched to digital-only broadcasts on January 23, 2009, broadcasting on VHF channel 9 (or virtual channel 9.1).

Programming

Coming Soon

Las Noticias Univision

WLII-DT presently broadcasts 35½ hours of locally produced newscasts each week (with 6½ hours on weekdays and 1½ hours on weekends). News programming on WLII began in 1986, with Ramón Enrique Torres and Jennifer Wolff as anchors of the 5:00 p.m. newscast. In 1990, a noon newscast premiered with Torres and Margarita Aponte as its anchors, followed after by the 10:30 p.m. newscast with Torres. On March 11, 1991, a weekday morning news program, Tu Mañana, made its debut; the program was anchored by Carlos Ochoteco and Cyd Marie Fleming and featured segments such as panel experts on different topics.
Over the years, many people have worked on Tu Mañana and Las Noticias. Reporters such as Carmen Dominicci, Elwood Cruz, Susan Soltero, Bruni Torres, Nuria Sebazco, Rommy Segarra, Felipe Gómez, Ada Monzón, Liza Lugo and many others have been featured.
In 1996, a monthly investigative/tabloid newsmagazine began airing called Las Noticias Xtra, which offered reports considered to be shocking by many. Taboo themes in Puerto Rican society such as homosexuality were featured. Las Noticias Xtra eventually was reduced to a weekly segment seen during the 6:00 and 11:00 p.m. newcasts.
During WLII's Tele Once years, the station's slogan was "Tele Once: 24 horas el canal de Las Noticias" ("Tele Once, the 24-hour news channel"), paralleling the 24 Hour News Source trend in the United States at this time. WLII began broadcasting its local newscasts in high definition in 2010. Due to budget cuts that imposed by Univision in Miami, WLII reduced its news department by between 20-50 employees, and Las Noticias a las 6 was reduced from one hour to 30 minutes. The latest reduction announced is that the weekend news editions 5/11 pm have been cancelled. Later in 2014 they brought back there weekend newscast las noticias Sabado and las noticias Domingo

News/station presentation

=Station slogans=

News team

=Current on-air staffEquipo de Noticias=

Local program hosts

Local comedians

Broadcasting

Satellite, repeater and translator stations

WLII programming can be seen across Puerto Rico on the following stations:






