[[Trigger finger]]

CATEGORIES: Ailments of unknown etiology, Fingers, Inflammations, Disorders of synovium and tendon

Trigger finger, trigger thumb, or trigger digit (also referred to as stenosing tenosynovitis), is a common disorder characterized by catching, snapping or locking of the involved finger flexor tendon, associated with dysfunction and pain. A disparity in size between the flexor tendon and the surrounding retinacular pulley system, most commonly at the level of the first annular (A1) pulley, results in difficulty flexing or extending the finger and the "triggering" phenomenon. The label of trigger finger is used because when the finger unlocks, it pops back suddenly, as if releasing a trigger on a gun.

Diagnosis

Diagnosis is made almost exclusively by history and physical examination alone.  More than one finger may be affected at a time, though it usually affects the index, thumb, middle, or ring finger.  The triggering is usually more pronounced late at night and into the morning, or while gripping an object firmly.

Treatment

Injection of the tendon sheath with a corticosteroid is effective over weeks to months in more than half of patients.
When corticosteroid injection fails, the problem is predictably resolved by a relatively simple surgical procedure (usually outpatient, under local anesthesia). The surgeon will cut the sheath that is restricting the tendon.
One recent study in the Journal of Hand Surgery suggests that the most cost-effective treatment is two trials of corticosteroid injection, followed by open release of the first annular pulley. However, this systematic review has not been updated since 2009.
There is a theoretical greater risk of nerve damage associated with the percutaneous needle release as the technique is performed without seeing the A1 pulley.
Investigative treatment options with limited scientific support include: non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; occupational or physical therapy; steroid iontophoresis treatment; splinting; therapeutic ultrasound, phonophoresis (ultrasound with an anti-inflammatory dexamethasone cream); and Acupuncture.

Prognosis

The natural history of disease for trigger finger remains uncertain.
There is some evidence that idiopathic trigger finger behaves differently in people with diabetes.
Recurrent triggering is unusual after successful injection and rare after successful surgery.
While difficulty extending the proximal interphalangeal joint may persist for months, it benefits from exercises to stretch the finger straighter.

Etiology

More than one potential cause has been described but the etiology remains idiopathic. It has also been called stenosing tenosynovitis (specifically digital tenovaginitis stenosans), but this may be a misnomer, as inflammation is not a predominant feature.
It has been speculated that repetitive forceful use of a digit leads to narrowing of the fibrous digital sheath in which it runs, but there is little scientific data to support this theory. The relationship of trigger finger to work activities is debatable and scientific evidence for






