[[Thom Yorke]]

CATEGORIES: 1968 births, 20th-century English singers, 21st-century English singers, Alternative rock guitarists, Alternative rock pianists, Alternative rock singers, Alumni of the University of Exeter, Anti-globalization activists, British alternative rock musicians, English activists, English electronic musicians, English environmentalists, English male singers, English rock singers, English singer-songwriters, English tenors, Grammy Award-winning artists, Ivor Novello Award winners, Living people, Music in Oxford, People educated at Abingdon School, People from Wellingborough, Radiohead members, Rhythm guitarists



Thomas Edward "Thom" Yorke (born 7 October 1968) is an English musician, singer, and songwriter. He is the lead vocalist, lyricist, principal songwriter, guitarist and pianist of the bands Radiohead and Atoms for Peace, known for his falsetto singing style. As a multi-instrumentalist, he mainly plays guitar and piano, but also plays synthesizer, bass guitar, and drums among other instruments, and makes use of electronic equipment such as samplers and drum machines; later Radiohead albums credit him with playing "laptop". In the 1990s, Yorke was known as a rock musician, but the 2000 Radiohead album Kid A saw him expand into electronic music. In 2006, he released a solo album, The Eraser. Outside music, Yorke is notable as a political activist on behalf of human rights, environmentalist and anti-war causes.
In 2002, Q magazine named Yorke the sixth most powerful figure in music,s "100 Greatest Singers of All Time" list.

Early life

Yorke was born on 7 October 1968, in Wellingborough, Northamptonshire. Yorke's father, a nuclear physicist and later a chemical equipment salesman, was hired by a firm in Scotland shortly after his son's birth and the family lived there until Yorke was seven. He was born with a paralysed left eye, and underwent five eye operations by the age of six. 19 During this time Yorke had to wear a patch over his eye. 20 He has stated that the last surgery was "botched", giving him a drooping eyelid.
Yorke's family moved frequently; Yorke moved from school to school, where classmates teased him for his eye. 21 The family finally settled in Oxfordshire in 1978. Yorke received his first guitar when he was seven; his earliest musical inspiration was guitarist Brian May of Queen.
After leaving school, Yorke took a gap year, during which he worked in a few jobs and was involved in a car accident that made him wary of any kind of mechanised transport; this informed the lyrics of several Radiohead songs, including the Bends B-side "Killer Cars" and "Airbag" from OK Computer. 38–39 In late 1988, Yorke left Oxford to study at the University of Exeter, which put On a Friday on hiatus aside from holiday break rehearsals. 43 At Exeter, Yorke worked as a DJ at Guild nights in the Lemon Grove and played with the band Headless Chickens. 48 He also met his partner Rachel Owen, and artist Stanley Donwood, with whom Yorke later collaborated to produce artwork for Radiohead albums and promotional material. 52

Career

Radiohead

On A Friday resumed activity in 1991 as the members were finishing their degree courses. They signed to Parlophone and changed their name to Radiohead. Around this time, Yorke said he "hit the self-destruct button pretty quickly"; he drank heavily, which resulted in him cutting his hair off and being too drunk to perform onstage.87 Radiohead gained notice with the worldwide hit single "Creep", which later appeared on the band's 1993 debut album Pablo Honey. Yorke admitted later that the success had inflated his ego; he tried to project himself as a rock star, which included bleaching his hair and wearing extensions. He said, "When I got back to Oxford I was unbearable ... as soon as you get any success you disappear up your own arse and lostsic it forever."Randall, p. 120
By the time of their second album, The Bends (1995), Radiohead had attracted a large fanbase and had begun to receive wider critical acclaim. After the album's release, the American rock band R.E.M. picked Radiohead as its opening act for the European leg of their tour. 177 During the tour, Yorke and R.E.M. singer Michael Stipe became close friends; Stipe gave him advice on how to deal with the demands of being in a famous rock band. 178 During the production of the band's third album, OK Computer (1997), all five members of Radiohead had differing opinions and equal production roles, with Yorke having "the loudest voice", according to guitarist Ed O'Brien. 195 OK Computer was heralded as a landmark album by nearly every publication that reviewed it, establishing Radiohead as one of the leading alternative rock acts of the 1990s. But Yorke was ambivalent about this success. Some of these concerns were voiced in the 1998 documentary film Meeting People Is Easy, which followed the band on their OK Computer tour. Yorke has explained that he dislikes the "mythology" of rock music and the media's obsession with celebrity.
Yorke and the band adopted a more radical approach on 2000's Kid A and 2001's Amnesiac, processing vocals, obscuring lyrics, and departing from rock for a more varied musical landscape including electronic, jazz and avant-garde classical influences. The albums divided fans and critics, but were commercially successful, and later established wide critical acclaim; at the turn of the decade, Kid A was named the best album of the 2000s by Rolling Stone and Pitchfork. In 2003, Radiohead released their sixth album, Hail to the Thief, a blend of rock and electronica that Yorke described as a reaction to the events of the early 2000s and newfound fears for his children's future, though he denied political intent. The band has continued to tour, and in 2005 they undertook recording sessions for a seventh album, In Rainbows, released as a digital DRM-free download in October 2007. In 2011, Radiohead released their eighth album, The King of Limbs, which Yorke described as "an expression of physical movements and wildness".

Solo work

Yorke released his solo album The Eraser in 2006. Produced by Radiohead producer Nigel Godrich and featuring cover art by Stanley Donwood, it was released on  the independent label XL Recordings. Yorke described the album as "more beats and electronics" and denied that it meant he was leaving Radiohead, saying, "I want no crap about me being a traitor or whatever splitting up blah blah... this was all done with their blessing."
Yorke rarely plays as a solo act, and has never embarked on a solo tour. He has sometimes played short acoustic sets of Radiohead songs in the band's webcasts and television appearances, and occasionally on his own at rallies. In 2006, he performed stripped-down versions of several songs from The Eraser ("Analyse", "The Clock", "Skip Divided" and "Cymbal Rush") on radio and TV programmes, has performed "Cymbal Rush" as an encore at some Radiohead concerts. In July 2009, Yorke played a solo performance at the Latitude Festival in England.

Atoms for Peace

In 2009, Yorke formed Atoms for Peace to perform songs from his solo album The Eraser. Alongside Yorke on vocals, guitar and keyboards, the band comprises bassist Flea of the Red Hot Chili Peppers, drummer Joey Waronker of Beck and R.E.M., percussionist Mauro Refosco of Forro in the Dark and Radiohead producer Nigel Godrich on keyboards and guitar. Answering a fan question on Reddit, Yorke wrote that determining whether new songs were for Radiohead or Atoms for Peace was "a grey area. getting greyer. obviously depends on who is being sampled."

Collaborations

Yorke has worked with producer Nigel Godrich on every Radiohead album since The Bends, as well as his solo album The Eraser and the Atoms for Peace album Amok. Beyond production and engineering roles, Godrich helps Yorke arrange and edit his songs. Describing their collaborative process, Godrich said: "I know, from years of experience, that what he does is he just bats things around, and comes up with fragments of things. They usually find a context in time." Yorke said: "Eraser'' song 'Black Swan', back in the day, was a six-minute load of crap. Except for this one juicy bit, and Godrich goes past and goes, 'That bit. Fuck the rest.' Usually it's something like that."
Yorke has worked with artist Stanley Donwood to create the cover art for every Radiohead album since The Bends, as well as The  Eraser and Amok. The two met as art students at the University of Exeter. Yorke is credited alongside Donwood under the monikers "The White Chocolate Farm", "Dr. Tchock", "Tchocky" or similar abbreviations.
Yorke has collaborated with several musical artists outside Radiohead and Atoms for Peace. For the 1998 film Velvet Goldmine, Yorke formed Venus in Furs with Radiohead's Jonny Greenwood, Suede's Bernard Butler, and Roxy Music's Andy Mackay, and recorded covers of the Roxy Music songs "2HB", "Ladytron" and "Bitter-Sweet". In the same year, he co-wrote "Rabbit in Your Headlights" with DJ Shadow, which appears on the UNKLE album Psyence Fiction, and dueted on "El President" with Isabel Monteiro of Drugstore. In 2000, Yorke duetted with PJ Harvey on "This Mess We're In" and contributed backing vocals to "One Line" and "Beautiful Feeling" for her Mercury Prize-winning album Stories from the City, Stories from the Sea. In the same year, he appeared on Björk's soundtrack album Selmasongs, singing on the Oscar-nominated song "I've Seen It All". Yorke and Björk worked together again in 2008 on the charity single "Náttúra". In 2009, Yorke recorded a cover of the Mark Mulcahy song "All for the Best" with his brother Andy for the compilation Ciao My Shining Star: The Songs of Mark Mulcahy.
Yorke has provided vocals for two tracks by the electronic musician Flying Lotus: "... He has also contributed music and production in collaborations with electronic and hip-hop artists including Modeselektor, Burial, Four Tet and MF DOOM.

Personal life

Yorke lives in Oxford with his partner, Rachel Owen, whom he met at university. Owen studied fine art printmaking at Exeter and painting at the Accademia di Belle Arti of Florence, and completed a PhD at the University of London researching the illustrations to Dante's Divine Comedy.
Yorke has had an uneasy relationship with other celebrities and the media.  Following Radiohead's 1993 Pablo Honey tour of America, Yorke became disenchanted at being "right at the sharp end of the sexy, sassy, MTV eye-candy lifestyle" he felt he was helping to sell to the world.[ref]
