[[Julian Byng, 1st Viscount Byng of Vimy]]

CATEGORIES: Governors General of Canada, Commissioners of Police of the Metropolis, People educated at Eton College, British Field Marshals, British Army personnel of the Mahdist War, British Army cavalry generals of World War I, Grand Officiers of the Légion d'honneur, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath, Members of the Royal Victorian Order, Foreign recipients of the Distinguished Service Medal (United States), Grand Crosses of the Order of the White Eagle (Serbia), Recipients of the Croix de Guerre 1914–1918 (France), Royal Military College of Canada people, Scouting and Guiding in Canada, Viscounts in the Peerage of the United Kingdom, Younger sons of earls, 1862 births, 1935 deaths, People from Barnet, 10th Royal Hussars officers, King's Royal Rifle Corps officers, British Militia officers, South African Light Horse officers, British Army personnel of the Second Boer War

Field Marshal Julian Hedworth George Byng, 1st Viscount Byng of Vimy  (11 September 1862 – 6 June 1935) was a British Army officer who served as Governor General of Canada, the 12th since Canadian Confederation.
Known to friends as "Bungo", he was born to a noble family in Hertsmere, England, and educated at Eton College, along with his brothers. Upon graduation, Byng received a commission as a militia officer and thereafter saw service in Egypt and Sudan before he enrolled in the Staff College at Camberley. There, he befriended individuals who would be his contemporaries when he attained senior rank in France. Following distinguished service during World War I—specifically, with the British Expeditionary Force in France, in the Battle of Gallipoli, as commander of the Canadian Corps at Vimy Ridge, and as commander of the British Third Army—Byng was in 1919 himself elevated to the peerage. He was in 1921 appointed as governor general by King George V, on the recommendation of Prime Minister of the United Kingdom David Lloyd George, to replace the Duke of Devonshire as viceroy, and occupied that post until succeeded by the Viscount Willingdon in 1926. Byng proved to be popular with Canadians, due to his war leadership, though his stepping directly into political affairs became the catalyst for widespread changes to the role of the Crown in all of the British Dominions.
After the end of his viceregal tenure, Byng returned to the United Kingdom and there served as the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis and was promoted within the peerage to become Viscount Byng of Vimy. Three years after being appointed as a field-marshal, Byng died at his home on 6 June.

Early life

Byng was born at the family seat of Wrotham Park, in Hertsmere, as the seventh son and 13th and youngest child of the Earl of Strafford, who due to the size of his family ran a relatively frugal household, and Harriet Elizabeth Cavendish, daughter of the Lord Chesham.

Military career

With three sons already in the army and another already put up for the 7th Queen's Own Hussars, Byng's father did not think he could afford a regular army commission for his youngest son. Thus, at the age of 17, Byng was instead sent into the militia and on 12 December 1879 commissioned as a second lieutenant in the 2nd (Edmonton) Royal Middlesex Rifles.
At a meeting of the Jockey Club in 1882, Byng's father was asked about his sons by his long-time friend, Prince Edward, Prince of Wales. Upon hearing that Byng had not yet found a permanent career, the Prince offered a place for him in the Prince's own regiment, the 10th Royal Hussars. This was, however, the most expensive regiment in the army, the Earl of Strafford could only afford to give Byng 200 of the necessary 600 pounds he would need each year, and yet, the Prince's offer could not be refused. Byng himself was delighted at the opportunity, as both his uncle, the Lord Chesham, and his cousin, Charles Cavendish, had served in the regiment. By raising finances through buying polo ponies cheaply, using his excellent horsemanship to train them, and then selling them for a profit,
It was while the regiment was en route home to the United Kingdom in 1884 that the Hussars were diverted to Sudan to join the Suakin Expedition and Byng, along with the rest of his regiment, on 29 February rode in the first line of the charge at the Battle of El Teb. The attack, which resulted in the deaths of both the squadron's other officers, was unsuccessful,
In June 1885, the regiment was relocated to the South Cavalry Barracks at Aldershot, where the Prince of Wales' eldest son, Prince Albert Victor, joined the regiment and thereafter the Prince of Wales and his other son, Prince George, became frequent visitors. Byng struck up a friendship with both Albert Victor and George, but did not socialise with them much outside of army circles. Byng was appointed as the regimental adjutant on 20 October 1886,

Staff College

In 1888, the hussars again moved, this time to York, where Byng kept his men busy by raising successful cricket and football teams. Byng was promoted to captain on 4 January 1890,
Once Byng was enrolled at the Staff College, he found amongst his fellow students men with whom he would be closely associated more than two decades later—Henry Rawlinson, Henry Hughes Wilson, Thomas D'Oyly Snow, and James Aylmer Lowthorpe Haldane—and in 1894, while en route to visit a friend at Aldershot, travelled with a cadet at the nearby Royal Military Academy Sandhurst, Winston Churchill. Evelyn, as she was known, later described her early encounters with Byng:


Commanding officer and World War I

Byng was deployed in November 1899 to South Africa, where he was to act as a provost marshal,
In his first two years of marriage, Byng's wife suffered several miscarriages, resulting in the declaration that she would be unable to bear children. By January 1904, Byng had also, while playing polo, broken his right elbow so severely that it was feared he would have to quit the army. After four months' treatment in England, though, he was pronounced to be again fit for duty and in May became the first commandant of the new cavalry school at Netheravon.
It was April 1909 when Byng was promoted to major-general and,
After three months serving as commander of the Cavalry Corps, beginning in May 1915, at which time he was also made a temporary lieutenant-general, but was not allowed much rest, as he spent the next month commanding the Suez Canal defences before returning to the Western Front to lead the XVII Corps. By June, he was in command of the Canadian Corps and was promoted when, for distinguished service, the King made substantive Byng's rank of lieutenant-general. Byng's greatest glory then came when he, along with his subordinate officer, the Canadian Major-General Arthur Currie, led the Canadian victory in April 1917 at the Battle of Vimy Ridge, an historic military milestone for the Dominion that inspired nationalism at home.
In June 1917, and holding the temporary rank of general,

Governor General of Canada

After Byng was made in July 1921 a Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St. Michael and St. George, it was announced on 2 August that King George V had, by commission under the royal sign-manual and signet, approved the recommendation of his British prime minister, David Lloyd George, to appoint Byng as his representative in Canada.
The Governor General travelled the length and breadth of the country, meeting with Canadians wherever he went. He also immersed himself in Canada's culture and came to particularly love hockey, rarely missing a game played by the Ottawa Senators. He was also fond of the Royal Agricultural Winter Fair, held each year in Toronto, and established the Governor General's Cup to be presented at the competition. Byng was also the first Governor General of Canada to appoint Canadians as his aides-de-camp (one of whom was future Governor General Georges Vanier) and approached his viceregal role with enthusiasm, gaining him popularity with Canadians on top of that received from the men he had commanded on the battlefields of Europe.

King-Byng Affair

While it had been acceptable prior to the turn of the 20th century for Canadian governors general to involve themselves in political affairs, being, as they were, representatives of the King in his British Council, Byng's tenure as viceroy of Canada was notable in that he became the first to step directly into political matters since the country had gained a degree of autonomy from the United Kingdom following the First World War: in the summer of 1926 he denied the recommendation of his prime minister, William Lyon Mackenzie King, who sought to have parliament dissolved in order to avoid a vote of non-confidence in his government. The Governor General's course of action in what came to be colloquially known as the King-Byng Affair remains debated, though the consensus amongst constitutional historians is that Byng's moves were appropriate under the circumstances. Mackenzie King, however, made much of the scenario and its outcome in the election that eventually followed on 14 September, in which King's Liberal Party gained a majority of seats, seeing King once again appointed as prime minister. At the 1926 Imperial Conference, King then went on to use Byng and his refusal to follow his prime minister's advice as the impetus for widespread constitutional change throughout the British Commonwealth. Byng himself said of the matter: "I have to await the verdict of history to prove my having adopted a wrong course, and this I do with an easy conscience that, right or wrong, I have acted in the interests of Canada and implicated no one else in my decision."

Post-viceregal life

Byng returned to England on 30 September 1926, and in January 1928 was created Viscount Byng of Vimy, of Thorpe-le-Soken in the County of Essex.—the highest rank an officer can attain—before he died suddenly of an abdominal blockage at Thorpe Hall on 6 June 1935.
Lord Byng of Vimy was buried at the 11th Century Parish Church of St. Leonard in Beaumont-cum-Moze.

Titles, styles, and honours

Titles

Honours

=Honorary degrees=

Honorific eponyms

Baron Byng High School|accessdate=20 May 2013}}[/ref]



Notes



Sources



|-
|-

|-
|-

|-


