[[GEDCOM]]

CATEGORIES: 1984 introductions, Computer file formats, Genealogy and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Genealogy software

GEDCOM (an acronym standing for ''GEnealogical Data COMmunication) is a proprietary and open de facto'' specification for exchanging genealogical data between different genealogy software. GEDCOM was developed by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) as an aid to genealogical research." From: "Jed R. Allen" Brigham Young University - Date: 29 Sep 1995 17:40:04 -0600 - GEDCOM-L Archives -- September 1995, week 5 (#7)
A GEDCOM file is plain text (usually either ANSEL or ASCII) containing genealogical information about individuals, and meta data linking these records together. Most genealogy software supports importing from and/or exporting to GEDCOM format. However, some genealogy software programs incorporate the use of proprietary extensions to the GEDCOM format, which are not always recognized by other genealogy programs, for example the GEDCOM 5.5 EL (Extended Locations) specification.5 EL (Extended Locations) specificationAbility to save information against places - "Support for parts of the GEDCOM 5.5EL proposal" -  FHUG Wish List0000688: Support for Gedcom 5.5EL - Gramps Bugtracker
In February of 2012 at the RootsTech 2012 conference, FamilySearch outlined a major new project around genealogical standards called GEDCOM X, and invited collaboration. In August of 2012 FamilySearch employee and GEDCOM X project leader Ryan Heaton dropped the claim that GEDCOM X is the new industry standard, and repositioned GEDCOM X as another FamilySearch open source project.2012-08-31 GEDCOM X: no industry standard, FamilySearch abandons GEDCOM X push, By Tamura Jones, Modern Software Experience.

GEDCOM model

GEDCOM uses a lineage-linked data model. This data model is based on the nuclear family and the individual. This contrasts with evidence-based models, where data are structured to reflect the supporting evidence. In the GEDCOM lineage-linked data model, all data are structured to reflect the believed reality, that is, actual (or hypothesized) nuclear families and individuals.

GEDCOM file structure

A GEDCOM file consists of a header section, records, and a trailer section. Within these sections, records represent people (INDI record), families (FAM records), sources of information (SOUR records), and other miscellaneous records, including notes.  Every line of a GEDCOM file begins with a level number where all top-level records (HEAD, TRLR, SUBN, and each INDI, FAM, OBJE, NOTE, REPO, SOUR, and SUBM) begin with a line with level 0, while other level numbers are positive integers.
Although it is theoretically possible to write a GEDCOM file by hand, the format was designed to be used with software and thus is not especially human-friendly. A GEDCOM validatorView of phpgedview's GEDCOM validator source code that can be used to validate the structure of a GEDCOM file is included as part of PhpGedView project, though it is not meant to be a standalone validator. For standalone validation you can use "The Windows GEDCOM Validator"The Windows GEDCOM Validator (dead link) or the older unmaintained GedcheckGedcheck - "uses a grammar file for the specific version of GEDCOM you want to check against." The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints from The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
During 2001, The GEDCOM TestBook Project evaluated how well four popular genealogy programs conformed to the GEDCOM 5.5 standard using the Gedcheck program. and included testing the GEDCOM 5.5 standard using the Gedcheck program. - Test Result are in the PDF's

Example

The following is a sample GEDCOM file. The first column indicates an indentation level.
The header (HEAD) includes the source program and version (Reunion, V8.0), the GEDCOM version (5.5), and the character encoding (MACINTOSH), which is invalid, as according to the GEDCOM 5.5 specification; valid choices are ANSEL, UNICODE or ASCII.
The individual records (INDI) define Bob Cox (ID 1—@I1@), Joann Para (ID 2), and Bobby Jo Cox (ID 3).
The family record (FAM) links the husband (HUSB), wife (WIFE), and child (CHIL) by their ID numbers.

Versions

The current version of the specification is GEDCOM 5.5, which was released on 12 January 1996.  A subsequent draft GEDCOM 5.5.1GEDCOM 5.5.1 draft specification was issued in 1999, introducing nine new tags, including WWW, EMAIL and FACT, and adding UTF-8 as an approved character encoding. This draft has not been formally approved, but its provisions have been adopted in some part by a number of genealogy programsGED-GEN is based on GEDCOM version 5.5.1 (draft), dated 2 October 1999. The following record types are parsed: header, individual, family, notes, source, and repository. However not all elements within these records are processed. - Specifications - GED-GEN Introduction0000688: Support for Gedcom 5.5EL(0008068) romjerome (developer) 2009-01-25 06:13 - "Note : GRAMPS 3.0.x supports a part of GEDCOM 5.5.1 on export, which is not supported by most programs" - Gramps Bugtracker"MyBlood supports the GEDCOM 5.5 and 5.5.1 file format." - MyBlood Support - Forum, FAQ, Know Problems and is used by FamilySearch.doc - FamilySearch XML to GEDCOM Mapping - .."The GEDCOM v5.5.1 ( While PAF 5.2 does support GEDCOM 5.5, PAF 5.2 uses UTF-8 as its internal character set, a feature which was introduced in the GEDCOM 5.5.1 draft, and can output a UTF-8 GEDCOM.2 and PAF Companion 5.4 - Software Version Changes Release 5.0.1.4, 22 December 2000 - "10.5 Character Set:UTF-8Personal Ancestral File 5.1 - "Also noted in a second test was the use of  four tags from a later draft version of the Gedcom specification, FONE (phonetic name), ROMN (romanized name), EMAIL (e-mail), and _UID" Jan/Feb 2002 NGS Newsmagazine
On 23 January 2002, a draft (beta) version of GEDCOM 6.0 was released for developer study only, as it was not a complete specification, and developers were recommended to not begin implementation in their software. For example, descriptions of the meaning and expected contents of tags were not included.0 specification GEDCOM 6.0 was to be the first version to store data in XML format, and was to change the preferred character set from ANSEL to Unicode.
Lineage-linked GEDCOM is the deliberate de facto common denominator.  Despite version 5.5 of the GEDCOM standard first being published in 1996, many genealogical software suppliers have yet to support the feature of multilingual Unicode text (instead of the ANSEL character set) introduced with that version of the specification. Uniform use of Unicode would allow for the usage of international character sets. An example is the storage of East Asian names in their original Chinese, Japanese and Korean (CJK) characters, without which they could be ambiguous and of little use for genealogical or historical research.

Release history

Limitations

Support for multi-person events and sources

A GEDCOM file can contain information on events such as births, deaths, census records, ship's records, marriages, etc.; a general rule of thumb is that an event is something that took place at a specific time, at a specific place (even if the time & place are not known).  GEDCOM files can also contain attributes such as physical description, occupation, and total number of children; unlike events, attributes generally cannot be associated with a specific time or place.
The GEDCOM specification requires that each event or attribute is associated with exactly one individual or family.5, pp. 26-27.  This causes redundancy for events such as census records where the actual census entry often contains information on multiple individuals.  In the GEDCOM file, for census records a separate census "CENS" event must be added for each individual referenced.  Some genealogy programs, such as GRAMPS and The Master Genealogist, have elaborate database structures for sources that are used, among other things, to represent multi-person events.  When databases are exported from one of these programs to GEDCOM, these database structures cannot be represented in GEDCOM due to this limitation, with the result that the event or source information including all of the relevant citation reference information must be duplicated each place that it is used.  This duplication makes it difficult for the user to maintain the information related to sources.
In the GEDCOM specification, events that are associated with a family such as marriage information is only stored in a GEDCOM once, as part of the family (FAM) record, and then both spouses are linked to that single family record.

Ambiguity in the specification

The GEDCOM specification was made purposefully flexible to support many ways of encoding data, particularly in the area of sources.  This flexibility has led to a great deal of ambiguity, and has produced the side effect that some genealogy programs which import GEDCOM do not import all of the data from a file.

Support for varying definitions of families and relationships

GEDCOM does not explicitly support data representation of many types of close interpersonal relationships, such as same-sex marriages, domestic partnerships, cohabitation, polyamory, polygamy or incest, but such relationships and any other can be represented using the ASSO tag.

Ordering of events that do not have dates

The GEDCOM specification does not offer explicit support for keeping a known order of events. In particular, the order of relationships (FAMS) for a person and the order of the children within a relationship (FAM) can be lost. In many cases the sequence of events can be derived from the associated dates. But dates are not always known, in particular when dealing with data from centuries ago. For example, in the case that a person has had two relationships, both with unknown dates, but from descriptions it is known that the second one is indeed the second one. The order in which these FAMS are recorded in GEDCOM's INDI record will depend on the exporting program. In Aldfaer for instance, the sequence depends on the ordering of the data by the user (alphabetical, chronological, reference, etc.). The proposed XML GEDCOM standard does not address this issue either.

Lesser-known features

GEDCOM has many features that are not commonly used, and hence are unknown to some people.  Some software packages do not support all the features that the GEDCOM standard allows.

Multimedia

The GEDCOM standard supports the inclusion of multimedia objects (for example, photos of individuals).5, p. 28.  Such multimedia objects can be either included in the GEDCOM file itself (called the "embedded form") or in an external file where the name of the external file is specified in the GEDCOM file (called the "linked form").  Embedding multimedia directly in the GEDCOM file makes transmission of data easier, in that all of the information (including the multimedia data) is in one file, but the resulting file can be enormous.  Linking multimedia keeps the size of the GEDCOM file under control, but then when transmitting the file, the multimedia objects must either be transmitted separately or archived together with the GEDCOM into one larger file.   Support for embedding media directly was dropped in the draft 5.5.1 standard.5.1, p. 6.

Conflicting information

The GEDCOM standard allows for the specification of multiple opinions or conflicting data, simply by specifying multiple records of the same type.  For example, if an individual's birth date was recorded as 10 January 1800 on the birth certificate, but 11 January 1800 on the death certificate, two BIRT records for that individual would be included, the first with the 10 January 1800 date and giving the birth certificate as the source, and the second with the 11 January 1800 date and giving the death certificate as the source. The preferred record is usually listed first.
This example encoded in GEDCOM might look like this:
 0 @I1@ INDI
 1 NAME John /Doe/
 1 BIRT
 2 DATE 10 JAN 1800
 2 SOUR @S1@
 3 DATA
 4 TEXT Transcription from birth certificate would go here
 3 NOTE This birth record is preferred because it comes from the birth certificate
 3 QUAY 2
 1 BIRT
 2 DATE 11 JAN 1800
 2 SOUR @S2@
 3 DATA
 4 TEXT Transcription from death certificate would go here
 3 QUAY 2
Conflicting data may also be the result of user errors. The standard does not specify in any way that the contents must be consistent. A birth date like "10 APR 1819" might mistakenly have been recorded as "10 APR 1918" long after the person's death. The only way to reveal such inconsistencies is by rigorous validation of the content data.

Internationalization

The GEDCOM standard supports internationalization in several ways.  First, newer versions of the standard allow data to be stored in Unicode (or, more recently, UTF-8), so text in any language can be stored.5, p. 45.  Secondly, in the same way that you can have multiple events on a person, GEDCOM allows you to have multiple names for a person,GEDCOM Standard 5.5, p. 27. so names can be stored in multiple languages (although there is no standardized way to indicate which instance is in which language).  Finally, in the latest draft version (5.5.1, not yet in widespread use), the NAME field also supports a phonetic variation (FONE) and a romanized variation (ROMN) of the name.5.1, p. 38

GEDCOM X

In February 2012 at the RootsTech 2012 conference, FamilySearch outlined a major new project around genealogical standards called GEDCOM X, and invited collaboration.
It will include software developed under the Apache open source license.  It includes data formats that facilitate basing family trees on sources and records (both physical artifacts and digital artifacts), support for sharing and linking data online, and an API.

Alternatives to GEDCOM

Commsoft, the authors of the RootsCommSoft to Return? Dick Eastman Online 3/14/2001 - Archive - Ancestry.com series of genealogy software and Ultimate Family Tree, defined a version called Event-Oriented GEDCOM (also known as "Event GEDCOM" and originally called InterGEDRootsWeb: TMG-L TMG InterGED/Event GEDCOM Date: Fri, 15 Feb 2002 13:33:18 -0700),
GRAMPS XML is an XML-based open format created by the open source genealogy project GRAMPS and used also by PhpGedView.








