[[Philip Selway]]

CATEGORIES: 1967 births, English drummers, Alumni of Liverpool John Moores University, English rock drummers, Living people, People educated at Abingdon School, People from Abingdon-on-Thames, Radiohead members, Ivor Novello Award winners, English folk guitarists, English electronic musicians

Philip James "Phil" Selway (born 23 May 1967) is an English musician, singer and songwriter, best known as the drummer of English rock group Radiohead. In addition to drums, he provides backing vocals, along with occasional guitar and lead vocals, for 7 Worlds Collide. Selway is well known for his precision and proficiency in various styles and unusual time signatures, He has worked with Samaritans since 1991.
Selway released his debut solo album, Familial, on 30 August 2010."Radiohead drummer announces details of debut solo album". The Independent. Retrieved 3 June 2010.

Radiohead

Before Radiohead became successful, Selway studied Literature, Life and Thought (English and History) at Liverpool Polytechnic's CF Mott Campus near Prescot (prior to it being renamed Liverpool John Moores University). Before that he had studied maths and worked for various touring musicians and worked as an English teacher as well. In the very early '90s, Selway left Radiohead's early line-up (then called Shindig or On a Friday) to move to Ireland, and only returned to the band when a relationship fell apart.
His timing and varied drumming helps to give the band its sound. Whereas his technique on earlier albums such as Pablo Honey and The Bends corresponded to the classic rock feel of the band's original style, the more experimental and atmospheric feel of their more recent work has been complemented by Selway's transition to a more solid, repetitive technique, often featuring a motorik sound.
Apart from his regular band duties, Selway also occasionally sings backing vocals during live performances, especially notable on "There There", "2+2=5", "I Will"  and "Go to Sleep". Since the album Kid A, he has also contributed drum machine programming.
Selway has studied drums in London at Drumtech under the tutelage of Francis Seriau along with fellow Radiohead member Ed O'Brien.

Work outside of Radiohead

Selway has been associated with emotional support group Samaritans as a listening volunteer since 1991. He performed with the band Dive Dive in March 2005 and appeared in the movie Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire as a member of the band "The Weird Sisters" along with Radiohead bandmate Jonny Greenwood and Pulp frontman Jarvis Cocker.
Selway has also toured and recorded with Neil Finn as part of the 7 Worlds Collide project. He drummed on their eponymous 2001 live album, and provides drums, guitar and occasional lead vocals on their 2009 studio album, The Sun Came Out, where he also penned two tracks.
He appears on two tracks – "Rest on the Rock" and "Out of Light" – on the album, Before the Ruin, by Roddy Woomble, Kris Drever and John McCusker.
In 2009 Selway was featured as a guitarist on Martin Simpson's studio album True Stories.
Selway released his debut solo album, Familial, on 30 August 2010. The album features Selway on guitar and vocals, along with Wilco members Glenn Kotche and Pat Sansone as well as fellow 7 Worlds Collide artists Lisa Germano and Sebastian Steinberg. He announced a solo tour on 4 February 2011.
The song "Falling" was featured in the episode "Happy Fucking Birthday" (episode 1 of season 5) of the TV show Nurse Jackie.

Personal life

Selway was born in Abingdon, Berkshire (now Oxfordshire, England). He and his wife Cait have three children: Leo, Jamie, and Patrick (to whom Kid A, Amnesiac, and Hail to the Thief were dedicated, respectively).
His mother Thea died during a Radiohead tour in May 2006. The band cancelled one of their dates in Amsterdam, so that Selway could carry out his family duties:
 Just wanted to say sorry to the people who were due to come to our show in Amsterdam last night, particularly those who made wasted journeys. My mum died suddenly in the early hours of yesterday morning and so I just wanted to be at home with my family. Mum was a big Radiohead fan, and was very proud of all we've done as a band. I love and miss her very much. 
The band later returned to Amsterdam in August to play the missed show. The discbox and CD release of In Rainbows mentions a dedication to Thea Selway.

Discography







