[[Peer group]]

CATEGORIES: Sociological terminology

A peer group is both a social group and a primary group of people who, through homophily, share similarities such as age, background, and social status. The members of this group are likely to influence the person's beliefs and behaviour. (n.d.). Dictionary. Retrieved October 25, 2012, from  Peer groups contain hierarchies and distinct patterns of behavior. 18 year olds are not in a peer group with 14 year olds even though they may be in school together. Just as teachers do not share students as a peer group.
During adolescence, peer groups tend to face dramatic changes. Adolescents tend to spend more time with their peers and have less adult supervision. Adolescents' communication shifts during this time as well. They prefer to talk about school and their careers with their parents, and they enjoy talking about sex and other interpersonal relationships with their peers. Children look to join peer groups who accept them, even if the group is involved in negative activities. Children are less likely to accept those who are different from them.
Cliques are small groups typically defined by common interests or by friendship. Cliques typically have 2-12 members and tend to be formed by age, gender, race, and social class. Clique members are usually the same in terms of academics and risk behaviors. Cliques can serve as an agent of socialization and social control.
Crowds are larger, more vaguely defined groups that may not have a friendship base. The level of involvement in adult institutions and peer culture describes crowds.

Socialization

At an early age, the peer group becomes an important part of socialization. E., Tepperman, L., & Albanese, P. (2008). Socialization. Sociology: a Canadian perspective (2nd ed., p. 112). Don Mills, Ont.: Oxford University Press. A 2002 study titled "Adolescents' Peer Groups and Social Identity" published in the journal Social Development supports this statement. (2002). Adolescent peer groups and social identity. Social Development, 11, 110-123. doi:10.1111/1467-9507.00189 Unlike other agents of socialization, such as family and school, peer groups allow children to escape the direct supervision of adults. Among peers, children learn to form relationships on their own, and have the chance to discuss interests that adults may not share with children, such as clothing and popular music, or may not permit, such as drugs and sex. Sociology 7th Canadian Ed. Toronto, Ontario: Pearson Canada Inc. p. 113.

Developmental psychology

Developmental psychologists, Lev Vygotsky, Jean Piaget, Erik Erikson, Harry Stack Sullivan, and social learning theorists have all argued that peer relationships provide a unique context for cognitive, social, and emotional development. Modern research echoes these sentiments, showing that social and emotional gains are indeed provided by peer interaction. How Children Develop, Exploring Child Develop Student Media Tool Kit & Scientific American Reader to Accompany How Children Develop. New York: Worth Publishers. ISBN 0-7167-6113-0
Vygotsky's Sociocultural TheoryAn introduction to Vygotsky (2nd edition). (2005). New York, NY: Routledge. Retrieved from  He also focuses on language development and identifies the zone of proximal development. The Zone of Proximal development is defined as the gap between what a student can do alone and what the student can achieve through teacher assistance. The values and attitudes of the peer group are essential elements in learning. Those who surround themselves with academically focused peers will be more likely to internalize this type of behavior.
Piaget's theory of cognitive development identifies four stages of cognitive development.C. (2012). Jean Piaget: Theorist of the child's mind. (pp. 89-107). New York, NY: Psychology Press. Retrieved from  In addition Piaget identified with aspects of development, occurring from middle childhood onwards, for which peer groups are essential. He suggested that children's speech to peers is less egocentric than their speech to adults. Egocentric speech is referring to the speech that is not adapted to what the listener just said.
Erikson's stages of psychosocial development include eight stages ranging from birth to old age. He has emphasized the idea that the society, not just the family, influences one's ego and identity through developmental stages. (1997). Contributions of Erik Erikson. Psychoanalytic Review, 84 (3), 337-347. Retrieved from  bin/ezpauthn. In his Latency stage, which includes children from 6–12 years old and this is when the adolescents begin to develop relationships among their peers.
Harry Stack Sullivan has developed the Theory of Interpersonal Relations.H., & Urban, H. B. (1963). Harry Stack Sullivan's Theory of Interpersonal Relations. (pp. 518-590). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons Inc. Retrieved from  Sullivan believed these functions developed during childhood and that true friendships were formed around the age of 9 or 10.
Social learning theorists such as John B. Watson, B.F. Skinner, and Albert Bandura, all argue for the influences of the social group in learning and development. Behaviourism, Operant Learning Theory, and Cognitive Social Learning Theory all consider the role the social world plays on development.. "Theories of Human Development." Developmental psychology: childhood and adolescence. 5th ed. Pacific Grove: Brooks/Cole Pub., 1999. 40-74. Print.
In The Nurture Assumption, JR Harris suggests that an individual's peer group significantly influences their intellectual and personal development.  Several longitudinal studies support the conjecture that peer groups significantly affect scholastic achievement,

Positive (advantages) attributes of peer groups

Serve as a source of information

Peer groups provide perspective outside of the individual's viewpoints. Members inside peer groups also learn to develop relationships with others in the social system. Peers, particularly group members, become important social referents forSherif, M., & Sherif, C. (1964). Reference groups. Chicago: RegneryYouniss, J., & Smollar, J. (1985). Adolescents' relations with mothers, fathers, and friends. teaching other members customs, social norms, and different ideologies. (ed.) (1968) Socialization and Society, Boston: Little Brown and Company. p5

Teach gender roles

Peer groups can also serve as a venue for teaching members gender roles. Through gender-role socialization, group members learn about sex differences, and social and cultural expectations. "Individuation, gender role, and dissent: Personality mediators of situational forces." Journal of personality and social psychology 53.6: 1088-1093 While boys and girls differ greatly, there is not a one-to-one link between sex and gender roles with males always being masculine and females always being feminine. Both genders can contain different levels of masculinity and femininity. L. (1975). Sex role adaptability: One consequence of psychological androgyny. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 31, 634–643. T., & Helmreich, R. (1978). Masculinity and femininity. Austin: University of Texas Press. Peer groups can consist of all males, all females, or both males and females. Studies show that the majority of peer groups are unisex. Peer groups can have great influence or peer pressure on each other's gender role behavior, depending on the amount of pressure.

Serve as a practicing venue to adulthood

Adolescent peer groups provide support as teens assimilate into adulthood. Major changes include: decreasing dependence on parents, increasing feelings of self-sufficiency, and connecting with a much larger social network. (1967). The second individuation process of adolescence. The Psychoanalytic Study of the Child, 22, 162–186Erikson, E. H. (1968). Identity: Youth and crisis. New York: Norton. M., & Newman, P. R. (1976). Early adolescence and its conflict: Group identity versus alienation. Adolescence, 11, 261–274. Adolescents are expanding their perspective beyond the family and learning how to negotiate relationships with others in different parts of the social system. Peers, particularly group members, become important social referents.  Peer groups also influence individual members' attitudes and behaviours on many cultural and social issues, such as: drug use, violence, and academic achievement. T., & Bauman, K. E. (1994). The contribution of influence and selection to adolescent peer group homogeneity: The case of adolescent cigarette smoking. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 653–663. L., Holt, M. K., & Henkel, R. R. (2003). Examination of peer-group contextual effects on aggression during early adolescence. Child Development, 74, 205–220. M. (2001). The peer group as a context for the development of young adolescent motivation and achievement. Child Development, 72, 1135–1150 and even the development and expression of prejudice. E. (2005). The development of prejudice in childhood and adolescence. In J. F.Glick, & L. A.), On the nature of prejudice: Fifty years afterAllport (pp. 310–326). Malden, MA: Blackwell. D. (1996). Peer prejudice and discrimination: Evolutionary, cultural, and developmental dynamics. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

Teach unity & collective behaviour

Peer groups provide an influential social setting in which group norms are developed and enforced through socialization processes that promote in-group similarity., & Nenga, S. K. (2003). Socialization in adolescence. In J.), Handbook of social psychology (pp. 157–182). New York: Kluwer Academic Peer groups' cohesion is determined and maintained by such factors as group communication, group consensus, and group conformity concerning attitude and behavior. As members of peer groups interconnect and agree on what defines them as a group, a normative code arises. This normative code can become very rigid, such as when deciding on group behavior and clothing attire. Member deviation from the strict normative code can lead to rejection from the group., and Wyndol Furman. "Age differences in adolescents' perceptions of their peer groups." Developmental Psychology 25.5 (1989): 827-834. PsycARTICLES. EBSCO. Web. 22 Sept. 2010.

Identity formation

Peer groups can help individuals form their own identity. Identity formation is a developmental process where a person acquires a sense of self. One of the major factors that influence the formation of a person's identity is his or her peers. Studies have showed peers provide normative regulation, and they provide a staging ground for the practice of social behaviors. This allows individuals to experiment with roles and discover their identities.

Negative (Disadvantages) attributes of peer groups

Peer pressure

The term peer pressure is often used to describe instances where an individual feels indirectly pressured into changing his/her behavior to match that of his/her peers. Taking up smoking and underage drinking are two of the best known examples.  In spite of the often negative connotations of the term, peer pressure can be used positively, for example, to encourage other peers to study, or not to engage in activities such as the ones discussed above. Although peer pressure is not isolated to one age group, it is usually most common during the adolescent stage. Adolescence is a period characterized by experimentation, and adolescents typically spend a lot of time with their peers in social contexts. Teenagers compel each other to go along with certain beliefs or behaviors, and studies have shown that boys are more likely to give in to it than girls. There has been much research done to gain a better understanding about the effects of peer pressure, and this research will allow parents to handle and understand their children's behaviors and obstacles they will face due to their peer groups. Learning how peer pressure impacts individuals is a step to minimizing the negative effects it leads to.

Future problems

Success of peer relationships is linked to later psychological development and to academic achievement. Therefore if one does not have successful peer relationships it may lead to developmental delays and poor academic achievement — perhaps even incompletion of a high school degree. Children with poor peer relationships may also experience job related and marital problems later in life.

Risk behaviors

Several studies have shown that peer groups are powerful agents of risk behaviors in adolescence. Adolescents typically replace family with peers regarding social and leisure activities, and many problematic behaviors occur in the context of these groups. A study done in 2012 focused on adolescents' engagement in risk behaviors.  Participants completed a self-report measure of identity commitment, which explores values, beliefs, and aspirations, as well as a self-report that measures perceived peer group pressure and control. Both peer group pressure and control were positively related to risky behaviors. However, adolescents who were more committed to a personal identity had lower rates of risk behaviors. Overall, this study shows us that adolescent identity development may help prevent negative effects of peer pressure in high-risk adolescents.

Aggression and prosocial behavior

Social behaviors can be promoted or discouraged by social groups, and several studies have shown that aggression and prosociality are susceptible to peer influence. A longitudinal study done in 2011 focused on these two behaviors. A sample of adolescents was followed over a one-year period, and results showed that adolescents who joined an aggressive group were more likely to increase their aggression levels. Also, adolescents were likely to display prosocial behaviors that were similar to the consistent behaviors of the group they were in. An adolescent's peer group plays a role in shaping him or her into an adult, and the lack of positive behavior can lead to consequences in the future.

Sexual promiscuity

Adolescence is also characterized by physical changes, new emotions, and sexual urges, and teenagers are likely to participate in sexual activity. A longitudinal study done in 2012 followed a group of adolescents for thirteen years. Self-reports, peer nominations, teacher ratings, counselor ratings, and parent reports were collected, and results showed a strong correlation between deviant peer groups and sexual promiscuity. Many teens claimed that the reasons for having sex at a young age include peer pressure or pressure from their partner. The effects of sexual activity at a young age are of great concern. Pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases are only a few of the consequences that can occur.

Adolescents and their peer groups

Gavin's study

In one cross-sectional, correlational study,Gavin, L. A., & Furman, W. (1989). Age differences in adolescents' perceptions of their peer groups. Journal of Developmental Psychology, 25 (5), 827-834.  four different developmental stages were examined: preadolescence (Grades 5 and 6), early adolescence (Grades 7 and 8), middle adolescence (Grades 9 and 10) and late adolescence (Grades 11 and 12). Self-report measures were used in which adolescents completed questionnaires. First, the students rated the importance of being in a popular group. Next, positive and negative behaviour were assessed. The extent to which students were bothered by negative behaviour targeted at them by others in their groups was also assessed. Structural group properties were also examined, including: group leadership or status hierarchy, group permeability, and group conformity.
Researchers found that early and middle adolescents reported placing more importance on being in a popular group and perceived more group conformity and leadership within their groups than pre- and late adolescents. Early and middle adolescents also reported more negative interactions and fewer positive interactions with group members and more negative interactions with those not part of their peer groups. Girls reported having more positive group interactions, being more bothered by negative interactions, and having more permeable group boundaries. Boys reported more negative interactions with those outside their groups and are more likely to have leaders in their peer groups. They also note the relationship between the importance of being in a popular peer group and conformity. Both become less important in late adolescence, showing that it is less important to conform when the value of group membership decreases. It is believed that positive interactions outside of peer groups increase and negative interactions outside of peer groups decrease by late adolescence because older adolescents feel more comfortable and have less need to control the behaviours of others. Findings that boys have more leaders are consistent with research showing that boys partake in more dominance struggles.

Tarrant's study

A questionnaire was handed out to 58 males and 57 females, aged 14–15 in the Midlands region of the UK. The first section dealt with group structure and activities of participants' peer groups. Participants were asked how many people were in their group, the gender composition of the group, frequency of group meetings, and the group's usual meeting places. The second section addressed the participants' levels of identification with their peer groups. The next section of the questionnaire was an intergroup comparison task in which participants compared their peer group to an outgroup. The comparison referred to how sixteen different adjectives "fit" or "described" both their ingroup and outgroup. The final part of the questionnaire was designed to check the manipulation of the adjective valence. In this section, participants rated the desirability of the above sixteen adjectives in their own opinions.
Findings supported social identity theory as participants consistently favoured the ingroup in two ways: the ingroup was always associated with a greater number of positive characteristics compared to the outgroup, and the more a participant identified with the ingroup, the higher their evaluations were for it.

Same race peer groups

Consistent with the dictionary definition of peer groups, youth tend to form groups based on similarities. It has been found that one of these similarities is by race., Taylor, A. Z., & Ho, A. Y. (2009). Race and ethnicity in peer relations research. Handbook of peer interactions, relationships, and groups, 394-413. Preference for same race grows stronger as youth develop. C., & Asher, S. R. (1979). Racial integration and children's peer preferences: An investigation of developmental and cohort differences. Child Development, 936-941. When Latino and Caucasian youth were given surveys asking them to indicate who in their school they had the highest preference to spend time with, they both nominated peers of their same race over peers of different races. D., Nishinia, A., Witkow, M. R., Graham, S., & Juvonen, J. (2007). The influence of classroom ethnic composition on same- and other- ethnicity peer nominations in middle school. Social Development, 16(4), 720-740. This is especially prevalent in classrooms and schools that have a clear cut majority and minority racial groups. Though benefits of homophily are met, preference for one's own racial group can lead to rejection of the racial out group, which can cause stress for both groups particularly in females.Sunwolf & Leets, 2004

Cross race peer groups

For classrooms and schools that have a more equal distribution of racial groups, there can be more socialization across peer groups. Cross racial peers groups can be very beneficial, lowering prejudice and increasing prosocial behaviors., & Crick, N. R. (2011). The significance of cross-racial/ethnic friendships: Associations with peer victimization, peer support, sociometric status, and classroom diversity. Developmental psychology, 47(6), 1763.; Verkuyten, M., & Thijs, J. (2002). School satisfaction of elementary school children: The role of performance, peer relations, ethnicity and gender. Social Indicators Research, 59(2), 203-228.; Pettigrew, T. F., & Tropp, L. R. (2000). Does intergroup contact reduce prejudice: Recent meta-analytic findings. Having a cross racial friend has also been shown to give youth a higher status and feel more socially satisfied.Graham, J. A., & Cohen, R. (2006). Race and sex as factors in children's sociometric ratings and friendship choices. Social Development, 6(3), 355-372.





Further reading


