[[Empress Michiko]]

CATEGORIES: 1934 births, Living people, People from Tokyo, Japanese empresses, Japanese philanthropists, Grand Cordons (Imperial Family) of the Order of the Precious Crown, Grand Cordons of the Order of Leopold (Belgium), Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the Netherlands Lion, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of St. Olav, Grand Crosses of the Order of Charles III, Grand Crosses of the Order of the Queen of Sheba, Grand Crosses of the Order of Vytautas the Great, Dames of the Order of the Royal House of Chakri, Members of the Royal Order of the Seraphim, Knights of the Elephant, Knights of the Order of the Gold Lion of the House of Nassau, Recipients of the Grand Star of the Decoration for Services to the Republic of Austria, Recipients of the Order of the White Eagle (Poland), Recipients of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany

, is the empress consort of Japan as the wife of Emperor Akihito, the current monarch of Japan reigning from 7 January 1989. She succeeded her mother-in-law, Empress Nagako (Kōjun), consort of the late Emperor Hirohito (Shōwa).
Michiko married Crown Prince Akihito and became "Crown Princess of Japan" until the death of Emperor Hirohito. She was the first commoner to marry into the Japanese Imperial Family. She had three children with her husband, and her elder son, Naruhito, is the current heir to the Chrysanthemum throne. As crown princess and later as empress, she has become the most visible and widely travelled imperial consort in Japanese history.

Early life and education

Michiko Shōda was born in Tokyo, the eldest daughter of Hidesaburō Shōda (正田 英三郎 Shōda Hidesaburō), president and later honorary chairman of Nisshin Flour Milling Company, and his wife, Fumiko Soejima (副島 富美子 Soejima Fumiko, Chinese article). Raised in Tokyo and in a cultivated family (she is the niece of several academics, including Kenjirō Shōda, a mathematician who was the president of the University of Osaka from 1954 until 1960List of Presidents of the University of Osaka on its official website), she received a careful education, both traditional and "Western", learning to speak English and to play piano and being initiated into the arts such as painting, cooking and Kōdō.
Shōda attended Futaba Elementary School in Kōjimachi, a neighborhood in Chiyoda, Tokyo, but was obliged to leave in fourth grade because of the American bombings during World War II. She then successively educated in the prefectures of Kanagawa (in the town of Katase, now part of the city of Fujisawa), Gunma (in Tatebayashi, home town of the Shōda family) and Nagano (in the town of Karuizawa, where Shōda have a second home resort). She returned to Tokyo in 1946 and completed her elementary education in Futaba and then attended the Seishin (Sacred Heart) Junior High School and High School in Minato, Tokyo. She graduated from high school in 1953.
After attending college, she became known by her family as "Mitchi" (ミッチ), but admitted to have also been named in her childhood as "Temple-chan", because of her curly hair and reddish hues unusual for a Japanese girl which made her look like the American child actress Shirley Temple. Although she came from a Catholic family and educated in Christian private schools, she is not baptized.
In 1957, she earned a bachelor of arts in English Literature from the Faculty of Literature at the University of the Sacred Heart, Tokyo with summa cum laude. She also attended courses at Harvard and Oxford.
From a particularly wealthy family, her parents were very worried about her early marriage, because she had met with several contenders in 1950s.« The Girl from Outside », Time, 23/03/1959 Biographers of the famous writer Yukio Mishima, including Henry Scott Stokes (author of The Life and Death of Yukio Mishima published by Cooper Square Press in 2000), report that he had considered marrying Michiko Shōda, and that he was introduced to her for that purpose some time in the 1950s.Saru, « 三島入門 (An Introduction to Mishima) », Mutant Frog Travelogue, 12/02/2006

Engagement and marriage

In August 1957, she met then-Crown Prince Akihito on a tennis court at Karuizawa, near Nagano. The Imperial Household Council (a body composed of the Prime Minister of Japan, the presiding officers of the two houses of the Diet of Japan, the Chief Justice of Japan, and two members of the Imperial Family) formally approved the engagement of the Crown Prince to Michiko Shōda on 27 November 1958. At the same time, media talked about the "romance of the tennis court" and presented their encounter as a real "fairy tale". The engagement Ceremony ("Nosai no Gi") took place on 14 January 1959.
Although the future Crown Princess was the daughter of a wealthy industrialist, she was nonetheless a commoner. During the 1950s, the media and most persons familiar with the Japanese monarchy had assumed that the powerful Imperial Household Agency (Kunaicho) would select a bride for the Crown Prince from amongst the daughters of the former court nobility (Kazoku) or from one of the former branches of the Imperial Family. Some traditionalists opposed the engagement, as Shōda comes from a Roman Catholic family,Herbert P. Bix, "Hirohito and the Making of Modern Japan", New York, 2001, p. 661 and although she was never baptized, she was raised in religious institutions and seemed to share the faith of her parents and it was widely rumoured that Empress Kōjun also was against the engagement. In 2000, after the death of Empress Kōjun, Reuters announced that the former Empress was one of the strongest opponents to the marriage, and in the 1960s, she pushed her daughter-in-law to depression accusing her of not being made for her son.« Japan's Dowager Empress Dead At 97 », CBS, 16/06/2000 Death threats prompted the authorities to organize the security of Shōda family. The writer Yukio Mishima, known for his traditional position, then said: "The imperial system becomes "tabloïdesque" (sic) in an effort to democratize the system. The idea (of the Imperial Family) to connect to people with a loss of dignity is wrong."Kyodo News, « Imperial marriage created bond with people », The Japan Times, 09/04/2009
However, the young couple had then gained wide public support and support of the political class that was ruling the country, also everyone showed affection to the young "Micchi" who had become the symbol of modernization and democratization of Japan (then the media spoke of a "Micchi boom"). The marriage finally took place on 10 April 1959 during a traditional Shinto ceremony. The wedding procession was followed in the streets of Tokyo by a crowd of over 500,000 people spread over 8.8 km route, and parts of the wedding televised (making this imperial wedding to be the first publicized in Japan) and was watched by around 15 million viewers. As of tradition dictates, upon her entry into the imperial family, she received a personal emblem ().

Crown Princess

The young couple then moved to , or "the East Palace of the Imperial House", the traditional name of the official residence of the crown prince installed since 1952, located within the grounds of the Akasaka Estate in Motoakasaka, Minato, Tokyo. They left Tōgū Palace after her husband acceded to the throne in 1989.
The couple have three children:
Contrary to the tradition that the children of the imperial family should be separated from their parents and placed with private tutors, Crown Prince Akihito and his wife Crown Princess Michiko again broke precedent from the start by preferring to raise their children instead of entrusting them to the care of court chamberlains; the Crown Princess even breastfed. At a more formal level, the Crown Prince and Princess visited 37 foreign countries between 1959 and 1989.
She suffered from several nervous breakdowns because of the pressure of the label, the media and, according to Reuters, the attitude of her mother-in-law, that have resulted in particular to make her lose her voice for seven months in the 1960s and again in the fall of 1993. More recently, Empress Michiko had to cancel many of her official duties in the spring of 2007, while suffering from mouth ulcers, nosebleeds and intestinal bleeding due to "psychological stress", according to her doctors.« People: Alan Hollinghurst, Empress Michiko of Japan, Dave Barry », International Herald tribune, 21/10/2004

Empress Consort

Upon the death of Emperor Shōwa on 7 January 1989, Crown Princess Michiko's husband became the 125th Emperor of Japan, and she became "Empress Consort". The new Emperor and Empress were enthroned (Sokui Rei Seiden no Gi) at the Tokyo Imperial Palace on 12 November 1990.
Since their enthronement, the imperial couple have visited 19 countries, and have done much to make the Imperial Family more visible and approachable in contemporary Japan. They also tried to be close to the people, visiting the 47 prefectures of Japan.
Her official duties, apart from visits to other countries, are to assist her husband at events and ceremonies, both within and outside the Imperial Palace (she has been at the Emperor's side everywhere, for example during the opening ceremony of the 1998 Winter Olympics in Nagano), receiving official guests including state guests and also to visit the social, cultural and charitable institutions and facilities. For example, in 2007, the Empress performed duties in her official capacity on more than 300 occasions. For many years the Emperor and Empress have visited facilities for children on Children's Day and facilities for the elderly on Respect for the Aged Day. The Imperial Household Agency announced that after 2014 they will pass on these duties to the younger generation. Their health has had no bearing on this decision.Présentation de la Croix-Rouge japonaise sur son site officiel
As empress, she is particularly responsible for Momijiyama Imperial Cocoonery, a sericulture farm on the grounds of the imperial palace. She participates in the annual ceremony of harvesting silk, personally feeds silkworms with blackberries and is responsible to take care of them, the frames, and the harvesting. The production and harvesting of silk are part of her ceremonial duties, linked to Shintoism, Japanese culture, and tradition. Since 1994, the Empress offers a part of the harvested silk of the koishimaru variety (the oldest species now kept in Japan) to the Shōsōin Treasure-house in the Buddhist temple Tōdai-ji in Nara to be used for the restoration of its treasures.Imperial Household Agency, «Activities of Her Majesty the Empress over the Past Year and Her Birthday Schedule», 20/10/2007
The Empress is expected to be the embodiment of traditional values such as modesty and purity. She has demonstrated a strong sense of duty throughout her life, which makes her quite popular amongst the Japanese. She takes part in religious ceremonies with the Emperor, such as visits to Ise Grand Shrine, other Shinto shrines and Imperial mausoleums to pray to the Imperial Family's ancestral spirits. In addition, she is an accomplished classical pianist.
The Empress was elevated into the Hall of Fame of International Best Dressed List in 1990.Vanity Fair

Hobbies, passions and literary works

The Empress particularly enjoys reading, music, and plays the piano. Moreover, the imperial family has been known for several decades to form, occasionally, a small family band, with Crown Prince Akihito playing the cello, Crown Princess Michiko playing the piano, and Prince Naruhito playing the violin. Empress Michiko is also known to be particularly keen on gagaku, kind of traditional Japanese court music.
She is also a fan of poetry, including the works of Michio Mado that she has selected, compiled and translated several of his poems in a series of collection under the titles Dobutsu-tachi (Animals) in 1992 and Fushigina Poketto (The Magic Pocket) in 1998. In June 2013, two collections of the poetry of Michio Mado, which the Empress had been asked to translate into English in the early Heisei era, Rainbow: Niji and Eraser: Keshigomu, were published. Together with her previously published translations of Michio Mado's poetry, including The Animals: Dobutsu-tachi, the publication of these new books means almost all the translations by the Empress of Mado's poems, which earned him the Hans Christian Andersen Award in 1994 are now published.
She herself has composed several poems, including waka. Présentation du livre Sé-oto, Le chant du gué de l'impératrice Michiko sur le site shunkin.net
In 1991, she wrote a children's book, illustrated by Wako Takeda: Hajimete no Yamanobori ("My First Mountain").

Titles and styles

Honours

See also List of honours of the Japanese Imperial Family by country

National honours

Foreign honours

Honorary positions

Issue







 in Japan


