[[Kid Rock]]

CATEGORIES: 1971 births, Midwest hip hop musicians, American libertarians, Atlantic Records artists, Living people, Michigan Republicans, People from Macomb County, Michigan, People from Clarkston, Michigan, Rap rock musicians, Rappers from Detroit, Michigan, World Music Awards winners, Musicians from Detroit, Michigan, American hip hop singers, 20th-century American musicians, 21st-century American musicians, American rock guitarists, American rock singer-songwriters, Songwriters from Michigan, American male rappers

Robert James Ritchie (born January 17, 1971), known by his stage name Kid Rock, is an American multi-instrumentalist, music producer and actor. He is most popularly known for his first commercial success, the 1998 studio album Devil Without a Cause, which sold 13 million albums worldwide. He is a five time Grammy Award nominee and has sold 25 million albums in the U.S. according to soundscan. The RIAA certified him selling 23.5 million albums. He was Soundscan's number one selling male solo musician of the 2000s, selling 17.6 million albums; he was 17th overall for the decade.
Born in Romeo, Michigan, Rock was a rapper and hip hop performer with 5 releases between 1990 and 1997, including a reissue and an EP. After signing a recording contract with Atlantic Records in 1998, he gained commercial success in the rap-rock genre behind the singles "Bawitdaba", "Cowboy" and "Only God Knows Why" (the latter foreshadowing his move into country rock). After Devil Without a Cause's success in 2000, he released The History of Rock, a compilation of remixed and remastered versions of songs from previous albums as well as the hit rock single, "American Bad Ass".
Rock's follow-up records became more rock-, country-, and blues-oriented, starting with 2001's Cocky. His collaboration with Sheryl Crow on the song "Picture" was his first country hit and biggest pop hit in the US to date charting at No. 4 on the Hot 100. The album featured the song "All Summer Long", which charted at No. 1 in eight countries across Europe and Australia. In 2010, he released Born Free, which featured an eponymous song that became the political campaign theme of Mitt Romney, the Republican nominee for President of the United States in the 2012 election.
Rock released Rebel Soul on November 19, 2012."Let's Ride", was a war anthem to the United States military, charted at No 105 on the Billboard Charts and No 8 on the rock charts. The album was certified gold in April 2013.
Kid Rock released his entire Atlantic Records catalog to iTunes in January 2013, with the exception "Racing Father Time EP". Three of the albums recharted on the Billboard 200. "Devil Without A Cause (No. 61), "Rock N Roll Jesus" (No. 142) and "Cocky" (No. 160). His old hits also re-entered the charts on the Rock Digital Songs Chart. They included " All Summer Long" (No. 16), "Cowboy" (No. 19), "Bawitdaba" (No. 21), "Picture" (No. 22), "Only God Knows Why" (No. 25) and "American Bad Ass" (No. 47). "All Summer Long charted at No. 18 and " Picture" charted at No. 26 on the Hot Digital Country sales chart as well. "Cocky" stayed on the Billboard 200 for nearly an entire year after being released on iTunes, sales jumped from 5.1 million to nearly 5.4 million in that time frame.

Early life

Robert James "Bob" Ritchie was born on January 17, 1971 in Romeo, Michigan to William "Bill" Ritchie, a car dealer who owned several local dealerships, and Susan Ritchie. He attended Romeo High School. His family also owned a six-acre orchard and Robert regularly helped pick apples and cared for the family's horses. At age eleven, he joined a breakdance crew called the Furious Funkers and taught himself to work a cheap belt-driven turntable. In high school, Ritchie DJed at parties for beer. He eventually joined Bo Wisdom of Groove Time Productions in Mt. Clemens, Michigan to perform basement parties for $30 a night. He chose his stage name while performing at these venues; club goers dubbed him "Kid Rock" after they had enjoyed watching "that white kid rock."
Ritchie eventually ran away to Mt. Clemens at 15 and stayed with his friend Chris Pouncy. He was forced by a local drug gang known as the "Best Friends" to sell drugs out of a car wash at which he worked. In an attempt to keep the kids out of trouble, a man in the neighborhood organized a rap group, composed of its founder The Blackman, Champtown, KDC, Chris "Doc Roun-Cee" Pouncy, and Bob. They were known as "The Beast Crew". While performing, Rock befriended producer D-Nice of the legendary hip-hop group Boogie Down Productions. When Rock opened for BDP one night, D-Nice invited an A&R representative from Jive Records to see him perform. This meeting led to a demo deal that developed into a full record contract.
Against his parents' wishes, Rock signed the deal at age 17. Despite his new record deal, he had a falling out with The Beast Crew when he signed over fellow member Champtown, though the two have since renewed their friendship. His vocals were left on the tracks of their debut underground album Chapter 1: He Don't Want Us No More, against Rock's wishes. He later became part of the Straight From The Underground Tour alongside several major rap artists, including Ice Cube, Too Short, D-Nice, Mac Dre, and Yo-Yo.

Career

Grits Sandwiches for Breakfast to The Polyfuze Method Revisited (1990-1997): "The Hip Hop Era"

On December 30, 1990, Kid Rock released his debut album Grits Sandwiches for Breakfast. As noted by Insane Clown Posse member Violent J, this album made Kid Rock one of the two biggest rap stars in Detroit in 1990, along with local independent rapper Esham. Though Jive Records did not push the album, it gained infamy when radio station WSUC-FM (90.5) of Cortland, New York was fined $23,700 by the FCC — then the largest fine against a radio station — for playing the song "Yo Da-Lin In the Valley". The album sold an estimated 100,000 copies. Kid Rock's career had begun to decline towards the end of 1990 and Jive Records released Kid Rock from his contract in 1991. Once back in Detroit, he became friends with Uncle Kracker after battling his brother in a freestyle rapping competition. Afterward, Uncle Kracker became Kid Rock's DJ. At the time Uncle Kracker had no clue how to work the turntables.
In late 1991, Kid Rock was picked up by an independent record label called Continuum Records, which held Pink Floyd at one time. Though Insane Clown Posse's Violent J disliked Kid Rock's rapping style, he paid Kid Rock to appear on Insane Clown Posse's first album, Carnival of Carnage in 1992, in an attempt to get the album noticed. Kid Rock showed up to record the song "Is That You?" intoxicated, but re-recorded his vocals and record scratching the following day. In March 1993, Continuum released his second album The Polyfuze Method. Kid Rock had taught himself how to play several different instruments including guitar, drums, keyboard, and organ. As a result, the album, which sold approximately 15,000 copies, featured a more rap rock-oriented sound. The album heavily sampled psychedelic blues from Led Zeppelin (Prodigal Son, My Oedipus Complex), Pink Floyd (The Cramper) and The Doors ( U Don't Know Me), Black Sabbath (Pancake Breakfast ) and The Smiths (Back From The Dead) amongst others. The album saw some local college radio success at Central Michigan University with the tracks "Back From The Dead" and "Balls In Your Mouth". He wanted "Prodigal Son" as the lead single, but Contiuum refused and released "U Don't Know Me" as the first single. It failed to chart, and the music video received little airplay on major music video channels. Kid Rock re-released "Back From The Dead" as a single to mainstream radio and produced the music video himself, but it also failed as a single.
He released an EP called Fire It Up in December 1993 that featured the song "I Am the Bullgod", which wouldn't be a hit until six years later. The singles "Prodigal Son " and " My Oedipus Complex were released, but failed to find a niche. Continuum didn't see a future with Kid Rock after this, and released him from his contract in 1994. He began side work with a local Detroit rap metal group Harm's Way in 1994 producing, scratching and playing drums on two of their independent releases. He also produced Thornetta Davis's Sunday Morning Coming Down a gospel album at the same time.
His on-again-off-again relationship with Kelly South resulted in a son, Robert James Ritchie Jr. Hard pressed for cash and with a kid on the way ,Kid Rock released monthly demo tapes dubbed The Bootleg Series which featured demos of him and other up-and-coming rappers and garage rock bands in the Detroit area. Around the same time, Kid Rock formed his back up band, Twisted Brown Trucker. He later recruited Joseph "Joe C." Calleja, whom he met at a 1994 concert in Roseville, Michigan, as part of the group. In 1995, Rock took a job as a janitor at Whiterooms Studios to pay studio fees. When he wasn't working, Kid Rock recorded the material that eventually made up his fourth album, Early Mornin' Stoned Pimp, which he released on his own label, Top Dog Records. The album was released on February 12, 1996. During the recording process, he met piano player Jimmie Bones, who soon joined the band. A loan from his father aided the release and Kid Rock sold 6,000 copies from the trunk of his car, sometimes after his concerts. This led to him re releasing The Polyfuze Method as the Polyfuze Method Revisted in 1997 adding " I Am The Bullgod and "Rollin On The Island" from Fire It Up and a demo called "Rain Check".
Lava/Atlantic Records A&R man Andy Karp starting following Kid Rock's career after seeing him in Cleveland in December 1996 and again in March 1997. Following a two song demo tape containing "Somebody's Gotta Feel This" and "I Got One For Ya", Jason Flom supported Karp in signing Kid Rock for $100,000. After being sign Kid Rock would be arrested in a bar fight celebrating his signing. It was there he wrote "Only God Knows Why"." They asked Rock to take out the "I'm going platinum" line on the title track's chorus, but he refused. While the conflict slowed down production, Devil Without a Cause was completed on schedule with Rock mostly playing all the instruments himself.

Devil Without a Cause to Cocky (1997–2002): "The Rap Rock Era"

In 1997, Kid Rock added drummer/vocalist Stefanie Eulinberg to his band, which consisted of Kenny Olson, Jason Krause, Jimmie Bones, Uncle Kracker, Misty Love, Shirley Hayden, and Joe C.. On August 18, 1998, Atlantic released Devil Without a Cause behind the single "Welcome 2 The Party" and Kid Rock went on the Vans Warped Tour to support the album. Sales of "Welcome 2 The Party" and Devil were slow, though the 1998 Warped Tour in Northampton, Massachusetts stimulated regional interest in Massachusetts and New England. This led to substantial airplay of the single "I Am The Bullgod" during the summer and fall of 1998 on Massachusetts rock staples WZLX and WAAF. In early December 1998, while DJing at a club, he met and became friends with MTV host Carson Daly. He talked Daly into getting him a performance on MTV and on December 28, 1998, he performed on MTV Fashionably Loudin Miami, Florida, creating a buzz from his performance, even upstagging Jay-Z. In May, his sales began taking off with the third single "Bawitdaba" and by April 1999, Devil Without a Cause had achieved a gold disc. The following month, Devil, as he predicted, went platinum.
Kid Rock's first major tour was Limptropolis, where he opened for Limp Bizkit with Staind. He solidified his superstardom with a Woodstock 1999 performance and on July 24 of that year, he was double platinum. The following single "Cowboy", a mix of southern rock, country, and rap, was an even bigger hit, making the Top 40. It even became the theme song of WCW's Jeff Jarrett. Rock's next single, the slow back porch blues ballad "Only God Knows Why", was the biggest hit off the album, charting at No. 19 on the Billboard Hot 100. It was one of the first songs to use the autotune effect. By the time the final single, "Wasting Time", was released, the album had sold 7 million copies. Devil Without A Cause was certified 11 times platinum by the RIAA on April 17, 2003. According to soundscan actual sales are 9.3 million as of 2013.
Rock was nominated as Best New Artist at the 2000 Grammy Awards, but lost to Christina Aguilera. He was nominated for "Bawitdaba" for Best Hard Rock Performance, but lost to Metallica's "Whiskey in the Jar".
After reacquiring the rights to his early material in 2000, Rock released The History of Rock, a collection of remixed and re-recorded songs from The Polyfuze Method and Early Mornin Stoned Pimp. "American Bad Ass", one of two new tracks, was released as a single, which sampled the Metallica track "Sad But True". It was used in the WWE as the Undertaker's theme song for his new "biker from hell" gimmick. The song was used for TV promos for the movies G.I. Joe: The Rise of Cobra and Battleship, released in 2009 and 2012, respectively. The second new song "Fuck That" was released on the Any Given Sunday movie soundtrack. His unreleashed 1994 song "Abortion" off the album received high praise by the anti-abortion group Rock For Life (a division of the American Life League).
On May 27, Kid Rock appeared on Saturday Night Live, performing "American Bad Ass" and an acoustic version of "Only God Knows Why", arranged by country singer David Allan Coe, that featured Phish's Trey Anastasio. Kid Rock joined Phish later in the year in Las Vegas, Nevada, for a set of cover songs.
From June 30 to August 22, 2000, Kid Rock joined the Summer Sanitarium Tour with Metallica, Korn, Powerman 5000, and System of a Down. Kid Rock filled in for James Hetfield of Metallica, singing vocals on the songs "Enter Sandman", "Sad But True", and "Nothing Else Matters". He also ran the turntables for "Fuel" for three shows after Hetfield injured his spine riding a jet ski on Lake Lanier the day before the July 7 Atlanta concert. Kid Rock would go on "The History Of Rock Tour" from August to September of that year.
On November 16, 2000, Joseph "Joe C" Calleja died in his sleep from Coeliac disease complications in Taylor, Michigan. Joe C's final song was "Cool Daddy Cool" for the Osmosis Jones soundtrack. The band made a cameo in the movie as the band playing in the club scene. Kid Rock was referred to as "Kidney Rock" to go along with the cartoon aspect of being a cell in the body of the main character, Frank, played by Bill Murray.
The 2001 American Bad Ass Tour, in which David Allan Coe performed as an opening act for Kid Rock, was the subject of criticism from journalist Neil Strauss, who alleged that Coe's songs were racist.
In early 2001, Rock inducted Aerosmith into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and performed "Sweet Emotion" at the induction ceremony. The same year, Rock landed his first acting role in the David Spade comedy Joe Dirt.
"American Bad Ass" was nominated for Best Hard Rock Performance at the 2001 Grammy Awards, losing out to Rage Against The Machine's "Guerrilla Radio". The History of Rock would go on to be certified double platinum.
In November, Kid Rock released Cocky, which was marketed as the official follow up to Devil Without a Cause. With the era of rap metal on the decline, Kid Rock included several southern rock and country ballads on the album. The first single, "Forever", featured his standard brash rap-rock sound, but lacked the selling power of Devil Without A Cause. The songs "Lonely Road of Faith" and "You Never Met a Motherfucker Quite Like Me" were released as singles, but were only minor hits. The album struggled to reach platinum a year later. Rock then had problems with the release of "Picture", a country-influenced duet with Sheryl Crow because his label felt it was wrong for his image and they were not keen to spend more money promoting a flagging album. When his label finally agreed to release it, Sheryl Crow's label refused to give permission. Rock, meanwhile, made a radio version with Allison Moorer, which was gaining airplay. Crow's label eventually caved and their version was finally released. When "Picture" was released, it introduced Kid Rock to a wider audience and was ultimately the most successful single on the album. The song would chart at number 4 on the Billboard Hot 100 and number 17 on country radio. The song remains his most successful pop song in the U.S. to date. The album went on to be certified 5x platinum by the RIAA. According to soundscan as of 2013 say it as sold 5.344 million albums.
On December 14, 2001, CMT aired an episode of Crossroads featuring Rock with Hank Williams, Jr. The episode drew a record 2.1 million viewers to CMT. He would perform for troops in January 2002 on an MTV USO Special at Germany's Ramstein Air Base along with Ja Rule and Jennifer Lopez.
Kid Rock covered ZZ Top's "Legs" for WWE Diva's Stacey Kiebler's Theme Song in 2002. He also helped Nickleback cover Elton John's Saturday Nights Alright For Fighting which also featured Pantera's Dimebag Darrell. It was his last guitar solo recording before being gunned down at a night club by an over obsessed fan.
At the end of 2002, Uncle Kracker left the band to pursue a solo career, and Detroit underground rapper Paradime replaced him. Kid Rock made his second movie, Biker Boyz, with Laurence Fishburne. He performed a tribute medley with Chuck D and Grandmaster Flash after Run DMC member Jam Master Jay was shot to death on VH-1 Big in 02.

Kid Rock to Rock n Roll Jesus (2003–2009): "Southern Rock Revivilist Era"

In 2003, Kid Rock returned with an eponymous album, almost stripping away the accustomed rap metal sound he had created, opting for southern rock and several country ballads in the wake of the success of "Picture". The album's lead single was a cover of Bad Company's "Feel Like Makin' Love". A media blitz accompanied the single capped off by the VH-1 special called A Kid Rock Christmas, which aired on December 14, 2003. He would release "Cold and Empty", "Jackson, Mississippi", and "I Am" to minor success on radio. The David Allan Coe-penned "Single Father" became his second charting country song, although, like the other singles, it was minor hit at #50. The album would go on to go platinum.
Kid Rock was involved in the halftime show controversy at Super Bowl XXXVIII in Houston, Texas on February 1, 2004.  He was criticized by the Veterans of Foreign Wars for desecrating the American flag, by wearing one slit in the middle as a poncho.
The following month, Kid inducted Bob Seger into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. In September 2005, Kid Rock filled in for Johnny Van Zant, the lead singer of Lynyrd Skynyrd, on the band's hit "Sweet Home Alabama" at the Hurricane Katrina benefit concert.
He performed "Erotica", the theme song for Spike TV's Stripperella, as well as lending his voice to a few episodes.
On February 28, 2006, Kid Rock released his first live album, Live Trucker, comprising songs from his homestead performances in Clarkston in 2000 and 2004 as well as Detroit's Cobo Hall on March 26, 2004. The album contained the last two performances of Joe C. on "Devil Without a Cause" and "Early Mornin' Stoned Pimp" in addition to Rock performing a duet with country star Gretchen Wilson on "Picture".
He brought Bob Seger back from semi-retirement during his pre-Super Bowl concerts on February 2 and 3, 2006 in Detroit. The two performed a version of Seger's "Rock 'n' Roll Never Forgets" on both nights. Kid Rock would appear on Bob Seger's album Face the Promise and on a Vince Gill cover of "Real Mean Bottle", a tribute to country legend Merle Haggard. He would make a cameo in the movie Larry the Cable Guy: Health Inspector and appeared in an episode of CSI: New York in 2006. He inducted Lynyrd Skynyrd into the 2006 Rock 'n' Roll Hall of Fame and performed "Sweet Home Alabama" with them.
Rock n Roll Jesus was released on October 9, 2007, becoming Kid Rock's first album to go number 1, selling 172,000 copies in its first week. and appeared for the first time on Larry King Live to discuss the new album.
The album's first two singles, "So Hott" and "Amen", were successful on rock radio getting the album to gold status. Then the album's third single, "All Summer Long", became a global hit. It utilized a mash up of Lynyrd Skynyrd's "Sweet Home Alabama" and Warren Zevon's "Werewolves of London". The song also sampled Michael Jackson's " Billy Jean"(drums) and Steve Miller's "Take The Money and Run" (acoustic gutair)."All Summer Long" would chart at No. 23 on the Billboard Hot 100. Kid Rock and Lynyrd Skynyrd would make joint live performances of "All Summer Long" and "Sweet Home Alabama" on both CBS Fashion Rocks and Good Morning America. They would then go on two summer tours together: "Rock N Rebel's I" and "Rock N Rebel's II". Lil Wayne became the first hip hop act ever to perform at the CMA Awards when he played guitar on "All Summer Long". The week before, the two performed together on the same song with Lil Wayne doing a freestyle mid song. "Rock n Roll Jesus" returned to the Top 10 for 17 straight weeks. "Roll On", "Rock N Roll Jesus", and "Blue Jeans And A Rosary", the albums remaining singles, were all minor hits.
In 2008, Kid Rock recorded "Warrior" for a National Guard advertising campaign.
Kid Rock performed on VH1's Storytellers on November 27, 2008, giving an insight to how he wrote some of his hit songs. On April 5, 2009, he performed a 5-song medley at WrestleMania XXV. The performance didn't go over well with the wrestling community as they complained the performance took time away from one more match on the card.
He was nominated for Best Rock Album and Best Male Pop/Rock Performance for "All Summer Long" at the 2009 Grammys, though he lost to Coldplay's Viva La Vida for the former award and to John Mayer's "Say" for the latter. He achieved his first country award winning for Best Wide Open Country Video for "All Summer Long" at the 2009 CMT Awards. On July 3, 2009, "Rock N Roll Jesus" was certified triple platinum by the RIAA. According to soundscan the album has sold 3.493 million albums as of 2013. Two weeks later, Kid Rock performed at Comerica Park on July 17 and 18, 2009.

Born Free through  Rebel Soul (2009–present): "The Heartland Rock Era"

In April 2010, Kid Rock started a spring cruise dubbed "The Chillin The Most Cruise". He followed this up by hosting the CMT Awards in June, performing "Cowboy", "Bawitdaba", and "Good Ol Boys" with Hank Williams Jr, Trace Adkins, Martina McBride, Kellie Pickler, Randy Houser, Zac Brown and Jamey Johnson.
Kid Rock released Born Free on November 16, 2010 and it debuted at No. 5, selling 189,000 copies in its first week. The album was produced by Rick Rubin and featured David Hidalgo and Matt Sweeney on guitar as well as Chad Smith on drums and Benmont Tench on keyboard. The album was his first album without a parental advisory sticker on it. The album's title track was released as its first single, peaking at No. 14 on the mainstream rock charts and no 31 on the active rock charts. It also charted at No.52 on country and No.39 on the adult pop charts. It was the theme song to the 2010 MLB playoffs on TBS as well as WWE's Tribute To The Troops Special. He performed the song at the Detroit Lions Thanksgiving halftime show. The album reached gold status on December 15, 2010. The follow up single was "God Bless Saturday", which peaked at No.37 on the mainstream rock charts. It is the secondary theme song for College Gameday on ESPN. The third single was "Collide", which featured Sheryl Crow and Bob Seger. Rock and Crow then went on a joint tour together after the song peaked at No.26 on the adult pop chart and No.51 on the country charts. The next single, a cover of Jason Boland's "Telephone Romeo" re-written as "Purple Sky", failed to chart. In November 2011, Kid Rock released "Care", a protest song about current politics in D.C. that had multiple versions released for the single. The album version featured Martina McBride and T.I. and the international single featuring Mary J. Blige. The music video was shot with Pistol Annie's Angeleena Pressley. The single peaked at number 26 on the Adult Contemporary charts and number 58 on the country chart.
He released the EP Racing Father Time in the Detroit area along with the album. It included remixes of "Slow My Roll" and "Lonely Road Of Faith", along with "The Midwest Fall" and "Forty". Born Free went platinum in July 2011. He returned to host the CMT Awards for a 2nd year doing a spoof on "Bawitdaba" with Wynonna Judd.
On January 15, 2011, Kid Rock celebrated his 40th birthday with a performance at Ford Field in Detroit. The marathon concert featured Uncle Kracker, Peter Wolfe, Reverend Run, Sheryl Crow, Cindy Crawford, Jimmie Johnson, and Anita Baker. He also returned to Comerica Park on August 12 and 13. In December, he went on a 12-city club tour and donated the proceeds to various charities in each city to support his single, "Care". Kid Rock became the first musician to play in a recorded concert for television at Elvis Presley's Graceland on November 28, 2011 when PBS taped an episode for their album Live from the Artists Den. He performed "Born Free" at a Michigan Rally for Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney in February. On May 12, 2012, he performed a benefit concert with the Detroit Orchestra, raising $1 million.
On December 7, 2011, Kid Rock joined Metallica on-stage at The Fillmore San Francisco during day two of the 30 Years of Metallica celebration to perform Seger's "Turn the Page". On April 14, 2012, he joined Travis McCoy, Black Thought, ?uestlove, and The Roots in performing a medley of Beastie Boys songs at the 2012 Rock N Roll Hall Of Fame ceremony.
Kid Rock recorded "In Detroit" as part of the NFL's promotion with Pepsi called "Pepsi Anthems" in August 2012. It was recorded as the theme song for the Detroit Lions.
Kid Rock released the album Rebel Soul on November 19, 2012, with "Let's Ride" as its lead single. This was his first mainstream album available for download from iTunes. A promotional video for "Cucci Galore" was released to YouTube prior to the release of "Rebel Soul".  A video for Happy New Year's came out in late December. It featured a cameo by super model Cindy Crawford. It gained minor attention from CMT and VH-1 and failed to chart. The title track was then released to rock radio but failed to chart as well. He made a remix of Redneck Paradise with Hank Williams Jr  and the music video aired on CMT in June 2013, making the Top 20 countdown. Country radio format refused to play the song because of its long run time.
The media press for this album included NASCAR's Race For The Chase, NASCAR at Homestead, Good Morning America, NFL Halftime Show, CBS This Morning and WWE Tribute for The Troops. This led to a No 5 debut selling roughly 146,000 copies. The album would go gold in April 2013. CMT aired Kid Rock live from Sturgis on August 22, 2013.
After years of a stalemate with Apple, Kid Rock released his catalog to ITunes in January 2013. The only pre-fame album still available is "Grits Sandwiches For Breakfast" however. His classics " All Summer Long", "Cowboy", " Bawitdaba", " Picture", "Only God Knows Why" and " American Bad Ass" all re-enterd the charts based off digital downloads. His albums "Devil Without A Cause", "Rock N Roll Jesus" and "Cocky" all re-charted in the same vein on the Billboard 200. Meaning with 2012's  "Rebel Soul" he had 4 albums in the Billboard 200 at one time with 8 singles charted as well.
Kid Rock announced his $20 Best Night Ever Summer Tour for 2013. Kid Rock took a paycut to allow all seats to be available at $20. When he heard that Ticketmaster was including a service charge, he struck a deal with Wal-Mart to keep it at $20. The concerts included free parking, free food from Jimmy John's, free coffee, $4 beer and all mercandise under $20. The tour name is named after an impromptu song he wrote after performing with Bob Seger on his winter Rebel Soul Tour in early 2013. The tour featured ZZ Top, Uncle Kracker, Marshall Tucker Band, Jamey Johnson and Kool And The Gang.
Kid Rock stated to his website he has returned to his studios and his writing new material for the follow up to "Rebel Soul" for likely a 2014 release. Kid Rock performed an unreleased song on his Chillin The Most 5 Cruise called "Ain't Enough Whiskey" a song thumbing its self at politics describes has a blues song.

Musical style and influences

Kid Rock's musical style ranges from Midwest hip hop and heavy metal to country rock and rap rock.
Kid Rock has influenced such artist and groups as Eminem, Lil Wayne, Yelawolf, Uncle Kracker, Paradime, Ty Stone, Jocaine and 75 North, Big & Rich, Gretchen Wilson, Jason Aldean, Colt Ford, The Sheepdogs, Rehab and the The Young Brothers. His son released his debut EP Wanted Dead Or Alive under the stage name "Bandit". He has since gone by Robert Ritchie instead of Bandit. Several established country artist have also borrowed his country rap style including Toby Keith ("Trailerhood", "Red Solo Cup", "What About Me"), Trace Adkins ("Brown Chicken, Brown Cow") and Blake Shelton ("Hillbilly Bone"). Several aging rock stars have tried to turn country after Kid Rock's Picture. They include Bon Jovi, Darius Rucker, Aaron Lewis (Staind) and Bret Micheals. Kid Rock has been named check in songs by Eminem (Beserk), Gretchen Wilson (Redneck Woman), Rehab ( Miss Jones), David Allan Coe (Free My Mind), Hank Williams Jr ( The F-Word)and several Uncle Kracker and Paradime songs. He has appeared in music videos for Eminem, Limp Bizkit, Tim McGraw,Gretchen Wilson, Yelawolf,Buckcherry and Uncle Kracker. He was also spoofed in Puddle Of Mudd's music video for "Psycho".

Twisted Brown Trucker

Twisted Brown Trucker is Kid Rock's band, formed in 1994 in Sterling Heights, Michigan. The original lineup included Kenny Olson on lead guitar, Uncle Kracker on turntables, Andy Gould and George Metropolous on guitar, Paul Anthony on bass and Bob Ebeling on drums and Charles Hughes on organs. The band first recorded together on the 1994 demo of "Dark & Gray" on his Bootleg Series Tapes, they would make three more appearances on the tapes in "Watch Me Come", "Only a Dog" and "Box #10". Trucker became both Rock's studio and live band in 1997.
Studio musicians for  Grits Sandwiches For Breakfast included David Bright, Patrica Halligan, Roz Davis and Doug E Fresh. Musicians for  The Polyfuze Method and Fire It Up included Chris Peters, Bob Ebuling, Bill Grant, Mike Henry, Peg Leg Sam, Jon Slow, Dono Zoyes. For  Early Mornin Stoned Pimp they included Andrew Nehra, Mike Nehra, Ed Harsch and Eric Hochenmeyer.  "Devil Without A Cause"  features bassist Matt O'Brien, who also appears on Cocky. Self Titled featured Kenny Wayne Shepphard, Alto Reed, Rayse Biggs, Johnny Evans, Larry Nozero. Sheryl Crow, Billy Gibbons and Hank Williams Jr lent backing vocals. Rock N Roll Jesus included Dan Dugmore, The Frisk Jubilee Singers and Paul Franklin.
Born Free consisted of an all star band the only member of TBT on the album was Marlon Young. The band featured David Hildago and Matt Sweeny on guitar, Justin Meldal Johnson on bass, Chad Smith on drums, Benmont Tench on keys and organ, Smokey Hormel on guitar, Kim Johnson on harmonica, Greg Fieldelman on piano and guitar, Lenny Castro on percussion with Trace Adkins providing background vocals. Micheal Young was the only studio musician to appear on Rebel Soul
Kenny Olson went on to perform with several other bands, and has appeared on other studio recordings such as the song "I Love You More Than You'll Ever Know" from the Les Paul tribute album Les Paul & Friends, as well as a version of "Little Wing" with Chaka Khan on the Jimi Hendrix tribute album Power of Soul: A Tribute to Jimi Hendrix.
Tudrick is currently with the band Detroit Cobras, who he was with before touring on Kid Rock's 'Live' Trucker tour.
Percussionist Larry Fratangelo won a Detroit Music Award in 2009 for Outstanding Urban/Funk Musician.


Personal life

Kid Rock has one child with Kelly Russell, named Robert James Ritchie Jr.

Marriage to Pamela Anderson

In 2001, Kid Rock began a relationship after meeting actress Pamela Anderson at VH1 tribute to Aretha Franklin. In April 2002, they were reportedly engaged, but called it off.
Rock later claimed, however, that the divorce was due to Anderson openly criticizing his mother and sister in front of his son from a previous relationship, Robert Jr., to which Rock took offense.
On July 6, 2011, Kid Rock appeared on CNN's Piers Morgan Tonight show where he said he has no regrets about anything he has done in the past.

Legal troubles

Kid Rock has multiple criminal offenses.
From March 1991 and September 1997, has charges stemming from alcohol-related arrests in Michigan.
In February 2005, charged with assault on DJ Jay Campos in 'Christies Cabaret' strip club. Rock pleaded no contest and was sued for $575,000 by Campos.
Charged with assault on Mötley Crüe drummer Tommy Lee at MTV's 2007 Video Music Awards, he pled guilty.
In October 2007, Kid Rock was involved in a brawl at a Waffle House in Atlanta and charged with simple battery.

Sex tape

Kid Rock and Scott Stapp, singer of the band Creed, appear in a sex tape from 1999 in which the two are seen partying and receiving oral sex from several groupies.
California pornography company Red Light District planned to release the tape in 2006, but both Rock and Stapp filed with the California courts to sue Red Light District and stop the tape's distribution.

Politics

In 2011, Kid Rock agreed to allow Mitt Romney's presidential campaign to officially make use of his music in campaign events, using his song "Born Free". Kid Rock later endorsed Mitt Romney's candidacy and performed on Romney's behalf at campaign events.  By May 2012, Kid Rock was still the first of a handful of high-profile musicians to endorse Mitt Romney, including Ted Nugent and Lee Greenwood. Kid Rock performed alongside Lynyrd Skynyrd and Trace Adkins at the 2012 Republican National Convention in Tampa, Florida. He introduced Romney's running mate, Paul Ryan, at a rally in Michigan in October 2012; Ryan went onstage to "Bawitdaba". Kid Rock has also met President Barack Obama, as well as former Presidents George H.W. Bush, Bill Clinton, and George W. Bush. In 2012, he and actor Sean Penn starred in the YouTube video "Americans", in which they both poked fun at their political activism.
He has also included social and political commentary in his songs, beginning with 2000's "Abortion," which, originally written in 1994, describes that he is suicidally depressed after the abortion of his unborn child. Other political or social concerned songs include "Black Chick, White Guy", "I Am," "Amen," "Born Free," "Care," "God Bless Saturday," "Times Like These," "The Midwest Fall," "Let's Ride," and "3 Catt Boogie."

Activism

Kid Rock has been involved with many charitable organizations, including Operation Homefront; he has frequently partnered with Jim Beam to make large donations to the organization. He is close friends with Tony Stewart, with whom he was worked with on charity events. Kid Rock has performed for American service men and women in countries such as Iraq, Afghanistan, Kuwait and Kosovo, as well as in Great Britain at R.A.F. bases such as RAF Lakenheath.

Scalpers

Recently Kid Rock has taken measures against ticket scalpers at his shows. These measures include: performing more frequently to lower ticket prices; changing the pricing structure; show an ID and the credit card to prove you purchased the tickets for platinum seats; and the first two rows of seats are not for sale—they are given out to fans.Kid Rock's $20 Concert Ticket Plan: Good for Fans, Bad for Scalpers, by Brad Tuttle, June 26, 2013

Discography

Tours

Cruises

Annual Chillin' the Most Cruise. 

Filmography

Awards and nominations

Other ventures and honors



Sources




