[[Gennadius of Constantinople]]

CATEGORIES: 458 births, 471 deaths, 5th-century Byzantine people, Patriarchs of Constantinople, 5th-century archbishops

Saint Gennadius (Greek: Άγιος Γεννάδιος) was the 21st Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople (458–471). Gennadius is seen to have been a learned writer and followed the Antiochene school of literal exegesis, although little writings has been left about him. He is celebrated in the Greek Orthodox Church on November 17, but is not listed in the Roman Martyrology.Martyrologium Romanum (Libreria Editrice Vaticana 2001 ISBN 88-209-7210-7)

Biography

His first public writing was quoted by Facundus (Defensio, II, iv) against Saint Cyril of Alexandria in two works, probably in 431 or 432, including a passage to show that his work was more violent even than the letter of Ibas. The Anathemas of Cyril and Two Books to Parthenius were criticized. In the latter he exclaims, "How many times have I heard blasphemies from Cyril of Egypt? Woe to the scourge of Alexandria!".
Timothy Aelurus, the Monophysite who made himself the Patriarch of Alexandria and was later chased from the Patriarchate by order of the Roman emperor, had obtained leave to come to Constantinople, intending, by a pretence of Ecumenisim, to re-establish himself on his throne.
Two Egyptian solitaries told John Moschus a story which is also recorded by Theodorus Lector. The church of Saint Pope Eleutherius at Constantinople was served by a reader named Carisius, who led a disorderly life. Gennadius severely reprimanded him in vain. According to the rules of the church, the patriarch had him flogged, which was also ineffectual. The patriarch sent one of his officers to the church of Saint Eleutherus to beg that holy martyr either to correct the unworthy reader or to take him from the world. Next day Carisius was found dead, to the terror of the whole town. Theodorus also relates how a painter, presuming to depict the Saviour under the form of Jupiter, had his hand withered, but was healed by the prayers of Gennadius.
About the same time Saint Daniel the Stylite began to live on a column of Pharos
The buying and selling of holy orders was a crying scandal of the age. Measures had been taken against simony by the Council of Chalcedon. It seems not later than 459, Gennadius celebrated a great council of eighty-one bishops, many of whom were from the East and even from Egypt, including those who had been dispossessed of their sees by Timothy Aelurus. The letter of this council against simony is still preserved (J. D. Mansi, VII, 912). An encyclical was issued, adding anathema to the former sentence.
Gennadius died in 471. He stands out as an able and successful administrator whom historians have roundly praised.

Biblical works

John Moschus said of Gennadius to have been very mild and of great purity. Gennadius of Marseilles said of Gennadius was lingua nitidus et ingenio acer, and so rich in knowledge of the ancients that he composed a commentary on the whole Book of Daniel.
Gennadius wrote a commentary on Daniel and many other parts of Old Testament and on all the epistles of St. Paul, and a great number of homilies. Of these only a few fragments remain. The principal fragments of his biblical works include Genesis, Exodus, Psalms, Romans, 1 and 2 Corinthians, Galatians, and Hebrews, and are interesting specimens of 5th century exegesis. cites Gennadius, CP. Patr., Patr. Gk. lxxxv. p. 1611, etc.; Bolland. AA. SS. Aug. 25, p. 148; Ceillier, x. 343. Some fragments are collected in Migne, Patrologia Graeca, LXXXV, chiefly from the two catenae of John Antony Cramer on Romans; a few passages are found in the catena of Aecumenius, others in the catenae of Nicephorus Callistus Xanthopulus, and a few in the Vienna MS. gr. 166 (46).
Gennadius is seen to have been a learned writer, who followed the Antiochene school of literal exegesis. Romans, a series of explanatory remarks on isolated texts, is his most important work, and although he fails to grasp the great central doctrine of the epistle, he shows thought and spiritual life.



Further reading


