[[Kirsten Dunst]]

CATEGORIES: 1982 births, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, Actresses from New Jersey, American people of German descent, American people of Swedish descent, American child actresses, American film actresses, American television actresses, American voice actresses, Best Actress Empire Award winners, German female models, German television actresses, German film actresses, German people of Swedish descent, Living people, Naturalized citizens of Germany, People from Brick Township, New Jersey, People from Point Pleasant, New Jersey, German people of American descent, People from New Jersey, People of German descent

Kirsten Caroline Dunst (born April 30, 1982) is an American-German actress, singer, and model.  She made her film debut in Woody Allen's short film Oedipus Wrecks for the anthology New York Stories (1989). At the age of twelve, Dunst gained widespread recognition playing the role of vampire Claudia in Interview with the Vampire (1994), a performance for which she was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress. She appeared in Little Women the same year and in Jumanji the following year to further acclaim. After supporting roles in the NBC medical drama ER (1996) and films such as Wag the Dog (1997), Small Soldiers (1998) and The Virgin Suicides (1999), Dunst transitioned into romantic comedies and comedy-dramas, starring in Drop Dead Gorgeous (1999), Bring It On (2000), Get Over It and Crazy/Beautiful (both 2001).
Dunst achieved international fame as a result of her portrayal of Mary Jane Watson in Sam Raimi's Spider-Man trilogy (2002–2007). Since then, her films have included the romantic comedy Wimbledon (2004), the science fiction romantic comedy-drama Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind (2004) and Cameron Crowe's tragicomedy Elizabethtown (2005). She played the title role in Sofia Coppola's Marie Antoinette (2006) and starred in the comedy film How to Lose Friends & Alienate People (2008). She won the Best Actress Award at the Cannes Film Festival and the Saturn Award for Best Actress for her performance in Lars von Trier's Melancholia (2011).
In 2001, Dunst made her singing debut in the film Get Over It, in which she performed two songs. She also sang the jazz song "After You've Gone" for the end credits of the film The Cat's Meow (2001).

Early life

Dunst was born in Point Pleasant, New Jersey, to Inez (née Rupprecht) and Klaus Dunst.
Until the age of eleven, Dunst lived in Brick Township, New Jersey, where she attended Ranney School.O'Sullivan, Eleanor. "The Jersey Shore's Starlet", Asbury Park Press, May 4, 2007. Accessed July 5, 2011. "Dunst, who was born in Point Pleasant, raised in Brick and schooled for a while at the Ranney School in Tinton Falls, has achieved an acting career unlike any of her peers." In 1993, her parents separated, and she subsequently moved with her mother and younger brother to Los Angeles, California, where she attended Laurel Hall School in North Hollywood. In 1995, her mother filed for divorce. The following year Dunst began attending Notre Dame High School, a private Roman Catholic high school in Los Angeles.
After graduating from Notre Dame High School in 2000, Dunst continued the acting career that she had begun. As a teenager, she found it difficult to deal with her rising fame, and for a period she blamed her mother for pushing her into acting as a child.

Career

Early work

Dunst began her career when she was three years old as a child fashion model in television commercials.

Critical success

The breakthrough role in Dunst's career came in Interview with the Vampire, a 1994 film based on Anne Rice's novel, in which she played the child vampire Claudia, a surrogate daughter to Tom Cruise and Brad Pitt's characters in the film.
Later in 1994, Dunst appeared in the adaptation of the drama Little Women opposite Winona Ryder and Claire Danes. The film received favorable reviews.
In 1995, she appeared in the fantasy adventure film Jumanji, loosely based on Chris Van Allsburg's 1981 book of the same name.
Dunst was offered the role of Angela in the 1999 drama film American Beauty, but turned it down because she did not want to appear in the film's suggestive sexual scenes or kiss co-star Kevin Spacey. She later explained: "When I read it, I was 15 and I don't think I was mature enough to understand the script's material." That same year, she appeared in the comedy Dick, alongside Michelle Williams. The film is a parody retelling the events of the Watergate scandal which led to the resignation of U.S. president Richard Nixon.
In Sofia Coppola's drama film The Virgin Suicides (1999), Dunst played the role of troubled adolescent Lux Lisbon.
In 2000, she played Torrance Shipman, the captain of a cheerleading squad in Bring It On.
The following year, Dunst had the lead role in the teen comedy Get Over It (2001).

Spider-Man and subsequent work

In 2002, Dunst co-starred opposite Tobey Maguire in the superhero film Spider-Man, the most successful film of her career to date, where she played Mary Jane Watson, the best friend and love interest of Peter Parker, played by Maguire. The film was directed by Sam Raimi. Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly remarked on Dunst's ability to "lend even the smallest line a tickle of flirtatious music." The movie grossed $114 million during its opening weekend in North America and went on to earn $822 million worldwide.
Following the success of Spider-Man, Dunst appeared in the independent drama Levity (2003), where she had a supporting role. The movie grossed $72 million worldwide.
The success of the first Spider-Man film led Dunst to reprise the role in the 2004 sequel, Spider-Man 2.
In 2005, she co-starred as flight attendant Claire Colburn alongside Orlando Bloom, in Cameron Crowe's tragicomedy Elizabethtown. The film premiered at the 2005 Toronto Film Festival. Dunst revealed that working with Crowe was enjoyable, but more demanding than she had expected. The movie garnered mixed reviews,
Dunst's next film role was the title character in the 2006 biographical film Marie Antoinette. Adapted from Antonia Fraser's book Marie Antoinette: The Journey, the film was Dunst's second with director Sofia Coppola.
In 2007 she reprised her role as Mary Jane Watson in Spider-Man 3.
In 2008, Dunst co-starred opposite Simon Pegg in How to Lose Friends and Alienate People,
Since 2010, Dunst's work has included directing the short film Bastard which premiered at the Tribeca Film Festival in 2010,
In 2011, Dunst starred in Lars von Trier's drama film Melancholia as a depressed woman at the end of the world. The film, which also stars Charlotte Gainsbourg, Kiefer Sutherland and Charlotte Rampling premiered at the 2011 Cannes Film Festival. The film received positive reviews and Dunst was singled out for praise. Steven Loeb of Southampton Patch wrote, "This film has brought the best out of von Trier, as well as his star. Dunst is so good in this film, playing a character unlike any other she has ever attempted... Even if the film itself were not the incredible work of art that it is, Dunst's performance alone would be incentive enough to recommend it."
Dunst has signed on to appear in Sweet Relief as peace activist Marla Ruzicka, a U.S. relief worker killed by a suicide bomb in Baghdad.
In 2012, Dunst appeared in Juan Diego Solanas' science fiction-romance film Upside Down co-starring Jim Sturgess.

Music

Dunst made her singing debut in the 2001 film Get Over It, performing two songs written by Marc Shaiman.
Dunst starred as the magical princess Majokko in the Takashi Murakami and McG directed short Akihabara Majokko Princess singing a cover of "Turning Japanese". This was shown at the "Pop Life" exhibition in London's Tate Modern museum. It shows Dunst prancing around Akihabara, a crowded shopping district in Tokyo. The exhibition was held from October 1, 2009 to January 17, 2010 in London.

Personal life

Dunst was treated for depression in early 2008 at the Cirque Lodge treatment center in Utah.
Dunst dated actor Jake Gyllenhaal from 2002 to 2004.usatoday.htm In 2012, she began dating her On the Road co-star Garrett Hedlund.Garrett Hedlund Reveals How He Began Dating Kirsten Dunst

Citizenship

She gained German citizenship in 2011 and now holds dual citizenship with Germany and the United States.

Politics

Dunst supported Democratic candidate John Kerry for the 2004 U.S. presidential election. Dunst explained that Tuesday is "not a holiday, and United States is one of the lowest democratic countries in voter turnout." She felt it important to "influence people in a positive way" to vote on November 4.

Charity work

Her charity work includes participation with the Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation, in which she helped design and promote a necklace, for which all proceeds from sales went to the Glaser foundation.

Filmography

Film

Television

Discography






