[[Bud Grant]]

CATEGORIES: 1927 births, Living people, American football wide receivers, Canadian football offensive linemen, Minneapolis Lakers draft picks, Minneapolis Lakers players, Minnesota Golden Gophers baseball players, Minnesota Golden Gophers football players, Minnesota Golden Gophers men's basketball players, Minnesota Vikings head coaches, Philadelphia Eagles players, Winnipeg Blue Bombers coaches, Winnipeg Blue Bombers general managers, Winnipeg Blue Bombers players, Canadian Football Hall of Fame inductees, Grey Cup champions, Pro Football Hall of Fame inductees, People from Superior, Wisconsin, American players of Canadian football

Harry Peter "Bud" Grant, Jr. (born May 20, 1927) is the former longtime American football head coach of the Minnesota Vikings of the National Football League (NFL) for eighteen seasons. Grant was the second (1967–83) and fourth (1985) head coach of the team. Prior to coaching the Vikings, he was the head coach of the Winnipeg Blue Bombers of the Canadian Football League (CFL) for ten seasons. Along with being the most successful coach in Vikings history, Grant is the third most successful professional football coach, behind Don Shula and George Halas, with a combined 290 wins in the NFL and CFL. Grant was elected to the Canadian Football Hall of Fame in 1983 and into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1994.  He was the first coach in the history of professional football to guide teams to the Grey Cup finals and the Super Bowl.
Grant attended the University of Minnesota and was a three sport athlete in football, basketball, and baseball. Following college, he had a professional playing career for the Minneapolis Lakers of the National Basketball Association (NBA), Philadelphia Eagles of the NFL, and Winnipeg Blue Bombers of the CFL.
To date Grant is the only man in history to play professionally in both the NFL and the NBA. 

Personal life

Childhood

Bud Grant was born on May 20, 1927, in Superior, Wisconsin to Harry Peter Sr. and Bernice Grant. His mother called him "Buddy Boy", which later became "Bud". As a child, Grant was diagnosed with poliomyelitis and a doctor suggested becoming active in sports to strengthen his weakened leg muscles over time. He started with baseball then added basketball and football as he got older. Due to a lack of organized school teams, he arranged to have football games between neighborhoods and contacted kids from other schools to participate. During the weekends, he would spend time outdoors alone hunting rabbits. In his late teens and college years, he played organized baseball in Minnesota and Wisconsin.

Family

Bud married Pat (formerly Patricia Bellew; born March 28, 1927) in 1950, and they eventually would have six children. Bud's son, Mike Grant, has been the football head coach for Eden Prairie High School in Eden Prairie, Minnesota since 1992. Bud's granddaughter Jenny is married to former NFL quarterback Gibran Hamdan. 
Bud's wife Pat died in 2009, succumbing to the effects of Parkinson's Disease.

Playing career

High school and college

Grant played football, basketball, and baseball at Superior Central High School (Wisconsin).

Professional basketball

After leaving the University of Minnesota, Grant was selected in both the NFL and NBA Draft. He was selected in the first round (fourteenth overall) of the 1950 NFL Draft by the Philadelphia Eagles

Professional football

After two seasons in the NBA, Grant decided to end his professional basketball career. He contacted the Philadelphia Eagles of the NFL and agreed to play for the team during the 1951 NFL season. In his first season with the Eagles, Grant played as a defensive end and led the team in sacks (an unofficial statistic at the time). He switched to offense as a wide receiver for his second season with the club and ranked second in the NFL for receiving yardage, with 997 yards on fifty-six catches, including seven touchdowns.
Grant's contract expired at the end of the 1952 NFL season and the Eagles refused to pay him what he thought he was worth. The Winnipeg Blue Bombers of the CFL had been interested in Grant while in college. Grant left for Winnipeg, Canada in 1953 and became the first professional player to "play out his option" and leave for another team. He played for the Blue Bombers until 1956 as an offensive end and was named a Western Conference all-star three times. The Blue Bombers played for the Grey Cup in 1953, but lost to the Hamilton Tiger-Cats in the 41st Grey Cup game.

Coaching career

Winnipeg Blue Bombers

Blue Bombers management decided that they needed a new coach prior to the 1957 season. On January 30, 1956, Grant accepted the Blue Bombers head coaching position after impressing management with his ability to make adjustments on offense and defense as a player. Club president, J.T. Russell, thought that Grant could coach even though nobody else did. Grant would remain the head coach of the Blue Bombers until 1966.
During his ten seasons as head coach in Winnipeg, he led the team to six Grey Cup appearances, winning the championship four times in 1958, 1959, 1961, and 1962. He finished his Blue Bombers coaching career with a regular season record of 105 wins, 53 loses, and two ties and an overall record of 122 wins, 66 loses, and 3 ties. Grant was the CFL Coach of the Year in 1965. Grant took on additional responsibilities as a club manager between 1964 and 1966. Max Winter, the Minnesota Vikings founder, contacted Grant in 1961 and asked him to coach the new NFL expansion team. Grant declined the offer and remained in Winnipeg until 1967 when Winter and General Manager Jim Finks were successful in luring Grant to Minnesota.

Minnesota Vikings

Grant continued his coaching success in the NFL as he took over from original coach, Norm Van Brocklin. Over his tenure as Vikings head coach, Grant was known for instilling discipline in his teams and displaying a lack of emotion during games. He believed that football is a game of controlled emotion and teams would not follow the coach's lead if he were to panic or lose his poise during the course of a game. He required his team to stand at attention in a straight line during the entire national anthem played before the game and even had national anthem practice. Grant required outdoor practice during the winter to get players used to the cold weather and would not allow heaters on the sidelines during games.
Grant and Finks orchestrated a rare trade in between leagues, which brought Joe Kapp from the British Columbia Lions to the Vikings. In return, the Vikings sent Jim Young, a Canadian born player, back to his native country.
In his second year, Grant led the team to a divisional championship and his first NFL playoffs appearance. In 1969, he led the team to its first NFL Championship and their first appearance in the Super Bowl. The Vikings lost in Super Bowl IV to the American Football League champion Kansas City Chiefs. Prior to the 1970 season, Minnesota released Joe Kapp. After starting Gary Cuozzo at quarterback in 1970 and 1971, the Vikings re-acquired Fran Tarkenton prior to the 1972 season. During the 1970s, the Vikings would appear in three more Super Bowls (VIII, IX, and XI) under Grant and lose each one, but was the first coach to lead a team to four Super Bowls. He retired after the 1983 NFL season and was succeeded by Les Steckel, who led the team to a 3-13 record the following season. Steckel was fired as head coach after the 1984 season and Grant returned as coach for the Vikings in 1985. After one season where he returned the club to a 7-9 record, he stepped down again. Grant retired as the eighth most successful coach in NFL history with an overall record of 161 wins, 99 losses, and 5 ties. As of 2014, he also remains the most successful coach in Vikings history. During his tenure with the Vikings, he led the Vikings to four Super Bowls, eleven division titles, one league championship and three NFC conference championships.

Head coaching record

Post-coaching career

After coaching football, Grant became a less prominent public figure and focused his time on hunting and fishing Grant addressed the five thousand supporters saying, "In this legislative session, we want to see some action. It's more important than any stadium they could ever build in this state."
He continues to maintain his connections with the Vikings as a consultant for the team and maintains an office at the team's headquarters in Eden Prairie.





Further reading

 | last = McGrane
 | first = Bill
 | authorlink = 
 | title = Bud: The Other Side of the Glacier
 | publisher = Harper & Row
 | year = 1986
 | pages = 
 | doi = 
 | isbn = 0-06-015583-3}}




