[[Jacob Baradaeus]]

CATEGORIES: 500s births, 578 deaths, Syriac people, Bishops of Edessa, Byzantine clergy, 6th-century bishops, 6th-century Byzantine people, Syriac Orthodox Church bishops

Jacob BaradaeusSometimes referred to as James. Other spellings of his surname include Al Baradai, Bar'Addai, Burdoho, Burdeono, Burdeana, or Burdeaya, also Phaselita, or Zanzalus. (died July 30, 578) was Bishop of Edessa from 543 until his death. One of the most important figures in the history of the Syriac Orthodox Church, and the Oriental Orthodox churches generally, he was a defender of the Miaphysite movement in a time when its strength was declining. His instrumental efforts in reorganizing and revitalizing the community gave it its alternate name, the Jacobites.

Biography

He was ordained by the Miaphysite bishop of Edessa (c. AD 541), with ecumenical authority over the members of their body throughout the East. By his indomitable zeal and untiring activity, this remarkable man rescued the Miaphysite community in Asia Minor and the East from the extinction (with which persecution by the Byzantine imperial power threatened it) through consecrating bishops, ordaining clergy, and uniting its scattered elements into an organization so well planned and so stable that it has endured through all the many political and dynastic storms in the Middle East.  Materials for his life are furnished by two Syriac biographies by his contemporary, John of Ephesus, whom Jacobus ordained bishop of Ephesus, printed by Land, cites in the translation of Robert Payne Smith, pp. 273–278, 291.

Name

His surname Baradaeus is derived from the ragged mendicant's garb patched up out of old saddle blankets, in which dress, the better to which disguise his spiritual functions from the eyes of the authorities, he performed his swift and secret journeys over Syria and Mesopotamia.

Early life

John of Ephesus reports that Jacobus was born at Tela Mauzalat (Tell Mawzalto), otherwise called Constantina, a city of Osrhoene, 55 miles to the east of Edessa, near the close of the 5th century. His father, Theophilus Bar-Manu, was a priest in Tela Mauzalat. In obedience to his parent's vow, Jacobus was placed at the age of two in the local monastery under the care of abbot Eustathius, and trained in Greek and Syriac literature and in the strictest asceticism.

Works

While he dwelled at Constantinople — 15 years, according to John of Ephesus — the anti-Chalcedonians suffered greatly. Justinian I had resolved to enforce the decrees of the Council of Chalcedon, and those bishops and clergy who refused to obey these decrees Justinian punished with imprisonment, deprivation, and exile. Whole districts of Syria and the adjacent countries were thus deprived of their pastors, and the Monophysite were threatened with gradual extinction. For ten years many churches had been destitute of sacraments, which they refused to receive from those they considered heretics. The extreme peril of the Monophysites was represented to Theodora by the Ghassanid king al-Harith, and she persuaded Jacobus to leave his cell and accept the hazardous and laborious task of rebuilding the Antiochian church. A considerable number of Monophysite bishops from all parts of the East, including Theodosius of Alexandria, Anthimus the deposed patriarch of Constantinople, Constantius of Laodicea, John of Egypt, Peter and others, who had come to Constantinople in the hope of mitigating the displeasure of the emperor and increasing the sympathies of Theodora, were held by Justinian in one of the imperial fortresses under house arrest. They consecrated Jacobus to the episcopate, nominally as bishop of Edessa, but virtually as a metropolitan with ecumenical authority.
The date of Jacobus's consecrated is uncertain, but that given by Assemani (AD 541) is probably correct. The result proved the wisdom of their choice. Of the simplest mode of life, inured to hardship from his earliest years, tolerant of the extremities of hunger and fatigue, "a second Asahel for fleetness of foot", cites Edward Gibbon, Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire.
Jacobus is said to have ordained the incredible number of 80,000 clergy. John of Ephesus says 100,000,

Problems

However, Jacobus failed miserably when he attempted to govern the vast and heterogeneous body he had created and organized. The simplicity and innocence of his character, as chronicled by his contemporary John of Ephesus, cites H. E. iv. 30. and states that for a full account see John of Ephesus, op. cit. (Payne Smith's trans. pp. 48 sqq., 81 sqq., 274 sqq.).
One of these factional squabbles was between Jacobus and the bishops Conon and Eugenius, whom he had ordained at Alexandria — the former for the Isaurian Seleucia, the latter for Tarsus — who became the founders of the obscure and short-lived sect of the "Cononites", or, from the monastery at Constantinople to which a section of them belonged, "Condobandites".
A still longer and more wide-spreading difference arose between Jacobus and Paul the Black, whom he had ordained patriarch of Antioch. cites  H. E. iv. 16.
Jacobus was persuaded that if he were to visit Alexandria the veneration felt for his age and services would bring to an end the rift between the churches of Syria and Egypt, and though he had denounced Peter, at arrival in Alexandria he was convinced not only to hold communion with Peter but to draw up papers documenting his formal assent to the deposition of Paul, only stipulating that it should not be accompanied by any excommunication. cites  H. E. iv. 20, 21.

Death

Wearied out at last, and feeling the necessity to end the violence and bloodshed which was raging unchecked, Jacobus suddenly set out for Alexandria, but never reached it. His party reached the monastery of Cassianus or Mar-Romanus on the Egyptian frontier, where a deadly sickness attacked them, and claiming the life of Jacobus, July 30, 578. His episcopate is said to have lasted 37 years, and his life, according to Renaudot, 73 years. cites  Lit. Or. ii. 342.






