[[Vince Lombardi Trophy]]

CATEGORIES: Super Bowl trophies and awards, Awards established in 1967

The Vince Lombardi Trophy is the trophy awarded each year to the winning team of the National Football League's championship game, the Super Bowl. The trophy is named in honor of legendary NFL coach Vince Lombardi.

History

During lunch with NFL commissioner Pete Rozelle in 1966, Let's Learn About the Vince Lombardi Trophy, Pittsburgh Post Gazette Tiffany & Co. vice president Oscar Riedner made a sketch on a cocktail napkin of what would become the Vince Lombardi Trophy. The original trophy was produced by Tiffany & Co. in Newark, New Jersey. The trophy was first awarded to the Green Bay Packers in 1967 (when the Super Bowl's official designation was the AFL-NFL World Championship Game) after they defeated the Kansas City Chiefs 35-10.
The award was initially inscribed with the words "World Professional Football Championship". It was officially renamed in 1970 in memory of legendary NFL head coach Vince Lombardi, after his death from cancer, to commemorate his leading the Green Bay Packers to victories in the first two Super Bowls.
Since Super Bowl XXX, the award has been presented to the winning team's owner on the field following the game, since 2005 to a specially-composed theme by David Robidoux & Tom Hedden. Previously, it was presented inside the winning team's locker room. In the case of the community-owned Packers' two titles since Super Bowl XXX, the team's President & CEO has accepted the trophy.
Unlike trophies such as the Stanley Cup and the Grey Cup, a new Vince Lombardi Trophy is made every year and the winning team maintains permanent possession of that trophy, with one notable exception being Super Bowl V's, won by the then-Baltimore Colts. The city of Baltimore retained that trophy as part of the legal settlement between the team and the city after the Colts' infamous "Midnight Mayflower" move to Indianapolis, Indiana on March 29, 1984. Since then, both the relocated Colts and their replacement in Baltimore, the Ravens, have won the Super Bowl and earned trophies in their own right.
Since Super Bowl XLV, the Vince Lombardi Trophy is also prominently featured in the standardized logo design now used for all future Super Bowl games.

Appearance

The Vince Lombardi Trophy stands  and depicts a football in a kicking position on a three concave sided stand, and is entirely made of sterling silver. NFL. Retrieved on 2013-07-29.
The words "Vince Lombardi Trophy" along with the Roman numerals of that year's Super Bowl are engraved on and the NFL shield is affixed onto the base. After the trophy is awarded, it is sent back to Tiffany's to be engraved with the names of the participating teams, the date, location, and the game's final score. It is then sent back to the winning team for them to keep. Smaller replicas are made for each person on the winning team.
For the first four championship games, both the NFL and the AFL logos were in the center of the trophy. Starting from Super Bowl V through XLII, the old NFL shield has been on the forefront. As of Super Bowl XLIII, a newer, modernized NFL shield (with eight stars and a rotated football designed akin to that atop the trophy) replaced the older logo. Otherwise, the trophy has had no significant changes made since the first Super Bowl.  The Green Bay Packers are the only team with all 3 versions having won Super Bowls I, II, XXXI, and XLV.

Teams with the most Vince Lombardi Trophies

The Pittsburgh Steelers  hold the most Vince Lombardi Trophies, with six. The San Francisco 49ers and the Dallas Cowboys are tied for second with five each.  The Green Bay Packers and the New York Giants are in fourth with four; and the New England Patriots, Washington Redskins and the Oakland Raiders are in sixth with three each.
Although no team has ever won three straight Super Bowls, two teams have won three Lombardi trophies in four years.  They are the Dallas Cowboys (1992, 1993, 1995) and the New England Patriots (2001, 2003, 2004). Also noteworthy is that the Pittsburgh Steelers have won four Super Bowls in six years (1974, 1975, 1978, 1979) and were the first team to win four Lombardi trophies overall.

Gallery

File:Front Side of Six Vince Lombardi Trophies.
File:49ers Super Bowl Trophies at Family Day 2009.
File:LombardiTrophiesGreenBay.
File:NYTrophies.
File:Pats SBTrophs beschnitten.




