[[Indian Institutes of Management]]

CATEGORIES: Business schools in India, Indian Institutes of Management

 
The Indian Institutes of Management (IIMs) are a group of 13 public, autonomous institutes of management education and research in India. The establishment of IIMs was initiated by Jawaharlal Nehru, the first Prime Minister of India, based on the recommendation of the Planning Commission. The IIMs primarily offer postgraduate, doctoral and executive education programmes. 
IIMs are registered as societies under the Indian Societies Registration Act.
The two-year Post Graduate Programme in Management (PGP), offering the Post Graduate Diploma in Management (PGDM), is the flagship programme across all IIMs.
 Some IIMs offer the Fellow Programme in Management (FPM), a doctoral programme. The Fellowship is considered to be equivalent to PhD globally. Many IIMs also offer short-term executive education/EMBA courses and part-time programmes.

Institutes

Indian Institute of Management Calcutta was the first IIM to be set up, on 13 November 1961. Its main campus is located in Joka, on the outskirts of Kolkata.
Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad was the second IIM to be set up, on 16 December 1961. In addition to the regular PGDM programme, it offers a two-year postgraduate programme in Agri-Business Management. It also offers a one-year postgraduate programme in Public Management and Policy.
Indian Institute of Management Bangalore, the third IIM to be established, was set up in 1973. Its main campus is located in Bilekahalli, Bangalore. Apart from its fulltime flagship 1 year(EPGP) and 2 year(PGP) Post Graduate Diploma programmes, it offers special programmes in Enterprise Management (PGPEM) and Public Policy Management (PGPPM).
Indian Institute of Management Lucknow is the fourth IIM to be established, in 1984. In addition to its primary campus in Lucknow, it has an additional campus in Noida. The campus was established in 2007 and focuses on executive programmes.
Indian Institute of Management Kozhikode, the fifth IIM, was established in 1996
Indian Institute of Management Indore, the sixth IIM, was established in 1996.
Indian Institute of Management Shillong, also known as Rajiv Gandhi Indian Institute of Management, was the seventh IIM established, following a 2005 decision by the Government of India.
Indian Institute of Management Rohtak, the eighth IIM to be inaugurated,Per the sources supplied in the text, IIM Rohtak was inaugurated on 30 June 2010 and IIM Ranchi was inaugurated on 6 July 2010. Therefore, IIM Rohtak was officially inaugurated before IIM Ranchi, making IIM Rohtak the eighth IIM by order of inauguration. Sources say IIM Rohtak is the eighth, see e.g. The Financial Times 7 November 2011. was the first of the six IIMs established in 2010–2011 as part of the Eleventh Five-Year Plan
Indian Institute of Management Ranchi, the ninth IIM to be established in 2010 with IIM Calcutta as its mentor, started operations on 6 July 2010. It offers a specialized programme in Human resource management called Post Graduate Diploma in Human Resource Management (PGDHRM).
Indian Institute of Management Raipur, the tenth IIM, was inaugurated on 11 October 2010. It was mentored by IIM Indore.
Indian Institute of Management Tiruchirappalli, the eleventh IIM, was inaugurated on 4 January 2011. It is mentored by IIM Bangalore and operates temporarily from the campus of National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli.
Indian Institute of Management Udaipur, the twelfth IIM, started operation on July 2011 from a temporary campus at the Mohanlal Sukhadia University
Indian Institute of Management Kashipur, the thirteenth and youngest IIM, started operation in July 2011, under the mentorship of IIM Lucknow.

Proposed IIM Bill

Since IIMs are not full-fledged universities, they do not give degrees. But the post graduate diplomas and fellowships granted by IIMs are considered as equivalent to Master's degrees and Doctorates, respectively. However, the Government of India is considering a legislative proposal to give IIMs the legal authority to grant degrees. Kapil Sibal, the Union Minister of Human Resource Development of India, has asked officials to prepare an Indian Institute of Management (IIM) Bill that empowers IIMs to give degrees. A final decision on this matter will be taken in Monsoon Session of Indian Parliament in July / August of 2013. 

History

After India became independent in 1947, the Planning Commission was entrusted to oversee and direct the development of the nation. India grew rapidly in the 1950s, and in the late 1950s the Commission started facing difficulties in finding suitable managers for the large number of public sector enterprises that were being established in India as a part of its industrial policy. To solve this problem, the Planning Commission in 1959 invited Professor George Robbins of the University of California to help in setting up an All India Institute of Management Studies. Based on his recommendations, the Indian government decided to set up two elite management institutes, named Indian Institutes of Management. Calcutta (now Kolkata) and Ahmedabad were chosen as the locations for the two new institutes.
The institute at Calcutta was established first, on 13 November 1961,
In 1972, a committee headed by Ravi J. Matthai took note of the success of two established IIMs and recommended the setting up of two more IIMs. Based on the committee's recommendation, a new IIM was established in Bangalore (IIM Bangalore) the next year, and was originally intended to cater exclusively to the needs of public sector enterprises. In 1981, the first IIM Review Committee was convened to examine the progress of the three existing IIMs and to make recommendations. The committee noted that the three IIMs were producing around 400 PGP graduates every year and that they had reached their optimum capacity. It proposed the opening of two more IIMs to meet the rising demand of management professionals. It also recommended expanding the Fellowship programmes to meet the growing demand of faculty in management schools in India. The fourth IIM (IIM Lucknow) was established in 1984 based on the committee's recommendation.
Two more IIMs were established in Kozhikode (IIM Kozhikode) and Indore (IIM Indore) in 1996. Since 2007, seven new IIMs have been set up, taking the total number of IIMs to 13.

Academics

The IIMs mainly offer postgraduate, doctoral and executive education programmes. Some of the programmes offered by all IIMs are similar; however, some IIMs offer unique programmes for specialised purposes.

Postgraduate education

All IIMs offer a two-year full-time Post Graduate Programme in Management (PGP). This programme is considered the flagship programme of IIMs, and awards the Post Graduate Diploma in Management (PGDM) to successful candidates. This diploma is equivalent to the Master of Business Administration (MBA) postgraduate degree. This programme usually starts in June and runs till April of the second year. The PGP is a general, fully integrated management programme with no specialisation, and typically includes courses in Accounting, Behavioural sciences, Finance, Economics, Human Resource Management (HRM), Management Sciences and Information Technology, Marketing, Business operations, Business Mathematics, Public Policy, Statistics and Decision Analysis, Strategy and General Management. It is usually structured into six trimesters spread across two years. The first year coursework generally consists of core courses in various management disciplines, while in the second year students are allowed to select courses from an exhaustive list of electives.
Since 2006, some IIMs have started offering flagship one-year full-time post graduate diploma programmes for professionals having approx. 5 years of experience or more. This program was necessitated because the normal 2 year program is primarily aimed at fresh graduates or graduates with less than 4-5 years of work experience. These 1 years programmes are general, fully integrated management programmes with no specialization, and typically includes courses in Accounting, Behavioural sciences, Finance, Economics, Human Resource Management (HRM), Management Sciences and Information Technology, Marketing, Business operations, Business Mathematics, Public Policy, Statistics and Decision Analysis, Strategy and General Management like a typical 2 year MBA program. These intensive programmes typically require 75 credits or around 750 hours of class room teaching along with projects and other course work as in a normal global 2 year MBA program.business-standard.html Business Standard| 18 August 2011
Designed as a regular MBA programme which focuses on using the prior experience of the class, the one year MBA is named differently by different IIMs. It's called the Post Graduate Program for Executives by IIM Calcutta (PGPEX in short), IIM Ahmedabad (PGPX) and IIM Ranchi (PGEXP), Executive Post Graduate Programme (EPGP) by IIM Bangalore and IIM Indore,  International Programme in Management for Executives (IPMX) by IIM Lucknow and . The exact structure, admission criteria and other details vary for these programmes. However, all these programmes admit only candidates with approx. 5 or more years of professional experience and usually use a combination of GMAT score, essays and personal interviews as the entry criteria similar to other globally reputed MBA programmes. The median GMAT score of the batches at IIM Bangalore is usually around 710.  | 18 August 2011
IIM Calcutta offers a Post Graduate Diploma in Computer aided Management (PGDCM) programme. This course, which was started in 1994, is similar to the regular PGDM programme, but with a special emphasis on Information technology and its business applications. It is aimed at creating business professionals who know how to apply Information and communication technology (ICTs) in business management. Most of the PGDCM coursework is integrated with the regular PGDM framework, and both PGDM & PGDCM are considered as part of the PGP programme. IIM Ahmedabad and IIM Lucknow offer a two-year Post Graduate Programme in Agribusiness Management (PGP-ABM) programme. This is essentially a MBA programme with a specialisation in Agribusiness. IIM Ranchi offers a post graduate programme specialized in Human Resources, called the Post Graduate Diploma in Human Resource Management (PGDHRM).  
Since July 2005, IIM Lucknow is also offering the Three Year Post-Graduate Programme in Management for Working Executives (also known as Working Managers Programme) from its Noida Campus. It aims at developing strong conceptual fundamentals and skills required to manage businesses of the future. The WMP aims to help to inculcate leadership and teamwork amongst participants, and foster the development of change agents to take leadership roles in the global area.iiml.ac.html  Indian Institute of Management Lucknow | 18 August 2011
IIM Calcutta offers a specialised executive MBA programme called the Post Graduate Programme for Executives for Visionary Leadership in Manufacturing (PGPEX-VLM) jointly with IIT Kanpur and IIT Madras. It is a one-year, rigorous programme with a heavy focus on the manufacturing sector.

Doctoral education

The Fellow Programme in Management (FPM) of IIMs is a full-time Doctoral level programme in management. This programme is aimed at preparing students for careers in teaching or research in different disciplines of management, as well as for careers outside academics that demand a high degree of research and analytical abilities. A student who completes this programme at any IIM, where (s)he is registered as a doctoral scholar, is awarded the title of Fellow of that institute (e.g. Fellow of the Indian Institute of Management Calcutta). This Fellow Program is equivalent to the Doctor of Philosophy degree. However, students receiving such a fellowship every year, across all IIMs, work in close association with one another in a specific research area of their choice.

Executive education

Many IIMs offer executive education certificate programmes targeted at working professionals. These are often short-term and/or part-time programmes and are known by various names such as  Management Development Programme (MDP), Advanced Masters Program in Management of Global Enterprises (AMPM), and Executive General Management Programme (EGMP). The certificate programmes at IIMs are not considered as equivalent to the MBA or EMBA. Only the diploma level programmes are considered as equivalent to an MBA or EMBA depending on whether it is full time or part-time.

Other programmes

Some IIMs offer specialised programmes targeted at various segments. IIM Ahmedabad offers a six-month, full-time programme called the Armed Forces Programme (AFP) aimed at military personnel. IIM Ahmedabad and IIM Bangalore offer full-time programmes in public management and are called the Post Graduate Programme in Public Management and Policy (PGP-PMP) and Post Graduate Programme in Public Policy Management (PGPPM) respectively. IIM Bangalore offers a two-year, part-time IIM Indore offers a 5-year Integrated program in Management (IPM) that is a combined undergraduate-cum-graduate diploma.  IIM Ranchi is the first and only IIM to offer a full-time Post Graduate Diploma in Human Resource Management (PGDHRM) programme.   

Admission process

Different programmes of IIMs follow different admission processes. Admission for residents of India to the flagship two-year PGP programmes at all IIMs is based on the Common Admission Test (CAT). CAT scores are often used as the primary short-listing criteria for admissions. International/overseas applicants have the option to apply using GMAT scores in lieu of CAT scores. Test requirements for doctoral programmes vary, some IIMs require candidates to make a presentation of a broad research idea or take a 'Research Aptitude Test (RAT)' followed by round(s) of interview while all compulsorily accept scores from standardised tests such as the CAT, GATE, GMAT and GRE. The overall profiles of candidates including past academic and professional accomplishments are considered for all programmes along with valid standard test scores. Some programmes require essays and academic and/or professional recommendations. The final round of admission evaluations involve an interview, before which some IIMs conduct other evaluation processes like written assessment tests and group discussions.

Entrance exam

The Common Admission Test (CAT) is a management aptitude test conducted by the IIMs primarily as an evaluation tool for admission to their two-year PGP programmes. It is widely considered as one of the most competitive exams in the world, The online test is now spread over a few weeks period.
In August 2011, the six newer IIMs (Raipur, Rohtak, Ranchi, Udaipur, Tiruchirapalli and Kashipur) announced that in the coming year they will eliminate the GD round. replacing it with a common written analysis test to evaluate communication and comprehensive skill. The seven older IIMs did not announce plans to change the admission process.
The admissions for the one year full-time programme is done by shortlisting based on GMAT scores in conjunction with candidate profile suitability. This is followed by evaluation of essays and a panel interview round. The quality of prior work experience and future leadership potential is a critical factor in the selections.

Reservation policy

IIMs also follow the affirmative action policy as per the provisions of the Indian constitution. As per the provisions, 15% of the seats are reserved for students of Scheduled Castes, and 7.5% seats for Scheduled Tribes. The Other Backward Classes have also been given 27% reservation since 2008 after the Supreme Court of India upheld the validity of government regulation. It is being implemented in a phased manner due to resource constraints. All aspirants have to appear for Common Admission Test which consists of an Objective type Exam, Group Discussion and Personal Interviews, though the requirements for reserved category candidates can be lower than the general cut-off standard. Once admitted to the course, a reserved category student also has to meet all the criteria for completing the course as a General category student. Regular counselling sessions, extra-classes and tutorials from senior students for needy students are a regular feature of IIMs.mbauniverse.php?id=3613



Notes






