[[Chris Evans (presenter)]]

CATEGORIES: 1966 births, Living people, BBC Radio 2 presenters, Car collectors, English radio DJs, English businesspeople, English radio personalities, English television presenters, English television producers, People educated at Boteler Grammar School, People from Warrington, Virgin Radio (UK), BBC Radio 1 presenters



Christopher James "Chris" Evans (born 1 April 1966) is an English presenter, businessman and producer for radio and television.
He started his broadcasting career working for Piccadilly Radio, Manchester as a teenager, before moving to London as a presenter for the BBC's Greater London Radio and then Channel 4 television, where The Big Breakfast made him a star. Soon he was able to dictate highly favourable terms, allowing him to broadcast on competing radio and TV stations. Slots like Radio 1 Breakfast Show and TFI Friday provided an appealing mix of celebrity interviews, music and comic games, delivered in an irreverent style that attracted complaints and higher ratings in equal measure. By 2000 he was the UK's highest paid entertainer, according to the Sunday Times Rich List.
In 2005, he started a new career on Radio 2, involving the long-running Drivetime programme, as well as a new breakfast show. More recent work for BBC1 and Channel 4 has not achieved the success of his earlier ventures.

Early life

Evans was born in Warrington, Lancashire,Prior to 01/04/1974 Warrington was in Lancashire because it was north of the River Mersey, the historic boundary between Cheshire and Lancashire. Please do NOT change England, the youngest child of bookmaker and health authority wages clerk Evans' father and both paternal uncles died of colorectal cancer.This Morning, 17 April 2013
Evans passed the 11 plus exam and started at Boteler Grammar School, Warrington. But 
After the death of his father, the 13-year-old Evans took part-time work at an outlet of T. J. & B. McLoughlin's newsagent–tobacconist in Woolston, and ran an alternative tuck-shop at Padgate High School, which was a comprehensive school he attended for the final three years of his secondary education. Evans left secondary school at age 16 after moving into the sixth form, and he then had a number of dead-end jobs in and around Warrington, including a private detective agency and notoriously as a "Tarzan-ogram."

Career

Early career

Evans began his professional career at Piccadilly Radio, Manchester in 1983, where he had previously had unpaid school-boy work. Until 1984 Evans had three jobs: as an assistant to Timmy Mallett, and playing a character on his show called 'Nobby Nolevel' ('No 'O' Level'); acting as a disc jockey in the evenings at local pubs when he was not at Piccadilly Radio; and still working at the newsagents, opening up daily at 5 am to sort out the newspaper deliveries.
Evans switched to a full-time position at the station in 1984, his new role including being driven around the Manchester area in the radio car to turn up at listeners' houses. In addition he was producer to presenter James H. Reeve. Following this he presented a weekday graveyard slot with competitions and segments where listeners had opportunities to sell their belongings on air.
After working as a producer on Richard Branson's service The Superstation, where he produced material for Jonathan Ross, Evans went on to work at BBC London radio station GLR, first as a producer on Emma Freud's mid-morning show, then Weekend Breakfast with Danny Baker. Evans became a GLR presenter in early 1990, taking over a Saturday afternoon show. Three months later, he started presenting The Greenhouse, a Monday to Thursday evening show; he remained on this slot until the end of 1990.
In early 1991, as a result of his first regular TV hosting work presenting the Power Up breakfast show on The Power Station for British Satellite Broadcasting, Evans moved to presenting Round at Chris's, every Saturday morning from 10:00 am to 1:00 pm, which he continued to present until April 1993.

Rise to popularity

In addition to his Saturday morning show on GLR, in March 1992 Evans began presenting a Sunday afternoon show on BBC Radio 1, replacing Phillip Schofield who had previously broadcast in the slot. His show called Too Much Gravy, was broadcast from 14:30 to 16:00 and ended in September 1992. His move to Radio 1 was short-lived but seen as a huge success, with controller Johnny Beerling later admitting he wished he'd offered Evans a full-time show there and then. At the time, however, Evans objected that Radio 1 had attempted to constrain his style, preventing him from using the "zoo" format, allegedly because Steve Wright was already doing that on the station.
In April 1993, Evans left GLR and joined the new Virgin Radio, to host a Saturday morning show.

The Big Breakfast

Evans' departure from radio was in part so he could devote his time to the new Channel 4 breakfast television show, The Big Breakfast, from 28 September 1992. Evans co-hosted the show with Gaby Roslin.
Evans left The Big Breakfast on 29 September 1994 and formed his own television production company, Ginger Productions. Its first major programme, Don't Forget Your Toothbrush, was broadcast between 1994 and 1995. The original concepts proved to be lucrative for Evans as its format was sold to numerous foreign broadcasters.

Radio 1 Breakfast Show

In April 1995, Evans returned to radio to host the flagship Radio 1 Breakfast Show. Evans negotiated into his contract with Radio 1 a clause allowing him to still make television programmes, and specifically an option to make a Friday night programme for Channel 4.
Allowed to create the "zoo" format he had previously been disallowed from performing on Radio 1, Evans was given a free rein by his friend, Radio 1 controller Matthew Bannister. Critics hated innuendo-laden features like Honk Your Horn and in Bed With Your Girlfriend, but Evans put on 600,000 new listeners over Steve Wright – one for every £5 spent on salary and advertising. The effect also flowed through into the listening figures for later programs. The audience grew as the breakfast format became more outrageous: humiliating assistant Holly Samos by repeatedly asking her about her sex life (Evans and Samos were reportedly in a relationship at periods through their time working together), and encouraging two female guests to perform a strip show on live radio.
Evans began making editions of Channel 4's TFI Friday from 1996. The show – devised, produced and hosted by Evans through his Ginger Media company – combined celebrity interviews, musical guests and daft games and competitions. Largely based on the successful formula of his radio show, it was initially a big success. However, as the success of both shows peaked, combined with a string of celebrity relationships and highly publicised nights drinking with friends Danny Baker and Paul Gascoigne, the strain began to show, and a model emerged described as a "template for his approach to all his subsequent projects – an abundance of enthusiasm at the beginning which eventually falls prey to boredom and shiftlessness."
Beginning to think he was indispensable at Radio 1, the first big falling-out with management came in December 1995 after taking his crew out on a 17-hour pub-crawl which ended two hours before they were due on air: Evans was fined one day's pay, £7,000. In 1996, broadcasting watchdogs investigated a continual trail of complaints against the show: Radio 1 refused to comment, Evans never said sorry. Evans also made increasing public demands of the Radio 1 management: after taking an extra week of unplanned holiday, Evans chose to turn up half an hour late for his 06:30 show and then demanded that his hours were changed so that it was a permanent fixture – this request was accepted.
However after the summer break things got decidedly worse. Criticised by the broadcasting watchdog for a tasteless joke about Holocaust victim Anne Frank, Evans countered with an item about haemorrhoids. Asked by Bannister to watch the rules, Evans the next day branded Bannister "The Fat Controller". In November, Evans announced on air that he was medically unfit to be on the radio – Bannister re-negotiated his contract to double his holiday to twice that of other Radio 1 DJs. After more publicised public drinking and self-confessed illness, Evans' spell at the station ended in January 1997 when he quit after his demand not to host the show on Friday (in order to have a full day getting ready for his TV show) was not accepted.
The Radio 1 Breakfast Show was taken over by Mark and Lard a.k.a. Mark Radcliffe and Marc Riley. When Evans found out that they were a ratings disaster, he quickly got in touch with BBC Radio 1 management to ask whether he could take back the show again. Station management declined but did offer him a weekend slot, which he turned down. In response to the falling ratings, bosses decided to replace its presenters with the relatively unknown Kevin Greening and the well known children's TV presenter Zoë Ball. Their tenure started on 13 October 1997.

Virgin Radio

During a holiday in Killarney, he listened to the Irish broadcaster, Gerry Ryan on the radio. Evans claims the variety on Ryan's show made him want to return to radio. Evans was then hired by Virgin Radio to host its breakfast show, prompting an immediate upsurge in listening figures to the station 1.8 million to 2.6 million. His first show was on 13 October 1997, the same day as Kevin Greening and Zoë Ball on Radio 1. Starting at 7:00 am, Evans' crew presented the show from Monday to Friday, but without Evans participating on a Friday.
As Sir Richard Branson had decided to reduce his media holding, he began talks to sell the station to Capital Radio in a deal that would have given him 10% of holding company Capital Group. As this became public knowledge, Evans, who did not want to work for Capital, publicly dismissed them as "a bleating, blowing asthmatic dog." The group later engaged in the prospect of buying the Daily Star newspaper, but decided against from commercial angles.

Sale of GMG – dismissal and legal cases

On 14 March 2000, Evans agreed the sale of Ginger Media Group to SMG plc for £225m. The sale made Evans the highest paid entertainer in the UK in 2000, estimated by the Sunday Times Rich List to have been paid around £35.5million.
Evans continued to host the station's breakfast show, but echoes of his earlier dismissal from Radio 1 began to emerge. In May 2000, the station was fined £75,000 (then the largest penalty imposed by the Radio Authority) for his repeated on-air endorsement of Ken Livingstone in the London mayoral elections.
Virgin Radio's new programme controller Paul Jackson, in light of audience figures which had dropped from a peak of 2.7 million to 1.7 million, had pruned Evans's "zoo" team and installed a music policy which replaced more eclectic choices with a strict diet of chart pop. As a result, on 20 June Evans was followed throughout the day by tabloid newspaper photographers, and undertook an "18-hour bender" which started after his show at 9.30 in the morning, and ended – after numerous pints of Kronenbourg and Guinness, plus five bottles of Dom Pérignon – with Evans asleep in front of a lap-dancer at Stringfellows.
Evans attempted to sue Virgin Radio, claiming that he was unfairly dismissed and denied share options worth £8.6 million.
In his autobiography, Evans writes that shortly after the sale of Virgin Radio he was offered £56m for his SMG shares by Goldman Sachs. He declined the offer and eventually sold them for £250,000.[

UMTV

In August 2002 Chris Evans set up a radio and television production company, UMTV, with the aim of specialising in live, cutting-edge, entertainment programming. Over the next 3 years UMTV produced more than 375 hours of television, with mixed success. TV shows included Boys and Girls hosted by Vernon Kay for Channel 4,
Following two high-profile shows which failed to perform in the ratings, UMTV hired Terry Wogan and Evans' former Big Breakfast co-host Gaby Roslin to host a weekday morning magazine show, The Terry and Gaby Show. Evans said publicly that if this show failed he would set up a market stall. Despite critical acclaim the audience numbers never took off and Channel 5 axed the show after its year-long run, citing its high cost as a reason. True to his word, Evans was pictured at the end of the final show with a market stall and later he opened it for real at Stables Market, Camden.

Radio 2

Evans re-entered public life in early 2005, presenting the breakfast slot of UK Radio Aid's day of programming for the victims of the Asian Tsunami, which was aired on most of the UK's commercial radio stations, and also The BRIT Awards in 2005 and 2006. including coverage of the Live 8 concert in London.

=Saturday afternoon show=

Evans then joined Radio 2 on a permanent basis in September 2005, presenting a weekly Saturday afternoon show from 14:00 to 17:00. His first show featured singer Robbie Williams, and accompanied by a posse including friend "Big" Pete Winterbottom and newsreader Andrew Peach. Evans told listeners to his first show: "We've had a couple of test drives over the summer and we've decided to take it. Yes, we like this vehicle."

=Move to Drivetime=

The show was well received by listeners and critics, and Evans was announced as the successor to Radio 2's Drivetime show on Thursday 2 March 2006 to succeed long-time host Johnnie Walker, beginning on 18 April.

=The Chris Evans Breakfast Show=

Evans took over Radio 2 breakfast show on 11 January 2010. His first three songs were The Beatles' "All You Need Is Love" and "Got to Get You into My Life"; and Frank Sinatra's "Come Fly with Me". His co-presenters include ex-BBC TV newsreader Moira Stuart, sports presenter Jonny Saunders who was replaced in June 2011 by Vassos Alexander, and travel reporter Lynn Bowles. Features include The Gobsmackers (two songs selected by a listener that sound good played back to back).

Sony Music Radio Personality of the Year

In May 2006, Evans was named music radio personality of the year at the annual Sony Radio Academy Awards, defeating rivals Jamie Theakston, Lauren Laverne, Marc Riley and Tim Lovejoy to win. When accepting the award, Evans thanked the BBC for giving him "a second chance."

Return to television

After his success in the 1990s, Evans' attempts at a TV comeback in the 21st century have been mixed with a record of poor ratings and cancellations, including falling viewing figures for his recent role as co-host of Friday editions of The One Show. OFI Sunday was cancelled after just five shows following poor reviews and low viewing figures. Its cancellation led Evans to complain on air during his Saturday BBC Radio 2 slot that he no longer knew how to be successful on television.

The One Show

In 2010, it was announced that Evans would be replacing Adrian Chiles as the Friday co-presenter of The One Show on BBC One. Chiles and then co-host Christine Bleakley left the show to join ITV. Evans now presents the show on Fridays with Alex Jones, and occasionally covers other weekdays.

Return to Channel 4

In January 2011 Evans returned to Channel 4 to present a new reality show Famous and Fearless, in which 8 celebrities in two teams, Boys and Girls. The celebrities that took part on the boys' team were: Rufus Hound, Charley Boorman, Sam Branson (Son of Richard Branson) and Jonah Lomu. On the girls' team were Jenny Frost, Kacey Ainsworth, Sarah Jayne Dunn and Dame Kelly Holmes. Holmes won the girls'; Boorman won the boys' and the show outright.  In February 2011, it was reported that the show had been axed after one series due to poor ratings.

Personal life

Evans has a daughter, Jade (born 1986), by former fiancé Alison Ward. In 1998 after a long running dispute, the couple reached an out of court arrangement whereby Evans provided a home for his child and an allowance to Ward.
Evans married Carol McGiffin in 1991. Their 1994 split was not amicable, however, and McGiffin has been scathing about Evans in newspaper articles in the years since. The two divorced in 1998. During his time at BBC Radio 1 and Virgin, Evans had well publicised relationships with Kim Wilde, model Rachel Tatton-Brown (whose sister was a researcher on The Big Breakfast), assistant producer Suzi Aplin, Anthea Turner, Geri Halliwell, and Melanie Sykes.
In May 2000, Evans met teenage pop star Billie Piper, whom he dated for a while. As a present to him, she proposed on his 35th birthday, and the couple married in a £200 ceremony at The Little Church of the West in Las Vegas, Nevada on 6 May 2001, in a ceremony attended by six guests including best man Danny Baker.
A keen golfer who plays with a handicap of 15, Evans met professional golfer, part-time model and columnist for Golf Punk magazine Natasha Shishmanian when they became golf partners in the All*Star Cup celebrity tournament in Newport – Evans gave his 17-year-old caddy at the event, Natalie Harrison, a £10,000 Russian Kristall Smolensk diamond he won for the quality of his play.
In March 2008, Evans admitted in his Radio 2 blog that he had taken "magic mushrooms" a couple of days before he attended a Meat Loaf concert at the Royal Albert Hall. He said "I thought I was chronicling the Albert Hall moving sideways on the back of a giant rock and roll crab, something I didn't think the world should miss."
A fan of fast cars, and particularly Ferraris,
In August 2002, Evans was a member of crew aboard the sailing yacht Nausicaa with six other people, when James Ward – landlord of the White Horse in Hascombe, Surrey, which was then Evans' local – drowned in an accident in the Solent.
Evans is related to Scottish Rugby international Max Evans and former Scottish Rugby international Thom Evans.
Evans is a supporter of the Labour Party, however he donated £100,000 to former Labour MP Ken Livingstone's Mayoral campaign when he stood as an independent candidate in 2000.
Evans is an Ambassador for The Scout Association.
On 1 June 2012, Natasha Shishmanian gave birth to the couple's second child. Evans announced the baby's birth live on air during his BBC Radio 2 Breakfast show by telephone.Chris Evans announcing the birth of baby Eli on 1 June 2012 on his breakfast show

Shows hosted

The following is a list of the main shows Evans has presented:

Television

Radio

Bibliography

To date, Evans has written two autobiographies:



69. Chris Evans Ferrari Collection – Goodwood Festival of Speed 2011 – Netcars.com




