[[Freediving]]

CATEGORIES: Free-diving, Individual sports, Underwater diving, Underwater sports

Freediving (also free diving,free-diving) is a form of underwater diving that relies on a diver's ability to hold his or her breath until resurfacing rather than on the use of a breathing apparatus such as scuba gear. Examples include breath-hold spear fishing, freedive photography, recreational breath-hold diving, apnea competitions, freediving short sections of underwater passages when caving, and to some degree, snorkeling. The activity that garners the most public attention is the extreme sport of competitive apnea in which competitors attempt to attain great depths, times, or distances on a single breath.

History

Underwater diving was practised in ancient cultures to reclaim sunken valuables, and to help aid military campaigns. In ancient times free diving without the aid of mechanical devices was the only possibility, with the exception of the occasional use of reeds and leather breathing bladders. The divers faced the same problems as divers today, such as decompression sickness and blacking out during a breath hold. Because of these dangers, diving in antiquity could be quite deadly.
Underwater diving for commercial, rather than recreational purposes may have begun in Ancient Greece, since both Plato and Homer mention the sponge as being used for bathing. The island of Kalymnos was a main centre of diving for sponges. By using weights (skandalopetra) of as much as 
The Mediterranean had large amounts of sea base trade. As a result, there were many shipwrecks, so divers were often hired to salvage whatever they could from the seabed. Divers would swim down to the wreck and choose the most valuable pieces to salvage. These salvage divers faced many dangers on the job, and as a result, laws, such as the Lex Rhodia, were enacted that awarded a large percentage of the salvage to the divers; in wrecks deeper than 50 feet, divers received one third of the salvage and in wrecks deeper than 90 feet they received half.
Divers were also used in warfare. Defenses against sea vessels were often created, such as underwater barricades aimed at sinking enemy ships. As the barricades were hidden under the water, divers were often used to scout out the sea bed when ships were approaching an enemy harbor. Once these barricades were found it was divers who were used to disassemble them, if possible.[ref]
[/ref] During the Peloponnesian War, divers were used to get past enemy blockades to relay messages as well as supplies to allies or troops that were cut off by the blockade. On top of all that these ancient frogmen were used as saboteurs, drilling holes in enemy hulls, cutting ships rigging and mooring.



Freediving is a technique used with various aquatic activities. Examples of recognized freediving activities are (non-) competitive freediving, (non-) competitive spearfishing, freediving photography and mermaid shows. Less recognized examples of freediving include, but are not limited to, synchronized swimming, underwater rugby, underwater hockey, underwater hunting other than spearfishing, underwater target shooting and snorkeling.
The discussion remains whether freediving is only a synonym for breath-hold diving or whether it describes a specific group of underwater activities. The term 'freediving' is often associated with competitive breath-hold diving or competitive apnea.

Competitive

Competitive freediving is currently governed by two world associations: AIDA International (International Association for Development of Apnea) and CMAS (World Underwater Federation).
Most types of competitive freediving have in common that it is an individual sport based on the best individual achievement. An exception to this rule is the bi-annual World Championship for Teams, held by AIDA, where the combined score of the team members makes up the team's total points.
There are currently nine disciplines used by official governing bodies and a dozen disciplines that are only practiced locally. In this article, the recognized disciplines of AIDA and CMAS will be described. All disciplines can be done by both men and women and, while done outdoors, no differences in the environment between records are recognized any longer. The disciplines of AIDA can be done both in competition and as a record attempt, with the exception of Variable Weight and No limits, which are both done solely as record attempts.
The following official disciplines are recognized by AIDA, CMAS, or both.

Pool disciplines

Depth disciplines

For all AIDA disciplines, the depth the athlete will attempt is announced before the dive. This is accepted practice for both competitions and record attempts.
Each organization has its own rules on recognizing an attempt. These can be found on the website from the respective organizations.

AIDA recognized world records


/ C-Mac World Record Holder

CMAS recognized world records



Recreational

Freediving is also a recreational activity, celebrated as a relaxing, liberating and unique experience significantly different from SCUBA diving. The advantages freediving has over scuba diving are: 
Experienced freedivers can often go as deep as scuba divers, and sometimes deeper. This type of freediving into spring caverns and caves is very different from diving in the ocean. Even though every spring cave is unique, these are the general differences:

Physiology

The human body has several reflex oxygen-conserving adaptations that manifest under diving conditions. The adaptations include:

Techniques

Breath-holding ability and, hence dive performance, is a function of on-board oxygen stores, scope for metabolic rate reduction, efficient oxygen utilization, and hypoxia tolerance. Needless to say, simple breath-holding is highly effective for increasing lung capacity. In addition, training is allocated to enhance blood and muscle oxygen stores, to a limited extent. A substantial proportion of performance is the result of metabolic suppression and redistribution of blood oxygen stores, the so-called dive response. Increasing lung capacity has some draw-backs, however.
Some deep-divers, like Sebastien Murat, model their diving on animal-diving strategies by diving on `empty´ lungs or a passive exhale. This has the effect of greatly accentuating the dive response. In non-ballast assisted dives it also minimize the effort of descend to the absolute minimum, since buoyancy is reduced. This helps conserve precious oxygen stores and accentuate the dive response. In addition, the `empty lung´ approach also limits the risk of a reflex reversal of the dive response during ascent, which is triggered by lung re-expansion. Some divers seek to bypass this lung re-expansion reflex that can occur over the last 30 m of ascent by exhaling over the last 5 or so meters. Though this may lock-down the dive response, it would require exhaling from depths of at least 20m to completely side-step. Moreover, it cannot avoid the fact that a substantial amount of oxygen is lost by exhaling, and at the worse possible moment, when the diver is already low on oxygen.
The empty lungs approach offers the additional advantage of substantially lowering nitrogen loads, which in very deep-diving, would otherwise result in nitrogen narcosis, poor decision making ability, potentially, loss of consciousness, and a high probability of decompression illness, though admittedly it substantially decreases the oxygen available for maintaining consciousness. For ballast-assisted dives, instead of doing a safety-stop during the final stages of ascent, Murat goes into breath-hold mode for up to 30" before descending to lower metabolism. This paradoxical strategy substantially reduces nitrogen uptake which would otherwise occur because of a combination of steep pressure gradient and elevated metabolism.  However, it must be noted that such techniques generally require considerable pressure adaptation and, beyond depth of about 60 or so meters, the use of sinus and ear cavity-flooding, since there exists essentially no air for pressure compensation of uppermost airways. Centrally, it requires a high degree of metabolic control to potentiate the dive response.

Training

Training for freediving can take many forms and be performed on land.
One example is the apnea walk. This consists of a preparation "breathe-up", followed by a short (typically 1 minute) breath hold taken at rest. Without breaking the hold, the participant then initiates a walk for as far as they can, until it becomes necessary to breathe again. Athletes can do close to 400 meters in training this way.
This form of training is good for accustoming muscles to work under anaerobic conditions, and for tolerance to CO2 build-up in the circulation. It is also easy to gauge progress, as increasing distance can be measured.
Before competition attempt, freedivers perform preparation sequence, which usually consists of physical stretching, mental exercise and breath exercise. It may include sequention of variable length static apnea, special purging deep breaths, hyperventilation. Result of preparation sequence is slower metabolism, lower heart rate and breath rate, lower level of CO2 in bloodstream

In fiction





Further reading




