[[Pietà]]

CATEGORIES: Iconography of Jesus, Virgin Mary in art, Italian words and phrases, Statues of Jesus, Art of the Passion, Christian art about death, Christian terms

The Pietà () is a subject in Christian art depicting the Virgin Mary cradling the dead body of Jesus, most often found in sculpture. As such, it is a particular form of the Lamentation of Christ, a scene from the Passion of Christ found in cycles of the Life of Christ.  When Christ and the Virgin are surrounded by other figures from the New Testament, the subject is strictly called a Lamentation in English, although Pietà is often used for this as well, and is the normal term in Italian.

Context and development

Pietà is one of the three common artistic representations of a sorrowful Virgin Mary, the other two being Mater Dolorosa (Mother of Sorrows) and Stabat Mater (here stands the mother).E.g. see Noël Quillerier's at Oratorio della Nunziatella
The Pietà developed in Germany (where it is called the "Vesperbild") about 1300, reached Italy about 1400, and was especially popular in Central European Andachtsbilder.G Schiller, Iconography of Christian Art, Vol. II,1972 (English trans from German), Lund Humphries, London, pp. 179-181, figs 622-39, ISBN 853313245 Many German and Polish 15th-century examples in wood greatly emphasise Christ's wounds. The Deposition of Christ and the Lamentation or Pietà form the 13th of the Stations of the Cross, as well as one of the Seven Sorrows of the Virgin.
Although the Pietà most often shows the Virgin Mary holding Jesus, there are other compositions, including those where God the Father participates in holding Jesus (see gallery below). In Spain the Virgin often holds up one or both hands, sometimes with Christ's body slumped to the floor. The subject of the pieta has been a subject on the Radio Four programme "Something Understood". 

Michelangelo

A famous example by Michelangelo is located in St. Peter's Basilica in the Vatican City. The body of Christ is different from most earlier pietà statues, which were usually smaller and in wood. The Virgin is also unusually youthful, and in repose, rather than the older, sorrowing Mary of most pietàs. She is shown as youthful for two reasons; God is the source of all beauty and she is one of the closest to God, also the exterior is thought as the revelation of the interior (the virgin is morally beautiful). The Pietà with the Virgin Mary is also unique among Michelangelo's sculptures, because it was the only one he ever signed, upon hearing that visitors thought it had been sculpted by Cristoforo Solari, a competitor. Wallace, 1995 Life and Early Works (Michelangelo: Selected Scholarship in English) ISBN 0-8153-1823-5 page 233 Michelangelo's signature is carved into the sash the Virgin wears on her breast.
Michelangelo's last work was another Pietà, this one featuring not the Virgin Mary holding Christ, but rather Joseph of Arimathea, probably carved as a self-portrait.
A generation later, the Spanish painter Luis de Morales painted a number of highly emotional Pietàs, with examples in the Louvre and Museo del Prado.

Gallery

Statues

File:Křivákova Pieta, 1390-1400.jpg|Bohemian Pietà, 1390-1400
File:Museo diocesano di klagenfurt, pietà, 1420 circa, da st. michael am zollfeld. 1420
File:Köln st severin pieta.jpg|15th-century German wood Pietà from Cologne
File:Vesperbild Schwaben um 1500. 1500
File:Michelangelo Pieta Firenze.jpg|Pietà by Michelangelo, Museo dell'Opera del Duomo, Florence
File:Lebpieta.JPG|Pieta near the base of the Our Lady of Lebanon statue, Harissa
File:Piedad Salamanca.jpg|"Pietà" by Luis Salvador Carmona (1760), New Cathedral, Salamanca (Spain), here in a procession
File:Gregorio Fernandez-Piedad.jpg|"Pietà" by Gregorio Fernández, National Sculpture Museum, Valladolid (Spain)
File:Andechs Kloster interior 027.JPG|18th-century Bavarian example with Rococo setting
File:Piethe.JPG| Pietà in front of Saint Joseph's Catholic Church Meenkunnam, Kerala, India
File:Abbaye_Saint-Arnould_(pieta).JPG|Polychromatic Pietà from the 16th century in the Saint-Arnulf Abbey in Metz, France
File:2279-NYC-St Patricks Cathedral. Patrick's Cathedral
File:La pietà in gesso esposto nel Museo Tripisciano di Palazzo Moncada a Caltanissetta 12.JPG|The Pietà: plaster of Michele Tripisciano in Caltanissetta (1913)

Paintings

File:Lamentation icon Nerezi MK. Panteleimon, Gorno Nerezi, 1164
File:Jean Malouel - Large Round Pietà - WGA13901.jpg|Pieta with God the Father, Jean Malouel, Louvre, 1400-1410
File:Kraków Pietà of Tubądzin. 1450
File:Meister der Pietà von Avignon 004.jpg|The Avignon Pietà, Enguerrand Charonton, 15th century
File:Angers Book of Hours (folio 13r).jpg|The prayer Obsecro te (1470s), from the Book of Hours of Angers
Bodleian Library, University of Oxford
File:Van-der-Weyden-Pieta.jpg|Pietà by Rogier van der Weyden, Museo del Prado, Madrid, with Saint John and a donor
File:Pietro Perugino cat19.jpg|Pietro Perugino, Uffizi
File:Deposition of Christ C2RMF.jpg|Deposition of Christ, Bronzino, 1540-1545, Musée de Besançon
File:Luis de Morales - Pietà.jpg|Luis de Morales, 16th century
File:El Greco Pietà.jpg|El Greco, Pietà, 1571-1576, Philadelphia Museum of Art
File:William-Adolphe_Bouguereau_(1825-1905)_-_Pieta_(1876).jpg|William-Adolphe Bouguereau, Pietà, 1876, Dallas Museum of Fine Arts





Further reading




