[[Asian golden cat]]

CATEGORIES: Felines, Mammals of India, Mammals of Bangladesh, Mammals of Nepal, Mammals of Bhutan, Mammals of Southeast Asia, Mammals of China, Carnivora of Malaysia, Animals described in 1827

The Asian golden cat (Pardofelis temminckii, syn. Catopuma temminckii), also called the Asiatic golden cat and Temminck's cat, is a medium-sized wild cat of Southeastern Asia. In 2008, the IUCN classified Asian golden cats as Near Threatened, stating that the species comes close to qualifying as Vulnerable due to hunting pressure and habitat loss, since Southeast Asian forests are undergoing the world's fastest regional deforestation rates.
The Asian golden cat was named in honor of the Dutch zoologist Coenraad Jacob Temminck, who first described the African golden cat in 1827.

Characteristics

The Asian golden cat is heavily built, with a typical cat-like appearance. It has a head-body length of  
The pelage is uniform in color, but highly variable ranging from red to golden brown, dark brown to pale cinnamon, gray to black. Transitional forms among the different colorations also exist. It may be marked with spots and stripes. White and black lines run across the cheeks and up to the top of the head, while the ears are black with a central grey area. Golden cats with leopard-like spots have been found in China, resembling a large leopard cat. This spotted fur is a recessive characteristic.M. (1938). The mammals of China and Mongolia. New York: American Museum of Natural History.

Distribution and habitat

Asian golden cats live throughout Southeast Asia, ranging from Tibet, Nepal, Bhutan, India and Bangladesh to Myanmar, Thailand, Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam, Southern China to Malaysia and Sumatra. They prefer forest habitats interspersed with rocky areas, and are found in dry deciduous, subtropical evergreen and tropical rainforests. in the Himalayas.S. and Shah K.B. (2008). Wild Mammals of Nepal. Himalayan Nature, Kathmandu.
In Laos, they also occur in bamboo regrowth, scrub and degraded forest from the Mekong plains to at least  Surveys in Thailand, northern Myanmar and India's western Arunachal Pradesh revealed fewer numbers., Myint, T., Zaw, T., Htun, S. (2005). Hunting patterns in tropical forests adjoining the Hkakaborazi National Park, north Myanmar. Oryx 39(3): 292., Madhusudan, M. D., Datta, A. (2006). Mammals of the high altitudes of western Arunachal Pradesh, eastern Himalaya: An assessment of threats and conservation needs. Oryx 40: 29–35.
In Bhutan's Jigme Singye Wangchuck National Park, they were recorded by camera traps at an altitude of ., Bhattacharya, T., Poudyal, K. and Sathyakumar, S. (2011). Notable observations on the melanistic Asiatic Golden cat (Pardofelis temminckii) of Sikkim, India. NeBIO 2 (1): 2–4.
Since Hodgson's description of 1831 of a male individual in Nepal under the binomial Felis moormensis, the country is believed to be the westernmost part of the felid's range. H. (1831). Some Account of a new Species of Felis. Gleanings in Science, Volume III. Calcutta 1832: 177–178. R. and Morrison-Scott T. C. S. (1966). Checklist of Palaearctic and Indian mammals 1758 to 1946. London. But no specimen has been recorded in the country, until in May 2009 a camera trap survey yielded the first photographic record of a melanistic Asian golden cat in Makalu Barun National Park at an altitude of ., Pal, P. (2009). First camera trap image of Asiatic golden cat in Nepal. Cat News 51: 17
Three subspecies have been recognized:
These trinomials do not yet reflect the taxonomic re-classification accepted since 2006.

Ecology and behavior

Asian golden cats are territorial and solitary. Previous observations suggested that they are primarily nocturnal, but a field study on two radio-collared specimens revealed arrhythmic activity patterns dominated by crepuscular and diurnal activity peaks, with much less activity late at night. The male's territory was  in a day and were more active in July than in March., L. I., Tewes, M. E., Silvy, N. J., Kreetiyutanont, K. (2005). Ecology of three sympatric felids in a mixed evergreen forest in North-central Thailand. Journal of Mammalogy 86: 29–38
Asian golden cats can climb trees when necessary. They hunt birds, large rodents and reptiles, small ungulates such as muntjacs and young sambar deer. They are capable of bringing down prey much larger than themselves, such as domestic water buffalo calves. Rangoon Gazette Ltd, Rangoon. In the mountains of Sikkim, they reportedly prey on ghoral. and Ghose, R.K. (1982). Progress report 1 on pilot survey of the WWF-India/Zoological Survey of India collaborative project on the status survey of the lesser cats in eastern India. Zoological Survey of India, Calcutta.
In captivity, Asian golden cats kill small prey with a nape bite, as is typical of felids. They also pluck birds larger than pigeons before beginning to feed. Their vocalizations include hissing, spitting, meowing, purring, growling, and gurgling. Other methods of communication observed in captive Asian Golden cats include scent marking, urine spraying, raking trees and logs with claws, and rubbing of the head against various objects, much like a domestic cat.

Reproduction

Not much is known about the reproductive behavior of this rather elusive cat in the wild. Most of what is known, has been learned in captivity.L. (1977). Record keeping and longevity of felids in captivity. In: Eaton, R.L. (ed.) The World's Cats. Vol. 3, no. 3. Seattle: Carnivore Research Institute, Burke Museum, University of Washington. Female Asian golden cats are sexually mature between 18 and 24 months, while males mature at 24 months. Females come into estrus every 39 days, at which times they leave markings and seek contact with the male by adopting receptive postures. (1989). Reproductive behaviour of small captive cats (Felis ssp.). Ph.D. thesis, University of California, Davis. During intercourse, the male will seize the skin of the neck of the female with its teeth. After a gestation period of 78 to 80 days, the female gives birth to a litter of one to three kittens in a sheltered place. The kittens weigh  at birth, but triple in size over the first eight weeks of life. They are born already possessing the adult coat pattern, and open their eyes at six to twelve days. In captivity, they live for up to twenty years., Thomas, W.D., Jones, M. and M. Dee (1988). A twenty-year overview of selected rare carnivores in captivity. Pp 191–229. In B. Dresser, R. Reece and E. Maruska, (eds.) Proceedings of 5th world conference on breeding endangered species in captivity. Cincinnati, Ohio.
A female Asian golden cat at the Washington Park Zoo (now the Oregon Zoo), showed a dramatic increase in the frequency of scent marking during estrus. At the same time, she often rubbed her neck and head on inanimate objects. She also repeatedly approached the male in the cage, rubbed on him, and adopted a receptive posture (Lordosis) in front of him. The male's rate of scent marking increased during this time, as did his frequency of approaching and following the female. The male's mounting behaviour included a nape bite, but in contrast to other small felids, the bite was not sustained.
A pair in the Washington Park Zoo produced 10 litters, all consisting of one kitten; 2 litters of a single kitten each were born at the Wassenaar Zoo in the Netherlands; and a single kitten was reported for another litter. 2 litters of 2 kittens each were born at a private cat breeding facility in California, but neither litter survived.

Threats

Asian golden cats inhabit some of the fastest developing countries in the world, where they are increasingly threatened by habitat destruction following deforestation, along with a declining ungulate prey base. Another serious threat is hunting for the illegal wildlife trade, which has the greatest potential to do maximum harm in minimal time. It has been reported killed in revenge for depredating livestock, including poultry but also larger animals such as sheep, goats and buffalo calves.

Illegal wildlife trade

Asian golden cats are mainly poached for their fur. J., Round, P. and Brockelman, W. Y. (2006). Status of birds and large mammals of the Dong Phayayen-Khao Yai Forest Complex, Thailand. Biodiversity Research and Training Program and Wildlife Conservation Society, Bangkok, Thailand. In Myanmar, 111 body parts of at least 110 individuals were observed in four markets surveyed between 1991 to 2006. Numbers were significantly larger than non-threatened species. Among the observed skins was a specimen with ocelot-like rosettes — a rare 'tristis' form. Three of the surveyed markets are situated on international borders with China and Thailand, and cater to international buyers, although the Asian golden cat is completely protected under Myanmar's national legislation. Effective implementation and enforcement of CITES is considered inadequate. R., Nijman, V. (2008). The wild cat trade in Myanmar. TRAFFIC Southeast Asia, Petaling Jaya, Selangor, Malaysia.

Conservation

Pardofelis temminckii is included in CITES Appendix I and fully protected over most of its range. Hunting is prohibited in Bangladesh, China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar, Nepal, Thailand, and Vietnam. Hunting is regulated in Laos. No information about protection status is available from Cambodia. In Bhutan the felid is protected only within the boundaries of protected areas.
The population size of the Asian golden cat is unknown and difficult to estimate. It was regarded as abundant in many countries until the later part of the last century, where poaching shifted away from tigers and leopards to this species. In China it is reported to be the next rarest cat apart from tigers and leopards.

In captivity

As of December 2008, there were 20 Asian golden cats in 8 European zoos participating in the European Endangered Species Programme. The pair in the German Wuppertal Zoo successfully bred again in 2007, and in July 2008, two siblings were born and mother-reared. In 2008, a female kitten was also born in the French Parc des Félins. The species is also kept in the Singapore Zoo. EAZA Felid TAG Annual Report 2007–2008. In: EAZA Yearbook 2007/2008. European Association of Zoos and Aquaria Apart from these, a few zoos in Southeast Asia and Australia also keep Asian golden cats. The only specimens held in North America are old and genetically impoverished individuals.

Taxonomy

The Asian golden cat bears a great resemblance to the African golden cat, but it is unlikely that they are closely related because the forests of Africa and Asia have not been connected in over 20 million years. Their similarity is more an example of convergent evolution.
The Asian golden cat is similar to the bay cat of Borneo in both appearance and behavior. Genetic studies revealed that the two species are very closely related. The Asian golden cat is found in Sumatra and Malaysia, which only separated from Borneo about 10,000 to 15,000 years ago. These observations led to the assumption that the Borneo bay cat is an insular subspecies of the Asian golden cat.
Genetic analysis has shown that the Asian golden cat, along with the bay cat and the marbled cat, diverged from the other felids about 9.4 million years ago, and that the Asian golden cat and bay cat differed as long as four million years ago, suggesting that the bay cat was a different species long before the isolation of Borneo. Because of the evident close relationship with the marbled cat, it has recently been suggested that all three species should be grouped in the genus Pardofelis. E., Eizirik, E., Pecon-Slattery, J., Murphy, W. J., Antunes, A., Teeling, E., O'Brien, S. J. (2006). The late miocene radiation of modern felidae: A genetic assessment. Science 311: 73–77

Mythology

In some regions of Thailand, the Asian golden cat is called Seua fai ("fire tiger"). According to a regional legend, the burning of an Asian Golden Cat's fur drives tigers away. Eating the flesh is believed to have the same effect. The Karen people believe that simply carrying a single hair of the cat will be sufficient. Many indigenous people believe this cat to be fierce, but in captivity it has been known to be very docile and tranquil.
In China, the Asian golden cat is thought to be a kind of leopard, and is known as "rock cat" or "yellow leopard". Different color phases have different names ; those with black fur are called "inky leopards", and those with spotted coats are called "sesame leopards".






