[[Scott Baio]]

CATEGORIES: 1961 births, Living people, Male actors from New York City, American male child actors, American male film actors, American male television actors, American television directors, American people of Italian descent, Participants in American reality television series, 20th-century American male actors, 21st-century American male actors, California Republicans, People from Brooklyn, Xaverian High School alumni

Scott Vincent James Baio () is an American actor and television director, best known for his roles as Chachi Arcola on the sitcom Happy Days and its spin-off Joanie Loves Chachi, the titular character on the sitcom Charles in Charge and the main character in the musical Bugsy Malone. He is also known for his role as Dr. Jack Stewart in the medical-mystery-drama series Diagnosis: Murder.
Baio has also appeared in various television programs as a guest star, several independent films, and currently stars on the Nick at Nite sitcom See Dad Run.

Career

In 1976, Baio played the title character Bugsy Malone in the cult children's gangster musical directed by Alan Parker, which also co-starred Jodie Foster. Baio and Foster later worked together again in the teen girl drama Foxes (1980), helmed by Adrian Lyne. When he was 16, Baio was then cast as The Fonz's cousin Chachi Arcola on Happy Days. During his time on Happy Days, Baio earned two Emmy Award nominations for his lead performances in the television movies Stoned (1981) and All the Kids Do It (1985). He won two Young Artist Awards during the Third Annual Youth in Film Awards (1980–1981) as Best Young Actor in a Television Special for Stoned and Best Young Comedian in Television or Motion Pictures for Happy Days. He also starred in the made-for-television youth drama specials The Boy Who Drank Too Much with Lance Kerwin and Senior Trip with Mickey Rooney.
In 1982, Baio was in a spin-off of Happy Days entitled Joanie Loves Chachi with Erin Moran, which lasted 17 episodes. That same year, he appeared opposite another actor, Willie Aames, in the film Zapped!, and recorded an album for RCA (he also recorded a second album The Boys Are Out Tonight the following year). During this same period, he also starred with Danny Aiello and undertook the lead role of Francis Geminiani in the special HBO cable television presentation of "Gemini", an adaptation of the Broadway comedy-drama "Happy Birthday, Gemini" by the award-winning playwright Alberto Innauranto. From 1984 until 1990, Baio starred in the syndicated comedy series Charles in Charge. In 1985, he was part of an ensemble cast for Alice in Wonderland, where he portrayed Pat the Pig. From 1987 through 1991, he was a director of the children's comedy series Out of This World.
During the 1990s, Baio appeared in various television programs, including the short-lived Look Who's Talking small screen spin-off Baby Talk. In 1991, he joined Diana Muldaur and Ally Walker in the NBC Monday Night Movie Perry Mason and the Case of the Fatal Fashion, as a young prosecutor. Between 1992 and 1995, he portrayed Dr. Jack Stewart in the medical mystery series Diagnosis: Murder starring Dick Van Dyke. Baio was a guest-star on many series, including Full House, Touched by an Angel, Veronica's Closet and The Nanny. He was also in a number of television series and commercials. He also starred in several films on television and video releases such as Detonator, Bar-Hopping, Dumb Luck, Face Value and Danielle Steel's Mixed Blessings.
Baio's other movies include the independent films Very Mean Men (2000), Face to Face (2001) and The Bread, My Sweet (2001). Very Mean Men was a comedy directed by Tony Vitale about a mob war between two families. Baio served as a co-producer with his older brother Steven on said film, and even played the crucial role of impetuous crime scion Paulie Minnetti who unwittingly instigates the crime feud. Variety praised his performance, stating it was "a career-reviving turn by Scott Baio." 
Face to Face (renamed Italian Ties) was a comic drama directed by Ellie Kanner about three young men (Scott Baio as Richie, Thomas Calabro as Philly and Carlo Imperato as Al) who kidnap their emotionally distant fathers for a weekend of genuine bonding. Baio co-wrote the screenplay with Jeffrey L. Gurian. The movie won the Audience Prize for Best Comedy at the Marco Island Film Festival, the Silver Screen Accolade in the Reno Film Festival and the 10 Degrees Hotter Best Feature Award during The Valley Film Festival.
The Bread, My Sweet (retitled A Wedding for Bella) was a romance film directed by Melissa Martin and produced by Adrienne Wehr. Baio portrayed Dominic Pyzola who is both a corporate raider in the daytime and a pastry chef  at night. He earned three Best Lead Actor prizes in the Atlantic City Film Festival, the Kansas City Halfway to Hollywood Film Festival and the San Diego Film Festival. The movie itself collected top accolades from the Santa Monica, Stony Brook, Marco Island, Houston World Festival and Iowa Hardacre Film Festival.
In 2005, Baio played himself in the Wes Craven film Cursed. Baio was also in the Emmy Award-winning comedy series Arrested Development as the madcap Bluth family's serious but overpaid lawyer, Bob Loblaw (pronounced similar to "Ba-bla-bla, a running joke). He took over the role of the clan's legal counselor from former Happy Days co-star Henry Winkler in four episodes: "Forget Me Now", "Notapusy", "Mr. F" and "Making a Stand". The Online Film and Television Association nominated him as Best Guest Actor in a Comedy Series.
In August 2006, Baio was formally invited by the AIA Actors Studio to discuss his professional experiences in television and movies. He talked about his own acting career plus his recent forays into writing, directing and producing. In 2007, Baio starred in the successful VH1 celebrity reality series Scott Baio Is 45..... Baio was also the co-host of the VH1 reality show Confessions of a Teen Idol, in which former teen idols attempt to resurrect their careers.Confessions of a Teen Idol VH1 Page
Baio is the star and producer of the Nick at Nite situation comedy See Dad Run, a show about a former actor's life as a stay-at-home-dad. The show debuted on October 6, 2012. Happy Days creator/producer Garry Marshall was a guest star in a November 2013 episode. That same month, Baio appeared as a guest star in the television program Sam & Cat, which is broadcast on Nickelodeon, the sister channel of Nick at Nite.

Personal life

Baio was born in Brooklyn, New York, the son of Rose, a homemaker, and Mario Baio, who worked as his manager.
In 2001, Baio and then-girlfriend, Jeanette Jonsson, got engaged and planned to wed as late as 2005. the family started the Bailey Baio Angel Foundation to provide financial support to other families who are dealing with metabolic disorders.Scott Baio on His Delicious Daughter Celebrity Baby Blog, January 29, 2009

Politics

Baio has voiced that his politics are conservative. He is a registered Republican. He was one of the famous guests in attendance during the historical ceremonies of the late U.S. President Ronald Reagan's televised state funeral. The New York Daily News published Michelle Caruso's article "A Goodbye As the Sun Sets in the West" (June 12, 2004) which mentioned Scott who had been seated near former U.K. Prime Minister Lady Thatcher: "Scott Baio who played Chachi on the hit sitcom Happy Days said: 'President Reagan made me feel proud to be an American. Today, I feel sadness.'"
In April 2010, Baio was involved in a controversy surrounding his Twitter postings. His posting, "Taxes are DONE... Have a great Monday!" was picked up by the blog Jezebel, and the heated web-based discussion between Baio, his wife, the Jezebel.
On July 1, 2010, he hosted The Dennis Miller Show and gave his views on current events, such as the BP oil spill. In May 2011, Baio was honored as a featured guest speaker during the Hollywood Congress of Republicans monthly meetup, saying, "I was never afraid to speak my mind. But I do remember times on a set where I'd hear my 'Liberal' friends talking and I didn't speak out. I stepped back and did not comment because there is a stigma the industry that if you talk a conservative and/or Republican, you don't work."






