[[Dolores Ibárruri]]

CATEGORIES: 1895 births, 1989 deaths, People from Biscay, Spanish anti-fascists, Communist Party of Spain politicians, Spanish emigrants to the Soviet Union, Spanish people of the Spanish Civil War (Republican faction), Basque politicians, Marxist journalists, Marxist writers, Recipients of the Order of Lenin, Russian people of Spanish descent, Russian people of Basque descent, Lenin Peace Prize recipients, Members of the constituent Congress of Deputies (Spain), Perpetrators of political repression in the Second Spanish Republic, Spanish women in politics, Anti-Revisionists, Women in 20th-century warfare, Women in European warfare, Spanish autobiographers

Isidora Dolores Ibárruri Gómez (9 December 189512 November 1989) — known as "La Pasionaria" (Spanish, "the Passionflower") — was a Spanish Republican leader of the Spanish Civil War and communist politician of Basque origin. She is perhaps best known for her defense of the Second Spanish Republic and the famous slogan ¡No Pasarán! ("They Shall Not Pass") during the Battle of Madrid.
The once Carlist Catholic young woman became a revolutionary militant, joining the Spanish Communist Party (PCE) when it was founded in 1921. In the 1930s, she became a writer for the PCE publication Mundo Obrero, and was elected to the Cortes as a PCE deputy for Asturias in February 1936 during the Second Republic. After her exile from Spain at the end of the Spanish Civil War, she was appointed General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Spain, a position she held from 1942 to 1960. She was then named honorary president of the PCE, a post she held for the rest of her life. Upon her return to Spain in 1977, she was reelected as a deputy to the Cortes for the same region she had represented during the Second Republic. She is usually regarded as one of the greatest public speakers of the 20th century. Oxford Dictionary, Speaker entry

Biography

Dolores Ibárruri was born to a Basque miner and a Castillian mother. She grew up in Gallarta, but moved to Somorrosto (Biscay) upon her marriage to revolutionary socialist miner Julián Ruiz Gabiña. Gallarta was located next to a large siderite mine which became the second-most important in Europe during the 1970s and which shut down permanently in 1993. Vintage and modern photograph of the town. 2004: Eusko Jaurlaritza—Gobierno Vasco.
She attended the municipal school as soon as she could talk. The curriculum was basic and mainly religious; discipline was harsh. Outside she and the other children sang revolutionary ditties, played pranks and took part in rival gang fights. A willful child, she was taken at the age of ten by her mother to the Church of San FelicisimoChurch of San Felicisimo today. Panoramio. in Deusto to be exorcized.
 
 Sometimes my small brothers and I engaged my mother in enlightening dialogue. One of us would ask the mother:

"Is it true that we are all sons of God?"

"It's true."

"Are we all brothers?"

"All!"

"Then if we are the brothers of so and so—mentioning the well-off people in town—why does Dad have to go to work everyday, even when it rains, while the slickers do not work and are better off than we are?"

Here the theological reach of my mother eluded her grasp and she would retort full of anger,

"Keep quiet! Children musn't ask such things!"Dolores Ibárruri, María Carmen García-Nieto París, María José Capellín Corrada. El único camino. Madrid: Editorial Castalia, 1992.

Ibárruri left school at fifteen after spending two years preparing for teacher's college at the encouragement of the schoolmistress. Her parents could not afford further education, so she went to work as a seamstress and later as a housemaid. She became a waitress in the town of Arboleda, the most important urban nucleus in the region of Somorrostro. Bizkaia. There she met Julián Ruiz Gabiña, union activist and founder of Socialist Youth of Somorrostro. They married in late 1915, two years after the birth of their first child. La Vanguardia Española. August 5, 1977, p. 10. The young couple participated in the general strike of 1917 and Ruiz returned to jail. During this time, Ibárruri spent nights reading the works of Karl Marx and others found in the library of the Socialist Workers' Centre in Somorrostro. Informe Semanal—La vida de Dolores Ibárruri, "Pasionaria." Part II. Radio Televisión Española, 1995. Youtube, seconds 33 to 55.
Ibárruri wrote her first article in 1918 for the miners' newspaper, El Minero Vizcaíno. The article came out during Holy Week and focused on religious hypocrisy, at odds with the Passion of Christ. Because of the article's theme and its timing, she signed it with the alias "Pasionaria."Dolores Ibárruri. Luis del Olmo con La Pasionaria. COPE Radio program Protagonistas. COPE Radio, 1988. Youtube, seconds 13 to 32. ABC. November 13, 1989, p. 30.
In 1920 Ibárruri and the Workers' Centre joined the budding Communist Party of Spain (PCE) and she was named a member of the Provincial Committee of the Basque Communist Party. After ten years of grassroots militancy, she was appointed to the Central Committee of the PCE in 1930. España Roja.
During this time, Ibárruri had six children. Of her five girls, four died very young. She "used to relate how her husband made a small coffin out of a crate of fruit."Irene Falcon confidante of La Pasionaria as quoted by newspaperwoman Pilar Urbano in: "'A Dolores y a Carrillo, Stalin les llamó "izquierdistas"'." El Mundo. December 10, 1995. Her son, Rubén, died at twenty-two in the Battle of Stalingrad. The remaining child, Amaya, outlived her mother. In 2008 Amaya resided in the working-class neighbourhood of Ciudad Lineal in Madrid. Crónica (Suplemento). El Mundo. August 17, 2008. Recital of her mother's 1938 farewell speech to the International Brigades. Homage of the Spanish United Left Party to the International Brigades on the 70th anniversary of their arrival in Spain celebrated in the Chamber of Columns of the Spanish Parliament. Madrid, October 9, 2006.

In Madrid (1931–36)

With the advent of the Second Republic in 1931, Ibárruri moved to Madrid. She became the editor of the PCE newspaper Mundo Obrero. She was arrested for the first time in September 1931. Jailed with common offenders, she persuaded them to begin a hunger strike to obtain freedom for political detainees. Following a second arrest in March 1932, she led other inmates in singing the "Internationale" in the visiting room. She encouraged them to turn down poorly paid menial labour in the prison yard." HomoLaicus. September 3, 2005. She wrote two articles from jail, one published by PCE periodical Frente Rojo and the other by Mundo Obrero. On March 17, 1932, she was elected to the Central Committee of the PCE at the 4th Congress held in Seville. Spanish Wikipedia.
In 1933, she founded , a women's organization opposed to Fascism and war. Archivo Histórico del PCE. Biblioteca Histórica Marqués de Valdecillas, Madrid. On April 18, Soviet astronomer Grigory Neujmin discovered asteroid 1933 HA and named it "Dolores" after her. In November she travelled to Moscow as a delegate of the 13th Plenum of the Executive Committee of the Communist International (ECCI), which weighed the danger posed by Fascism and the threat of war. Early American Marxism: A repository of source material (1864-1946). The sight of the Russian capital thrilled Ibárruri. "To me, who saw it through the eyes of the soul", she wrote in her autobiography, "it was the most wonderful city on earth. The construction of socialism was being managed from it. In it were taking shape the earthly dreams of freedom of generations of slaves, outcasts, serfs, proletarians. From it one could take in and perceive the march of humanity toward communism." She did not return to Spain until the new year.
In 1934 she attended the First Worldwide Meeting of Women against War and Fascism () in Paris. Although the meeting was chaired by Gabrielle Duchêne, president of the French branch of the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom, the separate Rassemblement was an organ of the short-lived French Popular Front;Laura Branciforte: "La solidaridad internacional bajo el lema del antifascismo." both Rassemblement and the Front dissolved in 1939.
Toward the end of 1934, Ibárruri and two others spearheaded a risky rescue mission to the mining region of Asturias to bring more than a hundred starving children to Madrid. The parents of these children had been jailed following the failed October Revolution suppressed by General Franco at the behest of the Republican government. She succeeded, but she was detained briefly in the prisons of Sama de Langre] and Oviedo. Informe Semanal—La vida de Dolores Ibárruri, "Pasionaria." Part II. Radio Televisión Española. 1995. Youtube, minutes 05:45 to 06:43. To spare her children further anguish, she sent them to the Soviet Union in the spring of 1935.
In 1935 she secretly crossed the Spanish border and went to the 7th World Congress of the Communist International held July 25-August 21 in Moscow. At this Congress, Georgi Dimitrov delivered a keynote speech in which he proposed the surrender of Marxist principle to the more immediate, expedient aim of fighting Fascism at all costs, even if this meant subordination to "progressive bourgeois" governments. Encyclopedia of Marxism. Marxists Internet Archive. Under this doctrine, the Popular Front came to power in France in June 1936, suppressed the revolutionary fervour of the Communist masses and withheld aid from the Spanish Republic during the Spanish Civil War. The Non-Intervention Pact, which sealed the fate of the Republic, was introduced by Léon Blum, president of the French Popular Front, and signed on August 2, 1936, by France, Britain, Russia, Germany and Italy." Flag.net. Ibárruri welcomed Dimitrov's speech as vindication of the PCE's long-standing position and returned home "full of enthusiasm, determined to do the impossible to achieve a consensus among the various workers' and democratic organizations of our country.". At the same venue she was elected deputy member of the ECCI and became the second Communist figure in Spain after José Díaz, the secretary-general of the PCE. Archivo Histórico del PCE. Biblioteca Histórica Marqués de Valdecilla, Madrid.
In 1936 she was jailed for the fourth time after enduring gross abuse from the arresting officers in Madrid. Upon her release, she hurried to Asturias to campaign for the PCE in the general elections of February 16. In these elections, 323,310 ballots were cast. However, "one ballot, one vote" did not rule. Each voter could choose up to 13 candidates simultaneously. The PCE received 170,497 votes, enough to seat one member of Parliament, Dolores Ibárruri. Documentary Services. Madrid: Congreso de los Diputados. The Popular Front's election platform included the release of political prisoners and La Pasionaria set out to free the detainees of Oviedo at once.
 
 As soon as the victory of the Popular Front in the elections became known I, already an elect member of Parliament, showed up at the prison of Oviedo the next morning, went to the office of the Director, who had fled in a mad panic because he had behaved like a genuine criminal toward the Asturian prisoners interned after the revolution of October 1934, and there I found the Administrator to whom I said, "Give me the keys because the prisoners must be released this very day." He replied, "I have not received any orders", and I answered, "I am a member of the Republic's Parliament, and I demand that you hand over the keys immediately to set the prisoners free." He handed them over and I assure you that it was the most thrilling day of my activist life, opening the cells and shouting, "Comrades, everyone get out!" Truly thrilling. I did not wait for Parliament to sit or for the release order to be given. I reasoned, "We have run on the promise of freedom for the prisoners of the revolution of 1934—we won—today the prisoners go free."[ref]Dolores Ibárruri
quoted by Mariano Muniesa in: "Emocionado Recuerdo a una Mujer del Pueblo: La Camarada, Compañera y Hermana Dolores Ibárruri." La Comuna. November 13, 2009.[/ref]Dolores Ibárruri. La Pasionaria explica la salida de los presos de la cárcel en Asturias. Youtube, minutes 00:00 to 01:23.

In the months before the Spanish Civil War, she joined the strikers of Cadavio mine in Asturias and stood beside poor tenants evicted in a suburb of Madrid. Around this time, Federico García Lorca, La Pasionaria and friends were chatting and sharing a coffee in a Madrid cafeteria when Lorca, who had been studying Ibárruri's appearance, told her, "Dolores, you are a woman of grief, of sorrows...I'm going to write you a poem."Dolores Ibárruri. Me faltaba España, 1939-1977. Barcelona: Editorial Planeta, 1984. The poet returned to Granada and met his death at the hands of the Nationalists before completing the task.

Civil War (1936–39)

Ibárruri offered a string of speeches, some of them radio broadcasts from Madrid: "Danger! To arms!" (July 19), "Our fighters must lack for nothing!" (July 24), "Discipline, composure, vigilance!" (July 29), "Restrain the hand of the foreign meddlers!" (July 30), "Fascism shall not pass!" (August 24), "Better to die standing up than to live kneeling down!" (September 3), "A salute to our militiawomen on the front line" (September 4), "Our battle cry has been heard by the whole world" (September 15). Documents. Marxists Internet Archive. It can be inferred that the majority in Madrid rallied to the side of the Republic, that uncontrolled elements roamed the capital that many rounds of gunfire were wasted out of nerves (July 29), that Nationalist propaganda was more effective (July 30) and that she understood early on that the war would be lost without foreign aid (August 24). On October 2 she wrote a revealing letter to her son in Russia, apologizing for not having written earlier and described the harrowing situation, "You cannot even imagine, my son, how savage is the struggle going on in Spain now... And in this fighting some of our finest and bravest comrades have perished."Dolores Ibárruri. Letter to her son. Marxists Internet Archive. She recounted that she had spent many days beside the troops at the front, and reveals her misgivings about the outcome of the war, "It is my hope that in spite of all the difficulties, particularly the lack of weapons, we shall still win."
The war became particularly brutal in 1937. Just as the London Blitz later drove the Allies to bomb German cities mercilessly, so the Nationalist bombardment of open cities spurred Ibárruri (speaking as the fourth, newly named vice president of Congress) to demand an equal response from the "progressive bourgeois" government. President Manuel Azaña was an intellectual and a writer unwilling to flout constitutional or international laws. Prime Minister Francisco Largo Caballero was a socialist who was reluctant to cooperate with the PCE. The closing lines of that speech signalled her readiness to endorse radical violence,
 
 Men and women of every country who love freedom and progress, we appeal to you for the final time. If our appeal remains a voice crying out in the wilderness, our protests are ignored, our humane conduct, if all these are taken for signs of weakness, then the enemy will have only himself to blame—for we shall give vent to our wrath and destroy him in his lair. We demand retribution. Marxists Internet Archive.

On February 24, Stalin forbade Soviet volunteers to be sent to fight in Spain,Efemérides 1937 en la historia del mundo. Hispanopolis. but he did not recall Order of Lenin awardee Alexander Orlov of the NKVD (secret police)..." The Sun. January 21, 2010. Orlov and the NKVD orchestrated the war that between May 3–8 broke out in Barcelona between the Popular Front and the Trotskyist Workers Party of Marxist Unification (POUM). What Next? Marxist Discussion Journal. The battle left some 1,000 fighters dead and 1,500 injured, though estimates vary." Fundación Andreu Nin. Marxismo en red. With the annihilation of the POUM, Stalin deprived the fugitive Leon Trotsky of a possible Spanish haven. Orlov used the same methods of terror, duplicity and deception that were employed in the Great Purge (1936–38).
As a result of the May 3–8 events in Barcelona, the Trotskyists and the Anarchists became, in Ibárruri's mind, the "Fascist enemy within."
 
 When we point out the need of opposing Trotskyism we discover a very strange phenomenon, that voices are raised in its defense in the ranks of certain organizations and among certain circles in certain parties. These voices belong to people who themselves are intoxicated with this counter-revolutionary ideology. The Trotskyists have long been transformed into the agents of Fascism, into the agents of the German Gestapo. We saw this on the ground during the May putsch in Catalonia; we saw this clearly in the disturbances that occurred in various other places. And everybody will realize this when the trial opens against the P.O.U.M. leaders who were caught spying. And we realize that the hand of Fascism is behind every attempt to demoralize our home front, to undermine the authority of the Republic. Therefore it is essential that we wipe out Trotskyism with a firm hand, for Trotskyism is no longer a political option for the working class but an instrument of the counter-revolution.
Trotskyism must be rooted out of the proletarian ranks of our Party as one roots out poisonous weeds. The Trotskyists must be rooted out and disposed of like wild beasts, for otherwise every time our men wish to go on the offensive we will not be able to do so due to lawlessness caused by the Trotskyists in the rear. An end must be put to these traitors once and for all so that our men on the front lines can fight without fear of being stabbed in the back. Reply to the Enemies, Slanderers and Undecided. Marxists Internet Archive.

Ibárruri ascribed the events to an "anarchotrotskyist" attempt at shutting down the Republican government on orders from Franco, acting in tandem with Adolf Hitler. She said the violence was the culmination of an anarchist plot that included plans to stop the movement of trains and cut all telegraph and telephone lines. She cited an "order the Catalan government to its forces to control the telephone building and disarm all people whom they encounter in the streets without proper authorization" as the aim of the anarchist plan. However, she provided no evidence to support these claims, which were widely held by fellow Party members at the time but have since been discredited.
The Communist party alleged that the anarchist "putsch" was motivated by their resentment of the centralized military command sought by the Communists and their allies in Lluis Companys's Catalan government and their desire to seize political power. The anarchists and Trotskyists saw the events as an attempt by the Communist Party (in close contact with the Stalinist NKVD) to rule over all revolutionary activity and blamed the Communists for authoritarianism. They contrasted the Communists' police state to the egalitarian conditions that obtained prior to the May 1937 events.
Ibárruri, Díaz and the rest of the PCE set out to destroy the Trotskyites.
 
 During the month of June 1937 the government of the Popular Front, now clearly under Communist sway, eradicates those segments of its own army under the control of the POUM and of the Anarchists, every one stationed in the Front of Aragon. On July 29 the 29th Division of the POUM is disarmed in the Front of Huesca and on August 4 the Anarchist-Sindicalista Council of Aragon is dissolved by decree.
In Barcelona the police unleashes the cruellest of persecutions against the POUM. The new police chief since May is Ricardo Burillo Stholle, a professional officer and a Mason, who was the commander of the Assault Guards that killed José Calvo Sotelo and who has now joined the PCE. On cue from Alexander Orlov—liaison of the NKVD (Soviet secret police) with the Ministry of the Interior of the Second Spanish Republic and responsible on the Soviet side for the transfer of the gold of Moscow from Spain to the Soviet Union—Burillo's officers arrest Andrés Nin leader of the POUM. Taken first to Valencia and then to Madrid, Nin will be tortured, skinned, mutilated and finally murdered by Orlov's agents at Alcalá de Henares on June 20, 1937." Generalísimo Francisco Franco.

The remnants of the POUM leadership were put on trial in Barcelona on October 11, 1938." Fundación Andreu Nin." LibCom. Referring to the arraignments, Ibárruri is often quoted to have said, "It is better to convict a hundred innocent ones than to acquit a single guilty one,"erredea 18:00 21 ene 2007 (CET). Reply to Tetoexp. ¿Rechazáis el franquismo? Hispasonic." La guerre d'Espagne. (a similar quote was also later attributed to Pol Pot). However, the full quotation is: "If there is an adage which says that in normal times it is preferable to acquit a hundred guilty ones than to punish a single innocent one, when the life of a people is in danger it is better to convict a hundred innocent ones than to acquit a single guilty one." indicating that her extreme policy applied only in extraordinary circumstances. Personajes famosos. ABC.es.
On April 30, 1938, Stalin proposed a military alliance to France and Britain,Efemérides 1938 en la historia del mundo. Hispanopolis. in effect, forsaking the Spanish Republic.

Exile, part I (1939–1960)

On March 6, 1939, she flew out of Spain under enemy naval fire to the major Algerian port city of Oran then under French sovereignty. Her arrival came as a surprise to the authorities, who hurriedly put her aboard a liner bound for Marseille. ABC. March 11, 1939, p. 5. The ship's captain was a Nationalist sympathizer, but a clandestine Communist cell aboard ship made sure that he did not steer the ship toward Nationalist-held Barcelona. This was the third time that Ibárruri had evaded capture by the Fascists.
She was helped in France by the Communists, who sheltered her in Paris under police surveillance (the Communist Party would be outlawed by the government of Édouard Daladier on September 26). From Paris she travelled to Moscow and stayed there with Díaz, generals Enrique Líster and Juan Modesto and others. She was reunited with Amaya and Ruben, who had escaped from a French internment camp at the end of the Spanish Civil War.
The Soviet Union received the refugees warmly. Ibárruri was given an apartment in Díaz' building. She was assigned a chauffeur to drive her around Moscow and she was invited to dine at the Dimitrovs'. She liked to attend the Bolshoi Theatre and the Romen Theatre. She was an avid reader. She delighted in seeing the emancipation of Russian women. In defence of Marxism. March 8, 2004. She helped other families adapt to their new country and overall she felt happy enough to sing on occasion.
Ibárruri worked in the ECCI Secretariat at the Comintern Headquarters near the Kremlin. The work involved the continual evaluation, analysis and discussion of the progress of Communism outside the Soviet Union. This task was complemented by internal discussions in the PCE central committee which focused on Spain. No serious disagreement existed between the PCE and the Communist Party of the Soviet Union until 1968, over the Warsaw Pact's forces invaded Czechoslovakia. The PCE supported/excused Stalin's domestic and foreign policies, including the signing of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact on August 24, 1939.
In January 1940 La Pasionaria wrote the following praise of Joseph Stalin.
 
 To speak about the triumph of socialism over one-sixth of the earth, to write about the lush development of agriculture in the Soviet Union, a development unequalled by any other country, to admire the astonishing growth of socialist industry and the impetuous gains of the workers, to marvel at the unprecedented accomplishments of the mighty Soviet air force, at the mighty beefing up of the Soviet navy, to describe the glorious exploits of the Red Army liberator of peoples, to study the wonderful framework of the huge socialist state with its multiple nationalities united by unbreakable bonds of fraternal friendship, to observe the progress of science, art and of the culture of all Soviet peoples, the joyous life of their children, women, workers, peasants and intellectuals, the abiding security of everyone and their faith in the future, to know the daily life of socialism and the heroic actions of the Soviet people means to see Stalin, to cite Stalin, to encounter Stalin." The Communist International, No. 1, January. Reprinted in the Marxists Internet Archive.

Ibárruri was asked to manage a new short-wave radio station that broadcast news, analysis and opinion to the citizens of Fascist Spain. The Moscow station carried the official name of Radio España Independiente,
Many Spanish refugees volunteered to fight alongside the Russians despite Stalin's initial disapproval. According to Ibárruri, more than 200 died in battle. On July 18, 1941, she greeted the Spanish 4th Special Unit assigned to the defence of the Kremlin. Elsewhere, from Crimea to Finland, the Spanish Communist volunteers fought as guerrillas deployed behind enemy lines, in the Red Army or with the Soviet air force; some made it to Berlin and at least one scouted territory held by the Spanish Fascist Blue Division.
On October 13, 1941, martial law was declared in Moscow as the German Third Panzer Army came within 
Radio España Independiente now broadcast from Ufa. She used various aliases such as Antonio de Guevara or Juan de Guernica presumably to make believe the station had an extensive network of commentators and newspapermen.
On March 19, 1942, Díaz committed suicide. La Pasionaria became secretary-general of the PCE after a brief period of consultations by Stalin.
On September 3 Ibárruri's son Ruben lost his life fighting heroically at Stalingrad. Celebrities. Russian WikipediaCSDF (RCSDF) Newsreel, 35 mm, black and white. The Battle Near Stalingrad. Documentary, 1973, Part II, minutes 04:18 to 04:29. NetFilm. Asteroid 2423 Ibarruri is named after him. Fact-Archive.
On March 1, 1943 Stalin created the Union of Polish Patriots and on May 15 the ECCI annulled the Third International and granted theoretical independence to every national Communist party. Hispanopolis. Ibárruri agreed with the decision.
On February 23, 1945, La Pasionaria left Moscow on a trip to Teheran, Baghdad and Cairo. In Cairo she and her party booked passage on the first passenger ship to leave Alexandria, understanding it was going to Marseille. In fact the ship, part of a British convoy, headed to Boulogne-sur-Mer near the Belgian border; the voyage lasted three months and she arrived in Paris too late to meet with Juan Negrín, the last president of the Spanish Republic to work out a common political strategy against Franco.
On December 5–8 the PCE held a plenum of the central committee in Toulouse where Santiago Carrillo, the former leader of Unified Socialist Youth in pre-war Spain, who had arrived in liberated France in November 1944, "gained control of the PCE", according to fellow Communist Enrique Líster. Así destruyó Carrillo el PCE. Barcelona: Editorial Planeta, 1983.
In his book Así destruyó Carrillo el PCE Líster criticized Ibárruri's conduct between 1939 and 1945, writing:
 
 examination of the situation of the PCE between 1939-1945 Would have shown that the political and moral conduct and behaviour of the immense majority of the members of our party, whether in Europe, America, Africa and above all in Spain, had been commendable whereas the conduct and behaviour of a portion of the leaders in exile had left a lot to be desired elaborates elsewhere, "there were many dirty secrets, many acts of cowardice". Dolores Ibárruri, Carrillo, Mije, Anton, Delicado are good examples of what we say though not the only ones.

The persecution of dissidents inside the PCE increased with time,
 
 Between 1947–1951 things get progressively worse. The persecution inside the party increases as do the arrests of comrades who come to Spain from France. But it wasn't just this, as we would find out later, assassination had become a tool of repression and management of the party... If the target of an assassination fled to Spain his presence was betrayed to the Spanish authorities through the broadcasts of Radio España Independiente.

Interrogations were cruel,
 
 Carrillo and Anton inflicted true terror. Some comrades came to the brink of insanity during the rounds of interrogation and others were driven to suicide out of the despicable accusations made against them.

The book names party members betrayed or murdered: Juanchu de Portugalete (1944), Gabriel León Trilla (1945; "the decision to eliminate Trilla belongs to Santiago Carrillo and Dolores Ibárruri"), Jesus Hernandez (1946), Lino (1950), Juan Comorera (1954), Monzon, Quiñones, Luis Montero, Jose el Valenciano. Even generals Modesto and Líster himself were at one point in the crosshairs of the PCE leadership, only to be saved inadvertently by Stalin who praised them before Ibárruri, Carrillo and Anton." kaosenlared. August 27, 2008.
The PCE persecuted Communists in northwestern Spain during those years. In 2008 Victor Garcia found the body of his father partially buried in a wooded area of O Deza (Pontevedra). He had been shot in the head. Garcia's father had not fled Spain after the defeat of 1939; he stayed behind and helped to organize a guerrilla force of 947 fighters in Galicia. Around the year 1944 the central committee of the PCE, then living in France and headed by Ibárruri and Carrillo ordered his execution. After it was carried out in 1948, the regional PCE liaison wrote, "At last we have hunted him down. This riffraff withstood us like a leech. We managed to catch him in Lalin from where he directed certain adventurous, uncontrolled groups. He is a provocateur who has given us many troubles; though belatedly we have eliminated him."R. Prieto: "Camaradas que matan." Faro de Vigo. August 23, 2009.

The exile, part II (1960–1977)

At the 6th Congress of the PCE held in Prague between January 28–31, 1960, 65-year-old Ibárruri ceded the post of secretary-general to Carrillo and accepted the honorary position of president. El VI Congreso. Historia del Partido Comunista de España. Paris: Editions Sociales, 1960. Chapter 4, pp. 274-283. As confirmation of her retirement from active politics she wrote her first memoir in 1960. The book, entitled El Unico Camino (The Only Way) was published first in Paris in 1962. El Unico Camino." Paris: Editions Sociales, 1962. The Open Library. The following year it was printed in Moscow. El Unico Camino. Moscow: Ediciones en Lenguas Extranjeras, 1963. Stanford's Libraries & Collections. The book was translated into English and published in New York in 1966 under a new title. They shall not pass: the autobiography of La Pasionaria. New York: International Publishers, 1966. Antiquarian Booksellers' Association of America. In her second memoir, Memorias de Pasionaria, 1939-1977, Ibárruri observates that the childhood reminiscences recorded in El Unico Camino came to her in sharp detail.
On November 10, 1961, she received a Doctor Honoris Causa in Historical Sciences by Moscow State University for her contributions to the development of Marxist theory. A Chronicle of the Day. 1961, Nº 46, minutes 06:54 to 07:27. NetFilm. In her acceptance speech she asserted that class struggle is the motor of history. In 1962 she attended the 10th Congress of the Italian Communist Party held December 2–8 in Rome where she met Socialists, Christian-Democrats and some church representatives. To the clerics she remarked, "We are not as wicked as you think, and we are not as good as we probably think we are." During the first few months of 1963 Ibárruri unsuccessfully appealed for the Spanish government to spare the life of executive committee member Julián Grimau. Before his execution Grimau wrote to Ibárruri saying, "My execution will be the last one." On the week of May 13 Ibárruri unveiled a plaque in his honour on Building 11, Block 1, of newly renamed Grimau Street in Moscow. A Chronicle of the Day. 1963, Nº 20, minutes 03:32 to 04:23. NetFilm. Grimau Street sign. Webshots, channel: Entertainment. June 15, 2004. On December 5 she arrived in Havana to commemorate the 5th anniversary of the Cuban Revolution."La Pasionaria," huésped de Fidel Castro. ABC. December 6, 1963, morning edition, p. 52. The Cuban leader invited Ibárruri to move permanently to the island, but she declined.
On April 15, 1964, she spoke at the banquet celebrating Nikita Khrushchev's 70th birthday. A Chronicle of the Day. 1964, Nº 16, minutes 06:26 to 06:33. NetFilm. On April 30 she shared the International Lenin Prize for Strengthening Peace Among Peoples, with three others. Hispanopolis. On February 22, 1965, Ibárruri asked the ministers of External Affairs and the Spanish army and the defense attorney, asking to appear as a witness at the court martial of former Republican commander Justo Lopez de la Fuente. De la Fuente had been condemned to twenty-three years in prison. ABC. May 3, 1967, morning edition, p. 57. Everyone expected that he would be sentenced to death. She held a press conference in Moscow to publicize these actions. On February 27 the Captain General of the Madrid region annulled the proceedings. However, the first sentence stuck and Lopez later died in prison.
Sometime during 1965 Ibárruri flew from Paris to Dubrovnik to apologize as president of the PCE to Josip Broz Tito. On May 17, 1948, the Cominform, successor to the ECCI, had expelled Yugoslavia from the community of Socialist countriesEfemérides 1948 en la historia del mundo. Hispanopolis. and Ibárruri had lent her voice and pen to his censure. The 20th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union held February 14–26, 1956, repudiated the charges against Yugoslavia. Now Ibárruri came face to face with the man she had slandered. She started to apologize profusely, but Tito cut her short and said, "Do not vex yourself, Dolores, do not worry. I know very well how things worked in those days. I know it perfectly. Furthermore, believe me, I most likely would have done what you did had I been in your situation." Ibárruri returned to visit Yugoslavia several times thereafter. ABC. August 31, 1976, Actualidad Gráfica, p. 4. In late December 1965 the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR decorated Ibárruri with an Order of Lenin medal. A Chronicle of the Day. 1966, Nº 1, minutes 01:56 to 03:18. NetFilm. A total of 431,418 decorations were given out between 1930 and 1991, but only seventeen went to foreigners. CollectRussia.
Ibárruri was chair of the editorial commission that wrote the four volumes of Guerra y revolución en España, 1936-1939 (War and Revolution in Spain, 1936-1936) which present the PCE's view of the Spanish Civil War. The tomes were published between 1966 and 1971. Guerra y revolución en España, 1936-1939. 4 vols. Moscow: Editorial Progreso, 1966-1971. Note: The first three volumes are also available from Bolerium Books (San Francisco, California).
On April 19, 1969, former Republican general Juan Modesto died in Prague. Ibárruri pronounced a brief eulogy. On May 6, 1970, the Spanish right-wing newspaper ABC reported that the PCE and the Kremlin had reached a new pact whereby the Spanish party dropped its censure of the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in exchange for the Kremlin's blessing on the party's wish to collaborate with non-Communist parties. The newspaper also reported that PCE president La Pasionaria's permanent residence was Moscow and the secretary-general's Italy. ABC. May 6, 1970, morning edition, p. 28.
On November 8, 1972, Ibárruri's estranged husband, 82-year-old Julin Ruiz Gabiña, returned from a workers' clinic in Moscow to Somorrostro, expressing a desire "to rest and to die in my land."Regresa a España, desde Moscú, el marido de "La Pasionaria". ABC. November 8, 1972, p. 52. On March 14, 1974, Ibárruri condemned the execution on March 2 of 26-year-old Catalan anarchist Salvador Puig Antich. She noted the revolutionary political stance taken by Bishop Antonio Añoveros Ataún of Bilbao who defended Basque cultural identity publicly and who defied Franco's decision to remove him. Asesinato de Puig Antich (10 minutos). Archivo Histórico Sonoro del PCE, March 14, 1974, minutes 04:02 to 08:51. On November 20, 1975, Spanish dictator Franco died. Ibárruri commented on the news laconically, "May the earth rest light upon him." On the week of November 17 Ibárruri was invested with the Order of the October Revolution. A Chronicle of the Day. 1975, Nº 47, minutes 07:00 to 07:54. NetFilm. On December 14 many representatives of Communist parties from around the world gathered in Rome to pay homage to her. The next summer Ibárruri attended the 3rd Plenum of the Central Committee of the PCE held July 28–31, 1976, in Rome under the clarion call of "national reconciliation."
On the night of January 24, 1977, a commando unit of Spanish and Italian neo-Fascists shot dead three Communist labour-rights attorneys, a law student and a manager at their law office in downtown Madrid; four others were seriously injured. On February 16 Ibárruri asked Spanish authorities in Moscow to allow her to return to Spain. She stated that she had travelled outside the USSR many times, that her profession was a publicist and contributor to newspapers and magazines, that she was the president of the PCE and that she wanted to travel freely to her own country. ABC. February 18, 1977, p. 21. On February 22 the still-illegal PCE made public its list of candidates for the general elections of June 15. Ibárruri appeared as a candidate in two electoral districts to be assured of election, one Madrid and the other Asturias; Carrillo appeared in three. ABC. February 22, 1977, p. 10. Despite a climate of fear and insecurity the Spanish government legalized the PCE on April 9, but the authorities denied Ibárruri a visa. On April 27 Julian Ruiz said that he would not be at the airport to greet his estranged wife, "Nevertheless she is the mother of my children and I wish her health and a peaceful life.",Julián y Dolores Ruiz. A la "Pasionaria" no la recibirá su marido. ABC. April 27, 1977, p. 52. Suplemento Blanco y Negro. The PCE arranged to have Ibárruri land in Madrid with or without a visa on May 13. However, on May 12 the authorities relented and provided it.

Back in Madrid (1977–1989)

At 2:00 PM Moscow time on May 13, 1977, Ibárruri left Shremetyevo Airport aboard an Aeroflot jet after a "very affectionate" sendoff by Boris Ponomarev and Mikhail Suslov, three other civilians and by Colonel Sergeyev the husband of Ibárruri's daughter; on the tarmac a girl dressed in traditional costume offered the departing president of the PCE a bouquet of flowers."La Pasionaria" llegó ayer a Madrid. La Vanguardia Española. May 14, 1977, p.3. A Chronicle of the Day. 1977, Nº 19, minutes 08:15 to 09:50. NetFilm. At 7:59 PM Madrid time the Aeroflot jetliner landed at Barajas Airport. The PCE lied about her arrival and did not give her an official welcome (secretary-general Carrillo was in Seville). Five hundred party members and sympathizers showed up at the airport, some waving PCE flags and wearing red berets with Communist insignia; they went up on the observation deck and watched and cheered as she landed. ABC. May 14, 1977, p. 25." El Mundo. December 10, 1995. ABC. May 15, 1977, p. 14. She went to the office of the Registrar General of Fuencarral and changed her name from Isidora to Dolores."Cosas que pasan": Doña Isidora. ABC. May 25, 1988, p. 20.
Ibárruri's first campaign rally was held May 23 on the Exhibition fairgrounds of Bilbao before 30-50,000 supporters. She acknowledged feeling tired, but volunteered to explain the workings of Socialist countries "where the workers can live very well without capitalism"; however the emotion of the day exhausted her and an evening press conference had to be cancelled."La Pasionaria" alaba al gran "país soviético". ABC. May 24, 1977, p. 10. The next day she spoke in the Suarez Puerta Stadium of AvilésPedro J. Ramírez. "Pasionaria." ABC. May 24, 1977, p. 9. in front of "many thousands of workers." A 20-year-old eyewitness remembers, "The city wore red. 'The Internationale' was heard everywhere... the atmosphere, the silence when Pasionaria spoke, the explosion of joy that day, they are unforgettable memories."Juan C. Galán. "Pasión al rojo vivo." La Nueva España. April 13, 2009. Note: Several dates given in the article are wrong. On May 25 at the presentation of his book, Eurocommunism and the State, Carrillo told a reporter that Ibárruri reminded him of the Pablo Iglesias he knew as a child, "a sick elderly man who participated very little in the activities of the party and who often kept quiet during meetings."Pedro J. Ramírez. "La comparación." ABC. May 26, 1977, p. 9. On May 28 Ibárruri spoke in Sama de Langreo and right-wing newspaper ABC admitted that she was drawing "multitudes."Asturias. U.C.D.: Mítin bajo la lluvia." ABC. May 28, 1977, p. 13." Part III. Radio Televisión Española. 1995. Youtube, 05:42 to 06:44. On May 30 she affirmed in La Felguera that the same spirit which had moved her in 1936 lived on to fight for the PCE and for Asturias.J. M. Ruiz Gallardón. Recortes de la prensa dominical." ABC. May 31, 1977, p. 4. On June 8 a full house (6,000 people according to ABC, 8,000 according to La Vanguardia) listened to her in the arena Palacio de los Deportes of the Asturian capital Oviedo.Méndez. "Asturias. Oviedo: Consultorio electoral telefónico permanente." ABC. June 9, 1977, p. 22. La Vanguardia Española. June 10, 1977, p. 11. The following day she appeared at the national rally of the party held in the neighbouring province of León.Iñigo Domínguez. "León. León: La capital, invadida por los carteles." ABC. June 9, 1977, p. 22.
The general elections of June 15 in the Oviedo constituency resulted in 584,061 votes cast, for a voter turnout rate of 74.6%. PCE got 60,297 votes (10.5% of the ballot), good enough to seat one member, Dolores Ibárruri. The party with the most votes was the Spanish Workers' Socialist Party (31.8%). In contrast, the dictatorship's party, Falange Española, garnered a minuscule 0.46%.1977 election resultsResultados provisionales: Análisis. ABC. June 17, 1977, p. 9. Congreso de Diputados. La Vanguardia Española. June 17, 1977, p. 18. On July 13 at 10:05 AM—she notes in her memoirs— Ibárruri stepped inside the chamber of Congress she had vacated forty-one years before. Moments later she occupied the inaugural session's vice-presidential chair. "Congreso: Intensa jornada dedicada a votaciones." ABC. July 14, 1977, p. 10.20 años de la muerte de La Pasionaria. Radio Televisión Española, minutes 00:44 to 00:51. The next day Radio España Independiente aired its last broadcast, number 108,300. Archivo Histórico Sonoro del PCE, July 14, 1977, 45 minutes. On July 22 the king opened Parliament. She joined in the 1-minute general standing ovation, although she remained seated. La Vanguardia Española. July 23, 1977, p. 3. Earlier, as Ibárruri entered Congress, a 56-year-old man in Falangist uniform gave the Roman salute and heckled her, "Drop dead! If you had any shame you would not have returned to Spain."Anécdotas de una sesión histórica. ABC. July 23, 1977, p. 4.
On August 4, 87-year-old Ruiz died in a hospital residence of Barakaldo; Ibárruri attended his funeral. She travelled to Moscow in October to celebrate the 60th anniversary of the Russian Revolution and did not return until November 21.C.E. de Asturias pide la sustitución de La Pasionaria como diputada. ABC. November 22, 1977, p. 14.
Her ailing health put her in hospital three times during the first nine months after her return. La Vanguardia Española. February 14, 1978, p. 7. Her age and frail health prompted the regional branch of the PCE in Asturias to ask for her retirement and substitution as early as November 21, 1977. However, the central committee argued that her symbolic presence was important,Declaraciones de La Pasionaria a una revista U.S.A.: "No hemos renunciado a la dictadura del proletariado". ABC. August 9, 1978, pp. 11-12. and she served out her full term. On October 31, 1978, she voted with a very loud "Yes" for the new Spanish Constitution. ABC. November 1, 1978, p. 5. On December 29, President Adolfo Suárez dissolved Congress and called new elections for March 1, 1979. The 84-year-old Ibárruri was not a candidate.
Her life and that of every Communist was put in danger on February 23, 1981, when Fascist elements of the Spanish armed forces and of the paramilitary police staged a coup. Radio Televisión Española.
Broadly speaking, though, the remaining years of Ibárruri's life were a tranquil sequence of feminist rallies,Pilar Urbano. Hilo directo: Vuelo con un DC. ABC. November 26, 1980, p. 9. political rallies,Gritos y aplausos por la "unidad" de los comunistas del PCE en el mitin de Gerardo Iglesias. ABC. November 10, 1983, p. 16. congresses of the PSUC and PCE,Margarita Sáez-Díez. Gana la tendencia "eurocomunista" en el Congreso extraordinario del PSUC. ABC. March 20, 1982, p. 8. ABC. February 20, 1988, Actualidad Gráfica, p. 5. of presiding over the meetings of the executive committee,El PCE, al borde de la escisión. ABC. March 25, 1985, front page. and of summer holidays in the Soviet Union. ABC. July 20, 1985, p. 36. Ibárruri denounced Enver Hoxha's stance against Khrushchev during the Sino-Soviet Split, saying Hoxha was behaving "like a dog that bites the hand that feeds him". Survivors of the International Brigades came to celebrate her 90th birthday. The PCE threw a party in the arena Palacio de Deportes of Madrid for 15,000 to 20,000 well-wishers. ABC. December 9, 1985, p. 16. La Opinión de A Coruña. November 12, 2009.
In October 1987 Ibárruri solicited financial assistance from Congress. She had not contributed to the national social security program and therefore had no pension. Congress granted her a monthly perquisite of 150,000 Pesetas (approximately 1,715 of 1987 Canadian dollars).J.A.S. La primera pensión privilegiada, para "La Pasionaria". ABC. October 20, 1987, p. 19. El PSOE busca el consenso de la oposición sobre las pensiones para ex parlamentarios. ABC. April 26, 1988, p. 27. On September 13, 1989, she was hospitalized, gravely ill with pneumonia. ABC. September 16, 1989, p. 25. She recovered and left the hospital on October 15, but she experienced a relapse on November 7 and died at 7:15 PM on November 12 at age 93. ABC. November 13, 1989, Actualidad Gráfica, p. 5. El País. November 13, 1989. On November 14, thousands of people paid homage as her body lay on a catafalque. Veterans of the civil war, war amps, the ambassadors of Cuba, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Yugoslavia and China were among the first to pay their respects as was the mayor of Madrid.A. Suárez. Miles de personas rindieron homenaje a "La Pasionaria". ABC. November 15, 1989, p. 26. On November 16, a short cortege carried her body from PCE headquarters to the Plaza of Columbus where Rafael Alberti and secretary-general Julio Anguita delivered a brief eulogy. ABC. November 17, 1989, Actualidad Gráfica, p. 7. Afterward, she was driven to Almudena Cemetery and interred near the grave of Pablo Iglesias. Find A Grave. Thousands attended her funeral and chanted, "They shall not pass!"Genin Andrada. Funeral of Dolores Ibárruri. Getty Images. The mayors of some townships declared four days of official mourning. Zigzag. Luto. ABC. November 21, 1989, p. 21.

Monuments and Memorials

La Pasionaria statue in Glasgow, Scotland

Dolores Ibaruri served as inspiration to artist Arthur DooleyGary Nisbet. Arthur Dooley (1929-94). Works in Glasgow. Glasgow—City of Sculpture. who was commissioned in 1974 by The International Brigade Association of Scotland to create a monument commemorating the 2,100 British volunteers of the International Brigade, ordinary men and women who joined the republican forces in the Spanish Civil War in their fight against Franco's regime. The monument's inscription is dedicated to the 534 volunteers who died in the conflict, 65 of them from Glasgow, which is where the monument is situated.
The statue was funded by money raised by Trade Unionists and Labour movement supporters. However, the £3000 raised was insufficient to cover the artist's plans for the statue to be cast in bronze. Instead, an armature was welded together from scrap iron and covered in fibreglass. The final version of the monument is a stylised female figure, representing Dolores Ibarruri, in a long dress, standing with legs apart and arms raised. On the plinth, Dooley carved Dolores' famous slogan - 'better to die on your feet than live forever on your knees'. The phrase was first used by the Mexican revolutionary leader, Emiliano Zapata, but Ibarruri gave it new meaning when she used it during the miners strike in Asturias, Spain, in 1934.
Over time, the B listed statue fell into extremely poor condition and this generated criticism from the public, elected officials and trades unionists. A restoration project was carried out between April 2010 and August 2010 and the monument was re-dedicated on 23 August 2010 by Leader of the Council, Bailie Gordon Matheson and Assistant Secretary of the Scottish Trades Union Congress, Grahame Smith in the presence of Thomas Watters, 97, a surviving International Brigade veteran. Thomas Watters, 97, was a veteran of the Scottish Ambulance Unit, which worked at the front line on the battlefields of Spain to aid wounded fighters and volunteers from across the world.

In her own words (Quotations)

June 16, 1936 (Madrid).
Excerpt of the reply given in Parliament to Gil-Robles and to José Calvo Sotelo. This rebuttal by Dolores Ibárruri in the parliamentary debate moved by the two foremost exponents of the Spanish Right is highly significant because it occurred less than one month before the assassination of Calvo Sotelo on July 13 and the start of the Spanish Civil War five days later.
 
 Gentlemen of the Right! You come here outraged to rend your vestments and to dab ash on your foreheads even while, as colleague De Francisco has said, someone whom you know and whom we are not unacquainted with as well José Antonio Primo de Rivera, orders the making of Civil Guard uniforms with intentions known to you and not unknown to us, and while in addition across the Navarre border—Mr. Calvo-Sotelo!—enter firearms and munitions wrapped in the Spanish flag with less noise, with less outrage than the provocation orchestrated by the miserable assassin Martinez Anido in Vera del Bidasoa township of the Basque country with whom the Honourable Member collaborated; and to the shame of the Spanish Republic justice has not been meted out either to him or to the Honorable Member who colluded. As I say, the facts are more telling than the words. I shall mention not only those that have taken place since the sixteenth of February but also those from a little earlier because the gales of today are the consequence of the winds of yesterday.
What happened since the truly republican constituents and the Socialists relinquished power? What happened from the time when men who, varnished with a deceptive republicanism, under the pretext of wishing to broaden the popular base of the republic, joined you, anti-republicans, and the government of Spain? This is what happened: The expropriations in the countryside were carried out collectively, the city halls of the Basque country were persecuted, the Statute of Autonomy of Catalonia was curtailed, all the democratic freedoms were assailed and crushed, all the labour codes were ignored, the Law of Municipal Boundaries was revoked law forbad an employer the hiring of workers living outside his circumscription—as colleague De Francisco was saying—the workers were mistreated, and all this kept storing up an enormous amount of hatred which necessarily had to climax in something, and that something was the glorious October 1934, the October which makes us proud, all Spanish citizens who have political discernment, who have dignity, who have a sense of responsibility about Spain's destiny in the face of scheming Fascism.
And all these actions carried out in Spain during the period aptly dubbed "The Black Biennial" were executed—Mr. Gil Robles!—by resorting not only to the police, to the coercive apparatus of the state, but to the underworld, to those criminal elements that every capitalist society harbours, men without roots, the cross of the proletariat, who were hired, given arms and immunity to kill, and who murdered the workers who stood out in the struggle and also men of the Left: Canales, Socialist; Joaquin de Grado, Juanita Rico, Manuel Andres and so many others who fell victim to these gangs of gunmen organized—Mr. Calvo Sotelo!—by a lady reference to Pilar Primo de Rivera the sister of Falange's founder whose name if cited stokes the hatred of Spanish workers for the shame and ruin it has brought to Spain and by pretentious dandies who dream of the victories and blood-soaked glories of Hitler or Mussolini." Lorenzo Peña. España Roja.

July 19, 1936 (Madrid).
Excerpt of the rallying radio address from the Ministry of the Interior the day following the start of the Spanish Civil War.
 
 Workers! Farmers! Antifascists! Patriotic Spaniards! Everyone rise to defend the Republic against the Fascist military uprising, to defend the common freedoms and the democratic triumphs of the people!
The country realizes the gravity of the current situation through the bulletins being issued by the government and the Popular Front. In Morocco and in the Canary Islands the workers are fighting beside the Armed Forces loyal to the Republic against the military rebels and Fascists.
To the cry of "Fascism shall not pass! The executioners of October shall not pass!" the workers and farmers of the various provinces of Spain are joining the fight against the enemies of the Republic declared in armed rebellion. Communists, Socialists, Anarchists, Republican democrats, the soldiers and services loyal to the Republic have inflicted the first defeats on the insurgents, who drag through the quagmire of Treason the military honour they have boasted about so much.
The whole country roils with fury at those savages who want to plunge democratic and the people's Spain into a hell of terror and death.
But they shall not pass!Dolores Ibárruri: "¡No pasarán! Llamamiento pronunciado por la Pasionaria en nombre del Partido Comunista ante los micrófonos del Ministerio de Gobernación, el 19 de julio de 1936." Lorenzo Peña. España Roja.

September 8, 1936 (Paris).
Conclusion of the speech delivered to a Convention of Solidarity organized in Paris as part of an official mission by the Popular Front to the French government asking for the lifting of the arms embargo against the Spanish Republic.
 
 Our people exude heroism, but a heroic spirit is not enough. The armament of the rebels must be confronted with rifles, airplanes, field guns. We defend the cause of freedom and peace. We need planes and guns to fight, to defend ourselves, our freedom, to prevent the insurgents bombing our open cities, murdering our women and our children. We need arms to defend freedom and peace!
Don't you forget—and let no one forget—that if today it falls to us to resist Fascist aggression the struggle does not end with Spain. Today it is our turn, but if the Spanish people are allowed to succumb, it will be your turn—all of Europe will be compelled to face up to aggression and war.
Help us to forestall the defeat of democracy because the consequence of such a defeat would be a new World War, which we are all interested in avoiding but whose first battles are being fought in our country already. For our children and yours! For the sake of peace and to oppose war demand that the border be opened! Demand that the French government fulfill its obligations with the Spanish Republican government! Help us obtain the arms we need to defend ourselves with! Fascism shall not pass! It shall not pass! It shall not pass!

March 5, 1937 (Valencia).
Opening address at the plenum of the central committee of the PCE. Significantly her appeal discloses that by this time the Republican side had splintered into quarrelling factions.
 
 Stand up, people of Spain!
Women! Defend the life of your children, defend the liberty of your men! Endure Every conceivable sacrifice rather than grant the victory of the forces which represent a past of oppression, a past of tyranny.
Everybody against the Reaction! Everyone against Fascism! One front only! One faction united shoulder to shoulder until the enemy is defeated!
Down with the rebel generals! Down with the counter-revolutionary elements! Long live the brave popular militias! Long live the loyal Forces that fight alongside the workers!
Long live the Republic. Long live democracy. Down with Fascism. Down with the Reaction.1937—Discurso de Pasionaria. Youtube.

November 1, 1938 (Barcelona).
Please listen to the transcript of Ibárruri's farewell address to the International Brigades read in English by Maxine Peake by clicking on the hyperlink provided with Note..." Youtube.
The International Brigades were honoured twice by the losing Republican side, first on October 25, 1938, at Les Masies (Tarragona) where General Chief of Staff Vicente Rojo Lluch presided and the legendary Republican commanders Enrique Líster and Juan Modesto attendedBrigadas Internacionales. and seven days later in Barcelona where La Pasionaria bid them farewell as they paraded down April The Fourteenth Avenue to the cheers of more than 250,000 people. Youtube.
1962.
Autobiography: El Unico Camino.
 
 The 1905 Russian Revolution, which evoked the solidarity of the Spanish proletariat, also had its song amid the workers of our country and I learned it from the miners of my region when I was a little girl.
On those days when the workers were allowed to place the red flags of their organizations on the windows of the Workers' Centre the district bustled with life. Even to those not affiliated with the Centre the red flag said something which escaped their conscious understanding yet shook them to the depths of their soul.

September 28, 1973.
About the repression in Pinochet's Chile. Radio España Independiente.
 
 Two names that are quite a symbol go together in death in this tough and very cruel fight that the Chilean people are called upon to wage for their own life and for the freedom of their homeland: Salvador Allende and Pablo Neruda, Socialist one, Communist the other, who will live forever in the grateful memory of their people and of all peoples. The Reaction passes away, but the people endure. And after this bloodbath with which the Chilean Reaction at the service of the Imperialists has wanted to bury for all time the democratic regime headed by President Salvador Allende, who enters History immortalized by his life and by his death, Chilean democracy, enriched with the blood of so many heroes fallen in the beastly repression, will be reborn and the Chilean people will rebuild that democracy in whose defense fell the noble and heroic President Salvador Allende and so many other anonymous heroes of the Chilean people, victims of the criminal Fascist military aggression—of the vile agents of North American imperialism who as our comrade Luis Corbalán denounced in a speech given in March of this year were plotting against the Chilean democracy." Audio: Discursos de Dolores Ibárruri, Pasionaria. La Conquista de la Civilización Socialista. Blogchevique.

November 20, 1975.
''Reaction over Radio España Independiente to General Franco's death.
 
 Dawn is breaking over Spain, and that dawn, scattering the darkness of the past, is the dawning of a Spain where the people will be the leading actor, where once more the rights of men and of the peoples who make up our multi-national and multi-regional country will be respected.
And in these moments of great emotion my first concern is for our imprisoned, all the political prisoners, who must be set free immediately; and this must be the paramount concern of everyone who fights for and desires the re-establishment of democracy in Spain.

December 14, 1983 (Madrid).
Message to the 11th Congress of the PCE.
 
 I have always defended a policy of unity around the principles of Marxism, of scientific socialism and of workmen's rights. Everything moves, everything changes; we must know how to adapt our theory, our politics and our struggle to the specific circumstances in which we live. As Lenin taught us, it is necessary to stride forward toward the future, getting rid of everything that divides us, everything that life has discarded, advancing toward our chosen goal, socialism and peace. Gerardo Iglesias reafirma la existencia del PCE para la estabilidad democrática. La Vanguardia Española. December 15, 1983, p. 9.

1989.
Biography by Andrés Sorel: Dolores Ibárruri, Pasionaria. Memoria humana.
 
 I shall die on my feet here on this sixth floor of Santisima Trinidad Street private office at PCE headquarters, watching the stars. It will be night. Silence will break out for a few moments. That arresting silence of the universe. I know that the stars when I vanish will remain pegged way up there, fixed, immutable, gazing on the absurd hustle and bustle of men, small and ridiculous, striving with each other during the sole second of life allotted them to learn and to know about themselves, wasting it stupidly, killing one another, the ones fighting to avert exploitation by the others. Memoria humana, in El último camino. El País. November 13, 1989.

Notes

List of works






