[[St. Louis Eagles]]

CATEGORIES: Defunct ice hockey teams in the United States, Defunct National Hockey League teams, National Hockey League in Missouri, Sports clubs established in 1934, Sports clubs disestablished in 1935, Sports in St. Louis, Missouri

The St. Louis Eagles were a professional ice hockey team and a former member of the National Hockey League (NHL) based in St. Louis, Missouri. The Eagles existed for only one year, playing in the 1934–35 NHL season.
The team was originally founded in 1883 as the Ottawa Senators, a successful independent team that joined the NHL as a charter member in 1917.  From the mid-1920s onward, they endured financial strain caused in part by being in the NHL's smallest market. The financial problems forced the Senators to suspend operations for the 1931–32 season. Upon their return to play – and having sold their better players in an effort to raise funds – the Senators finished in last place for two straight seasons and continued to lose money. Following the repeat last place finish, the team decided it could not survive in Ottawa and hoped to move to a bigger market.
In an attempt to recoup losses and pay outstanding debts, the Senators moved the NHL franchise to St. Louis, where it was nicknamed the Eagles.  However, the team continued to bleed money due to travel expenses, and it was forced to make ends meet by selling players to other teams. After the season, the owners asked the NHL for a second time for permission to suspend operations. This time, the NHL refused the request.  Instead, the league bought back the franchise, halted its operations and dispersed its players among the remaining teams. 

History

The move from Ottawa

The Ottawa Senators were founded in 1883 as an amateur club.  They began paying their players "under the table" in 1903 and turned openly professional in 1907.
However, for the better part of their tenure in Ottawa, the Senators played in the smallest market in the NHL. The 1931 census listed only 110,000 people in the city of Ottawa—roughly one-fifth the size of Toronto—which was the league's second-smallest market. The team started having attendance problems when the NHL expanded to the United States in 1924; games against the new American teams did not draw well.
The Senators' owners ultimately decided to move the franchise to St. Louis, Missouri and the transfer was approved by the league on May 14, 1934. Thomas Franklin Ahearn resigned as president of the Ottawa Auditorium and Redmond Quain became president. Quain transferred the players' contracts and franchise operations to a new company called the Hockey Association of St. Louis, Inc. Eddie Gerard was hired to coach the new team.
Even before the official debut of the Eagles, a problem had arisen for the new NHL club. There was already a professional hockey team in the city, the St. Louis Flyers, playing in the minor-pro American Hockey Association (AHA). The owners of the Flyers claimed they had an agreement with the NHL which prevented it from settling west of the Mississippi. They threatened to sue for $200,000 in compensation as soon as the Eagles played their first game. Following a visit from the AHA President, the Flyers were asked not to go forward with the lawsuit.  The Flyers did not pursue further legal action and eventually changed home venues.

1934–35 season

At the time there were nine teams in the NHL, divided into two divisions, the Canadian and American.  Logically, the Eagles should have been placed in the American Division with the Boston Bruins, Chicago Black Hawks, New York Rangers and Detroit Red Wings.  However, in defiance of all geographic reality, the Eagles retained the Senators' place in the Canadian Division alongside the Toronto Maple Leafs, Montreal Canadiens, Montreal Maroons, and New York Americans.
In their first game the Eagles succumbed to a late rally by the defending Stanley Cup champion Black Hawks, losing 3–1.
Under Boucher's coaching the team showed improvement, posting a 3–3–3 record in the first nine games.

The end of the Eagles

By season's end the Eagles ownership had lost $70,000, due primarily to the cost of train travel.  In those days, NHL teams traveled primarily by rail.  Due to being in the Canadian Division, the Eagles had to make a large number of trips to Montreal and Toronto.  An attempt to stabilize the franchise by selling off some of its players netted $58,000. The owners had hoped to move once more to save the franchise.
As a result, the ownership again petitioned the NHL to allow them to suspend operations for a year. This time the NHL refused and the Eagles were put up for sale.
The NHL distributed the players under contract with St. Louis through a dispersal draft. Teams selected players in an order based on the previous season's standings. Teams with the lowest point totals selected first. The Chicago Black Hawks did not participate in the draft. Eighteen of the twenty-three players under contract were selected with the remaining players being placed in the minor leagues. The players were distributed as follows:
No credible offers to purchase the dormant franchise ever surfaced.  As a result, the once-proud Senators/Eagles franchise never took the ice again, and remain one of two NHL teams to fold after winning a Stanley Cup (the other being the Maroons).
In 1938, the Montreal Maroons attempted to move to St. Louis. They were denied by the NHL due to the high travel costs that plagued the Eagles.

Final standings

Players

Twenty-nine players in all represented the Eagles during their lone season of existence. The last active player who played with the Eagles was Bill Cowley, who retired in 1947 after his final season with the Boston Bruins. He was also the only player in franchise history to start his career with the Eagles and be inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame. Syd Howe was the only captain of the team during its existence
Carl Voss led the team with 18 assists and 31 points Howe led them in goalscoring registering 14, despite being traded midway through the season. The totals were much lower than the NHL leaders as Charlie Conacher of Toronto led the league with 36 goals and 57 points, while Art Chapman of the Americans led for assists notching 34. Bill Beveridge was the only goaltender the team used during the season. Out of his 11 wins three were shutouts.
The list of players in the history of the team is presented below.
All player stats taken from Hockey-Reference.com

Team captains



Bibliography

}}
}}
}}
}}
}}


