[[Stack (abstract data type)]]

CATEGORIES: Articles with example pseudocode, Abstract data types

In computer science, a stack is a particular kind of abstract data type or collection in which the  principal (or only) operations on the collection are the addition of an entity to the collection, known as push and removal of an entity, known as pop. The relation between the push and pop operations is such that  the stack is a Last-In-First-Out (LIFO) data structure. In a LIFO data structure, the last element added to the structure must be the first one to be removed. This is equivalent to the requirement that, considered as a linear data structure, or more abstractly a sequential collection, the push and pop operations occur only at one end of the structure, referred to as the top of the stack. Often a peek or top operation is also implemented, returning the value of the top element without removing it.
A stack may be implemented to have a bounded capacity. If the stack is full and does not contain enough space to accept an entity to be pushed, the stack is then considered to be in an overflow state. The pop operation removes an item from the top of the stack. A pop either reveals previously concealed items or results in an empty stack, but, if the stack is empty, it goes into underflow state, which means no items are present in stack to be removed.
A stack is a restricted data structure, because only a small number of operations are performed on it. The nature of the pop and push operations also means that stack elements have a natural order. Elements are removed from the stack in the reverse order to the order of their addition. Therefore, the lower elements are those that have been on the stack the longest.cprogramming.html cprogramming.com

History

The stack was first proposed in 1946, in the computer design of Alan M. Turing (who used the terms "bury" and "unbury") as a means of calling and returning from subroutines. The same concept was developed, independently, by the Australian Charles Leonard Hamblin in the first half of 1957.C. L. Hamblin, "An Addressless Coding Scheme based on Mathematical Notation", N.S.W University of Technology, May 1957 (typescript)

Abstract definition

A stack is a basic computer science data structure and can be defined in an abstract, implementation-free manner,
or it can be generally defined as a linear list of items in which all additions and deletion are restricted to one end that is Top.
This is a VDM (Vienna Development Method) description of a stack:Jones: "Systematic Software Development Using VDM"
Function signatures:
   init: -> Stack
   push: N x Stack -> Stack
   top: Stack -> (N U ERROR)
   pop: Stack -> Stack
   isempty: Stack -> Boolean
(where N indicates an element (natural numbers in this case), and U indicates set union)
Semantics:
   top(init()) = ERROR
   top(push(i,s)) = i
   pop(init()) = init()
   pop(push(i, s)) = s
   isempty(init()) = true
   isempty(push(i, s)) = false

Inessential operations

In many implementations, a stack has more operations than "push" and "pop". An example is "top of stack", or "peek", which observes the top-most element without removing it from the stack. Computer Science Press, 1984 Since this can be done with a "pop" and a "push" with the same data, it is not essential. An underflow condition can occur in the "stack top" operation if the stack is empty, the same as "pop". Often implementations have a function which just returns if the stack is empty.

Software stacks

Implementation

In most high level languages, a stack can be easily implemented either through an array or a linked list. What identifies the data structure as a stack in either case is not the implementation but the interface: the user is only allowed to pop or push items onto the array or linked list, with few other helper operations. The following will demonstrate both implementations, using C.

=Array=

The array implementation aims to create an array where the first element (usually at the zero-offset) is the bottom. That is, array0 is the first element pushed onto the stack and the last element popped off. The program must keep track of the size, or the length of the stack. The stack itself can therefore be effectively implemented as a two-element structure in C:
The push() operation is used both to initialize the stack, and to store values to it. It is responsible for inserting (copying) the value into the ps->items array and for incrementing the element counter (ps->size). In a responsible C implementation, it is also necessary to check whether the array is already full to prevent an overrun.
The pop() operation is responsible for removing a value from the stack, and decrementing the value of ps->size. A responsible C implementation will also need to check that the array is not already empty.
If we use a dynamic array, then we can implement a stack that can grow or shrink as much as needed. The size of the stack is simply the size of the dynamic array. A dynamic array is a very efficient implementation of a stack, since adding items to or removing items from the end of a dynamic array is amortized O(1) time.

=Linked list=

The linked-list implementation is equally simple and straightforward. In fact, a simple singly linked list is sufficient to implement a stack—it only requires that the head node or element can be removed, or popped, and a node can only be inserted by becoming the new head node.
Unlike the array implementation, our structure typedef corresponds not to the entire stack structure, but to a single node:
Such a node is identical to a typical singly linked list node, at least to those that are implemented in C.
The push() operation both initializes an empty stack, and adds a new node to a non-empty one. It works by receiving a data value to push onto the stack, along with a target stack, creating a new node by allocating memory for it, and then inserting it into a linked list as the new head:
A pop() operation removes the head from the linked list, and assigns the pointer to the head to the previous second node. It checks whether the list is empty before popping from it:

Stacks and programming languages

Some languages, like LISP and Python, do not call for stack implementations, since push and pop functions are available for any list. All Forth-like languages (such as Adobe PostScript) are also designed around language-defined stacks that are directly visible to and manipulated by the programmer. Examples from Common Lisp:
C++'s Standard Template Library provides a "stack" templated class which is restricted to only push/pop operations.  Java's library contains a . PHP has an SplStack class.

Hardware stacks

A common use of stacks at the architecture level is as a means of allocating and accessing memory.

Basic architecture of a stack

A typical stack is an area of computer memory with a fixed origin and a variable size.  Initially the size of the stack is zero.  A stack pointer, usually in the form of a hardware register, points to the most recently referenced location on the stack; when the stack has a size of zero, the stack pointer points to the origin of the stack.
The two operations applicable to all stacks are:
There are many variations on the basic principle of stack operations.  Every stack has a fixed location in memory at which it begins. As data items are added to the stack, the stack pointer is displaced to indicate the current extent of the stack, which expands away from the origin.
Stack pointers may point to the origin of a stack or to a limited range of addresses either above or below the origin (depending on the direction in which the stack grows); however, the stack pointer cannot cross the origin of the stack.  In other words, if the origin of the stack is at address 1000 and the stack grows downwards (towards addresses 999, 998, and so on), the stack pointer must never be incremented beyond 1000 (to 1001, 1002, etc.).  If a pop operation on the stack causes the stack pointer to move past the origin of the stack, a stack underflow occurs.  If a push operation causes the stack pointer to increment or decrement beyond the maximum extent of the stack, a stack overflow occurs.
Some environments that rely heavily on stacks may provide additional operations, for example:
Stacks are often visualized growing from the bottom up (like real-world stacks). They may also be visualized growing from left to right, so that "topmost" becomes "rightmost", or even growing from top to bottom. The important feature is that the top of the stack is in a fixed position. The image to the right is an example of a top to bottom growth visualization: the top (28) is the stack 'bottom', since the stack 'top' is where items are pushed or popped from. Sometimes stacks are also visualized metaphorically, such as coin holders or Pez dispensers.
A right rotate will move the first element to the third position, the second to the first and the third to the second. Here are two equivalent visualizations of this process:
 apple                         banana
 banana    ===right rotate==>  cucumber
 cucumber                      apple
 cucumber                      apple
 banana    ===left rotate==>   cucumber
 apple                         banana
A stack is usually represented in computers by a block of memory cells, with the "bottom" at a fixed location, and the stack pointer holding the address of the current "top" cell in the stack.  The top and bottom terminology are used irrespective of whether the stack actually grows towards lower memory addresses or towards higher memory addresses.
Pushing an item on to the stack adjusts the stack pointer by the size of the item (either decrementing or incrementing, depending on the direction in which the stack grows in memory), pointing it to the next cell, and copies the new top item to the stack area. Depending again on the exact implementation, at the end of a push operation, the stack pointer may point to the next unused location in the stack, or it may point to the topmost item in the stack.  If the stack points to the current topmost item, the stack pointer will be updated before a new item is pushed onto the stack; if it points to the next available location in the stack, it will be updated after the new item is pushed onto the stack.
Popping the stack is simply the inverse of pushing.  The topmost item in the stack is removed and the stack pointer is updated, in the opposite order of that used in the push operation.

Hardware support

=Stack in main memory=

Most CPUs have registers that can be used as stack pointers. Processor families like the x86, Z80, 6502, and many others have special instructions that implicitly use a dedicated (hardware) stack pointer to conserve opcode space. Some processors, like the PDP-11 and the 68000, also have special addressing modes for implementation of stacks, typically with a semi-dedicated stack pointer as well (such as A7 in the 68000). However, in most processors, several different registers may be used as additional stack pointers as needed (whether updated via addressing modes or via add/sub instructions).

=Stack in registers or dedicated memory=

The  x87 floating point architecture is an example of a set of registers organised as a stack where direct access to individual registers (relative the current top) is also possible. As with stack-based machines in general, having the top-of-stack as an implicit argument allows for a small machine code footprint with a good usage of bus bandwidth and code caches, but it also prevents some types of optimizations possible on processors permitting random access to the register file for all (two or three) operands. A stack structure also makes superscalar implementations with register renaming (for speculative execution) somewhat more complex to implement, although it is still feasible, as exemplified by modern x87 implementations.
Sun SPARC, AMD Am29000, and Intel i960 are all examples of architectures using register windows within a register-stack as another strategy to avoid the use of slow main memory for function arguments and return values.
There are also a number of small microprocessors that implements a stack directly in hardware and some microcontrollers have a fixed-depth stack that is not directly accessible. Examples are the PIC microcontrollers, the Computer Cowboys MuP21, the Harris RTX line, and the Novix NC4016. Many stack-based microprocessors were used to implement the programming language Forth at the microcode level. Stacks were also used as a basis of a number of mainframes and mini computers. Such machines were called stack machines, the most famous being the Burroughs B5000.

Applications

Stacks have numerous applications. We see stacks in everyday life, from the books in our library, to the blank sheets of paper in our printer tray. All of them follow the Last In First Out (LIFO) logic, that is when we add a book to a pile of books, we add it to the top of the pile, whereas when we remove a book from the pile, we generally remove it from the top of the pile.
Given below are a few applications of stacks in the world of computers:

Converting a decimal number into a binary number

The logic for transforming a decimal number into a binary number is as follows:
However, there is a problem with this logic. Suppose the number, whose binary form we want to find, is 23. Using this logic, we get the result as 11101, instead of getting 10111.
To solve this problem, we use a stack. We make use of the LIFO property of the stack. Initially we push the binary digit formed into the stack, instead of printing it directly. After the entire number has been converted into the binary form, we pop one digit at a time from the stack and print it. Therefore we get the decimal number converted into its proper binary form.
Algorithm:
 '''function''' outputInBinary(Integer n)
     Stack s = ''new Stack''
     '''while''' n > 0 '''do'''
