[[Ashton Kutcher]]

CATEGORIES: 1978 births, 20th-century American male actors, 21st-century American male actors, American financiers, American investors, American male film actors, American male models, American male television actors, American memoirists, American people of Czech descent, American people of German descent, American people of Irish descent, American television producers, Businesspeople from Iowa, Living people, Male actors from Iowa, Participants in American reality television series, People from Cedar Rapids, Iowa, Pranksters, Private equity and venture capital investors, Twin people from the United States, University of Iowa people

Christopher Ashton Kutcher ( He is known for his portrayal of Michael Kelso in the Fox sitcom That '70s Show. He also created, produced, and hosted Punk'd and had lead roles in the Hollywood films Jobs, Dude, Where's My Car?, Just Married, The Butterfly Effect, The Guardian, and What Happens in Vegas.
Kutcher currently stars as Walden Schmidt on the CBS sitcom Two and a Half Men, since Charlie Sheen's firing from the show in 2011.

Early life

Kutcher was born in Cedar Rapids, Iowa to factory worker Larry M. Kutcher and Procter & Gamble employee Diane (Finnegan) Kutcher.
Michael's cardiomyopathy caused his home life to become increasingly stressful. He has stated that he "didn't want to come home and find more bad news about" his brother, and "I kept myself so busy that I didn't allow myself to feel". Kutcher attended Washington High School in Cedar Rapids for his freshman year, before his family moved to Homestead, Iowa, where he attended Clear Creek Amana High School. During high school, he developed a passion for acting and appeared in school plays. However, Kutcher's home life worsened as his parents divorced when he was 16. During his senior year, he broke into his high school at midnight with his cousin in an attempt to steal money; he was arrested leaving the scene. Kutcher was convicted of third-degree burglary and sentenced to three years' probation and 180 hours of community service. Kutcher stated that although the experience "straightened him out", he lost his girlfriend and anticipated college scholarships, and he was ostracized at school and in his community.
Kutcher enrolled at the University of Iowa in August 1996, where his planned major was biochemical engineering, motivated by the desire to find a cure for his brother's heart ailment. At college, Kutcher was kicked out of his apartment for being too "noisy" and "wild". "Dude – He's a star." Papermag. Retrieved October 6, 2006. Kutcher stated, "I thought I knew everything but I didn't have a clue. I was partying, and I woke up many mornings not knowing what I had done the night before. I played way too hard. I am amazed I am not dead." called "The Airliner" in Iowa City and was recruited to enter the "Fresh Faces of Iowa" modeling competition. After placing first, he dropped out of college and won a trip to New York City to the International Modeling and Talent Association (IMTA) Convention. Following his stay in New York City, Kutcher returned to Cedar Rapids, before relocating to Los Angeles to pursue a career in acting.

Career

Modeling career

After participating in an IMTA competition (losing to Josh Duhamel) in 1998, Kutcher signed with Next modeling agency in New York, appeared in ads for Calvin Klein, and modeled in Paris and Milan.

Television and film career

After his success in modeling, Kutcher moved to Los Angeles after his first audition,
In 2003, Kutcher produced and starred in his own series, MTV's Punk'd, as the host. The series involved hidden camera tricks performed on celebrities. He is also an executive producer of the reality television shows Beauty and the Geek, Adventures in Hollyhood (based around the rap group Three 6 Mafia), The Real Wedding Crashers, and the game show Opportunity Knocks. Many of his production credits, including Punk'd, come through Katalyst Films, a production company he runs with partner Jason Goldberg."Two New Producers, Lots of New Projects"  A 2004 interviewer described Kutcher as a "hunky young actor who is heading in all different directions at once", including "the hot L.A. restaurant Dolce":
 "If anything, I'm a trier," says Kutcher between puffs of filtered Lucky Strikes. "I think, more than anything, it comes from the fact that my father always had several irons in the fire. Also, I don't want to fail. If something doesn't work out—if That '70s Show got canceled or if I wasn't going to have a film career—I always wanted to have backup contingency plans. So I just started doing other things; and on a half-hour sitcom, you're really only working for 30 hours a week. It allows a lot of time for sitting around, which I always kind of filled with work." 
Because of scheduling conflicts with the filming of The Guardian, Kutcher was forced not to renew his contract for the eighth and final season of That '70s Show, although he did appear in the first four episodes of it (credited as a special guest star) and returned for the series finale. Kutcher produced and starred in the 2010 action comedy, Killers, in which he played a hitman. As of August 2013, Kutcher earns $750,000 an episode. "What They Earn". TV Guide. pp. 16 - 20.

Investments

Kutcher has also successfully invested in several technology startups.

Other work

Kutcher was part of the management team for Ooma, a tech start-up launched in September 2007. Ooma is in the Voice over Internet Protocol business and Kutcher's role was as Creative Director. He spearheaded a marketing campaign and produced viral videos to promote this service. Kutcher also created an interactive arm of Katalyst called Katalyst Media, with his partner from Katalyst Films, Jason Goldberg. Their first site was the animated cartoon Blah Girls. Ooma revamped its sales and marketing strategy with a new management team in the summer of 2008, replacing Kutcher as their creative director. Rich Buchanan, from Sling Media, became Ooma's Chief Marketing Officer.
In 2009, Kutcher established an international human rights organization with his then wife, Demi Moore. DNA Foundation, later known as Thorn, works to address the sexual exploitation of children and the proliferation of child pornography on a global scale.
On March 23, 2011, Kutcher launched his own Twitter client with UberMedia, called A. While the app was initially available exclusively for desktop computers with Adobe Air installed, it eventually became available on mobile platforms, for iPhone, Android, and BlackBerry. In order to download on one of the 3 mobile platforms, users must first have the UberSocial client installed on their device, and then proceed to the device's browser to download A.

Personal life

Relationships

In 2003, Kutcher began dating actress Demi Moore. Moore and Kutcher married on September 24, 2005, On November 27, 2013, the divorce was finalized.
Kutcher began dating his former That '70s Show co-star, Mila Kunis, in April 2012.

Interests and beliefs

Kutcher is a self-described fiscal conservative and social liberal. August 14, 2009. He has been a student of Jewish mysticism (Kabbalah), for several years. Kutcher has invested in an Italian restaurant, Dolce (other owners include Danny Masterson and Wilmer Valderrama) and a Japanese-themed restaurant named Geisha House located in Atlanta, Los Angeles and New York City.
On September 17, 2008, Kutcher was named the assistant coach for the freshman football team at Harvard-Westlake School in Los Angeles. However, he was unable to return in 2009 because he was filming
Spread.L.A. Times report on Kutcher
In February 2011, Kutcher sold his Hollywood Hills home, which he originally bought in 2004.
In April 2012, Kutcher became the 500th paying customer to sign up to ride Virgin Galactic's SpaceShipTwo.

Twitter presence

On April 16, 2009, Kutcher became the first user of Twitter to have more than 1,000,000 followers,

Controversy

In April 2011, Kutcher and wife Demi Moore began a public service announcement campaign claiming that "Real Men" do not engage the services of child prostitutes who are the victims of human trafficking.

Filmography

Films

Television

As a producer

Awards






