[[Marc Lépine]]

CATEGORIES: Criminals who committed suicide, Crime in Montreal, Université de Montréal, People from Montreal, Murder–suicides in Canada, 1964 births, 1989 deaths, Quebec murderers, Canadian mass murderers, Suicides by firearm in Quebec, Canadian people of Algerian descent

Marc Lépine (born Gamil Rodrigue Liass Gharbi) (October 26, 1964 – December 6, 1989) was a 25-year-old from Montreal, Canada who murdered fourteen women and wounded ten women and four menNote: Many sources state 13 were wounded, but the Coroner's report and the police officer responsible for the investigation state that 14 were wounded at the École Polytechnique, an engineering school affiliated with the Université de Montréal, in the École Polytechnique massacre, also known as the "Montreal Massacre".[ref]
</ref><ref name =L43></ref>
Lépine was born in Montreal, the son of a Canadian nurse and an Algerian businessman.  His father was abusive and contemptuous of women.   After his parents separated when he was seven, his mother returned to nursing to support her children. Lépine and his younger sister lived with other families, seeing their mother on weekends. Lépine was considered bright but withdrawn and having difficulties with peer and family relationships. He changed his name to Marc Lépine at the age of 14 giving as the reason his hatred of his father. Lépine's application to the Canadian Forces was rejected, and in 1982 he began a science program at a college, switching to a more technical program after one year. In 1986, he dropped out of the course in his final term, and was subsequently fired from his job at a hospital due to his poor attitude. He began a computer programming course in 1988, and again abandoned it before completion. Lépine twice applied for admission to the École Polytechnique, but lacked two required compulsory courses.
After several months of planning, Lépine entered the École Polytechnique de Montréal, on the afternoon of December 6, 1989.  He had long complained about women working in non-traditional jobs, and after separating men and women in a classroom, he shot the women, claiming that he was fighting feminism.  He then moved into other parts of the building, targeting women as he went, before killing himself. His suicide note blamed feminists for ruining his life.
Lépine's actions have been variously ascribed to psychiatric diagnoses such as personality disorder, psychosis, or attachment disorder, or societal factors such as poverty, isolation, powerlessness, and violence in the media. The massacre is regarded by criminologists as an example of a hate crime against women, and by feminists and government officials as misogynist attack and an example of the larger issue of violence against women.

Life

Childhood

Lépine was born Gamil Rodrigue Liass Gharbi on October 26, 1964 in Montreal, the son of Algerian immigrant Rachid Liass Gharbi and Canadian nurse Monique Lépine.[ref]

Instability and violence marked the family: they moved frequently, and much of Lépine's early childhood was spent in Costa Rica and Puerto Rico, where his father was working for a Swiss mutual funds company.  Gharbi had contempt for women and believed that they were only intended to serve men.[ref]
[/ref]  He required his wife to act as his personal secretary, slapping her if she made any errors in typing, and forcing her to retype documents in spite of the cries of their toddler.[ref]
[/ref]  He was also neglectful and abusive towards his children, particularly his son, and discouraged any tenderness, as he considered it spoiling.[ref]
[/ref][ref]

After two payments, Gharbi stopped making support payments, and to make ends meet Monique Lépine returned to nursing.

Adolescence

After the divorce became final in 1976, the children, then aged 12 and 9, returned to live with their mother, who was director of nursing at a Montreal hospital.
Lépine owned an air rifle as a teenager, which he used to shoot pigeons near his home with his friend.  They also enjoyed designing and building electronic gadgets.
Lépine applied to join the Canadian Forces as an officer cadet in September 1981 at the age of 17, but was rejected during the interview process.  He later told his friend it was because of difficulties accepting authority, and in his suicide letter, noted that he had been found to be "anti-social".[ref]

</ref><ref></ref>
An official statement from the military after the massacre stated that he had been "interviewed, assessed and determined to be unsuitable".

Adulthood

In 1982 at the age of 18, the family moved to Saint-Laurent, closer to his mother's work and to Lépine's new Cégep. He lost contact with his school friend soon after the move. This period marks the beginning of the seven years which he described in his suicide note as having "brought him no joy".
In August 1982, Lépine began a two-year pre-university course in pure sciences at Cégep de Saint-Laurent, failing two courses in the first semester but improving his grades considerably in the second semester. He worked part-time at a local hospital where his mother was director of nursing, serving food and doing custodial work. He was seen as nervous, hyperactive, and immature by his colleagues. He developed an attraction to another employee, however he was too shy to act on his feelings.[ref]
 After a year at college, he switched from the university-destined science program into electronics technology, a three-year technical program geared more towards immediate employment. His teachers remembered him as being a model student, quiet, hardworking and generally doing well in his classes, particularly those related to electrotechnology.  There was an unexplained drop in his marks in the fall 1985 term, and in February 1986, during the last term of the program, he suddenly and without explanation stopped attending classes, as a result failing to complete his diploma.
He moved out of his mother's home into his own apartment, and in 1986 he applied to study engineering at École Polytechnique de Montréal. He was admitted on the condition that he complete two compulsory courses, including one in solution chemistry.  In 1987, Lépine was fired from his job at the hospital for aggressive behaviour, as well as disrespect of superiors, and carelessness in his work. He was enraged at his dismissal, and at the time described a plan to commit a murderous rampage and then commit suicide.
In the fall of 1987, in order to complete his college diploma, Lépine took three courses, obtaining good marks in all,

Massacre

The massacre appeared to have been planned for several months if not longer.  In August 1989, Lépine picked up an application for a firearms-acquisition certificate and he received his permit in mid-October.  On November 21, 1989, Lépine purchased a Ruger Mini-14 semi-automatic rifle at a local sporting goods store.[ref]
 Lépine had always been very punctual paying his rent, but did not do so in December 1989.
On December 6, 1989, Lépine walked into the École Polytechnique de Montréal. There, he entered a second-floor classroom where he separated the men and women and then ordered the approximately fifty men to leave. Claiming that he was fighting feminism, he shot the nine women who remained, killing six and injuring the rest. After this, Lépine moved to other areas of the building, including the cafeteria, corridors and another classroom. A total of fourteen women (twelve engineering students, one nursing student, and one university employee) were killed, and four men and ten women injured before Lépine turned the gun on himself.
A three-page letter was found in the pocket of his jacket. The letter was never officially made public, but was leaked in November 1990 to Francine Pelletier, and published in the newspaper La Presse. In his suicide letter, Lépine claimed political motives, blaming feminists for ruining his life. He considered himself rational and expressed admiration for Denis Lortie, who had mounted an attack on the Quebec National Assembly in 1984 for political reasons, killing three Quebec government employees.
Marc Lépine was buried in the Cimetière Notre-Dame-des-Neiges in Montreal, a few blocks from where he committed the massacre.

Women murdered

Rationale

A police psychiatrist who interviewed Lépine's family and entourage, and who had access to his letters, suggested that he may have had a serious personality disorder, as he chose the multiple homicide/suicide strategy (killing one's self after killing others) that is a characteristic of this disorder. The psychiatrist noted "extreme narcissistic vulnerability" as shown by fantasies of power and success combined with high levels of self-criticism and difficulties dealing with rejection and failure. Feelings of powerlessness and incompetence were compensated for by a violent and grandiose imaginary life.
 Lépine's suicide statement == 
The following is a translation of the suicide letter written by Lépine on the day of the shooting. and Chalouh, M. The Montreal Massacre, Gynergy Books, 1991.
The original letter in French is also available.

The letter is followed by the list of nineteen names, with a note at the bottom:

Memorial

Canadians mark the day of the killings with a National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women.
In 2008, Lépine's mother Monique published Aftermath, a memoir of her own journey through the grief and pain of the incident. She had stayed silent until 2006, when she decided to speak out for the first time in the wake of that year's Dawson College shooting."Monique Lépine marks Montreal Massacre anniversary". cbc.
Lépine's life and death was dramatized by Adam Kelly in his controversial play The Anorak.Montreal Mirror - NOISEMAKERS 2009 - Arts
The shooting was dramatized by Denis Villeneuve in the 2009 film Polytechnique. Actor Maxim Gaudette won a Genie Award for Best Supporting Actor for his portrayal of Lépine."Polytechnique sweeps Genie Awards". Toronto Star, April 12, 2010.



Notes




