[[Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge]]

CATEGORIES: 1995 films, Indian films, Hindi-language films, Films set in London, Coming-of-age films, 1990s comedy-drama films, 1990s romantic drama films, Filmfare Best Movie Award winners, Directorial debut films, Yash Raj Films films, Film soundtracks, Films shot in Switzerland, Compositions by Jatin Lalit, Films shot in London

Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge (), also known as DDLJ, is a 1995 Indian romantic comedy musical film. It was written and directed by debutante director Aditya Chopra, produced by his father Yash Chopra, and stars Shahrukh Khan and Kajol. The film tells the story of a young couple who fall in love on a European vacation, and relates how the boy tries to win over the girl's parents so that she can marry him rather than the boy that her father has chosen for her. It was filmed in India, London, and Switzerland.
Earning over  During the 1996 awards season, the film won 10 Filmfare Awards, the most ever for a single film at that time, as well as the National Film Award for Best Popular Film Providing Wholesome Entertainment.
Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge was ranked by Indiatimes Movies among the "25 Must See Bollywood Films". It was one of two Hindi films in the "1001 Movies You Must See Before You Die" list along with Mother India. It was also placed twelfth on the British Film Institute's list of the top Indian films of all time. The film was declared an all-time blockbuster and it remains as the longest-running film in the history of Indian cinema. 

Plot

Raj Malhotra (Shahrukh Khan) and Simran Singh (Kajol) are two non-resident Indians living in London. Although both value their Indian roots, they have experienced different parenting styles. Simran has been raised by her conservative father Baldev (Amrish Puri) while Raj's father (Anupam Kher) is more liberal.
Simran has always dreamt of meeting a perfect boy who is the one for her. Her mother Lajjo (Farida Jalal) warns her against this, saying these dreams will never come true. Her father Baldev soon receives a letter from his friend Ajit (Satish Shah) who lives in Punjab. Ajit wants to keep a promise he and Baldev made to each other 20 years ago — to have Simran marry his son Kuljeet (Parmeet Sethi). Simran is disappointed by this news — she does not want to marry somebody whom she has never met before. Meanwhile, Raj has failed his degree which strangely makes his father proud of him. Raj asks his father if he can go on a train trip with his friends around Europe. His father agrees. Later, Raj enters Baldev's shop and steals some beer which infuriates him; he calls Raj a disgrace to Indians. Simran is also invited by her friends to go on the train trip. Simran tells her father that she thinks she should be allowed to go because it will be her last chance to see the world before she marries a complete stranger. Baldev lets her go but tells her not to betray his trust.
On the trip, Raj and Simran meet. Raj constantly flirts with Simran, much to her irritation. Then, the two miss their train to Zurich and are separated from their friends. They start to travel with one another to catch back up and become friends in the process. Raj falls in love with Simran on the journey and when they both part ways back in London, Simran realises that she is in love with him too. Simran tells her mother about the boy she met — Baldev overhears the conversation and becomes furious with her. He says that the family will move to India the next day. Meanwhile, Raj tells his father about Simran and that she is getting married soon. When Raj says he believes Simran loves him too, his father encourages him to go after her. Raj arrives at her house in London, only to find that she has already left for India. She left a souvenir they had bought together on their trip on her front porch, which encourages Raj to keep chasing her.
In India, Baldev is delighted to be reunited with his friend Ajit and all his relatives. Simran and her younger sister, Chutki, meet Kuljeet, Simran's fiance, and instantly dislike him due to his arrogance. Simran still cannot forget Raj and is miserable about having to marry Kuljeet. Her mother tells her to forget Raj because she knows that Baldev will never accept it. The next morning, Simran hears a familiar sound and runs out to the fields to find Raj there. She begs him to take her and run away because she knows her father will never let them be together. Raj refuses and says he will only marry Simran with her father's consent. Raj befriends Kuljeet and quickly gets accepted by both families. Soon Raj's father arrives in India and also becomes good friends with everyone. Eventually Lajjo and Chutki realise that Raj is the boy Simran fell in love with in Europe. Lajjo tells Raj and Simran to run away, but Raj still refuses. Baldev finally accepts Raj, until he discovers a photograph of Raj and Simran in Europe, and realises that Raj is the boy Simran had told them about. He openly insults Raj, telling him to leave.
Raj and his father are waiting at the station when Kuljeet and his friends arrive and attack them. Eventually Baldev and Ajit arrive and stop the fight.  Raj boards the departing train with his father. Simran soon arrives with her mother and sister. She tries to join Raj on the train but Baldev stops her. Simran begs him to let her go, saying she cannot live without Raj. Baldev thinks and realises that nobody can love his daughter more than Raj does. He lets her go, and she runs to catch the train as it takes off.

Cast

Production

Yash Chopra decided to launch his son Aditya, who had been working with him as an assistant director and producer, as a director with Dilwale Dulhaniya Le Jayenge. Aditya had total editorial control and made the film according to his own tastes and sensibilities. Yash did not see major portions until it was nearly complete.
The film was among the first to be produced with the large and rich South Asian diaspora in the West as its target. Some films that later followed this trend include Pardes (1997), Kabhi Khushi Kabhi Gham (2001), Kal Ho Na Ho (2003), and Salaam Namaste (2005); the diaspora market is seen as a safer financial investment than the desi market. Chopra then cast Kajol to star opposite Shahrukh Khan. The two actors had previous worked together in Baazigar (1993) and Karan Arjun (1995).
The first sequence filmed was of Kajol for the "Ho Gaya" song. Numerous scenes were shot in England and India.
Saroj Khan was the choreographer. After several disputes with Chopra, she was replaced by Farah Khan near the end of the shoot. Farah choreographed "Ruk Ja O Dil Deewane." Manish Malhotra was in charge of costume design, with help from Karan Johar. Sharmishta Roy was the art director. The film's title was suggested by one of the actors Kirron Kher, and was taken from the song "Le Jayenge Le Jayenge" from the 1974 film Chor Machaye Shor. The character of Raj sings small parts of this song throughout, and it recurs at the end. DDLJ is believed to be the only film with a "Title suggested by" credit.
After filming was complete, Chopra decided to make a Hollywood-style documentary of the filmmaking process, which had never been done before in India. Karan Johar and Chopra's brother Uday were put in charge. On 18 October, The Making of DDLJ was aired on Doordarshan, two days before the film's premiere.
DDLJ was the second Bollywood production and the first Yash Raj Film to be mixed in Dolby sound. It released in India with Dolby SR and a very limited release with Dolby Digital 5.1 which was brand new in India at the time.

Themes

Yash Raj Films was previously known for using foreign (non-Indian) locations for item numbers in their films. Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge started the trend for films designed to appeal to the Indian diaspora, which have foreign locations as integral parts of the story. The characters are themselves diaspora, and tend to be able to move around with ease between India and the West. This film repeats the usual conservative agenda of family, courtship and marriage, but it proposes that Indian family values are portable assets that can be upheld regardless of country of residence.
The story also aims to capture the struggle between traditional family values and the modern value of individualism. The film implies that "Indianness" can be defined by the importance of family life: whether at home or abroad, it is the Indian family system that is recognised as the social institution that most defines being Indian.
Also there are themes of the purity/sanctity of women being related to the purity/sanctity of the nation. In the scene after Raj and Simran spend the night together and Simran is concerned that something happened, Raj tells her: "You think I am beyond values, but I am a Hindustani, and I know what a Hindustani girl's izzat (honour) is worth. Trust me, nothing happened last night." This speaks to the Indian diaspora and their need to try and sustain their value system.

Soundtrack

The soundtrack features 7 songs composed by Jatin Lalit, with lyrics by Anand Bakshi and voice rendered by Lata Mangeshkar, Asha Bhosle, Kumar Sanu, Abhijeet, and Udit Narayan. Anand Bakshi won his third Filmfare Best Lyricist award after 14 years. Bhasker Gupta wrote for All Music that the soundtrack was the best of Jatin Lalit's career, and calls it the beginning of the fifth wave in Indian cinema soundtracks.
The soundtrack became the best selling Bollywood soundtrack of the year.

Reception

Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge opened to full houses and good reviews all over the world. It was a hit among both Indians and NRIs,
Tom Vick reviewed the film for Allmovie and said, "An immensely likeable movie, Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge performs the rarely achieved feat of stretching a predictable plot over three hours and making every minute enjoyable."
Anupama Chopra included the film in her list of "The 20 Best Hindi Films Ever Made", writing, "Perhaps the innocence of Raj and Simran's romance in which they can spend the night together without sex because Raj, the bratish NRI understands the importance of an Indian woman's honor. Perhaps it's the way in which the film artfully reaffirms the patriarchal status quo and works for all constituencies—the NRI and the local viewer. Or perhaps it's the magic of Shah Rukh Khan and Kajol who created a template for modern love, which was hip and cool but resolutely Indian."
Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge was ranked amongst Indiatimes Movies list of the 25 Must See Bollywood Films.

Accolades

Filmfare Awards

Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge won set the record at its time for the most Filmfare awards going to a single film with ten.

National Film Awards

Star Screen Awards

Legacy

In 2001, Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge overtook Sholay (1975) as the longest-running film in Indian cinema.
Audiences appreciated the duo of Shahrukh Khan and Kajol so much that they went on to work together in several other successful films including Kuch Kuch Hota Hai (1998), Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham... (2001), and My Name Is Khan (2010), and are often referred to as Indian cinema's most loved on-screen couple. The Western-made film Slumdog Millionaire also contains a scene where a young girl and young boy replace the adults usually seen in the "train scene". Also unlike the original, the scene does not end happily; the boy pulls his hand away and the girl is left behind.
The film's popularity has also led to numerous other references in contemporary films.
The British Film Institute (BFI) commissioned a book about Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge. It was the first Hindi film chosen for a series of studies on international films, called "BFI Modern Classics". The author was Anupama Chopra, and the book was released in 2002.
In 2006, members of the film team were honoured at a dinner event on the occasion of the film's 500 week anniversary. It was hosted by the Consulate General of Switzerland in Mumbai and by Switzerland Tourism.



Further reading

 
  | surname1 = Chopra
 | given1 = A
 | year = 2002
 | title = Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge ("The Brave-Hearted Will Take the Bride")
 | publisher = British Film Institute, London
 | ISBN = 0-85170-957-5
}}
 | surname1 = Chopra
 | given1 = A
 | year = 2004
 | title = Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge: The Making of a Blockbuster
 | publisher = Harper Collins Publishers, New Delhi
 | ISBN = 81-7223-552-6
}}
 | surname1 = Uberoi
 | given1 = P
 | year = 1997
 | title = The Diaspora Comes Home: Disciplining Desire in DDLJ
 | journal = Contributions to Indian Sociology
 | volume = 32
 | pages = 305–336
 | publisher = Mouton
 | url = 
}}
 | last1 = Punathambekar | first1 = A
 | author1-link =
 | title = Bollywood in the Indian-American Diaspora: Mediating a transitive logic of cultural citizenship
 | journal = International Journal of Cultural Studies
 | volume = 8
 | issue = 2
 | pages = 151–173
 | publisher = SAGE Publications
 | location =
 | year = 2005
 | url = 
 | issn =
 | doi = 10.1177/1367877905052415
 | mr =
 | zbl =
}}




