[[Bowling Green State University]]

CATEGORIES: Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities, American Association of State Colleges and Universities, Educational institutions established in 1910, Bowling Green State University, Education in Wood County, Ohio, Universities and colleges in Ohio, North Central Association of Colleges and Schools, Buildings and structures in Wood County, Ohio, Visitor attractions in Wood County, Ohio, 1910 establishments in Ohio

Bowling Green State University is a public university located in Bowling Green, Ohio, United States. The  south of Toledo, Ohio. The institution was granted a charter in 1910 as a normal school, specializing in teacher training and education, as part of the Lowry Normal School Bill that authorized two new normal schools in the state of Ohio. Over the university's history, it developed from a small rural normal school into a comprehensive public university.
As of 2012 Bowling Green offered over 200 undergraduate programs, about 2,500 students attend classes at Firelands and about 1,000 additional students at extension locations or online. About 85% of Bowling Green's students are from Ohio.
The university hosts an extensive student life program, with over 300 student organizations. Fielding athletic teams known as Bowling Green Falcons, the university competes at the NCAA Division I level (NCAA Division I-A for football) as a member of the Mid-American Conference in all sports except ice hockey, in which the university is a member of the Western Collegiate Hockey Association. The campus is home to annual events including the Dance Marathon a student-organized philanthropy event, Winterfest, and Buckeye Boys State.

History

Early history

The movement for a public high learning institution in northwestern Ohio began in the late 1800s as part of the growth in public institutions during the Progressive Era to meet demands for training and professional development of teachers. During the period, people of northwestern Ohio campaigned for a school in their region to produce better quality education and educators. The movement argued that the existing universities, The Ohio State University in Columbus, Miami University in Oxford and Ohio University in Athens, were distant and the region lacked a state-supported school of its own.
In 1910, the Ohio General Assembly passed the Lowry Normal School Bill that authorized Governor Judson Harmon to appoint the Commission on Normal School Sites to survey forty communities for two sites for normal schools, one in northeastern Ohio and one in northwestern Ohio.
The school opened on September 15, 1914 as Bowling Green State Normal School in two temporary locations at the Bowling Green Armory and at a branch school in Toledo for the 1914–1915 academic year.

Early growth and development

Over the next decade the school expanded academic facilities, athletics and student life, as enrollment grew to over 900 students. 
On October 28, 1927, Ivan "Doc" Lake, a BGSU graduate and sports editor of the Daily Sentinel-Tribune, established the nickname "Falcons".
Enrollment levels held steady into the Great Depression; but in 1933, the Ohio State Senate Welfare Commission proposed a plan to convert the school into a mental health institution. Students, faculty and administrators organized with the Bowling Green community to counter the proposal. The Student Protest Committee coordinated with the faculty and administration to organize a campus rally and march through the downtown Bowling Green. Members of the Protest Committee then launched a letter-writing campaign to community leaders throughout northwest Ohio, which helped convince the state legislature that closing the school would be counterproductive. The measure was defeated by a 14–5 vote. A few years later, in May 1935, the college was granted university status and changed its name to Bowling Green State University.
The university added the College of Business Administration to the existing College of Education and College of Liberal Arts.

World War II, Post-war era expansion

The 1940s, including World War II and its aftermath, brought big changes to BGSU. The war caused a drastic decrease in male enrollment and by 1943, the university canceled dances and formals, citing the lack of male students. Student life adapted to the wartime era with efforts such as the War Relief Committee, blood drives and War Bonds initiatives.
In the post-war era, BGSU constructed temporary structures to keep up with the increased housing demands for veterans and their families.  The university continued to add academic programs as the enrollment increased during the mid to late 1940s, including the Graduate School in 1948 after Dr. Emerson Shuck led the effort to create school. By 1950, enrollment grew to new record highs, with over 4,000 students.

McDonald era

1951 saw major changes when Ralph W. McDonald was appointed the fourth president in school history, following the retirement of Frank Prout. McDonald was the first university president from outside Ohio and came to BGSU with a focus on improving teacher education and certification standards. Prior to becoming president, he served as the Executive Secretary of the Department of Higher Education of the National Education Association for seven years. Under McDonald, BGSU reorganized its three colleges to group common departments together within each college. Reflecting the Cold War era, BGSU added an Air Force ROTC program and a Department of Air Science and Tactics. BGSU continued to add programs and in the early 1950s added a Master of Education (M.Ed.) and a Master of Science (M.S.) in Education. 
The university constructed new residence halls during the decade, Prout Hall in 1955 and Founders Quadrangle in 1957. In the years 2012-2014, the residence hall was renovated and remodeled.  This renovation updated the rooms, bathrooms, lobbies and outside sidewalks and walkways.

1960–1990: Diverse Growth

The College of Education experienced rapid growth and expansion during the 1960s when the university added various specialized education programs, including majors in special education, school psychology, guidance and counseling and vocational rehabilitation counseling. It expanded arts and music programs when the music department became the College of Education's first "school", renamed the School of Music in 1961. Specializations in guidance and counseling were added to the Master of Arts and Master of Education degrees in 1964; as well as a new department for teaching college administration. By 1965, BGSU's College of Education enrolled 5,470 students and was ranked the 16th largest producer of teachers in the United States. The university added new academic, administrative, and athletic facilities during the 1960s. Memorial Hall, later known as Anderson Arena, opened in 1960.
Student activism became common in the 1960s, reflecting the various social and political events of the time period. Vietnam War protests were common in downtown Bowling Green and on campus.
Bowling Green added two colleges in the early 1970s when the College of Health and Human Services opened in 1973 and the School of Music was elevated to the College of Musical Arts in 1975. In 1978, the university established the University Honors Program.
Throughout the 1970s construction continued, starting with the Mathematical Sciences Building,
The School of Technology was given college status in 1985 and renamed the College of Technology. The university expanded many of the technology and science facilities during the 1980s, including constructing the Planetarium and Physical Sciences Building. In 1985 Ronald Reagan became the seventh president or president to-be to visit the university after Warren G. Harding, Theodore Roosevelt, William Howard Taft, John F. Kennedy, Richard Nixon, and Gerald Ford.

Recent history

During the 1990s the university renovated and constructed many buildings. The BGSU Fine Arts Center received a $9.8 million addition in the early 1990s. Founders Hall was reopened in 1994 after extensive renovations at a cost of $15 million. That same year BGSU opened Olscamp Hall. East Hall  opened in 1998. All residence halls received wiring for Ethernet connections.
In 2008, the university began the first phase of a $200 million renovation project. BGSU first announced plans for the Stroh Center, a 5,000-seat arena to replace the aging Anderson Arena. The $36 million arena opened in September 2011, hosting basketball and volleyball; in addition to graduation ceremonies, concerts and other events. The arena was named for Kermit Stroh and Mary Lu Stroh, who donated $7.7 million for the project, the largest single private gift in BGSU's history.  
In 2009 the university began construction on the Wolfe Center for the Arts.

Campuses

Main

The main academic and residential campus is located on the northeast side of Bowling Green. The campus is arranged in a rectangle roughly one and a half miles long and one mile wide. It includes over 116 buildings on . The campus is bordered by Wooster Street to the south, Thurstin Avenue to the west, Poe Road to the north, and I-75 to the east. The university also owns buildings and parking lots throughout Bowling Green and the Bowling Green Research Enterprise Park just east of I-75. Ridge Street and East Merry Street run east-west through campus and Mercer Street bisects campus on a north-south axis.
The oldest portion of the BGSU campus is located in the southwest corner. It contains the oldest buildings on campus and was the original location. This area offers green space with large trees and historic buildings built in the early 1900s. Administrative services and classrooms occupy these buildings. Although not part of the historic section, Founders Hall, a large dorm, is located on the Southwest corner. Hanna Hall houses The Dorothy and Lillian Gish Film Theater and Gallery. Dedicated to BGSU in 1976, it features early film memorabilia and highlights the careers of both Lillian Gish and Dorothy Gish. The theater was renovated and rededicated in 1990. It seats 168 and is home to Tuesdays at the Gish, an International Film Series, and a Sunday Matinee Series, which are all free and open to the community.
The Science Research Complex is located on the northwest side of campus. The buildings of the science research complex were built in the mid-60s. They include Mathematical Science, Life Science, Psychology, Physical Science, and Technology (engineering).
Three large residence halls occupy the western edge of campus. The Offenhauer Towers consist of one ten-story and one eleven-story tower, connected by a first-floor lobby. and an eco-friendly dining facility known as The Oaks. Falcon Heights, a new residence hall, was added in 2011 across the street.
The Bowen-Thompson Student Union opened in 2002 in the west-central part of campus. It houses eateries including The Falcon's Nest food court, The Bowling Greenery, Starbucks and The Black Swamp Pub. Other facilities include the Campus Bookstore, The Peregrine Shop (a convenience store), an on-campus post office, computer labs, meeting rooms, a 250-seat movie theater, ballrooms, and various student lounges.
Central Campus features large lecture halls and classroom buildings. One of the most prominent is the  Oak Grove Cemetery is located in the north-central portion of campus. Student Health Services is located next to Oak Grove Cemetery.
The BGSU campus police station as well as counseling services are located in the College Park Office Building on the southern edge. Kohl Hall is a dormitory exclusive to members of the Chapman Learning Community, Partners in Context and Community for Urban Educators.
Arts programs are located to the east of Anderson Arena and Jerome Library in the east-central area. The Fine Arts Center is home to the School of Art and houses classrooms, a studio, workshop spaces, art galleries a glassblowing studio and faculty offices. BGSU is one of only a few schools that offer degrees in glassblowing. The Moore Musical Arts Center is located along Ridge St and is the home to the College of Musical Arts. Moore includes classrooms, recording studios, rehearsal halls, and Kobacker Hall, a large theater where many performances on campus are held.
Nearby are two identical residence halls known as the Harshman Quadrangle and the Kreischer Quadrangle, separated by a large field. This community offers members-only classes.
Bowling Green State University opened the Falcon health center in 2013, after demolishing the Popular Culture building in 2012.

=Athletic and recreation facilities=

Most athletic and recreation facilities are located on the eastern half of campus. The Student Recreation Center is a 

=Transportation and safety=

The campus fare-free bus transit system began in 1990 and runs throughout the campus and surrounding neighborhoods. In 2005 the university began testing Hybrid buses on the service's main route. It includes major stops at various residence halls, academic buildings and athletic buildings. The campus has a phone application that allows the students to track the location of the different buses around campus. This application also gives an estimated time on the buses arrival to the bus stops.
The Orange Bike program began in 2008 as part of an increase in campus sustainability. The program operates a community bikeshare system to reduce the carbon footprint of students' commutes across campus.
The University Police Department provides 24-hour law enforcement and security, campus escort service, motorist assistance, educational programs, and crime prevention information for the BGSU campus and surrounding areas. The department is staffed by 24 full-time, state-certified police officers granted full police authority by the Ohio Revised Code. In addition to the officers, the department includes a student safety services staff that provides services for the university community, such as crowd control and the campus escort service. The department deploys uniformed officers to patrol the campus in marked police cars, bicycles, and on foot and has a mutual aid agreement with the Bowling Green City Police and with all other state university police departments in Ohio.

BGSU Firelands

The college is located in Huron, Ohio, about 
First offered in 1946 in the Sandusky area and later expanded to serve Erie, Huron, Lorain, and Ottawa counties, extension programs established a foundation for BGSU Firelands, the university's regional campus. The college was established at a site located near Lake Erie in Huron, Ohio when the first building (now Foundation Hall) was opened. In 2003, Cedar Point Center opened its doors on the Firelands campus.

Academics and organization

Bowling Green State University offers more than 200 undergraduate majors and confers degrees.

For the 2011–12 academic year, the university was ranked 177th by U.S. News & World Report's National University Rankings of America's Best Colleges 2012, 162nd by The Washington Monthly's rankings of, and 481st by Forbes rankings of America's Top Colleges. In addition, BGSU was ranked 97th on the Top Public Schools ranking by U.S. News & World Report.
BGSU offered the nation's first PhD program in photochemical science, the first Ph.D. program in applied philosophy, The college of Business recently opened a facility at Levis Commons in Perrysburg, Ohio for its Professional MBA program. BGSU opened a satellite campus offering MBA classes at Owens State Community College in Findlay, Ohio in January 2013.

Tuition and graduation rates

Fall 2012 undergraduate tuition for the main campus costs are $371.40 dollars per credit hour for in-state tuition while out-of-state tuition is $676.40 per credit hour.
The six-year graduation rate for the university's main campus was 61 percent.

Faculty and Research

BGSU has a student-faculty ratio of 18:1.
In 1979, American author James Baldwin taught at BGSU for one quarter as a Distinguished Visiting Professor in the Ethnic Studies Department, after a month-long stint as writer in residence in 1978.
The Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education classified Bowling Green State University as a Doctorate-granting Research University with high research activity. In the first quarter of fiscal year 2012, BGSU received about $8.1 million in research funds from federal, university, private and others sources with over 52% from the National Science Foundation, National Institutes of Health, the United States Department of Energy, the United States Department of Health and Human Services, and the United States Department of Education. Research projects in the areas of Psychology, Sociology, Education and Human Development, Energy and Sustainability, are among the University's most prominent.
The BGSU Center for Sustainability and the Environment was named as one of Ohio's Centers of Excellence in advanced energy by the Ohio Board of Regents in October 2009. The center conducts research on renewable energy such as solar energy and wind generation on Lake Erie, energy conversion,  and using algae to generate biofuel. Research in conjunction with the University of Toledo created new ways to effectively determine appropriate Ohio windmill sites.
In 2010, BGSU's Health and Wellness Across the Lifespan Center was named as a Center for Excellence by the Ohio Board of Regents. The Center of Excellence for Health and Wellness Across the Lifespan primarily focuses on research pertaining to areas such as physical health, substance use and abuse, mental health, voice and speech science, family and marriage research, and health communication. It houses the first National Center for Family & Marriage Research, established by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services along with the Center for Family and Demographic Research, which received long-term funding by the National Institutes of Health for voice and speech science research.

Presidents

BGSU has had many Presidents, some of them are distinguished:

Athletics

Bowling Green's athletic teams are known as the Falcons. The university participates in NCAA Division I (Division I-A for football) as a member of the Mid-American Conference and the Western Collegiate Hockey Association for ice hockey. BGSU is one of only 13 universities in the country offering NCAA division I-A football, division I men's and women's basketball, and Division I ice hockey.
Bowling Green College Hockey team of 1984 won the national championship against Minnesota Duluth 5-4 in overtime. It was the first national championship that the Bowling Green College. People say it was the most athletic college team of its era. Eddie Powers was the starting goalie and was the best player on the team and 2nd ranked player in the nation at the time.
The Falcons women's basketball teams had recent postseason success. The team won conference championships in women's basketball in 2005, 2006, and 2007. 
Several BGSU coaches went on to prominent careers. Football coach Urban Meyer went on to great success at the University of Florida, earning two BCS National Championship Game appearances in a three-year span, winning in 2007 and 2009.

Club Sports and Events

BGSU offers a variety of sports at the club level.  Men's sports include cross country/track and field, rugby, lacrosse, baseball, basketball, soccer and ice hockey.  Women's club sports include rugby, cross country/track and field, soccer, softball, equestrian and gymnastics.  Also, in April 2011, BGSU hosted the National Club Track and Field Championships at Whittaker Track on the east end of campus.

Marching band

The Falcon Marching Band is the largest student organization at BGSU, with over 220 members. The band performs at home football games and other university functions; the band performed at select road football games and various bowl games including the Raisin Bowl in Fresno, California, Silver Bowl in Las Vegas, Nevada, Motor City Bowl in Detroit, Michigan, and the GMAC Bowl in Mobile, Alabama. In 2007, the band was invited to the Bands of America Regional in Indianapolis, Indiana. The Athletic Band is auditioned group that at most basketball and hockey games, as well as other university events.

Student life

Ohio residents account for 85% of the undergraduate student population while out-of-state students come from all 50 US states and 70 foreign countries. The student body consists of 54% women and 46% men, of which, 22% are either of international origin or members of ethnic minority groups.  Bowling Green had an on-campus residential student population of 6,500 students as of 2011. Approximately  85% are in-state students. The majority of students attend classes on BGSU's main campus. In addition to the main campus enrollment, 2,500 students enrolled in classes at BGSU Firelands as of 2011. 300 students attend classes at BGSU extension locations, and over 600 students attend classes via distance learning.
The university has an extensive student life program, with over 300 student organizations; club and recreational sports programs; nationally ranked living-learning communities and freshmen experience programs; student media organizations and publications; and Greek organizations.
In 2012 Bowling Green redesigned its undergraduate curriculum, creating an interdisciplinary program known as the BGeXperience (BGeX), that places a focus on personal growth and development, social connections, critical thinking, problem solving and diversity. First-year students begin the BGeX program during the BGeX Introduction Weekend prior to the start of the semester and continued taking courses designed to meet BGeX criteria throughout the four years of the undergraduate programs.
GeoJourney is a special academic program conducted by the School of Earth, Environment, and Society that features a nine-week field trip/camping trip/road trip across the United States to national parks and monuments granting 24 students a semester of college credit. The GeoJourney field program includes Geology, Environmental Studies and Native American studies. Credits apply to the BG Perspective general education requirements. Students on the journey conduct interdisciplinary field investigations and gain first-hand experiences in a wide range of environments. In 2004 the first GeoJourney trip went to 24 states, 30 national parks and covered over 14,500 miles across the United States.
As part of the Department of Recreational Sports, the BGSU Outdoor Program

Greek life

Bowling Green is home to many fraternities and sororities. In 2010, 13% of undergraduate men and 15% of undergraduate women were members of Greek organizations.  BGSU will be tearing down it's current Greek Town Homes and putting in a new Greek Village.  The demolition is scheduled for the fall of 2014 and the new Greek Village is scheduled for opening in the fall of 2016.

Media and publications

Campus newspapers include the independent student newspaper, The BG News,published since 1920. In 2008, the yearbook was replaced with a magazine format, The Key Magazine, and is published semi-annually, in fall and spring semesters.
Electronic media include two radio stations and one public television station, as well as student-produced television. BGSU's Public Broadcasting Service affiliate, WBGU-TV, broadcasts to nineteen counties in northwestern and west central Ohio and hosts PBS programming, local programming and BG24 News, a student-run television newscast airing live at 5:30pm twice a week (Tuesday and Thursday). The campus is home to two student-operated radio stations as part of the Department of Telecommunications. WBGU 88.1 FM and WFAL Falcon Radio. WBGU-FM serves as an independent radio, non-commercial educational (NCE), FCC-licensed station that focuses  mostly on independent music programming and broadcasts women's basketball and hockey; while the Bowling Green Radio Sports Organization (BGRSO) broadcasts BGSU athletic events on WBGU-FM and WFAL as well as local high school sports on WFAL.
The Mid-American Review is an international literary journal published through the BGSU Department of English. The Mid-American Review showcases contemporary fiction, poetry, nonfiction, and translations.

Traditions and events

SICSIC is an official spirit organization at BGSU that began in 1946 by President Frank J. Prout. SICSIC routinely attends major BGSU sporting events and other campus activities promoting school spirit. The organization is secret and contains six members, two each for sophomore, junior and senior classes. Two new members are chosen at the end of their class's freshman year to replace that year's two graduating seniors. The group is characterized by their use of gray jumpsuits and masks of famous pop culture and political figures to hide their identities, which are not revealed until the last home basketball game of their senior year.
BGSU's official mascots are Freddie and Frieda Falcon. Freddie Falcon began appearing at athletic events in 1950, while Frieda first appeared on February 25, 1966 as Mrs. Freddie Falcon. Nearly 20 years later, Frieda returned in the 1980–81 academic year as Freddie's little sister. 1980 marked the first official female Frieda after the 1966 version was played by a male cheerleader. Freddie and Frieda routinely make appearances at BGSU athletic events and other major events around campus and the community. In a similar tradition to SICSIC, the identities of the students who play Freddie and Frieda are not revealed until the end of the basketball and hockey seasons.
BGSU currently is the home of Ohio's largest student-run philanthropy, Dance Marathon.
Since the event began, it has raised over $2.2 million for the Children's Hospital.
Bowling Green hosts an annual event for three days in February similar to other winter cities to celebrate winter, snow, and cold weather activities.
Bowling Green has hosted the American Legion event known as Buckeye Boys State since 1978.

Notable alumni

Alumni of Bowling Green State University have become notable in a variety of different fields including politics and government, business, science, literature, arts and entertainment, and athletics. A number of Bowling Green Falcons have excelled at the collegiate, Olympic, and professional levels sports, including: Kevin Bieksa, and author James Carlos Blake, winner of the Los Angeles Times Book Prize.






