[[Melissa officinalis]]

CATEGORIES: Lamiaceae, Herbs, Medicinal plants, Honey plants, Plants described in 1753

Lemon balm (Melissa officinalis), also known as balm or balm mint, is a perennial herb in the mint family Lamiaceae, native to south-central Europe and the Mediterranean region.
It grows to 70–150 cm tall. The leaves have a gentle lemon scent, related to mint. During summer, small white flowers full of nectar appear. It is not to be confused with bee balm (which is genus Monarda). The white flowers attract bees, hence the genus name Melissa (Greek for 'honey bee').  Its flavour comes from citronellal (24%), geranial (16%), linalyl acetate (12%) and caryophyllene (12%).

Cultivation

In North America, M. officinalis has escaped cultivation and spread into the wild.usda. Retrieved July 2, 2010.
Lemon balm seeds require light and at least 20°C (70°F) to germinate. Lemon balm grows in clumps and spreads vegetatively, as well as by seed.  In mild temperate zones, the stems of the plant die off at the start of the winter, but shoot up again in spring. Lemon balm grows vigorously and should not be planted where it will spread into other plantings.
M. officinalis may be the "honey-leaf" (μελισσόφυλλον) mentioned by Theophrastus.1.4, identified as "M. officinalis" in the index of the Loeb Classical Library edition by Arthur F. Hort, 1916 etc. It was in the herbal garden of John Gerard, 1596.As "Melissa" (Common Blam) in both issues of Gerard's Catalogus, 1596, 1599: Benjamin Daydon Jackson, A catalogue of plants cultivated in the garden of John Gerard, in the years 1596-1599, 1876;
The many cultivars of M. officinalis include:
(M. officinalis 'Quedlinburger Niederliegende' is an improved variety bred for high essential oil content.)

Usage

Culinary use

Lemon balm is often used as a flavouring in ice cream and herbal teas, both hot and iced, often in combination with other herbs such as spearmint. It is also frequently paired with fruit dishes or candies. It can be used in fish dishes and is the key ingredient in lemon balm pesto.
It might be a better, healthier preservative than butylated hydroxy anisole in sausages.G.-I., Rehecho S., Calvo M.I., Cavero R.Y., Navarro I., Astiasarán I., Ansorena D.,"Effect of lyophilized water extracts of Melissa officinalis on the stability of algae and linseed oil-in-water emulsion to be used as a functional ingredient in meat products",   Meat Science 2010 85:2 (373-377)

Uses in traditional and alternative medicine

In the traditional Austrian medicine, M. officinalis leaves have been prescribed for internal (as tea) or external (essential oil) application for the treatment of disorders of the gastrointestinal tract, nervous system, liver, and bile.
Lemon balm is the main ingredient of Carmelite Water, which is still for sale in German pharmacies.
Lemon balm essential oil is very popular in aromatherapy. The essential oil is commonly codistilled with lemon oil, citronella oil, or other oils.

Research into possible effects on humans

High doses of purified lemon balm extracts were found to be effective in the amelioration of laboratory-induced stress in human subjects, producing "significantly increased self-ratings of calmness and reduced self-ratings of alertness." The authors further report a "significant increase in the speed of mathematical processing, with no reduction in accuracy" following the administration of a 300-mg dose of extract.
Lemon balm is believed to inhibit the absorption of the thyroid medication thyroxine.University of Maryland Medical Centre, "Lemon Balm"
Recent research found a daily dose of the tea reduced oxidative stress status in radiology staff who were exposed to persistent low-dose radiation during work.  After only 30 days of taking the tea daily, consuming lemon balm tea resulted in a significant improvement in plasma levels of catalase, superoxide dismutase, and glutathione peroxidase, and a marked reduction in plasma DNA damage, myeloperoxidase, and lipid peroxidation.
The crushed leaves, when rubbed on the skin, are used as a mosquito repellent.
Lemon balm is also used medicinally as an herbal tea, or in extract form. It is used as an anxiolytic, mild sedative, or calming agent.
Lemon balm and preparations thereof also have been shown to improve mood and mental performance. These effects are believed to involve muscarinic and nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Essential oils obtained from Melissa officinalis leaf showed high acetylcholinesterase and butyrylcholinesterase co-inhibitory activities., Okonogi S."Inhibition of cholinesterase by essential oil from food plant". Phytomedicine. 19 (8-9) (pp 836-839), 2012.
Its antibacterial properties have also been demonstrated scientifically, although they are markedly weaker than those from a number of other plants studied.
Lemon balm is mentioned in the scientific journal Endocrinology, where it is explained that Melissa officinalis exhibits antithyrotropic activity, inhibiting TSH from attaching to TSH receptors, hence making it of possible use in the treatment of Graves' disease or hyperthyroidism.

Chemistry

Lemon balm contains eugenol, tannins, and terpenes.

Gallery

Image:Melissa officinalis BB-1913.jpg
Image:Melissa officinalis01.jpg|Leaves
Image:Melissa officinalis1.jpg|Leaves
Image:Melissa officinalis2.JPG|Leaves
Image:Melissa officinalis3.JPG|Plant
Image:Melissa-officinalis-(Lemon-Balm)-flower-Vis-UV-IR-comparison.jpg|Spectral comparison showing nectar guide visible in UV






