[[Tea for the Tillerman]]

CATEGORIES: Cat Stevens albums, 1970 albums, Albums produced by Paul Samwell-Smith, Island Records albums, A&M Records albums, Mobile Fidelity Sound Lab albums, Universal Deluxe Editions, English-language albums

Tea for the Tillerman is an album by the singer-songwriter Cat Stevens. This album, Stevens' second during 1970, includes many of Stevens' best-known songs including "Where Do the Children Play?", "Hard Headed Woman", "Wild World", "Sad Lisa", "Into White", and "Father and Son". Four of the tracks ("Where Do the Children Play?", "On the Road to Find Out", "Tea for the Tillerman", and "Miles from Nowhere") were featured in the Hal Ashby and Colin Higgins' black comedy film Harold and Maude, in 1971. The track "But I Might Die Tonight" was featured in a film the year before, in 1970: Deep End, directed by Jerzy Skolimowski. Stevens, a former art student, created the artwork featured on the record's cover. "Tea for the Tillerman" was also used over the end credits for the BBC TV show Extras.
With "Wild World" as an advance single, this was the album that brought Stevens world-wide fame.
In November 2008, a "Deluxe Edition" was released featuring a second disc of demos and live recordings. In January 2012, a hi-res 24/192 kHz version was remastered using an Ampex ATR100 and a MSB Technology Studio ADC and released on HDtracks.

Critical reception

In a contemporary review for The Village Voice, music critic Robert Christgau gave the album a "B–" and found the music monotonous and lacking the "dry delicacy" Stevens exhibited on Mona Bone Jakon (1970).
In a retrospective five-star review, AllMusic's William Ruhlmann praised Stevens' themes of spirituality and transcendence, and felt that he had continued to show his ability as a pop melodicist: "As a result, Tea for the Tillerman became a big seller and, for the second time in four years, its creator became a pop star." In 2006, the album was included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die.rocklistmusic.co.htm In 2007, the album was included in the list of "The Definitive 200 Albums of All Time", released by The National Association of Recording Merchandisers and the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.com/features/Definitive_200.asp

Track listing

All songs written by Cat Stevens.

Original release

=Side one=

=Side two=

Deluxe Edition

=Disc two=

Personnel

Charts

Album
Single

Certifications

Cover versions

Songs from this album have been covered by a diverse range of artists, which include:

Use in popular culture

The title track is used by Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant for the closing credits of Extras. The fourth episode of the second series of the show features a cover of "Tea for the Tillerman" performed by Chris Martin of Coldplay.
The song "Miles From Nowhere" is featured in The A-Team and is used during Face's (Dirk Benedict) walking away scenes in the episode "Alive at Five".
The character Sid in Skins sings the song "Wild World" with the rest of the Skins cast at the end of the last episode of Skins in series 1.
The song "Wild World" is featured on the episode "Escobar Galloardo" from the first season of Nip/Tuck.




