[[Jizya]]

CATEGORIES: Arabic words and phrases in Sharia, Personal taxes, Islam and other religions, Judeo-Islamic topics, History of taxation, Taxation in the Ottoman Empire, Abolished taxes

Under Islamic law, jizya or jizyah (; Ottoman Turkish: cizye;) is a per capita tax levied on a section of an Islamic state's non-Muslim subjects, who meet certain criteria. The tax is and was to be levied on able-bodied adult males of military age (but with specific exemptions). 507 From the point of view of the Muslim rulers, jizya was a material proof of the non-Muslims' acceptance of subjection to the state and its laws, "just as for the inhabitants it was a concrete continuation of the taxes paid to earlier regimes." In return, non-Muslim subjects were permitted to practice their faith, to enjoy a measure of communal autonomy, to be entitled to the Muslim state's protection from outside aggression, and to be exempted from military service and from the zakat tax levied upon Muslim citizens. 34. The Holy Quran. Medina: King Fahd Holy Qur-an Printing Complex, pg. 507

Etymology and meaning

In Arabic it means: "What is taken from the dhimmis, which is the amount of money agreed upon in the contract that gives the non-Muslim the Dhimmai status; and it's derived from the act of the verb "reward"; as if it (jizya) is a requital for not being killed.".لسان العرب، الجزية - Lisan al-Arab (Dictionary)
The Arabic term jizya appears in verse 
Commentators disagree on the definition and derivation of the word jizya:
In practice, the word is applied to a special type of tax, levied upon the non-Muslim adult males living under an Islamic state.
After the Norman conquest of Sicily, taxes imposed on the Muslim minority were also called the "jizya".

Rationale

There were two main legal rationales for jizya: the Communalist and Universalist. The former believed that jizya was a fee in exchange for the dhimma (permission to practice one's faith, enjoy communal autonomy, and to be entitled to Muslim protection from outside aggression). The latter, however, assumed that such rights were every person's birthright (Muslim or non-Muslim), and the imposition of jizya on non-Muslims similar to the imposition of Zakat on Muslims. 77 For a comparison between them; refer to this section.
And al-Razi says in his interpretation of the quranic verse(9:29) in which the jizya was enacted:

Many Muslim rulers saw jizya as a material proof of the non-Muslims' acceptance of the authority of the Islamic state.

Islamic Law

Many scholars believe jizya is sanctioned by the Qur'an, the primary source of Islamic law, based on the following verse:

Since the verse does not define what jizya means, hadith texts that are needed to provide the definition. Not all scholar agree on the exact definition, most notably the Quranist scholars as they generally avoid hadith-inspired interpretation of the Qur'an.

Hadith sources

Jizya is mentioned a number of times in the hadith. Common themes across multiple hadith (and often multiple collections of hadith) include Muhammad ordering his military commanders to fight non-Muslims who aggressed against the Muslims, until they accepted Islam or paid the jizya, Muhammad and a number of caliphs imposing jizya on non-Muslim residents of Islamic lands, and the eventual abolition of jizya by Jesus' Second Coming.Sunan Abu Dawood Book 37, 4310

=Sahih Bukhari=

=Sahih Muslim=

=Sunan Abu-Dawud=

=Al-Muwatta=

Islamic legal commentary

Application

As Muslim army commanders expanded their empire and attacked countries in Asia, Africa and southern Europe, they would offer three conditions to their enemies: convert to Islam, or pay jizyah (tax) every year, or face war to death. Those who refused war and refused to convert were deemed to have agreed to pay jizya. War and Peace in the Law of Islam, Johns Hopkins University Press; pages 162–224; ISBN 978-1-58477-695-6

Source of jizya tax

In early periods of Islam, jizya was applied to every free adult male non-Muslim. Slaves, women, children, the old, the sick, monks, hermits and the poor, were all exempt from the tax, unless any of them was independent and wealthy. However, these exemptions were no longer observed during later periods in Muslim history, and discarded entirely by the Shāfi'ī School of Law, which prevailed in Egypt, also in theory."The provisions of ancient Islamic law which exempted the indigent, the invalids and the old, were no longer observed in the Geniza period and had been discarded by the Shāfi'ī School of Law, which prevailed in Egypt, also in theory." Goiten, S.D. "Evidence on the Muslim Poll Tax from Non-Muslim Sources", Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient 1963, Vol. 6, pp. 278–279.
Though jizya was mandated initially for People of the Book, viz. adherents of other monotheistic faiths (Judaism, Christianity, Sabianism), under the Maliki school of Fiqh, jizya was extended to all non-Muslims. Ceremonies of Possession in Europe's Conquest of the New World, 1492–1640, Cambridge University Press, Oct 27, 1995, pp. 79–80. Thus some Muslim rulers collected jizya from Hindus and Sikhs under their rule.
Jizya tax had to be paid by each non-Muslim male in person, by presenting himself, arriving on foot not horseback, by hand, in order to confirm that he lowers himself to being a subjected one, accepts humiliation of having been conquered, willingly pays in gratitude for his life being spared in lieu of the taxes. (2013). Slavery, the state, and Islam. Cambridge University Press; pages 60–64; ISBN 978-0521119627Mark Durie, The Third Choice: Islam, Dhimmitude and Freedom; see Chapter 6; ISBN 978-0980722307

Rate of jizya tax

By time of Mohammed, the jiyza rate was one dinar per year imposed on male dhimmis in Medina, Mecca, Khaibar, Yemen, and NejranA S Tritton, Caliphs and Their Non-Muslim Subjects: A Critical Study of the Covenant of Umar, pp. 204 and maximum of twelve dirhams under Achtiname of Muhammad for Saint Catherine's Monastery. Yusuf claims there was no amount permanently fixed for the tax, though the payment usually depended on wealth: the Kitab al-Kharaj of Abu Yusuf sets the amounts at 48 dirhams for the richest (e.g. moneychangers), 24 for those of moderate wealth, and 12 for craftsmen and manual laborers. 159–160
Other scholarsDennet, Daniel (1950). Conversion and the poll tax in early Islam. Harvard University Press.) Translated from Arabic by Leon Bercher. 5th ed. Algiers, 1960, pages 164–166Abu'l-Hasan al-Mawardi (1996), al-Ahkam as-Sultaniyyah. The Laws of Islamic Governance, trans. by Dr. Asadullah Yate, (London), Ta-Ha Publishers, pages 200-204 claim the tax rates and amounts were fixed and strictly implemented. The rate of jizya and Kharaj tax, head tax and land tax respectively, exceeded 20% for all non-Muslims, and payable by new moon. In the western Islamic states, for dhimmis who were Christians and Jews of Egypt and Morocco, these taxes were often graded into three levels with minimum rate being 20% of all estimated assets and any sales.Lane-Poole, S., & Gilman, A. (1893). The Moors in Spain (Vol. 6). T. Fisher; see pages 40–62 In the eastern Islamic states, for dhimmis who were Hindus and Jains, the tax structure were similar, with non-Muslims paying jizya and Kharaj tax rate at least twice the zakat tax rate paid by Muslims. The discriminatory and high tax rates led to mass civil protests of 1679 in India, these protests were crushed by Aurangzeb. (Ed.). (2002). A History of Modern India: 1480–1950. Anthem Press; pages 28-39, 89–127Elphinstone, M. (1905), The history of India: the Hindú and Mahometan periods; John Murray (London); see pages 616–658
In return for the tax, those who paid the jizya were permitted to keep their religion, practice it in private without offending Muslims, but were not allowed to build new Churches, Synagogues or Temples. (2003), Encyclopedia of Islam & the Muslim World, see articles on dhimmis and on minorities, ISBN 978-0028656038Ahmed, Z., & Ahmad, Z. (1975). "The Concept of jizya in Early İslâm." Islamic Studies, 14(4), see pages 293–305. They were considered to be under the protection of the Muslim state, subject to their meeting certain conditions. The Foundations of Islamic Political Economy. Hampshire: The Macmillan Press. p. 49–50

Associated taxes with jizya

Along with jizya as head tax (sometimes called neck tax), non-Muslims were also required to pay Kharaj as land tax. This was levied on anyone who worked on land or owned property on land. Both jizya and kharaj were not payable by Muslims or if the non-Muslim converted to Islam.). (1958). Taxation in Islam (Vol. 1). Brill (Netherlands); pages 27–49Coşgel, M., Miceli, T., & Ahmed, R. (2009). Law, state power, and taxation in Islamic history. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 71(3), pages 704–717
Other taxes payable, by or from the property of non-Muslim subjects, along with jizya were fai, ghanima and ushur. Fai (sometimes spelled fay) was non-Muslim property seized by a Muslim official; the non-Muslim was sometimes allowed to reclaim the seized property by paying 100% of assessed value of the seized property.T.W. Juynboll, Encyclopedia of Islam, 1st Edition, Brill, see article on 'Fai', pages 38–40; also see article on 'Fay' by F. Loekkegaard in Encyclopedia of Islam, 2nd Edition, BrillGhazanfar, S. M. (2003). Contributions of selected Arab-Islamic scholars, Medieval Islamic Economic Thought, Routledge (New York), pages 228–243; for basis: see Quran 59:7 Ghanima was the 20% tax paid by the Muslim army commander on the booty and plunder collected from non-Muslims by force (anwatan) after a war or after the commander launched a raid against non-Muslim trade posts, temples, or caravans. The commander and his Muslim soldiers were entitled to keep 80% of the booty. (Ed.). (2001). The Islamic law of nations: Shaybani's Siyar. Johns Hopkins University Press; pages 47–129, 290–310AHMAD, Z., & Ahmed, Z. (1975). FINANCIAL POLICIES OF THE HOLY PROPHET—A Case Study of the Distribution of Ghanima in Early Islam. Non-Muslims paid twice the rate than Muslims on assessed value of property in possession of the transiting person. This was in addition to the jizya. (2006), Zakat, Taxes, and Public Finance in Islam, in Islam and the Everyday World: Public Policy Dilemmas (Sohrab Behdad et al Editors), pages 165–182Ahamat, H., & Kamal, M. H. M. (2011). "Modern Application of Siyar (Islamic Law of Nations): Some Preliminary Observations". Arab Law Quarterly, 25(4), 423–439
Jizya and other associated taxes were payable by sedentary non-Muslim populations. Sadaqa was a tax levied on nomadic people, instead of jizya. The Early Islamic Conquests, Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-1597404587Shemesh, Ben (Ed.). (1958). Taxation in Islam (Vol. 1). Brill Archive. There is some controversy is sadaqa was mandatory or voluntary. R. (2006). "A Descriptive Overview of Islamic Taxation". Journal of American Academy of Business, 8(2), 16–28.

Punishment for failure to pay taxes

According to Abu Yusuf, jurist of Harun al-Rashid, those who didn't pay jizya should be imprisoned not to be let out of custody until payment. 160. Though it was an annual tax, non-Muslims were allowed to pay it in monthly installments. If someone had agreed to pay jizya, leaving Muslim territory for non-Muslim land was, in theory, punishable by enslavement if they were ever captured. This punishment did not apply if the person had suffered injustices from Muslims. NYU Press, 2001, page 47.
In practice, non-payment of jizya tax, or the associated Kharaj tax, by any non-Muslim subject in a Muslim state was punished by his family's arrest and enslavement. (1992). Race and Slavery in the Middle East: A Historical Enquiry. Oxford University Press; pages 7–11; ISBN 978-0195053265Hunwick, J. O. (2000). Aḥmad Bābā on Slavery. Sudanic Africa (A Journal of Historical Sources), pages 131–139. (1989). Slavery in the Arab world. Rowman & Littlefield; pages 25–47; ISBN 0941533301 The women and girls of an enslaved family would become property of a Muslim master and serve as houseworkers and female sex slaves (raqiq or baghiya). (1989). Slavery in the Arab world. Rowman & Littlefield; see Chapter 4; ISBN 0941533301Ennaji, M. (2013). Slavery, the state, and Islam. Cambridge University Press; see Chapter 2; ISBN 978-0521119627 A non-Muslim could avoid arrest or stop paying the jizya tax any time by converting to Islam as it was a punishment for not accepting Islam, and he was constantly reminded of this. War and Peace in the Law of Islam, Johns Hopkins University Press; pages 191–199; ISBN 978-1-58477-695-6 In some regions of Islamic rule, the Sultans faced rebellion and the non-Muslim masses refused to convert to Islam or pay jizya., & Glazer, A. (2005). "Taxation and Pricing when Consumers Value Freedom." Social Choice and Welfare, 24(2), pages 211–220 Militant opposition erupted to Islamic punishment for refusal to pay discriminatory jizya taxes, such as in India, Spain and Morocco. (1969). "jizyah and the State in India during the 17th Century." Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient / Journal de l'histoire economique et sociale de l'Orient, pages 322–340. M. (Ed.). (1987). A History of the Maghrib in the Islamic Period. Cambridge University Press In some cases, this led to its periodic abolishment such as the 1704 AD suspension of jizya in Deccan region of India by Aurangzeb. (Ed.). (2002). A History of Modern India: 1480–1950, Anthem Press; page 109-112

Use of jizya tax

Jizya was used to build mosques, buy freedom for Muslim prisoners of war in non-Muslim states, fund Islamic charities meant to help Muslims, fund enlargement of armies, and pay for the wars of expansion. A. (1989). "Economic Ideas of Shehu Usman Dan Fodio". Journal Institute of Muslim Minority Affairs, 10(1), 139–151. Harlow: Pearson EducationSchimmel, Annemarie (1980), Islam in the Indian Subcontinent, Brill (Netherlands), ISBN 9004061177 Non-Muslims and slaves owned by Muslims had no right to expenditures or grants from any collected jizya and other taxes. H., Lubetski, M., Gottlieb, C., & Keller, S. (Eds.). (1998), Boundaries of the Ancient Near Eastern World, Volume 273, Continuum; pages 245–299 Jizya and associated taxes also ended up in "private" treasuries.

History

Taxation from the perspective of people who came under the Muslim rule, was a concrete continuation of the taxes paid to earlier regimes,Cl. Cahen in Encyclopedia of Islam, jizya article but now lower under the Muslim ruleLewis (2002) p.57 and from the point of view of the Muslim conqueror was a material proof of the payer's subjection to the state and its laws. In Ottoman Hungary the tax was known as jizzye (According to Bat Ye'or, this fiscal policy in the forms of jizya, kharaj was a primary cause for the disappearance of dhimmi populations through conversion to Islam or flight. Farleigh Dickinson University Press, 2002, page 71.

During Muhammad's Era

Jizya was levied in the time of Muhammad on vassal tribes under Muslim control and protection, including Jews in Khaybar, Christians in Najran, and Zoroastrians in Bahrain. William Montgomery Watt traces its origin to a pre-Islamic practice among the Arabian nomads wherein a powerful tribe would agree to protect its weaker neighbors in exchange for a tribute, which would be refunded if the protection proved ineffectual. 49–50.
Three military campaigns during Muhammad's era culminated with the agreement requiring the new non-Muslim subjects to pay jizya, in return for Muslim protection: Battle of KhaybarStillman 18–19 and the expedition of Abdur Rahman bin Auf.

Early Islam and the Rashidun Caliphate

The history of the origins of the jizya is considered to be extremely complex, according to the Encyclopaedia of Islam. This is attributed to three reasons:Cahen, Cl.; İnalcık, Halil; Hardy, P. "Ḏj̲izzya." Encyclopaedia of Islam. Edited by: P. Bearman , Th. Bianquis , C.E. Bosworth, E. van Donzel and W.P. Heinrichs. Brill, 2008. Brill Online. 29 April 2008

Historical development

Following his migration to Medina, Muhammad drafted a document, known as the Constitution of Medina, which codified the rights and duties among Medina's communities, including the Jews and Muslims. 39Esposito (1998), p. 17 According to F. E. Peters, the Jewish tribes of Medina rejected Muhammad's claim to be a prophet, and secretly liaised with Muhammad's enemies in Mecca to overthrow him. 273.
Prompted by what he saw as their treasonous behavior, Muhammad's ensuing reaction — in contrast to his treatment of Jews outside of Medina — was determined and progressively more violent. After each major battle against Mecca, the Jewish tribes of Medina were accused of treachery. Having broken the terms of their compliance to Muslim rule, the Jewish tribes of Medina were first banished, then enslaved and finally part of the community was executed en masse. Montgomery. Muhammad at Medina, Oxford University Press, 1956, p. 265
Moshe Gil writes that during the Tabuk campaign however, Muhammad altered his policies towards Jewish and Christian communities by offering them protection in exchange for certain promises as evidenced from the Qur'an. These letters of protection were sent to several of these towns, asking them to pay taxes (jizya) and to agree not to maintain military forces in return for protection by Muslim forces (dhimma). A History of Palestine: 634–1099, Cambridge University Press, 1997, pp. 28–30.
The letter sent to the bishop Yuhanna at Eilat:
 "To Yuhanna bin Ruba and the worthies of Ayla, Peace be with you! Praise be Allah, there is no God save Him. I have no intention of fighting you before writing to you. Thou hast to accept Islam, or pay the tax, and obey God and his Messenger and the messengers of His Messenger, and do them honour and dress them in fine clothing, not in the raiment of raiders; therefore clothe Zayd in fine robes, for if you satisfy my envoys, you will satisfy me. Surely the tax is known to you. Therefore if you wish to be secure on land and on sea, obey God and his Messenger and you will be free of all payments that you owed the Arab tribes or non-Arabs, apart from the payment to God is the payment of his Messenger. But be careful lest thou do not satisfy them, for then I shall not accept anything from you, but I shall fight you and take the young as captives and slay the elderly. For I am the true Messenger of God; put ye your trust in God and his books and his messengers and in the Messiah son o f Maryam, for this is God's word and I too, put my trust in Him, for he is the Messenger of God. Come then, before a calamity befalls you. As for me, I have already given my envoys instructions with regard to you: give Harmal three wasqs of barley, for Harmala is your well-wisher, for if it were not for God and if it were not for this, I would not be sending you messengers, but rather you would be seeing the army. Therefore if you my messengers, you will have the protection of God and of Muhammad and all that stand at his side. My messengers are Shurahbil and Ubayy and Harmala and Hurayth b. Zayd who is one of the sons of the Banu Tayy'. All that they decide with regard to you shall be according to my wishes, and you will have the protection of God and of Muhammad the Messenger of God. And peace will be with you if you obey me. And the people of Maqnā thou shall lead back to their land." 
The letter sent to the people of Adhruh:
 "In the name of God, the merciful, the compassionate. From Muhammad the Prophet to the people of Adhruh; They live securely by virtue of the letter of security from God and from Muhammad. They are due to pay 100 dinars, good and weighed, on every Rajab. And if one them flees from the Muslims, out of fear and awe—for they feared the Muslims—they shall live securely until Muhammad will visit them before he leaves." [/ref]
Under Caliph Umar the Zoroastrian Persians were given People of the Book status, and jizya was levied on them. Christian Arab tribes in the north of the Arabian Peninsula refused to pay jizya, but agreed to pay double the amount, and calling it sadaqa, a word meaning "alms" or "charity". According to Yusuf al-Qaradawi the name change was done for the benefit of the Christian tribesmen, "out of consideration for their feelings".net - Ask The Scholar
Fred Donner, however, in The Early Islamic Conquests, states that the difference between sadaqa and jizya is that the former was levied on nomads, whereas the latter was levied on settled non-Muslims. Donner sees sadaqa as being indicative of the lower status of nomadic tribes, so much so that that Christian tribesmen preferred to pay the jizya. Jabala b. al-Ayham of the B. Ghassan is reported asked Umar "Will you levy sadaqa from me as you would from the ordinary bedouin (al-'arab)?" Umar acceded to collecting jizya from him instead, as he did from other Christians. The Early Islamic Conquests, Princeton University Press, 1981, p. 251.
Sir Thomas Arnold, an early 20th-century orientalist, gives an example of a Christian Arab tribe which avoided paying the jizya altogether by fighting alongside Muslim armies "such was the case with the tribe of al-Jurajimah, a Christian tribe in the neighbourhood of Antioch, who made peace with the Muslims, promising to be their allies and fight on their side in battle, on condition that they should not be called upon to pay jizya and should receive their proper share of the booty".
In his message to the people of Al-Hirah, Khalid bin Walid is recorded as saying (in reference to the jizya), "When a person is too old to work or suffers a handicap, or when he falls into poverty, he is free from the dues of the poll tax; his sustenance is provided by the Muslim Exchequer."
According to Muslim accounts of Umar, in his time some payers of the jizya were compensated if they had not been cared for properly. The accounts vary, but describe his meeting an old Jew begging, and assisting him; according to one version:
 Umar said to him, "Old man! We have not done justice to you. In your youth we realized jizyah from you and have left you to fend for yourself in your old age". Holding him by the hand, he led him to his own house, and preparing food with his own hands fed him and issued orders to the treasurer of the Bait-al-mal that that old man and all others like him, should be regularly doled out a daily allowance which should suffice for them and their dependents.IslamWay Radio 
In Khurasan, the local aristocracy lowered the jizya, and increased taxation of the Muslim subjects, in order to prevent the non-Muslim conversion to Islam that jizya encouraged.

Mughal Empire

In India, Islamic rulers imposed jizya starting in the 11th century. It was abolished by Akbar. However, Aurangzeb, the sixth prominent Mughal Emperor, levied jizya on his mostly Hindu subjects in 1679. His subjects were taxed in accordance with the property they owned. Government servants were exempt, as were the blind, the paralysed, and the indigent. Its introduction encountered much opposition, which was, however, overborne. Certain historians are of the view that the tax was aimed at forcibly converting Hindus to Islam.

Nineteenth and Twentieth centuries

In Persia, jizya was paid by Zoroastrian minority until 1884, when it was removed by pressure on the Qajar government from the Persian Zoroastrian Amelioration Fund."The Zoroastrians who remained in Persia (modern Iran) after the Arab–Muslim conquest (7th century AD) had a long history as outcasts. Although they purchased some toleration by paying the jizya (poll tax), not abolished until 1882, they were treated as an inferior race, had to wear distinctive garb, and were not allowed to ride horses or bear arms." Gabars, Encyclopædia Britannica. 2007. Britannica Concise Encyclopedia. 29 May 2007.
In 1894 jizya was still being collected in Morocco; an Italian Jew described his experience there:
 The kadi Uwida and the kadi Mawlay Mustafa had mounted their tent today near the Mellah ghetto gate and had summoned the Jews in order to collect from them the poll tax jizya which they are obliged to pay the sultan. They had me summoned also. I first inquired whether those who were European-protected subjects had to pay this tax. Having learned that a great many of them had already paid it, I wished to do likewise. After having remitted the amount of the tax to the two officials, I received from the kadi's guard two blows in the back of the neck. Addressing the kadi and the kaid, I said" 'Know that I am an Italian protected subject.' Whereupon the kadi said to his guard: 'Remove the kerchief covering his head and strike him strongly; he can then go and complain wherever he wants.' The guards hastily obeyed and struck me once again more violently. This public mistreatment of a European-protected subject demonstrates to all the Arabs that they can, with impunity, mistreat the Jews. Islam and Dhimmitude: Where Civilizations Collide, Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, 2002, pp. 70–71. 
The jizya was eliminated in Algeria and Tunisia in the 19th century, but continued to be collected in Morocco until the first decade of the 20th century (these three dates coincide with the French colonization of these countries)."Though in Tunisia and Algeria the jizya/kharaj practice was eliminated during the 19th century, Moroccan Jewry still paid these taxes as late as the first decade of the twentieth century." Michael M. Laskier, North African Jewry in the Twentieth Century: Jews of Morocco, Tunisia and Algeria, NYU Press, 1994, p. 12.
It is important to note that in the Ottoman Empire the "jizya" was abolished in 1856. It was replaced with a new tax, which non-Muslims paid in lieu of military service. It was called "baddal-askari" (Arab. Military substitution), a tax exempting Jews and Christians from military service. The Jews of Kurdistan, according to the scholar Mordechai Zaken, preferred to pay the "baddal" tax in order to redeem themselves from military service. Only those incapable of paying the tax were drafted into the army. Interestingly, Zaken shows that paying the tax was possible to an extent also during the war. Zaken shows that some Jewish individuals paid 50 gold liras every year during World War I. Apparently - according to Dr. Zaken - "in spite of the forceful conscription campaigns, some of the Jews were able to buy their exemption from conscription duty." Based on the testimonies of several Kurdish Jews, Zaken came to the conclusion that the payment of the "baddal askari" during the war was a form of bribe that bought them only a brief relief from military service. "It may have been a deferment of the military service for a one year period or shorter."Mordechai Zaken, Jewish Subjects and their Tribal Chieftains in Kurdistan: A Study in Survival, Brill, 2007, pp. 280–284–71.
In the mid 20th century, Hindus in British India who had been forcibly converted to Islam were forced to pay jizya to the Muslim League, particularly during the Noakhali genocide. 

Twenty-first century

In 2009 it was claimed that a group of militants that referred to themselves as the Taliban imposed the jizya on Pakistan's minority Sikh community after occupying some of their homes and kidnapping a Sikh leader.tribuneindia.htm#6
In 2014, the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) announced that it intended to extract jizya from Christians in the city of Raqqa, Syria, which it controls. Christians who refused to pay the tax would have to either convert to Islam or die. Wealthy Christians would have to pay the equivalent of USD 664 twice a year; poorer ones would be charged one-fourth that amount. 

Comparison between Zakat and jizya

Criticism and support

Critics often cite jizya as a form of discrimination, persecution and oppression in Islamic law. (2008), Religious Minorities in Shafii Law, Journal of Islamic Studies and Practical Int'l Law, 4, 3Chandra, S. (1969), Jizyah and the State in India during the 17th Century, Journal de l'histoire economique et sociale de l'Orient, 322-340Takim, L. (2007), Holy Peace or Holy War: Tolerance and Co-existence in the Islamic Juridical Tradition, Islam and Muslim Societies, 4(2)
Supporters argue that it is fair, since all Muslims are obliged to pay Zakat. While the tax rate and nature of zakat and jizya were different, supporters often cite jizya as a form of protection money and a religious requirement against non-believers in Islam per Sharia. R. (2005), Palestinian Christians: Equal Citizens or Oppressed Minority in a Future Palestinian State. Or. Rev. Int'l Law, 7, 26
In practice, however, Timothy H. Parsons states that during the early caliphate, non-Muslims had to pay the kharaj. The sum of the jizya and kharaj taxes levied on non-Muslims were considerably larger than the zakat tax on Muslims and conversion generally brought tax relief. Some evidence suggests that the jizya was sometimes double the Zakat; for example, the Hedaya (Guide on Mussalman Law),Charles Hamilton (1957), Hedaya, Lahore an Islamic legal text, declared it lawful to require twice as much of a Zimmee (dhimmi) as of a Mussulman (Muslim).4.; see also K.S. Lal, Theory and Practice of Muslim State in India, Delhi, 1999, pp. 139–140 (tax levies on Muslims in Muslim India: 5%, on dhimmis: 10%).



Notes






