[[Rye whiskey]]

CATEGORIES: Rye whiskey

Rye whiskey can refer to either of two types of whiskey: 

American rye whiskey

In the United States, "rye whiskey" is, by law, made from a mash of at least 51 percent rye. (The other ingredients of the mash are usually corn and malted barley.)  It is distilled to no more than 160 (U.S.) proof (80% abv), and aged in charred, new oak barrels.  The whiskey must be put into such barrels at not more than 125 (U.S.) proof (62.5% abv).  Rye whiskey that has been so aged for at least two years may be further designated as "straight", as in "straight rye whiskey".
Rye whiskey was the prevalent whiskey of the northeastern states, especially Pennsylvania and Maryland. Pittsburgh was the epicenter of Rye Whiskey production in the late 1700 and early 1800s. Jack Daniel's has released an unaged rye product, and thus is not legally "whiskey", though an aged version is planned.

Differences between rye and bourbon

Rye is known for imparting what many call a spicy or fruity flavor to the whiskey. Bourbon, distilled from at least 51% corn, is noticeably sweeter, and tends to be fuller bodied than rye. Due to its distinctive flavor, American rye whiskey is sometimes referred to as America's equivalent of an Islay whisky."You are all going to discover the beauty of young rye whiskey," Roundtable Interview, Malt Advocate Volume 16, Number 2, 2007. As bourbon gained popularity beyond the southern United States, bartenders increasingly substituted it for rye in cocktails like Whiskey sours, Manhattans, and Old Fashioneds, which were originally made with rye. All other things being equal, the character of the cocktail will be drier with rye.g. Wondrich, David, Imbibe!: From Absinthe Cocktail to Whiskey Smash, a Salute in Stories and Drinks to "Professor" Jerry Thomas, Pioneer of the American Bar, Perigee Books, 2007.  (ISBN 978-0-399-53287-0)  At page 241 Wondrich states, in giving the recipe for a Manhattan, that "all things being equal, a 100-proof rye will make the best Manhattan..."

Canadian rye whisky

Canadian whisky is often referred to as "rye whisky", since historically much of the content was from rye. There is no requirement for rye to be used to make whiskies with the legally-identical labels "Canadian Whisky", "Canadian Rye Whisky" or "Rye Whisky" in Canada, provided they "possess the aroma, taste and character generally attributed to Canadian whisky".
In modern practice, most Canadian whiskeys are blended to achieve this character, adding a flavoring whisky made from a rye mash and distilled to a lower proof, similar to an American straight rye whiskey, to a high-proof base whisky typically made from corn or wheat and aged in used barrels. Other lower-proof flavoring whisky varieties may also be included to achieve a desired taste. In some cases the corn-to-rye ratio may be as high as 9:1. Most contemporary Canadian whiskies contain only a fraction of rye, with the exception of Alberta Premium which is one of the very few whiskies made from 100% rye mash.
In contrast with the US "straight rye whiskey" counterpart, a minimum of 3 years aging  in small  wooden barrel is required, although they need not be new oak, nor charred.






