[[Greg LeMond]]

CATEGORIES: American cyclists, American Giro d'Italia stage winners, Tour de France winners, American Tour de France stage winners, Tour de France Champs Elysées stage winners, UCI World Champions, Cycle designers, United States Bicycling Hall of Fame inductees, 1961 births, Living people, People from Lakewood, California, Sportspeople with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder

Gregory James "Greg" LeMond (born June 26, 1961) is a former professional road racing cyclist, entrepreneur, and anti-doping advocate. Lemond won the World Championship twice and the Tour de France three times. LeMond was born in Lakewood, California, and raised in ranch country on the eastern slopes of the Sierra Nevada mountain range,Moore p. 54 near Carson City, NV.
In 1986, LeMond became the first non-European professional cyclist to win the Tour de France. LeMond is the only American to officially win the Tour—following Floyd Landis' and  Lance Armstrong's disqualifications for doping. LeMond retired from competition in December 1994. He was inducted into the United States Bicycling Hall of Fame in 1996.
During his career, LeMond championed several technological advancements in pro cycling, including the introduction of aerodynamic "triathlon" handlebars and carbon fiber bicycle frames,
LeMond is a vocal opponent of performance-enhancing drug use, and at times his commercial ventures have suffered for his anti-doping stance—as in 2001, when he first accused Lance Armstrong of doping and sparked a conflict that led eventually to the dissolution of his Lemond Bikes brand in 2008, which was licensed by Armstrong's primary sponsor Trek Bicycles.

Early life and amateur career

Greg LeMond was born in Lakewood, California and raised in ranch country on the eastern slopes of the Sierra Nevada mountain range, near Carson City, NV.  His parents are Bob LeMond and Bertha (d. 2006), and he has two sisters, Kathy and Karen. He attended Wooster High School in Reno, NV.
LeMond's introduction to cycling came in 1975 thanks to freestyle skiing pioneer Wayne Wong, who recommended the bike as an ideal off-season training aid. LeMond started competing in 1976, and after dominating the Intermediate category (13-15) and winning the first 11 races he entered, he received permission to ride against older, more seasoned competitors in the Junior (16-19) category. 20
In 1977, while still only 15, LeMond finished second in the Tour of Fresno to John Howard, then America's top road cyclist and the 1971 Pan American Games champion. LeMond caught the attention of Eddie Borysewicz, the US Cycling Federation's national team coach, who described LeMond as "a diamond, a clear diamond."Nye LeMond represented the United States at the 1978 Junior World Championships in Washington, D.C., where he finished ninth in the road race,LeMond p. 22 and again in the 1979 Junior World Championships in Argentina, where he won gold, silver and bronze medals—the highlight being his victory in the road race. At age 18, LeMond was selected for the 1980 U.S. Olympic cycling team, the youngest ever to make the U.S. team; however, the U.S. boycott of the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow prevented him from competing there.
Borysewicz, whom LeMond described as his "first real coach,"LeMond p. 24 wanted to retain his protégé through the next Olympic cycle and discouraged him from turning pro, but LeMond was determined. Nevertheless, while he was the reigning Junior World Road Champion in 1980, LeMond received no professional offers, and so in the spring 1980, he joined the U.S. National cycling team for a 6-week European racing campaign. There, he finished third overall in the Circuit des Ardennes Despite eventually receiving several other offers to turn professional besides Guimard's, LeMond did not consider them seriously, and he signed with Renault in Paris on the day the 1980 Tour de France finished. 27

Professional career

LeMond was a standout amateur rider "of superlative quality" and "exceptionally gifted,"

1981–1983: Early years

LeMond's first professional victory came three months into his 1981 debut when he won a stage of the French Tour de l'Oise. He followed with a win in the Coors Classic in the United States, finishing ahead of Sergei Sukhoruchenkov, the 1980 Olympic road champion.  The major step forward in 1981 occurred in the Dauphiné Libéré stage race where LeMond placed third.  The achievement is the more remarkable because he rode the race in support of team leader Bernard Hinault. LeMond missed standing on the podium with race winner Hinault, as Pascal Simon had finished ahead of him. Two weeks later Simon was accessed a 10 minute penalty when it was discovered he had been doping. LeMond considered the race to have been a "major steppingstone" in his career.  Said LeMond: "It showed me that I had the kind of climbing ability that you need to win the top European stage races."LeMond p.28 LeMond won a total of five races in his rookie season of 1981.
LeMond broke his collarbone on April 11, 1982 while racing the cycling classic Liège–Bastogne–Liège. 34 The injury forced LeMond to ride a reduced schedule before entering the World Championships, which were in Goodwood, England that year. In the men's road race competition LeMond broke for the line but was out-sprinted by Italian Giuseppe Saronni. 34 Following the race LeMond's American teammate Jacques Boyer accused LeMond of chasing him down in the final 800 meters. Saronni was very strong at the end of the race and flew past Boyer and LeMond, winning by 5 seconds over LeMond, with another 5 seconds back to Kelly. Boyer placed tenth. Said Kelly: "I don't think that Boyer was fading... Nobody wanted to go after him... Boyer was the only man up the road."
LeMond was supported by his teammate George Mount, who observed, "What's LeMond going to do? Throw his bike down in front of everybody because Boyer is such a good buddy of everyone?... LeMond made a good move and a good sprint... The best he could have got was fifth or sixth place."Blumenthal p. 35
LeMond did not apologize. The U.S. team was not set up as the European teams, and did not have an independent race to determine the national champion. Instead the highest finisher at the World's was considered the national champion. LeMond had argued for the team to compete as the European teams did, but team management and Boyer voted against him. Thus unlike the other teams at the world championship, the US riders were competing against each other.67-69 At 21 LeMond was the first American pro to win a medal at the World's since Frank Kramer took silver in 1912. Said LeMond: "I'm racing for Renault and I'm racing for myself. It's a business and it's my living. To me, that second place was almost as good as winning, especially at my age."Blumenthal p. 31 
Two weeks later, on September 20, 1982, LeMond won the 12-day, 837-mile Tour de l'Avenir, including a tour through the French Alps, by a world-record 10 minutes, 18 seconds. The victory, and the time advantage LeMond held at the end, stunned Europe and provided broad confirmation that LeMond was indeed fuoriclasse.
The following year, 1983, LeMond won the World Championship outright, becoming the first American rider to do so. LeMond's cycling talent—his overall strength, climbing ability, ability to ride a fast time trial and his capacity to recover quickly—all suggested LeMond would be an excellent prospect for the most demanding Grand Tours. 146

1984–1986: Grand Tours

LeMond rode his first Tour de France in 1984, finishing third in support of team leader Laurent Fignon, and winning the white jersey of the Best Young Rider classification. The following year he was brought across to La Vie Claire to ride in support of team captain Bernard Hinault who had regained his form and was attempting to win his fifth Tour.
For the 1986 Tour, LeMond was a co-leader of the La Vie Claire team alongside Hinault. Commenting on the team situation prior to the final individual time trial at Stage 20, LeMond offered the following with a wry smile:
 "He's attacked me from the beginning of the Tour De France. He's never helped me once, and I don't feel confident at all with him." 
LeMond had to keep his eye on his teammate and rival throughout the race. Hinault rode aggressively and repeatedly attacked, and the division created in the La Vie Claire team was unmistakable.

1987–1988: Shooting accident and recovery

LeMond had planned to defend his title in the 1987 Tour de France with La Vie Claire, but was unable to participate. Early that year, he was riding in the Tirreno–Adriatico, an early spring tune-up race, when he fell, suffering a fracture to his left wrist.  He returned to the United States to recover from the injury.  The week before returning to Europe he went turkey hunting near his family home in the foothills of the Sierra Nevada with Rodney Barber and Patrick Blades, his uncle and brother-in-law.
With 35 shotgun pellets still in his body, including three in the lining of his heart and five more embedded in his liver, LeMond attempted to return to racing in 1988. His comeback was hampered by over-training which resulted in tendonitis in his right shin requiring surgery.  He missed the Tour for the second year running. Tensions in the relationship between LeMond and PDM were aggravated when LeMond discovered that doping was going on at the PDM squad. The result was that LeMond moved from PDM, one of the strongest teams in the peloton, to ADR, a team based in Belgium.  The team was co-sponsored by Coors Light for American races.

1989: Return to elite level

After struggling in the 1989 Paris–Nice early-season race and failing to improve his condition, LeMond informed his wife Kathy that he intended to retire from professional cycling after the 1989 Tour de France.  He had some flashes of form in the two day Criterium International, sharing an escape with Fignon, Indurain, Mottet, Roche and Madiot and finishing 5th overall. He started the 1989 Giro d'Italia in May as preparation for the Tour to follow, but struggled in the mountains and was not in contention for any of the leaders' jerseys before the final 53 km individual time trial into Florence. LeMond placed a surpising second there, more than a minute ahead of overall winner Laurent Fignon. Some of his improvement he attributed to an anti-anemia treatment he received twice during the race.
Coming into the 1989 Tour de France LeMond was not considered a contender for the General Classification (GC). Buoyed by the result, LeMond continued to ride well over the opening flat stages, winning the 73 km stage 5 individual time trial, and gaining the yellow jersey of race leader for the first time in three years. 187  LeMond seemed to ride himself into better condition during the first week's flat stages, and he was coming into peak form by the time the Tour reached the mountains.  LeMond remained at the front of the race in the Pyrénées, but lost the lead to his former teammate and rival Laurent Fignon on stage 10 in Superbagnères.  Five days later LeMond reclaimed yellow in the Alps, after the 39 km stage 15 mountain time trial from Gap to Orcières-Merlette.  The see-saw battle continued, and when Fignon attacked on the upper slopes of Alpe d'Huez LeMond was unable to go with him, placing the yellow jersey back on the shoulders of Fignon.  Fignon held a 50-second advantage over LeMond going into the 21st and final stage, a rare 24.5 km individual time trial from Versailles to the Champs-Élysées in Paris. 189
Fignon had won the Tour twice before, in 1983 and 1984, and was a very capable time trialist. It seemed improbable that LeMond could take 50 seconds off Fignon over the short 24.5 kilometer course.  This would require LeMond to gain two seconds per kilometer against one of the fastest chrono-specialists in the world.  LeMond had done wind tunnel testing in the off season and perfected his riding position. He rode the time trial with a  rear disc wheel, a cut-down Giro aero helmet and the same Scott clip-on aero bars which had helped him to the Stage 5 time trial win.  Holding his time trialing position LeMond was able to generate less aerodynamic drag than Fignon, who used a pair of disc wheels but chose to go helmetless and did not use the aero bars that are now commonplace in time trials. Instructing his support car not to give him his split times, LeMond rode flat-out and finished at a record pace to beat Fignon by 58 seconds and claim his second Tour de France victory. As LeMond embraced his wife and rejoiced on the Champs-Élysées, Fignon collapsed onto the tarmac, then sat in shock and wept.
The final margin of victory of eight seconds was the closest in the Tour's history.
LeMond's return to the pinnacle of cycling was confirmed on August 27, when he won the 259 km World Championships road race in Chambéry, France, defeating Fignon again and edging Dimitri Konyshev and Sean Kelly on the line.

1990: A third tour win

LeMond parlayed the success of his 1989 season into the richest contract in the sport's history, signing a $5.5 million deal for three years with Z-Tomasso of France. He entered the 1990 Tour de France as defending champion and a pre-race favorite after leaving ADR to join the much stronger Z-Tomasso team. At "Z" his team mates included Robert Millar, Eric Boyer and Ronan Pensec, all of whom already had finishes in the top six of the Tour de France.
The squad's tactical plan was upset on the first day, when a breakaway that included LeMond's teammate Ronan Pensec, but no major favorites, arrived ten minutes ahead of the field. LeMond was prevented from challenging for the lead until the yellow jersey left the shoulders of teammate Ronan Pensec.  LeMond closed in on race leader Claudio Chiappucci, finally overtaking him in the final individual time trial on stage 20, where he finished over two minutes ahead of the unheralded Italian.  LeMond at last had the yellow jersey, wearing it the following day as the Tour rode into Paris. 196 LeMond had the distinction of winning the 1990 Tour without taking any of the individual stages. He remains the last rider to win the Tour while wearing the world champion jersey. Over the course of the 1990 Tour the perceived strength of the Z team was confirmed, as they led the team classification through most of the race, adding the team title to LeMond's yellow jersey.
In September, LeMond attempted to defend his title at the 1990 UCI Road World Championships, but finished fourth, eight seconds behind the winner, his former teammate Rudy Dhaenens of Belgium.

1991–1994: Change in the peloton and retirement

LeMond felt confident before the 1991 Tour de France. He was the defending champion, trained well and had a solid team to support him. LeMond was among the leaders going into the Stage 8 individual time trial, and he finished second to the Spaniard Miguel Indurain. LeMond felt he was riding extremely well, and though his TT-effort had propelled him into the yellow jersey, losing eight seconds to Indurain shook his confidence. He held the yellow jersey for the next four days until Stage 12, a challenging 192 km mountain stage.  LeMond experienced difficulty on the first climb and he cracked on the Col de Tourmalet, losing significant time to Claudio Chiappucci, and eventual winner Indurain.   He continued to race, but was unable to seriously challenge for the lead thereafter, finishing the 1991 Tour seventh overall.
In 1992, LeMond won the Tour DuPont.  It would be the last major win of his career.  In the 1992 Tour de France he had to abandon in the mountains, the same day that his compatriot and former domestique Andy Hampsten won atop Alpe d'Huez.
LeMond did extensive endurance training on the road the following winter, but his performances the following spring failed to improve.  LeMond had to abandon the 1993 Giro d'Italia two days before the final stage after difficult racing left him third-from-last on GC.  He was too exhausted to enter the 1993 Tour de France.
The following year LeMond began the 1994 Tour de France but found he was unable to race effectively.  He had to abandon after the first week before the race had reached the difficult mountain stages.  That December he announced his retirement.  At the time the reasons for LeMond's increasing difficulties were not entirely known.  At a loss, he speculated that a condition known as mitochondrial myopathy might be responsible for the difficulty he was having performing against the current riders."Greg LeMond Ending Career," Samuel Abt, International Herald Tribune, December 3, 1994
Since 2010 LeMond acknowledged that the increasing prevalence of doping contributed to his lack of competitiveness.  Said LeMond:  "Something had changed in cycling. The speeds were faster and riders that I had easily out performed were now dropping me. At the time, the team I was on, Team Z, became more and more demanding, more and more concerned ..." He stated he had been told in 1994 that he would need to blood dope in order to win again.
In a wide-ranging interview with American novelist Bryan Malessa in 1998, LeMond was asked if his career had not been interrupted by the hunting accident, how did he feel he would compare to five time Tour winners such as Bernard Hinault and Miguel Indurain.  LeMond responded: "Of course you can't rewrite racing history, but I'm confident that I would have won five Tours."

Two years after his retirement LeMond was inducted into the United States Bicycling Hall of Fame in a ceremony at Rodale Park in Trexlertown, PA.  The event was held on June 8, 1996, during the U.S. Olympic Cycling Team Trials.

Business interests

Greg LeMond was a pioneer in the use of carbon fiber bicycle frames in European professional road cycling, and his Tour de France win in 1986 ahead of Bernard Hinault was the first for a carbon-framed bicycle.  These bicycle frames featured "Greg LeMond" branding.

LeMond Cycles

In 1990, LeMond founded LeMond Bicycles to develop robotic machines for himself that would also be marketed and sold to the public. The following year, searching for an equipment edge for Team Z at the 1991 Tour de France, LeMond concluded an exclusive licensing agreement between his company and Carbonframes, Inc., to access the latter's advanced composites technology.
The two parties first found themselves at odds in July 2001, after LeMond expressed public concern over the relationship between Italian doping doctor Michele Ferrari and Trek's star athlete, Lance Armstrong. "When I heard he was working with Michele Ferrari, I was devastated," LeMond was quoted as saying of Armstrong. "If Lance is clean, it is the greatest comeback in the history of sports. If he isn't, it would be the greatest fraud."
Trek's president John Burke pressured LeMond to apologize, claiming, "Greg's public comments hurt the LeMond brand and the Trek brand." Burke allegedly justified his demand for an apology by advising that, "As a contractual partner, he LeMond could criticize doping only generally – not point his finger at specific athletes, particularly one that happens to be the company's main cash cow."
In April 2008, Trek announced that it was dropping LeMond Bicycles from its product line and would sue to sever the licensing agreement. It quickly emerged that in March 2008, LeMond had filed a complaint against Trek for breach of contract, claiming that they had not made a "best efforts" attempt to sell his bicycles, as well as describing attempts to 'silence' him about doping, including incidents in 2001 and 2004. His complaint included statistics detailing slow sales in some markets, including the fact that between September 2001 and June 2007, Trek only sold $10,393 worth of LeMond bikes in France, a country in which LeMond was both famous and popular.
As promised, Trek counter-sued and stopped producing bicycles under the LeMond brand. After nearly two years of litigation, in February 2010, LeMond reached an out-of-court settlement with Trek in their breach-of-contract dispute, the terms of which were confidential.

LeMond Fitness/Revolution

In 2002, LeMond, Bernie Boglioli and others founded LeMond Fitness, Inc. "to help individuals achieve their fitness and performance goals and train more effectively."

LeMond and Time

At the Interbike trade show in September 2013 LeMond announced that he was returning to the business of bicycle manufacture and sales by partnering with French company Time. The new line began with a series of commemorative designed bicycles, to be followed with road, cyclocross, and gravel-road models. LeMond purchased Time Sport USA, the US distributor for the company.  He will be responsible for US distribution of the company's line of frames, bikes, and components. Said LeMond: "I'm really excited to be back in the bike industry."

Real estate

In 2002 LeMond joined with his parents-in-law David and Sacia Morris, friend Michael Snow and J.P. Morgan & Co. fund manager Jorge Jasson to invest in the exclusive Yellowstone Club, a Big Sky, Montana private ski and golf community founded by timber baron Tim Blixseth and his wife Edra. Each of the five partners paid Blixseth $750,000 for one percent shares in the exclusive resort. LeMond also purchased several building lots and maintained a property at the resort. Four years later LeMond and partners sued Blixseth in 2006 following reports of a Credit Suisse loan to the resort of $375 million from which Blixseth reportedly took $209 million in a disputed partial payout for his ownership stake. The Credit Suisse loan was based on a $1.16 billion Cushman & Wakefield valuation of the resort, for which LeMond and partners each sought $11.6 million for their one-percent shares."LeMond claims he was swindled on Montana's millionaire mountain," Bloomberg News, October 27, 2006  In 2007, LeMond settled his suit with the Blixseths for $39 million;  followed by their divorce and the bankruptcy of the Club in 2009."LeMond continues long legal fight with Yellowstone Club," New West, November 21, 2008

Restaurants

LeMond became a restaurateur in August 1990, when, in partnership with his wife and her parents, he opened Scott Kee's Tour de France on France Avenue in the Minneapolis suburb of Edina, Minnesota.
LeMond also partnered in several Bruegger's bagel bakery-café franchises.

Anti-doping stance and controversies

LeMond is a longtime vocal opponent of performance-enhancing drug use. He first spoke on-record against doping in cycling after winning the 1989 Tour de France.
LeMond has consistently questioned the relationship between riders and unethical sports doctors like Ferrari,, 27:00 and 44:00 Play the Game Conference, Coventry University, 2009 Jun 12, retr 2012 10 14  Said LeMond: "When I speak out about doping people could translate it and think it was about the riders.  Actually I feel like I am an advocate for the riders. I look at them as being treated like lab rats that are test vehicles for the doctors. The doctors, the management, the officials, they're the ones that have corrupted riders. The riders are the only ones that pay the price."
LeMond's most notable conflicts have been with fellow Tour de France riders Lance Armstrong and Floyd Landis. 
McQuaid rejected LeMond's call for new leadership and was dismissive of LeMond."

Personal life

LeMond is married to his wife Kathy (previously Kathy Morris) and together they have three children: sons Geoffrey and Scott and daughter Simone.
LeMond is an avid outdoor enthusiast and fly angler,  LeMond confessed, "I always pack my fly fishing equipment when I travel to bike events. I fish every chance I get."
After retiring from pro cycling, LeMond competed in Formula Ford 2000 series auto racing. He is also a motivational speaker and was the guest speaker for Sumitomo Drive Technologies' International Sales Meeting in Cancun, Mexico on May 2, 2008. LeMond narrated an award-winning documentary for Adventures for the Cure that same year.
On July 16, 2007, LeMond rode the L'Étape du Tour cyclosportive with his son, and found it to be a defining moment in his post-competition life. "I had the time of my life", he said, despite getting "650th place" and being "impressed that I even finished". LeMond continued, "I decided that day that nobody's going to keep me from cycling, not Trek, not Armstrong, not Verbruggen, not anybody." Undeterred, LeMond took the stand and testified, before admitting to the world that he had been molested.
Several weeks later, LeMond and his wife Kathy gave an extensive interview to Paul Kimmage of The Sunday Times. LeMond provided additional details concerning the circumstances of his 2001 apology to Armstrong, stating that Trek, the longtime manufacturer and distributor of LeMond Racing Cycles, had threatened to end the relationship at the behest of Armstrong. He described the two years following the forced apology as the worst in his life, marked by self-destructive behavior that ultimately led him to disclose his sexual abuse to his wife and seek help. LeMond also described how being a victim of molestation had impacted both his racing career and his life since.
In September 2007, Greg LeMond became a founding board member of the non-profit organization 1in6.1in6.org
On the morning of January 30, 2013, 51 year-old LeMond crashed his Jaguar in wintery conditions while en route to the dentist in Wayzata, Minnesota, but had no memory of the incident. While he was expected to make a full recovery, the accident curtailed LeMond's public appearances in the first half of 2013.

Palmarès

Grand Tours and World Championship results timeline

WD = Withdrew






