[[X11 color names]]

CATEGORIES: Color, X Window System, Cascading Style Sheets

In computing, on the X Window System, X11 color names are represented in a simple text file, which maps certain strings to RGB color values. It is shipped with every X11 installation, hence the name, and is usually located in <X11root>/lib/X11/rgb. The web colors list is descended from it.
The list does not show continuity either in selected color values or in color names, and many color triplets have multiple names. Despite this, graphic designers and others got used to them, making it practically impossible to introduce a different list. In some applications multipart names are written with spaces, in others joined together, often in camel case; this article uses spaces and uppercase initials.
Color names are not standardized by Xlib or the X11 protocol.  In earlier releases of X11 (prior to the introduction of Xcms), server implementors were encouraged to modify the RGB values in the reference color database to account for gamma correction.
The list first shipped with X10 release 3 (X10R3) on 7 June 1986, having been checked into RCS by Jim Gettys in 1985.freedesktop.txt The same list was in X11R1 on 18 September 1987. Approximately the full list as is available today shipped with X11R4 on 29 January 1989, with substantial additions by Paul Ravelling (who added colors based on Sinclair Paints samples), John C. Thomas (who added colors based on a set of 72 Crayola crayons he had to hand) and Jim Fulton (who reconciled contributions to produce the X11R4 list). The project was running DEC VT240 terminals at the time, so would have worked to that device.

Clashes between web and X11 colors

The first versions of Mosaic and Netscape Navigator used the X11 colors as the basis for the Web colors list, as both were originally X applications. The W3C specifications SVG and CSS level 3 module Color eventually adopted the X11 list with some changes. It is a superset of the 16 "VGA colors" defined in HTML 3.2 and CSS level 1.
Perhaps most unusual of the color clashes between X11 and W3C is the case of 'Gray'. In HTML, 'Gray' is specifically reserved for the 128 triplet, i.e. 50% gray counterparts. This resulted in W3C's 'Gray', at 50%, actually being significantly darker than 'Dark Gray', at 66%.
The W3C also defined a color that is equal to X11's 'Green', but called it 'Lime'.

Color name charts

These charts are not a standard set of colors to be found on any X Window system. Rather it is the standardized X11 color names accepted by browsers following W3C standards. This set is cut down and rationalized, and has a few differences from a typical rgb. RGB values shown are normalised to the 8-bit integer range 0 to 255.
|}

Shades of gray

The list shown above covers only the colors supported by popular browsers. Some browsers like Netscape Navigator insisted on an 'a' in any 'Gray' except for 'Light Grey'.
The complete rgb. The shades are apparently defined by the formula Gray N := round(N% × 255) resulting in e.g. 'Gray 96' .
On the other hand 'Gray' .

Color variations

For 78 colors as listed above, rgb.g. 'Snow 1' is the same as 'Snow'. These variations are neither supported by popular browsers nor adopted by W3C standards.
The formulae used to determine the RGB values for these variations appear to be somewhere near
Examples:








