[[Picathartes]]

CATEGORIES: Higher-level bird taxa restricted to the Afrotropics, Picathartes, Picathartidae, Bird genera

The picathartes, rockfowl or bald crows are a small genus of two passerine bird species forming the family Picathartidae found in the rain-forests of tropical west and central Africa. They have unfeathered heads, and feed on insects and invertebrates picked from damp rocky areas. Both species are totally non-migratory, being dependent on a specialised rocky jungle habitat.
Both species are listed as Vulnerable to extinction on the IUCN Red List.

Taxonomy and systematics

The taxonomic position of the clade and its two species has been confusing. At various times, it has been grouped with the babblers, flycatchers, starlings, crows and others before being placed in a family of its own.

Species

A possible third species may exist in Uganda, in the vicinity of the Kasinga Channel, linking Lake Edward with Lake George.

Description

The picathartes are large (. The strong feet and grey legs are adapted to terrestrial movement, and the family progresses through the forest with long bounds on the ground. The wings are long but are seldom used for long flights. The plumage is similar between the two species, with white breasts and bellies and darker (grey and grey-black) wings, backs and tails. The neck color varies between the two species, giving them their individual names (Grey-necked and White-necked Picathartes). They also have bald heads with brightly coloured and patterned skin.

Behaviour and ecology

Rockfowl are generalised feeders, taking a wide range of invertebrate prey. Prey items include a range of insects, particularly beetles, termites and ants, as well as millipedes, centipedes, earthworms and gastropods. Frogs and lizards are also taken, but these are mostly fed to their chicks. Prey is taken both by foraging on the ground and in the trees. They will also forage in shallow flowing water for crabs. When foraging on the ground they move forward with hops and bounds, then pausing to search for prey. The longish bill is used to turn over leaves and seize prey, but the feet are never used for either. Both species will follow swarms of ants in order to snatch prey fleeing the ants. 
Both species of rockfowl breed seasonally in the wet season. Where an area experiences two wet seasons in a year they will breed twice in that year. Despite reports of cooperative breeding it is now thought that they are exclusively monogamous, breeding in pairs. They are also commonly reported to be colonial, and will breed in colonies of up to seven pairs, but solitary breeders and smaller colonies of just two pairs are more common. The nest is made of mud attached to a cave roof or overhanging rock on a cliff. The nest is a cup like structure of dried leaves, twigs and plant fibres set into dried mud. Two eggs are laid, 24 to 48 hours apart. Both parents participate in incubating the eggs, each taking 12 hour shifts before being relieved by their partner. It takes around 20 days for the eggs to hatch. Picathartes hatchlings are altricial at hatching, almost naked (a few feathers are present on the crown and back) and helpless. The chicks take around 25 days to fledge.

Distribution and habitat

The rockfowl are distributed in West and western Central Africa, in Guinea, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Ivory Coast, Ghana (White-necked Rockfowl), Nigeria, Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon and the Republic of the Congo (Grey-necked Rockfowl). The rockfowl live in lowland rainforest at up to 800 m, in rocky and hilly terrain on the slopes of hills and mountains. These birds require forest litter for foraging, a large enough area to contain army-ant swarms (Dorylinae), and rocks, cliffs or caves for nesting sites.






