[[Ruse, Bulgaria]]

CATEGORIES: Ruse, Bulgaria, Populated places in Ruse Province, Port cities and towns in Bulgaria, 100 Tourist Sites of Bulgaria, Ancient Roman buildings and structures in Bulgaria, Bulgaria–Romania border crossings, Populated places on the Danube, Baroque architecture in Bulgaria, Rococo architecture, Jewish communities

Ruse (also transliterated as Rousse or Russe;  from the capital Sofia. It is the most significant Bulgarian river port, serving an important part of the international trade of the country.
Ruse is known for its 19th- and 20th-century Neo-Baroque and Neo-Rococo architecture, which attracts many tourists. It is often called the Little Vienna. The Ruse-Giurgiu Friendship Bridge, until 14 June 2013 the only one in the shared Bulgarian-Romanian section of the Danube, crosses the river here.

Etymology

The legend for the city claims, that the name Ruse comes from the name of a female founder of the city, whose name was Rusa, meaning "blond hair". In the 13th and 14th centuries, during the time of the Second Bulgarian Empire, a fortified settlement called Rusi, first mentioned in 1380, emerged near the ruins of the earlier Roman town. Scholars suggest that the city on the river bank derived its present name from the Cherven fortress, meaning red, through the root rous, which is present in many Slavic languages.

Geography

Ruse is located on the right bank of the Danube, which is the high bank, having two underwater terraces and three river terraces at  high. The Rousse TV Tower is built there on the remains of Leventtabia, a former Turkish fortification.

Climate

Ruse has a continental climate (Köppen climate classification Dfa/Dfb) with very hot summers and relatively cold winters. Owing to its position on the Danubian Plain, the city's winters can get windy. Winter temperatures often dip below , and precipitation during this time tends to be higher than in summer, with more frequent yet milder periods of rain.

History

Antiquity

The city emerged as a Neolithic settlement from the 3rd to 2nd millennium BCE, when pottery, fishing, agriculture, and hunting developed. Excavations reveal several layers, suggesting that the place was attacked by neighbouring tribes and suffered a number of natural disasters. Ancient sanctuaries were found nearby, where idols of a pregnant woman, a fertility goddess, were prevalent.
The later Thracian settlement developed into a Roman military and naval centre during the reign of Vespasian (69-70 CE) as part of the fortification system along the northern boundary of Moesia. Its name, Sexaginta Prista,Roman Fortress "Sexaginta Prista" suggests a meaning of "a city of 60 ships" (from  — a special type of guard ship), based on the supposed 60 nearby berths.
The fortress was located on the main road between Singidunum (modern Belgrade) and the Danube Delta and was destroyed in the 6th century by Avar and Slavic raids. Hungarian historian Felix Philipp Kanitz was the first to identify Sexaginta Prista with Ruse, but the Škorpil brothers demonstrated the link later through studying inscriptions, coins, graves, and objects of daily life. An inscription from the reign of Diocletian proves that the city was rebuilt as a praesidium (a large fortification) after it was destroyed by the Goths in 250 CE.
The settlement was also mentioned as Golyamo Yorgovo in the Middle Ages, whose present successor is Giurgiu in Romania.

Ottoman rule

During Ottoman rule, the invaders destroyed the town, reacting to a 1595 unsuccessful liberation attempt by a joint Vlach-Bulgarian army, led by Michael the Brave. After its rebuilding in the following years, Ruse was dubbed Rusçuk (Turkish for "little Ruse") and had again expanded into a large fortress by the 18th century. It later grew into one of the most important Ottoman towns on the Danube and an administrative centre of Tuna Vilayet, which extended from Varna and Tulcea to Sofia and Niš.
The "Dunav" newspaper appeared – it was the first printed in Bulgaria and ... in Bulgarian. Some Bulgarian schools were founded. The streets are renamed and numbered for the first time in Bulgarian lands. A post-office, hospital, home for the aged were founded. Three empires met here for trading: Austro-Hungary, Russia, British Empire, France and Italy opened consulates in Ruschuk. Imperceptibly, the modern city arose from the shades of the settlement. In 1865 the Obraztsov Chiflik was founded on the place where the English Consul's farm was and it was the first modern farm on the territory of the whole Ottoman Empire of that time.
Ruse developed into a centre of the Bulgarian National Revival and hosted the headquarters of the Bulgarian Revolutionary Central Committee.

Modern Bulgaria

After it became part of modern Bulgaria on 20 February 1878, Ruse was one of the key cultural and economic centres of the country. Intensive building during the period changed the city's architectural appearance to a typical Central European one. Ruse is famous for the many first innovations in Bulgaria, including:
Here manufactured the first Bulgarian factories for soda-water, lemonade and also for neckties.sudigital.pdf "Mеждународен алманах за България 1898. Annuaire international de la Bulgarie. 1898 / А Дюрастел" - page 443 The first aviator Simeon Petrov was born in Ruse.rodenkrai.html Симеон Петров – първият дипломиран пилот
In the newly liberated Bulgaria of the late 19th century, Ruse was a cosmopolitan city with a multiethnic population. According to the first census conducted in 1883, ethnic Bulgarians were the majority.
"All façades on main streets of Russe shall have rich decorations with plastic stone", postulate the Regulations for Constructions of Private Buildings of 1893, issued by the Municipality of Russe.
After knyaz Alexander Battenberg's 1886 abdication, and as a reaction to the regentship's course led by prime minister Stefan Stambolov, a group of Russophile (pro-Russian) military officers revolted in Ruse. The riot was violently crushed, and 13 of the leaders were quickly sentenced to death and executed near the city, which caused a lot of public discontent. Decades later, in 1934, local citizens raised funds and built a monument at the place where the Russophile officers were executed. The monument was blown up in 1940, but rebuilt in 1966 at approximately the same spot.

World War II and Socialism

Between World War I and II, after Southern Dobruja was lost to Romania, the economic significance of the city decreased. So did the population, and Ruse was no longer the second-largest city in Bulgarian lands (after former East Rumelian capital Plovdiv), being quickly surpassed by Sofia and Varna. Many big companies left, and all foreign consulates were closed, except for the Russian one, which has remained functional since.
The return of Southern Dobruja to Bulgaria in September 1940 fostered good conditions for restoration of the city's leading role. It became a provincial centre, and economic activity revived. The construction of the Ruse-Giurgiu bridge in 1954 and the fast industrialization gave a new push to development. Ruse emerged again as an important economic, transport, cultural, and educational hub. Engineering, chemical, and light industries expanded; a large harbor was built; and the city became a university centre. At the 1985 census, a population of more than 186,000 was reported.

Fall of Socialism and democratic Bulgaria

In the early 1980s, Ruse entered a dark period of its history. The Verachim factory was built in Giurgiu, which polluted the air between 1980 and 1987, impacting the city's development. Population decreased, and 15,000 people moved out between 1985 and 1992. Fortunately, in 1987, the Romanian factory ceased the pollution, under pressure from environmental organizations on both Bulgarian and Romanian communist leadership. Organizations, such as Ekoglasnost, provoked nationwide demonstrations and strongly influenced the change to democracy.
During the 1990s, the economic crisis in Bulgaria affected Ruse. Most big companies suffered a decline and unemployment increased, which led to renewed emigration waves. Since 2000, the city has been continually regaining its former leading status.

Population

Demographics

Ruse is the fifth biggest city in Bulgaria by population. It was the most populated city of Bulgaria in 1880 with 26,163 people.sofia.asp?lines=316&nxt=1&update=all
The number of the residents of the city (not the municipality) reached its peak around 1990, numbering almost 192 000. According to the 2011 census, Ruse was inhabited by 149,642 people within the city limits, while the Ruse Municipality along with the legally affiliated adjacent villages had 167,585 inhabitants.

Migration

Ethnic, linguistic and religious composition

According to the latest 2011 census data, the individuals declared their ethnic identity were distributed as follows:
Total: 149 642
In Ruse Municipality 137,337 declared as Bulgarians, 12,500 as Turks, 1,721 as Gypsies and 14,832 did not declare their ethnic group.
According to the first census in 1883, the ethnic composition was as follows:
Total: 26,156

Economy & Infrastructure

Economic activity

The average number of employees under labour contract in 2012 is 70 007 people, while the average annual salary - 7 155 lv, 60% higher compared to the 2007's statistics. The employment rate for people from the age of 15 to 64 is 57.8%, whereas the unemployment is  12.9%. The relative share of the population aged between 25 and 64 years with higher education is 22.1%, 2.9% higher than in 2007. The relative share of the population aged between 25 and 64 years with secondary education is 60.1%, 3.4% higher than in 2007. 148 091 is the number of nights spent by tourists in 2012. The total number of enterprises is 10 830.
Foreign direct investment in non-financial enterprises for 2012 has been 347 321 euro. The total economic output, manufactured in the city is assessed at 3 286 383 leva, while the revenue increases with 1 319 186 leva compared to 2007 - 5 764 845 leva for 2012.nsi.bg/bg/content/11422/област-русе "НСИ Регионална статистика Русе - икономическа активност"

Economic profile

Ruse is a big industrial centre. It has a duty-free zone and 2 industrial zones: East and West. Ruse Iztok Power Plant has an energy producing capacity of 400 MW and the Ruse West Power Plant has 41 MW. There are a logistics park and a business park in the city.
The city's economy is dominated by light industry — tailoring, textiles and food processing. Big manufactures are Fazan (the first factory for socks in Bulgaria), Fenix 94 (socks), Ariston S (women's fashion), Danini (lady's fashion), Top Man (men's fashion), Karina (lady's fashion) and Sirma Prista (dairy products). The petroleum industry and the chemical industry are represented by companies, producing paints and motor oils - Orgachim, Prista Oil, Lubrica, Megachim, EKON 91, Ninachim and Polysan.
The machinery industry and ships construction are well developed. Also, one of the world's leading companies in yacht design Vripack has an architecture and engineering studio in Ruse. Big metal-working companies are Zhiti — a leading producer of low-carbon steel wires, nails, fasteners, chain-link nettings, barbed wires; Precis Inter Holding produces electro-welded steel and aluminum tubes and profile; At Sparky welded parts, road construction machines, transportation and agricultural machines are being designed, engineered and built; Express Service LTD is the only locomotive producer in Bulgaria; Witte Automotive is a big producer of mechanical and mechatronic latches / locks for doors and hoods, hinges or door check arms, door handle modules and safety products for car seats. Keros is a major producer of ceramic floor wall tiles and porcelain tiles. Steiner Elektronik Technologie is specialized in the production of single-sided, double-sided and multi-layer PCBs; Naiden Kirov JSC manufactures low-voltage electrotechnical accessories for households. Dunarit is a big manufacturer of military and engineering products, founded in 1903. The main production of Zita is devices and appliances for control of temperature and passing of different fluids designed for automatics, pneumatics, hydraulics and everyday life technology. Woodworking and furniture production is represented by Ergodesign, Apex, Stefany Style, Gold Apolo and IRIM.
There are 65 hotels and 1,769 beds in Ruse. The income from accommodations for the fourth quarter of 2011 г. is 1,661,294 lv. 
There are many hypermarkets such as Metro Cash & Carry, Kaufland, Mr. Bricolage, Praktiker, and some supermarket chains such as Billa, Lidl, and Carrefour.
The first private museum in Bulgaria will soon be opened in the Old High School of Music.

Infrastructure

Ruse is a major road and railway hub in Northern Bulgaria. Railway transportation in the city dates back to 1867 when it became a station of first railway line in Bulgaria Ruse - Varna. There are railways to Southern Bulgaria, Sofia, Varna and Bucharest. Ruse has two railway stations for passenger services (Ruse Central and Ruse Razpredelitelna) and two for freight transport services. There are intercity buses that link Ruse with cities and towns all over the country and some European countries. They are based in two bus stations: South and East.
Ruse has an extensive public transport system with around 30 bus and trolleybus lines, including the Ruse trolleybus system. Most of the buses are operated under a concession by the Bulgarian subsidiary of the Israeli transport holding Egged Ruse. There are also several suburban bus lines, operated by various private Bulgarian transport companies.
Approximately  southeast of Ruse is the village of Shtraklevo, near which is the former military Ruse Airport with an international statute but currently closed. Plans exist to redevelop and reopen the airport for internal, charter, and cargo flights. The runway is long enough for Boeing 747s (Jumbo Jets). The Henri Coandă International Airport in Otopeni, Romania is 70 km north of Ruse.
The Danube bridge is located east of Ruse. It was the only road and rail bridge between Bulgaria and Romania until the opening of a second bridge crossing to Romania on 14 June 2013 at Vidin.
Ruse is the biggest Bulgarian port towns on the bank of the Danube River. After the opening of the Rhine–Main–Danube Canal which covers  and connects 13 European countries with Asia via the Black Sea, the river becomes the longest inland waterway on the planet. This key position has determined the 19th century-long co-existence of Ruschuk.

Architectural and natural landmarks

Architectural landmarks

Ruse is one of the 100 Tourist Sites of Bulgaria. The city is famous for its preserved buildings from the end of the 19th and the beginning of the 20th century. There are more than 260 monuments. Most of the sights of the city are located at the center of Ruse (museums,  architectural landmarks,  the theater,  the opera,  hotels, restaurants, cafes and souvenir shops).  Among all the sights the following ones are outstanding:
Other landmarks are:

Natural landmarks

Education

There is one university in Ruse - "Angel Kanchev" University of Ruse with a capacity of 15 000 students. The university's structure includes a subsidiaries in Silistra and Razgrad.
There is also a subsidiary of the College of Agriculture - Plovdiv in the city.

Religious buildings

In 1978, the "All Saints" Church was destroyed and the Pantheon of National Revival Heroes was built thereupon.
The Jewish community in Ruse built and consecrated a synagogue in 1797. It was destroyed in the 1810 fire, but two other synagogues were later built in 1826 and 1852.

Culture

Theatres and opera houses

Noted for its rich culture, Ruse hosts a philharmonic orchestra, the Rousse State Opera (founded in 1949) and the "Sava Ognianov" theater.

Museums & exhibitions

Libraries

Regular events

Notable citizens

International relations

Consulates

Twin towns — Sister cities

Ruse is twinned with:

Honours

Ruse Peak (800 m) on Livingston Island in the South Shetland Islands, Antarctica is named after the city.



Gallery

File:Rousse-monument-freedom-nedko.jpg|Statue of Liberty at night
File:Ruse TodorBozhinov 09.08.09 (15).JPG
File:Ruse TodorBozhinov 09.08.09 (31).JPG
File:Ruse TodorBozhinov 09.08.09 (22).JPG
File:03-08-2006-Rousse 114.jpg|The Rousse TV Tower as seen from the city
File:Rousse-architecture2.jpg|Old architecture
File:Rusenska-opera.jpg|The opera-house
File:Ruse 053.jpg|The Roman Catholic St Paul of the Cross Cathedral (1890)
File:Ruse TodorBozhinov HDR (3).jpg
File:Ruse TodorBozhinov 09.08.09 (72).JPG
File:Rousse-street-scene.JPG
File:Rousse-architecture5.jpg
File:Ruse TodorBozhinov HDR (2).jpg| The Court House
File:Ruse TodorBozhinov 09.08.09 (33).JPG
File:Rousse-english-language-school.jpg|The English language school in Ruse
File:Ruse TodorBozhinov 09.08.09 (76).JPG
File:Ruse TodorBozhinov 09.08.09 (52).JPG
File:Ruse TodorBozhinov 09.08.09 (36).JPG
File:Rousse-architecture4-library.jpg
File:Armenska curkva.JPG
File:Rousse St Georgi Church.jpg
File:Rousse High School of Music Nedko 2.jpg
File:Rousse-evangelical-church.jpg
File:Rousse-Hristo-Botev-school.jpg
File:The Assu Church in Rousse.jpg
File:Roman Wall Rousse 078.jpg|Walls of the Roman Fortress "Sexaginta Prisca"
File:Rousse-gruev-architecture.JPG|The old Credit and Trade Popular Bank (1911)
File:Rousse-weather-station.jpg|First meteo station in Bulgaria
File:Rousse-church-St-Petka.jpg
File:Monument of 5th Danube Infantry Regiment.jpg
File:Rousse Catholic Eparchy Detail.jpg
File:Rousse-mosque-Mincov.jpg
File:Rousse-muslim-school.jpg



 
 






