[[Core War]]

CATEGORIES: 1984 video games, Programming games, Artificial life models, Programming contests, Digital organisms

Core War is a programming game created by D. G. Jones and A. K. Dewdney in which two or more battle programs (called "warriors") compete for control of a virtual computer. These battle programs are written in an abstract assembly language called Redcode.
At the beginning of a game, each battle program is loaded into memory at a random location, after which each program executes one instruction in turn. The object of the game is to cause the processes of opposing programs to terminate (which happens if they execute an invalid instruction), leaving the victorious program in sole possession of the machine.

Gameplay

Key features

Versions of Redcode

A number of versions of Redcode exist.  The earliest version described by A. K. Dewdney differs in many respects from the later standards established by the International Core War Society, and could be considered a different, albeit related, language.  The form of Redcode most commonly used today is based on a draft standard submitted to the ICWS in 1994 that was never formally accepted, as the ICWS had become effectively defunct around that time.  Development of Redcode, however, has continued in an informal manner, chiefly via online forums such as the rec.corewar newsgroup.

Strategy

Warriors are commonly divided into a number of broad categories, although actual warriors may often combine the behavior of two or more of these.  Three of the common strategies (replicator, scanner and bomber) are also known as paper, scissors and stone, since their performance against each other approximates that of their namesakes in the well-known playground game.

Core War Programming

With an understanding of Core War strategies, a programmer can create a warrior to achieve certain goals. Revolutionary ideas come once in a while; most of the time, however, programmers base their programs on already published warriors. Using optimizers such as OptiMax or core-step optimizer tools, a more effective warrior can be created.
Warriors can also be generated by genetic algorithms or genetic programming. Programs that integrate this evolutionary technique are known as evolvers. Several evolvers were introduced by the Core War community and tend to focus on generating warriors for smaller core settings. The latest evolver with significant success was µGP

Development

Core War was inspired by a self-replicating program called Creeper and a subsequent program called Reaper that destroyed copies of Creeper. Dewdney was not aware of the origin of Creeper and Reaper and refers to them as a rumor originating from Darwin and the worm experiments of Shoch and Hupp.  The 1984 Scientific American article on Core War nevertheless cites the game Darwin, played by Victor A. Vyssotsky, Robert Morris, and Douglas McIlroy at Bell Labs in 1961. The word "Core" in the name comes from magnetic-core memory, an obsolete random-access memory technology.
The first description of the Redcode language was published in March 1984, in Core War Guidelines by D. G. Jones and A. K. Dewdney.
The International Core Wars Society (ICWS) was founded in 1985, one year after Dewdney's original article. The ICWS published new standards for the Redcode language in 1986 and 1988, and proposed an update in 1994 that was never formally set as the new standard.

Redcode

 
  0000:  ADD.AB  #   4, $   3
 0001:  MOV.F   $   2, @   2
 0002:  JMP.B   $  -2, $   0
 0003:  DAT.F   #   0, #   0
 Assembled ICWS-94 style Redcode
 
Redcode is the programming language used in Core War.  It is executed by a virtual machine known as a Memory Array Redcode Simulator, or MARS.  The design of Redcode is loosely based on actual CISC assembly languages of the early 1980s, but contains several features not usually found in actual computer systems.
Both Redcode and the MARS environment are designed to provide a simple and abstract platform without the complexity of actual computers and processors. Although Redcode is meant to resemble an ordinary CISC assembly language, it differs in many ways from "real" assembly.






