[[Theodore Maiman]]

CATEGORIES: 1927 births, 2007 deaths, Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences, Stanford University alumni, University of Colorado alumni, American physicists, Japan Prize laureates, Wolf Prize in Physics laureates, Deaths from mastocytosis, Disease-related deaths in British Columbia, Laser researchers, Jewish physicists, Members of the United States National Academy of Engineering

Theodore Harold "Ted" Maiman (July 11, 1927 – May 5, 2007

Life and career

Maiman was born in Los Angeles, California, to Abraham "Abe" Maiman, an electrical engineer and inventor, and Rose Abramson. At a young age his family moved to Denver, Colorado, where he helped his father with experimentation in a home electronics laboratory. In his teens Maiman earned money by repairing electrical appliances and radios,
Following a year's service in the U.S. Navy at the end of World War II,
In 1956 Maiman started work with the Atomic Physics Department of the Hughes Aircraft Company (later Hughes Research Laboratories or HRL Laboratories) in California where he led the ruby maser redesign project for the U.S. Army Signal Corps, reducing it from a 2.5-ton cryogenic device to 4 pounds while improving its performance.
Maiman had begun conceptualizing a solid-state laser design even before he undertook the maser project at Hughes.
Following his invention of the laser, in 1961 Maiman and seven colleagues departed Hughes to join the newly formed Quantatron company, which grew in-house ruby crystals for lasers. In 1962 Maiman founded and became the president of the Korad Corporation, which manufactured high-power ruby lasers. After Korad was fully acquired by Union Carbide in 1968, Maiman left to found Maiman Associates, a venture capital firm. In 1971 Maiman founded the Laser Video Corporation, and from 1976 to 1983 he worked as vice president for advanced technology at TRW Electronics (now Northrup Grumman).

Awards and recognition

Maiman received numerous prizes, awards, and accolades over the years for his development of the first laser. He was given membership in both the National Academies of Sciences and Engineering. He was made a Fellow of the American Physical Society, the Optical Society of America (OSA), and the Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE). In 1962 Maiman was awarded the Franklin Institute's Stuart Ballantine Medal for physics.
Recognition for Maiman and his laser invention continued posthumously. In a 2007 obituary testimonial, maser co-inventor Charles H. Townes described Maiman's 1960 Nature article on his laser as "probably more important per word than any of the papers published by Nature over the past century."

Death

Maiman died from systemic mastocytosis on May 5, 2007 in Vancouver, Canada, where he lived with his wife, Kathleen.






