[[University of the West of England]]

CATEGORIES: Alumni of the University of the West of England, University of the West of England, Educational institutions established in 1970, 1970 establishments in England, University Alliance, Gloucestershire

The University of the West of England (also known as UWE Bristol, or simply UWE) is a university located near the  city of Bristol, United Kingdom. Its main campus is at Frenchay near  Bristol, about five miles (8 km) north of the city centre and close to the M32 motorway.
UWE also has campuses at St Matthias and Glenside in north-east Bristol and Bower Ashton, near Ashton Court in south-west Bristol. There is also a regional centre at Gloucester Docks, Gloucestershire, and an associate faculty (Hartpury College) specialising in animal behaviour and welfare, agricultural and sports related courses in Hartpury, Gloucestershire.
With around 25,000 students and 3,000 academic staff,).
The Chancellor of UWE is Sir Ian Carruthers

History

The University of the West of England can trace its roots back to the foundation of the Merchant Venturers Navigation School, which was founded in 1595. Part of this institution, to which the Universities of Bristol and Bath also partly owe their origins, became a technical college which, after merger with other colleges, in turn became Bristol Polytechnic in 1970; the then-main campus was at Ashley Down, now a campus of the City of Bristol College. Like the other former polytechnics, this gained university status and its present name as a result of the Further and Higher Education Act, 1992.History of UWE
The Bower Ashton site was formed in 1969 as the West of England College of Art which was formerly the art school of the Royal West of England Academy in Queens Road, Bristol. The St Matthias site was originally built in Victorian times and was a teacher training college. These campuses, together with campuses in Redland, Ashley Down, Unity Street and Frenchay became part of Bristol Polytechnic around 1976.
The Avon and Gloucestershire College of Health which is now the Glenside Campus and the Bath and Swindon College of Health Studies joined in January 1996. Hartpury campus joined in 1997. An £80 million student village located at the Frenchay campus, which includes a sports centre and rooms for 2000 students, opened in 2006. The university is a lead academic sponsor of Bristol Technology and Engineering Academy, a new university technical college which is due to open in September 2013. 

Campuses

Frenchay campus

UWE's largest and primary campus is Frenchay, situated to the 4 miles to the north of Bristol city centre with Filton to the West and Stoke Gifford to the North.
As of September 2008 UWE have purchased the major part of neighbour Hewlett Packard's adjoining land, resulting in a  
Bower Ashton will be retained for a longer period, but may ultimately move. It is the single largest development in the university's history.

Bower Ashton campus

The Bower Ashton campus is home to the School of Creative Arts (formerly the Faculty of Art, Media and Design), which forms the major part of the Faculty of Creative Arts following the university reorganisation in 2007.  Adjacent to the Ashton Court estate, on the edge of the city of Bristol, the West of England College of Art was established here in purpose-built premises in 1969, moving from its previous location as the art school of the Royal West of England Academy in Clifton. In 1970 the college became part of Bristol Polytechnic, the precursor of the University.
The campus is undergoing a programme of redevelopment. Phase 1 was completed in 2008 and included a new building (F Block), which is now the main entrance to the campus. The tower block (B block) was also refurbished.[ref]

Among its Principals and Deans were the war artist Jack Chalker, the graphic designer Paul van Der Lem, and Paul Gough RWA, a fine artist, who became the first Pro-Vice Chancellor and Executive Dean of the Faculty in its expanded form of over 2,600 students.

Glenside campus

Glenside campus is the home of the School of Health and Social Care at the University of the West of England (UWE), Bristol. It is located on Blackberry Hill in the suburb of Fishponds. Stanley Spencer worked as a medical orderly at the Beaufort Hospital (Glenside) from 1915-16.
The Faculty of Health and Social Care was created in 1996 when the former Avon and Gloucestershire College of Health and Bath and Swindon College of Health Studies joined with the existing Faculty of Health and Community Studies at UWE. The Glenside Museum is situated within the campus. Glenside Museum. Retrieved on 2013-08-13.
The School of Health and Social Care is part of the Faculty of Health and Life Sciences and includes the following schools:
It is one of the largest faculties of its kind in the UK offering full- and part-time courses at all levels, from BSc and Diploma courses to MSc and PhD, plus continuing education, in the areas of Midwifery, Nursing, Occupational Therapy, Physiotherapy, Radiography, Social Work and other health-related professions. Many students undertake placements as part of their course in settings within the Avon, Gloucestershire & Wiltshire Strategic Health Authority area and in some case throughout the south west of England.
Research centres at the school are:
The school hosts the whole systems action research group Centre for Social and Organisational Learning as Action Research (SOLAR), and the Centre for Local Democracy which is a multifaculty research centre of the university.

St Matthias campus

St Matthias (known colloquially as St Matt's) is located in the suburb of Fishponds in Bristol. Built in the Victorian times by the Church of England, the campus has some Victorian Gothic buildings, set around a sunken lawn. The campus is currently home to some departments within the faculty of Creative Arts, Humanities and Education. The remaining departments are due to move to Frenchay in 2015.

UWE Stadium

As part of the masterplanning process, the University has identified an undeveloped area of 9.3 hectares which has the benefit of planning permission for office development. Potential uses for this site were considered, but it has subsequently been identified as an 'opportunity site' with the uses to be determined. UWE Stadium. Retrieved on 2013-08-13.
It is part of this 'opportunity site' that has been identified for a new stadium by Bristol Rovers Football Club. The 'UWE Stadium', as it will be called, will be developed in a spirit of partnership between the University and Bristol Rovers, albeit privately financed.
The proposed 21,700 seat stadium is to include retail units, a sports bar and club, a banqueting suite and venue space for hire. .ac. Retrieved on 2013-08-13.

Organisation and administration

Coat of arms

Echoing Bristol's long connection with the sea and the Merchant Venturers' Navigation School, the top of the crest depicts a ship's mainmast and rigging. The flaming fire basket indicates guidance, hope and the desire for learning.
The shield at the centre is adapted from that of the College of St Matthias with the wavy line representing the rivers of Avon and Severn. The unicorn is taken from the arms of the City of Bristol and the sea stag from those of the former County of Avon. Both these creatures wear a crown of King Edgar around their necks. Edgar is regarded as a local monarch because he was crowned in Bath Abbey in 973. The wavy lines enclosed in circles on the shoulders represent the fountain of knowledge and learning.
The unicorn and sea stag each support an apple tree, known as the tree of knowledge and is taken from the coat of arms of the Council for National Academic Awards which used to authorise degrees awarded to students of Bristol Polytechnic.
The motto Light, Liberty, Learning is a Disraeli quotation and corresponds directly to the symbolism of the coat of arms. The fire basket represents the Light, the Bristol and Avon supporters represent liberty, and the trees of knowledge and learning.

Structure

The university is divided into four faculties which are then subdivided into departments:

Academic profile

League tables

UWE has consistently been ranked among the top ten new universities in the UK and has always scored 'excellent' in the teaching assessments carried out by the Quality Assurance Agency.
Ofsted reports have rated UWE's primary, secondary and further education initial teacher training (ITT) courses  as outstanding – the top grade available. The university is also rated the fourth best university in the UK for Architecture according to a survey in the Architects' Journal.
According to The Guardian Good University Guide 2013 Land & Property Management has been ranked 4th out of 18 other institutions

Research

UWE Bristol was one of the biggest winners following the financial outcome of the latest Research Assessment Exercise in 2008. UWE increased its research funding allocation by 122%, one of the biggest increases in the country.uwe.ac.aspx The RAE 2008 results showed that over a third (37%) of research carried out at UWE was considered to be world-leading or internationally excellent. The results highlighted the significant presence of world-leading research in biomedical sciences, art and design and in communication, cultural and media studies. The results also show high levels of international excellence across a range of subjects including accountancy and finance, computer science, engineering, linguistics, town and country planning, plant science, nursing, history and architecture and built environment.
In 2010, UWE launched a research repository in order to host electronic versions of the research of its academics. The UWE Research Repository is open access.

Bristol Robotics Laboratory

Bristol Robotics Laboratory (BRL), the largest robotics laboratory of its type in the UK was officially opened on 10 May 2012 by the Rt Hon David Willetts MP, Minister for Universities and Science. The Laboratory is a partnership between University of the West of England (UWE) and the University of Bristol. BRL strives to understand the science, engineering and social role of robotics and embedded intelligence.
According to EE/Times, it is the largest robotics laboratory in Europe. EE Times (2012-05-17). Retrieved on 2013-08-13. The BRL is home to a community of 70 academics and businesses who are leading current thinking in nouvelle and service robotics, intelligent autonomous systems and bio-engineering. Over £1.65 million has been spent on the new facilities. The total area of the BRL is circa 2,400 sqm, with over 300 square metres of specialised laboratory space and two Flying Arenas.
Bristol Robotics Laboratory. Brl.ac.uk. Retrieved on 2013-08-13.

National College for Legal Training

The National College of Legal Training (NCLT) is a collaboration between UWE and Central Law Training, launched in January 2010 to provide postgraduate legal training."National College of Legal Training", Law Careers."UWE to offer cut-price part-time LPC for recession-hit students", Legalweek. NCLT Study centres are located at Coventry University, Manchester Metropolitan University, Southampton Solent University and University of Westminster."NCLT:The Flexible Legal Practice Course" (official website) (accessed 1 September 2010).

Student life

Students' Union

UWE Students' Union ("UWESU"), formerly known as Bristol Polytechnic Students' Union (BPSU) until it changed its name in line with its parent establishment becoming a university in 1992, is based at Frenchay campus and was established in 1971. It is run by a team of four sabbatical officers, who are elected annually from the student population. The Students' Union operates bars at all main sites, "Escape" and "Red" at Frenchay, "Bar 75" at Glenside, the "St Matt's Bar" and "Faculty of Creative Arts Bar" - otherwise known as the FoCA Bar.  There are also shops at Frenchay, Glenside, St Matthias and Bower Ashton.
UWESU Jobshop provides employment opportunities for students, while UWESU Student Lettings provides a comprehensive Lettings Agency exclusively for UWE students.

Facilities

At Frenchay campus a NatWest bank and Blackwell's book store operate on campus. The student radio station, Hub Radio operates out of a studio on campus.
The University House Services department operates three bars, one canteen and four coffee shops.  Staff only facilities at Frenchay include "Felixstowe Court", "Paninos" and "Café Severn".  At each of the other campuses House Services operate canteens named "Traders".
In August 2006, a new sports centre was opened at Frenchay, including a large main hall with a wooden sprung floor and two glass back squash courts. The hall has court markings for sports including, badminton, basketball, netball, 5-a-side football, volleyball and indoor hockey. There is a 70 station fitness suite, changing rooms and a hockey pitch. At St Matthias campus there is a small sports hall and outdoor pitches.
The Centre for Student Affairs offers advice, counselling and career development guidance to students and there is a university-wide multi-faith chaplaincy, based at the Octagon Centre at Frenchay.

Student accommodation

In September 2006, Frenchay Student Village opened providing on-campus accommodation for 1,932 students, adding to the 252 units already provided in Carroll Court.  Campus accommodation is also provided at Glenside and St Matthias campuses.  In partnership with UNITE Student Housing a further 1,500 places are provided in Bristol City Centre and UWE Accommodation services also places students in vetted private rentals.
The main halls of residence are
The student village, St Matthias and Marketgate are all en suite, however Marketgate has 12 studio flats that allow for single occupancy. All other accommodation is shared bathrooms and shared kitchen facilities. All accommodation at UWE is self-catering. 

Notable alumni








