[[Shaivism]]

CATEGORIES: Hindu denominations, Shaivism

Shaivism or Saivism (, śaiva paṁtha; lit. "associated with Shiva"), is one of the four most widely followed sects of Hinduism, which reveres the god Shiva as the Supreme Being. Followers of Shaivam, called "Shaivas," and also "Saivas" or "Shaivites," believe that Shiva is All and in all, the creator, preserver, destroyer, revealer and concealer of all that is. Shaivism is widespread throughout India, Nepal and Sri Lanka. Areas notable for the practice of Shaivism include parts of Southeast Asia, especially Malaysia, Singapore, and Indonesia.
Shaivism is the Hindu sect that worships the god Shiva. Shiva is sometimes depicted as the fierce god Bhairava. Saivists are more attracted to asceticism than adherents of other Hindu sects, and may be found wandering India with ashen faces performing self-purification rituals.

General features

Sacred ash came to be used as a sign of Shaivism. Devotees of Shiva wear it as a sectarian mark on their foreheads and other parts of their bodies with reverence.  The Sanskrit words bhasmaApte, p. 714. and vibhutiApte, p. 866 can both be translated as "sacred ash".

History

It is very difficult to determine the early history of Shaivism. Shaivism is the oldest worship of hinduism. Pashupata was the first Lord worshipped.. As explained by Gavin Flood, the text proposes: 

During the Gupta Dynasty (c. 320 - 500 CE) Puranic religion developed and Shaivism spread rapidly, eventually throughout the subcontinent, spread by the singers and composers of the Puranic narratives. 320 - 500 CE) and  Puranic religion as important to the spread across the subcontinent, see: Flood (1996), p. 154.

Major schools

Shaivism has many different schools reflecting both regional and temporal variations and differences in philosophy. 200-228. For an overview that concentrates on the Tantric forms of Śaivism, see Alexis Sanderson's magisterial survey article Śaivism and the Tantric Traditions, pp.660--704 in The World's Religions, edited by Stephen Sutherland, Leslie Houlden, Peter Clarke and Friedhelm Hardy, London: Routledge, 1988. Shaivism has a vast literature that includes texts representing multiple philosophical schools, including non-dualist (abheda), dualist (bheda), and non-dual-with-dualism (.

Puranic and non-Puranic

Alexis Sanderson's review of Shaivite groups makes a broad distinction into two groups, with further subdivisions within each group:For overview of Sanderson's method of grouping, see: Flood (2003), p. 206.

Pashupata Shaivism

Pashupata Shaivism: The Pashupatas (Sanskrit: 

Shaiva Siddhanta

Shaiva Siddhanta: Considered normative tantric Saivism, Shaiva Siddhanta provides the normative rites, cosmology and theological categories of tantric Saivism. D. 2006. The Tantric Body. P.120 There is a dualistic dimension to Shaivism, as expounded by Meykandar. The pure, or Shuddha Saivism,however, proclaimed by Rishi Thirumular and his paramparai (guru lineage), is strictly non-dualistic, and proclaims the soul to be at all times one with Shiva.  Subramuniyaswami, Sivaya, Dancing with Siva, Merging with Siva. This tradition was once practiced all over India. For example the theologians Sadyojoti, Bhatta Nārāyanakantha and his son Bhatta Rāmakantha (ca. 950-1000 AD) developed a sophisticated Siddhanta theology in Kashmir. 2003. The Blackwell Companion to Hinduism. Malden: Blackwell. pg. 210. However the Muslim subjugation of north India restricted Shaiva Siddhanta to the south,Flood, Gavin. D. 2006. The Tantric Body. P.34 where it merged with the Tamil Saiva cult expressed in the bhakti poetry of the Nayanars. D. 1996. An Introduction to Hinduism. P.168 It is in this historical context that Shaiva Siddhanta is commonly considered a "southern" tradition, one that is still very much alive. D. 1996. An Introduction to Hinduism. P.168 

Kashmir Shaivism

Kashmir Shaivism: Kashmir Saivism, a householder religion, was based on a strong monistic interpretation of the Bhairava Tantras (and its subcategory the Kaula Tantras), which were tantras written by the Kapalikas. D. 1996. An Introduction to Hinduism. P.164-167 There was additionally a revelation of the Siva Sutras to Vasugupta. D. 1996. An Introduction to Hinduism. P.164-167 Kashmir Saivism claimed to supersede the dualistic Shaiva Siddhanta. D. 2006. The Tantric Body. P.61 Somananda, the first theologian of monistic Saivism, was the teacher of Utpaladeva, who was the grand-teacher of Abhinavagupta, who in turn was the teacher of  Ksemaraja. D. 1996. An Introduction to Hinduism. P.164-167Flood, Gavin. D. 2006. The Tantric Body. P.66 The label Kashmir Shaivism, though unfortunately now widely adopted, is really a misnomer, for it is clear that the dualistic Shaiva Siddhanta was also in North India at one point in time. 

Siddha Siddhanta

Natha Siddha Siddhanta: Founded by Matsyendranatha (ca 800–1000) and expounded by Rishi Gorakshanatha (ca 950), this monism is known as Bhedabheda, embracing both the transcendent Shiva as well as the immanent Shiva. Shiva is efficient and material cause. The creation and final return of soul and cosmos to Shiva are likened to bubbles arising and returning to water. Influential in Nepal, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal.

Lingayatism

Lingayatism: Made popular by Basavanna (1105–1167), this version of qualified nondualism, Shakti Vishishtadvaita, accepts both difference and nondifference between soul and God, like rays are to the sun. Shiva and the cosmic force are one, yet Shiva is beyond His creation, which is real, not illusory. God is efficient and material cause. Influential primarily in Karnataka.

Shiva Advaita

Shiva Advaita: This monistic theism, formulated by Srikantha (ca 1050), is called Shiva Vishishtadvaita. The soul does not ultimately become perfectly one with Brahman, but shares with the Supreme all excellent qualities. Appaya Dikshita (1554–1626) attempted to resolve this union in favor of an absolute identity—Shuddhadvaita. Its area of origin and influence covers most of Karnataka state. 
Shaivism left a major imprint on the intellectual life of classical Cambodia, Champa in what is today southern Vietnam, Java and the Tamil lands. The wave of Shaivite devotionalism that swept through late classical and early medieval India redefined Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. Shaivite worship legitimized several ruling dynasties in pre-modern India, incluidng the Chola and the Rajputs. A similar trend was witnessed in early medieval Indonesia with the Majapahit empire and pre-Islamic Malaya.A. Nilakanta. "A Historical Sketch of Saivism", in: Bhattacharyya (1956), Volume IV pages 63 -78.J.

Shaivite literature and texts

The . The Shiva Rahasya Purana, an Upapurana, is an important scriptual text.
One of the most important text of Shaivism is Tirumurai.

Festivals

The myth of Saivsm and Buddhism was played every year at the 6th day Vaigasi festival of Shri Pathrakali Mariamman temple, Thirumangalam.





Sources

|last = Chakravarti
|first = Mahadev
|year = 1994
|title = The Concept of Rudra-Śiva Through The Ages 
|place = Delhi
|publisher = Motilal Banarsidass
|edition = Second Revised
|isbn = 81-208-0053-2
}} 
|last = Tattwananda
|first = Swami
|year = 1984
|title = Vaisnava Sects, Saiva Sects, Mother Worship  
|place = Calcutta
|publisher = Firma KLM Private Ltd.
|edition = First Revised
|isbn =
}}






