[[Serval]]

CATEGORIES: Animals described in 1776, Fauna of East Africa, Fauna of the Sahara, Fauna of West Africa, Felines, IUCN Red List endangered species, Mammals of Africa, Mammals of Algeria, Mammals of Angola, Mammals of Botswana, Mammals of Burkina Faso, Mammals of Kenya, Mammals of Morocco, Mammals of Namibia, Mammals of South Africa, Mammals of Tanzania, Mammals of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mammals of Uganda, Mammals of Zambia

The serval 

Description

The serval is a medium-sized cat, measuring 
It is a strong yet slender animal, with long legs and a fairly short tail. Due to its leg length, it is relatively one of the tallest cats. The head is small in relation to the body, and the tall, oval ears are set close together. The pattern of the fur is variable. Usually, the serval is boldly spotted black on tawny, with two or four stripes from the top of the head down the neck and back, transitioning into spots. The "servaline" form has much smaller, freckled spots, and was once thought to be a separate  species. The backs of the ears are black with a distinctive white bar. In addition, melanistic servals are quite common in some parts of the range, giving a similar appearance to the "black panther" (melanistic leopard).
White servals have never been documented in the wild and only five have been documented in captivity. One was born and died at the age of two weeks in Canada in the early 1990s. Three males were born at Big Cat Rescue in Tampa, Florida in 1997 (Kongo and Tonga) and 1999 (Pharaoh). Big Cat Rescue. Retrieved on 2012-07-03. Big Cat Rescue. Retrieved on 2012-07-03. Sites.com. Retrieved on 2012-07-03. Another is owned by a family living in Regina, Saskatchewan, Canada.[ref]
</ref>
Servals have the longest legs of any cat, relative to their body size. Most of this increase in length is due to the greatly elongated metatarsal bones in the feet. The toes are also elongated, and unusually mobile, helping the animal to capture partially concealed prey. Another distinctive feature of the serval is the presence of large ears and auditory bullae in the skull, indicating a particularly acute sense of hearing.

Distribution and habitat

The serval is native to Africa, where it is widely distributed south of the Sahara. It was once also found in Morocco, Tunisia, and Algeria, but may have been extirpated from Algeria and remains in Tunisia only because of a reintroduction program. Serval became extinct in the Cape provinces of South Africa over the last century mainly due to habitat loss, hunting and poaching. However private game reserves in the Eastern Cape have begun re-introducing the species in the hopes of contributing to the eventual re-establishment of these wild cats in the region.
Its main habitat is the savanna, although melanistic individuals are more usually found in mountainous areas at elevations up to . The serval needs watercourses within its territory, so it does not live in semi-deserts or dry steppes. Servals also avoid dense equatorial jungles, although they may be found along forest fringes. They are able to climb and swim, but seldom do so.

Subspecies

Nineteen subspecies were recognized in Mammal Species of the World, but some authorities treat several of these as synonyms (a few have even treated the serval as monotypic). (1997). The Kingdon Guide to African Mammals. Academic Press. ISBN 0-12-408355-2

Hunting and diet

The serval is nocturnal, and so hunts mostly at night, unless disturbed by human activity or the presence of larger nocturnal predators. Although the serval is specialized for catching rodents, it is an opportunistic predator whose diet also includes birds, hares, hyraxes, reptiles, insects, fish, and frogs.
As part of its adaptations for hunting in the savannas, the serval boasts long legs (the longest of all cats, relative to body size) for jumping, which also help it achieve a top speed of 
The serval is extremely intelligent, and demonstrates remarkable problem-solving ability as well as easily outwitting its prey, and eluding other predators. The serval will often play with its captured prey for several minutes before consuming it. In most situations, the serval will ferociously defend its food against attempted theft by others. Males can be more aggressive than females.

Behavior

Like most cats, the serval is a solitary, nocturnal animal. It is known to travel as much as , and marks its territory by spraying urine onto prominent objects such as bushes, or, less frequently, by scraping fresh urine into the ground with its claws. Threat displays between hostile servals are often highly exaggerated, with the animals flattening their ears and arching their backs, baring their teeth, and nodding their heads vigorously. In direct confrontation, they lash out with their long forelegs and make sharp barking sounds and loud growls.
Like many cats, the serval is able to purr. The serval also has a high-pitched chirp, and can hiss, cackle, growl, grunt, and meow.

Reproduction and life history

Oestrus in the serval lasts for up to four days, and is typically timed so the kittens will be born shortly before the peak breeding period of local rodent populations. A serval is able to give birth to multiple litters throughout the year, but commonly does so only if the earlier litters die shortly after birth. Gestation lasts from 66 to 77 days and commonly results in the birth of two kittens, although sometimes as few as one or as many as four have been recorded.
The kittens are born in dense vegetation or sheltered locations such as abandoned aardvark burrows. If such an ideal location is not available, a place beneath a shrub may be sufficient. The kittens weigh around  at birth, and are initially blind and helpless, with a coat of greyish woolly hair. They open their eyes at 9 to 13 days of age, and begin to take solid food after around a month. At around six months, they acquire their permanent canine teeth and begin to hunt for themselves; they leave their mother at about 12 months of age. They may reach sexual maturity from 12 to 25 months of age.
Life expectancy is about 10 years in the wild, and up to 20 years in captivity. - Additional references are given in the section of the web page linked.

Conservation

The serval has dwindled in numbers due to human population taking over its habitat and hunting for its pelts. The serval is sometimes preyed upon by the leopard and other large cats. The serval is listed in CITES Appendix 2, indicating it is "not necessarily now threatened with extinction, but that may become so unless trade is closely controlled."CITES Appendices. cites. Private game reserves in the Eastern Cape have begun re-introducing the species in the hopes of contributing to the eventual re-establishment of these wild cats in the region. North of the Sahara, it occurs in only Morocco and Algeria, but has now possibly disappeared from the latter country and the subspecies from this region (L. s. constantina) is considered endangered under US-ESA.U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (2011). Leptailurus serval constantina. Endangered Species Act. It formerly occurred naturally in Tunisia, but now only through a reintroduction program based on servals from East Africa.

Heraldry and literature

The serval  was the symbol of the Tomasi family, princes of Lampedusa, whose best-known member was Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusa, author of one of the most famous Italian novels of the 20th century, Il Gattopardo. Opération Serval, a 2013 French military operation in the Northern Mali conflict, was named after the African cat.






