[[West Edmonton Mall]]

CATEGORIES: West Edmonton Mall, Music venues in Edmonton, Shopping malls established in 1981, IMAX venues, Visitor attractions in Edmonton, Shopping malls in Edmonton

West Edmonton Mall (WEM), located in Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, is the largest shopping mall in North America and the third largest in the world (along with The Dubai Mall) by gross leasable area. It was the world's largest mall until 2004.[ref]
</ref>
West Edmonton Mall covers a gross area of about 

History

West Edmonton Mall first opened its doors to the public on September 15, 1981. The mall has been expanded three times since its opening in 1981, with these additions completed in 1983 (Phase II), 1985 (Phase III) and 1999 (Phase IV). It was the largest indoor shopping centre in the world until 2004 (History of Shopping Malls) and was put in the Guinness World Records. The four phases of construction are used in a colour-coded system as a guideline for finding stores and attractions.
The mall's amusement park was originally called Fantasyland, until The Walt Disney Company took the mall to court, claiming ownership of the name, which is a themed area found at its Disneyland-style theme parks around the world. WEM lost and subsequently renamed the attraction Galaxyland. Since the name change, they introduced the mall's mascot Cosmo who is the basis for several rides in Galaxyland. The amusement park is located in what is referred to as Phase One, although it stretches into Phase II. However, the mall was allowed to retain the name Fantasyland Hotel for its on-site hotel. The hotel is a separate building but it is attached to Phase III of the mall.
The Mindbender indoor roller coaster had a fatal accident on June 14, 1986 when several of the cars came loose and came off the track. Three people died in the accident.
In the early 1990s, the Woodward's department store chain, one of WEM's anchors, went bankrupt, and its locations were purchased by the Hudson's Bay Company. As a result, WEM boasted two full Bay department stores until the late 1990s when the company closed the store that had replaced Woodward's, leading to a renovation (known as Phase IV) that added a Famous Players multiplex, a two-floor HMV location (complete with an HMV stage, which has played hosts to autograph signings for bands, Hollywood celebrities and World Wrestling Entertainment superstars), a $12.6 million Playdium entertainment complex/arcade (now closed), an indoor shooting range, a Chapters bookstore with a Starbucks, as well as several other smaller stores. In 2005, the upstairs space previously occupied by Playdium was rented by three NewCap Radio radio stations: 790 CFCW, K-97 97.3 (Formerly, 97.3 K-Rock), and 96.3 Capital FM (formerly 96.3 Big Earl).
The closure of the Eaton's chain in the 1990s resulted in another anchor shuffle at WEM as Eaton's vacated its Phase I anchor location; Zellers, which had been located in Phase II near the ice rink, relocated to the Eaton's site, and the former Zellers location was renovated to house several smaller retailers, as well as add a new ground-level entrance corridor.
The closures of Canadian Tire and IKEA in the mid-1990s left vacancies that sat unfilled until the spaces were converted into a T & T Supermarket in 2002, and an entertainment complex called Ed's Rec Room that consists of a billiard hall, bowling alley and nightclub, respectively.
Among the stores that are only found in Edmonton at WEM are DeSerres, and Simons, along with others.
The mall suffered millions of dollars in damage on July 11, 2004 when a severe storm of hail and rain caused roofs to fail and drains to overflow. The Ice Palace and surrounding sections were the most damaged, and the World Waterpark had a sewage overflow. The damage was promptly repaired. The Ice Palace has suffered occasional flood damage since as well.
In the summer of 2009, the mall's dinner theatre was relocated and Edmonton's second branch of Bed, Bath and Beyond opened in the dinner theatre's old location above the west-end food court. In August 2010, Victoria's Secret opened their first Canadian store in the mall.
La Maison Simons opened a  The construction of the Simons store resulted in HMV reducing its second-floor footprint. The most recent anchor change at the mall occurred in 2012 when its Zellers location closed; which was reformatted into a Target department store, which opened in May 2013. Target became the third major retailer to occupy WEM's southeast-corner anchor.

Major attractions

Galaxyland

Galaxyland was originally known as "Fantasyland;" however, during a court battle with Disney, West Edmonton Mall changed the park's name to Galaxyland in July 1995 after completing some minor renovations. It is an indoor amusement park located on the north side of the mall. It is the second-largest indoor amusement park in the world, behind Ferrari World, and features 24 rides and attractions. There are 8 beginner rides, 9 intermediate rides, 7 thrill rides, including the triple loop Mindbender roller coaster, which derailed and killed 3 riders in July 1986, and 5 other "pay at site" rides/games. The Mindbender is the world's largest indoor triple loop roller coaster. The latest attraction in Galaxyland, which opened on July 17, 2007, called the Galaxy Orbiter, begins at the Mindbender and intertwines with the entire park. was the loading area replaced by an interactive laser ride based on the theme of the park's mascot, Cosmo. In March 2011, new feature, which replaced the Sonic Twister (which succeeded the Disco Dynamo) debuted, the "Cosmic Revolution". It rotates and manoeuvres in a similar pattern to the "Sonic Storm" but with possible upside-down sensations. Other attractions include the TurboRide 3D Theatre, which sits directly underneath the Mindbender, the privately owned Haunted Castle and Fun House (also beneath the Mindbender), the Autosled roller coaster which is a tamer alternative to the Mindbender, the Swing of the Century, and Galaxy Kids, a large play area for young children.

World Waterpark

The World Waterpark is the world's second largest indoor waterpark, built in 1985, with a size of over  high.
The wavepool has six wave bays, each with two panels with a total of  generating waves up to two metres high.
The major slides are all on the east side of the park, with a children's play area and change room access behind them. On the west side is a tube ride which has been changed many times over, a three-person inflatable raft slide and the separately owned Bungee Tower where one can bungee jump directly over the wave pool.
Recent renovations brought new signage, a complete resurfacing of the wave pool, and changeroom upgrades. There have also been large renovations to the children's play park at the far east side in 2008. The new version of this play park is called "Caribbean Cove" and contains a 1200 litre bucket that drops water on the whole play park on regular 2 minute intervals. A small dolphin themed child's park was open during the renovations and is still open to this date. Also more recently, they have added 3 more slides, taking down the Skyscreamer and building a new one along with a skyscreamer extreme and a loop waterslide.

Sea Life Caverns / Sea Lions Rock

West Edmonton Mall has an indoor lake which contains a salt-water habitat with a sea lion and a replica of the Santa María, built during the 1986 World Exposition in Vancouver. The Santa María has been used for an annual Christmas fundraiser, raising toys for underprivileged children. Also, the submarines, a longtime favorite, had been replaced with the Deep-Sea Derby, a bumper boat ride with squirt guns. Deep Sea Adventure is also home to the mall's aquatic life, most of which are housed beneath the main floor in the "Sea Life Caverns". Today, what was once the Dolphin's Lagoon is now the Sea Lions' Rock, with three sea lions (Clara, Kelpie and Pablo) providing the entertainment for the current presentation labeled "Swim, Slide, and Splash!".

Ice Palace

Ice Palace is a scaled down version of a National Hockey League (NHL) regulation sized ice rink located in the centre of the mall. The Edmonton Oilers occasionally practiced at the Ice Palace. This drew huge crowds during the Wayne Gretzky years in the 1980s. The Oilers' contract for using the rink, however, has since expired. The rink is used for various hockey and other sporting tournaments.
During special events, such as Remembrance Day, the ice rink is covered with fabric and a ceremony is held on it.

Professor WEM's Adventure Golf

Professor WEM's Adventure Golf is an 18-hole miniature golf course. The miniature golf course was originally known as Pebble Beach Mini Golf, and was designed to be a mini golf version of Pebble Beach Golf Links. The course was refurbished and given the Professor WEM theme in the mid-1990s.

Movie theatres

Originally, the mall was home to four movie theatre complexes. However, as of 2008, only the Scotiabank Theatre, formerly Famous Players SilverCity, (with an animatronic fire breathing dragon and IMAX screen) is in the mall. Until 2005, a discount cinema, owned by Cineplex Odeon was located outside the Phase I entrance to Galaxyland; the majority of the space it occupied was bought out by skateboarding/snowboarding store West 49 which also built an indoor skatepark in the basement. Prior to the opening of SilverCity, in the late 1990s there was a Famous Players theatre located near the Palace Casino, as well as a second Cineplex Odeon below Ed's Recreation Centre (formerly Red's), on the main level with the Gourmet Court (Phase III).

Ed's Recreation Centre

Other attractions

The mall also includes several "theme areas" including:

Future developments

Plans are underway for a total retrofit of the mall shopping areas through all the phases. Construction began in spring 2011 and are be staged, expected to last 18 to 24 months. As of August 2013, the construction is still underway.
In 2002, the City of Edmonton approved plans for the mall to expand with an additional 30,000 m2 (320,000 sq ft) of retail space, a facility for sports, trade shows and conventions, a 12-story office building, and a 600-unit apartment building, along with more parking. "West Edmonton Mall gets go-ahead for expansion" , however, construction on any of these items has yet to begin.
Currently, a number of large shopping malls, all larger than the West Edmonton Mall, are under construction in China, and the retail centre in Beijing has already displaced the West Edmonton Mall as the world's largest. The SM Mall of Asia, located in Pasay City, Metro Manila, Philippines has also surpassed the mall's gross floor size by .

Controversies

West Edmonton Mall was the object of a controversy when, after arresting a woman for trespassing, their security staff were caught on videotape allegedly assaulting her. A judge had agreed to release the video after the charges against the woman were dismissed. Cbc. Retrieved on 2013-07-12.

Anchors

West Edmonton Mall Transit Centre

The Edmonton Transit System operates a major transit centre on the south side of West Edmonton Mall, outside mall entrance 48. Buses using the transit centre enter and exit from 87 Avenue NW. The large shelter building at the transit centre is accessible and equipped with power doors.

Bus bay assignments








