[[Tammar wallaby]]

CATEGORIES: Animals described in 1817, Macropods, Mammals of South Australia, Mammals of Western Australia, Mammals with sequenced genomes, Marsupials of Australia, Model organisms

The tammar wallaby (Macropus eugenii), also known as the dama wallaby or darma wallaby, is a small macropod native to South and Western Australia. Though its geographical range has been severely reduced since European colonisation, the tammar remains common within its reduced range and it is listed as of Least Concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). It has been introduced to New Zealand and reintroduced to some areas of Australia where it had been previously eradicated. Skull differences distinguish tammars from Western Australia, Kangaroo Island and mainland South Australia, making them distinct populations groups or possibly different subspecies.
Around the size of a rabbit, the tammar is among the smallest of the wallabies. Its coat colour is largely grey. The tammar has several notable adaptations, including the ability to retain energy while hopping, colour vision and the ability to drink seawater. A nocturnal species, it spends nighttime in grassland habitat and daytime in shrub. It is also very gregarious and has a seasonal, promiscuous mating pattern. A female tammar can nurse a joey in her pouch while keeping an embryo in her uterus. The tammar is a model species for research on marsupials, and on mammals in general. It is one of many organisms to have had its genome sequenced.

Taxonomy and classification

The tammar wallaby was seen in the Houtman Abrolhos off Western Australia by survivors of the 1628 Batavia shipwreck, and recorded by François Pelsaert in his 1629 Ongeluckige Voyagie.
Fossil evidence of the tammar wallaby exists from the late Pleistocene era—remains were found in the Naracoorte Caves. The mainland and island dwelling tammars split from each other 7,000–15,000 years ago, The Western Australia Department of Environment and Conservation lists these populations as subspecies; M. e. derbianus, M. e. eugenii and M. e. decres respectively.

Population dynamics and conservation

The tammar wallaby is listed as of Least Concern by the IUCN, due to its abundance and presumably stable population. However, the fragmentation of its range has led to high amounts of inbreeding and morphological abnormalities in some populations.
Since European occupation, tammar wallaby populations on both mainland Australia and some of the islands have been greatly reduced or even eradicated. In the early 20th century, the mainland population of tammars in Western Australia was described as numerous in much of the south-west, but declining in the cultivated areas, particularly to the north.  
Tammars from these areas were introduced to Kawau Island in New Zealand by colonial administrator Sir George Grey in 1870. Since then, they have flourished to the point where their foraging has damaged indigenous plants. Pest control operators have used sodium fluoroacetate, a naturally occurring rodenticide, to control their populations, Tammars have also been successfully translocated to other areas, such as Nambung National Park and Avon Valley National Park.

Resistance to sodium fluoroacetate

Different tammar populations have varying levels of resistance to sodium fluoroacetate. Mainland Western tammars appear to be the most resistant, while those on Kangaroo Island are much more vulnerable.

Appearance and physiology

One of the smallest wallaby species, the tammar wallaby features a small head and large ears with a long tail, thick at the base. It has dark grey-brown upperparts with paler grey highlights, rufous on the sides of the body and limbs, particularly in males, and pale grey-buff underparts.

Locomotion

As with most macropods, the tammar wallaby moves around by hopping. This species has a hopping frequency of 3.5 strides per second, with a stride length of 0.8–2.4 m (2.5–8 ft).

Senses

The tammar has 324° peripheral vision and 50° binocular vision.

Thermoregulation and water turnover

Tammars lick their forearms and pant to keep cool in hot weather. They breathe more heavily and lose more water when the temperature is over 

Sudden deaths

In late 1998, 120–130 tammar wallabies died suddenly in research facilities and zoos in New South Wales and Queensland, perishing less than twelve hours after exhibiting the first symptoms, with most exhibiting no symptoms at all. Post mortem examination revealed haemorrhage of muscle, and abdominal and thoracic organs. The syndrome is known as tammar sudden death syndrome and the pathogen is an orbivirus of the family Reoviridae.

Ecology and life history

Mostly nocturnal, tammar wallabies spend much of their time foraging. of space. Tammar home ranges overlap with those of conspecifics.
During the day, tammars stay close to scrub for shade and move out to more open grassland by nightfall.
The tammar rests in two positions: a "sitting tail forward" position, in which the hind legs are outstreached with tail brought forward in between, the body prone and the head above ground; and a "lying" position, in which the animal lies on its side with the head touching the ground. The former position is typically used during the day for long periods, and the latter position is used at night for brief periods. When lost, young tammars are known to emit a coarse screeching call and adult females may respond with a similar call.

Breeding and development

The tammar wallaby has a promiscuous mating system.
The female tammar can conceive shortly after giving birth.
When it reaches the pouch, the underdeveloped joey suckles the teat of one of the four mammary glands while the others recede. The joey remains attached to the teat for 100–125 days, after which it ceases its attachment but remains in the pouch and continues to suckle, but more intermittently. The joey begins to leave the pouch and eat grass at around 200 days when it is more developed. It still suckles, more forcefully but less regularly. By 250 days, the joey no longer needs the pouch, and it is fully weaned at around 300–350 days. Male tammars may live for around 11 years, while females live for 14 years.

Use in science

Model organism

