[[Leave No Trace]]

CATEGORIES: Environmental ethics, Environmental organizations, Environmental sayings, Hiking, Scoutcraft

Leave No Trace refers to a set of outdoor ethics and also to a nonprofit organization that teaches those principles. Leave No Trace principles are designed to promote conservation in the outdoors. The organization Leave No Trace exists to educate people about their recreational impact on nature as well as the principles of Leave No Trace to prevent and minimize such impacts.
Leave No Trace is built on Seven Principles: Plan Ahead and Prepare, Travel and Camp on Durable Surfaces, Dispose of Waste Properly, Leave What You Find, Minimize Campfire Impacts, Respect Wildlife, and Be Considerate of Other Visitors. The Seven Principles have been adapted to different activities, ecosystems and environments.

Origins

In the mid 20th-century there was a cultural shift in wilderness ethics from woodcraft where wilderness travelers prized themselves on their ability to rely on the resources of wild lands to a post-WWII ethics of minimal impact on the environment.
Also in the 70s, groups such as the Sierra Club were advocating minimum impact camping techniques. The Boy Scouts of America (BSA) had been actively advocating training and implementation of Leave No Trace and outdoor ethics principles early in the 70's at such places as Philmont Scout Ranch in Northern New Mexico. A pilot program in the 80s between the BSA and the Bureau of Land Management in the High Uintas Wilderness tried to reach a wide audience.
The national education program of Leave No Trace was developed in 1990 by the United States Forest Service in conjunction with the National Outdoor Leadership School (NOLS). At the time the USFS also created other programs such as Smokey Bear, Woodsy Owl, and previously in 1985 the Tread Lightly! program which was geared towards motorized recreation. The Bureau of Land Management joined the program in 1993 followed by the National Park Service and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service in 1994.

Principles

Leave No Trace provides a framework for outdoor recreation decision making, which is summarized in the following Seven Principles:

Scientific Foundation

Two primary scientific disciplines form the foundation of the Leave No Trace program: recreation ecology and human dimensions of natural resources. Recreation ecology research, "a field of study that examines, assesses and monitors visitor impacts, typically to protected natural areas, and their relationships to influential factors" has provided the foundation for Leave No Trace messaging because of its focus on recreational impacts. Recreation ecology has dominated most minimum-impact research, and reviews suggest that there have been over one thousand recreation ecology articles published within recent decades. Examples include both ecological and social impacts of visitors like these NOLS Recreational Ecology Research Reports. Yet, the behavior of outdoor enthusiasts is perhaps the largest determinant of impact, and human dimensions research, which focuses on the sociological, psychological, cultural, and economic aspects of recreationists is limited but growing with regard to Leave No Trace-related studies.
The majority of human dimensions research related to Leave No Trace has evaluated educational effectiveness through various communication strategies in an effort to increase knowledge and influence behavioral change. For example, studies have evaluated communication strategies to mitigate human and wildlife conflict, reduce litter, minimize removal of natural objects or deter off-trail hiking. Few studies have addressed Leave No Trace specifically, instead focusing on minimum-impact behaviors broadly, and even fewer studies have evaluated the most common user-group, frontcountry visitors. More recently, however, social scientists have explored concepts such as knowledge, attitudes, beliefs, values, and behaviors of outdoor enthusiasts in the context of Leave No Trace practices, and have begun examining the perceptions of frontcountry visitors.

Organization

The Leave No Trace program is managed by the Leave No Trace Center for Outdoor Ethics,  which is a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization. The Leave No Trace Center for Outdoor Ethics is dedicated to the responsible enjoyment and active stewardship of the outdoors by all people worldwide. The Center's mission is to teach people how to enjoy the outdoors responsibly. This mission is accomplished through education, research, volunteerism and partnerships. Leave No Trace tries to build awareness, appreciation and respect for wildlands. Since its founding in 1994, the Center has provided training in every state in the U.S. and over 25 countries. There are more than 25,000 active volunteers and members who help provide training and outreach that impacts more than 22 million people annually in the U.S. alone.

Training

A Leave No Trace Master Educator Course is typically five days in length and designed for people who are actively teaching others outdoor skills or providing recreation information to the public. The Master Educator Course provides participants with a comprehensive overview of Leave No Trace skills and ethics through practical application in a field-based setting. The first day is spent in a classroom introducing the course and schedule, providing in-depth information on the overall Leave No Trace program and the Center for Outdoor Ethics, reviewing gear, and packing. The remaining days are spent in the field on a short backcountry trip learning and practicing the principles of Leave No Trace. Each course is staffed with a minimum of two experienced outdoor professionals who are Master Educator Instructors.
The Leave No Trace Trainer Courses are two-day trainings facilitated in an outdoor setting by Master Educators. Participants learn the concepts of Leave No Trace and prepare to teach Leave No Trace curriculum in a variety of settings. Workshop topics include the underlying ethics and seven principles of Leave No Trace.
Leave No Trace Awareness Workshops are any type of formal Leave No Trace training that are one day or less in length.

Programs

=State Advocate Program=

The Leave No Trace State Advocate Program assists interested Leave No Trace educators and volunteers with their local effort to promote and teach minimum impact outdoor ethics. These active State Advocate volunteers are a key part of the Leave No Trace program because they coordinate outreach, education and training in their respective states. The State Advocates support volunteers with Leave No Trace training, increase on-the-ground awareness and attend events to further the Leave No Trace program and mission. The State Advocates have been instrumental in building communities of volunteers and educators, state-by-state.

=Subaru/Leave No Trace Traveling Trainer Program=

The Subaru/Leave No Trace Traveling Trainers provide hands-on educational workshops and training. Each presentation is unique, from an hour-long workshop to a two-day Leave No Trace Trainer Course. One team travels the West coast, one team travels the East, and the Senior Team travels the entire lower 48 states. The teams visit outdoor retail stores, National and State Parks, schools, and festivals like National Public Lands Day. These trainers also provide Leave No Trace courses specific to rock-climbing, mountain biking, sea kayaking, and others.

=Promoting Environmental Awareness In Kids=

The Promoting Environmental Awareness (PEAK) Program began as a partnership program between the Leave No Trace Center for Outdoor Ethics and REI in 2003. The program's curriculum centers on providing youth, age 6-12, with information about Leave No Trace through hands-on activities, referred to as "modules". The program is presented in a "PEAK Pack," which includes a large packet of ready-to-go activities, supporting materials and an instructional DVD. Activities can be delivered in any sequence and are designed to be 30–60 minutes lessons each. Initially, the PEAK program included four modules. Over the past five years, the program has grown to include six standard modules, a Start Card with teaching tips, an instructional DVD, additional modules (two new modules are added per year to both PEAK and Teen), a Teen Pack and both Spanish PEAK and Teen packs. The "Packing with PEAK Fund" was created to help make the Packing with PEAK program available to youth-serving organizations across the country.

Partners

The Leave No Trace Center for Outdoor Ethics has partnerships with the National Park Service, the U.S. Forest Service, the Bureau of Land Management, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,LNT Non-profit Partners US Army Corps of Engineers, and nearly 400 other partners such as colleges, universities, outfitter/guide services, small businesses, non-profits and youth serving organizations such as the Boy Scouts of America and the American Camp Association. An example of how this partnership works is that wilderness areas managed by the U.S. Forest Service actively promote adherence to Leave No Trace principles, as do most of the nearly 400 units managed by the National Park Service. The Center has also developed partnerships with other parks, municipalities, and agencies that wish to incorporate the Leave No Trace program in information provided to the public.
The Center for Outdoor Ethics currently has four international branches in Ireland, Australia, New Zealand and Canada, and dozens of international partners around the world.








