[[Premier of the Republic of China]]

CATEGORIES: Executive Yuan, Premiers of the Republic of China, Heads of government in Asia

The President of the Executive Yuan (), is the head of the Executive Yuan, the executive branch of the Republic of China (ROC), which currently administers Taiwan, Matsu, and Kinmen. The premier is appointed by the President of the Republic of China.ey.tw/en/cp.aspx?n=95097CAF31185CC1

History

Before the establishment of the Executive Yuan in 1928, the premier of the Republic of China was created as "Premier of Cabinet" () in 1916 in the Beiyang Government. In 1928, the Kuomintang (KMT) Government established the Executive Yuan and Tan Yankai served as the first President of the Executive Yuan.

Powers and responsibilities

The premier presides over the Executive Yuan Council, which makes up the official cabinet. The deputy premier, ministers, and chairpersons of the Executive Yuan are appointed by the president on the recommendation of the premier. The premier's official duties also include presenting administrative policies and reports to the Legislative Yuan, responding to the interpellations of legislators (much like Question Time in some parliamentary systems), and, with the approval of the president, asking the Legislative Yuan to reconsider its resolutions. Laws and decrees promulgated by the President of the Republic must also be countersigned by the premier.
In the event of vacancies in both the presidency and the vice presidency, the premier serves as Acting President of the Republic for up to three months.
One-third of the Legislative Yuan may initiate a no-confidence vote against the premier. If approved with simple majority, the premier must resign from office within ten days and at the same time may request that the President dissolve the Legislative Yuan. If the motion fails, another no-confidence motion against the same premier cannot be initiated for one year.  This power has never been used.  In practice, the President has enough legitimacy and executive authority to govern in the face of a legislature controlled by the opposition, and would likely respond to a vote of no-confidence by nominating another person with similar views.

Premier as head of government

The Constitution of the Republic of China did not originally define strictly the relation between the premier and the president of the Republic and it was not clear whether the government would lean towards a presidential system or parliamentary system when divided. Power shifted to Premier Chiang Ching-kuo after President Chiang Kai-shek's death but shifted to the presidency again when Chiang Ching-kuo became president. After President Lee Teng-hui succeeded Chiang as president in 1988, the power struggle within the KMT extended to the constitutional debate over the relationship between the president and the premier. The first three premiers under Lee, Yu Kuo-hwa, Lee Huan, and Hau Pei-tsun were mainlanders who had initially opposed Lee's ascension to power. The appointment of Lee and Hau were compromises by President Lee to placate the conservative mainlander faction in the party. The subsequent appointment of premier Lien Chan was taken as a sign of Lee's consolidation of power. Moreover, during this time, the power of the premier to approve the president's appointments and the power of the Legislative Yuan to confirm the president's choice of premier was removed (out of fears that the Democratic Progressive Party would one day gain control of the legislature), clearly establishing the president as the more powerful position of the two.
The relationship between the premier and the legislature again became a contentious issue after the 2000 Presidential election, which led to the election of the Democratic Progressive Party's Chen Shui-bian to the presidency, while the legislature has remained under the control of the Pan-Blue Coalition.  Initially, President Chen Shui-bian appointed to the premiership Tang Fei, who was a member of the Kuomintang, but this arrangement proved unworkable and subsequent appointments were from the Democratic Progressive Party. The established constitutional convention is that the premier is responsible to the President and does not have any responsibility to the legislature other than to report on his activities. However, the Pan-Blue Coalition has contended that Chen's actions are unconstitutional and has proposed to name its own choice of premier. Pan-Blue has since rejected, on principle, all legislative bills originating from the Executive Yuan (though some bills with inter-party support are simply rewritten and reintroduced by legislators), leading to legislative gridlock. This has renewed calls for a constitutional amendment to better define the relationship between the executive and legislative branches of government.






