[[Kate Moss]]

CATEGORIES: 1974 births, Living people, English female models, People from Croydon, People from Addiscombe, British people convicted of drug offences

Katherine Ann "Kate" Moss (born 16 January 1974) is an English model. Born in Croydon, Greater London, Moss was later discovered in 1988 at the age of 14 by Sarah Doukas, the founder of Storm Model Management, at JFK Airport in New York City.
Moss rose to fame in the early 1990s as part of the heroin chic fashion trend. She is known for her waifish figure, and role in size zero fashion. Moss would later go on to have campaigns for a variety of designers including Gucci, Dolce & Gabbana, Calvin Klein, Chanel and Rimmel. Kate Moss will receive a Special Recognition award in December at the 2013 British Fashion Awards to acknowledge her contribution to the fashion industry during her 25-year career.
Aside from modelling, Moss has embarked on numerous ventures, both fashion related and non-fashion related, which include her own clothing line and involvement in musical projects. Moss has won numerous accolades for her modelling career, in 2007, TIME magazine named her one of the 100 most influential people in the world."The 2007 TIME 100: Kate Moss", Time. Retrieved 20 April 2013 Moss has also been used as inspiration in a large amount of cultural depictions including a £1.5m ($2.8m) 18 carat gold statue was made of Moss in 2008 as part of a British Museum exhibition.
Moss's private life has received fervent media attention. Moss began dating Jefferson Hack in the early 2000s with whom she has a daughter, Lila Grace Moss Hack. Moss later dated musician Pete Doherty. Moss is currently married to Jamie Hince, guitarist for The Kills. Moss has received media scrutiny for her party lifestyle, and drug use. Drug allegations began in late 2005 which led to Moss being dropped from a large number of fashion campaigns. Moss was cleared of all drug charges and resumed her modelling career. In 2012, she came second on the Forbes top-earning models list, estimated to have earned $9.2 million in one year. 

Early life

Moss was born in Croydon, Greater London Moss's parents divorced when she was 13. She attended Ridgeway Primary School and Riddlesdown Collegiate, formerly known as Riddlesdown High School, in Purley.

Career

Beginnings and heroin chic

Moss was discovered in 1988 at the age of 14 by Sarah Doukas, the founder of Storm Model Management, at JFK Airport in New York City, for their curvaceous and tall figures.
Moss ushered in the heroin chic look in 1993

Controversy and return to prominence

Moss has had campaigns with major Italian, French, American, and British designers including Gucci, Dolce & Gabbana, Calvin Klein, Chanel, Rimmel,
April 2005 saw the launch of the Rimmel London mascara TV ad featuring a leather-clad Kate Moss riding a motorbike through London to the sound of the rock song "Another Cold Beer" by Steven Crayn, an advertising campaign that is still running.
Twelve months after her cocaine scandal, Moss made a comeback by bagging 18 top modelling contracts for the Autumn/Winter 2006 season including Rimmel, Agent Provocateur, Virgin Mobile, Calvin Klein Jeans and Burberry. Moss designed a collection, in collaboration with Katy England, for Topshop.
In November 2006, Moss won the Model of the Year prize at the British Fashion Awards, the top accolade in British fashion, but the award divided opinion and stirred fresh controversy.
Fashion designing and later work=== 
On 1 May 2007, a collection of clothes designed by Moss exclusively for the Topshop chain were launched across the UK in the chain's 225 stores. A Kate Moss "countdown to launch" board filled a window of the company's flagship Oxford Street store and on 30 April, Moss launched the clothing line at Topshop in Oxford Street, where she briefly appeared in the shop window modelling a red dress from the clothing collection just before the shop was opened, causing a media frenzy.
In early 2010, it was revealed that she had designed a range of handbags for luxury goods house Longchamp.
In 2012 Moss appeared as a Model for the Spring/Summer Collection for Supreme.
Moss was an Ambassador and the face of the Spanish fashion retailer Mango since autumn 2011.
In January 2012, having seen a performance by Dutch illusionist Hans Klok on the BBC's The One Show, Moss called fashion designer Stella McCartney and recommended that she book him as one of the attractions at her London Fashion Week show the following month. It was originally planned that Moss, a self-confessed magic fan, would act as Klok's assistant, and she spent several days working with him to rehearse three illusions, a levitation, a sawing in half and a guillotine illusion. However, she was forced to drop out of the show after suffering temporary paralysis of her right arm due to a trapped nerve, and her place was taken by TV presenter and model Alexa Chung.
Also in 2012, Moss appeared in the video of George Michael's latest song White Light, inspired by when he contracted pneumonia.
Moss performed with Naomi Campbell in the closing ceremony of the 2012 Olympic Games on 12 August 2012.
Moss posed nude for the 60th-anniversary issue of Playboy magazine, in December 2013.
In February 2014, Moss collected David Bowie's Brit Award for Best British Male, while wearing a one-piece printed "woodland creatures" costume, as worn originally by Bowie.digitalspy.co.html
On 30 April 2014, Moss's second collection for Topshop will be unveiled. Her first collection with Topshop was a success resulting in a long-lasting relationship with the brand. The upcoming collection is inspired by Moss's own wardrobe and will be sold in 40 countries.

Legacy

Moss was voted 9th in Maxim's "50 Sexiest Women of 1999" and 22nd in FHM 
In 2012 she was included on MODELS. Moss is represented by number one international modeling agency IMG Models.
Moss has also been the subject of portraits by contemporary artists such as Lucian Freud and Chuck Close. In 2005, a painting of Moss by Freud sold for £3.93 million at a Christie's auction. Close has taken a series of daguerreotypes of Moss, which he has also translated into Jacquard tapestry."White Cube—Family and Others.". Retrieved 13 May 2009. In October 2010, she appeared on the cover of Bryan Ferry's album Olympia.
A £1.5m ($2.8m) 18 carat gold statue was made of Moss in 2008 as part of a British Museum exhibition.
Quinn had previously unveiled a painted-bronze, life-size sculpture of Moss in a contorted yoga pose, titled Sphinx.
The cello rock group Rasputina released a song entitled "Kate Moss" off their 1996 album Thanks for the Ether. A part spoken word piece, part orchestral it imagines Moss attempting to pontificate an intellectual platform in the context of epistemology. The piece highlights the pseudo-intellectualism that was prevalent in the fashion and music world during the early and mid-1990s when punk and indie music served as a major commercial interest point.
In addition to being known for her modelling work, Kate Moss is also an international fashion icon. because of her frequent use of fur.

Other ventures

Moss appeared on Oasis singles "Don't Go Away" (1998) and "Fade Away" (1994), and on the Be Here Now album (1997), playing tambourine, Johnny Depp playing a guitar.
She has appeared in music videos such as "Kowalski" by Primal Scream, "I Just Don't Know What to Do with Myself" by the White Stripes, "Something About the Way You Look Tonight" by Elton John, "Sex with Strangers" by Marianne Faithfull, "Love Don't Bother Me" by Stage Dolls, "Delia's Gone" and "God's Gonna Cut You Down" by Johnny Cash, and "Queenie Eye" by Paul McCartney.
She has also provided vocals for songs by Primal Scream (the 2003 version of "Some Velvet Morning"), Babyshambles ("La Belle et la Bête") and The Lemonheads ("You're a Dirty Robot"). Prior to breaking up with Pete Doherty, Moss co-wrote four songs on Babyshambles' second album Shotter's Nation—"You Talk", "French Dog Blues", "Baddie's Boogie", and "Deft Left Hand".
In 1999, Moss played a non-musical role in the British screen comedy Blackadder: Back & Forth, appearing both as Maid Marian and as a fictional Queen of England "who looks good naked"."Baldrick's Video Diary" 1994, Directed by Anthony Palmer, as featured in Blackadder The Ultimate Edition 2009, 16:23
Moss put her name to four perfume lines. Her first one, the original, is named "Kate Moss". Other perfumes include Vintage Muse, Lila Belle and Love Blossoms.thelondonperfumecompany.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=kate+moss

Philanthropy

She supported War Child. Moss also designed a charm in a necklace for Wallis in 2007 in aid of Cancer Research UK and said "I am happy to give my support to help fund crucial research, as so many lives are affected by this terrible disease".babybling.
She has also helped to launch the SamandRuby charity in March 2006. The charity was started to provide funding for the education and shelter of Thai children. The SamandRuby organisation is named after a friend of Moss's, Samantha Archer Fayet, and her 6-month-old daughter Ruby Rose who were killed by the tsunami while visiting Thailand.
Moss made a short film with Misery bear for the March 2011 Comic Relief event entitled "Misery Bear's Comic Relief Starring Kate Moss".

Personal life

Kate Moss has a daughter, Lila Grace Moss Hack,Tennant, Laura. "Living Review: Life Etc – What's in a name?"
Moss had a relationship with former Libertines member Pete Doherty, first meeting him at her 31st birthday party in January 2005.
Moss married Jamie Hince, guitarist for The Kills, on 1 July 2011 at St Peter's Church, Southrop in Gloucestershire; she wore a dress by John Galliano.
According to Forbes, Moss has earned more money since then than ever before: her 2004–2005 earnings were $5 million In 2007, with estimated earnings of $9 million, she was the second highest paid model in the world, behind Gisele Bündchen.
She made her first appearance in the British women's Sunday Times Rich List in 2007, where she was estimated to be worth £45 million. She ranked as the 99th richest woman in Britain.
In the 2009 Rich List, she was ranked as the 1,348th richest person in the UK, with a net worth of £40 million.

Controversy

On 20 September 2005, the Swedish fashion retailer H&M, which had intended to feature her in a campaign of their autumn clothes range designed by Stella McCartney, announced it was dropping Moss after drug allegations. The contract was reportedly worth £4 million a year.
Moss continued to appear in major ad campaigns during this period for Dior. She was on the cover of the November 2005 W and also appeared inside in a multi-page fashion shoot. She was also defended by designer Alexander McQueen, who, during his walk-out after a fashion show, wore a t-shirt saying "We love you Kate".
On 5 January 2006, the Metropolitan Police asked Moss to return from the US to Britain to answer questions about the September 2005 cocaine scandal. Ultimately, Moss was cleared of all charges and resumed her modelling career.



Bibliography




