[[Coherent states]]

CATEGORIES: Quantum mechanics

In physics, in quantum mechanics, a coherent state is the specific quantum state of the quantum harmonic oscillator whose dynamics most closely resembles the oscillating behaviour of a classical harmonic oscillator. It was the first example of quantum dynamics when Erwin Schrödinger derived it in 1926 while searching for solutions of the Schrödinger equation that satisfy the correspondence principle.E. Schrödinger, Der stetige Übergang von der Mikro- zur Makromechanik, Naturwissenschaften 14 (1926) 664-666. The quantum harmonic oscillator and hence, the coherent states, arises in the quantum theory of a wide range of physical systemsJ.R. Klauder and B. Skagerstam, Coherent States, World Scientific, Singapore, 1985. 
For instance, a coherent state describes the oscillating motion of the particle in a quadratic potential well (for an early reference, see e.g.
Schiff's textbookL.I. Schiff, Quantum Mechanics, McGraw Hill, New York, 1955.). 
These states, defined as eigenvectors  of the lowering operator and forming an overcomplete family, were introduced in the early papers of John R. Klauder, e.g. 
.J. R. Klauder, The action option and a Feynman quantization of spinor fields in terms of ordinary c-numbers, Ann. Physics 11 (1960) 123–168. 
In the quantum theory of light (quantum electrodynamics) and other bosonic quantum field theories, coherent states were introduced by the work of Roy J. Glauber in 1963. Here the coherent state of a field describes an oscillating field, the closest quantum state to a classical sinusoidal wave such as a continuous laser wave.
However, the concept of coherent states has been considerably generalized, to the extent that it has become a major topic in mathematical physics and in applied mathematics, with applications ranging from  quantization to signal processing and image processing (see Coherent states in mathematical physics). For that reason, the coherent states associated to the quantum harmonic oscillator are usually called
canonical coherent states (CCS) or standard coherent states or Gaussian states in the literature.

Coherent states in quantum optics

In quantum mechanics a coherent state is a specific kind of quantum state, applicable to the quantum harmonic oscillator, the electromagnetic field, etc.W-M. Zhang, D. H. Feng, and R. Gilmore, Coherent states: Theory and some applications, Rev. Mod. Phys. 62 (1990) 867-927.J-P. Gazeau, Coherent States in Quantum Physics, Wiley-VCH, Berlin, 2009. that describes a maximal kind of coherence and a classical kind of behavior.  Erwin Schrödinger derived it as a minimum uncertainty Gaussian wavepacket in 1926 while searching for solutions of the Schrödinger equation that satisfy the correspondence principle.  It is a minimum uncertainty state, with the single free parameter chosen to make the relative dispersion (standard deviation divided by the mean) equal for position and momentum, each being equally small at high energy.  
Further, contrary to the energy eigenstates of the system, the time evolution of a coherent state is concentrated along the classical trajectories.
The quantum linear harmonic oscillator and hence, the coherent states, arise in the quantum theory of a wide range of physical systems.  They are found in the quantum theory of light (quantum electrodynamics) and other bosonic quantum field theories.
Glauber was prompted to do this to provide a description of the Hanbury-Brown & Twiss experiment that generated very wide baseline (hundreds or thousands of miles) interference patterns that could be used to determine stellar diameters.  This opened the door to a much more comprehensive understanding of coherence.  
(For more, see Quantum mechanical description.)
In classical optics light is thought of as electromagnetic waves radiating from a source. Often, coherent laser light is thought of as light that is emitted by many such sources that are in phase. Actually, the picture of one photon being in-phase with another is not valid in quantum theory.  Laser radiation is produced in a resonant cavity where the resonant frequency of the cavity is the same as the frequency associated with the atomic electron transitions providing energy flow into the field.  As energy in the resonant mode builds up, the probability for stimulated emission, in that mode only, increases.  That is a positive feedback loop in which the amplitude in the resonant mode increases exponentially until some non-linear effects limit it.  As a counter-example, a light bulb radiates light into a continuum of modes, and there is nothing that selects any one mode over the other. The emission process is highly random in space and time (see thermal light). In a laser, however, light is emitted into a resonant mode, and that mode is highly coherent. Thus, laser light is idealized as a coherent state. (Classically we describe such a state by an electric field oscillating as a stable wave.  See Fig.1)
The energy eigenstates of the linear harmonic oscillator (e.g., masses on springs, lattice vibrations in a solid, vibrational motions of nuclei in molecules, or oscillations in the electromagnetic field) are fixed-number quantum states.  The Fock state (e.g. a single photon) is the most particle-like state; it has a fixed number of particles, and phase is indeterminate. A coherent state distributes its quantum-mechanical uncertainty equally between the canonically conjugate coordinates, position and momentum, and the relative uncertainty in phase heuristically and amplitude are roughly equal—and small at high amplitude.

Quantum mechanical definition

For an optical field,
   and   
are the real and imaginary components of the mode of the electric field.
With these (dimensionless!) operators, the Hamiltonian of either system becomes
as the vacuum. Therefore one can interpret the quantum noise of a coherent state as being due to the vacuum fluctuations.
as a single-photon Fock state—it represents a Poisson distribution of fixed number states with a mean photon number of unity.
This can be easily seen, as can virtually all results involving coherent states, using the representation of the coherent state in the basis of Fock states:
Similarly, the average photon number in a coherent state is 
and the variance is 
These results apply to detection results at a single detector and thus relate to first order coherence (see degree of coherence).  However, for measurements correlating detections at multiple detectors, higher-order coherence is involved (e.g., intensity correlations, second order coherence, at two detectors). Glauber's definition of quantum coherence involves nth-order correlation functions (n-th order coherence) for all n.  The perfect coherent state has all n-orders of correlation equal to 1 (coherent).  It is perfectly coherent to all orders.
Roy J. Glauber's work was prompted by the results of Hanbury-Brown and Twiss that produced long-range (hundreds or thousands of miles) first-order interference patterns through the use of intensity fluctuations (lack of second order coherence), with narrow band filters (partial first order coherence) at each detector.  (One can imagine, over very short durations, a near-instantaneous interference pattern from the two detectors, due to the narrow band filters, that dances around randomly due to the shifting relative phase difference.  With a coincidence counter, the dancing interference pattern would be stronger at times of increased intensity to both beams, and that pattern would be stronger than the background noise.)  Almost all of optics had been concerned with first order coherence.  The Hanbury-Brown and Twiss results prompted Glauber to look at higher order coherence, and he came up with a complete quantum-theoretic description of coherence to all orders in the electromagnetic field (and a quantum-theoretic description of signal-plus-noise).  He coined the term coherent state and showed that they are produced when a classical electrical current interacts with the electromagnetic field.
from Figure 5, simple geometry gives
From this we can see that there is a tradeoff between number uncertainty and phase uncertainty
the number-phase uncertainty relation. This is not a formal uncertainty relation: there is no uniquely defined phase operator in quantum mechanics L. Susskind and J. Glogower, Quantum mechanical phase and time operator,Physics 1 (1963) 49. 
P. Carruthers and M.N. Nieto, Phase and angle variables in quantum mechanics,Rev. Mod. Phys. 40 (1968) 411-440. 
S.M. Barnett and D.T. Pegg, On the Hermitian optical phase operator,J. Mod. Opt. 36 (1989) 7-19.   
P. Busch,  M. Grabowski   and P.J. Lahti,  Who is afraid of POV measures? Unified approach to quantum phase observables, Ann. Phys. (N.Y.)  237 (1995) 1-11. 
V.V. Dodonov,  'Nonclassical' states in quantum optics: a 'squeezed' review of the first 75 years,  J. Opt. B: Quantum Semiclass. Opt.  4 (2002) R1-R33.
V.V. Dodonov and V.I.Man'ko (eds),   Theory of Nonclassical States of Light, Taylor \& Francis, London, New York, 2003. 
A. Vourdas, Analytic representations in quantum mechanics,  J. Phys. A: Math. Gen.  39 (2006) R65-R141. 
J-P. Gazeau,Coherent States in Quantum Physics, Wiley-VCH, Berlin, 2009.

The wavefunction of a coherent state

To find the wavefunction of the coherent state, it is easiest to start with the Heisenberg picture of the quantum harmonic oscillator for the coherent state |α〉. We have that
So the coherent state is an eigenstate of the annihilation operator in the Heisenberg picture. 
In the coordinate representations resulting from operating by 〈x|,  this amounts to the  differential equation,
which is easily solved to yield
where δ(t) is a still undetermined phase, to fixed by demanding that the wavefunction satisfies the Schrödinger equation. 
It follows that
The mean position and momentum of this "minimal Schrödinger wave packet"  are thus oscillating just like a classical system, 

Mathematical characteristics of the canonical coherent states

Each of these properties may  lead to generalizations, in general different from each other (see the article 'Coherent states in mathematical physics' for some of these). We emphasize that
coherent states   have mathematical features  that are very different from those
of a Fock state; for instance two different coherent states are not orthogonal:
The last state is known as Agarwal state or photon-added coherent state and
The resolution of the identity may also be expressed in terms of particle position and momentum.
the closure relation of coherent states reads
This can be inserted in any quantum-mechanical expectation value, relating it to some
quasi-classical phase-space integral and explaining, in particular, the origin of
partition functions consistent with quantum 
mechanics.
In addition to being an exact eigenstate of annihilation operators, a coherent state is 
an approximate common eigenstate of particle position and momentum. Restricting to 
one dimension again, 
The error in these approximations is measured by the uncertainties 
of position and momentum,

Coherent states of Bose–Einstein condensates

Coherent electron states in superconductivity

Generalizations

