[[Elastography]]

CATEGORIES: Medical imaging

Elastography is a medical imaging modality that maps the elastic properties of soft tissue. This modality emerged in the last decade. It includes Ultrasound Elasticity Imaging, Magnetic Resonance Elasticity Imaging and Tactile Imaging.

Ultrasound Elasticity Imaging

The Ultrasound Elasticity Imaging can be subdivided into strain and shear wave Elasticity Imaging.

Transient elastography

Transient elastography is a 1D medical imaging modality based on mechanical tissue excitation and ultrasound measurements. Transient elastography uses a special probe that consists of an ultrasound transducer array mounted on the axis of a motor vibrator. The vibrator generates shear wave within the tissue, which is detected by pulse-wave ultrasound imaging in a manner similar to M-mode Doppler imaging, for example, to diagnose cirrhosis.

Strain Imaging

Ultrasound Elasticity Imaging is used for breast examination with a number of high-resolution linear transducers. Assessing tissue stiffness may boost breast imaging specificity. Diagnostic Imaging. 2009;31(12):15-17. A large multi-center breast imaging study has demonstrated both reproducibility Shear wave elastography for breast masses is highly reproducible. Cosgrove DO, Berg WA, Doré CJ, Skyba DM, Henry JP, Gay J, Cohen-Bacrie C; the BE1 Study Group. Eur Radiol. 2011 Dec 31. and significant improvement in the classificationShear-wave Elastography Improves the Specificity of Breast US: The BE1 Multinational Study of 939 Masses. Berg     WA, Cosgrove DO, Doré CJ, Schäfer FKW, Svensson WE, Hooley RJ, Ohlinger R, Mendelson EB, Balu-Maestro C, Locatelli M, Tourasse C, Cavanaugh BC, Juhan V, Stavros AT, Tardivon A, Gay J, Henry JP, Cohen-Bacrie C, and the BE1 Investigators. Radiology 2012;262:435-449 of breast lesions when shear wave elastography images are added to the interpretation of standard B-mode and Color mode ultrasound images.

Acoustic Radiation Force

Acoustic Radiation Force Impulse (ARFI) Imaging is another imaging modality being researched to non-invasively characterize liver stiffness.pratt.edu/research/liver_fibrosis
The key difference from transient elastography is that ARFI makes use of ultrasound beams to push the target tissue (called pushing beams), in additional to the conventional ultrasound beams for imaging (called tracking beams). 

Supersonic Shear Imaging

SuperSonic Imagine Real-Time ShearWave(TM) ElastographySupersonic Shear Imaging: A New Technique for Soft Tissue Elasticity Mapping. Bercoff J. et al., IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control, Vol. 51, No. 4, April     2004.-L. Gennisson,a M. Rénier, S. Catheline, C. Barrière, J. Bercoff,   M. Tanter, and M. Fink, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 122 16, December 2007 has demonstrated clinical benefit in breast, thyroid, liver, prostate and MSK imaging.

Magnetic Resonance Elasticity Imaging

Magnetic Resonance Elastography allows measurement of the propagation of shear waves in tissue using magnetic resonance imaging. Magnetic resonance elastography by direct visualization of propagating acoustic strain waves. Science 1995; 269: 1854-7.219, 220. Magnetic resonance elastography: Non-invasive mapping of tissue elasticity. Med Image Anal 2001; 5: 237-54.

Tactile Imaging

Tactile Imaging is a medical imaging modality that translates the sense of touch into a digital image. Tactile Imaging is used for imaging of the prostate,Weiss RE, Egorov V, Ayrapetyan S, Sarvazyan N, Sarvazyan A. Prostate mechanical imaging: a new method for prostate assessment. Urology 2008; 71(3):425-429. breast,Egorov V, Sarvazyan AP. Mechanical Imaging of the Breast. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 2008; 27(9):1275-87. vagina and pelvic floor support structures,Egorov V, van Raalte H, Sarvazyan A. Vaginal Tactile Imaging. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 2010; 57(7):1736-44. and myofascial trigger points in muscle. Elastography and tactile imaging for mechanical characterization of superficial muscles. J Acoust Soc Am 2012; 132(3):1983.



Cespedes, E.I.  Elastography: Imaging of Biological Tissue Elasticity.  Ph.D. Dissertation.  University of Houston, Houston, TX.  December 1993.




