[[Elle Macpherson]]

CATEGORIES: 1960s births, Living people, Australian chief executives, Australian expatriates in the United Kingdom, Australian expatriates in the United States, Australian female models, Australian film actresses, Australian philanthropists, Australian television actresses, Australian television presenters, Australian women in business, Businesspeople in advertising, Businesspeople in fashion, Participants in Australian reality television series, Participants in British reality television series, People from Sydney, Reality television judges

Elle Macpherson (born 29 March, either 1963 or 1964) is an Australian businesswoman, television host, model, and actress. She is well known for her record five cover appearances for the Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue beginning in the 1980s, leading to her nickname "The Body". She is also known as the founder primary model and creative director for a series of business ventures, including Elle Macpherson Intimates, a lingerie line, and The Body, a line of skin care products. In 2010, she became the host and executive producer of Britain & Ireland's Next Top Model. She is currently an executive producer of NBC's Fashion Star and was the host for the first season.

Early life

Macpherson was born Eleanor Nancy Gow in Killara, New South Wales, the daughter of entrepreneur and sound engineer Peter Gow, a former president of a Sydney rugby league team, the Cronulla-Sutherland Sharks, and Frances Gow, a nurse. Her mother later remarried, and a clerical mistake in registering at her new school meant that her surname was changed from Gow to Macpherson (her stepfather's surname). "Body Talk with Elle Macpherson", pp.   16–31 
Macpherson grew up in East Lindfield, a suburb in the North Shore of Sydney, and attended Killara High School, completing her Higher School Certificate in 1981. She briefly studied law for one year at the University of Sydney. Macpherson has a sister, businesswoman and environmentalist Mimi Macpherson, also known as Miriam Frances Gow.

Career

Rise to fame as model

Macpherson enrolled to study law at Sydney University. Before beginning her university studies, she visited the United States to spend one year doing modelling work in order to earn money to pay for her law books. 
In 1986, Time magazine had already put her on the cover (with a feature entitled "The Big Elle") but by that time, she had also appeared on the covers of Cosmopolitan, Elle, GQ, Harper's Bazaar and Vogue. She cemented her high profile through frequent appearances in Elle, where she appeared in every issue for six straight years. During that time, at the age of 21, she married Gilles Bensimon, the creative director of Elle. 30–33: "Before starting college, Elle went on a skiing trip to Aspen, Colorado. On the way home, she was persuaded by her Australian modelling booker to stop off in New York City to see if she could get some work. She stayed for 20 years, marrying the photographer Gilles Bensimon at 21. She was his muse, but the age difference ... proved to be too great, and they divorced six years later (1989)."

Eventually she garnered more exposure through Sports Illustrated magazine's annual Swimsuit Issue. She appeared on the cover a record five times: 1986, 1987, 1988, 1994, and 2006. Along with Naomi Campbell, she co-hosted  the Miss Universe 2001 pageant. Her popularity had reached such a level that Australian government offered her a position on its tourist commission as an unofficial ambassador. 
After appearing nude in the 1994 film Sirens, Macpherson learned that the media had begun searching for nude photos of her, including contacting her ex-boyfriends. To address this, Macpherson appeared in a nude pictorial in the May 1994 issue of Playboy magazine, in order to produce nude photos "on her own terms". "'I did it my way': Supermodel Elle Macpherson bared it all for Playboy - but on her own terms". Mail Online.
Macpherson returned to the runway in 2010 to close the fall Louis Vuitton show for Marc Jacobs in Paris.

Business career

In the 1980s, together with Linda Evangelista, Christy Turlington, Tatjana Patitz, Naomi Campbell, Pavlína Pořízková, and Cindy Crawford, Macpherson became part of the new generation of supermodels. In 1989 she was given the nickname Elle "The Body" Macpherson by Time Magazine after she appeared on their cover. She went on to use the name in a number of business ventures.
In 1994, she left her agency, Ford Models, to form her own company, Elle Macpherson Inc., which would serve as the financial organizational base for her later endeavours. 28–33: "The Elle calendar became a worldwide hit, and a new version has been produced twice since, while her 1995 video, Your Personal Best Workout: The Body, was also a bestseller". She soon went on to produce her own highly popular series of calendars, each of which was accompanied by a "making of" television program in 1992, 1993, and 1994. She used this success as a springboard to create the "Your Personal Best – The Body" series of workout videos.
She later diversified her portfolio of businesses, and in 1990 launched her lingerie collection 'Elle Macpherson Intimates' in partnership with Bendon Limited Apparel. Intimates met with remarkable international success, becoming the single best-selling lingerie line in both Great BritainThe Sunday Times Business, 23 March 2008, p. 17: "Macpherson, supermodel-turned-lingerie queen, has made that her leitmotif. Elle Macpherson Intimates range is the biggest selling brand of fashion lingerie in Britain." and AustraliaTatler, July 2002, vol. 297, num. 7, pp. 98–107: "We're going through Elle's underwear. This is what she does. She designs knickers and bras. She's very good at it, very successful. It makes her more money than modelling, and Elle has made a lot of money modeling."
The partnership was among the first instances of a crossover between a model and a fashion label. In 1989, when she was first approached by Bendon to promote their lingerie in Australia, Macpherson saw an opportunity to reverse their strategy and suggested a licensing arrangement, with products bearing her name and designs created in partnership with Bendon's team. Though commonplace now, the idea was unorthodox at the time.
Macpherson took a leading role in the development and management of the company, serving as Chief Marketing Officer and later Creative Director. In January 2010, Macpherson expanded the line, launching Obsidian as a sub-brand. While nursing her second child, she spearheaded the development of a signature maternity bra line. 36–42: "And so, Macpherson made the transition from model, to designer and chief marketing officer for the growing product line. The company credits her with the ideas for many products, including its successful maternity-bra line, which Macpherson designed while nursing her second child." Intimates has retained a high brand recognition into the 2000s, appearing as a featured brand on America's Next Top Model; last year, the brand celebrated 10 years of being stocked at Selfridges.
Macpherson has also created her own line of beauty products: "Elle Macpherson – The Body". The line was carried at Boots, 
In addition to her executive responsibilities at Elle Macpherson Intimates and The Body, Macpherson spent a year on the Board of Directors at Hot Tuna, advising on product development, brand positioning and sales strategy. She has since been featured in print and advertising campaigns for the company.
In 2007, the BBC TV series The Money Programme aired a documentary which followed Macpherson through her day-to-day business as she continued to develop her international lingerie business. In 2009 Macpherson delivered the Keynote Address at the annual meeting of the International Trademark Association.

=Awards=

Macpherson has received a number of awards recognizing her business acumen and the success of Elle Macpherson Intimates. In 2005, she was named Glamour Magazine's Entrepreneur of the Year; in 2008, the Underfashion Club's Femmy Awards crowned her Lingerie Designer of the Year; in 2009, she received a World Career Award from the Women's World Awards.

Acting career

Macpherson made her film debut playing an artist's model in the 1994 Sirens, which starred Hugh Grant, Sam Neill, and Tara FitzGerald. After Sirens, she followed with a two-year series of acting roles, appearing in films such as Woody Allen's Alice, Batman & Robin alongside George Clooney, The Edge with Anthony Hopkins, and The Mirror Has Two Faces with Barbra Streisand. In 1996 Macpherson hosted an episode of Saturday Night Live.
In 1999, Macpherson appeared in five episodes of the American TV series Friends as Joey Tribbiani's roommate and eventual girlfriend, Janine Lecroix. Macpherson went on to act in the movie Jane Eyre with William Hurt, and she has also appeared alongside Ben Stiller and Sarah Jessica Parker in If Lucy Fell. Her most controversial acting role was in the Showtime cable network miniseries, A Girl Thing, in which she plays a woman experimenting with bisexuality along with Kate Capshaw. In 2001, she appeared in the Italian movie South Kensington.
Macpherson played agent Claudia Foster in The CW Network's drama series, The Beautiful Life, appearing with Mischa Barton, Sara Paxton and Corbin Bleu. The show centred on aspiring models working for a modeling agency, trying to make it big in New York City and in the fashion world.

=Britain and Ireland's Next Top Model=

In July 2010, Macpherson became the new host of Britain and Ireland's Next Top Model, taking over from Lisa Snowdon. She also serves as executive producer on the show. The revamped show's panelists now include OBE-winning fashion designer Julien Macdonald, designer Whitney Port and male model Tyson Beckford."Elle Macpherson takes over Britain's Next Top Model", BBC News, 1 February 2010

=Fashion Star=

Macpherson hosts and executive produces NBC's reality competition series Fashion Star. The series gives 14 unknown designers, mentored by celebrities such as Jessica Simpson, Nicole Richie, and John Varvatos, the chance to launch their collections in three of America's largest clothing retailers, including Macy's, H&M, and Saks Fifth Avenue. Its first season was sold to 75 countries.

Extortion attempt

According to a police statement reproduced online, between 11 and 22 July 1997 William Ryan Holt and Michael Mischler broke into Macpherson's Los Angeles house while she was away on business in Chicago.

Philanthropic work

Macpherson is a European Ambassador for RED, an initiative set up by Bono and Bobby Shriver to raise money and awareness for the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria and to help eradicate AIDS for women and children in Africa. She is also an ambassador for UNICEF. 90–99: "I am working on projects like my ex's education program a charity that funds schools for needy children world-wide, with Bono and the American Express RED project—which is all about poverty and AIDS support—and UNICEF's breast-feeding program." 
In Australia, she is an ambassador for the Smile Foundation, which helps the families of children with rare diseases and organises government research grants. She has also modelled for charitable causes including fundraising for 2007 British flood victims,

Personal life

Macpherson met French fashion photographer Gilles Bensimon in 1984 on a photo session for Elle magazine. They wed in May 1986, and divorced three years later. 
Macpherson began a relationship with London-based French financier Arpad Busson in 1996.
Macpherson subsequently began dating Miami-based hotel heir and billionaire Jeffrey Soffer in early 2009.
After living for many years in the UK, Besides English, she speaks fluent French and is conversational in Italian and Spanish.

Filmography








