[[Anna Paquin]]

CATEGORIES: 1982 births, 20th-century Canadian actresses, 21st-century Canadian actresses, Actresses from Manitoba, Best Drama Actress Golden Globe (television) winners, Best Supporting Actress Academy Award winners, Bisexual actors, Bisexual women, Canadian child actresses, Canadian people of New Zealand descent, Canadian emigrants to New Zealand, Canadian emigrants to the United States, Canadian expatriate actresses in the United States, Canadian film actresses, Canadian television actresses, LGBT entertainers from Canada, Living people, New Zealand film actresses, New Zealand people of Canadian descent, New Zealand television actresses, People educated at Wellington Girls' College, People from Winnipeg, Waldorf school alumni, LGBT people from New Zealand

Anna Helene Paquin ( She later appeared in a number of successful films, including Fly Away Home, She's All That, Almost Famous, and the X-Men franchise as Rogue from Marvel Comics. Paquin is also known for her role as Sookie Stackhouse in the HBO series True Blood, for which she won a Golden Globe Award for Best Performance by an Actress in a Television Series – Drama in 2009.

Early life

Paquin was born in Winnipeg, Manitoba, the daughter of Mary Paquin (née Brophy), an English teacher and native of Wellington, New Zealand, and Brian Paquin, a high school physical education teacher from Canada. Paquin has two older siblings: Andrew (born 1977), a director, and Katya (born 1980),
While in New Zealand, Paquin attended Hutt Intermediate School from 1994 to 1995. Having begun her secondary education in Wellington at Wellington Girls' College, she completed her high school diploma at Windward School in Los Angeles, after moving to the US with her mother following her parents' divorce in 1995. She graduated from Windward School in June 2000 and completed the school's community service requirement by working in a soup kitchen and at a special education centre. She studied at Columbia University for one year, but has since been on a leave of absence to continue her acting career.

Career

Child actress

It was in New Zealand in 1991 that Paquin became an actress. Director Jane Campion was looking for a little girl to play a main role in The Piano, set to film in New Zealand, and a newspaper advertisement was run announcing an open audition. Paquin's sister read the ad and went to try out with a friend; this inspired Paquin to also audition. When Campion met Paquin—whose only acting experience had been as a skunk in a school play—she was very impressed with the nine-year-old's performance of the monologue about Flora's father, and she was chosen from among the 5000 candidates.
When The Piano was released in 1993 it was lauded by critics, won prizes at a number of film festivals, and eventually became a popular film among a wide audience. Paquin's debut performance in the film earned her the 1993 Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress at the age of 11, making her the second-youngest Oscar winner in history, behind Tatum O'Neal. The Piano was made as a small independent film and wasn't expected to be widely known, and Paquin and her family did not plan to continue in the acting circles. However, she was invited to the William Morris Agency, and she kept receiving offers for new roles. She systematically refused them, but she did appear in three commercials for the phone company MCI in 1994. She also appeared as a voice in an audio book entitled The Magnificent Nose in 1994.
In 1996, she appeared in two films. The first role was as young Jane in Jane Eyre. The other was a lead part in Fly Away Home playing a young girl who, after her mother dies, moves in with her father and finds solace in taking care of orphaned goslings.
As a teenager, she had roles in films, including A Walk on the Moon, Amistad, Hurlyburly, She's All That and Almost Famous.

X-Men, True Blood and beyond

Paquin returned to worldwide prominence with her role as the mutant superheroine Rogue in the Marvel Comics movie X-Men in 2000, its sequel X2 in 2003, and its third installment, X-Men: The Last Stand, in 2006.
Between 2006 and 2007, she starred in, as well as executive-produced Blue State. The film is made by Paquin Films, a production company formed by both her and her brother, Andrew Paquin. In November 2006, she completed the film Margaret, which was released in 2011. She played Elaine Goodale in HBO's made-for-TV film Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee, based on Dee Brown's best-seller.
Paquin was cast as waitress Sookie Stackhouse in the HBO series True Blood in 2008, her first role in a TV series. The show is based on The Southern Vampire Mysteries series of novels by Charlaine Harris, set in the fictional town of Bon Temps, Louisiana. While working on True Blood, she started dating co-star Stephen Moyer and later married him in 2010.
In 2009, Paquin played Irena Sendler, a Polish woman hailed as a heroine of the Holocaust, in The Courageous Heart of Irena Sendler, a CBS TV film biographical film based on the book Mother of the Children of the Holocaust: The Irena Sendler Story, by Anna Mieszkowska. The film was made in Latvia, and was a Hallmark Hall of Fame presentation for the network.
In 2010, Paquin's film The Romantics, a romantic comedy with Josh Duhamel and Katie Holmes, was released in the US at selected cinemas in September. She played a cameo role in Scream 4, alongside Kristen Bell in 2011. She also played the voice of Kristin on an episode of Phineas and Ferb.
Upcoming projects for her in 2012 included Straight A's, co-starring Ryan Phillippe, and Free Ride with Cam Gigandet. Also Black Wings Has My Angel, alongside Tom Hiddleston, set to start shooting in autumn 2012, and released in 2013. In early 2013, it was announced that Paquin was going to reprise her role as Rogue in the upcoming film X-Men: Days of Future Past.

Personal life

On 5 August 2009, Paquin announced her engagement to her True Blood co-star Stephen Moyer, whom she had been dating since filming the series pilot in 2007."True Blood's True Romance", TV Guide, 24 February 2009
On 1 April 2010, Paquin came out as bisexual in a public service announcement for the Give a Damn campaign as part of the True Colours Fund, an advocacy group organised by Cyndi Lauper dedicated to LGBT equality. 
The True Colours Fund was created to "inspire and engage everyone, especially straight people, to become active participants in the advancement of gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender equality". I'm bisexual, and I give a damn".
Anna also supports other charities and foundations such as the Children's Hospital Los Angeles and the Make-A-Wish Foundation.

Filmography

Film

Television

Theatre credits

Awards and nominations








