[[Woolston, Cheshire]]

CATEGORIES: Warrington, Civil parishes in Warrington

Woolston is a civil parish and suburb of Warrington, Cheshire, England. It has a population of 7,868.
Woolston lies in the east-central part of Warrington, on the north banks of the River Mersey and Manchester Ship Canal, and is bounded on the east by the M6 motorway. The localities of Paddington and Martinscroft are within Woolston's parish boundaries.

History

Woolston was anciently part of Lancashire, but after local government reforms of 1974, it became part of Cheshire.
In 1894, Woolston with Martinscroft joined the newly formed Warrington Rural District as a civil parish, where it remained until 1933.
Throughout time its name has changed often. At time of the Vikings it was called Wulfiges Town (probably because of the wolves that occupied the land).
It is a civil parish which grew in the 20th century: the population in 1921 was just 451.

Economy

A large area of the district is covered by warehousing districts.  The largest by far is the "Grange" this is an area of modern warehousing and light manufacturing built next to the M6 motorway.  This area was home to a large Safeway distribution depot that was taken over by Morrisons in January 2006, and then taken over by Iceland in mid-2006.  In 2007, this was outsourced to DHL, while still continuing to serve Iceland.  Woolston is home to a number of smaller businesses including Big Storage on the main A57 and Paragon Framing  There is also an industrial estate to the south called the "New Cut industrial estate", this features a large pipework fabrication business (WH Capper)  The estate gets its name from the canal which borders it and the "new cut" of the River Mersey.

Geography

The area has two main natural areas: Woolston Linear Park and the Woolston Eyes Nature Reserve—a Site of Special Scientific Interest.
Woolston is situated in the Mersey Valley and so there is a very slight lowering in height between it and the surrounding areas.  The highest point is on the Woolston Eyes, formerly Thelwall Eyes, (four-man-made areas formed by large embankments for the dispersement of dredging waste).  The lowest point is the marshland formed by the dereliction of the Woolston New Cut Canal and Woolston Old Canal. The Manchester Ship Canal denotes the southerly boundary of the Eyes reserve and can be crossed either via nearby Latchford locks or by the unique penny ferry crossing (11p each way as of October 2009). Woolston has plenty of waterways including the aforementioned canals; the new cut of the River Mersey; and the Manchester Ship Canal.

Demography

At the 2001 Census:

Housing

Of 1783 households

Employment

Race and gender

of which
Source:Office for National Statistics Neighbourhood profiles for areas Warrington 014A,014B,014B

Transport

The nearest rail stations to Woolston are Padgate and Birchwood.  Mainline services are available from Warrington Bank Quay and Warrington Central (2–3 miles away).
The M6 motorway runs down the eastern edge of the district and the A57 to Manchester and Liverpool runs directly through the district.  There is also a road running from the motorway past the Grange to Birchwood and Longbarn, two areas built during the new town initiative.
Warrington Borough Transport (3, 4, 4A) and Warrington Coachways (104) provide local bus services to Warrington Town Centre, whilst First Greater Manchester operate an inter-urban service (100) to Manchester via Irlam and the Trafford Centre.
The Penny Ferry (now 24p) can be used to cross the Manchester Ship Canal to Thelwall. This is part-time service. If not available a detour can be made over the Latchford Locks.
Manchester Airport is the closest major airport to Woolston.

Public services

The area is served by an ante-natal clinic on Holes Lane and a GP doctors surgery located close by. There is also a new chiropractic clinic at Woolston Neighbourhood Hub.
Education is provided by Woolston Church of England Primary School, St. Peters' Catholic Primary School and Woolston Community Primary School.  Secondary Education is provided for by Woolston Community High School. Although from September 2008 there will be no student intake, and by 2012 the school will close completely.
Warrington's Direct Services are based in Woolston and provide services to the local community.
There are no local fire and police services.  The nearest providers are at Risley Police Station and Birchwood Fire Station. Although there is a community police office located on the site of Dam lane shops.
There are three churches in Woolston: the Church of The Ascension and St Martin's Methodist Church (both modern) and a small but old Roman Catholic church, St Peter's, in Martinscroft.
The Woolston neighbourhood hub is where the library is now located along with the leisure centre that has a gym and swimming pool.



Notes and references

Notes

Bibliography


