[[Time-scale calculus]]

CATEGORIES: Dynamical systems, Calculus, Recurrence relations

In mathematics, time-scale calculus is a unification of the theory of difference equations with that of differential equations, unifying integral and differential calculus with the calculus of finite differences, offering a formalism for studying hybrid discrete–continuous dynamical systems.  It has applications in any field that requires simultaneous modelling of discrete and continuous data. It gives a new definition of a derivative such that if one differentiates a function which acts on the real numbers then the definition is equivalent to standard differentiation, but if one uses a function acting on the integers then it is equivalent to the forward difference operator.

History

Time-scale calculus was introduced in 1988 by the German mathematician Stefan Hilger. However, similar ideas have been used before and go back at least to the introduction of the Riemann–Stieltjes integral which unifies sums and integrals.

Dynamic equations

Many results concerning differential equations carry over quite easily to corresponding results for difference equations, while other results seem to be completely different from their continuous counterparts.  The study of dynamic equations on time scales reveals such discrepancies, and helps avoid proving results twice — once for differential equations and once again for difference equations. The general idea is to prove a result for a dynamic equation where the domain of the unknown function is a so-called time scale (also known as a time-set), which may be an arbitrary closed subset of the reals. In this way, results apply not only to the set of real numbers or set of integers but to more general time scales such as a Cantor set.
The three most popular examples of calculus on time scales are differential calculus, difference calculus, and quantum calculus. Dynamic equations on a time scale have a potential for applications, such as in population dynamics. For example, they can model insect populations that evolve continuously while in season, die out in winter while their eggs are incubating or dormant, and then hatch in a new season, giving rise to a non–overlapping population.

Formal definitions

A single point in a time scale is defined as:

Operations on time scales

Classification of points

As illustrated by the figure at right:

Continuity

Derivative

Take a function:
(where R could be any normed Banach space, but set it to be the real line for simplicity).

Integration

Laplace transform and z-transform

A Laplace transform can be defined for functions on time scales, which uses the same table of transforms for any arbitrary time scale. This transform can be used to solve dynamic equations on time scales. If the time scale is the non-negative integers then the transform is equal to a modified Z-transform:

Partial differentiation

Partial differential equations and partial difference equations are unified as partial dynamic equations on time scales. Ahlbrandt, Christina MorianPartial dynamic equations on time scales, B Jackson – Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics, 2006Partial differentiation on time scales, M Bohner, GS Guseinov, Dynamic Systems and Applications 13 (2004) 351–379

Multiple integration

Multiple integration on time scales is treated in Bohner (2005).

Stochastic dynamic equations on time scales

Stochastic differential equations and stochastic difference equations can be generalized to stochastic dynamic equations on time scales.STOCHASTIC DYNAMIC EQUATIONS, SUMAN SANYAL, 2008

Measure theory on time scales

Associated with every time scale is a natural measure defined via
turns out to be the usual Lebesgue–Stieltjes integral with respect to this measure
and the delta derivative turns out to be the Radon–Nikodym derivative with respect to this measure

Distributions on time scales

The Dirac delta and Kronecker delta are unified on time scales as the Hilger delta:[ref]The Laplace transform on time scales revisited, John M. Davis, Ian A. Gravagne , Billy J. Jackson ,
Robert J. Marks II , Alice A. Ramos, J. Math. Anal. Appl. 332 (2007) 1291–1307[/ref]Bilateral Laplace Transforms on Time Scales: Convergence, Convolution, and the Characterization of Stationary Stochastic Time Series, John M. Davis, Ian A. Gravagne and Robert J. Marks II

Integral equations on time scales

Integral equations and summation equations are unified as integral equations on time scales. Tisdell, 2007

Fractional calculus on time scales

Fractional calculus on time scales is treated in Bastos, Mozyrska, and Torres.



Notes



Further reading


