[[Bridesmaid]]

CATEGORIES: Wedding ceremony participants


The bridesmaids are members of the bride's party in a wedding. A bridesmaid is typically a young woman, and often a close friend or sister.  She attends to the bride on the day of a wedding or marriage ceremony. Traditionally, bridesmaids were chosen from unwed young women of marriageable age.
The principal bridesmaid, if one is so designated, may be called the chief bridesmaid or maid of honor if she is unmarried, or the matron of honor if she is married. A junior bridesmaid is a girl who is clearly too young to be marriageable, but who is included as an honorary bridesmaid. In the United States, typically only the Maid/Matron of Honor and the Best Man are the official witnesses. 
Often there is more than one bridesmaid: in modern times the bride chooses how many to ask. Historically, no person of status went out unattended, and the size of the retinue was closely calculated to be appropriate to the family's social status. A large group of bridesmaids provided an opportunity for showing off the family's social status and wealth. Today, the number of bridesmaids in a wedding party is dependent on many variables, including a bride's preferences, the size of her family, and the number of attendants her partner would like to have as well.
The male equivalent is the groomsman, also known in British English as the Best Man; in the United States, the role of attending to the groom has diverged from that of escorting guests to their seats, which is undertaken by Ushers, and the two positions are no longer synonymous and are often if not usually filled by different persons.
In some countries, such as in Norway and England, it is customary for bridesmaids to be small children rather than grown women. They may carry flowers during the wedding procession and pose with the married couple in bridal photos.  In an American-style wedding, this role is likewise separate from that of the bridesmaid, and the small child performing it is known as a flower girl.

Duties

Although many exceed the minimum, the bridesmaids' required duties are very limited.  A junior bridesmaid has no responsibilities beyond attending the wedding.
The duties and costs of being a bridesmaid are parsed out between a bride and her attendants in a variety of ways. Since modern bridesmaids, unlike their historical counterparts, can no longer rely on having their clothes and travel expenses paid for by the bride's family, and are sometimes even told they must pay for parties that the bride wants to have before the wedding, it is customary for the bride to present the bridesmaids with gifts as a sign of gratitude for their friendship, and for standing up for her in her wedding.

Maid of Honour 

In the United Kingdom, the term "maid of honour" originally referred to the female attendant of a queen. The term bridesmaid is normally used for all bridal attendants in the UK.  However, when the attendant is married, or is a mature woman, the term matron of honour is often used.  The influence of American English has led to the chief bridesmaid sometimes being called the maid of honor.  
In North America, a wedding party might include several bridesmaids, but the Maid of Honor is the title and position held by the bride's chief attendant, typically her closest friend or sister. In modern-day weddings some brides opt to choose a long-time male friend or brother as their head attendant, using the title Best Man or Man of Honor.
The activities of the principal bridesmaid may be as many or as varied as she allows the bride to impose upon her. Her only required duty is to participate in the wedding ceremony. Typically, however, she is asked for help with the logistics of the wedding as an event, such as addressing invitations, and for her help as a friend, such as attending the bride as she shops for her wedding dress.
On the day of the wedding, her principal duty is to provide practical and emotional support. She might assist the bride with dressing and, if needed, help the bride manage her veil, a bouquet of flowers, a prayer book, or the train of her wedding dress during the day. In a double-ring wedding, the chief bridesmaid is often entrusted with the groom's wedding ring until it is needed during the ceremony. Many brides ask bridesmaids, if they are adults, to be legal witnesses who sign the marriage license after the ceremony. If there is a reception after the wedding, the Maid of Honour may be asked to offer a toast to the newlyweds.

Origin and history

The Western bridesmaid tradition is thought to have originated from Roman Law, which required ten witnesses at a wedding in order to outsmart evil spirits (believed to attend marriage ceremonies) by dressing in identical clothing to the bride and groom, so that the evil spirits would not know who was getting married.  Even as late as 19th century England, there was a belief that ill-wishers could administer curses and taint the wedding. In Victorian wedding photographs, for example, the bride and groom are frequently dressed in the same fashion as other members of the bridal party.
Other people cite the Biblical story of Jacob, and his two wives Leah and Rachel, who both literally came with their own maids as detailed in the Book of Genesis (29:24, 46:18) as the origin of bridesmaids.  These women were handmaidens (servants or slaves) instead of social peers.








