[[Brat Pack (actors)]]

CATEGORIES: American male film actors, American film actresses, Articles about multiple people

The Brat Pack is a nickname given to a group of young actors who frequently appeared together in teen-oriented coming-of-age films in the 1980s. First mentioned in a 1985 New York magazine article, it is now usually described as the cast members of two specific films released in 1985 – The Breakfast Club and St. Elmo's Fire – although sometimes other actors are included. The "core" members were Emilio Estevez, Anthony Michael Hall, Rob Lowe, Andrew McCarthy, Demi Moore, Judd Nelson, Molly Ringwald, and Ally Sheedy.
The actors themselves were known to dislike the label. Many of their careers peaked in the middle of the 1980s but declined afterwards for various reasons. However, the films they starred in together are frequently referenced in popular culture and are regarded as some of the most influential of their time.

Membership

The term "Brat Pack", a play on the Rat Pack from the 1950s and 1960s, was first popularized in a 1985 New York magazine cover story, which described a group of highly successful film stars in their early twenties. Estevez was cited as the "unofficial president" of the Brat Pack. He and Demi Moore were once engaged. McCarthy claimed that he was never a member of the group, saying, "The media made up this sort of tribe. I don't think I've seen any of these people since we finished St. Elmo's Fire."Miller, Samantha and Jewel, Dan. "Brat Race". People. April 19, 1999.
The initial New York magazine article covered a group of actors much greater than the currently understood meaning of the term "Brat Pack". For example, most of the cast members of The Outsiders were mentioned, including Tom Cruise, C. Thomas Howell, Matt Dillon, and Ralph Macchio, none of whom starred in any other 1980s movies with any "core" Brat Packers. Charlie Sheen appears in several lists - more for his family relationship to Brat Pack leader Emilio Estevez and his partying than for his collaborative film work with other members. James Spader and Robert Downey, Jr. have also been considered members, and performed alongside other Brat Packers: both of them with Andrew McCarthy in Less Than Zero, and Downey with Anthony Michael Hall – Weird Science and Johnny Be Good, and the cast of Saturday Night Live – and The Pick-up Artist with Molly Ringwald. Other actors who have been linked with the group include Kevin Bacon, Matthew Broderick, Jon Cryer, John Cusack, Jami Gertz, Mary Stuart Masterson, Sean Penn, Lou Diamond Phillips, Kiefer Sutherland, and Lea Thompson. In her autobiography, Melissa Gilbert connects herself with the Brat Pack, as her social life centered on Estevez and Lowe (to whom she was engaged). Through frequent collaborative work, actor Harry Dean Stanton, then in his late 50s, became a mentor for the group of young actors.

Article

David Blum's New York story, titled "Hollywood's Brat Pack", ran on June 10, 1985. It was originally supposed to be just about Emilio Estevez, but one night, Estevez invited Blum to hang out with him, Rob Lowe, Judd Nelson, and others at the Hard Rock Cafe. It was a typical night out for the group, who had gotten close while filming St. Elmo's Fire. That night, Blum decided to change the article's focus to an entire group of young actors at the time. The St. Elmo's Fire crew members did not like Blum and sensed that he was jealous of the actors' success. You Couldn't Ignore Me If You Tried. Three Rivers Press. pp. 106-119.
When the piece ran, the actors all felt betrayed, especially Estevez. The article mentioned people in several different films but focused on Estevez, Lowe, and Nelson, and portrayed those three negatively. The "Brat Pack" label, which the actors disliked, stuck for years afterward. Before the article ran, they had been regarded as talented individuals; after the article, all of them were grouped together and regarded as unprofessional. Interviewed for Susannah Gora's 2010 book You Couldn't Ignore Me If You Tried, Blum admitted that he should not have written the article. You Couldn't Ignore Me If You Tried. Three Rivers Press. pp. 117-128, 289-291, 336.
With the increased negative attention to them, the actors soon stopped socializing with each other. On the group's camaraderie, Ally Sheedy later said, "article just destroyed it. I had felt truly a part of something, and that guy just blew it to pieces."Gora, Susannah (2010). You Couldn't Ignore Me If You Tried. Three Rivers Press. p. 128.

Legacy

During the late 1980s, several of the Brat Pack actors had their careers derailed by problems relating to drugs, alcohol, and in Lowe's case, a sex tape. According to Gora, "Many believe they could have gone on to more serious roles if not for that article. They were talented. But they had professional difficulties, personal difficulties after that."Wilson, Craig. "John Hughes and the Brat Pack, revisited". usatoday. February 16, 2010. Retrieved 2011-01-24. Demi Moore did become a star in the 1990s, appearing in films such as Ghost and G.I. Jane. You Couldn't Ignore Me If You Tried. Three Rivers Press. pp. 285-286. By the 21st century, the term "Brat Pack" had lost its negative connotation. You Couldn't Ignore Me If You Tried. Three Rivers Press. p. 332.
The films themselves have been described as representative of "the socially apathetic, cynical, money-possessed and ideologically barren eighties generation." According to author Susannah Gora, these films "changed the way many young people looked at everything from class distinction to friendship, from love to sex and fashion to music." They are considered "among the most influential pop cultural contributions of their time."Gora, Susannah. You Couldn't Ignore Me If You Tried: The Brat Pack, John Hughes, and Their Impact on a Generation (Random House, Inc., 2010), p. 3.
In 2012, Entertainment Weekly listed The Breakfast Club as the best high school movie ever made."50 Best High School Movies". ew. September 22, 2012. Retrieved March 2, 2013. On VH1's list of the 100 greatest teen stars, Molly Ringwald was ranked #1, Rob Lowe was ranked #2, Anthony Michael Hall was ranked #4, Ally Sheedy was ranked #34, and Andrew McCarthy was ranked #40."100 Greatest Teen Stars #'s 20-1". vh1. Retrieved March 2, 2013."100 Greatest Teen Stars #'s 40-21". vh1. Retrieved March 2, 2013.

Filmography

Beyond the two primary films, there is no generally accepted list of "Brat Pack" movies. While Blum's article credits Taps, a 1981 sleeper starring Timothy Hutton with Cruise and Penn, as the first Brat Pack movie, the list of movies below represents the more traditional filmography, with each movie including at least two core members in starring roles:
Some films have been dubbed "Brat Pack movies" despite having no stars from the core membership, including 1984's Red Dawn Other 1980s films, many with similar coming-of-age themes, that starred only one core Brat Pack actor with one or more close contributors include:

Gallery






