[[Saeed Hajjarian]]

CATEGORIES: 1954 births, Living people, University of Tehran alumni, Iranian Vice Ministers, Iranian reformists, Iranian writers, Iranian journalists, Iranian newspaper publishers (people), History of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iranian democracy activists, Islamic Iran Participation Front politicians

Saeed Hajjarian ( believe was in retaliation for his help in uncovering the chain murders of Iran and his significant help to the Iranian reform movement in general.Analysis: Who wanted Hajjarian dead?  BBC

Early life and education

Hajjarian was born in Shiraz in 1954. He studied mechanical engineering at Tehran University. In 1977 Hajjarian was enrolled in mechanical engineering undergraduate program but then he shifted to political sciences and received his doctoral qualification from Tehran University in 2003. A young Iranian revolutionary during the 1979 Iranian Revolution, he was one of the students who took over the US embassy in Tehran in 1979.

Career

After the revolution, Hajjarian involved in the formation of the intelligence apparatus of the newly founded Islamic Republic. Through the 1980s, he was working in the ministry of intelligence, where his positions included vice minister for political affairs. In the late 1980s, he left the ministry, and established Center for Strategic Research under the presidency. That was where he played an important role in creating a new discourse based on democracy and rule of law for his generation of revolutionaries.
When Mohammad Khatami was elected President in 1997, he appointed Hajjarian his political advisor. In 1999, he was elected to the city council of Tehran in the first city elections after the 1979 revolution. Hajjarian was also the editor of Sobh-e Emrooz newspaper, which was a strong advocate of Khatami's reforms. He was believed to be the source of information for many articles written by the investigative journalists, Akbar Ganji and Emadeddin Baghi. These included stories about the "Chain murders" of dissident intellectuals by members of Iran's intelligence ministry.

Assassination attempt

In March, 2000 he was shot in the face by a gunman on the doorstep of Tehran's city council.
His assailant, Saeed Asgar, a young man who was reported to be a member of the Basij militia, was later arrested and sentenced to spend 15 years in jail.

Possible cause

His attempted assassination is thought to be associated with the exposure of the "Chain murders"  in his Sobh Emrouz daily newspaper, and the "key role" he is believed to have played "in bringing about ... damaging disclosures," both as the editor of the exposing newspaper and one of the few reformists likely to be a source of information about activity in the intelligence ministry. Consequently, "some believe that remnants" of the chain murder "intelligence killer group may have been" behind his attempted assassination.23 Retrieved 11 July 2009

Recovery

Hajjarian slowly recovered somewhat from the shooting. By 2005, Hajjarian was still unable to speak with a clear voice and still using the wheelchair, although could walk with help. As of 2009 he still spoke with difficulty and was "dependent on the constant care of doctors and family."

Research works and viewpoints

According to author Abbas Milani, Hajjarian argued that domination of politics by clerics was wrong, but could be gradually eroded by "mobilizing the masses and using them as bargaining chips with Iran's rulers."The New Republic, "The New Democrats"  by Abbas Milani, July 15, 2009 (not available for free online) His strategy for the reform movement was described by another journalist as extending the reformists "reach by triangulating between the mass movement they represented and the autocratic state with which they shared power. He coined the phrase that would define the reformists' strategy: Pressure from below, negotiation at the top."
Hajjarian argued that there is a way of combating the predominance of Valiyat al-faqih (rule of the Islamic jurist) by underlining the de facto secularization of religion by the supreme leader of the Islamic Republic, Khomeini. He allegedly showed the supremacy of politics as such over any religious norm when he said that the interests of the Islamic Republic are paramount in Islam and that zakat, salat, hajj, and everything else in Islam, are subordinant. This kind of decision, he states, means that politics are more important than religion and that this acknowledges the secularization of religion. In this context, he argues, it is possible to reassess velayat faqih and to reject its supremacy within the political field in Iran.

2009 elections

On 16 June 2009, four days after the disputed presidential election, it was reported that Hajjarian had been arrested.

Quotes








