[[Homo ergaster]]

CATEGORIES: Early species of Homo, Lower Paleolithic, Pliocene primates, Pleistocene primates, Pleistocene extinctions, Fossil taxa described in 1975, Prehistoric mammals of Africa, Prehistoric Kenya

Homo ergaster (meaning "working man") or African ''Homo erectus is an extinct chronospecies of Homo'' that lived in eastern and southern Africa during the early Pleistocene, between 1.8 million and 1.3 million years ago.
There is still disagreement on the subject of the classification, ancestry, and progeny of H. ergaster, but it is now widely accepted to be the direct ancestor of later hominids such as Homo heidelbergensis, Homo sapiens, and Homo neanderthalensis and Asian Homo erectus.
It is one of the earliest members of the genus Homo, possibly ancestral to, or sharing a common ancestor with, Homo erectus. "By the 1980s, the growing numbers of H. erectus specimens, particularly in Africa, led to the realization that Asian H. erectus (H. erectus sensu stricto), once thought so primitive, was in fact more derived than its African counterparts. These morphological differences were interpreted by some as evidence that more than one species might be included in H. erectus sensu lato (e.g., Stringer, 1984; Andrews, 1984; Tattersall, 1986; Wood, 1984, 1991a, b; Schwartz and Tattersall, 2000)." ... "Unlike the European lineage, in my opinion, the taxonomic issues surrounding Asian vs. African H. erectus are more intractable. The issue was most pointedly addressed with the naming of H. ergaster on the basis of the type mandible KNM-ER 992, but also including the partial skeleton and isolated teeth of KNM-ER 803 among other Koobi Fora remains (Groves and Mazak, 1975). Recently, this specific name was applied to most early African and Georgian H. erectus in recognition of the less-derived nature of these remains vis à vis conditions in Asian H. erectus (see Wood, 1991a, p. 268; Gabunia et al., 2000a). It should be noted, however, that at least portions of the paratype of H. ergaster (e.g., KNM-ER 1805) are not included in most current conceptions of that taxon. The H. ergaster question remains famously unresolved (e.g., Stringer, 1984; Tattersall, 1986; Wood, 1991a, 1994; Rightmire, 1998b; Gabunia et al., 2000a; Schwartz and Tattersall, 2000), in no small part because the original diagnosis provided no comparison with the Asian fossil record."
The latest discoveries go even further claiming that all five contemporary species of early "Homo" in Africa, "Homo habilis", "Homo rudolfensis", "Homo ergaster", and "Homo erectus" are representatives from the same species, best named "Homo erectus" who evolved about 2 million years ago in Africa and expanded through Eurasia, as far as China and Java, where it was first documented from about 1.2 million years ago.
The binomial name was published in 1975 by Groves and Mazák. The second part, "ergaster", is derived from the Ancient Greek  "workman", in reference to the comparatively advanced lithic technology developed by the species, introducing the Acheulean industry.

Discovery and representative fossils

The South African palaeontologist John T. Robinson first discovered a mandible of a new hominid in southern Africa in 1949; he named the species Telanthropus capensis, though it is now recognised as a member of Homo ergaster. The name was first applied by Colin Groves and Vratislav Mazák to KNM-ER 992, a mandible discovered near Lake Rudolf (now Lake Turkana), Kenya in 1975, which became the type-specimen of the species. The most complete skeleton of H. ergaster (and one of the most complete extinct hominids to date), KNM-WT 15000, was discovered at Lake Turkana, Kenya, in 1984 by paleoanthropologists Kamoya Kimeu and Alan Walker. They nicknamed the 1.6-million-year-old specimen "Turkana Boy".

Classification and special distinction

Many paleoanthropologists still debate the definition of H. ergaster with H. erectus as separate species. Some call H. ergaster the direct African ancestor at H. erectus, proposing that H. ergaster emigrated out of Africa and into Asia, branching into a distinct species. Most dispense with the species-name ergaster, making no distinction between such fossils as the Turkana Boy and Peking Man. Though "Homo ergaster" has gained some acceptance as a valid taxon, H. ergaster and H. erectus are still usually defined as distinct African and Asian populations of  larger species H. erectus. (For the remainder of this article, the name "Homo ergaster" will be used to describe a distinct species for the convenience of continuity in reading.)
H. ergaster may be distinguished from H. erectus by its thinner skull-bones and lack of an obvious supraorbital foramen. It may be distinguished from Homo heidelbergensis by its thinner bones, more protrusive face, and lower forehead. Derived features separating it from earlier species include reduced sexual dimorphism,. Remains have been found in Tanzania, Ethiopia, Kenya, and South Africa.

Divergence

Homo habilis is generally accepted as the putative ancestor of the genus Homo, and often of H. ergaster most directly. This taxon's status as a legitimate species within "Homo", however, is particularly contentious. H. habilis and H. ergaster coexisted for 200,000-300,000 years, possibly indicating that these species diverged from a common ancestor.
It is unclear what genetic influence H. ergaster had on later hominids. Recent genetic analysis has generally supported the Out-of-Africa hypothesis, and this may designate H. ergaster the role of ancestor to all later hominids.

Origin and extinction

H. ergaster is believed to have diverged from the lineage of H. habilis between 1.9 and 1.8 million years ago; the lineage that emigrated from Africa and fathered H. erectus diverged from the lineage of H. ergaster almost immediately after this. These early descendants of H. habilis may have been discovered in Dmanisi, Georgia. H. ergaster remained stable for ca. 500,000 years in Africa before disappearing from the fossil record around 1.4 million years ago. No identifiable cause has been attributed to this disappearance; the later evolution of the similar H. heidelbergensis in Africa may indicate that this is simply a hole in the record, or that some intermediate species has not yet been discovered.

Use of tools

Homo ergaster used more diverse and sophisticated stone tools than its predecessor, Homo habilis.
H. ergaster refined the inherited Oldowan  developing the first Acheulean bifacial axes:

Sociality

Sexual dimorphism in H. ergaster is greatly reduced from its australopithecine ancestors (around 20%), but still greater than dimorphism in modern humans. This diminished dimorphism is speculated to be a sign of reduced competition for mates between males,.
Not only was H. ergaster like modern humans in body, but also more in organisation and sociality than any earlier species. It is conceivable that H. ergaster was the first hominin to harness fire: whether as the containment of natural fire, or as the lighting of artificial fire, is still a matter of contention. It is now assumed, however, that erectus did have control of fire, as well as each other hominin sharing a common ancestor with ergaster.
The social organisation of H. ergaster probably resembled that of modern hunter-gatherer societies. Unlike australopithecines, ergaster males presumably did not compete at all for females, which had themselves increased in size greatly in proportion to males. This reduced competition and dimorphism also coincided with an increase in brain size and efficiency of stone tools.

Linguistic use

According to the BBC series Walking With Cavemen, Homo ergaster was probably the first hominid to use "what we would recognise as a human voice," though its symbolic cognition was probably somewhat limited compared to modern humans.
It was thought for a long time that H. ergaster was restricted in the physical ability to regulate breathing and produce complex sounds. This was based on Turkana Boy's cervical vertebrae, which were far narrower than in later humans. Discoveries of cervical vertebrae in Dmanisi, Georgia some 300,000 years older than those of Turkana Boy are well within the normal human range.
It has been established, furthermore, that the Turkana Boy probably suffered from a disease of the spinal column that resulted in narrower cervical vertebrae than in modern humans (as well as the older Dmanisi finds). While the Dmanisi finds have not been established definitively as H. ergaster; they are older than Turkana Boy (the only definite ergaster vertebrae on record), and thereby suggest kinship to ergaster. Turkana Boy, therefore, may be an anomaly.
There is no archaeological evidence that Homo ergaster made use of symbolic thought (such as figurative art), but the well-evolved brain and physical capabilities (along with reconfiguration of ergaster's breathing-apparatus) suggest some form of linguistic or symbolic communication.



General:

Footnotes





 

