[[Mira Sorvino]]

CATEGORIES: 1967 births, American film actresses, American people of Italian descent, American television actresses, Best Supporting Actress Academy Award winners, Best Supporting Actress Golden Globe (film) winners, Harvard University alumni, Living people, People from Manhattan, People from Tenafly, New Jersey, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses

Mira Katherine Sorvino (born September 28, 1967) is an American actress. She came to prominence after winning the Academy Award and Golden Globe for best supporting actress for her performance in Woody Allen's Mighty Aphrodite (1995). She is also known for her roles in the films Romy and Michele's High School Reunion (1997), Mimic (1997), The Replacement Killers (1998), Summer of Sam (1999), and more recently Like Dandelion Dust (2009). She received Golden Globe and Emmy nominations for her role in Norma Jean & Marilyn (1996), and a Golden Globe nomination for her role in Human Trafficking (2005).

Early life

Sorvino was born on September 28, 1967 in New York City, New York.
Sorvino was raised in Tenafly, New Jersey,Seal, Mark. "Mira Sorvino's Barcelona", American Way, January 1, 2001. Accessed December 18, 2013. "When Mira Sorvino arrived in Barcelona in 1994 to film a movie called Barcelona, she had a past in academia and a future in acting. Raised in Tenafly, New Jersey, she was the daughter of tough-guy character actor Paul Sorvino, who raised his kids to strive for an education instead of childhood acting careers." where she wrote and acted in backyard plays with her childhood friend Hope Davis and in theater productions at Dwight-Englewood School. Sorvino was accepted into Harvard University, and studied one year as an exchange student in Beijing, China, where she became fluent in Mandarin Chinese.

Career

Sorvino spent the next three years in New York City, trying to make a name for herself as an actress. opened doors for her.
After small roles in Robert Redford's Quiz Show and Whit Stillman's Barcelona, she was cast in the 1995 Woody Allen film Mighty Aphrodite. Her portrayal of a happy go lucky prostitute made her a star, winning her an Academy Award and Golden Globe for Best Supporting Actress. Other credits include Romy and Michele's High School Reunion alongside Lisa Kudrow, At First Sight with Val Kilmer, and Summer of Sam from Spike Lee. She portrayed Marilyn Monroe for the 1996 HBO film Norma Jean & Marilyn, and the lead role in the 1997 horror movie Mimic.
In recent years, Sorvino has starred in lower-budget and independent films.
In February 2008, she guest starred in the "Frozen" episode of the medical television drama House. There was talk of making her character, psychiatrist Cate Milton, a recurring character; however, the writers strike put a temporary freeze on such discussions.
More recently, she starred in Attack on Leningrad (2009), Multiple Sarcasms (2010) alongside Timothy Hutton and Stockard Channing, and Nancy Savoca's Union Square (release date, July 2012), with Patti Lupone and Tammy Blanchard.net
She was considered for the role of video game heroine Jill Valentine in Resident Evil: Apocalypse (2004) before the role was played by British actress Sienna Guillory.
In 2012, the feature film Union Square, co-written and directed by the Sundance Film Festival's Grand Jury Award Winner, Nancy Savoca, was premiered at the Toronto Film Festival. In it, Mira co-stars with Patti Lupone, Tammy Blanchard, Mike Doyle, Michael Rispoli and Daphne Rubin-Vega.net  The movie opened on July 13, 2012 to packed houses in New York City, Los Angeles, and Toronto, garnering notice and acclaim from major print sources such as the New York Times to online sources like Newsday, Yahoo Voices 
In 2012, Mira Sorvino played the Elaine, the mother of the lead, in the film adaptation of Wendy Mass's popular children's book Jeremy Fink and the Meaning of Life.com
In 2014, she recurred as Head Detective Betsy Brannigan on the final season of Psych, and will recur on the fourth season of Falling Skies as a character named Sara.

Personal life

Sorvino met actor Christopher Backus at a friend's charades party in August 2003. On June 11, 2004, they married in a private civil ceremony at the Santa Barbara, California courthouse, then later had a hilltop ceremony in Capri, Italy. The couple have four children: daughters Mattea Angel (born 2004)Mira Sorvino Gives Birth to a Girl - Pregnancy, Mira Sorvino : People.people. She had previously dated filmmaker Quentin Tarantino for close to three years in the 1990s.
She has been affiliated with Amnesty International since 2004,
In honor of Sorvino's role as Dr. Susan Tyler, an entomologist who was investigating deadly insect mutations in the feature film Mimic, a compound excreted by the sunburst diving beetle as a defensive mechanism was named "mirasorvone" by Thomas Eisner.,
Sorvino was once an atheist but has since become a devout Christian.

Filmography

Film

Television






