[[Grand Valley State University]]

CATEGORIES: Grand Valley State University, Education in Ottawa County, Michigan, Education in Grand Rapids, Michigan, Holland, Michigan, Traverse City, Michigan, Muskegon, Michigan, North Central Association of Colleges and Schools, American Association of State Colleges and Universities, Educational institutions established in 1960, Allendale, Michigan, Visitor attractions in Ottawa County, Michigan, Education in Muskegon County, Michigan, Universities and colleges in Kent County, Michigan, 1960 establishments in Michigan

Grand Valley State University (commonly referred to as GVSU, GV, or Grand Valley) is a public liberal arts university located in Allendale, Michigan, United States. The university was established in 1960, and its main campus is situated on  west of Grand Rapids. Classes are also offered at the university's growing Pew Campus in Downtown Grand Rapids, Meijer Campus in Holland, and through centers at Muskegon and Traverse City established in cooperation with local community colleges.
GVSU is a comprehensive coeducational university serving more than 24,654 students as of fall 2012,
GVSU's NCAA Division II sports teams are called the Lakers. They compete in the Great Lakes Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (GLIAC) in all 19 intercollegiate varsity sports and have won the National Association of Collegiate Directors of Athletics (NACDA) Directors' Cup for NCAA Division II every year from 2004 to 2011 after finishing second in 2002 and 2003.

History

Formation, planning and construction

In 1958 the Michigan Legislature commissioned a study that demonstrated a need for a four-year college in the Grand Rapids area, Michigan's second largest metropolitan region. Local businessman Bill Seidman created a committee to study the report and spearhead the planning and promotion to create such an institution. In the following year the Michigan Legislature established the college. A naming contest was held, and out of 2500 submissions, "Grand Valley State College" was chosen. Private donations, including $350,000 to purchase land and $1,000,000 for construction, were secured from 5,000 individuals, organizations, and business throughout West Michigan. In 1961, the Grand Valley State College Board of Control chose a 

Early years

Grand Valley State College accepted its first class of 225 students in 1963 and held its first graduation of 138 students on June 18, 1967. The middle-late 1960s saw the addition of the first dormitories and construction of new academic buildings, including the Zumberge Library, named for the university's first president, James Zumberge.
In 1969, the Grand Valley Lanthorn printed an issue containing several vulgarities and obscenities. After complaints from some at Grand Valley State College and the surrounding communities, the Ottawa County, Michigan, sheriff arrested the editor, and the prosecutor closed down the newspaper office. The university, then a co-ed college, sued the sheriff and prosecutor for closing the Lanthorn offices. Eventually, Michigan's Attorney General settled the case out of court, ruling in favor of Grand Valley State College.
During the 1970s Grand Valley used a multiple college concept: "College of Arts and Sciences," "Thomas Jefferson College," "William James College," "Seidman College of Business," and "College IV." Former Michigan Governor William Milliken signed into law for the name to be changed to Grand Valley State Colleges in 1973. However the "s" was dropped and the name was reverted to Grand Valley State College in 1983 when the academic programs were reorganized into divisions.

Continued growth

In 1987 the Michigan Legislature passed a law renaming the college to "Grand Valley State University."

Beyond 50th anniversary

In 2012, GVSU announced several more construction projects and land purchases. All projects will begin in summer or spring of 2013.

Campuses and centers

Grand Valley has three campuses: the main campus in Allendale and two satellite campuses in the surrounding area. Smaller centers in Muskegon and Traverse City also exist.
The Interurban Transit Partnership operates several The Rapid bus routes under contract with the university. The public can ride these buses by paying the fare, but rides are free to Grand Valley students, faculty and staff on all Rapid routes with a valid I.D. card.

Allendale campus

The University's main and original campus in Allendale is the location of most of the university's programs. The Allendale campus is composed of 1,322 acres perched above the Grand River next to a system of ravines and is divided into two areas, north and south campus, separated in the middle by West Campus Drive.  State highway M-45 links the campus in suburban Allendale to US Highway 31/Lake Michigan to the west and Grand Rapids, Michigan to the east. Lubbers Stadium, the GVSU Fieldhouse and all other athletic facilities for the school's 19 varsity sports are also located on the Allendale campus. The campus is dotted with many sculptures including Dale Eldred, Joseph Kinnebrew and James Clover. Academic facilities on the Allendale campus include: 122 classrooms, 144 research laboratories, 20 lab prep rooms, 21 computer labs, and the Zumberge Library.

Robert C. Pew Grand Rapids campus

The  Robert C. Pew Grand Rapids Campus is located in the heart of downtown Grand Rapids and is also located on the banks of the Grand River. It consists of 11 buildings and three leased spaces and includes the Richard DeVos Center, L.V. Eberhard Center, Cook-DeVos Center for Health Sciences, Beckering Family Carillon Tower, The Depot (houses the Michigan Small Business and Technology Development headquarters), Hauenstein Center for Presidential Studies, Keller Engineering Laboratories, John C. Kennedy Hall of Engineering, Peter F. Secchia Hall (housing), Winter Hall (housing), and the Van Andel Global Trade Center. These facilities include 57 classrooms, 78 research laboratories, 23 lab prep rooms, 11 computer labs, and the Steelcase library.
Medical mile
The Cook-DeVos Center for Health Sciences, which opened in 2003, is at capacity and discussions about constructing an additional health science building nearby are underway.

Meijer campus in Holland

The Meijer Campus, located just outside downtown Holland, was opened in 1998 and was named for the Meijer Family for their generous donation of land. The campus houses continuing education programs in 

Muskegon centers

GVSU has three locations in Muskegon:

Traverse City center

The Traverse City Regional Center was established in the fall of 1995 and is located at the NMC University Center in a partnership with Northwestern Michigan College. The center offers undergraduate and graduate degrees in education, social work, and liberal studies.

Detroit center

The Detroit Center was established in 2012 when GVSU purchased the Barden Building adjacent to Comerica Park in downtown Detroit, Michigan to house its charter school offices. The center also houses the Southeast Michigan Region of the Michigan Small Business & Technology Development Center, of which GVSU is the supervisor.

Organization and administration

Administration

Grand Valley State University is governed by an eight member Board of Trustees, whose members are appointed by the Governor of Michigan and confirmed by the Michigan Senate for terms of eight years. This is setup is provided for by the Constitution of the State of Michigan of 1963. Members of the Board of Trustees serve without compensation. The Board of Trustees appoints the president of the university, formulates university policies, controls university finances, and acts as the supreme governing body of the institution. The president of the university administers the policies of the Board of Trustees.

Funding and financial

GVSU's general fund budget is $333.8 million, of which $276.3 million is from tuition, and $57.5 million is from state appropriations. As of fall 2012, Grand Valley's amount of university-based student financial aid was $239 million. Also, during the 2009–2010 academic year, full-time dependent students received an average award of $9,050 totaling more than $200 million in total assistance including $55 million of that in scholarships, grants, and employment.

Public safety

The Grand Valley Police Department provides law enforcement services for the Allendale Campus. While the department is self-empowered to enforce its jurisdiction, officers are also deputized by the Ottawa County Sheriff's Department. Because Allendale doesn't have its own police department, the Grand Valley State University Police can handle cases anywhere in Ottawa County, mainly in Allendale and the area surrounding the campus. The department handles other security issues, such as parking and driving violations, community policing, as well lost and found. Allendale Fire Department serves the campus. The Department of Public Safety also employs several students who assist the department by performing a variety of clerical and security based duties and services. 
The Pew Campus Security and Regional Centers is an entity distinct from the Department of Public safety, and handles security and public safety issues for the Grand Rapids Pew Campus and all Regional Centers including the Holland (MI) Meijer Campus, the Muskegon (MI) campus and the Traverse City (MI) campus. This department is not sworn or certified and relies on the Grand Rapids Police Department and other local law enforcement agencies for official law enforcement when necessary.

Student government

Student government at Grand Valley is formally known as Student Senate. There are currently 50 student senators that serve on one of seven different committees. Student Senate offices are located in the Kirkhof Center on GVSU's Allendale campus.

Academics

Profile

Grand Valley State University is a large, primarily residential comprehensive university that has a large undergraduate enrollment and emphasis.
Grand Valley's student body consists of 21,317 undergraduates and 3,337 graduate students across all campuses and centers with the majority being on the Allendale campus (as of Fall 2012). The fall 2012 incoming freshman undergraduate class of 4,005 students, represented all 83 Michigan counties, 20 states, and 27 countries. 83% of first year students live on campus: 3,335 freshman chose to live on-campus in fall 2012, while 670 chose to live off-campus. As of fall 2012, a total of 370 international students were enrolled at the university representing 82 different countries.
GVSU's undergraduate admissions are classified as "more selective" by US News & World Report as Grand Valley admitted 69% of applicants for the 2008–2009 school year. The fall 2012 freshman class entered Grand Valley with an average high school GPA of a 3.5 and an average ACT composite score of a 24.
US News and World Report noted in its "Best Colleges 2011" that 98 percent of Grand Valley graduates either find employment or pursue advanced degrees after graduation.

Colleges

The university consists of eight degree-granting colleges:
GVSU also is home to the Frederik Meijer Honors College, which is non-degree-granting, but is to provide a more challenging interdisciplinary education in a learning-living environment. The honors college is located in Glenn A. Niemeyer Learning and Living Center on the south side of the Allendale campus.

Study abroad

The Barbara H. Padnos International Center collaborates with students who wish to study abroad. Grand Valley has more than 4,000 study abroad programs, both affiliated with and independent from GVSU, from which students can choose.

Rankings

U.S. News and World Report ranked Grand Valley 7th in the "Top Public Regional Universities in the Midwest" category and 34th in the "Regional Universities (Midwest) tier 1" category for 2011.

Research

During the two years prior to October 2009 university researchers engaged in over 186 research projects funded by more than $32.7
million in grants. Grand Valley's Annis Water Resources Institute conducts research on water resources, including: ecosystem structure and function, contaminants and toxicology, hydrology, land use, watershed, stream, and wetland ecology, water quality, and basic and applied limnology. GVSU's Michigan Alternative and Renewable Energy Center (MAREC) recently received funding for its $3.7 million Lake Michigan Offshore Wind Assessment Project to test wind energy on Lake Michigan. The research should take three years as a floating buoy will be used and moved to collect data from different locations on the lake.

Accreditation

Grand Valley as an institution is accredited by The Higher Learning Commission of the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools. Grand Valley also has baccalaureate program accreditation with AACSB, ABET, APTA, CSWE, NASAD, NASM, NCATE, and NLN.

GVSU and MSU partnerships

The Michigan State University College of Human Medicine maintains the Secchia Center, a medical campus in downtown Grand Rapids.
The Early Assurance Program reserves spaces in MSU's medical program for top-performing GVSU pre-medical graduates. One of the goals of the program is to select first-generation college students, students from underprivileged areas, and/or students who have expressed a desire to work in medical specialties that are in high demand. Students entering the program must agree to work in under-served areas after completion of their medical degrees. The first group of six students entered this program during the fall 2010 semester.
The two universities have announced a joint program specializing in clinical trial management, aimed at providing the necessary foundations for carrying out clinical drug trials in West Michigan. It is an online certificate program, and was started due to requests from local drug trial companies. The program is set to begin for the fall semester of 2011.

University libraries

The mission of the Grand Valley State University libraries is to "enrich the educational mission of the university by advancing intellectual growth and discovery. Through the acquisition, application, dissemination, and preservation of knowledge we strive to serve the community, the state, the nation, and the world."

Library locations

Each library's collection is tailored to its location and the programs it serves, with daily deliveries between sites.

Library services

The University libraries offer opportunities for research, collaboration, and individual study. Collectively, the libraries subscribe to over 60,000 print and electronic journals. They also house more than 1,482,633 books including more than 829,463 electronic books.

Collections

Grand Valley is a recipient of United States government documents and currently receives 44% of the documents distributed by the Federal Depository Library Program.
The Curriculum Materials Library in the DeVos Center downtown houses instructional materials for preschool through grade twelve and provide spaces where education majors can preview resources, develop lesson plans, create media for the classroom, and try out teaching aides.
Seidman House on the Allendale Campus houses the University Archives, which include extensive collections of rare books and Michigan novels, the Harvey Lemmen Collection on Abraham Lincoln, the Young Lords  project on line at Young Lords in Lincoln Park  , the largest Latino oral history collection in the Mid - West by Jose Cha Cha Jimenez , and the American Civil War, and the papers of acclaimed Michigan author Jim Harrison.
The Digital Collections database contains a selection of photographs, correspondence, diaries, interviews, and publications from the holdings of the Libraries' Special Collections & University Archives, and other University entities.
The Dorothy A. Johnson Collection is a collection on philanthropy, volunteerism, and nonprofit leadership. It is considered to be one of the most comprehensive in the United States and is the only one of its kind in Michigan.

New Allendale campus library

Grand Valley is moving forward with plans to build a new library on the Allendale campus. The new $70 million, 

Athletics

The Grand Valley State Lakers are the intercollegiate  athletic teams of Grand Valley State University. The GVSU Lakers compete at the NCAA Division II level and offer 20 varsity sports including 11 for women and 9 for men. The university currently participates in and is a founding member of the Great Lakes Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (GLIAC). Grand Valley's varsity athletic teams have won 15 national championships in seven sports and have been national runners-up thirteen times in eight sports. GVSU has also won the prestigious National Association of Collegiate Directors of Athletics (NACDA) Directors' Cup for NCAA Division II schools in 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, and 2011 after finishing second in 2002 and 2003. The cup is awarded to the top athletic programs based on overall team national finishes. Grand Valley is the first college east of the Mississippi River to win the Director's Cup for NCAA Division II.

Mascot

The official mascot of Grand Valley State is Louie the Laker.

Fight song

"GVSU Victory!" which is sometimes referred to as "Grand Valley Victory" is the fight song for the Grand Valley State University Lakers.

Arts

Fine arts

GVSU has a National Association of Schools of Art and Design (NASAD) accredited art program, including emphases in illustration, graphic design, ceramics, printmaking, painting, visual studies, and sculpture. Art students attend classes at the Calder Art Center, named for contemporary artist Alexander Calder. The building includes exhibition space under the name of the Stuart & Barbara Padnos Art Gallery.
Admission into the GVSU art program requires an initial review of the potential student's work. Admitted students then undergo a series of foundation classes that properly introduce them to the formal basics of art. Passing the foundation review allows access to higher level art studies, and a choice of approaching an emphasis. Subsequent reviews may take place depending upon emphases, including both junior and senior level reviews.

Music

The New Music Ensemble (NME), directed by Bill Ryan,
Directed by Richard Stoelzel, Grand Valley's trumpet ensemble has been a top competitor in the National Trumpet Competition for nearly a decade, placing 1st in the ensemble division in 2006 and 2008.

Student life

The Office of Student Life at GVSU is located in the Kirkhof Center near the center of the Allendale campus. Its offices are home to the Community Service Learning Center, Fraternity and Sorority Life, Laker Leadership Programs, Major Campus Events and Traditions, Student Organizations, and the Transitions Orientation Program.

Fraternity and Sorority Life

GVSU currently has 32 fraternities and sororities. As of fall 2012, the GVSU Fraternity and Sorority Community consisted of 1235 undergraduate members, representing approximately 6% of the undergraduate population.

=Fraternities=

Interfraternity Council (IFC)
Multicultural Greek Council (MGC)
National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC)

=Sororities=

National Panhellenic Conference (NPC)
Multicultural Greek Council (MGC)
National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC)

Honorary & professional organizations

Sustainability

Grand Valley's Sustainable Community Development Initiative provides "Grand Valley administration, faculty, staff, students, and community stakeholders with the required skills and capabilities to become better stewards and responsible global citizens in the workforce, communities, and family life." In other rankings GVSU was placed as high as 16th in the world and 10th in the United States for its sustainability efforts and environment-friendly university management by Universitas Indonesia GreenMetric World University Ranking for 2011.
The university is currently home to eleven Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) buildings or building additions. Several more buildings including the new Mary Idema Pew Library  are in construction or planning stages to be LEED certified as well. All new construction and major renovations at GVSU must meet LEED standards required by the university.
The Student Environmental Coalition or SEC, is the student-run sustainability organization on campus. The mission of the group is "Helping to engage students at Grand Valley's campus to be conscious citizens by promotion of environmental awareness."
Grand Valley hosted meetings relating to sustainability, including a summit in which various sustainability issues were explored by university officials and local experts in April 2010,

Media

GVSU has a variety of media outlets offered to its campuses.
The Grand Valley Lanthorn is the student-run newspaper, published on Mondays and Thursdays during the academic year. Copies of the paper are free and available at both the Allendale and Grand Rapids campuses in designated newsstands and online. Until the fall of 2006, the paper was only published once per week. Currently 8,000 copies of the paper are published per issue totaling 16,000 copies per week.
GVSU has several electronic media outlets including three radio stations and three television stations.  The university owns and operates its own Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) Public television station WGVU-TV in Allendale, Michigan and WGVK-TV, its full-time satellite station in Kalamazoo, Michigan.  In addition, GVSU also operates two National Public Radio (NPR) stations in WGVU (AM) and WGVU-FM with the same call letters, which feature a mixture of jazz, blues, and news, including local and NPR programming. WCKS ("The Whale") is the student-run radio station, broadcasting over the internet and on a soon-to-be announced FM channel. GVTV is the student-run television station on channel 10 on the university cable system.

Student organizations

As of fall 2012, GVSU has over 356 student-run organizations. Student organizations include categories in, but are not limited to, Academic and Professional, Student Life Sports, Cultural, Honorary, Interfaith and Religious, Media, Performing Arts, Service and Advocacy, and Special Interests.

Housing and residence life

Grand Valley State University is home to 29 living centers (residence halls) and three on-campus apartment complexes on its main Allendale campus, and two residence halls on its Pew Grand Rapids campus, totaling 6,068 beds.

Notable people

The list of Grand Valley State University people includes notable alumni, faculty, staff and University presidents. There are over 88,000 alumni who reside in all 50 U.S. states, Canada and 25 countries around the world. Many GVSU alumni have gone on to achieve success in a variety of fields including art, athletics, business, government, journalism, public affairs, and science.

In popular culture








