[[Harry Ramsden's]]

CATEGORIES: Fast-food seafood restaurants, English brands, Catering and food service companies of the United Kingdom, Restaurants established in 1928, Restaurants in England, Restaurant chains in the United Kingdom, Visitor attractions in Leeds, 1928 establishments in England, Fish and chip restaurants

Harry Ramsden's is a fast food restaurant chain based in the United Kingdom which offers fish and chips and assorted themed dishes. The business has 35 owned and franchised outlets throughout the UK and Ireland and serves around four million meals annually.
It is Britain's longest established restaurant chain.

Early history

The business was started by Harry Ramsden (1888–1963) in 1928 in a wooden hut in White Cross, Guiseley, West Yorkshire, northern England. Three years later he moved into a new premises, complete with fitted carpets, oak panelled walls and chandeliers. The original hut still stands on the same site adjacent to the main restaurant, which once held the Guinness World Record for the largest fish and chip shop in the world, seating 250 people, serving nearly a million customers a year. Harry Corbett of Sooty fame was a nephew of Harry Ramsden and played the piano in his uncle's original restaurant.
In 1954 the business was sold to Harry Ramsden's long term business partner Eddie Stokes for 

Expansion

In 1988, the company, which still comprised the original Guiseley fish and chips premises, was bought by Merryweathers, led by Chairmen John Barnes and Richard Richardson.marketingjudo.co.php Barnes & Richardson led the transition of the business from a single restaurant in Yorkshire to a world famous brand.
In 1989, following a decision by their bank to withdraw funding, the management floated the company on the London Stock exchange. The public offer was over-subscribed by two and a half times. The next ten years saw rapid expansion throughout the UK and worldwide through company owned and franchised restaurants. Worldwide locations in Hong Kong, Australia, Epcot and Saudi Arabia added to the growing stature as an international brand.Marketing Judo ISBN 0-273-66316-X
A franchise deal with Granada motorway services to develop kiosk-style units ultimately led to Granada Ltd buying Harry Ramsden's for  in October 1999. When acquired by Granada Harry Ramsden's comprised four company owned restaurants, twenty five franchises and sixteen Henry Higgins units. Granada expanded Harry Ramsden's into motorway locations. Some franchise territories infringed onto motorways so Granada bought the franchises back. In 2000 Compass merged with Granada. Under Compass, the business was expanded into motorway service station kiosks, contract catering locations such as schools, Post Office canteens, Little Chef, Butlins and Haven Holidays.

SSP ownership and future

By April 2006, Compass had spun off its motorway service stations to Moto bought by Macquarie Bank of Sydney, Australia. Its specialist airports and railways division SSP was sold for  to EQT Partners of Sweden (who also own Findus). Harry Ramsden's was sold with the SSP business.
Under the early years of SSP ownership the business had to compete with other SSP brands for investment.
In 2008 SSP recruited industry turnaround specialist Chris Sullivan as Managing Director.
On 19 January 2010 SSP sold Harry Ramsden's to Boparan Ventures Limited. BVL is the private investment vehicle of Ranjit Boparan.
Commenting on the deal, SSP CEO Andrew Lynch praised the turn around in performance by Chris Sullivan and his team and said:
BVL planned to open another 100 units in the next five years and create 600 new jobs.
On 29 November 2011 it was announced that the original Harry Ramsden's restaurant in Guiseley, Leeds, would close amid statements from the owners that it was losing money and that any refurbishment to make it profitable would not be viable.
BVL are continuing to invest in the Harry Ramsden's brand, with their Bournemouth branch holding the title for World's Largest Fish and Chip Restaurant, seating 417 diners across its restaurant, cafe and terrace. 

Undercover Boss

In 2010, the chain was the focus of an episode of the Channel 4 television series Undercover Boss. The then-CEO of the company, Marija Simovic, posed as a new starter in a variety of locations – Swindon, Merry Hill Shopping Centre, Blackpool, Southampton and Great Yarmouth – to try to understand why the company was struggling in today's market. At the end of the programme, Simovic promised big changes in a bid to turn around the company's fortunes, along with promoting a number of employees who had impressed her.

Licensing

Under the name of the brand, Premier Foods sell mushy peas (since April 2006), and Young's Bluecrest (owned by Heinz since October 1999) sell frozen fish and oven chips.








