[[Evelyn Glennie]]

CATEGORIES: Fellows of the Royal Academy of Music, Dames Commander of the Order of the British Empire, Musicians awarded knighthoods, Deaf classical musicians, Grammy Award-winning artists, People from Ellon, Aberdeenshire, Scottish classical musicians, Female drummers, 1965 births, Living people, Marimbists, Scottish percussionists, Xylophonists

Dame Evelyn Elizabeth Ann Glennie, DBE (born 19 July 1965) is a Scottish virtuoso percussionist.

Early life

Glennie was born and raised in Aberdeenshire. Her father was Herbert Arthur Glennie, an accordionist in a Scottish country dance band, and the strong, indigenous musical traditions of north-east Scotland were important in the development of the young musician, whose first instruments were the mouth organ and the clarinet. Other major influences were Glenn Gould, Jacqueline du Pré and Trilok Gurtu. She studied at Ellon Academy and the Royal Academy of Music, and was also a member of the National Youth Orchestra of Scotland. She was a member of the Cults Percussion Ensemble, formed in 1976 by local musical educator Ron Forbes. They toured and recorded one album, which was re-released on Trunk Records in 2012.Trunk Records album page

Career

Glennie tours extensively in the northern hemisphere, spending up to four months each year in the United States, and performs with a wide variety of orchestras and contemporary musicians, giving over 100 concerts a year as well as master classes and "music in schools" performances; she frequently commissions percussion works from composers and performs them in her concert repertoire.
She also plays the Great Highland Bagpipes and has her own registered tartan known as "The Rhythms of Evelyn Glennie". Glennie is in the process of producing her own range of jewellery and works as a motivational speaker.

Deafness

Glennie has been profoundly deaf since the age of 12, having started to lose her hearing from the age of 8. This does not inhibit her ability to perform at an international level. She regularly plays barefoot during both live performances and studio recordings in order to feel the music better.
Glennie contends that deafness is largely misunderstood by the public. She claims to have taught herself to hear with parts of her body other than her ears. In response to criticism from the media, Glennie published "Hearing Essay" in which she discusses her condition.

Collaborations

Glennie was featured on Icelandic singer Björk's album Telegram, performing the duet "My Spine". She has collaborated with many other musicians including former Genesis guitarist Steve Hackett, Bela Fleck, Bobby McFerrin, Fred Frith and The King's Singers.
On 21 November 2007, the UK government announced an infusion of £332 million for music education. This resulted from a successful lobbying spearheaded by Glennie, Sir James Galway, Julian Lloyd Webber, and Michael Kamen, who also (in 2002/2003) together formed the Music in Education Consortium. Telegraph. Retrieved on 2012-01-22.
In 2012, she collaborated with Underworld on the soundtrack to the Opening Ceremony of the London 2012 Olympic Games and performed live in the stadium.

Personal life

In 1994, Glennie married composer, sound engineer and tuba player Greg Malcangi, with whom she collaborated on several musical projects. They divorced in 2003 following her widely-publicised affair with orchestral conductor Leonard Slatkin.

Recognition

Glennie has won many awards, including:
 | url = 
 | title = Percussive Arts Society: Hall of Fame: Evelyn Glennie 
 | author = Lauren Vogel Weiss
 | date= undated
}}[/ref]Percussive Arts Society to Induct Roy Burns and Dame Evelyn Glennie to the PAS Hall of Fame at Pasic 2008. Percussive Arts Society-PAS. 1 May  2008
She has been awarded 15 honorary doctorates from universities in the United Kingdom, the Officer of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire (OBE) in 1993, and was promoted to Dame Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire (DBE) in the New Year's Honours of 2007.2007 Rod and Zara top New Year Honours . BBC News (30 December 2006). Retrieved on 2012-01-22. She owns over 1800 percussion instruments from all over the world and is continually adding to her collection. She was also a VIP of the music industry. Glennie is an Ambassador of the Royal National Children's Foundation (formerly the Joint Educational Trust) which helps support vulnerable, disadvantaged young people at state and independent boarding schools throughout the UK.

Albums

Films

Autobiography

 | isbn = 0-09-174305-2
 | author = Evelyn Glennie
 | title = Good Vibrations: My Autobiography
 | publisher = Hutchinson
 | date = May 3, 1990
}}[/ref]

Television appearances






