[[Cru (Christian organization)]]

CATEGORIES: Religious organizations established in 1951, Evangelicalism, Evangelical parachurch organisations, Christian youth organizations, Religious tract publishing companies, Christianity in Orlando, Florida, Christian organizations established in the 20th century, International student religious organizations, Student religious organizations in the United States

Cru, known as Campus Crusade for Christ around the world, is an interdenominational Christian organization that promotes evangelism and discipleship in more than 190 countries
around the world. In 1996, USA Today called Cru the largest evangelical organization in the United States. Today, the organization employs over 25,000 full-time missionaries and has trained 225,000 volunteers around the world.American Executive, July 2008
Founded in 1951 at the University of California, Los Angeles by Bill Bright as a ministry for college students, Cru has since expanded its focus to include adult professionals, families, and more. The World Headquarters is located in Orlando, Florida, and the current president of the organization is Steve Douglass.
Cru is also the publisher of The Four Spiritual Laws, also known as the "Knowing God Personally" booklet. This takes non-believers through the four steps of Christianity and sums up the Gospel in just a few short pages. It provides an overview to those who do not want to feel pressured by someone lecturing them. It's also an easier read for someone who finds the Bible intimidating.
On July 19, 2011, it was announced that Campus Crusade for Christ in the United States will be changing their name to Cru in order to overcome existing barriers and perceptions inherent in the original name. This name was already in use on a number of college campuses.Press Release

Ministries

Campus Ministry

Cru has active ministries on 1,064 college and university campuses with over 50,000 students actively involved in the U.S. ministry in 2007.Campus Ministry fact sheet
While Cru continues to use one-to-one conversations about God to reach out to students, they also use mass meetings, film showings and new media, such as Google advertising with e-mail responses and social networking on Facebook.  which shows a YouTube video known as "#FallingPlates" is also used extensively. American Executive "Campus Crusade for Christ: Viral Evangelism," July 1, 2008.

The Jesus Film Project

The Jesus Film Project was founded in 1981 to translate the Hollywood film Jesus into other languages so that it could be shown by missionaries to peoples around the world in their native languages.Jesus Film Project Fact Sheet
The first translation was done for the Tagalog-speaking people of the Philippines. In 2004, the organization made the film available for viewing on its website in over 800 languages.  Audio dramatizations in a number of languages are also available.
The origins of The Jesus Film Project date back to 1945 when a young businessman named Bill Bright wanted to privately finance a film about the life of Jesus ChristCome Help Change the World, by Bill Bright, page 143 that was entertaining, biblically accurate, and which could be translated into non-English languages. Rather than making a film at that time, Bright went on to found a Christian ministry to reach college students called Campus Crusade for Christ in 1951.
In 1976, with Cru's influence spreading beyond college campuses to sports, the marketplace and other aspects of society, Bright turned his attention once again to filmmaking. Hollywood producer John Heyman approached Bright to fund a project to put the entire Bible on film. The project would eventually be scaled back to just one book of the Bible, the Gospel of Luke, and be financed primarily by Campus Crusade supporters Bunker and Caroline HuntCome Help Change the World, by Bill Bright, pages 144–145 for a sum of US$6 million.
A team of 500 scholars and leaders from secular and Christian organizations began to research historical elements for a film about Jesus. Filming took place over the course of several months throughout the Middle East.The Jesus Film Project History of the Film
Jesus was produced by John Heyman, a German-born Jew and starred British Shakespearean actor Brian Deacon as Jesus, Rivka Neumann as Mary, Yosef Shiloach as Joseph and Niko Nitai as Peter.Internet Movie Database
The Jesus Film Project has translated Jesus into 1,006 languages and shown the film in 228 nations.

Athletes in Action

Athletes in Action works with athletes and coaches who compete at both the collegiate and professional level to use the platform of sport to help people around the world with questions of faith.Athletes in Action Web site
Among the events sponsored by Athletes in Action is the NFL-sanctioned Super Bowl BreakfastSuper Bowl Breakfast Official Site which features the presentation of the Bart Starr Award "to honor the NFL player who best exemplifies outstanding character and leadership in the home, on the field and in the community."Bart Starr Award

FamilyLife

In 1976, Cru began providing pre-marriage seminars for its staff members. Following their success, married staff couples began asking for encouragement through marriage seminars. Demand for the seminars spread to community leaders and pastors so they opened the seminars to the public in 1978. Since 1976 more than 1.5 million people have attended conferences. Today, approximately 100 "Weekend to Remember" conferences are held annually in almost every major city in America. FamilyLife offers multiple resources like The Art of Marriage, Stepping Up, LifeReady Woman, HomeBuilders Couples Series, HomeBuilders Parenting Series, Resurrection Eggs, and What God Wants for Christmas.History of FamilyLife
FamilyLife president Dennis Rainey hosts the daily FamilyLife Today radio broadcast.About FamilyLife Today Broadcasts

Josh McDowell

In 1964, Josh McDowell became a traveling representative of Cru addressing campus groups about the Christian faith. Over the years his ministry has focused on Christian apologetics, youth issues such as relationships and sexuality, and international humanitarian aid.
McDowell's writings have concentrated on addressing challenges to belief, questions posed by non-Christians, doubts about faith, and non-Christian religions. Notable works include Evidence That Demands A Verdict, The Resurrection Factor, He Walked Among Us, More Than A Carpenter and The Da Vinci Code: A Quest for Answers. McDowell has arranged his arguments by pleading for a cumulative case of evidences, such as archaeological discoveries, the extant manuscripts of the biblical texts, fulfilled prophecies, and the miracle of the resurrection.

Other ministries

The Christian Embassy is a Cru ministry with offices in a number cities around the world. Its United Nations office is accredited as a Non-Governmental Organization. Another office located in Washington, D.C., is geared towards the diplomatic community, including presidential employees, members and the staff of the United States Congress, and workers in The Pentagon. Its alleged influence among the military and in national politics has attracted attention from the media.Washington Post EditorialChristian Embassy Letter to the Editor
Global Aid Network (GAiN) is the humanitarian aid arm of Cru.

Military Ministry

The Military Ministry was started by Bright in 1965 and originally led by retired Colonel Jack Fain, USAF (Ret.).militaryministry.  In July 2009 Christianity Today noted the organization's Bridges to Healing Ministry, which specifically addresses the issue of PTSD."When the War Never Ends". Christianity Today. July 2009.

Timeline

Chronology of events in Cru's history:Cru Newsroom

1950s

1960s

Cru begins new ministries to high school students, military personnel, and athletes, as well as a new prayer ministry.

1970s

1980s

1990s

2000s

2010s

Fundraising

Staff members

Cru staff members raise funds for the organization to pay their salaries and ministry expenses. All staff have the same base pay adjusted by tenure, life situation (single, married, children), and geographic cost of living.campuscrusadeforchrist.
Married staff members are considered a missionary team. In practice this means that if single staff members marry, their new spouse must join staff also if they are not on staff already, otherwise the existing staff member must resign. If a prospective member is engaged or plans to marry in the first year, their fiance must apply as well.ccci.htm CCCI.org staff qualifications
Cru does not invite single parents to join, as they feel the demands of the mission would take away from the single parent's ability to raise their child.

Around the world

In many parts of Europe, Cru is known as Agape Europeagapeeurope. In Israel Cru was known as ONE FOR ISRAEL until July 2013. The collegiate ministry is known in some parts of the world as Student Life (Poland, New Zealand, Australia and United Kingdom); Power to Change (Canada); Lembaga Pelayanan Mahasiswa Indonesia (LPMI) In Indonesia; or LIFE Ministry (southeast Africa). In English-Speaking West Africa, the organization is known as Great Commission Movement. The changing of the name of the U.S.-based ministry to Cru will not affect the names of overseas ministries.






