[[Sheltron]]

CATEGORIES: Warfare of the Middle Ages, Tactical formations, Wars of Scottish Independence

A sheltron (also sceld-trome, schiltrom or shiltron) is a compact body of troops forming a battle array, shield wall or phalanx. The term is most often associated with Scottish pike formations during the Wars of Scottish Independence in the late 13th and early 14th centuries.

Etymology

The term dates from at least 1000 AD and derives from Old English roots expressing the idea of a "shield-troop".scildtruma,sceldtroman,scheltron 
[/ref]

Examples of the formation

Circular schiltrons

There are two recorded Scottish instances of circular schiltrons: William Wallace's army at Falkirk (1298), and Thomas Randolph's forces on the first day of Bannockburn (1314).[ref]
</ref>
The circular formation is essentially static.  At Falkirk, the formation was fortified by driving stakes into the ground before the men, with ropes between.cit.,p.80  Charles Oman describes the formation thus:

Rectilinear schiltrons

There are numerous accounts of rectilinear schiltrons — they were employed at the battles of Glen Trool (1307), Bannockburn (the main battle), Myton (1319), Dupplin Muir (1332), Culblean (1335), Halidon Hill (1333), Neville's Cross (1346) and Otterburn (1388).
Unlike the circular schiltron, the rectilinear formation was capable of both defensive and offensive action.  The offensive use of the schiltron is a tactical development credited to Robert the Bruce at Bannockburn. He had drilled his troops in the offensive use of the pike (requiring great discipline) and he was able to fight the English forces on flat, firm ground suitable for their large force of cavalry. Bruce's new tactic was a response to a crushing defeat for the Scots at Falkirk when the first recorded use of the schiltron by a Scottish army failed in the face of a combination of Welsh conscripted longbowmen, English archers and English cavalry. A History of the English-Speaking Peoples, Volume 1, The Birth of Britain (New York: Bantam Books, 1974, 12h printing), p.225.
Detailed descriptions of the formation are rare but those given by English chroniclers of Bannockburn demonstrate the essential features:

English examples

The term schiltron is also used by Barbour to describe English infantry at Bannockburn.cit., p.132  It is also used by the author of the Lanercost Chronicle to describe the English spearmen at the Battle of Boroughbridge (1322).  In both cases, a rectilinear formation is being described, though that at Boroughbridge is curved, with its flanks bent back.

European parallels

While doubtless a Scottish development, the schiltron fits into a Northern European context of infantry combat.  Parallels with Scandinavian practice have already been drawn (see Etymology above) and the multiple-ranked tightly-packed infantry formations were standard across Europe during the Middle Ages.
Schiltron-like formations were also used by the Welsh troops at the battles of Orewin Bridge (1282) and Maes Moydog (1295), although this tactic was generally unsuccessful for the Welsh.cit, pp. 69–71
Perhaps the closest parallel is with the armies of medieval Flanders.  Here too can be seen the deep blocks of fighting men, with rows of spears braced in the earth to resist cavalry. The greatest of their battles was possibly Courtrai in 1302, where the Flemings destroyed a French army of knights and foot-soldiers. The Flemings also made great use of a circular "crown-shaped" formation, similar to those used at Falkirk and Bannockburn.cit, p. 184
A similar square formation ("formação em quadrado") of pike armed foot soldiers was used by the English-assisted Portuguese troops against Castillian armies in the late 14th century, namely at Aljubarrota (1385).






