[[National Alliance (United States)]]

CATEGORIES: Neo-Nazi organizations in the United States, Organizations established in 1974, Organizations disestablished in 2013, 1974 establishments in West Virginia, White supremacist groups in the United States, Far-right politics in the United States, 2013 disestablishments in West Virginia, Organizations designated as hate groups by the SPLC

The National Alliance was a white nationalist, anti-semitic political organization. It was founded by university physics professor Dr. William Luther Pierce in 1974, and was based in  Hillsboro, West Virginia. The group ceased operations, as a "membership organization," in 2013.splcenter.org/blog/2013/09/25/in-a-near-final-collapse-the-neo-nazi-national-alliance-ends-membership/

History

Pierce founded the group in 1974 about the same time as he created the pantheistic Cosmotheist Community Church.  
He was a former physics professor and the author of The Turner Diaries and Hunter, both novels about a white revolution in America, which he wrote under the pen name Andrew MacDonald. The National Alliance was reorganized from an earlier group: the National Youth Alliance (NYA) which in turn was formed out of the remains of an organization called Youth for Wallace which supported Governor George Wallace's 1968 presidential campaign. The NYA broke into factions as a result of infighting, and Pierce gained control of the largest remnant in 1970 and continued the organization under that name until its reorganization in 1974. Pierce previously had been an associate of the assassinated leader of the American Nazi Party, George Lincoln Rockwell, and had been editor of the party's magazine, National Socialist World.
Pierce died of cancer on July 23, 2002. Power struggles within the organization began almost immediately.
Billy Roper, the Deputy Membership Coordinator, was fired in September 2002.
In August 2003 another internal disruption occurred with two members of the Board of Directors, firefighter Fred Streed and former economics professor Robert DeMarais resigning.
In April 2005, prominent Alliance member Kevin Alfred Strom, then editor of National Vanguard Magazine, issued a declaration calling for Erich Gliebe to step down; In March 2007 National Vanguard dissolved.
Shortly after the attempted Strom-coup, Gliebe resigned as Chairman of the Alliance stating that he needed more time to spend with his family, having married former-stripper Erika Snyder.  Gliebe briefly appointed Shaun Walker as his successor.   However, in June 2006, Walker was arrested for conspiring to commit Civil Rights violations (in 2007 Walker was sentenced to 87 months in prison).
According to the SPLC, paid membership had declined to fewer than 800 and the paid staff was down to only 10 people as of 2006.
In January 2013 prominent Sacramento Unit Coordinator Jim Ring resigned from the organization and issued a plea for Gliebe to resign.splcenter.  According to Ring, as of 2012 the organization consisted of less than 100 members, with no paid staff members other than Gliebe.net/2013/09/06/afp-lack-of-leadership-is-blamed-for-demise-of-pro-white-group/
In 2013 it was revealed that the organization's property in Mill Point, West Virginia had been put up for sale. This development, coupled with the organization's websites being down for much of 2013 and the end of the once-weekly American Dissident Voices broadcasts, suggest that the National Alliance may have ceased operating.
The end of the National Alliance, as a "membership organization" was confirmed by Erich Gliebe in September, 2013.

Business

Before the death of Pierce, the Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) and the Federal Bureau of Investigation called the Alliance the best-financed and best-organized white nationalist organization of its kind in the United States. Membership in 2002 was estimated at 2,500 with an income of $1 million annually.
In the past, the organization ran a white power record label called Resistance Records, and its radio program, American Dissident Voices, was once heard on shortwave, AM and FM stations, and streaming audio on the Internet.  At one point in the mid-1990s there were 22 radio stations, AM and FM, which carried the program. The original host was Strom until early 1997 when Pierce took it over full-time. Upon the death of Pierce in July 2002 it again was hosted until April 16, 2005 by Strom. Walker then became the voice for American Dissident Voices until his arrest in June 2006.  At that time, Gliebe became the voice of the radio program.  The program became erratic in 2012 and ceased entirely in 2013.

Continuation under Kevin Strom

Kevin Alfred Strom announced the opening of  the new National Alliance on December 28, 2013 and is continuing broadcasts of American Dissident Voices in the original format, from a compound under construction in Tennessee with a group of original followers of William Pierce.kevinalfredstrom.com








