[[Let Go (Avril Lavigne album)]]

CATEGORIES: 2002 debut albums, Albums certified double platinum by the Associação Brasileira dos Produtores de Discos, Arista Records albums, Albums produced by The Matrix (production team), Avril Lavigne albums, English-language albums, Nettwerk Records albums, Post-grunge albums

Let Go is the debut album by Franco-Canadian singer-songwriter Avril Lavigne, released on 4 June 2002. For a year after signing a record deal with Arista, Lavigne struggled due to conflicts in musical direction. Lavigne relocated to Los Angeles, California, and recorded there her earlier materials for the album, the kind of sound to which the label was not amenable. She was paired to the production team The Matrix, who understood her vision for the album.
The album was credited as the biggest pop debut of 2002, and was 6x platinum in the United States. It was released to generally positive critical reviews, although Lavigne's songwriting received some criticism. It also did extremely well in Canada, receiving a diamond certification from the Canadian Recording Industry Association, as well as reaching multi-platinum in many countries around the world, including the UK in which she became the youngest female solo artist to have a number-one album in the region.

On 18 March 2013, Let Go was re-released as a double disc-set paired with her second studio album, Under My Skin, which is released under RCA Records.allmusic.com/album/let-go-under-my-skin-mw0002491013/releases

Background

After being signed to Arista Records in November 2000 upon the authorization of the label's CEO, Antonio "L.A." Reid, Lavigne moved to New York with the assistance of Reid. There, she began working on her debut album, Let Go, collaborating with a host of prime songwriters and producers.
Lavigne relocated to Los Angeles, where she collaborated with songwriter-producer Clif Magness, who gave her ample creative control in the writing process. Lavigne and Magness wrote "Losing Grip" and "Unwanted", songs that she deemed reflective of her vision for the entire album.
Now two years since she signed the deal, Lavigne, who was then unknown, came to the attention of the three-piece production team The Matrix. Arista could not find the right direction for Lavigne, so the team's manager, Sandy Roberton, suggested that they work together: "Why don't you put her together with The Matrix for a couple of days?"
When Josh Sarubin, the A&R executive who signed Lavigne to the imprint, heard the song, he knew it was right for her. Lavigne presented the song to Reid, who agreed the musical direction Lavigne and The Matrix were taking, and set "Complicated" as the album's lead single.

Writing and recording

With The Matrix, Lavigne recorded tracks in Decoy Studios, situated in a Los Angeles suburb known as Valley Village.
Introduced as a singer-songwriter, Lavigne's involvement produced significant issues. Lavigne has implied that she is the primary author of the album. In an article published in Rolling Stone magazine, Lavigne stated that while working with The Matrix, one member would be in the recording studio while they were writing, but did not write the guitar parts, lyrics, or the melody. According to Lavigne, she and Christy wrote all the lyrics together. Graham would come up with some guitar parts, "and I'd be like, 'Yeah, I like that,' or 'No, I don't like that.' None of those songs aren't from me."
The Matrix, who produced six songs for Lavigne, five of which appear in the album,
Although she needed pop songs "to break" into the industry, Lavigne felt "Complicated" does not reflect her and her songwriting skills. Nonetheless, she was grateful for the song as it successfully launched her career. She favors more "Losing Grip", because "it means so much more when it comes straight from the artist".

Release and promotion

The album was released on 4 June 2002, in Canada and the United States. Later, on 22 July, Let Go hit record stores worldwide, and on 26 August in some parts of Europe, including the United Kingdom and Ireland. A DataPlay version of the album was released in September 2002. Arista had established a deal with DataPlay earlier in 2002, and included Let Go alongside albums by rock singer Santana and singer Whitney Houston in the release.
Although Lavigne was targeted to the teen audience, a marketing strategy attributed to the successful launch of her career;
Lavigne filmed her performance in Buffalo, New York, on 18 May 2003, the final date of her five-week headlining North American tour. The tour DVD My World was released on 4 November 2003, on joint venture by Arista Records and 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment. The DVD features the concert, a behind-the-scenes featurette, five music videos and a six-song bonus audio CD that includes an unreleased track "Why".

Singles

Other songs

Other songs were released as regional radio-only singles. "Things I'll Never Say" was released as a radio-only single in Italy. "Unwanted" was released as a promotional single in the United Kingdom. The song "Tomorrow" was played in one episode of the second season of the Warner Bros. series Smallville, while the song "Anything But Ordinary" was played in one episode of the TV series Birds of Prey.

Reception

Critical reaction

Let Go received generally favorable reaction from critics, earning 68 points on Metacritic based on the collated reviews from 7 publications.
Some reviewers had similar sentiments toward the quality of the lyrics to some songs in the album. Saraceno said that Lavigne "still has some growing up to do lyrically", asserting "Sk8er Boi" shows her "lyrical shortcomings" and calling the phrasing in "Too Much to Ask" "awkward and sometimes silly".
The album earned Lavigne numerous awards from organizations around the world. The success of the album's commercial performance led Lavigne to be named Best New Artist at the 2002 MTV Video Music Awards

Commercial performance

Let Go was commercially successful in the United States, gaining praise from Entertainment Weekly magazine as one of the biggest pop debut albums of 2002.
Chartwise, the album reached higher peak positions notably during and after the holidays. Following her show-opening performance at the 2002 Billboard Music Awards, Let Go continued to be one of the holiday's top sellers with sales that week of 272,000.
Let Go was also selling well in Canada, surpassing sales of over one million unit sales in less than a year. The Canadian Recording Industry Association certified the album diamond in May 2003.. 'Let Go' reached its peak worldwide during Christmas holiday with almost 860,000 copies sold worldwide during Christmas week and then another 600,000 copies worldwide in first week of 2003.

Track listing

(*) Additional production
Bonus CD
Bonus DVD

Personnel

This list of credits is based on barnesandnoble.

Charts and certifications

Charts

Decade-end charts

Alltime charts

Certifications






Chart procession and succession

Awards

At the 2003 Grammy Award, received five nominations Best Pop Vocal Album for Let Go, Song of the Year & Best Female Pop Vocal Performance for "Complicated", Best Female Rock Vocal Performance for "Sk8er Boi", Best New Artist. At the 2004 Grammy Awards received three nominations Song of the Year & Best Female Pop Vocal Performance for "I'm with You", Best Female Rock Vocal Performance for "Losing Grip".

Notes






