[[Brendan Smyth]]

CATEGORIES: 1927 births, 1997 deaths, Roman Catholic priests from Northern Ireland, Roman Catholic Church sex abuse cases in Ireland, Priests convicted of child sexual abuse, Irish rapists, Irish Roman Catholic priests, Irish people convicted of child sexual abuse, Irish people who died in prison custody, Members of the clergy with criminal convictions, Deaths from myocardial infarction, 20th-century Roman Catholic priests

Brendan Smyth (8 June 1927 – 22 August 1997) was a Roman Catholic priest who became notorious as a child molester, using his position in the Roman Catholic Church to obtain access to his victims. During a period of over 40 years, Smyth sexually abused and indecently assaulted over 100

Early life and ordination

Born John Gerard Smyth,"Evil spirit of a ruined church", The Irish Times (Weekend Review), p5. 20 March 2010. in Belfast, Northern Ireland, Smyth, upon joining the Norbertine Roman Catholic religious order in 1945, changed his name to Brendan. The Norbertines, also known as the "Premonstratensians," were aware of Smyth's crimes as early as the late 1940s, yet they did not report him to either the Garda Síochána or the Royal Ulster Constabulary. Smyth was moved from parish to parish and between dioceses and countries whenever allegations were made. In some cases, the order did not inform the diocesan bishop that Smyth had a history of sexual abuse and should be kept away from children. He abused children in parishes in Rhode Island and North Dakota in the US and was suspected of similar actions while on pastoral work in Wales and Italy. Norbertine Father Bruno Mulvihill made several attempts to alert church authorities about the abuse committed by Smyth.

1994 arrest

Smyth's first conviction followed the reporting to police of his abuse of four siblings in Belfast's Falls Road. After his arrest in 1991, he fled to the Republic of Ireland, where he spent the next three years on the run, staying mostly at Kilnacrott Abbey. This led to the collapse of the Fianna Fáil–Labour Party coalition government when the poor handling of an extradition request from the RUC by the Irish Attorney General's office led to a further delay of Smyth's trial. An award-winning UTV Counterpoint programme on the scandal by journalist Chris Moore, followed by a book, accused the head of the Norbertines and the Archbishop of Armagh of mishandling the case, and the Norbertines of negligence and a failure to tell others of Smyth's crimes, enabling Smyth to sexually abuse large numbers of children for 40 years.

Death

Smyth died at 70 in prison of a heart attack in 1997 after collapsing in the exercise yard,
On 27 October 2005, one of Smyth's victims succeeded in having the title "Reverend" removed from the gravestone. "Abuse priest has 'Rev' title removed from grave". Retrieved from bishop-accountability.org

Later investigations

Reviewers of the case differ as to whether there was a deliberate plot to conceal Smyth's behaviour, incompetence by his superiors at Kilnacrott Abbey, or some combination of factors. Cahal Daly, both as Bishop of Down and Connor, a diocese where some of the abuse took place, and later as Cardinal Archbishop of Armagh, is recorded as having been privately furious at the Norbertine "incompetence".
In 2010, Daly's successor as Roman Catholic Archbishop of Armagh, Cardinal Seán Brady, faced "huge pressure to resign" after he admitted that in 1975 he witnessed two teenage boys sign oaths of silence after testifying in a Church inquiry against Smyth.  Survivors groups saw this as evidence of collusion, but Brady said he "did not have the authority" to turn Smyth in.

Dramatisation

A two-part dramatisation of the Smyth case, Brendan Smyth: Betrayal of Trust, was broadcast by the BBC on 13 March 2011 with Ian Beattie in the title role and Richard Dormer as Chris Moore. It was directed by Michael McDowell.





Further reading


