[[Computer Fraud and Abuse Act]]

CATEGORIES: 1986 in law, 98th United States Congress, Computing legislation, Hacking (computer security), Information technology audit, United States federal commerce legislation, Law articles needing an infobox, Fraud legislation, Fraud in the United States, United States federal computing legislation

The Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (CFAA)  while, in theory, limiting federal jurisdiction to cases "with a compelling federal interest-i.e., where computers of the federal government or certain financial institutions are involved or where the crime itself is interstate in nature." (see "Protected Computer", below). In addition to clarifying a number of the provisions in the original section 1030, the CFAA also criminalized additional computer-related acts. Provisions addressed the distribution of malicious code and denial of service attacks. Congress also included in the CFAA a provision criminalizing trafficking in passwords and similar items. 
The Act has been amended a number of times—in 1989, 1994, 1996, in 2001 by the USA PATRIOT Act, 2002, and in 2008 by the Identity Theft Enforcement and Restitution Act. 

Protected computers

The only computers, in theory, covered by the CFAA are defined as "protected computers". They are defined under section  to mean a computer:
In practice, any ordinary computer has come under the jurisdiction of the law, including cellphones, due to the inter-state nature of most internet communication. (See the case history, below).

Criminal offenses under the Act

(a) Whoever—

Specific sections

Notable cases and decisions referring to the Act

Sibel Edmond's Boiling Frogs podcast 61  Thursday, 13. October 2011. Interview with Prouty by Peter B. Collins and Sibel Edmonds[/ref]

Aaron's Law proposal

In the wake of the prosecution and subsequent suicide of Aaron Swartz, lawmakers have proposed to amend the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act. Representative Zoe Lofgren has drafted a bill that would help "prevent what happened to Aaron from happening to other Internet users". Aaron's Law (; S. 1196 at GovTrack; S. 1196 at OpenCongress.) would exclude terms of service violations from the 1984 Computer Fraud and Abuse Act and from the wire fraud statute, despite the fact that Swartz was not prosecuted based on Terms of Service violations.cnet.com/8301-1023_3-57564193-93/new-aarons-law-aims-to-alter-controversial-computer-fraud-law/
In addition to Lofgren, Representative Darrell Issa and Representative Jared Polis—all on the House Judiciary Committee, raised questions about the government's handling of the case. Polis called the charges "ridiculous and trumped up," while referring to Swartz as a "martyr." Issa, also chair of the House Oversight Committee, announced that he is investigating the actions of the Justice Department's prosecution.
As of May 2014, Aaron's Law was stalled in committee, reportedly due to tech company Oracle's financial interests

Amendments history

2008
• Eliminated the requirement that information must have been stolen through an interstate or foreign communication, thereby expanding jurisdiction for cases involving theft of information from computers;
• Eliminated the requirement that the defendant's action must result in a loss exceeding $5,000 and created a felony offense where the damage affects ten or more computers, closing a gap in the law;
• Expanded  to criminalize not only explicit threats to cause damage to a computer, but also threats to (1) steal data on a victim's computer, (2) publicly disclose stolen data, or (3) not repair damage the offender already caused to the computer;
• Created a criminal offense for conspiring to commit a computer hacking offense under section 1030;
• Broadened the definition of "protected computer" in  to the full extent of Congress's commerce power by including those computers used in or affecting interstate or foreign commerce or communication; and
• Provided a mechanism for civil and criminal forfeiture of property used in or derived from section 1030 violations.








