[[Motoi Sakuraba]]

CATEGORIES: 1965 births, Anime composers, Japanese film score composers, Japanese rock musicians, Living people, People from Akita Prefecture, Progressive rock musicians, Rock keyboardists, Television composers, Video game composers, Tales music, Musicians from Akita Prefecture

 is a prolific Japanese composer of video games, anime series, and television dramas as well as independent progressive rock albums.Motoi Sakuraba - Unofficial English web site

Biography

Motoi Sakuraba was born in Akita Prefecture, Japan. He is married to Yuko Sakuraba and has a daughter, Mio Sakuraba.
Sakuraba broke into the music scene as composer and keyboard player of the progressive rock band Deja-Vu, which he formed in 1985.team-e.co.html They later released an album called Baroque in the Future, in 1988. The band later disbanded, and Sakuraba went on to release a solo progressive rock album, Gikyokuonsou, in 1991.
In late 1989, Sakuraba began working as a composer for Wolf Team, joining Masaaki Uno and Yasunori Shiono. The professional friendships formed here in Sakuraba's early years have resulted in a great demand for his composing and arranging abilities.
In 1994, former Wolf Team director and composer Masaaki Uno started working at Camelot Software Planning as coordinator and sound director, developing games for Sony, Sega and Nintendo. Sakuraba was called upon as a composer for various Camelot games, including the Mario Golf, Mario Tennis, and Golden Sun series.
In 1995, Wolf Team developed the breakthrough game Tales of Phantasia for Namco. This and other games in the  Tales series primarily feature Sakuraba and fellow Wolf Team composer Shinji Tamura as composers (the main exception so far has been Tales of Legendia, composed by Go Shiina). Eventually the remnants of Wolf Team morphed into the Namco Telenet joint subsidiary Namco Tales Studio in 2003. Also in 1995, former Wolf Team director and producer Jun Asanuma, as well as Tales of Phantasia writer and programmer Yoshiharu Gotanda, founded tri-Ace with financial backing from Enix. The Star Ocean and Valkyrie Profile games have been their keystone productions. Again, Sakuraba has been the composer for all their games, with the exception of the Noriyuki Iwadare-scored Radiata Stories (which included arrangements of a few choice Sakuraba tracks).
In 1999, long-time Sakuraba sound designer and programmer Hiroya Hatsushiba, a former member of Wolf Team and tri-Ace, founded tri-Crescendo. While initially continuing to contribute sound work to tri-Ace games, tri-Crescendo began game development in 2001. Together with Monolith Soft, tri-Crescendo started working on Baten Kaitos; Namco provided the financial backing. Hatsushiba, as director and main programmer of the project, again called upon Sakuraba's composing services. This has extended to the sequel (Baten Kaitos Origins) and Eternal Sonata.
In 2007, Sakuraba was selected to join a long list of video-game composers to contribute music to Super Smash Bros. Brawl. He was selected to arrange the famous "Menu Theme" from the game's predecessor, Super Smash Bros. Melee. He also arranged "Gourmet Race" from Kirby Super Star, "Jungle Level Ver.2" from Donkey Kong Country, "Mario Tennis / Mario Golf" from Mario Tennis / Mario Golf, "Victory Road" from Pokémon Ruby / Pokémon Sapphire, "Airship Theme" from Super Mario Bros. 3, the "Battlefield Theme" and "Final Destination". In addition, the track "Battle Scene / Final Boss (Golden Sun)" was based on his music from Golden Sun: The Lost Age.
In more recent years, Sakuraba has continued to write music for games in franchises he has worked on in the past, such as Star Ocean: The Last Hope, Golden Sun: Dark Dawn, Mario Tennis Open, and many Tales of games including Hearts, Graces, Xillia, Xillia 2, and Zestiria. He has also contributed to other well known games such as Dark Souls, Dark Souls II, Kid Icarus: Uprising, and the Valhalla Knights series (Valhalla Knights 2, Eldar Saga, and Valhalla Knights 3).
In addition to all this, Sakuraba has also put out several progressive rock solo albums, while also being regularly contracted for projects in other media through his own TEAM Entertainment, a company founded in 1999.

Live performances

During July 2003, Sakuraba held a live concert in Tokyo, Japan. He performed progressive rock interpretations of music from the PlayStation games Star Ocean: The Second Story and Valkyrie Profile. His bandmates for this concert were bassist Atsushi Hasegawa (a member of the band Gerard) and drummer Toshihiko Nakamura. As noted, this concert was released on DVD and CD; many Sakuraba fans worldwide were delighted by the news that the DVD was region-free.
At the same time as they were rehearsing for the concert, Hasegawa and Nakamura assisted in recording new material for the Director's Cut of Star Ocean: Till the End of Time.
The following year, the trio performed another concert. The venue was smaller, but included music from Baten Kaitos and a couple of new, non-game-related pieces. This concert was not officially recorded and released, however.
However, in 2006, a new concert was given in celebration of tri-Ace's new Valkyrie Profile: Silmeria title. This concert has been released on CD.
On September 17 and September 18, 2011 at Club Citta in Kawasaki, Kanagawa, Sakuraba and his band joined up with the Earthbound Papas, led by famous video game composer Nobuo Uematsu, to perform at Fantasy Rock Fest 2011. This event featured video game music performance along with new progressive rock pieces from both composers. The first six tracks that Sakuraba and his band played are confirmed to be new pieces and were sold at the event as a preview CD for his then upcoming solo album After all... which was officially released by Strange Days Records on October 19, 2011. It is unknown, however, whether or not there is a recording of these performances.

Musical style

Motoi Sakuraba takes the baroque and melodic Japanese progressive rock of the 1980s and expands it with his own trademark complex rhythms, emotional flutes, use of male choir, and heavy reverb. The lighter side of his style is a crossover between symphonic progressive rock, cinematic orchestra and new age. Sakuraba is also known for introducing many jazz-like improvisations to his music style. In recent years he has made a serious effort toward expanding his style even further.squareenixmusic.shtml

Discography






