[[Heidi Klum]]

CATEGORIES: 1973 births, Living people, 21st-century American actresses, Actresses from Los Angeles, California, American businesspeople in retailing, American cosmetics businesspeople, American fashion businesspeople, American fashion designers, American female singers, American film actresses, American philanthropists, American television actresses, American television talk show hosts, American women in business, Businesspeople from Los Angeles, California, German emigrants to the United States, German fashion businesspeople, German fashion designers, German female models, German female singers, German film actresses, German philanthropists, German television actresses, German television talk show hosts, German television producers, German women in business, Musicians from Los Angeles, California, Participants in American reality television series, People from Bergisch Gladbach, Primetime Emmy Award winners, Project Runway judges, Television producers from California

Heidi Klum (
Klum became internationally known for her appearances on the cover of the Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue. In 1997 she became the first German model to become a Victoria's Secret Angel. Following a successful modeling career, Klum became the host and a judge of the reality show Project Runway which earned her an Emmy nomination in 2008 and a win in 2013 for Outstanding Host for a Reality or Reality-Competition Program (shared with co-host Tim Gunn). She has worked as a spokesmodel for Dannon and H & M, and has appeared in numerous commercials for McDonald's, Volkswagen and others. In 2009, Klum became Barbie's official ambassador on Barbie's 50th anniversary. As an occasional actress, she had supporting roles in movies including Blow Dry (2001), Ella Enchanted (2004), and made cameo appearances on The Devil Wears Prada (2006) and Perfect Stranger (2007). She has also appeared on TV shows including Sex and the City, How I Met Your Mother, and "Parks and Recreation". Currently, Klum is a judge on the NBC reality show America's Got Talent.
In May 2011, Forbes magazine estimated Klum's total earnings for that year as $20 million. She is ranked second on Forbes list of the "World's Top-Earning Models", behind Gisele Bündchen. Forbes noted that since ending her 13-year run as a Victoria's Secret Angel, Klum has become more of a businesswoman than a model. She was married to English R&B singer Seal from 2005 until 2012.

Early life and discovery

Klum was born and raised in Bergisch Gladbach, a town outside Cologne. She is the daughter of Erna and Günther Klum. After winning, she appeared on the Gottschalk Late Night Show, a top German television show with host Thomas Gottschalk. She accepted the contract a few months later after graduating from school and decided not to try for an apprentice position at a fashion design school.

Career

Acting and modeling

Klum has been featured on the covers of Vogue, Elle, and Marie Claire, and became widely known after appearing on the cover of the Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue and for her work with Victoria's Secret as an "Angel". Klum has hosted the 2002, 2006, 2007, and 2009 Victoria's Secret Fashion Shows. On October 1, 2010, the New York Post reported in its "Page Six" gossip column that Klum would be leaving Victoria's Secret, which was later confirmed by Klum."Heidi Klum quitting Victoria's Secret" NYPost. (2010)
In addition to working with well-known photographers on her first husband's Sports Illustrated shoots, she was the object and subject of Joanne Gair body painting works in several editions from 1997 to 2010. She wrote the foreword to Gair's book of body paint work, Body Painting, Masterpieces. She was a spokesmodel for McDonald's, Braun, Dannon, H & M, and Liz Claiborne, among others. She is currently and Volkswagen. In addition to modeling, she has appeared in several TV shows, including Spin City, Sex and the City, Yes, Dear, and How I Met Your Mother. She had a role as an ill-tempered hair model in the movie Blow Dry, played a giantess in the movie Ella Enchanted and was cast as Ursula Andress in The Life and Death of Peter Sellers. She had cameo appearances in The Devil Wears Prada and Perfect Stranger.
Her other projects include dance and video games. She is featured in the 2006 James Bond video game Everything or Nothing, wherein she plays the villain Dr. Katya Nadanova.
In July 2007, having earned $8 million in the previous 16 months, Klum was named by Forbes as third on the list of the World's 15 Top-Earning Supermodels.
In 2008, Klum was a featured guest on an American Volkswagen commercial, where she was interviewed by a black Beetle. When she commented that German engineering is so sexy, she caused the Beetle to blush and turn red. She has been a part of several commercials for Volkswagen and McDonald's on German television. 
In November 2008, Klum appeared in two versions of a Guitar Hero World Tour commercial, wherein she did a take on Tom Cruise's iconic underwear dancing scene in Risky Business. In both versions, she lip-synced to Bob Seger's "Old Time Rock and Roll" while dancing around the living room with the wireless guitar controller."VIDEO: Heidi Klum's risqué business as she spoofs Tom Cruise's famous air guitar scene". Daily Mail. November 5, 2008
In October 2009, Klum was the often-nude one-woman subject of Heidilicious, In 2010, Klum became the new face and creative advisor for European cosmetics brand Astor, for which she sets artistic direction and designs new products and fashion forward color collections."Heidi Klum represents Astor for Coty" September 10, 2010, Fashion Mag. She provided a simple explanation in her official statement, stating: "All good things have to come to an end. I will always love Victoria and never tell her secret. It's been an absolute amazing time!""Heidi Klum Is Retiring From Victoria's Secret At 37! Do You Think She Should Stay?" September 30, 2010, Hollywood Life
It was reported in May 2011 that Klum trails far behind Gisele Bündchen at No. 2 with estimated earnings of $20 million on Forbes' list of the World's Top-Earning Models (2010-2011). Forbes noted that since ending her 13-year run as a Victoria's Secret Angel, Klum has become more of a businesswoman than a model. She's partnered with New Balance and Amazon.

Producing

In December 2004, Klum became the host, judge and executive producer of the reality show Project Runway on the U.S. cable television channel Bravo (airing on Lifetime television beginning in 2009), in which fashion designers compete for the opportunity to show their line at New York Fashion Week and receive money to launch their own fashion line. She received an Emmy Award nomination for the show for each of the first four seasons. Klum was nominated for an Emmy in 2008 for "outstanding host of a reality or reality-competition show" for Project Runway, the first year that category was recognized by the Emmys.
Klum has been the host, judge and co-producer of Germany's Next Topmodel, the German version of the internationally successful reality television show, since 2006. All nine seasons aired on the German TV station ProSieben.

Design and other business ventures

Klum designed clothing lines (one for men), featured in the German mail-order catalog "Otto". She designed shoes for Birkenstock,
Klum has two fragrances, called "Heidi Klum" and "Me". She designed makeup for Victoria's Secret as part of their "Very Sexy Makeup Collection", titled "The Heidi Klum Collection". The first run debuted in Fall 2007. A second run was released in Fall 2008.
Klum was involved in the development of a namesake rose, the Heidi Klum rose, which is available in Germany.
For the 2008 US Open, Klum designed a screen print t-shirt which was sold at the US Open shop. It featured childlike butterfly pictures. Proceeds will go to a non-profit organization maintaining the park, which is home to the US Open. 
Heidi became Barbie's official ambassador for the doll's 50th anniversary in 2009, even having made a Barbie doll out of herself.
Klum and husband Seal announced in June 2010 that they will be making a reality series on Lifetime titled Love's Divine (after Seal's song of the same name.)
In January 2010, Klum launched two lines of maternity wear: Lavish by Heidi Klum for A Pea in the Pod, and Loved by Heidi Klum for Motherhood Maternity. Klum stated, "I experienced fashion challenges during my four pregnancies and combined my knowledge of what works in terms of style, comfort and practicality to create these lines"."Heidi Klum Launching Two Maternity Lines!" January 06, 2010, People
In October 2010, Klum with New Balance, HKNB, launched a line of active woman's wear fashion clothing on Amazon. 
Klum is a "Real Celebrity" on the website Stardoll, where she has a line of virtual jewelry, and a virtual clothing line called Jordache. Users can go to Klum's suite (address) and interact with her by doing interviews, sending pending requests or dressing Klum's doll.

Other work

Klum is an artist, and had several of her paintings appear in various art magazines in the U.S. On September 27, 2002 she dedicated a sculpture she painted called "Dog with Butterflies" to commemorate the role of rescue dogs in the aftermath of September 11.
In November 2006, Klum released her debut single "Wonderland", written for a series of television advertisements for the German retailer "Douglas".

Personal life

In 1997, Klum married stylist Ric Pipino. The couple divorced in 2002.
In early 2004, while still pregnant with Leni, Klum began a relationship with musician Seal. She filed for divorce from Seal three months later on April 6, 2012. She also requested that her name be restored to her birth name of Heidi Klum."Heidi Klum Files For Divorce" April 6, 2012, TMZ.com
Klum was in a relationship with her bodyguard Martin Kristen from September 2012 until early 2014. 
Since February 2014, Klum has been dating Vito Schnabel.

Philanthropy

On April 30, 2011, Klum led Walk for Kids, a community 5k to raise funds as part of Children's Hospital Los Angeles community awareness efforts.

Filmography





Notes




