[[Kathy Ireland]]

CATEGORIES: 1963 births, Living people, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, Actresses from Glendale, California, Actresses from Santa Barbara, California, American businesspeople in retailing, American children's writers, American evangelicals, American female models, American film actresses, American non-fiction writers, American pro-life activists, American television actresses, American voice actresses, Dancing with the Stars (U.S. TV series) participants, Models from California, Participants in American reality television series, Writers from Glendale, California, Writers from Santa Barbara, California

Kathleen Marie "Kathy" Ireland (born March 20, 1963) is an American model, actress, and entrepreneur.

Early life

Kathy Ireland was born in 1963 in Glendale, California, the daughter of John Ireland, a labor union organizer, and Barbara Ireland, who worked in charity.

Modeling

At age 16, Ireland was discovered by an agent for the Elite Model Management company. She appeared on covers for Vogue and Cosmopolitan.

Starting in 1984, Ireland was featured in the annual Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue for 13 consecutive years, with her final appearance in 1996. She returned to the cover in 1992 and in 1994. In her third appearance, she was accompanied by Rachel Hunter and Elle Macpherson, who were both pregnant at the time.
During SI Swimsuit's 50th Anniversary event, Ireland's 1989 cover was awarded "The Greatest Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Cover Of All Time." 

Business ventures

Kathy Ireland Worldwide

In 1993, Ireland put her name on a line of socks for Kmart, which became a bestseller. The retailer subsequently gave Ireland her own clothing line.
In 2004, Ireland's annual take is thought to be around $10 million. Forbes described Ireland as a "prototype for model-turned-mogul" in a 2006 article about the trend of modelpreneurs. Between 2005-2012, Ireland's company grew to about $2 billion in annual sales and became a leader in its industry.
"Supermodel meets supermogul as Warren Buffet teams up with former swimsuit model Kathy Ireland, now a CEO and worth $2 billion", "Daily Mail", May 4, 2013

Other ventures

Ireland is chief designer for Royal Footwear & Accessories (The RFA Group)."Gorham Catches a Wave with New Kathy Ireland Collection", "HFN Magazine", October 10, 2012. Ireland is the Group Brand Ambassador for BrandSource.
Ireland designs wedding dresses and gowns. Her company provides rental sites for weddings. She also designed a collection of jewelry inspired by  Elizabeth Taylor.

Other activities

Public speaking

Ireland has delivered keynote speeches at corporate events, industry conventions, and pro-life events.
Ireland gave a keynote at the Googleplex, the corporate headquarters for Google on July 12, 2012. She delivered the keynote at Licensing Expo 2012 in Las Vegas."kathy ireland Worldwide Delivers Keynote at Licensing Expo 2012" "ybltv.com", June 13, 2012

Books

Ireland has written six books, including three for children. Her debut effort (with Laura Morton), Powerful Inspirations: Eight Lessons that Will Change Your Life, was published in 2002.amazon. Her children's books, Mona's Favorite Words, What Do Mommies Do? and An Angel Called Hope, were released in November 2005.amazon.com/gp/product/B000BUTA5U Amazon page for Story Reader 3-Pack

Acting

Ireland has appeared in a number of television and movie roles. Her first movie, 1988's Alien from L.A., was later skewered during the fifth season of Mystery Science Theater 3000. Ireland's other appearances include Melrose Place, Boy Meets World, The Larry Sanders Show, Muppets Tonight, Side Out, Mr. Destiny, Necessary Roughness, Mom and Dad Save the World, National Lampoon's Loaded Weapon 1, Once Upon A Christmas, and its sequel Twice Upon A Christmas. She also appeared in the ninth season of Dancing with the Stars, where her couple was the third eliminated in the second week of competition.

Philanthropy

Ireland's sister, Cynthia, has a child with Down syndrome. Ireland wrote an article about her niece and the need for an increase in research.
Ireland was presented with an honorary Doctorate of Humane Letters in 2012 by the California State University System, which said she "generously uses her power and influence to benefit others, supporting social causes including empowering women, supporting young girls through mentoring, and providing opportunities for girls and women at risk." 
Ireland has lent her estates to charitable organizations such as Toys For Tots to generate funds for charity.
She received the WithIt 2013 Legacy Award on January 27, 2013 at World Market Center - Las Vegas."Kathy Ireland to Receive WithIt 2013 Legacy Award" residentiallighting.com
Ireland and NFL wide receiver Tim Brown are ambassadors for 9-1-1 For Kids, a non-profit organization that specializes in making educational materials to assist emergency dispatchers in teaching children the proper use of 9-1-1 and other general emergency preparedness tips.Ryan Dedmon, Anaheim PD Communications, Dispatchers and Children Honored as 9-1-1 Heroes at Celebrity Golf Tournament, 9-1-1 Magazine, May 29, 2013
Ireland received the YWCA of Greater Los Angeles Phenomenal Woman of the Year award. On November 8, 2013, Ireland presented Los Angeles District Attorney Jackie Lacey with the YWCA of Greater Los Angeles' Silver Achievement Award to honor Lacey's work with abused and abandoned children. The award was presented at the 2013 Rhapsody Ball, held at the Beverly Hills Hotel.

Israel

Ireland has been outspoken in her support for Israel. On October 15, 2009, she became an international ambassador for the Friends of Sheba Medical Center, traveling back to the country in 2010 to film a documentary entitled Holy Land Heroes highlighting its work for wounded soldiers and terror victims.
On June 23, 2011, Ireland was honored by the Anti-Defamation League with the American Heritage Award presented by the National Home Furnishings Industry.
She received the Messenger of Peace Award at the Jewish National Fund Tree of Life Gala in 2012.

Personal life

Ireland is a Christian. She is a pro-life advocate.
Ireland appeared on Larry King Live in 2009 to discuss her weight gain and women's health. She had gained a pound a year for 25 years and the cumulative effect had become obvious to her in a candid photograph her son had taken.
Ireland received an honorary master's of fine arts degree from the for-profit American Intercontinental University's School of Design.

Friendship with Elizabeth Taylor

Elizabeth Taylor and Ireland had a close friendship and attended public events together. After Ireland received outspoken criticism for her uneven performance as an on-air host of ABC's 2010 pre-Oscar special, Taylor publicly defended Ireland; "I have never seen anyone epitomize glamour and grace and professionalism like she did." "Elizabeth Taylor 'Boiling' Over Criticism Of Kathy Ireland At Oscars", "Access Hollywood", 03/11/2010"Elizabeth Taylor and Kathy Ireland", "Zimbio", September 26, 2008
Ireland publicly credits Taylor as her mentor and for part of her success in life, business, design and philanthropy."Kathy Ireland on Her Mentor Elizabeth Taylor", "ET Online", March 26, 2013 Taylor bequeathed her Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Oscar to Ireland.

Filmography






