[[Caracal]]

CATEGORIES: Felines, Fauna of Iran, Mammals of Africa, Mammals of Southwest Asia, Mammals of India, Mammals of Israel, Mammals of Pakistan, Monotypic mammal genera, Carnivorans of Africa, Animals described in 1843

The caracal 
German naturalist Johann Christian Daniel von Schreber first described Felis caracal in 1776 from a specimen collected from Table Mountain, South Africa, which is considered the type locality of the species. The generic name Caracal was first used by the British naturalist John Edward Gray in 1843 on the basis of a type specimen collected near the Cape of Good Hope. I. (1939). The Fauna of British India, including Ceylon and Burma. Mammalia. – Volume 1. Taylor and Francis Ltd., London. Pages 306–310Gray, J. E. (1843). List of the specimens of Mammalia in the collection of the British Museum. The Trustees of the British Museum, London.
The caracal has been classified variously with Lynx and Felis in the past, but molecular evidence supports a monophyletic genus closely allied with the African golden cat and serval.

Characteristics

The caracal is distinguished from Felis by the presence of a long tuft on the tip of the ears, exceeding half their length. No trace of pattern remains in the coat, except a few spots on the underside and inside of the fore legs.
It is a slender, long-legged cat of medium size with a relatively short tail. The fur on the back and sides is generally of a uniform tawny grey or reddish, frosted-sand colour. The belly and the undersides of the legs and chest are whitish and spotted or blotched with pale markings. The tufted ears are black-backed. Black caracals also occur. The skull is high and rounded. The jaw is short, stoutly built, and equipped with large powerful teeth. About 92% of caracals lack the second upper premolar teeth. Males reach a head and body length of 
Facial markings comprise a dark line running down the center of the forehead to near the nose, and another one running from the inner edge of the eye to the nostrils. The pupils of the eyes contract to form circles. A light-colored ring encircles the eyes, and a rather indistinct dark brown patch occurs over each eye. White patches occur on either side of the nose. The inner surface of the pinna is covered with small white hairs. Numerous stiff hairs emerge from between the pads and probably are an adaption for moving through soft sand. G., Sludskii, A. A. (1972). Mlekopitaiuščie Sovetskogo Soiuza. Vysšaia Škola, Moskva. (In Russian; English translation: Heptner, V.G., Sludskii, A.A., Komarov, A., Komorov, N.; Hoffmann, R.S. (1992). Mammals of the Soviet Union. Vol III: Carnivores (Feloidea). Smithsonian Institute and the National Science Foundation, Washington DC).

Distribution and habitat

Caracals are common in parts of their sub-Saharan African range, especially in South Africa and southern Namibia, where they expand into new, and recolonize vacant, areas. They occur at much lower densities in Central and West Africa, where the carnivore community is more diverse. They occupy a wide variety of habitats from semidesert to relatively open savanna and scrubland to moist woodland and thicket or evergreen and montane forest such as in the Western Cape of South Africa. They prefer drier woodland and savanna regions with lower rainfall and some cover.
They also occur in the Saharan mountain ranges and semiarid woodlands. and Jackson, P. (1996). Caracal Caracal caracal. in: Wild Cats. Status Survey and Conservation Action Plan. IUCN/SSC Cat Specialist Group, Gland, Switzerland and Cambridge, UK.
On the Arabian Peninsula, caracals occur throughout the mountain ranges and hilly steppe regions, but probably do not penetrate far into the great sand deserts of the interior. L., Bates, P. J. J. (1991). The Mammals of Arabia. Second edition. Harrison Zoological Museum, Sevenoaks, England. 354 pp.
The Caspian Sea, Ustyurt, and the Aral Sea constitute the northern distribution limit of caracals, which barely extends east of the Amu Darya. In Turkmenia, caracals were known from the coastal plains at the mouth of the Atrek River to the foothills of the Kopet-Dag, along the Tedzhen River, in the deserts along the Murghab River and east of the Kushka River. Their range extends southeastwards through Iran, Baluchistan, Punjab, and central India to Uttar Pradesh.

Distribution of subspecies

Subsequent to Schreber's first description of a caracal from South Africa, several subspecies were described, of which these are recognized today:
Russian zoologist Heptner described C. c. michaëlis in 1945 from the western Karakum.

Ecology and behaviour

Adult caracals are solitary, but have also been observed in pairs. They produce the usual range of sounds for cats, including growling, hissing, purring, and calling. Unusually, they also make a barking sound, which is possibly used as a warning. They scent mark their territory, leave faeces in visible locations, and mark territory by spraying urine onto bushes or logs, or raking it into the ground with their hind feet.
Their home ranges are large in arid areas. Three males averaged 
Caracals can survive without drinking for a long period—their water demand is satisfied with the body fluids of prey. They are known for their ability to capture birds by leaping , including hyraxes, springhares, gerbils, mice, and birds. They are capable of taking antelopes, including species such as mountain reedbuck, springbok, common duiker, and steenbok. Occasionally, they tackle adult goitered gazelle.

Reproduction and lifecycle

Mating occurs year round.
In the Sahara, breeding is reported to occur primarily in midwinter. (1993). La Vie Sauvage au Sahara. in the Sahara. Delachaux et Niestlé, Lausanne (Switzerland) and Paris (in French).
Estrus lasts 5–6 days. Females copulate with several males in a "pecking order" which is related to the age and size of the male. One female was found to have mated with three different males during every estrus period, each time the same individuals in the same sequence. In some areas, males have been observed to fight aggressively for access to females and to remain with one for several days to guard against rivals; in others, they appear to be less protective. Copulation can last from 90 seconds to 10 minutes.
Gestation lasts from 69 to 81 days, and litter size ranges from one to six kittens. Females use caves, tree cavities, or burrows as shelter when giving birth. Newborn kittens weigh , and open their eyes between four and ten days of age. Kittens venture outside the birthing den at around one month of age. Their deciduous teeth are fully developed at the age of 50 days. They are weaned at about 10 weeks. At around four or five months, the canine teeth appear, with the others following over the next six months. The young stay with their mother for up to one year, when they start to reach sexual maturity. In captivity, they have lived to be 16 years old.
In 1998, a caracal was hybridised with a domestic cat at the Moscow Zoo.

Threats

Habitat destruction due to agriculture and desertification is a significant threat in central, west, north, and northeast Africa where caracals are naturally sparsely distributed. It is also likely to be the main threat in the Asian part of its range. As caracals are capable of taking small domestic livestock, they are often subject to persecution. Severity of depredation appears to be dependent on the availability of wild prey and husbandry techniques.
In Iran, the killing of small livestock has brought the caracal into serious conflict with local people, who sometimes make efforts to eradicate it. The cat has never been recorded to be killed in road incidents, and no severe poaching pressure on it appears to happen.

Conservation

Populations in Asian range states are included in CITES Appendix I; populations in African range states are included in Appendix II. Hunting of the species is prohibited in Afghanistan, Algeria, Egypt, India, Iran, Israel, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Morocco, Pakistan, Syria, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan. In sub-Saharan Africa, the caracal is protected from hunting in about half of its range states. In Namibia and South Africa, the caracal is classified as a "problem animal", which permits landowners to kill the species without restriction; nonetheless, caracal have persisted and remain widespread.

In captivity

As of November 2009, 18 caracals were kept in 12 AZA-accredited institutions participating in the Population Management Plan. (ed.) (2009). "Caracal PMP". 5.

Etymology

The word caracal is derived from the Turkish words kara kulak, which means "black ear". kara kulak Zargan Turkish-English Dictionary  In Persian, the caracal is known as  
It is also called African lynx, Asian lynx and desert lynx, though it is not a member of the genus Lynx.
The local Toubou name is ngam ouidenanga, meaning gazelle cat.
In Afrikaans, it is called Rooikat, which means red cat.

In culture

Caracals appear to have held some religious significance for the ancient Egyptians. They were found in wall paintings, their bodies embalmed, and sculptures of caracals and other cats guarded tombs.
Historically, caracals have been used in India for hunting and blood sports. A popular sport in India was to have a captive caracal set upon a flock of pigeons, whereupon bets were made on how many birds could be taken down by the cat. A practised caracal could ground as many as a dozen birds. Today, as well as in the past, caracals have occasionally been kept as exotic pets in Africa, India, North America, and elsewhere.
The Caracal Battalion is a unique combat unit in the Israel Defense Forces. About two third of the battalion soldiers are women and their main role is to prevent infiltration on the south borders of Israel.






