[[Jonathan Frid]]

CATEGORIES: 1924 births, 2012 deaths, 20th-century Canadian male actors, 21st-century Canadian male actors, Male actors from New York City, Male actors from Ontario, Alumni of the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, Broadway theatre people, Canadian male film actors, Canadian male soap opera actors, Canadian male stage actors, Deaths from pneumonia, Infectious disease deaths in Ontario, McMaster University alumni, People from Hamilton, Ontario, Yale School of Drama alumni

John Herbert "Jonathan" Frid (December 2, 1924 – April 14, 2012) was a Canadian theater, television, and film actor, known for having played the role of vampire Barnabas Collins on the gothic television soap opera Dark Shadows.

Biography

Early life and career

Frid was born of Scottish, He moved to the United States in 1954, and received a Master of Fine Arts degree in Directing from the Yale School of Drama in 1957.
As a student at Yale in 1956, Frid starred in the premiere of William Snyder's play A True And Special Friend.
He began using the stage name Jonathan Frid in 1962, and made his  Broadway debut as an understudy in the 1964 play Roar Like a Dove.Roar Like a Dove at the Internet Broadway Database

Television

Early television roles on the Canadian Broadcasting Company included parts in Julius Caesar, and The Picture of Dorian Gray.
Frid is widely known for the role of vampire Barnabas Collins on the original gothic cult television serial Dark Shadows, which ran from 1966 to 1971.  He also starred as Barnabas Collins in the 1970 movie House of Dark Shadows. In 1967, Frid had made plans to move to the U.S. West Coast to pursue a career as an acting teacher when he won the role that ultimately made him a household name. As Frid explained on his Web site, he had barely entered his apartment as the phone call from his agent came informing him that he had won the role of Barnabas Collins. He agreed to accept it after being told it was a short-term one that would provide him with extra cash while he prepared to move. As the character's popularity soared, Frid scrapped those plans."Biography" (2002). Jonathan Frid (official site). Archived from the original on July 20, 2011.
After Dark Shadows ended in 1971, he returned to performing in live theater full-time with starring roles in the Broadway plays Murder in the Cathedral as Thomas Becket and Wait Until Dark as Harry Roat. Frid had previously played the role of a psychiatrist on the CBS Television soap opera As the World Turns.
In 1973, Frid appeared in the TV movie The Devil's Daughter starring Shelley Winters, and the following year starred in Oliver Stone's directorial debut, Seizure (aka Queen of Evil). In 1978, he returned to Canada, where he would perform onstage in Toronto.
Frid began performing readings at Dark Shadows fan conventions in the 1980s, and while developing ideas for his one-man shows. Frid succeeded Abe Vigoda in the role of Jonathan Brewster in the 1986–1987 Broadway revival of Arsenic and Old Lace.Arsenic and Old Lace (1986–1987] at the Internet Broadway Database and its "Replacement and/or Transfer Information"
In 1994, Frid retired and returned to Canada. He continued to perform one-man shows for charities in both Canada and the United States. In 2000, he starred in the play Mass Appeal which enjoyed a successful, limited run in Hamilton and at the Stirling Festival Theatre in Stirling, Ontario.
Frid attended Dark Shadows conventions in New York in August 2007, Burbank, California, in July 2008, and Elizabeth, New Jersey, in August 2009. In 2010, he returned to the role of Barnabas for the first time in 39 years in a Dark Shadows audio drama, The Night Whispers. which became his final film appearance.

Death

Frid died at Juravinski Hospital in Hamilton, Ontario, of pneumonia and complications after a fall. Frid's nephew, David Howitt, subsequently confirmed that Frid in fact died in the early hours of April 14, 2012.  Howitt added that while Friday the 13th "makes for good press... it's good to get it right."





Further reading


