[[Subhash Kak]]

CATEGORIES: 1947 births, 20th-century philosophers, 21st-century philosophers, Indian computer scientists, Indian emigrants to the United States, Theoretical computer scientists, American computer scientists, Contemporary Indian philosophers, Indian poets, Living people, American people of Indian descent, Kashmiri people, Louisiana State University faculty, Academics of Imperial College London, American Hindus, Modern cryptographers, Mystics, Indian mathematicians, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi alumni, Oklahoma State University faculty, People from Srinagar

Subhash Kak (; Subhāṣ Kāk) (born March 26, 1947 in Srinagar, Kashmir) is an Indian American computer scientist. He is Regents Professor and a previous Head of Computer Science Department at Oklahoma State University in Stillwater who has made contributions to  cryptography, neural networks, and quantum information. He is also notable for his  Indological publications on history, the philosophy of science, ancient astronomy, and the history of mathematics.
Subhash Kak completed his BE from NIT Srinagar and Ph.D. at the Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi in 1970. He taught there. During 1975-1976, he was a visiting faculty at Imperial College, London, and a guest researcher at Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill. In 1977, he was a visiting researcher at Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Bombay.cs.edu/~subhashk/bio. and Elaine T. Delaune Distinguished Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering. In 2007, he joined the Computer Science department at Oklahoma State University.Departmental directory, OSU
His research in the fields of cryptography, random sequences, artificial intelligence, and information theory have been published in peer-reviewed journals. He proposed a test of algorithmic randomnessTerry Ritter, Randomness tests and a type of instantaneously trained neural networks (INNs) (which he and his students have called "CC4 network" and others have called "Kak neural networks"). He claims to be amongst the first to apply information metrics to quantum systems.S. Kak, "On quantum numbers and uncertainty," Nuovo Cimento, 34B, 530-534, 1976. He was featured as one of the pioneers of quantum learning in the journal Neuroquantology edited by Cheryl Fricasso and Stanley Krippner.neuroquantology.php/journal/article/view/446
Kak has argued that there are limits to the intelligence machines can have and it cannot equal biological intelligence.S. Kak, Active agents, intelligence and quantum computing. Information Sciences, vol. 128, 1-17, 2000. He asserts that:
Kak has proposed the use of recurring decimals for error correction coding, cryptography and as random sequences.S. Kak, Encryption and error-correction coding using D sequences. IEEE Transactions on Computers, C-34: 803-809, 1985. Watermarking using decimal sequencesDecimal sequence based random number generator

Kak neural network

The Kak neural network, also called the CC4 networkA. Shortt et al, Optical implementation of the Kak neural network. Information Sciences, vol. 171, 2005, pp. 273-287  The training algorithm for binary data creates links to the new hidden node that simply reflects the binary values in the training vector. Hence, no computation is involved. Kak, New algorithms for training feedforward neural networks. Pattern Recognition Letters 15, 1994, pp. 295-298;  S. Kak, On generalization by neural networks. Information Sciences 111, 1998, pp. 293-302.


Kak's three-stage protocol

Kak's three-stage protocol is a protocol for quantum cryptography suggested by Kak.S. Kak, "A Three-Stage Quantum Cryptography Protocol," Foundations of Physics Letters 19 (2006), 293-296. Trusted certificates in quantum cryptography Implementing the three stage protocol Classical authentication aided three stage protocol This protocol was recently implemented in free space using optics.Multi-Photon Approach in Quantum Cryptography Implemented

Indological publications

Kak's writings concerning the astronomy of the Vedic period in his book The Astronomical Code of the Rigveda (1994) back "Indigenous Aryans" ideology, questioning conventional views on the Indo-Aryan migration and the nature of early Indian science. His chronology and astronomical calculations have been opposed by several Indologists (such as Michael Witzel) and Western historians,.linguistlist. CSC, New Delhi, 2000. and the West. Wolpert (ed.), "Encyclopedia of India." Scribner's, 2005.

The Astronomical Code of the Rigveda and Archaeoastronomy

The Astronomical Code of the Rigveda (New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan, 1994; revised and enlarged edition, New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 2000) claims regularities in the organization of the Rigveda, connecting the structure to certain numbers in the astronomy-based ritual of the five-layered brick altars of the Vedic times.
Kak's archaeoastronomical claims have the effect of significantly extending the Vedic period, postulating the arrival of ethnic Indo-Aryans to the 7th millennium BC. This claim is in contradiction with mainstream Indology and historical linguistics and science historians
Kak arranges the number of hymns in each book of the Rigveda as follows, and compares the arrangement to a Vedic fire altar:
