[[Idée fixe (psychology)]]

CATEGORIES: Stereotypes, French language, Literary terms, Paranoia, Personality disorders, Delusional disorder, Obsessive–compulsive disorder, Psychosis, Social psychology

An idée fixe is a preoccupation of mind held so firmly as to resist any attempt to modify it, a fixation. The name originates from the French : idée, idea + fixe, fixed. Although not used technically to denote a particular disorder in psychology, idée fixe is used often in the description of disorders, and is employed widely in literature and everyday English.

Today's usage

As an everyday term, idée fixe may indicate a mindset akin to prejudice or stereotyping:
However, idée fixe has also a pathological dimension, denoting serious psychological issues, as in this account of Japanese culture for a popular audience:

The pathology is what is denoted in psychology and in the law, as in this technical article about anorexia nervosa:

Idée fixe began as a parent category of obsession, and as a preoccupation of mind the idée fixe resembles today's obsessive-compulsive disorder: although the afflicted person can think, reason and act like other people, they are unable to stop a particular train of thought or action. However, in obsessive-compulsive disorder, the victim recognizes the absurdity of the obsession or compulsion, not necessarily the case with an idée fixe, which normally is a delusion. Today, the term idée fixe does not denote a specific disorder in psychology, and does not appear as a technical designation in the Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders. Nonetheless, idée fixe is used still as a descriptive term, and appears in dictionaries of psychology.

Background

The initial introduction of the term idée fixe, according to intellectual historian Jan E. Goldstein, was as a medical term around 1812 in connection with monomania. As originally employed in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, idée fixe  was "a single pathology of the intellect", distinct from monomania, a broader term that included idée fixe, but also a wider range of pathologies that did not stem from "a single compelling idea or from an emotional excess". A second difference is that the victim of idée fixe was understood to be unaware of the unreality of their frame of mind, while the victim of monomania might be aware. At that time, idée fixe was discussed as a form of neurosis or monomania.:
The idea of monomania was developed by Esquirol as a diagnostic category in his work Des Malades Mentales (1839) and related to the idée fixe by Griesinger (1845) who viewed "every single idée fixe as the expression of a deeply deranged psychic individuality and probably an indicator of an incipient form of mania".
The "pathologicalization" of political convictions was used to discredit political anarchists.  The further historical evolution of idée fixe was much entangled with the introduction of psychologists into legal matters such as the insanity defense, and is found in a number of texts.

Legal implications

During the nineteenth century and early twentieth century, monomania appears in treatises on criminal law:
The aberrations of pyromania and kleptomania still are recognized as impulse control disorders or conduct disorders, and the notion of irresistible impulse still plays a legal role in the insanity defense.
Possibly the best example of the role of idée fixe in an insanity defense today is its use in identifying the paranoid personality disorder.
The extreme case of paranoid psychosis " ... includes preoccupation with delusional beliefs; believing that people are talking about oneself; believing one is being persecuted or being conspired against; and believing that people or external forces control one's actions."
The legal issues surrounding paranoia include judgment of competence to stand trial, conditions for involuntary hospitalization, involuntary medication, and a focus upon awareness or not of unreality at the moment when the defendant "snapped".

Literature

An example of an idée fixe is in Cervantes's  Don Quixote:
Molière also used the idée fixe repeatedly:
Although Melville's Captain Ahab may come to mind as another famous example of idée fixe, and it is sometimes referred to this way, more often Ahab's obsession is referred to as monomania (the more inclusive term), and Melville himself does that. It would seem from the description of Ahab's possession that idée fixe applies quite accurately, as the following description suggests:
However, what makes monomania the better term is that "Captain Ahab ... has an inkling of his true state of mind: 'my means are sane, my motive and my object mad.
The words idée fixe also occur explicitly: for example, in Arthur Conan Doyle's Sherlock Holmes:

and in Abraham B. Yehoshua's novel about the  Mani family through six generations:
and in the account of the war on terror by George Bush's counter-terrorism chief Richard A. Clarke:








