[[Garbage (band)]]

CATEGORIES: Garbage (band), Musical groups from Wisconsin, Alternative rock groups from Wisconsin, Electronic music groups from Wisconsin, Rock music groups from Wisconsin, Electronic rock musical groups, Grunge musical groups, Industrial rock musical groups, Musical groups established in 1994, Musical groups reestablished in 2010, Trip hop groups, Almo Sounds artists

Garbage is a rock band formed in Madison, Wisconsin, in 1994.
Garbage's debut album, Garbage, was an unexpected smash, selling over 4 million copies and certified double platinum in the UK, US, and Australia while accompanied by a string of increasingly successful singles in 1995–1996, including "Stupid Girl" and "Only Happy When It Rains".
Despite critical acclaim,""Breaking Up the Girl" Hits magazine trade ad". Retrieved 2008-02-24 Garbage's 2001 third album Beautiful Garbage failed to match the commercial success achieved by its predecessors."Bleed Like Me press release, published by Geffen Records, dated February 21, 2005. Retrieved 2008-02-24 Garbage quietly disbanded amidst the troubled production of fourth album Bleed Like Me, but ultimately regrouped to complete the album, which was released in 2005 and peaked at a career-high No. 4 in the US.

History

Formation and early years (1993–1994)

Duke Erikson and Butch Vig had been in numerous bands, including Spooner and Fire Town (with Steve Marker as a sound engineer). In 1983, Vig and Marker founded Smart Studios in Madison and Vig's production work brought him to the attention of Sub Pop. Spooner reunited in 1990 and released another record, but disbanded in 1993 as Vig and Marker's career as producers gained strength."Welcome to Spooner Town", by Andy Davis, Record Collector, issue No. 209, January 1997 In 1994, as Vig become "kind of burned out on doing really long records," he got together with Erikson and Marker, and they started doing remixes for acts such as U2, Depeche Mode, Nine Inch Nails and House of Pain. The remixes featured different instrumentation, and often highlighting new guitar hooks and bass grooves. This experience inspired the three men to form a band, where they "wanted to take that remix sensibility and somehow translate it into all of the possibilities of a band setup." An early comment that their work sounded "like garbage" inspired the band's name.
Initial sessions with Vig on vocals, along with the members' past work with all-male groups, led to the band's desire for a woman on lead.  Marker was watching 120 Minutes when he saw the music video for Angelfish's "Suffocate Me". He showed the video to Erikson and Vig while their manager Shannon O'Shea tracked down the band's singer, Shirley Manson. When Manson was contacted, she did not know who Vig was and was urged to check the credits on Nevermind, the popular Nirvana album which Vig produced.
On April 8, 1994, Manson met Erikson, Marker, and Vig for the first time in London. Later that evening Vig was informed of Nirvana frontman Kurt Cobain's suicide. Garbage was put on hold until Angelfish was finished touring North America in support of Live."Thanks For Your, Uhh Support, Absolute Garbage DVD. Retrieved 2008-02-24 Erikson, Marker, and Vig attended the Metro Chicago date, and Manson was invited to Madison to audition for the band. The audition did not go well, but Manson socialized with the men while there and they found they had a similar taste in music. Angelfish disbanded at the end of the Live tour. Manson called O'Shea and asked to audition again feeling that "it would work out".
Manson described her first session with the band as "a disaster", as she had no experience as a session musician, and she and the band were "two parties totally uncomfortable with the situation", but the "mutual disdain" from that meeting managed to pull the band together. The first songs were skeletal versions of the songs "Stupid Girl", "Queer" and "Vow", which led to some ad-libbed lyrics by Manson."Making Music June 1, 1996 issue". Retrieved 2008-02-24 Manson had never written a song prior to this session; nevertheless, this time she was invited to join the band. Lyrics were penned at a cabin in the north woods of Wisconsin while the songs were recorded at Smart Studios."Garbage press release, published by Mushroom Records, dated September 19, 1995. Retrieved 2008-02-24 Conscious of the grunge genre that had made their names, particularly Vig's, the band made every effort to avoid sounding similar, deliberately striving to make a pop record."Melody Maker, September 30, 1995 issue". Retrieved 2008-02-24
Garbage sent out demo tapes with no bio, to avoid a bidding war over Vig's production history."Record Collector No. 209". Retrieved 2008-02-24 Garbage signed with Mushroom UK worldwide (excluding North America) and secured the band a Volume magazine compilation inclusion.
Garbage had not even considered "Vow" for inclusion on the album or even as a single."Musician issue 01/01/96" Retrieved - 2008-02-24 Because the exclusive licensing of Volume prevented a full commercial single release, on March 20, 1995, Mushroom issued "Vow" in a limited 7" vinyl format through Discordant, a label set up just to launch Garbage.""Only Happy When It Rains" sell-in sheet (issued September 1995)" Retrieved 2008-02-24 By May, commercial alternative radio in the US had picked up on the track, and it began to receive heavy rotation nationwide."Garbage advance Almo Sounds promo disc sleeve notes". Retrieved 2008-02-24 "Vow" debuted on Hot Modern Rock Tracks at No. 39. It climbed gradually over the following weeks, peaking at No. 26 on July.

Garbage (1995–1997)

In August 1995, Garbage debuted on the Billboard 200 at No. 193. In the United Kingdom, its release was preceded by non-album track "Subhuman" and "Only Happy When It Rains" as singles to promote the album instead of "Queer". The album debuted on the UK album chart at No. 12."Music Week issue 25/04/05" (Retrieved - 2008-02-24) In Australia, the album debuted at No. 5."Version 2.0 Repackage'' Mushroom Records Point-of-Sale brochure" (Retrieved - 2008-02-24) "Queer" was quickly released in the UK and Europe, while Garbage began their first tour. Garbage was nominated for Brit Awards for Best New Band and Best International Newcomer.
Garbage toured for the self-titled Garbage throughout 1996. "Only Happy When It Rains" was released as a single in North America; "Stupid Girl" was released to promote European dates. MTV announced that "Only Happy When It Rains" was certified a "Buzz clip", guaranteeing heavy rotation on its network from February 13. "Stupid Girl" received frequent video and radio airplay in the UK and peaked at No. 4, becoming the band's first top 10 hit on the UK Singles Chart and elevated the album to No. 6."beautifulgarbage promotional history press release" (Retrieved - 2008-02-24)
In May, Garbage reworked "Milk" with Tricky in a Chicago recording studio before supporting Smashing Pumpkins on their arena tour until the overdose of Pumpkins keyboardist Jonathan Melvoin. "Stupid Girl" peaked at No. 24 on the Hot 100. Its Top 40 radio remix by Todd Terry received massive airplay.""Hits (Stupid Girl trade ad)"" | (Retrieved - 2008-02-24)
Worldwide, the final single release from the album was the reworked version of "Milk", which became the band's second UK top 10 hit. The band performed the song live at the MTV Europe Music Awards in London on November 14; Garbage won the Breakthrough award at the event. while Capitol Records released a remix of "#1 Crush" from the soundtrack to Romeo + Juliet, which topped the Modern Rock Tracks chart for four weeks from the end of the year; the remix was also featured as the theme for the TV show Hex. "#1 Crush" was later nominated for Best Song From a Movie at the 1997 MTV Movie Awards.
Garbage Video, a compilation of the album's promotional videos, was released in November 1997. Garbage was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best New Artist, while "Stupid Girl" received two nominations for Best Rock Song and Best Rock Performance By A Duo Or Group

Version 2.0 (1997–2000)

Garbage relocated to Friday Harbor, Washington on March 1, 1997 to write songs for their second album. Returning to Smart Studios a short while later, the band found themselves under intense pressure to repeat the success of Garbage. The band decided not to change their formula, but progress musically by pushing their sound as far as it could go—hence the album's eventual title Version 2.0, which was completed by February 15, 1998. In March, the first single "Push It" became the No. 1 most added record at the UK Alternative Radio.
In May 1998, Version 2.0 debuted at No. 1 in the UK and at No. 13 in the Billboard 200. By October 12, "Special" was released and Garbage was nominated for three MTV Europe Music Awards: "Best Group", "Best Rock Act" and "Best Video" for "Push It".
In early 1999, Version 2.0 received two Grammy Award nominations for Album of the Year and Best Rock Album "Special" was No. 1 most added single at the Top 40 radio.""Hits ("Special" trade ad)"" | (Retrieved - 2008-02-24) In Europe, Garbage began their biggest headline tour, releasing singles for "When I Grow Up" and "The Trick Is to Keep Breathing". In April, "When I Grow Up" was released to Modern Rock radio.""Hits ("When I Grow Up" trade ad)"" (Retrieved - 2008-02-24) "When I Grow Up" was then featured on the movie Big Daddy. Version 2.0 was awarded the European Platinum Award by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry for 1 million sales across Europe and US. "You Look So Fine" was released as the final single from Version 2.0 worldwide, as Garbage toured Europe, including headlining in Edinburgh to mark the opening of the Scottish Parliament.
On August 4, Garbage was contracted to perform the theme for the James Bond film The World Is Not Enough and worked with composer David Arnold in London and Vancouver. "The World Is Not Enough" reached the top 10s in Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway and Finland, as well as the top 40 in Germany, Austria, Switzerland and the UK. "Special" received Grammy nominations for Best Rock Song and for Best Rock Performance by a Duo or Group, while "When I Grow Up" was re-issued in Europe.

Beautiful Garbage (2001–2002)

Garbage regrouped on April 10, 2001. The group began work on their third record, and put aside plans for a B-sides album due to the sale of Almo Sounds to the UMG. Manson ran an online blog throughout the recording of the album named Beautiful Garbage. During the recording of the album, Garbage invoked a provision of its contract to leave Almo, and sued UMG when it refused to terminate the contract. UMG threatened to use Manson's 1993 solo contract to tie Garbage to the label. Lead single "Androgyny" was released to radio by the end of August, and its video was released on September 10.
Released three weeks after the September 11 attacks, the album suffered from lack of promotion, mixed reaction from critics and fans alike, and the failure of its lead single "Androgyny" to achieve high chart positions."Thanks For The, Uhhh, Support Documentary" (Retrieved - 2007-12-11) Despite faltering in major markets, Beautiful Garbage debuted at No. 1 on Billboard's Top Electronic Albums chart where it stayed for 8 weeks, topped the album charts in Australia, and was named one of Rolling Stone's "Top 10 Albums of the Year"."Breaking Up the Girl Hits magazine trade ad" (Retrieved - 2007-12-11)
In October, Beautiful Garbage achieved a No. 13 debut on the Billboard 200,
Garbage supported U2 on the third leg of their Elevation Tour. After the last show, Vig contracted Hepatitis A and was replaced by Matt Chamberlain for European dates. In December "Breaking Up the Girl" was released as a single and the theme song to the Daria telemovie Is It College Yet?. On December 27, Rolling Stone's US and Australian editions named Beautiful Garbage as one of their critics "Top 10 Albums of the Year".
"Cherry Lips" was released at the end of 2001, becoming a massive hit in Australia, peaking at number seven on the ARIA Charts, and number eleven in the highly influential Triple J Hottest 100, 2001. Sony Music Japan released an exclusive E.P. of rare tracks titled Special Collection.

Bleed Like Me (2003–2005)

Garbage started proper work on their fourth record in March 2003, writing "Right Between the Eyes" in 30 minutes. It was a false start. Vig relocated to Los Angeles while Manson returned to Scotland."Butch Vig as quoted on Bleed Like Me Electronic Press Kit" (Retrieved - 2008-02-24) During the Christmas period, Vig decided to give the band another chance as he met excited Garbage fans eager to hear how the album was going.
In January 2004 Garbage reconvened in Los Angeles with Dust Brother John King, drummer Matt Chamberlain, bassist Justin Meldal-Johnsen, His performance was regarded by the band as "raising the bar" for the record. Following the John King sessions, the band formally relocated to Los Angeles and wrote two new songs, "Metal Heart" and "Boys Wanna Fight", which were more energetic songs than the band had been writing as well as lyrically more "overtly political" both songs referencing the US and UK led 2003 invasion of Iraq.
In 2005, lead single "Why Do You Love Me" debuted on the Modern Rock Tracks chart at No. 39.
On August 25, 2005 Garbage cancelled their scheduled October tour dates in France, Belgium and United Kingdom and released a statement that the band had "somewhat overextended themselves" and had decided to conclude their tour in Australia on October 1. The band confirmed that they were going "on indefinite hiatus" to dispel reports of a band split.

Absolute Garbage (2007–2008)

Garbage ended their 18-month hiatus on January 31, 2007, at a benefit show in Glendale, California, organised by Vig to help pay musician Wally Ingram's medical care following treatment for throat cancer. Prior to this, Garbage had been sharing song ideas via the internet and were keen on getting into the recording studio to complete them. completing four tracks including "Tell Me Where It Hurts", which was released as the album's lead single.
Absolute Garbage was released in July, remastered and including a special edition bonus remix package. A DVD format rounded out the package; among the fifteen Garbage music videos included was a documentary film titled "Thanks For Your, Uhhh Support" featuring backstage and behind-the-scenes footage, live performances and interviews. Vig stated that Garbage was considering mid-2008 to begin making a fifth album, saying, "We're thinking about it... I think we're more interested in making something that's much more primal and stripped down. Absolute Garbage is the postscript to chapter one. Whatever we do next will definitely be chapter two".Cult - News - Shirley Manson joins 'Sarah Connor' - Digital Spy A Garbage track called "Witness to Your Love" was released on a charity, "limited availability," compilation in the US. The release was available from Urban Outfitters from Wednesday, October 15, 2008, to Thursday, January 31, 2009, and went on radio in the US on October 17.com

Not Your Kind of People and recent activity (2010–present)

On February 1, 2010, it was confirmed through Shirley Manson's official Facebook profile that she spent a week in the studio with her bandmates.Singer Manson introduces new husband to students in Paisley | Herald Scotland
On September 17, 2011, the band clarified that their forthcoming 11-track LP would be mixed by October 17, while another 12 songs will be finalized by the end of the year and see release as "b-sides, extra tracks and maybe one might even come your way simply as a Christmas present from Garbage as a thank you to you all for sticking around,"Garbage: "To Clarify a Point" Retrieved 2011-09-17. though this did not materialize.
The band announced to Billboard that their fifth studio album will be released independently of any major label support, with Vig confirming, "We're looking at this as free agents. We're out of all our corporate responsibilities from the past, and initially we thought that was terrifying but now we think it's liberating. We're going to put the record out on our own label and just figure out how to license it and market it because we want it under our control." Vig also stated that the group would tour in support of the record. On January 6, 2012, the band announced that they had entered Red Razor Studios in Glendale, California to record bonus material for their forthcoming album,"Were back at Red Razor recording bonus tracks!" www.com. Access date: January 12, 2012. later confirming on Twitter that a further five tracks were being worked on, including the new title "What Girls Are Made Of.""The 5 extra tracks we are working on are beginning to sound sooooo good." www.com Access date: January 12, 2012.
Not Your Kind of People was released on May 14, 2012, reaching number 13 on the Billboard 200,
In the December 2012 issue of Rolling Stone, Shirley Manson and Butch Vig announced plans to enter a recording studio to record new material.
In April 2013, Vig told Billboard that the band will begin recording the follow-up to Not Your Kind of People in June 2013, and hope to have their sixth studio album out in 2014.
The band released their first live DVD, One Mile High... Live, on May 27, 2013.
Shirley Manson confirmed that they will release two new songs for Record Store Day on April 19, 2014. "Girls Talk", an out-take from the Absolute Garbage sessions,Welcome Back... Garbage, by Malcome Dome, published in Classic Rock magazine, August 2007 issue

Musical style

Garbage's intention is to make pop-like songs which mixed a variety of genres, with Steve Marker saying that the band wanted to "take pop music and make it as horrible sounding as we can." Shirley Manson has stated that the band itself "used to describe sound as sci-fi pop, because we felt it was taking a futuristic approach." Vig has said the crossover-heavy sound was inspired by the band's background with remixes, where songs would be rearranged to every musical style to which they held interest,More than a Woman, Spin and also that he "grew up listening to everything from pop radio and opera to country music and polka, so I really thought that Garbage would be an interesting and eclectic thing to do."
Garbage have been inspired by Roxy Music, Patti Smith, and David Bowie.

Concert tours

Discography

Members





Sources




