[[Howard Kaloogian]]

CATEGORIES: 1959 births, Living people, Members of the California State Assembly, American activists, Lawyers from San Diego, California, American people of Armenian descent, Michigan State University alumni, Pepperdine University alumni, Politicians from San Diego, California, California Republicans, Activists from California, People associated with the Tea Party movement

Howard James Kaloogian (born December 30, 1959) is an American politician and a former member of the California State Assembly. A Republican, he failed in 2004 to be elected to the United States Senate and in 2006 to be elected to the House.

Biography

Kaloogian grew up in Michigan, of Armenian-born parents. Kaloogian earned a Bachelor's from Michigan State University and a law degree from Pepperdine University. During 1988–1996, he was an estate attorney. He got his start in politics at the suggestion of Bill Morrow, after Morrow read a strongly worded letter Kaloogian wrote to the editor of the San Diego Union-Tribune purporting to correct a reader's misleading interpretation of the preamble to the Constitution of the United States.
From 1994–2000, Kaloogian was a member of the California Assembly, representing California District 74, which covers portions of northern San Diego County. He won his seat in the 1994 legislative elections, with 61% of the votes counted."Final California Election Results", Los Angeles Times, November 10, 1994 He endorsed Senator Phil Gramm's presidential bid in 1995."20 State GOP Lawmakers Back Gramm", Los Angeles Times, March 1, 1995
Kaloogian was twice re-elected to the Assembly. He recorded an unchanged majority, 61%, in the 1996 legislative election "Final California Election Results", Los Angeles Times, March 28, 1996 and was re-elected again in the 1998 election, where his share of the vote fell to 57%."Final California Election Results", Los Angeles Times, November 5, 1998
In 2003, Kaloogian became the chairman of the Recall Gray Davis Committee, dedicated to the ousting of governor Gray Davis.com. How grassroots conservatives used the Internet and talk radio in the first successful drive to force a recall vote of a California governor, Lynn Vincent, August 2, 2003.
Kaloogian is a founder and co-chairman of Move America Forward, a political action group. Kaloogian considers President Ronald Reagan to be one of his political heroes. He states "My political hero, Ronald Reagan, made a profound statement in his farewell address to the nation." Kaloogian serves on the Ronald Reagan Legacy Project and was the Chairman of the Defend Reagan Project, which campaigned in 2003 for CBS to drop a docudrama about Reagan, The Reagans. The campaign was successful, as CBS did not show the mini-series, but handed it off to Showtime.
In 2004 Kaloogian ran for the U.S. Senate from California but lost the Republican primary with 11% of the vote, placing him 3rd out of 11 candidates."California Elections", Los Angeles Times, March 4, 2004 He also ran unsuccessfully in the special election to fill the opening created by the resignation of disgraced Congressman Duke Cunningham in California's 50th Congressional District.
In 2008 Kaloogian chaired an Anti-Barack Obama political action committee called "Our country deserves better".
Howard Kaloogian is married to Martha Lynn, and has a step-son.

2006 campaign for Congress

Kaloogian ran in the special election to fill the opening in California's 50th District to the House of Representatives caused by the resignation of disgraced former Congressman Duke Cunningham. In the special elections where the top vote-getter from each party moves to the next round, Kaloogian finished a distant third among the Republican candidates. The next round took place at the same time as the primary for the term that commenced January 3, 2007. On April 17, Kaloogian announced his withdrawal from the primary for the next congressional term. State Senator Bill Morrow, who was running against Kaloogian, challenged an implied endorsement by him of Kaloogian on Kaloogian's website."McClintock and Morrow protest Kaloogian using photos, quotes". Morrow is quoted in the article as saying "Howard Kaloogian's campaign Web site includes a picture and a quote from me from 2001 that implies that I have endorsed his candidacy for Congress." According to the article, Murrow asked Kallogian to remove his photo from the campaign website.

Altered photo controversy

During the 2006 campaign, an image showing "a busy urban street scene" in Baghdad was posted on Kaloogian's web site. The image was removed after bloggers at the Daily Kos noted that the image was actually of Istanbul. Baghdad on the Bosporus, Dana Milbank, March 30, 2006. Kaloogian later said using the photo was "a stupid mistake".com Candidate admits 'stupid' Web error, Carla Marinucci, March 30, 2006, p. B3. According to the article, "Kaloogian said the photo was taken during a layover in Istanbul and was mixed up with those taken on the Iraq tour."

Notes and references


