[[Frank Murkowski]]

CATEGORIES: 1933 births, Alaska Republicans, American bankers, American people of Polish descent, Governors of Alaska, Living people, People from Fairbanks, Alaska, People from Ketchikan Gateway Borough, Alaska, Politicians from Seattle, Washington, Republican Party state governors of the United States, Republican Party United States Senators, Santa Clara University alumni, Seattle University alumni, State cabinet secretaries of Alaska, United States Coast Guard personnel, United States Senators from Alaska, American Roman Catholics

Frank Hughes Murkowski (; born March 28, 1933) is an American politician and a member of the Republican Party. He was a United States Senator from Alaska from 1981 until 2002 and the eighth Governor of Alaska from 2002 until 2006.

Early life and career

Murkowski was born in Seattle, Washington, the son of Helen (née Hughes) and Frank M. Murkowski.

U.S. Senate

During his time in the Senate, he was most notable as Chairman of the Energy and Natural Resources Committee from 1995 to 2001. As chair, he argued and attempted unsuccessfully to open the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil drilling.
In a floor statement in the Senate, regarding the bar of homosexuals serving in the military, Mr. Murkowski stated that homosexuals have a right to choose their lifestyle, but there exists no right to serve.  In his opposition to lifting the ban, his speech focused on the cost affect on the Veterans Administration in treating service members infected with HIV.  His daughter and successor in the Senate, Lisa Murkowski, voted to repeal the ban on homosexuals in the armed services, and later became the third Republican Senator to endorse the legalization of same-sex marriage while in office.

Governor

Murkowski was elected governor on November 5, 2002, receiving nearly 56% of the vote, the highest percentage for any gubernatorial candidate in Alaska history up until that point. He succeeded Democrat Tony Knowles and took office on December 2, 2002.  
Upon his inauguration, he resigned his Senate seat and appointed his daughter, Lisa Murkowski, the Majority Leader-designate of the Alaska House of Representatives, in his place. His opponents derided the appointment as an act of nepotism.
Toward the end of his administration he brokered a deal for a gas pipeline that was never considered, in final form, by the legislature.  Murkowski threatened to sign the deal without legislative approval, but the legislature successfully brought a lawsuit to enjoin him from doing so.
Governor Murkowski ran for re-election in 2006, but came in third behind former Wasilla mayor Sarah Palin and Fairbanks businessman John Binkley in the Republican primary election on August 22, 2006 (Palin winning with 51% and Binkley taking second with 30% to Murkowski's 19%).". Retrieved March 16, 2007. Murkowski left office with one of the nation's worst approval ratings of 19%.
On March 4, 2008, Murkowski's former chief-of-staff, Jim Clark admitted that he was aware that Veco Corp had paid $10,000 for a political poll to gauge the popularity of then-incumbent Governor Murkowski. Clark was charged with "honest services fraud". Before he was sentenced, the US Supreme Court ruled that the statute was drafted with unconstitutional vagueness and henceforth will only cover "fraudulent schemes to deprive another of honest services through bribes or kickbacks supplied by a third party who has not been deceived."  Since Clark was guilty of neither bribes nor kickbacks, all charges were voided. 
In all 28 years of public service, Murkowski spent two years in the armed services, 22 years as Alaska's junior senator in D.C. and four years as governor.

Jet plane scandal

In 2005, in spite of opposition from the Alaska Legislature, Murkowski purchased a Westwind II jet with state money for $2.7 million.

Electoral history






