[[American Tobacco Trail]]

CATEGORIES: Rail trails in North Carolina, North Carolina outdoor recreation, Protected areas of Wake County, North Carolina, Protected areas of Chatham County, North Carolina, Protected areas of Durham County, North Carolina, East Coast Greenway, National Recreation Trails of the United States

The American Tobacco Trail (ATT) is a  long Rails-to-Trails project located in the Research Triangle region of North Carolina, running along an abandoned railroad bed originally built for the American Tobacco Company in the 1970s. The route crosses through the City of Durham, Durham County, Chatham County, and Wake County. The ATT is part of the East Coast Greenway and is open to pedestrians, cyclists, equestrians (in non-urban sections) and other non-motorized users.

Route

Durham County

The ATT begins in the city of Durham across Morehead Avenue from the Durham Bulls Athletic Park. The trail is a  wide asphalt paved greenway with loose gravel shoulders. It is open to walkers, cyclists, rollerbladers and wheelchair users, but not equestrians.
The American Tobacco Trail runs through the city of Durham to the Chatham county line. This segment of the ATT is a designated portion of the East Coast Greenway. A pedestrian bridge was erected over I-40 in April 2013, connecting the northern and southern segments of the Durham County portion of the trail, but due to construction errors did not open until February 2014.

Chatham County

The ATT trail traverses Tobacco Trail Brochure:  Once the trail crosses into Chatham county, the trail converts to a dual surface of asphalt and compacted screenings. The trail is open for foot, bike and equestrian use by TRTC. The trail crosses Northeast Creek and O'Kelly Chapel Road, past the Old Chatham Golf Course. It also traverses the end of Pittard Sears Road, Panther Creek, and continues past New Hope Church Road. 

Wake County

The ATT traverses  wide with a granite screening surface. The trail is open to hikers, cyclists, wheelchair users and equestrians. Users can access this portion of the greenway most conveniently at 1305 White Oak Church Road, Apex, NC 27523 The towns of Apex and Cary have plans to connect their municipal greenway systems to the ATT in the future. The trail terminates at a trailhead off of Ragan Rd.
In total,  on public roads is required to get between these two continuous sections.

History

J.B. Duke founded the American Tobacco Company in 1890, which subsequently acquired the Lucky Strike Company and over 200 other firms.  The company built processing plants and warehouses in Durham which were served by several rail lines built in 1905.  The rail line to the south which is now the ATT, connected from Durham to Bonsal, NC and onwards to Duncan.  It was known as the New Hope Valley Railway and later Durham & South Carolina (it never got as far as SC), and later became part of the Norfolk Southern Railway system.S. Army Corps of Engineers built the Jordan Lake reservoir in Chatham County necessitating the relocation of a large portion of the tracks.  A portion of the original right-of-way is presently a natural surface trail accessible off of Stagecoach Rd. in Durham.triangletrails.HTM Accessed May 31, 2010 A new rail line was built on higher ground a few miles to the east.  However, only about 10 years later, the tracks were removed from this new railroad as Norfolk Southern had been bought out, and trains could access the American Tobacco complex via the Southern Railway more economically.  Since then, work has progressed at a moderate pace to develop the trail for pedestrian, bicycle, and equestrian use.








