[[SAP AG]]

CATEGORIES: Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange, Banking software companies, Companies based in Baden-Württemberg, Companies established in 1972, CRM software companies, ERP software companies, Multinational companies headquartered in Germany, OpenTravel Alliance, SAP AG, Software companies of Germany

SAP AG is a German multinational software corporation that makes enterprise software to manage business operations and customer relations. Headquartered in Walldorf, Baden-Württemberg, Germany, with regional offices around the world.prcarbon.html PR Carbon Worldwide News Network and PR Distribution
The company's best-known software products are its enterprise resource planning application systems and management (SAP ERP), its enterprise data warehouse product – SAP Business Warehouse (SAP BW), SAP Business Objects software, and most recently, Sybase mobile products and the in-memory computing appliance SAP HANA. 
SAP is one of the largest software companies in the world.

History

Foundation

When Xerox decided to exit the computer industry in 1975, they asked IBM to migrate their business systems to IBM technology. As part of IBM's compensation for the migration, IBM was given the rights to the Scientific Data Systems (SDS)/SAPE software, reportedly for a contract credit of $80,000.
Five IBM engineers from the AI department 
International Directory of Company Histories, Vol. 16. St. James Press, 1997.
(Dietmar Hopp, Klaus Tschira, Hans-Werner Hector, Hasso Plattner, and Claus Wellenreuther, all from Mannheim, Baden-Württemberg) were working in an enterprise-wide system based on this software, only to be told that it would be no longer necessary. Rather than abandon the project, they decided to leave IBM and start another company.
In June 1972 they founded  ("Systems, Applications and Products in Data Processing").
Their first client was the German branch of Imperial Chemical IndustriesSAP UK – ICI Success Story. Sap. Retrieved on 24 April 2011. in Östringen, where they developed mainframe programs for payroll and accounting. Instead of storing the data on punch cards mechanically, as IBM did, they stored it locally. Therefore, they called their software a real-time system, since there was no need to process the punch cards overnight (for this reason their flagship product carried an R in its name until the late 1990s). This first version was also a standalone software, that could be offered to other interested parties.

Enterprise resource planning

In 1973, the first commercial product was launched. It was called SAP R/1,[ref]

In 1976, SAP GmbH was founded, and moved its headquarters the following year to Walldorf, Germany. The company's official name became SAP AG after the 2005 annual general meeting. AG is short for Aktiengesellschaft, a (public limited company).
Three years later, in 1979, SAP launched SAP R/2, expanding the capabilities of the system to other areas, such as material management and production planning. In 1981, SAP brought a re-designed product to market. However, SAP R/2 did not improve until the period between 1985 and 1990. 
SAP released the new SAP R/3 in 1992. SAP developed and released several versions of R/3 through 1995. By the mid-1990s, SAP followed the trend from mainframe computing to client/server architectures. The development of SAP's internet strategy with mySAP. SAP was awarded Industry Week's Best Managed Companies in 1999.

Corporate restructuring

In August 1988, SAP GmbH became SAP AG (a corporation by German law), and public trading started on 4 November 1988. Shares were listed on the Frankfurt and Stuttgart stock exchanges. In 1995, SAP was included in the German stock index DAX and on 22 September 2003, SAP was included in the Dow Jones STOXX 50.[ref]
</ref>
In November 2010, SAP lost a US$1.3 billion intellectual property lawsuit—related to the actions of the SAP subsidiary TomorrowNow—to Oracle Corporation; the penalty was cited as the largest software piracy judgment in history. SAP filed post-trial motions to lower the damage awarded to Oracle and stated it may also file an appeal. (26 January 2011) SAP earnings dinged by TomorrowNow trial | Business Tech – CNET News. News.com. Retrieved on 24 April 2011. On 9 September 2011, the verdict was overturned by Judge Phyllis J. Hamilton, who called the penalty "grossly excessive."Oracle Verdict Against SAP Is Overturned. NYTimes. Retrieved on 7 November 2011.

Acquisitions

Business and markets

SAP is the world's largest business software company and the third biggest independent software provider by revenue (as of 2007). It operates in four geographic regions: EMEA (Europe, Middle East, Africa), America (United States and Canada), LAC (Latin America and Caribbean), and APJ (Asia Pacific and Japan), which represents Japan, Korea, Australia and New Zealand, India, Greater China, and Southeast Asian countries. In addition, SAP operates a network of 115 subsidiaries, and has R&D (Research & Development) facilities around the globe in Germany, India, US, Canada, France, Brazil, Turkey, China, Hungary, Israel, Ireland and Bulgaria.
SAP focuses on six industry sectors - process industries, discrete industries, consumer industries, service industries, financial services, and public services - and 25 industries.

Enterprise Service-Oriented Architecture

Service-oriented architecture has been incorporated into the SAP ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning) system and other products defined within the SAP Enterprise Services Architecture (Enterprise SOA).
Enterprise SOA=== 
SAP Enterprise Service Oriented Architecture (or Enterprise SOA) has been defined by SAP AG as "an open architecture for adaptive business solutions" and "the blueprint for an architecture that enables innovation and standardization in a single environment".  Enterprise SOA is enabled by the SAP NetWeaver platform, and builds on the benefits of Web services.  SAP has positioned Enterprise SOA to deliver the benefits offered by service-oriented architecture, including enabling both flexibility and business efficiency.  SAP states that Enterprise SOA provides companies with a "cost-effective blueprint for composing innovative new applications by extending existing systems, while maintaining a level of flexibility that makes future process changes cost-effective". Franz-Josef Fritz (SAP AG), SAP Insider, Apr May Jun 2004  SAP Solutions that currently use Enterprise SOA are mySAP CRM, mySAP ERP, and mySAP SRM.

E-SOA Authentication

SAP E-SOA supports different authentication methods like SAP Logon Ticket, Kerberos authentication, Security Assertion Markup Language (SAML) assertions, SSL and X.509 client certificates, apart from basic authentication (User ID and Password) to guarantee stronger authentication and Single Sign-On methods across SAP technologies.

Products

SAP's products focus on Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP). The company's main product is SAP ERP. The current version is SAP ERP 6.0 and is part of the SAP Business Suite. Its previous name was R/3. The "R" of SAP R/3 stood for realtime. The number 3 related to the 3-tier architecture: database, application server and client (SAPgui). R/2, which ran on a Mainframe architecture, was the predecessor of R/3. Before R/2 came System RF, later dubbed R/1.
SAP ERP is one of five enterprise applications in SAP's Business Suite. The other four applications are:
Other major product offerings include: the NetWeaver platform, Governance, Risk and Compliance (GRC) software, Duet (joint offering with Microsoft), Performance Management software and RFID. SAP offers service-oriented architecture  capabilities (calling it Enterprise SOA) in the form of web services that are wrapped around its applications.
While its original products were typically used by Fortune 500 companies, SAP now actively targets small and medium sized enterprises (SME) with its SAP Business One and SAP Business All-in-One.
 SAP's CRM solution now have over 8 million users on its platform.
On 19 September 2007 SAP announced a new product named SAP Business ByDesign. SAP Business ByDesign is a software as a service (SaaS) offering, and provides a fully integrated enterprise resource planning (ERP) software, On Demand. SAP Business ByDesign was previously known under the code name "A1S".
In October 2007, SAP AG announced the friendly takeover of Business Objects. This acquisition expanded SAP's Product Suite of Business Intelligence (BI) software and increased the customer installed base to 89,000. Sap. Retrieved on 24 April 2011.
In February 2009 SAP AG, which invested in Coghead, purchased the start-up's intellectual property. SAP will only be using the company's technology as an internal resource and has no plans to offer Coghead's products to its customers.
In May 2010 SAP AG announced that it is buying the database software maker Sybase for US$ 5.8 billion in cash. The deal closed at the end of July 2010. Sybase will continue to run as a separate, independent unit but will be leveraged across the other SAP areas.
As of July 2010 TechniData is a 100% subsidiary of SAP AG.
In October 2010, SAP AG announced the release of SAP HANA 1.0 (High-performance Analytics Appliance), an in-memory appliance for Business Intelligence allowing real-time analytics.
SAP Enterprise Learning (environment) is an enhancement of the previous version of the learning management system, SAP Learning Solution 600. Apart from the features in SAP Learning Solution 600, SAP Enterprise Learning (environment) contains a virtual learning room feature powered by Adobe Connect. SAP officials say there are over 100,600 SAP installations serving more than 41,200 companies in more than 25 industries in more than 120 countries.
SAP Press has published a book on SAP Enterprise Learning.
SAP Human Resources Management System is one of the largest modules in the SAP R/3 system which consists of many sub modules that assist with tasks of human resource management.
SAP's Accounting Solution was ranked as one of the most popular solutions in Capterra's 2014 Top Accounting Software Infographic.

Partnerships

SAP partners include Global Services Partners with cross-industry multinational consulting capabilities,SAP – Global & Local Partner Directories: Global Services Partners. SAP AG. Retrieved 7 July 2011. Global Software Partners providing integrated products that complement SAP Business Suite solutions,SAP – Global & Local Partner Directories: Global Software Partners. Sap. Retrieved on 7 July 2011. and Global Technology Partners providing user companies with a wide range of products to support SAP technology, including vendors of hardware, database, storage systems, networks, and mobile computing technology. SAP AG. Retrieved 7 July 2011.
Extensions partners: this is a small number of companies which provide functionality that complements SAP product capabilities.
These enhancements fulfill high quality standards and are certified, sold and supported by SAP directly.
These partner companies include Adobe, CA Technologies, Hewlett-Packard, IDS Scheer, OpenText, Redwood Software, Vistex Inc., Knoa Software, Nakisa Inc, ICON-SCM, BackOffice Associates, Prometheus Group and SmartOps. SAP. Retrieved on 24 April 2011.

SAP PartnerEdge

SAP products for small businesses and midsize companies are delivered through its global partner network. In 2008, SAP signed SAP Global Service partnership with HCL Technologies, a $6 b technology service provider, headquartered in India. Sap. Retrieved on 7 July 2011. SAP PartnerEdge has also signed with ENFOS, Inc., a software as a service company, to develop their EcoHub Partner Sustainability Solution platform. The SAP PartnerEdge program, SAP's partner program, offers a set of business enablement resources and program benefits to help partners including value added resellers (VARs) and independent software vendors (ISVs) be profitable and successful in implementing, selling, marketing, developing and delivering SAP products to a broad range of customers. SAP AG. Retrieved 7 July 2011.

Communities

SAP Community Network (SCN) is a community of SAP customers, partners, employees, and influencers – typically in roles such as: developers, consultants, integrators, and business analysts – who gain and share knowledge about ABAP, Java, .SAP – Communities. Sap. Retrieved on 7 July 2011. SAP Community Network has more than 2.5 million members, representing a wide range of roles and lines-of-business, from countries and territories all over the world, in 24 industries.

Organization

Functional units of SAP are split across different organizational units for R&D needs, field activities and customer support. SAP Labs are mainly responsible for product development whereas the field organizations spread across each country are responsible for field activities such Sales, Marketing, Consulting etc. Head office located in SAP AG is responsible for overall management as well as core Engineering activities related to Product Development. SAP customer support, also called Active Global Support (AGS) is a global organization to provide support to SAP customers worldwide.

SAP Labs locations

SAP Labs is the research and development organization of the parent company.
The labs are located in Germany, France, Ireland, Bulgaria and Hungary in Europe; Palo Alto, USA; Bangalore, Mumbai and Gurgaon, India; São Leopoldo, Brazil; Ra'anana and Karmiel, Israel; Montreal, Vancouver, Toronto and Waterloo Canada and Shanghai, China. SAP Labs IndiaSAP India – SAP Labs | Emerging Solutions from SAP's Research and Development Centre. Sap. Retrieved on 24 April 2011. is the largest development unit in terms of number of employees outside the SAP headquarters located in Walldorf, Germany. Sap. Retrieved on 24 April 2011.
Each SAP Lab has prominent area of expertise and focus. SAP Labs in Sophia Antipolis, France for example specializes in development of Java based SAP software products. Whereas, SAP Labs in Palo Alto, California is famous for its focus on innovation and research.
SAP opened in June 2009 its new SAP Labs campus in Brazil, representing the first SAP Labs Center in Latin America and the eighth worldwide. The facility is located in São Leopoldo, in the state of Rio Grande do Sul and employs 520  people. Events.com. Retrieved on 2013-07-26. Of particular note are the building's structure and interior, which are composed entirely of environmentally friendly materials. Since these materials were not available in Brazil, constructing the facility did not come cheap for SAP. The project was an effort not only to create a "green house" in Latin America, but also to design offices with a pleasant work atmosphere.
SAP Labs Latin America has just received Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) Gold certification for the building.

User groups

User Groups are independent, not-for-profit organizations of SAP customer companies and partners within the  SAP Ecosystem that provide education to their members, influence SAP product releases and direction, exchange best practices, and provide insight into the market needs. Examples of User Groups are the Americas' SAP Users' Group (ASUG),[ref]
</ref> the German speaking SAP User Group (DSAG),<ref>
</ref> the SAP Australian User Group (SAUG),<ref>
</ref> User Community of SAP Customers in the Indian Subcontinent <ref>
</ref> and the SAP UK & Ireland User Group.<ref>
</ref><ref>
