[[Larry Agran]]

CATEGORIES: Mayors of Irvine, California, People from Irvine, California, United States presidential candidates, 1992, University of California, Berkeley alumni, Harvard Law School alumni, 1945 births, Living people

Lawrence Alan "Larry" Agran (born February 2, 1945) is a former mayor of Irvine, California. Agran currently serves as a member of the City Council.

Early life

Agran was born in Chicago, the son of Selma and Reuben Agran. Agran graduated Phi Beta Kappa from the University of California, Berkeley in 1966 with a Bachelor of Science degree in both history and economics.  He then  earned a Juris Doctor (with honors) from Harvard Law School in 1969, specializing in public interest law.   
Agran served as Legal Counsel to the California State Senate Committee on Health and Welfare, and taught legislation and public policy at the UCLA School of Law and the University of California, Irvine Graduate School of Management.

City government

Between 1979 and 1990, he served on the city council, including 6 years as Mayor (Irvine employs a council-manager government).
Larry Agran rejoined the Irvine City Council and has, for many years, served as a city councilman; he chaired the City's Great Park board until February 2011.  (The board is charged with planning, constructing and operating a new park of nearly  produced its first crop of strawberries and the newly opened Great Park Carousel had more than 25,000 riders in the first two months of 2011.

Presidential candidacy

In 1992, Agran unsuccessfully sought the Democratic Party nomination for President.  Agran was generally ignored by the media during his candidacy, a topic heavily covered in the 1995 documentary Spin.  The media did not report his polling numbers even as he met or exceeded the support of other candidates such as Jerry Brown.  Party officials excluded him from most debates on various grounds, even having him arrested when he interrupted to ask to participate.  Even when he managed to join the other candidates in a forum, his ideas went unreported.
As mayor of the largest planned city in the United States, he entered the race but he had little media coverage.  Ironically, despite holding only a local office and being little known outside California in a poll on January 22, 1992 he tied with two well-known national politicians: Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa and the former Governor of his home state Jerry Brown.Lary Agran, the Press, by Joshua Meyrowitz – CJR, March/April 92
Some people, like ARG pollster Dick Bennett thought that, had that surprise strength in the polls been played up by news organizations the result might well have been a further rise in the polls.  However, Bennett said, the press completely ignored the story, and he began to sink.
Because of lack of coverage, Agran's early success would not help his campaign, and he remained little known.
The U.S. Conference of Mayors led to the first significant mention of his campaign in The New York Times.  In a January 24 article, Richard Berke noted that, after listening to the candidates, "dozens of Mayors . . . seemed to agree on one thing: the single candidate who truly understands urban needs is Larry Agran".  Some major candidates also participated.  Despite the fact that Agran was regarded by his colleagues as the most experienced in the urban area themes, his performance did not meet a big response in media.
According to Carole Florman, organizer of the Global Warming Leadership Forum in Tallahassee in February (in which Agran participated), "the audience "was more enthusiastic about Larry Agran than about Bill Clinton".City of Irvine Website – Larry Agran
Despite his success in these events, Agran performed poorly in the New Hampshire primary, but did pick up modest support in later primaries as a protest candidate with appeal to those unhappy with the other candidates.  He received three votes at the 1992 Democratic National Convention.
Agran was barred from every TV debate along with some other minor candidates, such as Eugene McCarthy.
Mayor Agran's bid has been viewed as an example of an experienced candidate whose campaign was successfully stopped by the media.YouTube – Broadcast Yourself

Return to city government

In 1998, Agran re-entered public service as an Irvine City Council member. Agran was elected to serve as mayor once more on November 7, 2000, and was re-elected on November 5, 2002.  The current mayor of Irvine is Steven Choi.  Agran continues to serve on Irvine's City Council.

Electoral history

Race for Mayor of Irvine, 2002Our Campaigns – Mayor – Irvine Race – Nov 5, 2002
NOTE: Although Agran is a Democrat, offices in Irvine are formally nonpartisan.
Race for Mayor of Irvine, 2000Our Campaigns – Mayor – Irvine Race – Nov 7, 2000
1992 Democratic National Convention
United States presidential election, 1992 (Democratic primary)Our Campaigns – US President – D Primaries Race – Feb 1, 1992
Including write-in candidates.






