[[Laura Schlessinger]]

CATEGORIES: 1947 births, Living people, American children's writers, American karateka, American people of Italian descent, American physiologists, American self-help writers, American talk radio hosts, American television talk show hosts, Columbia University alumni, Commentators, Conservatism in the United States, Converts to Judaism from atheism or agnosticism, Critics of feminism, Jewish American writers, Jewish women writers, People from Brooklyn, Radio personalities from Los Angeles, California, Stony Brook University alumni, University of Southern California alumni

Laura Catherine Schlessinger (born January 16, 1947) is an American talk radio host, socially conservative commentator and author.
Previously, Schlessinger combined a local radio career with a private practice as a marriage and family counselor, but after going into national syndication she concentrated her efforts on the daily The Dr. Laura Program, and on authoring self-help books. The books Ten Stupid Things Women Do to Mess Up Their Lives, and The Proper Care and Feeding of Husbands are among her bestselling works. A short-lived television talk show hosted by Schlessinger was launched in 2000. In August 2010, she announced that she would end her syndicated radio show in December 2010.
Her show moved to Sirius XM Radio's Sirius XM Stars on January 3, 2011. Schlessinger announced a "multi-year" deal to be on satellite radio.'Dr. Laura' to Launch Exclusively on SIRIUS XM Radio

Early life and education

Schlessinger was born in Brooklyn, New York, and raised in Brooklyn and on Long Island. 20, 23. Her parents were Monroe "Monty" Schlessinger, a civil engineer of Jewish heritage, and Yolanda (Ceccovini) Schlessinger, an Italian Catholic war bride. Schlessinger said her father was "petty, insensitive, mean, thoughtless, demeaning and downright unloving". She described her mother as a person with "pathological pride", who "was never grateful", who "would always find something to criticize," and who "constantly expressed disdain for men, sex and love". She credited her father with giving her the drive to succeed.
Schlessinger attended Westbury High School and Jericho High School where she showed an interest in science. 23, 26-28. She received a bachelor's degree from Stony Brook University.

Radio career

Schlessinger's first appearance on radio was in 1975 when she called into a KABC show hosted by Bill Ballance. Impressed by her quick wit and sense of humor, Ballance began featuring her in a weekly segment. 63. Schlessinger's stint on Ballance's show led to her own shows on a series of small radio stations. By 1979 she was on the air Sunday evenings from 9:00 to midnight on KWIZ in Santa Ana, California. That year, the Los Angeles Times described her show as dealing with all types of emotional problems, "though sex therapy is the show's major focus".(free abstract, article available for a fee)
In the late 1980s, Schlessinger was filling in for Barbara De Angelis' noon-time relationship-oriented talk show in Los Angeles on KFI, while working weekends at KGIL in San Fernando. Her big break came when Sally Jessy Raphael began working at ABC Radio, and Maurice Tunick, former Vice-President of Talk Programming for the ABC Radio Networks, needed a regular sub for Raphael's evening personal advice show. Tunick chose Schlessinger to fill in for Raphael.
Ultimately, Schlessinger began broadcasting a daily show on KFI which was nationally syndicated in 1994 by Synergy, a company owned by Schlessinger and her husband. In 1997, Synergy sold its rights to the show to Jacor Communications, Inc., for $71.5 million. Later, Jacor  merged with Clear Channel Communications and a company co-owned by Schlessinger, Take On The Day, LLC, acquired the production rights. The show became a joint effort between Take On The Day, which produced it, Talk Radio Network, which syndicated and marketed it to radio stations, and Premiere Radio Networks, (a subsidiary of Clear Channel), which provided satellite facilities and handled advertising sales. As of September 2009, Schlessinger  broadcast from her home in Santa Barbara, California with KFWB as her flagship station. Podcasts and live streams of the show have been available on her website for a monthly fee, and the show was also on XM Satellite Radio.
At its peak, The Dr. Laura Program was the second-highest-rated radio show after The Rush Limbaugh Show, and was heard on more than 450 radio stations. Writing in 1998, Leslie Bennett described the popularity of the show:
In May 2002, the show still had an audience of more than 10 million, but had lost several million listeners in the previous two years as it was dropped by WABC and other affiliates, and was moved from day to night in cities such as Seattle and Boston. These losses were attributed in part to Schlessinger's shift from giving relationship advice to lecturing on morality and conservative politics. Pressure from gay rights groups caused dozens of sponsors to drop the radio show as well.
Schlessinger used "Hot Talkin' Big Shot", a song by country and blues singer and songwriter Nikki Hornsby, for several years as cue music for her radio program and for a national radio commercial advertising for the show.
On August 17, 2010, during an appearance on Larry King Live, Schlessinger announced the end of her radio show saying that her motivation was to "regain her First Amendment rights",
On January 3, 2011, Schlessinger's show moved exclusively to Sirius XM Radio.

Television show

In 2000, Schlessinger signed a deal with Paramount Domestic Television to produce a syndicated talk show, which would be carried mainly by television stations owned and operated by CBS. The producers hoped to extend the success of Schlessinger's radio show to daytime television, however, the show was controversial before it ever aired, and it proved to be short-lived.
In the months before the premiere of her TV show, Schlessinger called homosexuality a "biological error", said that homosexuality was acceptable as long as it was not public, and said that homosexuals should not attempt to adopt children. She regularly compared gay parenting to pedophilia by reiterating her view that "a huge portion of the male homosexual populace is predatory on young boys." Schlessinger was frequently criticized in lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transsexual (LGBT) media for these views. Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation (GLAAD), an LGBT media watchdog group, began monitoring Schlessinger's on-air comments about LGBT people, posting transcripts of relevant shows on its website.
In March 2000, a group of gay activists launched StopDrLaura. Laura television show prior to its premiere. Laura. StopDrLaura.com, Retrieved on May 3, 2007
The first episode of Schlessinger's television show aired September 11, 2000. Critics and viewers complained that the format had been dumbed down and did not stand out from any other daytime talk show. The biting rhetoric that worked well on radio seemed overly harsh for face-to-face discourse, owing to the normal sympathetic nature of most other daytime hosts; the radical change in Schlessinger's demeanor from her radio persona left viewers cold. Ultimately, the television show failed to generate the energy and interest of Schlessinger's radio show.
The credibility of Schlessinger's television program also suffered during its first month when the New York Post reported that Schlessinger had used show staff to falsely pose as guests on the show. A September 25, 2000, episode named "Readin', Writin', and Cheatin'" featured a so-called college student who specialized in professional note-taking. On the next day's show, "Getting to the Altar," the same guest appeared in different hair and makeup and said she was a woman living with her boyfriend. In fact, the woman was San-D Duchas, a researcher for the show whose name appeared in the closing credits of the shows on which she posed as a guest. Apparently, Schlessinger was unaware of this incident until it was disclosed by the Post, and immediately put a stop to any further use of this practice.
By November 2000, advertisers that had originally committed to Schlessinger's show left, and the ratings plummeted. Other stations outside of CBS did the same thing, while others moved it to weaker sister stations. The television show was cancelled in March 2001 and last aired in September 2001.
In 2004, Schlessinger said that although there is more money and celebrity in television, it is not as meaningful or intimate as radio, and for her television was a "terrible experience".

Publications

Columns

For several years, Schlessinger wrote a weekly column syndicated by Universal Press Syndicate that was carried in many newspapers, as well as Jewish World Review. She discontinued the column in July 2000, citing lack of time due to her upcoming television show. She wrote a monthly column for WorldNetDaily between 2002 and 2004, with one entry in 2006.[ref]


Books

Schlessinger has written thirteen books for adults and four for children. Several follow the mold of her successful Ten Stupid Things Women Do to Mess Up Their Lives, with similarly named books giving advice for men, couples, and parents, while others are more moral in orientation.

Magazine

For several years, Schlessinger published a monthly magazine, Dr. Laura Perspective. She was the editor, her husband a contributing photographer, and her son the creative consultant. The magazine has since gone out of publication.

Website

Schlessinger has a website which contains hints for stay-at-home parents, her blog, a reading list, and streaming audio of her shows (by subscription only). When it was started, 310,000 people tried to access it simultaneously and it crashed. Certain aspects of feminism are often discussed on her website; she was a self-proclaimed feminist in the 1970s, but is now opposed to feminism.

Charitable work

Schlessinger created the Laura Schlessinger Foundation to help abused and neglected children in 1998. Schlessinger regularly asked her on-air audience to donate items for My Stuff bags, which go to children in need. All other donations came from other people or groups, usually in the form of donated items for the bags. Per the foundation's reports, money not used for operations was directed toward pro-life organizations, such as crisis pregnancy centers. In September 2004, Schlessinger announced that she was closing down the foundation because it had become too difficult and costly for her and her husband to underwrite, and they wished to devote their "energies and resources to other pressing needs".
In 2007, Schlessinger began fundraising for Operation Family Fund, an organization which aids the families of fallen or seriously injured veterans of the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. In 2008, she helped raise more than $1 million for the organization.

Awards

Schlessinger has received numerous awards from both media and conservative organizations. She was the first woman to win the Marconi Award for Network/Syndicated Personality of the Year (1997).
Schlessinger received a National Heritage award from the National Council of Young Israel in March 2001. She also received the National Religious Broadcasters Chairman's Award, and has lectured on the national conservative circuit. She was the commencement speaker at Hillsdale College in June 2002, and was awarded an honorary degree as a doctor of tradition and culture.
In 2007, Schlessinger was given an Exceptional Public Service award by the Office of the U.S. Secretary of Defense. In 2008, Talkers Magazine presented her with an award for outstanding community service by a radio talk show host.

Religious beliefs

Schlessinger was non-religious until she and her son began practicing Conservative Judaism in 1996. In 1998, Schlessinger, Bishop, and their son converted to Orthodox Judaism,Although Schlessinger's father was Jewish, her mother was not, thus, she was not a Jew under Jewish law, and conversion was required in order for her to become an Orthodox Jew.  and began instruction under Rabbi Reuven P. Bulka of Ottawa, Ontario.  During this time, Schlessinger sometimes used Jewish law and examples to advise her callers about their moral dilemmas. She occasionally clarified ethical and moral issues with her local Orthodox Rabbi Moshe D. Bryski, before mentioning them on the air. She was embraced by many in the politically conservative segment of Orthodox Judaism for bringing more awareness of Orthodoxy to her radio show. Some of her expressed views were explicitly religious, and are referenced her 1999 book The Ten Commandments: The Significance of God's Laws in Everyday Life. Although her other books have stressed the importance of morality, they are more secular in nature.
In July 2003, Schlessinger announced on her show that she was no longer an Orthodox Jew.

Marriage and family life

Schlessinger met and married Michael F. Rudolph, a dentist, in 1972 while she was attending Columbia University. The couple had a Unitarian ceremony. 53-55 Separating from Rudolph, Schlessinger moved to Encino, California in 1975 when she obtained a job in the science department at the University of Southern California. 58, 64. Their divorce was finalized in 1977. 63, 83.
In 1975, while working in the labs at USC, she met Lewis G. Bishop, a professor of neurophysiology who was married and the father of three children. 82. Bishop separated from his wife and began living with Schlessinger the same year. 84, 103. Schlessinger has vociferously proclaimed her disapproval of unwed couples "shacking up" and having children out of wedlock. But according to personal friend, Shelly Herman, "Laura lived with Lew for about nine years before she was married to him." "His divorce was final in 1979. 88. Bishop and Schlessinger married in 1985. Herman says that Schlessinger told her she was pregnant at the time, which Herman recalls as "particularly joyful because of the happy news." Schlessinger's only child, a son named Deryk, was born in November 1985. 90, 105.
Schlessinger was estranged from her sister for  years, and many thought she was an only child. She had not spoken to her mother for 18Bane, Vickie p. 24. to 20 years before her mother's death in 2002 from heart disease. Concerning the day that she heard about her mother's death, she said: "Apparently she had no friends and none of her neighbors were close, so nobody even noticed! How sad." In 2006, Schlessinger wrote that she had been attacked in a "vulgar, inhumane manner by media types" because of the circumstances surrounding her mother's death, and that false allegations had been made that she was unfit to dispense advice based on family values. She said that she had not mourned the deaths of either of her parents because she had no emotional bond to them.

Controversies

Libel lawsuit

In 1998, Schlessinger was in a Costa Mesa surf shop with her son when she began perusing the skateboarding magazine, Big Brother. On her radio program, Schlessinger declared the magazine to be "stealth pornography." When the owner of the store publicly denied that she found pornography in his store, Schlessinger sued him for lying, claiming that his denial had hurt her reputation.Dr. Laura Goes After Surf Shop For Porn When the case went to court, the judge dismissed her suit, but the shop owner's $4 million defamation countersuit lodged for hurting the reputation of his store was allowed to stand.

Internet publication of nude photos

In 1998, Schlessinger's early radio mentor, Bill Ballance, sold nude photos that he had taken of Schlessinger in the mid-1970s to a company specializing in internet porn. The photos were taken while Schlessinger was involved in a brief affair with then-married Bill Ballance.

Use of racial epithet

On August 10, 2010, Nita Hanson, a black woman married to a white man, called Schlessinger's show to ask for advice on how to deal with a husband who did not care when she received racist comments by acquaintances. Schlessinger first replied that "some people are hypersensitive" and because of that she'd need at least 2 good examples of racism the caller had received. The caller informed Schlessinger that the acquaintances in question had stated, "How you black people do this? You black people like doing that." Schlessinger responded by telling the caller that her examples weren't racist and that "A lot of blacks only voted for Obama simply because he was half black. Didn't matter what he was going to do in office; it was a black thing. You gotta' know that. That's not a surprise." Schlessinger continued by telling the caller, "chip on your shoulder," "sensitive," "Don't NAACP me," "A lot of what I heard from Jade pseudonym is a lot of what I hear from black think and it's really distressing and disturbing," etc. Laura's rant: In her own words.  August 13, 2010. Accessed February 12, 2012.
During the call, Schlessinger also used the word "nigger" eleven times. When Hanson asked, "Is it ever ok to say that word?" Schlessinger responded, "It depends how it's said. Black guys talking to each other seem to think it's ok." After the call Schlessinger said, "If you're that hypersensitive about color and don't have a sense of humor, don't marry out of your race." After the call, Schlessinger immediately took herself off the air, and early that evening wrote an apology to Los Angeles Radio People online journalist Don Barrett. A day later, as soon as she was back on the air, Schlessinger apologized.
Schlessinger announced she would end her radio show at the end of 2010: Schlessinger said that she will not retire.

Bibliography

Advice books:
|publisher=Cliff Street Books|year=2002|page=288|isbn=978-0-06-051260-6}}
|isbn=978-0-06-057786-5}}
|year=2008|page=208|isbn=978-0-06-083833-1}}
|year=2009|page=224|isbn=978-0-06-169029-7}}
Religious books:
|isbn=978-0-06-017307-4}}
Children's books

Fictional portrayals

In January 1992, Schlessinger played herself in the Quantum Leap Season Four episode "Roberto!".
In 1999, Schlessinger was parodied as  Dr. Nora on the sitcom Frasier. The character was portrayed as having dogmatic and fundamentalist social views that promoted social conservatism. The character was also shown to have a degree that belies her therapeutic advice and was estranged from her mother.
In 2000, in the episode "The Midterms" on The West Wing, the fictional "Dr. Jenna Jacobs" is scolded by President Bartlet, who criticizes her views on homosexuality, and points out she is not a doctor in any field related to morality, ethics, or theology. He quotes from the Bible to point out the inconsistency of condemning certain sins but not others. Show creator Aaron Sorkin admitted to modeling Bartlet's diatribe on an anonymous "Letter to Dr. Laura," which was a popular viral email at the time.
Schlessinger is featured as an antagonist in the animated series Queer Duck.








