[[Bull shark]]

CATEGORIES: Viviparous fish, Carcharhinidae, Fish of Israel, Saltwater fish of Florida

The bull shark (Carcharhinus leucas), also known as the Zambezi shark or, unofficially, as Zambi in Africa and Nicaragua shark in Nicaragua, is a shark commonly found worldwide in warm, shallow waters along coasts and in rivers. The bull shark is known for its aggressive nature, predilection for warm shallow water, and presence in brackish and freshwater systems including estuaries and rivers.
Bull sharks can thrive in both saltwater and freshwater and can travel far up rivers. They have even been known to travel as far up the Mississippi River as Illinois,Sharks In Illinois. In-Fisherman (16 July 2012). Retrieved on 30 November 2013. although there have been few recorded freshwater attacks. They are probably responsible for the majority of near-shore shark attacks, including many attacks attributed to other species.
Unlike the river sharks of the genus Glyphis, bull sharks are not true freshwater sharks, despite their ability to survive in freshwater habitats.

Etymology

The name "bull shark" comes from the shark's stocky shape, broad, flat snout, and aggressive, unpredictable behavior. In India, the bull shark may be confused with the Sundarbans or Ganges shark. In Africa, it is also commonly called the Zambezi River shark or just Zambi. Its wide range and diverse habitats result in many other local names, including Ganges River shark, Fitzroy Creek whaler, van Rooyen's shark, Lake Nicaragua shark,

Anatomy and appearance

Bull sharks are large and stout, with females being larger than males. The bull shark can be up to  Bull sharks are wider and heavier than other requiem sharks of comparable length, and are grey on top and white below. The second dorsal fin is smaller than the first. The bull shark's caudal fin is longer and lower than that of the larger sharks, and it has a small snout, and lacks an interdorsal ridge.
Bull sharks have a bite force of up to 

Distribution and habitat

The bull shark is commonly found worldwide in coastal areas of warm oceans, in rivers and lakes, and occasionally salt and freshwater streams if they are deep enough. It is found to a depth of .  In the Atlantic, it is found from Massachusetts to southern Brazil, and from Morocco to Angola. In the Indian Ocean, it is found from South Africa to Kenya, India, and Vietnam to Australia.
Populations of bull sharks are also found in several major rivers, with more than 500 bull sharks thought to be living in the Brisbane River. One was reportedly seen swimming the flooded streets of Brisbane, Queensland, Australia, during the Queensland floods of late 2010/early 2011. In the Pacific Ocean, it can be found from Baja California to Ecuador. 
The shark has traveled  up the Amazon River to Iquitos in Peru. Bull shark (Carcharhinus leucas). sharks-med.com It also lives in fresh water Lake Nicaragua, in the Ganges and Brahmaputra rivers of West Bengal and Assam in eastern India and adjoining Bangladesh. It can live in water with a high salt content as in St. Lucia Estuary in South Africa. The bull shark is generally prolific in the warm coastal waters and estuarine systems of the Mozambique Channel and southward, including Kwa-Zulu Natal and Mozambique. The species has a distinct preference for warm currents.
After Hurricane Katrina, many bull sharks were sighted in Lake Pontchartrain. wwltv. 16 September 2006 Bull sharks have occasionally gone up the Mississippi River as far upstream as Alton, Illinois. They have also been found in the Potomac River in Maryland.8-Foot Shark Caught In Potomac River. Nbcwashington. Retrieved on 4 May 2012.

Behavior

Freshwater tolerance

The bull shark is the best known of 43 species of elasmobranch in ten genera and four families to have been reported in fresh water.
Initially, scientists thought the sharks in Lake Nicaragua belonged to an endemic species, the Lake Nicaragua shark (Carcharhinus nicaraguensis). In 1961, following specimens comparisons, taxonomists  synonymized them. elasmo-research. Accessed 6 April 2008. They can jump along the rapids of the San Juan River (which connects Lake Nicaragua and the Caribbean Sea), almost like salmon. Bull sharks tagged inside the lake have later been caught in the open ocean (and vice versa), with some taking as little as seven to eleven days to complete the journey.
Bull sharks are able to regulate themselves to live in either fresh water or salt water. It is possible for the bull shark to live in fresh water for its entire life, but it has been observed that this does not happen for certain reasons, mostly due to reproduction. Young bull sharks will leave the brackish water in which they are born and move out into the sea in order to breed with bull sharks of the other sex. While theoretically, it may be possible for bull sharks to live in purely freshwater, it was observed that the bull sharks that were being experimented on had died within four years. The stomach was opened and all that was found were 2 small fishes that were unidentifiable. The cause of death could have been starvation since the primary food source for bull sharks resides in salt water.
The bull shark is known to be able to live in both saltwater and freshwater.  It was found in a research experiment that, the majority of the time, the bull sharks were found to be at the mouth of an estuary.  The water salinity was tested every month to determine if the difference in salinity is what drove bull sharks into the river. It was found that the bull shark stayed at the mouth of the river independent of the salinity of the water. The driving factor for a bull shark to be in freshwater or saltwater is its age; as the bull shark ages the tolerance for very low or high salinity increases. It was found that the majority of the newborn or very young bull sharks were found in the freshwater area, whereas the much older bull sharks were found to be in the saltwater, as they had developed a much better tolerance for the salinity. This is one of the reasons why adult bull sharks will travel into the river (in order to reproduce). The newborns are not born with a high tolerance for high salinity, so they are born in freshwater and stay there until they are able to travel out.

Diet

Bull sharks are typically solitary hunters,  but occasionally hunt in pairs. Life-sea.com (15 November 2011). Retrieved on 30 November 2013.  They often cruise through shallow waters, and can accelerate rapidly and be highly aggressive, even possibly attacking a racehorse in the Brisbane River in the Australian state of Queensland. 
The bull shark's diet consists mainly of bony fish and sharks, including other bull sharks, but can also include turtles, birds, dolphins, terrestrial mammals, crustaceans, echinoderms, and stingrays. They hunt in murky waters because it is harder for the prey to see the shark coming. Wilson (eds.) London & New York: Smithsonian Institution, ISBN 0789477645. Bull sharks have been known to use the bump-and-bite technique to attack their prey. Bull sharks have attacked hippopotamuses in Africa's Zambezi River, based on bite marks on the hippos' feet. Wildlife Explorer. Group 4, cards 33 and 4. ISBN 1-886614-77-6.
The bull shark is known to be a solitary hunter, although there are brief moments in which the bull sharks will team up with another bull shark in order to make it easier to hunt and to trick prey. Marinebio. Retrieved on 30 November 2013.
Sharks are known to be opportunistic when feeding, and the bull shark is no exception to this, as it is part of the Carcharhinus family of sharks. Normally, sharks eat in short bursts, and when food is scarce, sharks digest for a much longer period of time in order to avoid starvation. The bull shark continues to bite and tackle its prey until the prey is unable to escape, and then the bull shark eats its prey.
The bull shark is known to populate the Indian River. In Florida, researchers examined the contents of the bull shark's stomach. Stingrays and Ariid catfishes, which are both abundant in the Indian River, were found to be in the stomach of examined bull sharks.  One surprising discovery, the head of a small shark, was found, suggesting that the bull shark is capable of feeding upon other sharks in addition to the other fish that it preys on.
It also has been cited in the San Juan River area, that the bull shark had consumed sharks. Vorenburg induced a "shark eat shark" environment in which lemon sharks and bull sharks were put into an environment where they had to fight for food, and the injured sharks from the bouts were consumed by the bull sharks. In addition to lemon sharks, they also fed on young sandbar sharks. There has been no evidence to prove that there are different feeding patterns among young and adults or among males and females. Bull sharks do not actively seek out food, but rather are dependent on anything that is available to them. As part of their survival mechanism, bull sharks will regurgitate the food in their stomachs in order to escape from a predator as they stop for the regurgitated food.

Reproduction

Bull sharks mate during late summer and early autumn, at birth and take 10 years to reach maturity. Coastal lagoons, river mouths, and other low-salinity estuaries are common nursery habitats.
175 cm to 235 cm seems to be the size of a fully matured female bull shark that produce viable eggs for fertilization. The courting routine between bull sharks has not been observed in detail as of yet. It is speculated that the male bites the females on the tail until they turn upside down and they male can copulate at that point. At some points, the harassment of the male can become violent. It is not uncommon to see scratches and other marks on a mature female from the mating ritual.
Bull sharks have an unusual migratory pattern in comparison to other sharks. They are found in rivers all over the world. They have the ability to go from seawater and freshwater. They give birth in the freshwater of rivers. The young bull sharks are free from predators while they grow up in the river before they go out to the sea in order to find mates.
The ability to be able to survive in both freshwater and saltwater also gives another benefit that has been driven by evolution. Because the majority of sharks are only able to survive in saltwater, the bull shark has evolved to have their offspring in the freshwater where other sharks cannot enter.  The freshwater acts as a protective area where the young are able to grow and mature without the threat of larger sharks preying on the younger bull sharks. This is an explanation for the behavior that is observed from the bull sharks as to why there would be any reason for the adult bull shark to ever travel into a freshwater area despite being able to tolerate the high salinity of marine water.
Bull sharks are born alive in freshwater which is in contrast to most sharks since they lay eggs. The average litter for a female bull shark is around 1 to 13 pups. Psrc.calstate. Retrieved on 30 November 2013.  The average time span for a female bull shark to be pregnant is around 10 to 11 months. Sharkinfo. Retrieved on 30 November 2013. The male bull shark is able to begin reproducing around the age of 15 years while the female cannot begin reproducing until the age of 18 years. Unlike most sharks though, the bull shark does not rear their young like other sharks, the young bull sharks are born into flat, protected areas. Freshwater presents a natural defense against most larger predators, and the flat land is an added defense as most large predators will not swim in shallow areas. This increases their chance of survival since the parents do not rear the young in the traditional manner. This is also the reason why there is a high mortality rate in young bull sharks. Since the parents do not rear and protect the young, any predator that is able to attack a young bull shark is easily able to kill and eat the young bull shark without much resistance. Bioexpedition. Retrieved on 30 November 2013.

Interactions with humans

Since bull sharks often dwell in very shallow waters, they may be more dangerous to humans than any other species of shark, and along with the tiger shark, oceanic whitetip and great white shark, are among the four shark species most likely to attack humans.
One or several bull sharks may have been responsible for the Jersey Shore shark attacks of 1916, which were the inspiration for Peter Benchley's novel Jaws. The speculation of bull sharks possibly being responsible is based on some attacks occurring in brackish and freshwater.
The bull shark is responsible for attacks around the Sydney Harbour inlets. Most of these attacks were previously attributed to great white sharks. In India, bull sharks swim up the Ganges River and have attacked people. Many of these attacks have been attributed to the Ganges shark, Glyphis gangeticus, a critically endangered river shark species that is probably the only other shark in India able to survive in fresh water, although the sand tiger shark was also blamed during the 1960s and 1970s.
The bull shark prefers coastal water which is less than 100 feet in depth. This is mostly due to their feeding patterns since they prefer murky waters. This is also a problem since this gives the most interaction with humans. It is known that bull sharks inhabit areas off the coast of Florida, and there have been reports of bull sharks getting close enough to the coast to attack humans since the bull shark is a territorial animal.

Visual cues

Behavioral studies have confirmed that sharks can take visual cues in order to discriminate between different objects.  The bull shark is able to discriminate between colors of mesh netting that is present underwater. It was found that bull sharks tended to avoid mesh netting of bright colors rather than colors that blended in with the water. Bright yellow mesh netting was found to be easily avoided when it was placed in the path of the bull shark. This was found to be the reason that sharks are attracted to bright yellow survival gear rather than ones that were painted black. This is very important because it gives an insight into how bull sharks are able to pick up certain visual keys underwater that might give them an advantage when seeking out certain prey.

Energy conservation

In 2008, researchers tagged and recorded the movements of young bull sharks in the Caloosahatchee River estuary. Specifically, they were testing to find out what determined the movement of the young bull sharks.  It was found that the young bull sharks synchronously moved downriver when the environmental conditions changed.  This large movement of young bull sharks were found to be moving as a response rather than other external factors such as predators. An interesting find was that the movement was directly related to the bull shark conserving energy for itself. One way the bull shark is able to conserve energy is that when the tidal flow changes, the bull shark uses the tidal flow in order to conserve energy as it moves downriver.  Another way for the bull shark to conserve energy is to decrease the amount of energy needed to osmoregulate the surrounding environment.

Ecology

Bull sharks are apex predators and rarely have to fear being attacked by other animals. Humans are their biggest threat. Larger sharks, such as the tiger shark and great white shark, may attack them. There have been stories documented in the media of saltwater crocodiles preying on young bull sharks in the rivers and estuaries of Northern Australia.



Notes and references

General references

 
 



