[[Human Rights in China (organization)]]

CATEGORIES: Human rights in China, Non-profit organizations based in the United States, Human rights organizations based in the United States, International non-profit organizations, International Federation for Human Rights member organizations, Tiananmen Square protests of 1989


Human Rights in China () is a New York-based international, Chinese, non-governmental organization with intentions to promote international human rights and facilitate the institutional protection of these rights in the People's Republic of China. 83HRIC: Mission and approach HRIC is a member organization of the International Federation for Human Rights. Hu Jintao en France : les droits humains doivent enfin être abordés ! According to Fang Lizhi, HRIC s committed to an independent, non-political, and intelligent approachGarry Rodan, op. cit., p. 212
Founded by Chinese students and scholars in March 1989, HRIC Rights In China implements programs to generate infrastructural change in China while also engaging in advocacy strategies on behalf of individuals in China. 197.
With offices in Hong Kong and New York,US Asia Law Institute: Fellowship Opportunity for NYU Law Graduates: Robert L. Bernstein Fellowship in International Human Rights HRIC serves as a source of analysis and information on the human rights situation in China, as well as an active NGO advocate in the international arena. In 2005, HRIC was also recognized for its creative and effective use of technology by The Tech Museum of Innovation as one of twenty-five Tech Award Laureates of the year.Twenty Five Global Innovators Named as 2005 Tech Museum Awards Laureates, The Tech Museum
HRIC's Executive Director from 2002 to  is Sharon Hom. Its former Executive Director is Xiao Qiang.

Program

HRIC links individual advocacy with systemic and policy interventions addressing human rights, technology, legal and administrative reform issues. HRIC's core programs and reports address human rights violations affecting China's rural population,HRIC: Implemention of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in the PRC Executive Summary migrant workers,HRIC: INSTITUTIONALIZED EXCLUSION: The tenuous legal status of internal migrants in China's major cities A report by Human Rights in China November 6, 2002 ethnic minorities,HRIC: Xinjiang Report: Devastating Blows Religious Repression of Uighurs in Xinjiang women,HRIC: Report on implementation of CEDAW in the People's Republic of China, by Human Rights in China, Asia Monitor Resource Centre, China Labour Bulletin, Hong Kong Christian Industrial Committee and children.HRIC: Second Periodic Report of the People's Republic of China on Implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child

Domestic advocacy

HRIC's domestic work with political prisoners provides support for legal representation and assistance to activists in China in calling upon the Chinese government to engage in a constructive reassessment of the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 and subsequent crackdown and to move toward greater reforms and social stability.
By supporting domestic groups such as the Tiananmen Mothers, HRIC links Chinese calls for redress to current international debates such as lifting the European Union arms embargo on China. HRIC's online June 4 Archive,HRIC: June 4th Archive is a Chinese-language archive documenting the history of the 1989 Tiananmen democracy movement. HRIC also maintains Fill the Square,HRIC: Fill the Square, petition "Support a call for truth and justice for the 1989 Tiananmen Square victims". an online petition mobilizing individuals and organizations worldwide to support the Tiananmen Mothers' demands for accountability for the June Fourth crackdown.

International advocacy

HRIC's advocacy initiatives contribute to multilateral and bilateral human rights policy discussions, analyses, and recommendations. HRIC provides briefings and reports to United Nations bodies, international conferences, WTO processes, and the EU-China Dialogue. As of 2006, HRIC has submitted over 40 individual cases of the victims of human rights abuses to the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention; 13 of the cases have had decisions made on them, and all of the 13 have been deemed arbitrary. 1).
HRIC regularly addresses the relationship between corporate social responsibility, trade, and human rights through reports, briefings, and presentations, thus contributing to a global framework that respects and promotes human rights. HRIC has outlined a best practices matrix for IT companies doing business in ChinaHRIC: IT Best Practices Matrix involving information communication technology (ICT), surveillance and security, multilaterals, the media, governments, and NGOs.

Online advocacy

HRIC's online advocacy project supports Chinese citizens' increasing activism and promotes the free flow of information in China by building a technology platform that uses proxy server technology and a biweekly e-newsletterHRIC: shuangzhoukan.org (Chinese) sent to hundreds of thousands of subscribers in China. The project includes the development of six interrelated Web sites with online Chinese publications, tools for accountability, and advocacy resources.

Ongoing publications

China Rights Forum is HRIC's bilingual semiannual journal. Since its founding in 1990, it has covered a range of issues regarding China's human rights developments. It includes articles from Chinese scholars, artists, writers and activists promoting democratic reform, labor rights, freedom of expression, and the rights of religious and ethnic minorities and disadvantaged groups. Archives of the articles are available online.
Biweekly Chinese Journal (中国人权双周刊) is a Chinese-language biweekly journal publishing in-depth analyses, current events commentaries, theoretical discussions, and law reviews, in addition to news from China that has been banned and censored in the mainland. Issues covered have included torture and corruption in China, Internet censorship, and China's legal system. The majority of the contributors and readers are mainland Chinese Internet users.
Daily News Brief is HRIC's daily news roundup.

Reports

HRIC has published thematic reports and briefings, issues backgrounders, and short reports on topics involving ethnic minorities, women and children, control of the media, labor rights and state secrets, legal reform, and social unrest. HRIC also issues long reports on human rights issues and circulates them to multilateral bodies, media, policy makers, governments, and NGOs.HRIC Publications

Funding

HRIC is funded by private foundations and individuals from Europe, Asia, and North America. Since it was founded, HRIC has obtained support from groups including the National Endowment for Democracy, Open Society Institute, the International Centre for Human Rights and Democratic Development, the European Human Rights Foundation, Human Rights Watch, and Asia Watch. cit., p. 202[ref]NED: 
[/ref] In 2006, the New York University School of Law honored Robert L. Bernstein by establishing the Robert L. Bernstein Fellowship in International Human Rights which supports an annual, one-year fellowship for recent graduates to work with the NGO. Bernstein Fellowship in International Human Rights. 








