[[Arabic diacritics]]

CATEGORIES: Arabic diacritics, Arabic words and phrases, Quranic orthography, Phonetic guides

The Arabic script has numerous diacritics, including i'jam ). 
The Arabic script is an impure abjad, where short consonants and long vowels are represented by letters but short vowels and consonant length are not generally indicated in writing.  is optional to represent missing vowels and consonant length. Modern Arabic is nearly always written with consonant pointing, but occasionally unpointed texts are still seen. Early texts such as the Qur'an were initially written without pointing, and pointing was added later to determine the expected readings and interpretations.

Tashkil (marks used as phonetic guides)

The literal meaning of ) is to provide a phonetic guide or a phonetic aid; i.e. show the correct pronunciation. It serves the same purpose as furigana (also called "ruby") in Japanese or pinyin or zhuyin in Mandarin Chinese for children who are learning to read or foreign learners.
The bulk of Arabic script is written without ) as well. Another use is in children's literature. Harakat are also used in ordinary texts when an ambiguity of pronunciation might arise. Vowelled Arabic dictionaries provide information about the correct pronunciation to both native and foreign Arabic speakers.
Short vowels can be included in cases where readers could not easily resolve word ambiguity from context alone, or simply wherever their writing might be considered aesthetically pleasing.
An example of a fully vocalised (vowelised or vowelled) Arabic from the Qur'ān (Al-Fatiha 1:1):
Some Arabic textbooks for foreigners now use  as a phonetic guide similarly to English dictionaries providing transcription.

Harakat (short vowel marks)

The , for example, are markers for both vowels and consonants.

=Fatḥah=

  
The .
When a   is not usually written in such cases.

=Kasrah=

  
A similar diagonal line below a letter is called a .
When a  means 'breaking'.

=Ḍammah=

  
The .
When a  should be written on the preceding consonant to avoid mispronunciation.

=Maddah=

  
The .
In theory, the same sequence .

=Dagger alif=

  
The superscript (or dagger) '''').
The dagger .

=Alif waslah=

  
The .
It only occurs in the beginning of words (can occur after prepositions and the definite article). It is commonly found in imperative verbs, the perfective aspect of verb stems VII to X and their verbal nouns (.
It occurs in phrases and sentences (connected speech, not isolated/dictionary forms) 1) to replace the elided hamza whose alif-seat has assimilated to the previous vowel, e.g., في ٱليمن or في اليمن (alif by itself is also indicative of the connecting hamza);
2) in hamza-initial imperative forms following a vowel, especially following the conjunction و, e.g., قُم و ٱشرب الماء

=Sukun=

  
The .
The .

Tanwin (final postnasalized or long vowels)

  
The three vowel diacritics may be doubled at the end of a word to indicate that the vowel is followed by the consonant n. These may or may not be considered .
These endings are used as non-pausal grammatical indefinite case endings in literary Arabic or classical Arabic (triptotes only). In a vocalised text, they may be written even if they are not pronounced (see pausa). See  varies from country to country, and there is a trend in simplifying the Arabic grammar. 
The sign  endings in indefinite triptote forms:

Shaddah (consonant gemination mark)

  
The shadda or shaddah ), is a diacritic shaped like a small written Latin "w".
It is used to indicate gemination (consonant doubling or extra length), which is phonemic in Arabic. It is written above the consonant which is to be doubled. It is the only  ('teacher', female).

I'jam (phonetic distinctions of consonants)

The ijam . Typically ijam are not considered diacritics but part of the letter.
Early manuscripts of the  became small black letters or strokes. 
Typically, Egyptians do not use dots under final .

Hamza (glottal stop semi-consonant)

  
Although often a diacritic is not considered a letter of the alphabet, the hamza .
Which letter is to be used to support the  depends on the quality of the adjacent vowels.
Consider the following words:  for more details.

History

