[[Thomas Truxtun]]

CATEGORIES: 1755 births, 1822 deaths, 18th-century American naval officers, 19th-century American naval officers, People of the Quasi-War, People from Hempstead (village), New York, Congressional Gold Medal recipients, American naval personnel of the American Revolution, American people of the Barbary Wars, Pennsylvania sheriffs, Burials in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Burials at Christ Church (Philadelphia)

Thomas Truxtun (or Truxton) (February 17, 1755 – May 5, 1822) was an American naval officer after the Revolutionary War, when he served as a privateer, who rose to the rank of commodore in the late eighteenth century and later served in the Quasi-War with France and the First Barbary War in North Africa. He was one of the first six commanders appointed to the new US Navy by President Washington. During his naval career he commanded a number of famous US naval ships including . Later in civilian life he became involved with politics and was also elected Sheriff.

Early life and education

Born near Hempstead, New York, on Long Island, Truxtun was the only son of an English country lawyer.120  He lost his father at a young age and was taken to Jamaica on Long Island with relatives and placed under the care of a close friend, John Troup.27 Having little chance for a formal education, he joined the crew of the British merchant ship Pitt at the age of 12,McBride, 1815 pp.26-27 against his father's previous wishes for him to pursue a career in politics.120-121Seawell, 1898 p.43

Naval service

Because of his skills, by the time he was twenty, Truxtun had garnered command of his own vessel, Andrew Caldwell. Before the Revolution he was impressed into the Royal Navy and was offered a midshipman's warrant, which he turned down.
He operated as a U.S. privateer during the American Revolutionary War, commanding several ships: Congress, Independence, Mars, and St. James. Truxtun was highly successful in capturing enemy ships during this period, not once suffering a defeat.
After the war he returned to the merchant marine, where he remained for 12 years. In 1786 he commanded Canton, operating from Philadelphia, one of the first American ships to engage in trade with China.

Quasi-War

In 1794 and the war with France looming, Truxtun was one of the first six captains appointed by President Washington in the newly formed US Navy.177 During the Quasi-War with France Truxtun commanded  overseen her construction in Baltimore, Maryland, with Silas Talbot. After a rank dispute with captains Dale and Talbot, Truxtun was placed in charge of the ship by President Washington. He commanded her with considerable success.156-159McBride, 1815 p.30

Constellation engages L'Insurgente

Because of constant French privateering attacks against American vessels, an American squadron commanded by Truxtun was sent to the West Indies to patrol the waters between Puerto Rico and Saint Kitts with orders to engage any French forces they found in the area. Also on board was the young and later famous John Rodgers, acting 1st Lieutenant.32-33 On 9 February 1799, while sailing independently of his squadron in his flagship Constellation, Truxtun encountered and engaged the French frigate LInsurgente into an engagement that lasted an hour and fourteen minutes. Barreau did not strike his colors until his ship was almost a complete wreck. French loses were 29 killed and 44 wounded, while Truxtun's crew only suffered one killed and two wounded.31Toll, 2006 pp.115-117 It was the first battle engagement since the Revolutionary War that an American ship had encountered an enemy ship.157

Constellation engages La Vengeance

On 31 January 1800, Constellation engaged La Vengeance, a larger vessel with a broadside of 

Command of USS ''President

 America's fastest sailing ship.15 She was the last of the original six frigates launched. After the vessel was fitted out for sea duty, she set sail for Guadeloupe on 5 August with Captain Truxtun in command, relieving Stephen Decatur. She conducted routine patrols during the latter part of the Quasi-War and recaptured several American merchant ships; however, her overall service in this period was uneventful. She returned to the United States in March after a peace treaty with France was ratified on 3 February 1801.217-221
His victories, perhaps most notably that over L'Insurgente, made Truxtun a hero of the time. Consequently, when Truxtun arrived home he was awarded a Congressional Gold Medal on 2 February 1800, becoming the eighth recipient of that body's "highest expression of national appreciation for distinguished achievements and contributions."Seawell, 1898 p.51
During this period, Truxtun was involved in a dispute over rank with Richard Dale. Truxtun took command of President for a few months in 1800, then retired from the Navy and located first in Perth Amboy, New Jersey, and later in Philadelphia. He was offered command during the First Barbary War in 1801 but refused, settling firmly into retirement.

Writer

Truxtun had a thorough understanding of the art of celestial navigation and was one among few men of his day who possessed such intimate knowledge of this navigational art. He also designed the original Navy signal manual and wrote the predecessor to the Navy Regulations in use today.127

Later civilian life

Truxtun ran an unsuccessful campaign for the United States House of Representatives in 1810. In 1816 he was elected sheriff of Philadelphia County, serving until 1819.129 He also published several books, well-known at the time, covering navigation and naval tactics.
Truxtun died in Philadelphia on 5 May 1822 and is buried at Christ Church Burial Ground.

Legacy and honors



Notes



Bibliography

Further reading




