[[List of anime in the United States]]

CATEGORIES: Lists of anime, American television-related lists

These anime series have been shown and have achieved varying levels of popularity in the United States and Canada, this is contributed to the era known as the "anime boom" which lasted from mid-1990s to mid-2000s. In the United States, most anime can be seen televised on channels such as Adult Swim, Neon Alley, FUNimation Channel, G4, Nicktoons, Vortexx, Cartoon Network or viewed online on streaming websites such as Anime Network, FUNimation 's website, Crunchyroll, Netflix, Crackle, YouTube and Hulu.

1960s

In the 1960s, Astro Boy, Speed Racer and Kimba the White Lion were introduced in the U.S. and were popular in the ratings. However their style of animation and storytelling really never stood out as being "Japanese" to American viewers thus they were never classified as "anime".

1970s

1980s

In the early 1980s, CBN Cable aired an English dub of the Christian-themed anime series Superbook and The Flying House.
In the 1970s and 1980s many production companies such as DiC Entertainment, Nelvana, Hasbro, Warner Bros. Animation and Walt Disney Television Animation outsourced Japanese, Korean and Taiwanese studios to help animate many original animated series for network syndication such as Transformers, Inspector Gadget, Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, Muppet Babies, DuckTales and Care Bears. TMS Entertainment (known for Lupin III and Detective Conan) would animate the popular animated series Tiny Toon Adventures and Rainbow Brite.
In the mid-1980s super robot and space opera anime was very popular, series such as Voltron, Transformers and Robotech were successful in ratings and also commercial successes through selling merchandise. 
There was an early attempt by Harmony Gold to air a dub of Dragon Ball in the late 1980s but was unsuccessful.
In 1988, the anime film Akira was released theatrically in the U.S. by Streamline Pictures. Though it was a commercial failure, it gained a cult following.

1990s

The 1990s, was the period in which anime became successful in the U.S. market and the terms "anime" and "manga" became commonly well known (ultimately replacing the former majorly known term "Japanimation").  Companies such as FUNimation Productions, Bandai Entertainment, 4Kids Entertainment, Central Park Media, Media Blasters, Saban Entertainment, Viz Video, Pioneer LDC and ADV Films began licensing anime in the United States. 
Viz which was already successful with its manga translation of Rumiko Takahashi's Ranma ½, bought the rights to the anime and released it via direct-to-video starting in 1994. Ranma ½ enjoyed success in the VHS market and was the first anime title in the 1990s to have this level of success and one of the first titles to be recognized as an "anime". Viz also began publishing a magazine called Animerica in the 1990s which featured manga as well as articles on Japanese culture, fashion, manga, anime and video games, this helped spread the otaku subculture to Americans.
DiC (then-owned by Disney) and FUNimation (with the help of Saban and Ocean Studios) licensed Sailor Moon (1995) and Dragon Ball Z (1996) respectively and both were televised in the U.S. through early morning syndication. Since the two anime were very successful internationally, they were purchased to capitalize on the success of superhero shows like Power Rangers (The very popular Americanized version of the tokusatsu series Super Sentai) and Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles. Power Rangers ratings overthrew both Anime and Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles. Power Rangers is the most popular and longest running boys action series. 
1998, Cartoon Network which had an action-themed evening block named Toonami began airing Sailor Moon and Dragon Ball Z both became overwhelmingly successful with younger audiences (being that they were aired in the evening hours which children were home) and as a result both got revived: receiving new dubs with significantly less editing being that these episodes were on cable television and with the recent inception of television rating system (both were rated TV-Y7-FV), the standards were relaxed. Voltron, Robotech and Ronin Warriors also enjoyed renewed success on Toonami. Toonami would still continue to air anime and is credited with the beginning the era of  the anime boom in the United States in the late 1990s and early 2000s. 
In 1997, the very popular yet controversial series Neon Genesis Evangelion was released on VHS uncut by ADV Films and in 2002, both the films End of Evangelion and Evangelion: Death and Rebirth were both released in the U.S. by Manga Entertainment. Evangelion grew to have a large fan base in the United States and is famed for its combining of the mecha genre with various aspects of philosophy, psychology, religious imagery, mental illnesses and shock horror elements.
In 1998, Pokémon was introduced to U.S. and it became a ratings hit, a pop culture phenomenon and monumental commercial success through its merchandising (trading cards, VHS, toys, video games etc.). Digimon was introduced in 1999; although it was a success, it did not reach the same level of popularity as Pokémon. 
Sci Fi Channel also aired many experimental, avant-garde, action, horror and science fiction anime films and series during the 1990s during the late night and early morning hours and still continued to do so up until 2011. Ghost in the Shell, Ninja Scroll, Akira, Street Fighter II: The Animated Movie, and Urusei Yatsura: Beautiful Dreamer are among the films that have aired. Series such as Gurren Lagann, Gundam 00, Casshan: Robot Hunter, Record of Lodoss War, Iria: Zeiram the Animation, Rave Master, Tokko, Chrono Crusade and Fist of the North Star have also aired.
In 1998, Disney's Miramax released the anime film Princess Mononoke in the U.S. theatrically, though it was not a great success at the box office (it did much better on DVD releases) it began the relationship between Disney and Studio Ghibli to distribute the latter's films in the U.S.

2000s

In 2002, Spirited Away was released through Disney theatrically and was successful enough to be the first anime film to be nominated for and win an Academy Award.
In the 2000s even after the popular series Dragon Ball Z and Sailor Moon ended their runs, Toonami still continued to air popular anime such as Dragon Ball, Dragon Ball GT, Rurouni Kenshin,Yu Yu Hakusho, . Naruto was very successful on Toonami and remains of the most popular anime titles in U.S. In 2008, Toonami was discontinued and anime began airing exclusively on Adult Swim, the late night counterpart to Cartoon Network
The block Adult Swim began airing on Cartoon Network in 2001, its first anime title aired was Cowboy Bebop. Cowboy Bebop was very successful and remains the longest aired anime series on Adult Swim. Adult Swim also aired series including Fullmetal Alchemist, InuYasha, Outlaw Star, Pilot Candidate, Paranoia Agent, Samurai Champloo,  Death Note, s-CRY-ed, Eureka Seven, Ghost in the Shell, FLCL, Neon Genesis Evangelion, Case Closed, Lupin III, Blue Gender, Code Geass, Bleach, Blood+, Trinity Blood, Shin Chan, Wolf's Rain, Moribito and Trigun. Adult Swim mostly airs anime under the title "Action" even though Shin Chan and Super Milk Chan are comedies. Adult Swim became so successful over the years that Turner Broadcasting split it from Cartoon Network & is now ranked as an independent network.
Due to the popularity of Dragon Ball Z, Funimation would continue to dominate the anime distribution in the United States and continued licensing several popular titles such as Yu Yu Hakusho, Case Closed, Blue Gender, Fruits Basket, Black Cat, Ouran High School Host Club, Kodocha, One Piece, Kenichi: The Mightiest Disciple, Trinity Blood, Fullmetal Alchemist, Tsubasa: Reservoir Chronicle and Shin Chan and launched its own channel FUNimation Channel to exclusively carry most of its titles. FUNimation would also rescue rights to titles when if its licensor discontinued, such the case with ADV Films (which closed in 2008) and Geneon (which closed in 2007).
After the success of Pokémon in the late 1990s, 4Kids Entertainment continue to license anime titles and target them towards children such as the Yu-Gi-Oh! franchise, Sonic X, Magical DoReMi, Mew Mew Power, Shaman King, Kirby Right Back At Ya!, Dinosaur King and Ultimate Muscle. However 4Kids was met with much controversy for its use of "Americanization" and heavy editing of content, particularly with its dub of Yu-Gi-Oh! and One Piece.

2010s

In 2010, Dragon Ball Z Kai premiered on Nicktoons and became a hit success for the network,  Nicktoons also aired the original Dragon Ball Z films and Dragon Ball GT. Starting on March 2013, Yu-Gi-Oh! and its continuing series started to air on the network.
Fansub sites of popular anime have been popular yet controversial in the U.S. though many are criticized since they steal money away from anime licensors and have been blamed for the cause of many companies going out of business. Section23, Bandai, Viz, TV Tokyo and FUNimation have tried to limit these efforts by sending cease and decease letters or blocking out content on many sites. Also the production of English dubs of anime in general have decreased and many distributors are switching to the subtitle-only market such as Sentai Filmworks, Aniplex Of America and NIS America.
In 2012, Bandai Entertainment folded its anime licensing department and continued to sell their licensed and eventually studio Sunrise (owned by Bandai Visual) made deals with FUNimation and Sentai Filmoworks to license and republish Sunrise titles formerly licensed by Bandai Entertainment. In 2012, 4Kids Entertainment filed for bankruptcy and sold off the rights to the Yu-Gi-Oh! franchise back to Konami and the remaining licenses went to Saban Brands.
In early 2012, Fullmetal Alchemist: The Sacred Star of Milos was released in over 100 theaters throughout North America.
Disney released The Secret World of Arrietty theatrically and it grew to become a huge box office success and is one of the highest grossing films of 2012 (Number 50 in the Worldwide box office).
In 2012, due to popular request on Twitter, Reddit and Facebook: the Toonami block was revived and began airing on Adult Swim replacing Adult Swim Action. Similar to Midnight Run, it is now targeted to young adult demographic with little to no editing of content.

