[[Logarithm]]

CATEGORIES: Logarithms, Elementary special functions, Scottish inventions

The logarithm of a number is the exponent to which another fixed value, the base, must be raised to produce that number. For example, the logarithm of 1000 to base 10 is 3, because 10 to the power 3 is 1000:  More generally, for any two real numbers b and x where b is positive and b ≠ 1,
The logarithm to base 10  and is prominent in computer science.
Logarithms were introduced by John Napier in the early 17th century as a means to simplify calculations. They were rapidly adopted by navigators, scientists, engineers, and others to perform computations more easily, using slide rules and logarithm tables. Tedious multi-digit multiplication steps can be replaced by table look-ups and simpler addition because of the fact—important in its own right—that the logarithm of a product is the sum of the logarithms of the factors:
provided that b, x and y are all positive and b ≠ 1.
The present-day notion of logarithms comes from Leonhard Euler, who connected them to the exponential function in the 18th century.
Logarithmic scales reduce wide-ranging quantities to smaller scopes. For example, the decibel is a logarithmic unit quantifying sound pressure and signal power ratios. In chemistry, pH is a logarithmic measure for the acidity of an aqueous solution. Logarithms are commonplace in scientific formulae, and in measurements of the complexity of algorithms and of geometric objects called fractals. They describe musical intervals, appear in formulae counting prime numbers, inform some models in psychophysics, and can aid in forensic accounting.
In the same way as the logarithm reverses exponentiation, the complex logarithm is the inverse function of the exponential function applied to complex numbers. The discrete logarithm is another variant; it has applications in public-key cryptography.

Motivation and definition

The idea of logarithms is to reverse the operation of exponentiation, that is raising a number to a power. For example, the third power (or cube) of 2 is 8, because 8 is the product of three factors of 2:
It follows that the logarithm of 8 with respect to base 2 is 3, so log2 8 = 3.

Exponentiation

The third power of some number b is the product of three factors of b. More generally, raising b to the  power of b is written bn, so that
Exponentiation may be extended to by, where b is a positive number and the exponent y is any real number. For example, b−1 is the reciprocal of b, that is, , esp. section 2 for an elementary treatise.)

Definition

The logarithm of a positive real number x with respect to base b, a positive real number not equal to 1, chapter 1
The logarithm is denoted "logb(x)" (pronounced as "the logarithm of x to base b" or  "the  logarithm of x"). In the equation y = logb(x), the value y is the answer to the question "To what power must b be raised, in order to yield x?". This question can also be addressed (with a richer answer) for complex numbers, which is done in section "Complex logarithm", and this answer is much more extensively investigated in the page for the complex logarithm.

Examples

For example,  16. Logarithms can also be negative:
since
A third example: log10(150) is approximately 2.176, which lies between 2 and 3, just as 150 lies between , respectively.

Logarithmic identities

Several important formulas, sometimes called logarithmic identities or log laws, relate logarithms to one another.

Product, quotient, power and root

The logarithm of a product is the sum of the logarithms of the numbers being multiplied; the logarithm of the ratio of two numbers is the difference of the logarithms. The logarithm of the , in the left hand sides.

Change of base

The logarithm logb(x) can be computed from the logarithms of x and b with respect to an arbitrary base k using the following formula:
Typical scientific calculators calculate the logarithms to bases 10 and e., p. 21 Logarithms with respect to any base b can be determined using either of these two logarithms by the previous formula:
Given a number x and its logarithm logb(x) to an unknown base b, the base is given by:

Particular bases

Among all choices for the base, three are particularly common. These are b = 10, b = e (the irrational mathematical constant ≈ 2.71828), and b = 2. In mathematical analysis, the logarithm to base e is widespread because of its particular  analytical properties explained below. On the other hand, , chapter 17, p. 275
Thus, log10(x) is related to the number of decimal digits of a positive integer x: the number of digits is the smallest integer strictly bigger than log10(x)., p. 20 For example, log10(1430) is approximately 3.15. The next integer is 4, which is the number of digits of 1430. The logarithm to base two is used in computer science, where the binary system is ubiquitous, and in music theory, where a pitch ratio of two (the octave) is ubiquitous and the cent is the binary logarithm (scaled by 1200) of the ratio between two adjacent equally-tempered pitches.
The following table lists common notations for logarithms to these bases and the fields where they are used. Many disciplines write log(x) instead of logb(x), when the intended base can be  determined from the context. The notation blog(x) also occurs.

History

Predecessors

The Babylonians sometime in 2000–1600 BC may have invented the quarter square multiplication algorithm to multiply two numbers using only addition, subtraction and a table of quarter squares. However, it could not be used for division without an additional table of reciprocals (or the knowledge of a sufficiently simple algorithm to generate reciprocals). Large tables of quarter squares were used to simplify the accurate multiplication of large numbers from 1817 onwards until this was superseded by the use of computers.
The Indian mathematician Virasena worked with the concept of ardhaccheda: the number of times a number of the form 2n could be halved. For exact powers of 2, this is the logarithm to that base, which is a whole number; for other numbers, it is undefined. He described relations such as the product formula and also introduced integer logarithms in base 3 (trakacheda) and base 4 (caturthacheda)
Michael Stifel published Arithmetica integra in Nuremberg in 1544, which contains a table of integers and powers of 2 that has been considered an early version of a logarithmic table.[ref]
[/ref][ref]
[/ref]
In the 16th and early 17th centuries  an algorithm called prosthaphaeresis was used to approximate multiplication and division. This used the trigonometric identity
or similar to convert the multiplications to additions and table lookups. However, logarithms are more straightforward and require less work. It can be shown using Euler's Formula that the two techniques are related.

From Napier to Euler

The method of logarithms was publicly propounded by John Napier in 1614, in a book titled Mirifici Logarithmorum Canonis Descriptio (Description of the Wonderful Rule of Logarithms). Joost Bürgi independently invented logarithms but published six years after Napier.[ref]
</ref>
Johannes Kepler, who used logarithm tables extensively to compile his Ephemeris and therefore dedicated it to Napier,, p. 44 remarked:

By repeated subtractions Napier calculated . These computations, which occupied 20 years, allowed him to give, for any number N from 5 to 10 million, the number L that solves the equation
Napier first called L an "artificial number", but later introduced the word "logarithm" to mean a number that indicates a ratio:  (arithmos) meaning number. In modern notation, the relation to natural logarithms is:

where the very close approximation corresponds to the observation that
The invention was quickly and widely met with acclaim. The works of Bonaventura Cavalieri (Italy), Edmund Wingate (France), Xue Fengzuo (China), and
Johannes Kepler's Chilias logarithmorum (Germany) helped spread the concept further.[ref]
, section 2[/ref]
In 1647 Grégoire de Saint-Vincent related logarithms to the quadrature of the hyperbola, by pointing out that the area f(t) under the hyperbola from  satisfies
The natural logarithm was first described by Nicholas Mercator in his work Logarithmotechnia published in 1668,, p. 152 Around 1730, Leonhard Euler defined the exponential function and the natural logarithm by
Euler also showed that the two functions are inverse to one another.[ref]

