[[Minute Maid Park]]

CATEGORIES: Houston Astros stadiums, Major League Baseball venues, Sports venues completed in 2000, Baseball venues in Houston, Texas, Coca-Cola buildings and structures, College baseball venues in the United States, Retractable-roof stadiums in the United States

Minute Maid Park (also The Ballpark at Union Station, Enron Field, and Astros Field) is a ballpark in Downtown Houston, Texas, United States that opened in 2000 to house the Houston Astros Major League Baseball team.
The ballpark was Houston's first retractable-roofed stadium, protecting fans and athletes from Houston's notoriously humid weather as did its predecessor, the Astrodome, but also allowing fans to enjoy outdoor baseball during favorable weather. The ballpark also features a grass field, compared to the Astrodome's artificial AstroTurf, which was generally disliked by professional baseball players. The largest entrance to the park is inside what was once Houston's Union Station, and the left-field side of the stadium features a railway as homage to the site's history. The train moves along a track on top of the length of the exterior wall beyond left field whenever an Astros player hits a home run, and/or when the Astros win a game. The engine's tender, traditionally used to carry coal, is filled with giant oranges in tribute to Coca Cola subsidiary Minute Maid's most famous product, orange juice. The ballpark has 5,095 club seats and 63 luxury suites.

History

Union Station and pre-ballpark era

In 1909, during the time when West End Park was Houston's premier ballpark, the Houston Belt and Terminal Railway Company commissioned the design of a new union station for the city from New York City-based architects Warren and Wetmore.  The location called for the demolition of several structures of Houston prominence.  Horace Baldwin Rice's residence and Adath Yeshurun Congregation's synagogue among other structures were removed.
With an original estimated cost of $1 million USD, Union Station was constructed by the American Construction Company for an eventual total of five times that amount.
The station served as the main inter-city passenger terminal for Houston for over seven decades thereafter.  Passenger rail declined greatly after World War II, and the last regularly-scheduled train, the Lone Star, moved its service to Houston's current Amtrak station on July 31, 1974.  With this move, the building effectively became abandoned.  On November 10, 1977, the building was added to the National Register of Historic Places by the National Park Service.

Planning and funding

In August 1995, Astros owner Drayton McLane, then leasing the Astrodome from Harris County, commented to the Houston Chronicle that he was not in the market for a new ballpark. In reference to Pittsburgh's Three Rivers Stadium and Cincinnati's Riverfront Stadium, McLane noted, "... I remember when those were built in the 1970s and those were as good a stadiums as there were. They were the most modern stadiums in the world, and now they're saying they're all bad. That they can't make a go of it without a new stadium. It helps, but there are other things involved."
Later that year, Houston's NFL franchise and joint-tenant of the Astrodome, the Houston Oilers, announced that they were leaving to Nashville, Tennessee in order to have a new stadium built for the team there.  Citing a lack of adequate luxury boxes, in October, Astros Vice-President Bob McClaren claimed that renovations to the Astrodome would help increase revenue. According to the organization, the team was in danger of being sold to a Virginia businessman who was expected to move the Astros to Washington D.C. because of poor revenue.
In June 1996, University of Houston alumnus, BMC Software and San Diego Padres owner, John J. Moores, who wanted to own the next NFL franchise in Houston, met with Texas State Senator Mario Gallegos, Jr., and other local Hispanic leaders in regards to the future of a football-only Astrodome and a new baseball-only ballpark in Downtown Houston.
In August 1996, Houston's Union Station received a $2 million USD grant from the Texas Transportation Commission for renovation in a separate project. It was at this time that the Union Station location was proposed by Lay. Upon an agreement between all of the leadership entities, the idea of a retractable roof stadium was confirmed for the new ballpark.  A November referendum was planned for Harris County residents to approve the deal.
The Harris County referendum that took place on November 5. 1996 to help fund the ballpark passed by a narrow margin of 51% to 49%. The Harris County-Houston Sports Authority would assist in financing for the new ballpark as well as allow for renovation of the Astrodome by allowing for special county-wide taxation of rental cars, tickets, parking, and hotel use.
In June 1997, with the ability to create a sports authority signed into law, concurrent votes of the Harris County Commissioners' Court and the Houston City Council to establish the Harris County-Houston Sports Authority on effective September 1, 1997.  Its chairman and twelve other directors were jointly appointed by the Mayor of Houston and Harris County Judge.  The institution remains in existence today.
The ballpark was named "Enron Field" after a $100 million, thirty-year naming rights deal was made with Enron on April 7, 1999.

Design and construction

Early stadium sketches from Kansas City-based HOK Sport using the working title "The Ballpark at Union Station" were released to the public on October 11, 1996, where Astros President Tal Smith was open about his suggestions for the stadium including the location of the flagpole in center field and a traditional dirt path from the pitcher's mound to home plate.  While the dirt path did not become implemented, the flagpole idea became known as "Tal's Hill", which remains a reality at the ballpark today.
In late 1997, it was announced that local Brown & Root would manage construction of the stadium, while HOK Sport with Walter P. Moore would design it.
Ground broke for The Ballpark at Union Station on October 30, 1997. Its groundbreaking ceremony was attended by Enron CEO Kenneth Lay, Houston Mayor Bob Lanier, Astros owner Drayton McLane, Harris County Judge Robert Eckles, Harris County Commissioner El Franco Lee, and Harris County-Houston Sports Authority Chairman Jack Rains.

Opening and current use

The ballpark was first christened as Enron Field on April 7, 2000, with naming rights sold to the Houston energy and financial trading company in a 30 year, $100 million deal. Astros management faced a public relations nightmare when the energy corporation went bankrupt in 2001.  During its days as Enron Field, it was also dubbed "Ten-Run" or "Home Run" Field due to its cozy left-field dimensions. In keeping with this theme while paying homage to its current sponsor, the nickname "The Juice Box" is colloquially used today. The extremely deep center-field and left-center-field dimensions help to balance out the park significantly, and Minute Maid's Batting park factor is consistently very near average.  However, in 2014, it was ranked the 12th most batter-friendly ballpark by comparing the statistics from 2012-2013 seasons and 2014 (accurate to April 12, 2014).

Alterations

In 2004, the Roast launched Wi-Fi throughout the ballpark, allowing fans to use the Internet while attending a game for a fee.
The visiting team's bullpen is housed entirely in the exterior left field wall, next to the Crawford Boxes, making it one of the few bullpens in Major League ballparks to be completely indoors. Although windows in the outfield fence offer a view into and from the bullpen, its entrance is actually built into the side of the Crawford Boxes.
In 2006, the Chick-fil-A cows were unveiled on the foul poles, saying EAT MOR FOWL, and the cows have Astros caps on. Anytime an Astros player hits the pole, the fans in attendance get a free chicken sandwich from Chick-fil-A. Hunter Pence is the first and second Astro to hit the left field "Fowl Pole" when he did it twice in the 2007 season. Ty Wigginton became the third Astro to hit the left field pole on September 16, 2007. Kazuo Matsui hit the right field foul pole on August 3, 2009 with a 2 run homer in the 6th inning to beat the Giants. Carlos Lee hit the left field pole on July 28, 2010, giving the Astros a 8-1 win against the Cubs. 2 days later, Jeff Keppinger hit the Left Field pole to help the Astros win 5-0 against the Brewers.
After the 2008 season, the Astros' groundskeepers began installing  The Astros also became one of the first to use the new Chemgrass, later known as AstroTurf after its first well-publicized use at the Houston Astrodome in 1966.
For the 2011 season, the park added a large  Daktronics HD screen nicknamed "El Grande" replacing the original one in center field. At 54 feet high and 124 feet wide, it is the third largest scoreboard in Major League Baseball, behind Safeco Field (home of the Seattle Mariners) and Kaufmann Stadium (home of the Kansas City Royals).  The old screen was taken out and replaced by billboards. Additionally, a smaller HD screen was added on the far left field wall. The ring of advertisement screens around the park were replaced in favor of HD ribbon boards.

Major events

Events other than baseball

While primarily a baseball venue, Minute Maid Park can adequately host sports such as soccer and both codes of rugby.  The venue can also play host to large-scale rock concerts.  It is not large enough to comfortably accommodate American football.
Its debut as a soccer venue happened during the 2006 edition of the CONCACAF Champions Cup. The stadium hosted the first leg of the quarterfinal between Portmore United of Jamaica (the "home" team) and Club América of Mexico.
The stadium also is the host of the Houston College Classic college baseball, part of the winter fan festival held in February. The tournament features local schools the University of Houston and Rice University every year, a pair of major conference schools, alternating between Big 12 members University of Texas at Austin, Texas Tech University, Baylor University and SEC member Texas A&M University, as well as two other teams from around the country.
The nationally syndicated TV talk show Rachael Ray held a mass wedding at the park following Hurricane Ike for 40 couples who were unable to get married after a company they paid to hold the weddings went bankrupt.  Comedian Jeffrey Ross served as best man for all 40 couples.  The ceremony was aired as part of a special episode of the talk show on November 21, 2008.

Features

In dramatic contrast to the Astrodome, the most pitching-oriented stadium in Major League Baseball for most of its existence, Minute Maid Park is known for being particularly hitter-friendly down the lines, especially in left field where it is only 315 ft (96 m) to the Crawford Boxes, though the wall there is 19 feet (5.8 m) tall. In a challenge to home run hitters, former Astros owner Drayton McLane's office window, located in the old Union Station and directly above the Crawford Boxes, is made of glass and a sign below the window is marked 422 ft (135 m) from home plate.
In contrast to the ease of hitting a home run to the Crawford Boxes, it is quite difficult to hit a ball out in center field, as the dead-center wall is 436 ft (133 m) from home plate, deepest center field of any park in baseball.[ref]Bleacher Report - Ranking MLB's Most Hitter-Friendly Ballparks, by the Numbers - 12: Minute Maid Park
[/ref] Fielding is a challenge there as well, due to the  wide center field incline known as Tal's Hill, for former team president Tal Smith, an element taken from Crosley Field and other historic ballparks (in a bit of gallows humor, the hill is also known as the "Grassy Knoll"), and the flagpole in play, an element taken from Yankee Stadium before its remodeling in the mid-'70s and Tiger Stadium among others. Milwaukee Brewers player Richie Sexson once hit a ball off the flagpole.  There was a mark there until the 2011 season, when the pole was repainted.
While Crosley Field's infamous left field terrace, which was half as steep (only 15 degrees) as Tal's Hill (30 degrees), was a natural feature of the site on which the park was located, Tal's Hill is purely decorative. Both structures have been held in equal disdain by the respective outfielders who have had to patrol those areas. This hill has caused some of the most replayed catches in recent baseball history, and plenty of controversy as well. Lance Berkman said, "If the ball rolls onto the hill, it's not steep enough to roll back, so you have to go get it. Then there's the chance of running into the flagpole that's on it and getting hurt." Fans started an online petition to remove the hill and flagpole, though the petition has since been discontinued.
The ballpark features 19,201 seats on the lower level, 7,132 seats on the second level, 880 seats on the suite level, and 13,750 seats on the upper level.
A concourse above Tal's Hill features the "Phillips 66 Home Run Porch" in left-center field that is actually over the field of play, and features a classic gasoline pump that displays the total number of Astros home runs hit since the park opened.
The electrification of Minute Maid Park's retractable roof was developed by VAHLE, Inc.
The stadium can also be fully air-conditioned when required.

Transportation access

Minute Maid Park is located in Downtown Houston in a centralized area of the city, and accessible via a short driving distance on Interstate 10 (Katy Freeway/East Freeway), Interstate 69 (Southwest Freeway/Eastex Freeway), and Interstate 45 (Gulf Freeway/North Freeway).  Street parking, garage parking, and private lot parking are available, with an estimated 25,000 spots within walking distance to the ballpark. Taxi cabs and pedicabs are also commonly found near the surrounding ballpark area.
Public transportation allows for accessibility via bus or light rail service.  Using METRORail North Line with service at Preston Station, the ballpark is six blocks away.  A light rail station within one block from Minute Maid Park known as "Convention District Station" is currently under construction as an expansion of METRORail, and will service the planned East End Line and Southeast Line upon their implementations.

Gallery

Image:PanoramicMinuteMaidParkHouston.
Image:Conoco_Home_Run_Porch.jpg|The Phillips 66 Home Run Porch
Image:MMPDSC00122.jpg|Interior view of Minute Maid Park
Image:Minute_maid_park.
Image:Minute Maid Park Centerfield.JPG|View of the infield from Center Field
File:Union Station ediface of Minute Maid (Enron Field). 



Notes






