[[American Medical Association]]

CATEGORIES: Organizations established in 1847, American Medical Association, Medical and health professional associations in Chicago, Illinois, Supraorganizations

The American Medical Association (AMA), founded in 1847 and incorporated in 1897,

Scope and operations

(See also List of presidents of the American Medical Association)
The AMA's stated mission is to promote the art and science of medicine for the betterment of the public health, to advance the interests of physicians and their patients, to promote public health, to lobby for legislation favorable to physicians and patients, and to raise money for medical education. The Association also publishes the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA), which has the largest circulation of any weekly medical journal in the world. The AMA also publishes a list of Physician Specialty Codes which are the standard method in the U.S. for identifying physician and practice specialties.
The AMA has one of the largest political lobbying budgets of any organization in the United States. The AMA's vehement campaign against Medicare in the 1950s and 1960s included the Operation Coffee Cup supported by Ronald Reagan. Since the enactment of Medicare, the AMA reversed its position and now opposes any "cut to Medicare funding or shift of increased costs to beneficiaries at the expense of the quality or accessibility of care". However, the AMA remains opposed to any single-payer health care plan that might enact a National Health Service in the United States, such as the United States National Health Care Act. In the 1990s, the organization was part of the coalition that defeated the health care reform advanced by Hillary and Bill Clinton.
The AMA has also supported changes in medical malpractice law to limit damage awards, which, it contends, makes it difficult for patients to find appropriate medical care. In many states, high risk specialists have moved to other states that have enacted reform. For example, in 2004, all neurosurgeons had relocated out of the entire southern half of Illinois    A recent report by the AMA found that in a 12 month period, five percent of physicians had claims filed against them.Medical Liability Claim Frequency: A 2007-2008 Snapshot of Physicians
Claims that the AMA generates $70 million in revenue through its stewardship of Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) codes appear to be a mischaracterization. of the transparent financial information the AMA voluntarily offers in its Annual Report.  The AMA has publicly reported this figure represents income from its complete line of books and products, which include more than 100 items, not just CPT.ama-assn.pdf
The AMA sponsors the Specialty Society Relative Value Scale Update Committee which is an influential group of 29 physicians, mostly specialists, who help determine the value of different physician's labor in Medicare prices.
Collections of the association's papers dating from the late 1860s to the late 1960s are held at the National Library of Medicine.

Charitable activities

Politics

Throughout its history, the AMA has been actively involved in a variety of medical policy issues, from Medicare and HMOs to public health, and climate change. Between 1998 and 2011, the AMA spent $264 million on lobbyists, second only to the American Chamber of Commerce.

Criticisms

[/ref]
 | last =Berlant
 | first =Jeffrey
 | authorlink =
 | coauthors =
 | title =Profession and Monopoly: a study of medicine in the United States and Great Britain
