[[Luddite]]

CATEGORIES: History of social movements, Philosophy of technology, Criticism of science, Technology in society, Industrial Revolution, 19th century in the United Kingdom, Pejorative terms for people, History of the textile industry, Social movements, Agrarian politics

The Luddites were 19th-century  English textile artisans who protested against newly developed labour-saving machinery from 1811 to 1817. The stocking frames, spinning frames and power looms introduced during the Industrial Revolution threatened to replace the artisans with less-skilled, low-wage labourers, leaving them without work.
Although the origin of the name Luddite (

Background

The movement can be seen as part of a rising tide of English working-class discontent in the early 19th century.  An agricultural variant of Luddism, centering on the breaking of threshing machines, occurred during the widespread Swing Riots of 1830 in southern and eastern England. The Common People. pp. 249–253 
Spasmodic rises in food prices provoked Keelmen in the port of Tyne to riot in 1710
The Luddite movement emerged during the harsh economic climate of the Napoleonic Wars, which saw a rise in difficult working conditions in the new textile factories.  The movement began in Nottingham on 11 March 1811 and spread rapidly throughout England over the following two years.  Handloom weavers burned mills and pieces of factory machinery.

History

Luddite acts 1811-1813

The Luddites met at night on the moors surrounding industrial towns, where they would practise drills and manoeuvres. Their main areas of operation were Nottinghamshire in November 1811, followed by the West Riding of Yorkshire in early 1812 and Lancashire by March 1813. Using the pseudonym King Ludd, the Luddites and their supporters anonymously sent death threats to—and even attacked—magistrates and food merchants. 

Isolated incidents post 1814

Activists smashed Heathcote's lacemaking machine in Loughborough in 1816. 
In 1817, an unemployed Nottingham stockinger and probable ex-Luddite named Jeremiah Brandreth led the Pentrich Rising, which was a general uprising unrelated to machinery, but which could be viewed as the last major Luddite act.

Government response

The British Army clashed with the Luddites on several occasions.  At one time, more British soldiers were fighting the Luddites than were fighting Napoleon on the Iberian Peninsula. Studies in the History of Labour., London, Weidenfeld and Nicolson, page 6 Three Luddites, led by George Mellor, ambushed and assassinated a mill owner named William Horsfall from Ottiwells Mill at Crosland Moor in Marsden, West Yorkshire.  Horsfall had remarked that he would "Ride up to his saddle in Luddite blood."  Mellor fired the fatal shot to Horsfall's groin, and all three men were arrested.
The British government sought to suppress the Luddite movement with a mass trial at York in January 1813, following the attack on Cartwrights mill at Rawfolds near Cleckheaton.  The government charged over sixty men, including Mellor and his companions, with various crimes in connection with Luddite activities.  While some of those charged were actual Luddites, many had no connection to the movement.  These trials were not legitimate judicial reckonings of each defendant's guilt, but show trials intended to deter other Luddites from continuing their activities.  By meting out harsh consequences, including, in many cases, execution and penal transportation, the trials quickly ended the movement.
Parliament subsequently made "machine breaking" (i.e. industrial sabotage) a capital crime with the 
Frame Breaking Act"Destruction of Stocking Frames, etc. Act 1812" at books.com and the Malicious Damage Act."The Malicious Damage Act, 1812 at books.com  Lord Byron opposed this legislation, becoming one of the few prominent defenders of the Luddites after the treatment of the defendants at the York trials.

In contemporary thought

The title Luddite developed a secondary meaning: a "Luddite" is a term describing those opposed to, or slow to adopt or incorporate into their lifestyle, industrialisation, automation, computerisation or new technologies in general."Luddite" Compact Oxford English Dictionary at AskOxford. Accessed February 22, 2010. In 1956, there is a parliamentary speech that said 'Organised workers were by no means wedded to a Luddite Philosophy'. 
Economists use the term Luddite fallacy to explain that: The notion of technological unemployment leading to structural unemployment (and being macroeconomically injurious). If a technological innovation results in a reduction of necessary labour inputs, then the industry-wide cost of production falls, which lowers the competitive price and increases the equilibrium supply point, which will require an increase in aggregate labour inputs to reach, theoretically.).



Notes



Further reading




