[[Glasgow Prestwick Airport]]

CATEGORIES: Airports established in 1938, Airports in Scotland, Transport in South Ayrshire, Airfields of the United States Army Air Forces Air Transport Command on the North Atlantic Route, Airfields of the United States Army Air Forces in the United Kingdom

Glasgow Prestwick Airport  ( Northeast of the town of Prestwick in South Ayrshire and 32 mi from the city centre of Glasgow.
In physical terms, Prestwick is Scotland's largest commercial airfield, although in passenger traffic terms it sits in fourth place after Edinburgh Airport, Glasgow International, and Aberdeen Airport. Passenger traffic peaked at 2.4 million in 2007 following ten years of rapid growth, driven in part by the boom in no-frills airlines, especially from Ryanair which uses the airport as an operating base. There has been a significant reduction in passenger traffic with around 1.1 million passengers passing through the airport in 2013.

History

The airport began life around 1934 — primarily as a training airfield — with a hangar, offices and control tower were constructed by the end of 1935. The airport's original owner was David Fowler McIntyre, also the owner of Scottish Aviation with backing from the then Duke of Hamilton. MacIntyre and Hamilton were the first aviators to fly over Mount Everest in 1933.
In 1938 passenger facilities were added. These were used until further investment made Prestwick compatible with jet transportation. The October 1946 USAAF diagram shows 6600-foot runway 14/32 with 4500-ft runway 8/26 crossing just west of its midpoint. In 1958 runway 13/31 was  opened. A parallel taxiway, link road and an all-new terminal building were opened by the Queen Mother in 1964. The extension of Runway 13/31 caused considerable disruption to road users as the main road from Monkton into Prestwick was now crossing the tarmac of the existing runway. This was controlled by a "level crossing" system until the new perimeter road was completed.

Military use

The United States Air Force (USAF) operated a base in 1952 on the site of the original airport using former Royal Air Force (RAF) facilities (the USAF Military Air Transport Service (MATS) 1631st Air Base Squadron), and in 1953 on the Monkton side of the airport, both used by the USAF MATS. The USAF base closed in 1966.
There had been proposed plans drawn up pre-war for the post war years which would have been classed as extremely ambitious, especially in the austere post-war years. Among the various proposals was a  long main runway, an integral freight yard and railway station, and a semi enclosed mooring for flying boats and other amphibious aircraft. However, the runway was never lengthened to that degree, and the decline in seaplane and flying boat operations also meant that the latter proposal was never enacted. It is telling however, that many years since those proposals were made, Glasgow Prestwick Airport does have its own railway station, something that neither Glasgow International nor Edinburgh Airports currently have.
Today, part of the Prestwick site is occupied by the Royal Navy Fleet Air Arm with RNAS Prestwick, (officially known by the Royal Navy as HMS Gannet), where a detachment of 3 Sea Kings provide a search and rescue role, covering one of the largest SAR areas of the UK including Ben Nevis, the Lakes, Northern Ireland and  past the Irish coast. Additionally, Gannet SAR provides a medical evacuation service to the Scottish island communities. Personnel at the base numbers 15 officers, 11 ratings, 28 civil servants and 50 civilian staff.
The crews regularly feature as part of the popular Channel 5 documentary series Highland Emergency.
2009 saw the unit break a new record as they were tasked to 447 call outs. This figure equates to 20% of the UK's total military SAR call outs for 2009 making them, for the second year in succession, the busiest Search & Rescue base in the UK.

Industrial use

Scottish Aviation built a factory using the original terminal building and hangars at Prestwick, which from 1974 produced such aircraft as the Prestwick Pioneers, and later the Jetstream and Bulldog. One part of the factory, the large white art-deco building which remains to this day, had in fact been the Palace of Engineering that had been built as part of the Empire Exhibition at Bellahouston Park in Glasgow in 1938. When Scottish Aviation merged with British Aerospace as a result of the Aircraft and Shipbuilding Industries Act, BAe maintained aircraft production at the site until 1998, primarily updates of the Jetstream line. A total of 1,243 complete aircraft were built at Prestwick by this time.
Today BAE Systems retains a small facility at Prestwick for its BAE Systems Regional Aircraft division, with the adjoining main manufacturing site, producing components for Airbus and Boeing aircraft, having been sold to Spirit AeroSystems in January 2006.
In the beginning Prestwick was the only Scottish airport allowed to operate a transatlantic link, largely due to the benign weather conditions on the Ayrshire coast. Indeed, with a much lower incidence of fog than any other airport in the United Kingdom due to a geological anomaly, Glasgow Prestwick has the reputation of being "Britain's only fog-free airport".  For this reason it is often used as a diversionary airport when weather conditions close aviation hubs elsewhere in the United Kingdom - heavy snowfall in the recent severe winters of 2009 and 2010-2011 resulted in large numbers of intercontinental flights bound for London Heathrow and elsewhere to be diverted to Prestwick.  This is perhaps one reason it managed to avoid total closure when it appeared that BAA were running down operations. It was also partly a political decision to silence those that questioned why Glasgow needed two airports when Glasgow Corporation had already invested money building Glasgow International Airport.
After British Airways had ceased regular passenger operations in 1983, BA continued to intermittently use Prestwick as a site for pilot training, especially for training Concorde pilots. Concorde became a semi-regular visitor to the airport. Today, Prestwick still sees regular circuit training taking place, both military & c use paragraph read betterommercial.  The circuit aircraft usually are Boeing 757, Boeing 737 and the A320 Family. Military aircraft include the KC-10 Extender on fuel stops and the KDC10.
Prestwick was also the first airport in Scotland to have the new Boeing 787 Dreamliner land.

Elvis Presley

Glasgow Prestwick Airport is considered to be the only piece of United Kingdom territory on which Elvis Presley ever set foot, when the United States Army transport plane carrying him home stopped to refuel in 1960, en route from Germany... 50 years after Prestwick - Evening Times | News | Editor's PicksWere you there when Elvis landed in Prestwick? A lounge bearing his name and a marker reflecting this event were inaugurated in 2006.
However on 21 April 2008, during a BBC Two radio interview with Ken Bruce, theatre impresario and chairman of Everton F.C., Bill Kenwright, said that Elvis actually spent a day in the UK being shown around London by Tommy Steele in 1958.
In response, Mark Rodwell, chief executive of Prestwick Airport, told BBC Radio Scotland, that until it was proved otherwise Prestwick Airport remains the only place in the United Kingdom that Elvis Presley ever set foot.

1990s

In 1991 the newly privatised British Airports Authority, BAA Limited, consolidated their portfolio of UK airports. Part of this was to move all transatlantic traffic departing from Scotland to Glasgow International Airport, near Paisley, and sell Prestwick off to the private sector. In the early to mid-1990s passenger figures fell sharply with only freight traffic and a small number of charter flights using Prestwick on a regular basis. At this point the airport faced an uncertain future.
1992 marked the beginning of a renaissance for the struggling airport when purchased by "Canadian entrepreneur" which then sold it to Infratil in 2001.infratil.glasgowprestwick.html and in October 2013 Infratil announced that the Scottish Government's intention to renationalise the airport.

Present day

Today, Ryanair serves more than 20 destinations from Prestwick — one of their maintenance hubs – and other budget airlines have also moved into the airport. As well as the thriving no-frills segment, Prestwick has continued its traditional strategic role as a refuelling point for military aircraft – the USAF, RAF and the Canadian Forces Air Command are frequent visitors for example. Cargo traffic has also become another stronghold of Prestwick with the vast majority of Scotland's Boeing 747 Freighter traffic entering via the airport. On 5 September 2009 the A380 approached and took off from the airport
The airport was owned by Infratil, a New Zealand company and majority owner of Wellington International Airport Infratil also owned Manston Airport until November 2013. Manston was sold to a shell company owned by Ann Gloag a co-founder of Stagecoach, Prestwick's previous owner.  In April 2005, Infratil completed a major refurbishment of the terminal building, and rebranded the airport using the phrase "pure dead brilliant", taken straight from the Glasgow patter. Some of the rebranding has been controversial, in particular the redecoration of the airport bar. The bar was rebranded in February 2006 with a logo depicting a man in a kilt, unconscious with an empty bottle of whisky. Despite objections that it promoted the wrong image of Scotland to foreign visitors and embarrassed local travellers, the airport management insisted the logo was "fun and visually stimulating". However, it was removed a matter of weeks after installation, after the South Ayrshire Licensing Board said the logo trivialised excessive drinking.Daily Record
On 6 July 2005, Prestwick Airport became the entry point for the participants in the 31st G8 summit held in Gleneagles. Strathclyde Police implemented an unprecedented level of security around the airport for the duration of the summit.
Since 2007 the airport has occasionally been used by BBC motoring TV show Top Gear as the location for various stunts and experiments. The best known was a scene similar to one featured in the film Casino Royale and featured both a Ford Mondeo and a Citroën 2CV parked behind the engines of a Virgin Atlantic Boeing 747-400, in an experiment to investigate whether the thrust from the aircraft's four jet engines really could lift a car off the ground.youtube.com/watch?v=vJaqOKNAP1E
The car park and A79 outside the terminal building have been reconstructed to comply with governmental movement and access restrictions mandated in the aftermath of the Glasgow International Airport terrorist attack.
An Airbus A380 made an approach and go round at Prestwick Airport for the first time on 5 September 2009.
On 8 March 2012 the airport owner Infratil announced that they had placed the airfield up for sale. The airport remained unsold until October 2013 when the Scottish Government announced it was in negotiations to take the airport back into public ownership.infratil.com/our-news/infratil-news/2013/scottish-government-to-pursue-taking-over-glasgow-prestwick-airport/
Subsequently the Scottish Government took ownership on Friday 22 November for £1, Infratil having incurred annual losses of £2m. It is expected the airport will continue to operate as normal and there will be no job losses. Deputy First Minister Nicola Sturgeon told BBC Scotland that work would now begin for "turning Prestwick around and making it a viable enterprise".
On 1 April 2014, The Robert Burns World Federation told Scottish MPs at Holyrood to rename the airport to Robert Burns International Airport a petition was created to rename it as well and was discussed by the public petition committee.

Future

According to a 2008 Master Plan the departure lounge is at capacity and congested during peak operations. The plan proposes "a central pier that provides adequate circulation and waiting space prior to boarding the aircraft" to cope with a continuing increase in passenger departures.glasgowprestwick.html It also proposed raising the number of aircraft stands from 6 to 12.
As part of the privatisation of the UK's search and rescue service, Bristow Helicopters will base two AgustaWestland AW189 helicopters in a new hangar, replacing HMS Gannet by mid-2017.

Airlines and destinations

Passenger

Cargo

The majority of cargo carriers operates Boeing 747-400F aircraft to and from Prestwick. Air Foyle HeavyLift and Volga-Dnepr are also occasional users of Prestwick with Antonov An-124 aircraft.

Operational facts

Statistics

Ground transport

Despite being further away from the city of Glasgow than Glasgow International Airport, Prestwick is well patronised with convenient public transport options. A forty-minute train journey from Glasgow Central to the airport can even be quicker than the equivalent direct bus journey from the city centre to Glasgow International Airport, although by train, it is marginally over ten minutes from Glasgow Central Station to Paisley Gilmour Street, from where the bus connection to Glasgow Airport takes only another ten minutes.
Prestwick airport is the only airport in Scotland to have its own railway station, Glasgow Prestwick Airport railway station, which was built by the airport in 1994.Online video detailing access to the rail services from the airport The station continues to be owned and operated by the Airport, and not by Network Rail or First ScotRail.
All services from the station are operated by First ScotRail. The most frequent services are on the electrified route between Glasgow Central and Ayr on the Ayrshire Coast Line. Trains run half-hourly Monday to Saturday (and Sunday during the summer) and hourly on Sunday. There are also less frequent services to Stranraer, Newcastle and Kilmarnock. All passengers traveling to/from the airport will receive 50% discount from/to anywhere in Scotland on the standard fare. Passengers joining the train at Prestwick Airport require to show their official flight confirmation and photo id to the train conductor when buying their ticket, as there is no ticketing office at Prestwick Airport.
New routes are also marked with a promotional period (normally 6 months after launch) during which time rail travel is free to and from the airport.
The railway station will be extended about 45 meters, so longer trains can handle more people.
Buses to Prestwick Airport are operated by Stagecoach Western and Dodds of Troon, with regular semi-fast services to Glasgow and Ayr.
Prestwick airport operate their own car parks and offer both long- and short-term parking. Shuttle Bus services operate 24 hours a day, between the terminal and the car park.

Prestwick Air Show

Prestwick Airport also used to host a bi-annual airshow, the first of which was held on 30 September 1967. While very small in scale compared to such shows as RAF Fairford or Farnborough, the air show was a local attraction and drew a considerable crowd. There were constant rumours in later years that the SR-71 Blackbird reconnaissance aircraft would make an appearance, but this came to nothing, most likely due to difficulties associated with handling the special fuel. The last air show was in 1992. However, a new Prestwick World Festival of Flight has been organised, with the first annual event taking place between 30 August and 8 September 2013. It has been funded by the South Ayrshire Council, Prestwick Airport itself, and a number of local aerospace companies, including BAE Systems and UTC. The Prestwick World Festival of Flight will include an "air pageant" and a static aviation display. There have also been reports in local media in Ayrshire that the Scottish International Airshow will take place at Prestwick in September 2014.

Incidents and accidents





Further reading




