[[David Copperfield (illusionist)]]

CATEGORIES: 1956 births, American male film actors, American magicians, American television personalities, Jewish American male actors, Living people, Magician of the Year Award winners, People from Metuchen, New Jersey, Professional magicians, American people of Russian-Jewish descent

David Copperfield (born David Seth Kotkin; September 16, 1956) is an American illusionist, and has been described by Forbes as the most commercially successful magician in history."Houdini in the Desert". Forbes. May 8, 2006
Copperfield's television specials have won 21 Emmy Awards of a total 38 nominations. Best known for his combination of storytelling and illusion, Copperfield's career of over 30 years has earned him 11 Guinness World Records,Guinness World Records 2006, p. 197 ISBN 1-904994-02-4 a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame,
Copperfield has so far sold 40 million tickets and grossed over $4 billion, which is more than any other solo entertainer in history.
When not performing, he creates experiences for his chain of eleven islands in the Bahamas – Musha Cay and the Islands of Copperfield Bay, which has completed a $35 million renovation under Copperfield's supervision.

Early years

Copperfield was born David Seth Kotkin in Metuchen, New Jersey,
When Copperfield was 10, he began practicing magic as "Davino the Boy Magician" in his neighborhood,

Career and business interests

At age 18, Copperfield enrolled at New York city's Jesuit based school, Fordham University.  However, three weeks into his freshman year Copperfield left Fordham, as he was cast in the lead role of the musical "The Magic Man", in Chicago.   At this time is when he adopted his new stage name "David Copperfield", taken from the famous Charles Dickens novel because he liked the sound of it.  Copperfield was the show: he sang, danced and created most of the original illusions it used. "The Magic Man" put Copperfield's name on the map; in fact, the show became the longest running musical in Chicago's history.
At age 19, he was headlining at the Pagoda Hotel in Honolulu, Hawaii. thumb|180px|Copperfield performing for the 1977 ABC special. Copperfield's career in television began in earnest when he was discovered by Joseph Cates, a producer of Broadway shows and television specials. Cates produced a magic special in 1977 on ABC called "The Magic of ABC" hosted by Copperfield, as well as several of "The Magic of David Copperfield" specials on CBS between 1978 and 1998. There have been 20 Copperfield TV specials between 1977 and 2001.
Copperfield played the character of "Ken the Magician" in the 1980 horror film Terror Train. He also made an uncredited appearance in the 1994 film Prêt-à-Porter. Most of his media appearances have been through television specials and guest spots on television programs. His illusions have included making the Statue of Liberty disappear, flying, levitating over the Grand Canyon, and walking through the Great Wall of China.
In 1996, in collaboration with Francis Ford Coppola, David Ives, and Eiko Ishioka, Copperfield's Broadway show Dreams & Nightmares broke box office records in New York at the Martin Beck Theatre.  Reviewer Greg Evans, described the sold-out show in Variety magazine: "With a likable, self-effacing demeanor that rarely comes across in his TV specials, Copperfield leads the audience through nearly two hours of truly mind-boggling illusions.  He disappears and reappears, gets cut in half, makes audience members vanish and others levitate.  Copperfield climaxes his show with a flying routine, seven years in the making, that defies both logic and visual evidence -- he could probably retire just by selling his secrets to future productions of Peter Pan."Evans, Greg - "David Copperfield: Dreams & Nightmares," Variety, Dec 5, 1996.
Also during 1996, Copperfield joined forces with Dean Koontz, Joyce Carol Oates, Ray Bradbury and others for David Copperfield's Tales of the Impossible, an anthology of original fiction set in the world of magic and illusion. A second volume was later published in 1997, called David Copperfield's Beyond Imagination. In addition to the 2 books, David also wrote an essay as part of the "This I Believe" series from NPR and the This I Believe, Inc.
In 2002, he was the subject of an hour A&E Television network biographical special on his life & career, aired on A&E's "Biography" channel.
On May 7, 2009, Copperfield was dropped by Michael Jackson from Jackson's residency at the O2 Arena after an alleged row over money. Copperfield wanted $1 million (£666,000) per show.

In August 2009, Copperfield brought his show to Australia. Couriermail.au. March 15, 2009"More Than Meets the Eye". The Sydney Morning Herald, August 7, 2009
In January 2011 David Copperfield joined the cast of the new feature film Burt Wonderstone with Steve Carell, Jim Carrey, James Gandolfini, and Olivia Wilde. Copperfield and his team also developed illusions used in the film.
In July 2012, OWN-TV network aired a one-hour special and interview with Copperfield as part of the network's "Oprah's Next Chapter" series. The show featured many aspects of Copperfield's personal life and family—with tours of his island home and Las Vegas conjuring museum—and a sampling of his illusions and magic effects.  During the interview, he and his girlfriend Chloe Gosselin, a French fashion model, announced their engagement, and appeared together briefly with their young daughter strolling down the beach on the island."Oprah's Next Chapter: David Copperfield - @ OWNTV#Nextchapter
Copperfield notes that his role models growing up were not magicians, that "My idols were Gene Kelly and Fred Astaire and Orson Welles and Walt Disney ... they took their individual art forms and they moved people with them ... I wanted to do the same thing with magic. I wanted to take magic and make it romantic and make it sexy and make it funny and make it goofy ... all the different things that a songwriter gets to express or a filmmaker gets to express ...."

International Museum and Library of the Conjuring Arts

Copperfield owns the International Museum and Library of the Conjuring Arts, which houses the world's largest
The museum is not open to the public; tours are reserved for "colleagues, fellow magicians, and serious collectors". Located in a warehouse at Copperfield's headquarters in Las Vegas, the museum is entered via a secret door in what was described by actor Hugh Jackman as a "sex shop"COP-A-FEEL. N.Y. Post. October 20, 2007 "We pull up outside this sex shop and David gets out, pulls out a set of keys, and walks in, and we're thinking 'Oh my god what have we got ourselves into here?'" and by Forbes as a "mail-order lingerie warehouse". "'It doesn't need to be secret, it needs to be respected,' he said. 'If a scholar or journalist needs a piece of magic history, it's there.'"

Musha Cay and the Islands of Copperfield Bay

In 2006 Copperfield bought eleven Bahamian islands called Musha Cay. Copperfield has stated that the islands may contain the Fountain of Youth, a claim which resulted in him receiving a Dubious Achievement Award from Esquire Magazine in 2006.esquire.

"Magic Underground" restaurant

David Copperfield's Magic Underground was planned to be a restaurant based on Copperfield's magic.

Recorded message for expanded gambling in Maryland

In October 2012, Maryland residents received a robocall from Copperfield, supporting a Maryland ballot initiative that would expand gambling in the state.

Accidents and injuries

On March 11, 1984, while rehearsing an illusion called "Escape from Death" where he was shackled and handcuffed in a tank of water, Copperfield became tangled in the chains and started taking in water and banging into the sides of the tank. He was pulled from the water after 1 minute 20 seconds, hyperventilating and in shock, and taken to a Burbank hospital, and found to have pulled tendons in arms and legs. He was in a wheelchair for a week and used a cane for a period thereafter.
Doing a rope trick, Copperfield accidentally cut off the tip of his finger with sharp scissors.
On December 17, 2008, during a live performance in Las Vegas, one of Copperfield's assistants named Brandon, 26, was sucked into the spinning blades of a  high industrial fan that Copperfield walks through. The assistant sustained multiple fractures to his arm, severe bleeding, and facial lacerations that required stitching. Copperfield canceled the rest of the performance and offered the audience members refunds.

Litigation

On July 11, 1994, Copperfield sued magician and author Herbert L. Becker in order to prevent publication of Becker's book which reveals how magicians perform their illusions.
In 1997, Copperfield and Claudia Schiffer sued Paris Match for US$30 million after the magazine claimed their relationship was a stunt,
On August 25, 2000, Copperfield unsuccessfully sued Fireman's Fund Insurance Company for reimbursement of a $506,343 ransom paid to individuals in Russia who had commandeered the entertainer's equipment there."David Copperfield Sues Fireman's Fund". Insurance Journal, August 29, 2000
In 2004, John Melk, co-founder of Blockbuster Inc., and previous owner of Musha Cay, sued Copperfield for fraud after Copperfield's purchase of the island chain, alleging that Copperfield had deliberately obscured his identity during the purchase and that he would not have sold the island to Copperfield.  Copperfield claimed that Melk had agreed to sell the property to Copperfield's Imagine Nation Company, and that Copperfield negotiated the deal through a third party because he feared Melk was "seeking to exploit" Copperfield's celebrity status by demanding an unrealistic price."Magic Star in $56.5 Mil Exuma Resort Row," Bahamas B2B. The terms of the settlement are undisclosed.
On November 6, 2007, Viva Art International Ltd and Maz Concerts Inc. sued Copperfield for nearly $2.2 million for breach of contract[ref]

Copperfield was accused of sexual assault in 2007 by Lacey L. Carroll.

Personal life

Copperfield was engaged to supermodel Claudia Schiffer for six years; the couple separated in 1999 citing work schedules.[ref]
[/ref] They had met in 1993 at a Berlin celebrity gala when he brought her on stage to participate in a mind reading act and his flying illusion. While they were engaged, Schiffer sometimes appeared on stage with Copperfield to act as his special guest assistant in illusions including being sawn in half. Vogue. Retrieved March 31, 2012. Claudia Schiffer and David Copperfield The Independent. Retrieved March 31, 2012. Retrieved March 31, 2012. She also appeared alongside Copperfield in David Copperfield: 15 Years of Magic, in which she played the role of a reporter interviewing him, and during which they reprised their performance of the 'Flying' illusion.
In April 2006, he and two female assistants were robbed at gunpoint after a performance in West Palm Beach, Florida."Magician David Copperfield robbed after show at Kravis Center". Palm Beach Post. April 25, 2006. His assistants handed over their money, passports, and a cell phone. According to his police statement, Copperfield did not hand over anything, claiming that he used sleight of hand to hide his possessions.
Copperfield and his girlfriend Chloe Gosselin, a French fashion model who is 28 years his junior, had a daughter named Sky in February 2010. The news did not break publicly until over a year later, when The New York Post reported it in August 2011, and it was confirmed by Copperfield's publicist.

Earnings

Forbes magazine reported that Copperfield earned $55 million in 2003, making him the tenth highest paid celebrity in the world (earnings figures are pre-tax and before deductions for agents' and attorneys' fees, etc.).[ref]
[/ref] He earned $57 million in 2004 and 2005, and $30 million in 2009 in entertainment earnings, according to Forbes.[ref]


Charitable activities

Project Magic

In 1982, Copperfield founded Project Magic,[ref]


Achievements and awards

Guinness World Records

Copperfield holds 11 Guinness World Records, including earnings and attendance records, and largest stage illusions.

Television specials

Worldwide tours

Plans for new illusions

Copperfield declared that amongst the new illusions he plans to create, he wants to put a woman's face on Mt. Rushmore, straighten the Leaning Tower of Pisa and even vanish the moon.
Bunnie Nichols Copperfield to change the world through magic. The Nation. March 12, 1997David Copperfield coming to Barbara B. Mann - cape-coral-daily-breeze.. Cape Coral Daily Breeze (January 17, 2009). He also wants to make an island disappear.youtube.com/watch?v=-DXvb-KFFkQ

Filmography

Notable tricks








