[[International Women's Day]]

CATEGORIES: Civil awareness days, Feminism, Public holidays in Russia, Public holidays in the Soviet Union, International observances, March observances, Recurring events established in 1909, United Nations days, Women, United Nations observances, Public holidays in Ukraine, Women's events, Women's history, Fixed holidays

'''

International Women's Day (IWD), also called International Working Women's Day, is celebrated on March 8 every year. In different regions the focus of the celebrations ranges from general celebration of respect, appreciation and love towards women to a celebration for women's economic, political, and social achievements. Started as a Socialist political event, the holiday blended in the culture of many countries, primarily in Europe, including Russia. In some regions, the day lost its political flavor, and became simply an occasion for men to express their love for women in a way somewhat similar to a mixture of Mother's Day and Valentine's Day. In other regions, however, the political and human rights theme designated by the United Nations runs strong, and political and social awareness of the struggles of women worldwide are brought out and examined in a hopeful manner. This is a day which some people celebrate by wearing purple ribbons. 

History

The earliest Women's Day observances were held on many different dates: May 3, 1908, in Chicago; February 28th, 1909, in New York; and
February 27, 1910, in New York.
In August 1910, an International Women's Conference was organized to precede the general meeting of the Socialist Second International in Copenhagen, Denmark. Inspired in part by the American socialists, German Socialist Luise Zietz proposed the establishment of an annual 'International Woman's Day' (singular) and was seconded by fellow socialist and later communist leader Clara Zetkin, although no date was specified at that conference. In the Austro-Hungarian Empire alone, there were 300 demonstrations. In Vienna, women paraded on the Ringstrasse and carried banners honouring the martyrs of the Paris Commune. Women demanded that women be given the right to vote and to hold public office. They also protested against employment sex discrimination. Americans continued to celebrate National Women's Day on the last Sunday in February.
In 1913 Russian women observed their first International Women's Day on the last Sunday in February (by Julian calendar then used in Russia).
Although there were some women-led strikes, marches, and other protests in the years leading up to 1914, none of them happened on March 8. In 1914 International Women's Day was held on March 8, possibly because that day was a Sunday, and now it is always held on March 8 in all countries.
In 1917 demonstrations marking International Women's Day in Saint Petersburg on the last Sunday in February (which fell on March 8 on the Gregorian calendar) initiated the February Revolution. Women in Saint Petersburg went on strike that day for "Bread and Peace" - demanding the end of World War I and an end to Russian food shortages. Leon Trotsky wrote, "23 February (8th March) was International Woman's Day and meetings and actions were foreseen. But we did not imagine that this 'Women's Day' would inaugurate the revolution. Revolutionary actions were foreseen but without date. But in morning, despite the orders to the contrary, textile workers left their work in several factories and sent delegates to ask for support of the strike… which led to mass strike... all went out into the streets." 
Following the October Revolution, the Bolshevik Alexandra Kollontai and Vladimir Lenin made it an official holiday in the Soviet Union, and it was established, but was a working day until 1965. On May 8th, 1965 by the decree of the USSR Presidium of the Supreme Soviet International Women's Day was declared a non-working day in the USSR "in commemoration of the outstanding merits of Soviet women in communistic construction, in the defense of their Fatherland during the Great Patriotic War, in their heroism and selflessness at the front and in the rear, and also marking the great contribution of women to strengthening friendship between peoples, and the struggle for peace. But still, women's day must be celebrated as are other holidays."
From its official adoption in Russia following the Soviet Revolution in 1917 the holiday was predominantly celebrated in communist and socialist countries. It was celebrated by the communists in China from 1922, and by Spanish communists from 1936.
In the West, International Women's Day was first observed as a popular event after 1977 when the United Nations General Assembly invited member states to proclaim March 8 as the UN Day for women's rights and world peace.
In the 1980s historian Renée Coté uncovered the origins of the March 8th date for International Women's Day. Her research was published in 1984 in Canada, as, La Journée internationale des femmes ou les vrais dates des mystérieuses origines du 8 de mars jusqu'ici embrouillés, truquées, oubliées : la clef des énigmes. La vérité historique. Montreal: Les éditions du remue ménage.

International Women's Day Official UN Themes

2010 International Women's Day

On the occasion of 2010 International Women's Day the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) drew attention to the hardships displaced women endure. The displacement of populations is one of the gravest consequences of today's armed conflicts. It affects women in a host of ways.

2011 International Women's Day

Events took place in more than 100 countries
In Pakistan, Punjab Govt. Project Gender Reform Action Plan, District Gujranwala celebrated this day in large scale in the Gift University Gujranwala. Mrs. Shazia Ashfaq Mattu, MPA and GRAP officer Mr. Dr. Yasir Nawaz Manj organized the events in very effective manners.
Australia issued a 100th anniversary commemorative coin.
In Egypt however, the day was a step back for women. In Egypt's Tahrir Square, hundreds of men came out not in support for women but to harass the women who came out to stand up for their rights as the police and military stood by watching the events unfold in front of them. "The women - some in headscarves and flowing robes, others in jeans - had marched to Cairo's central Tahrir Square to celebrate International Women's Day. But crowds of men soon outnumbered them and chased them out," wrote Hadeel Al-Shalchi for AP.Hadeel Al-Shalchi, "Egyptian women's rights protest marred by hecklers", "The Washington Post", March 8, 2011

2012 International Women's Day

The UN theme for International Women's Day 2012 was Empower Rural Women – End Hunger and Poverty.
On the occasion of International Women's Day 2012, the ICRC called for more action to help the mothers and wives of people who have gone missing during armed conflict. The vast majority of people who go missing in connection with conflict are men. As well as the anguish of not knowing what has happened to the missing husband or son, many of these women face economic and practical difficulties. The ICRC underlined the duty of parties to a conflict to search for the missing and provide information to the families.Helping women take matters into their own hands International Committee of the Red Cross
The Google Doodle for March 8, 2012 had an International Women's Day theme.

2013 International Women's Day

The UN theme for International Women's Day 2013 was "A promise is a promise: Time for action to end violence against women,"
The 2013 International Women's Day, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) draw attention to the plight of women in prison.

2014 International Women's Day

The UN theme for International Women's Day 2014 is "Equality for Women is Progress for All".
The Google Doodle on the eve of IWD 2014 (7 March 2014) featured an International Women's day doodle video, showing images and videos of women around the world, with music by Zap Mama.
American singer Beyoncé Knowles also posted an International Women's Day video to her YouTube account. Throughout the song, her song ***Flawless plays, which includes a portion of the "we should all be feminists" speech given by author Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie. Knowles is a modern-day feminist. 

2017 International Women's Day

thumb|Ukrainian group Femen calling for a sex strike to protest against sexual exploitation of women.2017 will be the hundredth anniversary of the Russian Revolution, which was sparked on March 8, 1917 by women protesting against bread shortages in St. Petersburg. These events culminated in the abdication of Tsar Nicholas II on March 15. Worldwide celebrations and re-enactments are scheduled to begin on March 8, 2017. Among the organisers is the Ukrainian women's direct action group FEMEN, which aims "to shake women in Ukraine, making them socially active; to organize in 2017 a women's revolution." Femen: "Ми даємо чиновникам і політикам, проср...тися", Табло ID (September 20, 2010)
On this day a global women's strike including a sex strike is planned, called by, among others, the International Union of Sex Workers.

In modern culture

