[[Black Sabbath (album)]]

CATEGORIES: 1970 debut albums, Black Sabbath albums, Vertigo Records albums, Warner Bros. Records albums, Albums produced by Rodger Bain, Universal Deluxe Editions, Castle Communications albums, Sanctuary Records albums, Albums certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America

Black Sabbath is the eponymous debut album by English heavy metal band Black Sabbath. Released on 13 February 1970 in the United Kingdom, and later on 1 June 1970 in the United States, the album reached number eight on the UK Albums Chart and has been categorised as the first major album to be credited with the development of the heavy metal genre.

Recording

According to guitarist Tony Iommi, the album was recorded in a single day on 16 October 1969, while other sources say that 17 November 1969 was the date of recording.
Iommi began recording the album with a white Fender Stratocaster, his guitar of choice at the time. A malfunctioning pickup forced him to finish recording with a Gibson SG, a new guitar he had recently purchased as a backup but had not played much yet. The SG was a right-handed model which he played upside down. Soon after recording the album, he met another guitarist who was playing a left-handed SG upside down, and the two agreed to swap guitars. Decades later, Iommi donated that original left-handed SG guitar to the Hard Rock Cafe.

Music and lyrics

According to Allmusic's Steve Huey, the album is "the birth of heavy metal as we now know it". Huey noted that the album "transcends its clear roots in blues-rock and psychedelia to become something more". The songs on the album's first half feature simple blues licks by Iommi and deal with themes characteristic of heavy metal, including evil, paganism, and the occult. Most of the second half has blues-rock jamming. Former Metal Maniacs magazine editor Jeff Wagner credited the album for making a distinction between rock and roll and heavy metal. He said that the album transfigured blues rock into "something uglier, found deeper gravity via mournful singing and a sinister rhythmic pulse". Sputnikmusic's Mike Stagno observed that Black Sabbath combined elements of rock, jazz and blues, with heavy distortion to create one of the most influential albums in metal history.
Musically and lyrically the album was considered quite "dark" for the time. The first song on the album is based almost entirely on a tritone interval played at slow tempo on the electric guitar. The song's lyrics concern a "figure in black" which bass player Geezer Butler claims to have seen after waking up from a nightmare.
Similarly, the lyrics of the song "N.I.B." are written from the point of view of Lucifer. Contrary to popular belief, the name of that song is not an abbreviation for "Nativity in Black". Osbourne said in his autobiography that it is merely a reference to drummer Bill Ward's pointed goatee at the time, which was shaped as a pen-nib. The latter includes harmonica performed by vocalist Ozzy Osbourne.

Artwork

The album cover features a depiction of Mapledurham Watermill, situated on the River Thames in Oxfordshire, England. Standing in front of the watermill is a figure dressed in black. The name of the woman pictured on the front cover is forgotten, though guitarist Iommi says that she once showed up backstage at a Black Sabbath show and introduced herself.
On the original release, the inner gatefold sleeve featured an inverted cross with a poem written inside of it. The album was not packaged with a gatefold cover in the US.

Release

The album was recorded for Fontana Records, but prior to release the record company elected to switch the band to another of their labels, Vertigo Records, which housed the company's more progressive acts.

Critical reception

Black Sabbath received negative reviews from contemporary music critics.
With the passage of time, reviews have become more positive.

Accolades

In 1989, Kerrang! listed the album at number 31 among the "100 Greatest Heavy Metal Albums of All Time". and goth genres. 263–4

Track listing

All songs credited to Tony Iommi, Geezer Butler, Bill Ward and Ozzy Osbourne, except where noted.

European edition

North American edition

Original North American Warner Bros. Records pressings of Black Sabbath quote incorrect running times for "Wicked World" and the "Warning" medley (4:30 and 14:32, respectively). These pressings also credit the album's original songs using the band members' given names: Anthony Iommi, John Osbourne, Terence Butler, and William Ward. Records, catalog no. WS 1871, released June 1970.
The Castle Communications edition of 1986 also featured a live version of "Tomorrow's Dream" as bonus track.

1991 Japanese edition

Personnel

Black Sabbath

Production

Release history



Notes






