[[Prince Edward, Duke of Kent]]

CATEGORIES: 1935 births, Living people, House of Windsor, Princes of the United Kingdom, Alumni of Institut Le Rosey, Presidents of the Football Association, British Field Marshals, Royal Air Force air marshals, Dukes of Kent, English Freemasons, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George, Knights Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knights of the Garter, Recipients of the Canadian Forces Decoration, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of St. Olav, Grand Commanders of the Order of Saints George and Constantine, Members of the Order of Tri Shakti Patta, First Class, Knights Grand Band of the Order of the Star of Africa, Recipients of the Supreme Order of the Renaissance, Grand Crosses of the Order of Merit of the Republic of Poland, Order of Charles XIII, Stroke survivors, People educated at Ludgrove School, People educated at Eton College, Graduates of the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst, People from Westminster, People associated with the University of Surrey, Grand Masters of the United Grand Lodge of England, Presidents of the British Computer Society, Royal Scots Greys officers, Royal Scots Dragoon Guards officers, Presidents of the British Science Association



Prince Edward, Duke of Kent  (Edward George Nicholas Paul Patrick; born 9 October 1935), is a grandchild of King George V and Queen Mary. He has held the title of Duke of Kent since 1942.
The Duke of Kent carries out royal duties on behalf of his first cousin, Queen Elizabeth II. He is perhaps best known as President of the All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club, presenting the trophies to the Wimbledon champion and runner-up. He also served as the United Kingdom's Special Representative for International Trade and Investment, retiring in 2001. He is also the President of the Scout Association, the President of the Royal United Services Institute, the President of the Royal Institution of Great Britain and the Grand Master of the United Grand Lodge of England (since 1967).
At the time of his birth, Prince Edward was 7th in the line of succession to his grandfather, behind his three uncles, his cousins Elizabeth and Margaret, and his father. As of the birth of Zara Phillips' first child, the Queen's fourth great-grandchild, on 17 January 2014, Prince Edward is in 33rd position. As of the death of the 7th Earl of Harewood in 2011, he is the Queen's eldest living paternal cousin, though he is 9 years younger than the Queen herself.
On 21 March 2013, it was reported that the Duke had suffered a mild stroke in the early hours of 18 March 2013.

Early life

Prince Edward was born on 9 October 1935, at No. 3 Belgrave Square, London. His father was Prince George, Duke of Kent, the fourth son of George V and Mary of Teck. His mother was Princess Marina, Duchess of Kent (née Princess Marina of Greece and Denmark), the daughter of Prince Nicholas of Greece and Denmark, and Grand Duchess Helen Vladimirovna of Russia. As a grandson of a British sovereign in the male line, he was styled as a Prince of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, His Royal Highness Prince Edward of Kent.
The Prince was baptised in the Private Chapel of Buckingham Palace on 20 November 1935 by the Archbishop of Canterbury Cosmo Lang.  His godparents were: King George V and Queen Mary (his paternal grandparents); the Prince of Wales (his paternal uncle); the Princess Royal, Countess of Harewood (his paternal aunt); the Duke of Connaught and Strathearn (his great-great-uncle, whose son, Prince Arthur of Connaught, stood proxy); the Duchess of Argyll (his great-great-aunt); and Prince Nicholas of Greece and Denmark (his maternal grandfather).Yvonne's Royalty Home Page – Royal Christenings

Education

Prince Edward began his schooling at Ludgrove, a preparatory school in Berkshire, before going on to Eton College and then Le Rosey in Switzerland. After school he entered the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst where he won the Sir James Moncrieff Grierson prize for foreign languages.
Prince Edward speaks fluent French.

Duke of Kent

On 25 August 1942 Prince Edward's father, the Duke of Kent, was killed when his plane crashed in bad weather in Caithness. Prince Edward, then aged 6, succeeded his father as Duke of Kent, Earl of St Andrews and Baron Downpatrick. He later took his seat in the House of Lords in 1959.
As a royal duke, he was destined for royal duties at an early age. At the age of 16 he walked behind the coffin of his uncle, George VI, at his state funeral in 1952. In 1953, he attended the coronation of his cousin, Elizabeth II, paying homage at her throne after her crowning (following the Dukes of Edinburgh and Gloucester).

Military service

The Duke of Kent graduated from the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst on 29 July 1955 as a Second Lieutenant in the Royal Scots Greys,

Marriage and issue

The Duke of Kent married Katharine Worsley at York Minster on 8 June 1961. Katharine is the only daughter of Sir William Arthrington Worsley, 4th Bt., and his wife, Joyce Morgan Brunner. After their wedding, she was styled Her Royal Highness The Duchess of Kent, though in 2002, she ceased to use the style of Royal Highness and has expressed a preference to be known as  Katharine, Duchess of Kent, the latter the typical style of a divorced or widowed peeress, which she is not. However she remained legally HRH The Duchess of Kent.
The Duke and Duchess of Kent have three children, none of whom carries out royal duties:
The Duchess of Kent converted to Roman Catholicism in 1994.   Because this conversion did not occur until many years after their marriage, it did not cause the Duke to lose his place in the line of succession (the Act of Settlement 1701 only applies where the spouse is a Catholic at the time of marriage). The couple's son Lord Nicholas also converted to Roman Catholicism following his mother's example.
The Duke and Duchess of Kent reside at Wren House, Kensington Palace, in London.  

Royal duties

The Duke of Kent has performed royal duties on behalf of his cousin, the Queen, for over 50 years. The Duke has represented the Queen during independence celebrations in the former British colonies of Sierra Leone, Uganda, Guyana, Gambia and most recently Ghana for their (Ghana's) 50th Independence Anniversary Celebration. He has also acted as Counsellor of State during periods of the Queen's absence abroad.
One of the Duke's major public roles for many years was Vice-Chairman of British Trade International, and later as the United Kingdom's Special Representative for International Trade and Investment. This position saw the Duke travel abroad to represent the British government in fostering trade relations with foreign countries and organisations.
His other interests include serving as the president of the Wimbledon All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club, a position he succeeded from his late mother, Princess Marina, Duchess of Kent. His other roles include President of the Commonwealth War Graves Commission, the RAF Benevolent Fund, the Royal National Lifeboat Institution, the Stroke Association, RUSI, the Royal Institution and is Patron of St Mungo's. He also makes the final decision in the award of the Mountbatten Medal.
Edward is President of the Scout Association, and, along with Prince William, visited the Centenary World Scout Jamboree at Hylands Park, Chelmsford in July 2007.
For almost 29 years Edward has been the Patron of Endeavour a national youth organisation.
He has also served as Royal Bencher of The Honourable Society of Lincoln's Inn since 2001, a position previously occupied by his father.

Freemasonry

On 16 December 1963, the Duke was initiated into Royal Alpha Lodge No. 16 and into Freemasonry. In December 2013, he celebrated 50 years as a Freemason.

Scouting

The Duke has served as the President of The Scout Association since 1975.

Titles, styles, honours and arms

Titles and styles

The Duke's current full style is Field Marshal His Royal Highness Prince Edward George Nicholas Paul Patrick, Duke of Kent, Earl of Saint Andrews and Baron Downpatrick, Royal Knight of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, Grand Master and Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Personal Aide-de-Camp to Her Majesty.

=Military ranks=

Honours

See also List of honours of the British Royal Family by country
Foreign Honours

=Appointments=

=Honorary military appointments=

=Other appointments=

Arms

Issue

Ancestry






