[[Anna Faris]]

CATEGORIES: 1976 births, Actresses from Maryland, Actresses from Washington (state), American child actresses, American film actresses, American television actresses, American voice actresses, Living people, People from Baltimore, Maryland, People from Edmonds, Washington, People from Seattle, Washington, University of Washington alumni, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses

Anna Kay Faris ( born November 29, 1976) is an American actress and singer. She is known for her comedic roles in the Scary Movie film series, Lost in Translation, The House Bunny, My Super Ex-Girlfriend, Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs, Yogi Bear, What's Your Number?, The Dictator, and I Give It a Year.

Early life

Faris was born in Baltimore, Maryland.
Her parents encouraged her to pursue acting when she was young,

Career

Faris' first film role came shortly after college with her independent film, Lovers Lane in 1999, in which she played an ill-fated cheerleader. Her breakout role came the following year in 2000 in the horror-film parody Scary Movie where she played Cindy Campbell. She appeared on the TV series Friends in the recurring role of Erica, the mother whose twin babies are adopted by Chandler and Monica.
In 2003, she said she was "cast last-minute" in the film Lost in Translation, in which she played an actress promoting an action movie. In 2008, she produced and starred in The House Bunny, about a retired Playboy bunny. In season four of HBO's Entourage, Faris guest starred as herself in three episodes and appeared in a video on Eatdrinkordie.
She voiced Sam Sparks in the 2009 animated film Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs, the computer-animated chipmunk Jeanette Miller in the live-action Alvin and the Chipmunks: The Squeakquel (2009) and Alvin and the Chipmunks: Chipwrecked (2011). In 2011, she starred in and served as executive producer of the 2011 romantic comedy What's Your Number? alongside Chris Evans. In 2012, she starred alongside Sacha Baron Cohen in The Dictator. She appeared in the comedy film Movie 43 in the segment "The Proposition" alongside her husband Chris Pratt. In 2013, she appeared in I Give It a Year and reprises her role as Sam Sparks in the sequel Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs 2. She plays the main role in the sitcom series Mom as Christy.

In the media

Faris has appeared on the covers of Raygun, Playboy, Tad Friend described her in The New Yorker as "Hollywood's most original comic actress".

Personal life

While filming Lovers Lane in London, Faris met her first husband, Ben Indra. They began dating in that year and were married in June 2004, but they divorced in April 2007, citing irreconcilable differences.

Filmography

Film

Television

Discography

Awards and nominations






