[[University of Auckland]]

CATEGORIES: University of Auckland, 1880s establishments in New Zealand, Educational institutions established in 1883, Worldwide Universities Network

The University of Auckland (

History

Early history

The University of Auckland began as a constituent of the University of New Zealand, founded on 23 May 1883 as Auckland University College. Stewardship of the University during its establishment period was the responsibility of John Chapman Andrew (Vice Chancellor of the University of New Zealand 1885–1903). Housed in a disused courthouse and jail, it started out with 95 students and 4 teaching staff: Frederick Douglas Brown, professor of chemistry (London and Oxford); Algernon Phillips Withiel Thomas, professor of natural sciences (Oxford); Thomas George Tucker, professor of classics (Cambridge); and George Francis Walker, professor of mathematics (Cambridge). By 1901, student numbers had risen to 156; the majority of these students were training towards being law clerks or teachers and were enrolled part-time. From 1905 onwards, an increasing number of students enrolled in commerce studies.
The University conducted little research until the 1930s, when there was a spike in interest in academic research during the Depression. At this point, the college's executive council issued several resolutions in favour of academic freedom after the controversial dismissal of J.C. Beaglehole (allegedly for a letter to a newspaper where he publicly defended the right of communists to distribute their literature), which helped encourage the college's growth.
In 1934, four new professors joined the college: Arthur Sewell (English), H.G. Forder (Mathematics), C.G. Cooper (Classics) and James Rutherford (History). The combination of new talent, and academic freedom, saw Auckland University College flourish through to the 1950s.auckland.ac. The University of Auckland. Retrieved on 18 July 2009.
In 1950, the Elam School of Fine Arts was brought into the University of Auckland. Archie Fisher, who had been appointed principal of the Elam School of Fine Arts was instrumental in having it brought in the University of Auckland.
The University of New Zealand was dissolved in 1961 and the University of Auckland was empowered by the University of Auckland Act 1961.
In 1966, lecturers Keith Sinclair and Bob Chapman established The University of Auckland Art Collection, beginning with the purchase of several paintings and drawings by Colin McCahon. The Collection is now managed by the Centre for Art Research, based at the Gus Fisher Gallery.
Professor Stuart McCutcheon became Vice-Chancellor on 1 January 2005. He was previously the Vice-Chancellor of Victoria University of Wellington. He succeeded Dr John Hood (PhD, Hon. LLD), who was appointed Vice-Chancellor of the University of Oxford.
The University opened a new business school building in 2007, following the completion of the Information Commons. It has recently gained international accreditations for all its programmes and now completes the "Triple Crown" (AMBA, EQUIS and AACSB).
On 1 September 2004, the Auckland College of Education merged with the University's School of Education (previously part of the Arts Faculty) to form the Faculty of Education. The faculty is based at the Epsom Campus of the former college, with an additional campus in Whangarei.
The North Shore Campus, established in 2001, was located in the suburb of Takapuna. It offered the Bachelor of Business and Information Management degree. At the end of 2006, the campus was closed and the degree relocated to the City campus.
In May 2013 the University purchased a site for new 5 hectare campus  adjacent to the major business area in Newmarket.  It will provide the University with a site for expansion over the next 50 years, with Engineering occupying the first of the new faculties in 2014.

Administration

The head of the University is the Chancellor, currently Ian Parton, however this position is only titular. The chief executive of the University is the Vice-Chancellor, currently Professor Stuart McCutcheon, who is the University's fifth Vice-Chancellor.

Coat of arms

The Blazon of the Arms of the University of Auckland is: Azure between three mullets argent an open Book proper edged and bound Or with seven Clasps on either side Or, on a chief wavy also argent three Kiwis proper. Translation of the Blazon. The shield is the first part described "Azure" means blue so the shield is blue. A "mullet" is a five pointed star and when there are three of them they are depicted two above and one below. Their colour is silver ("argent".)  Between these stars is an open book and "proper" means the book is shown in its natural colours – normally black and white. The edge ("edged") of the book and the binding of the book is in gold ("Or".) and it is bound with seven clasps on either side which would close the book securely when closed. These clasps are also gold. A "chief" is a broad strip at the top of the shield but "wavy" means that the base of the chief is in a wave like line. The colour of the chief is silver ("argent".) On the chief are three kiwis and "proper" means that's they are shown in their natural colour.
The university's motto is Ingenio et labore which may be translated from Latin as "By natural ability and hard work."

Admission

Since eliminating open entry in 2009, Scoop.co. all applicants must have a university entrance qualification. Domestic students are required to achieve the NZQA University Entrance Standard, Retrieved 20 July 2009. while international students must achieve an equivalent approved qualification in their country.auckland.ac. Retrieved 20 July 2009. Admission to the University also requires applicants to meet the preset academic and English language entry requirements specific to the degree for which they are applying."General information about entry requirements". The University of Auckland. Retrieved 20 July 2009. Some programs also have a preset number of places available within the degree. To be guaranteed entry students must achieve a rank score as well as meet any additional requirements." The University of Auckland. Retrieved 22 November 2013.
All students who did not complete their high school education or equivalent in English are also required to provide a valid IELTS score (minimum of 6.0) or equivalent."English language requirements". The University of Auckland. Retrieved 20 July 2009.

Campuses

The University of Auckland is spread across six campuses, all situated in Auckland Region and Northland Region in the upper North Island of New Zealand.
In July 2011 Kim and Jeanette Goldwater gifted a 14-hectare winery in Waiheke Island to the University. This is set to host the University's Wine Science courses.
In 2010 Lion ceased operations at its Newmarket brewery and moved to East Tamaki, selling the site to the University of Auckland in May 2013. The university plans to build an engineering research space and a new civil structures hall.
From the start of the first semester of 2010, the University banned smoking on any of its property, including inside and outside buildings in areas that were once designated as smoking areas.

Faculties and institutes

Schools and faculties

Research institutes

Academic staff

Until his death in 2009, the longest serving staff member was Emeritus Professor of Prehistory, Roger Curtis Green, BA BSc (New Mexico), PhD (Harv.), FRSNZ, MANAS. He had been on the staff 1961–66 and from 1973 onwards. The longest serving, non-'retired' staff member is Bernard Brown, ONZM, LLB (Hons) (Leeds), LLM (Sing.). He has been a full-time senior lecturer in the faculty of law 1962-65 and 1969 onwards. William Phillips, the influential economist largely famed for his Phillips curve, taught at the university from 1969 until his death in 1975.
According to the Association of University Staff of New Zealand (AUS) in 2007, New Zealand universities, including the University of Auckland, had been taking a more litigious approach to managing their staff in recent years and engaged lawyers and employment advocates to handle even minor matters. The University of Auckland "paid out more than $780,000 in 2006 to settle problems it listed as including personal grievances and disputes".

Auckland UniServices

Auckland UniServices Limited is the commercial research and knowledge transfer company for the university. Auckland UniServices Limited. Retrieved on 18 July 2009.

Rankings

University rankings

The University of Auckland is New Zealand's leading university.  It is the only one included in the Times Higher Education top 200 and it is the highest ranked New Zealand university in the QS World University Rankings and Shanghai Jiao Tong Academic Ranking of World Universities. Some 35 percent of the top ranked academic researchers in New Zealand are at the University of Auckland.

QS World University Rankings

In 2010 QS World University Rankings ranked Auckland 68th overall in the world, scoring very consistently in the subject rankings: 51st in Arts & Humanities, 55th in Engineering & IT, 41st in Life Sciences & Biomedicine, 68th in Natural Sciences and 38th in Social Sciences.
In 2011 QS World University Rankings ranked Auckland 82nd overall in the world. In the subject rankings it ranked less than the previous year: 55th in Arts & Humanities, 62nd in Engineering & IT, 50th in Life Sciences & Biomedicine, 73rd in Natural Sciences, 41st in Social Sciences and 33rd in Accounting & Finance.

PBRF rankings

The University of Auckland is a research-led university, and had the second highest ranking in the 2006 and 2012 Performance Based Research Fund (PBRF) exercises conducted by the government that evaluated the quality of researchers and research output of all tertiary institutions in New Zealand.
In the previous PBRF evaluation in 2003, when the University was ranked the top research university in New Zealand, the Commission commented: "On virtually any measure, the University of Auckland is the country's leading research university. Not only did it achieve the highest quality score of any TEO education organisation, but it also has by far the largest share of A-rated researchers in the country."

Universal Business Schools Rankings

The University of Auckland Business School was ranked number 34 in the Universal Business Schools Ranking in 2013.

Accommodation

The University provides a range of accommodation options for students. Several hundred live in Residential Halls and Apartments, which provide, respectively, food, accommodation, social and welfare services, alongside self-catered, private residences.

Halls of Residence

Apartments

The university ceased leasing Railway Campus in November 2008.

Students' association

The Auckland University Students' Association (AUSA) represents students at the University. AUSA publicises student issues, administers student facilities, and assists affiliated student clubs and societies. AUSA also produces the student magazine Craccum and runs the radio station bFM. The name of the alumni association is the University of Auckland Society.

CECIL

CECIL (CSL, short for Computer Supported Learning) is the university's learning management and course management system and was developed in house. It has more than 44,000 logins per day (2008 April). Cecil support staff work with academics on research into cheating detections during online assessment,Detecting Cheaters using a Learning Management System. Cecil. Retrieved 6 November 2008. productivity improvement using a learning management system (LMS),Increasing Teaching Productivity with EuropeMMM. Cecil. Retrieved 6 November 2008. and effectiveness of tools in LMS. Ed/ITLib Digital Library, AACE. Retrieved 6 November 2008. Cecil contains many of the features of similar systems such as Sakai Project and WebCT. Cecil also provides interactive tools for collaboration and other tools specific to the University. Cecil. 6 November 2008. CECIL is currently run on a Microsoft SharePoint 2007 based system, but preparations are underway to upgrade to a Microsoft SharePoint 2010 based system. Cecil. Retrieved 5 January 2011.

Prominent alumni

 | editor-last = Bath | editor-first = Richard
 | page = 111
 | year = 1997
 | title = Complete Book of Rugby
 | publisher = Seven Oaks Ltd
 | ISBN = 1-86200-013-1}}</ref>






