[[Lake Manly]]

CATEGORIES: Lakes of the Great Basin, Former lakes, Pleistocene, Lakes of the Mojave Desert, Death Valley, Geology of California, Geology of Nevada, Lakes of Inyo County, California, Natural history of the Mojave Desert, Endorheic lakes of California

Lake Manly is a pluvial, former freshwater, endorheic, rift lake that filled the Death Valley basin of Inyo County, California through the Holocene before the area's climate changed to desert. Following its isolation from the Colorado River system, Lake Manly receded by evaporation with Badwater Basin, Middle Basin, and Cotton Ball Marsh occupying the space left behind. At its greatest extent Lake Manly was roughly 

Background

As Lake Manly evaporated to the surface of Death Valley, it left a remarkable legacy.  Under the surface of Death Valley is one of the world's largest aquifers. Being fed by the Amargosa River and Salt Creek, this aquifer is barely visible above ground at Badwater Basin, at .
Shoreline Butte has easy-to-see strandlines formed by wave action from the ancient lake. These features were created by strands of the lake, which would change its depth over time and also cause slight changes in climate. The conditions under which this lake existed are called "pluvial" by geologists instead of glacial because glaciers did not directly touch Death Valley, but the meltwater from the glaciers and the cooler and wetter climate of the time affected the valley. Approximately  of gravel, sand, and mud overlay the bedrock of the valley floor.
Lake Manly is named after William L. Manly, who was among the original Death Valley party in 1849.  Manly and a companion hiked out of Death Valley into the Greater Los Angeles Area, where he found help and returned to rescue his party.

Geologic Timeline

In 1999, geologists drilled a 186-meter deep core into the Death Valley floor near Badwater Basin. The core has shed light on the contemporary understanding of Lake Manly's age and clearly divided Lake Manly's history into six distinct time periods. The six time periods all clearly corresponded to the climate in Death Valley, which was the driving force behind Lake Manly's formation and disappearance.

Depositional Features

Lake Manly left behind many deposits, indicating the range of its waters. Geologists have discovered 30 distinct deposits. The deposits range from strandlines to shoreline gravel to spit and bar complexes, among others. The numerous features span Death Valley from north to south, but are primarily located on the eastern side. Despite how far ranging the features are, the record of deposition is far more incomplete than other Pleistocene pluvial lakes such as Lake Bonneville or Lake Lahontan. Deposits from Lake Manly are often only partially intact because they have been affected by erosion or faulting. The depositional features provide insight into Lake Manly's history and expand the geologic understanding of the region.

Reemergence

In 2004, severe flooding resulted in Lake Manly reappearing on a large scale.





Further reading




