[[Raising Arizona]]

CATEGORIES: 1987 films, 1980s comedy films, 1987 soundtracks, 20th Century Fox films, American films, American independent films, American criminal comedy films, Carter Burwell albums, English-language films, Films directed by the Coen brothers, Films set in Arizona, Films shot in Arizona, Films about abduction, Film scores, Varèse Sarabande soundtracks

Raising Arizona is a 1987 American comedy film directed, written, and produced by the Coen brothers, and starring Nicolas Cage, Holly Hunter, William Forsythe, John Goodman, Frances McDormand, and Randall "Tex" Cobb. Not a blockbuster at the time of its release, it has since achieved cult status. In a manner typical of Coen Brothers fare, the movie is replete with symbolism, visual gags, unconventional characters, flamboyant camera work, biblical references, pathos, and idiosyncratic dialogue. The film ranked 31st on the American Film Institute's 100 Years...100 Laughs list, and 45th on Bravo's "100 Funniest Movies" list.

Plot

Criminal Herbert I. "Hi" McDunnough (Nicolas Cage) and policewoman Edwina "Ed" (Holly Hunter) meet after she takes the mugshots of the recidivist. With continued visits, Hi learns that Ed's fiancé has left her. Hi proposes to her after his latest release from prison, and the two get married. They move into a desert mobile home, and Hi gets a job in a machine shop. They want to have children, but Ed discovers that she is infertile. Due to Hi's criminal record, they cannot adopt a child. The couple learns of the "Arizona Quints," sons of locally famous furniture magnate Nathan Arizona (Trey Wilson); Hi and Ed kidnap one of the five babies, whom they believe to be Nathan Junior.
Hi and Ed return home and are soon visited by Hi's prison buddies, Gale and Evelle Snoats (John Goodman and William Forsythe), who have just escaped from prison. Under the brothers' influence, Hi is tempted to return to his felonious ways. Their problems get worse when Hi's supervisor, Glen (Sam McMurray), proposes wife swapping and Hi assaults him. That night, Hi decides to steal a package of diapers for the baby. Ed sees him robbing the convenience store and, furious, drives off without him. Hi is forced to flee on foot from the convenience store chased by police, gun-toting store cashiers, and a pack of dogs. Ed eventually picks him up, leading to a tense ride home.
At the McDunnough residence the next day, Glen approaches Hi to fire him, reveals that he has deduced Junior's identity, and blackmails Hi, threatening to turn him over to the police unless Glen and Dot get custody of Junior. Gale and Evelle overhear this conversation and turn on Hi, tying him up and taking Junior for themselves. Gale and Evelle leave with plans to rob a "hayseed" bank with Junior in tow. When Ed comes home, she frees Hi and the two arm themselves and set out together to retrieve the child. En route, Ed suggests that they should end their marriage after recovering the boy. Meanwhile, Nathan Arizona Sr. is approached by the bounty hunter Leonard Smalls (Randall "Tex" Cobb) who offers to find the child. Nathan Sr. declines the offer, believing that Smalls is his son's kidnapper. Smalls decides to recover the child anyway to sell on the black market. He begins tracking Gale and Evelle and learns of their bank robbery plans.
Gale and Evelle rob the bank but forget to take Junior in the car on their getaway. One of the bank's anti-theft dye canisters explodes in their loot sack, disabling the car and incapacitating them. At the bank, Smalls arrives for Junior just ahead of Ed and Hi. Ed grabs the baby and flees; Hi is able to fend Smalls off for a while, but soon finds himself at Smalls' mercy. As Smalls throws Hi to the ground and prepares to kill him, Hi holds up his hand to reveal that he has pulled the pin from one of the hand grenades on Smalls' vest. Smalls struggles, but is blown to pieces by the grenade.
Hi and Ed sneak Junior back into the Arizona home and are confronted by Nathan Sr. After Nathan Sr. learns why they took his son, he understands the couple's predicament and counsels the young couple. When Hi and Ed say that they are breaking up, he advises them to sleep on it. Hi and Ed go to sleep in the same bed, and Hi has a dream about Gale and Evelle reforming after returning to prison; Glen gets his due from a Polish-American police officer after "telling one Polack joke too many"; and Nathan Jr. gets a football for Christmas from "a kindly couple who wish to remain unknown," later becoming a football star. The dream ends with an elderly couple together enjoying a holiday visit from a large family of children and grandchildren.

Cast

In contrast to Blood Simple, the characters of Raising Arizona were written to be very sympathetic. 32. The Coens wrote the part of Ed for Holly Hunter. 21.
Several babies had to be fired on-set due to them taking their first steps rather than crawling. One mother put her baby's shoes on backwards to keep the baby crawling rather than walking. 19 The character of Leonard Smalls was created when the Coen Brothers tried to envision an "evil character" not from their imagination, but one that the character Hi would have thought up. 29 Randall "Tex" Cobb gave the Coens difficulty on set, with Joel noting that "he's less an actor than a force of nature ... I don't know if I'd rush headlong into employing him for a future film."

Production

Conception

The Coen Brothers started working on Raising Arizona with the idea to make it as different as possible from their previous film, Blood Simple, by having it be far more optimistic and upbeat. 17. 18. The starting point of scriptwriting came from the idea of the character of Hi, who has the desire to live a regular life within the boundaries of the law. 27. To create their characters' dialect, Joel and Ethan created a hybrid of local dialect and the assumed reading material of the characters, namely, magazines and the Bible. 29. The script took three and a half months to write. 30
The film was influenced by the works of director Preston Sturges and writers such as William Faulkner and Flannery O'Connor, known for her southern literature. 23. 24. 26. Joel and Ethan showed their completed script to Circle Films, which was their American distributor for Blood Simple. Circle Films agreed to finance the movie. 34. The Coens came to the set with a complete script and storyboard. With a budget of a bit more than five million dollars, Joel Coen noted that "to obtain maximum from that money, the movie has to be meticulously prepared."Coen, Coen, Allen 2006, pp. 28.

Filming

Raising Arizona was shot in thirteen weeks. The relationship between actor Nicolas Cage and the Coens was respectful, but turbulent. When he arrived on-set, and at various other points during production, Cage offered suggestions to the Coen brothers, which they ignored. 19. Cage said that "Joel and Ethan have a very strong vision and I've learned how difficult it is to accept another artist's vision. They have an autocratic nature."Coen, Coen, Allen 2006, pp. 20.
Many crew members who had worked with Joel and Ethan on Blood Simple returned for Raising Arizona, including cinematographer Barry Sonnenfeld, co-producer Mark Silverman, production designer Jane Musky, associate producer and assistant director Deborah Reinisch, and film composer Carter Burwell. 33Russell 2001, pp. 27

Release

The film was screened out of competition at the 1987 Cannes Film Festival.

Reception

As of 2012, the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported that 90% of 49 critics gave the film a positive review. Last accessed: February 14, 2012. The film opened to mixed reviews, however. Among the positive reviews, David Denby of New York wrote that the film was a "deranged fable of the New West" which turned "sarcasm into a rude yet affectionate mode of comedy."Russell 2001, pp. 44 Richard Corliss of Time referred to the film as "exuberantly original." Rita Kempley of The Washington Post gave a positive review, stating that it was "the best kidnapping comedy since last summer's Ruthless People."
Negative reviews focused on a "style over substance" view of the film. Variety wrote, "While Arizona is filled with many splendid touches and plenty of yocks, it often doesn't hold together as a coherent story."
Later writings about the film have been generally positive. Both the British film magazine Empire and film database Allmovie gave the film five stars, their highest ratings.

Soundtrack

The score to Raising Arizona is written by Carter Burwell, the second of his collaborations with the Coen brothers.  The sounds are a mix of organ, massed choir, banjo, whistling, and yodeling.
Themes are borrowed from the "Goofing Off Suite," originally recorded by Pete Seeger in 1955, which includes an excerpt from the Chorale movement of Ludwig van Beethoven's Symphony No. 9 and "Russian Folk Themes and Yodel." Credited musicians for the film include Ben Freed (banjo), Mieczyslaw Litwinski (Jew's harp and guitar), and John R. Crowder (yodeling). Holly Hunter sings a traditional murder ballad, "Down in the Willow Garden," as an incongruous "lullaby" during the film.
Selections from Burwell's score to Raising Arizona were released on an album in 1987, along with selections from the Coens' sole previous feature film, Blood Simple.  The tracks from Raising Arizona constitute the first ten tracks on a 17-track CD that also features selections from the Blood Simple soundtrack.
Allmusic gave the album a rating of 



 | last= Coen | first= Joel
 | coauthors = Ethan Coen, William Rodney Allen
 | title= The Coen brothers: interviews
 |publisher= University Press of Mississippi
 |year= 2006
 |isbn= 1-57806-889-4
 |url=
}}
 | last= Russell | first= Carolyn R.
 | title= The films of Joel and Ethan Coen
 |publisher= McFarland
 |year= 2001
 |isbn= 0-7864-0973-8
 |url=
}}




