[[Texas Academy of Mathematics and Science]]

CATEGORIES: Gifted education, National Consortium for Specialized Secondary Schools of Mathematics, Science and Technology schools, University of North Texas, High schools in Denton County, Texas, Public high schools in Texas

The Texas Academy of Mathematics and Science ("TAMS") is a two-year residential early entrance college program serving approximately 375 students at the University of North Texas.unt. TAMS is a member of the National Consortium for Specialized Secondary Schools of Mathematics, Science and Technology.
TAMS was established in 1987 by the Texas legislature, in order to provide high school students seeking careers in math, science, and engineering an opportunity to take advanced coursework.301 ( Students take UNT classes for their two years at TAMS, and graduate with a TAMS high school diploma, as well as a UNT college transcript with a minimum of 57 hours of transferable college credits.unt.edu/admissions/eligibility

Admissions

Applicants are limited to Texas residents who are sophomores in high school.unt. Selected applicants are then invited to interview at one of TAMS's "Interview Days." During Interview Day, applicants take algebra diagnostic tests.unt.edu/admissions/how-to-apply

Academics

Core subjects required for graduation include biology, chemistry, physics (mechanics and electromagnetism), mathematics (precalculus and calculus), English literature, US history, and political science.unt.
All core courses must be taken at TAMS/UNT during the fall and spring semesters. The minimum cumulative GPA required for graduation is 3.0. Students whose GPA drops below this threshold are put on academic probation, and may be dismissed.unt.edu/academics/academic-program#dismissal

Tuition and fees

TAMS students are responsible for paying for room and board in McConnell Hall and $1300 Program Charge.unt.pdf  Thirty percent of students receive financial aid to defray costs.unt.

Research, scholarships, and awards

Students at TAMS are encouraged to take the opportunity of conducting research under the guidance of a professor either on or off-campus during the school year as well as the summer.unt. Students' research may be recognized by professors listing a student as co-author of a papers or by awards at competitions such as Siemens Westinghouse Competition in Science and Technology and the Intel Science Talent Search. A number of students also compete for the Barry M. Goldwater Scholarship.

Student life

Clubs and events

TAMS students participate in the UNT community through activities such as community service projects and tutoring. TAMS has a number of student activities and events, ranging from academic clubs like Math Club and Junior Engineering Technical Society (JETS) to performance groups like Academy Players (theater) and Dull Roar (music), to cultural groups such as FACES (Fellowship for the Advancement of Cultural Education for Students).unt. In addition to clubs, the McConnell Hall Association functions as a part of the UNT Residential Hall Association.
Students may also participate in yearly or more frequent events such as proms, school dances, coffee houses, and an annual talent show.

McConnell Hall

All TAMS students live in McConnell Hall. The hall consists of three floors, segregated by gender. The hall is furnished with a kitchenette, multiple meeting rooms, and two common rooms. One of the common rooms, the Smitty Study, serves as a public recreation room when it is not functioning as a study area during quiet hours. The other common room, Mac Café, aptly named because it once was home to a university cafeteria, hosts various student activities and serves as a gathering place for both academic and social interaction.






