[[Mike Stock (musician)]]

CATEGORIES: 1951 births, Living people, English songwriters, Ivor Novello Award winners, English record producers, English pop musicians, People from Margate, Musicians from Kent

Michael Stock (born 3 December 1951) is an English songwriter, record producer and musician best known for being a member of the songwriting and production team Stock Aitken and Waterman that achieved success in the 1980s and 1990s. He has written and/or produced numerous worldwide hits including 18 #1 records in America and the UK, and over a hundred Top 40 hits.
Stock is one of the most successful songwriters of all time as recognised by the Guinness Book of Records.

Biography

Stock was born in Margate, Kent, England in 1951. He was self- taught in playing the piano and guitar and began writing songs at the age of seven.
In 1970 Stock earned a placement at the University of Hull to study Drama and Theology and formed a band with a fellow student, the later acclaimed Oscar-winning director, Anthony Minghella.
Stock's band had gone through several guitar players before he was alerted to Matt Aitken; a guitarist who had been spotted by another member of his band working on a cruise ship.

Stock Aitken and Waterman

Formation and Early Hits: Divine, Hazell Dean, Dead or Alive (1984-85)

Stock had briefly worked with Pete Waterman in 1980 when John Milton, Mark Stock and Mike wrote the song  -'One Nine for a Lady Breaker' – for a CB radio club.
In 1983 Stock had been approached by Andy Paul, a Greek Cypriot, to write a song for Cyprus in the Eurovision Song Contest. 'Anna Maria Elena' was voted by the Cypriot public to represent their country in the competition and the re-recorded version would be Stock and Aitken's second collaboration with Waterman. The team were then asked to produce a song for Divine and they recorded 'You Think You're a Man' at the Marquee Studio which was released by Proto Records in July 1984 reaching number 16 in the UK charts.

The Hit Factory: Bananarama, Mel and Kim, Princess (1985-86)

In 1985 the trio built a new studio at 'The Vineyard' recording studio complex, The Borough that would later be dubbed 'The Hit Factory'. Whilst working with the band Brilliant, Stock wrote a song for their backing singer Desiree Heslop called 'Say I'm Your Number One', which became a hit in the UK under her stage name 'Princess'. Towards the end of 1985 the group Bananarama approached SAW to record a cover of 'Shocking Blue's' Venus. The track became a huge hit in the UK and went to #1 in America in July 1986.

Rick Astley, Ferry Aid (1987)

In 1987 Rick Astley recorded what would be one of the team's biggest hits-Never Gonna Give You Up, though initially Stock and Aitken were unsure of its appeal with Astley's unorthodox but strong voice.

Kylie Minogue, Jason Donovan, Band Aid II (1988-89)

In 1987 Pete Waterman formed PWL the in-house label of SAW and one of the first artists to be released on the label was Australian soap star, Kylie Minogue. Stock was contacted by Terry Blamey, Kylie Minogue's manager informing him that she had been in London for ten days waiting to work with SAW though Pete Waterman had not informed Stock. Kylie went on to record three more studio albums with SAW scoring 15 successive top 10 hits including; Je Ne Sais Pas Pourquoi, Hand On Your Heart, Wouldn't Change A Thing, Tears on My Pillow, Better The Devil You Know, Shocked among many others.
Soon after, Jason Donovan's first single- 'Nothing Can Divide Us' became a top 5 hit. Donovan went on to have numerous hits with SAW including the number 1 Sealed With A Kiss, Every Day (I Love You More) and the Christmas number 2 record When You Come Back To Me-kept off the top spot by the Band Aid II record –Do They Know It's Christmas?, also produced by Stock Aitken and Waterman.

Donna Summer, Cliff Richard and later work (1989-93)

1989 became Stock Aitken and Waterman's most successful year having helmed seven UK  #1s (a feat equalled only by George Martin in 1963) and 15 top 5s.

Post SAW

In 1993 Stock formed 'Love This Records', and built a brand new multi million pound recording studio in London.
In 1994 Stock produced several artists for Simon Cowell including Kym Mazelle, Jocelyn Brown and Robson and Jerome. Their cover of Unchained Melody produced by Stock and Aitken became the highest selling non-charity single of the decade, remaining at  #1 for 7 weeks in 1995 selling 2.5 million copies. Stock produced a further two #1 singles with Robson and Jerome and two #1 albums.
After several years producing hits for Stock's own label 'Love This Records' and with Simon Cowell for BMG/RCA, the structural integrity of Stock's studio became compromised by the tunnelling of the Jubilee Line extension, and the damage forced Stock to pursue legal action against London Underground.
In 1998 Stock and Aitken teamed up with Steve Crosby who had created the group Steps, to form the band Scooch. Their first single 'When My Baby' reached #29 and their follow up, 'More Than I Needed To Know', was a top 5 hit in the UK in 2000 and went to  #1 in Japan.
In 2003 Stock formed the label Better the Devil Records and had a huge hit with the Fast Food Song selling 200,000 CD singles. Stock wrote and produced two further singles for the Fast Food Rockers including the top 10 'Smile Please'.

Recent

In 2005 Stock briefly teamed up with Pete Waterman to write and produce a single for 'The Sheilas' of the Sheila's Wheels car insurance brand and again in 2010, collaborating on the UK's entry in the Eurovision Song Contest, "That Sounds Good To Me".co.uk
Most recently Stock formed the company 'The Show 4 Kids', in response to the sexualisation of pop music, citing the unsuitable sexual nature of pop videos for young children.
In summer 2012 The Go!Go!Go! Show debuted a new live show at the Empire Cinema in London's Leicester Square. It marked the first time in over 50 years that the famous venue has hosted live entertainment.



Notes






