[[Relationship of Command]]

CATEGORIES: At the Drive-In albums, 2000 albums, Albums produced by Ross Robinson, Fearless Records albums, Grand Royal albums

Relationship of Command is the third and final studio album by the post-hardcore band At the Drive-In, and was released in September 2000. The band reached mainstream success through the album, if only for a short time before their break-up in 2001.
The album combines a hardcore aggressive edge with a melodic drive and harmonious, emotive and surreal vocals and lyrics.

Background

Relationship of Command was recorded over a seven-week period starting on January 17, 2000, following a tour supporting Rage Against the Machine. The album was recorded at the Indigo Ranch Studios, in Malibu, California, and was produced by Ross Robinson and mixed by Andy Wallace. Known for his unorthodox production methods, Robinson at one point took bass player Paul Hinojos for a drive in his SUV through the hills of Malibu to get his adrenaline going prior to recording. He also brought Iggy Pop to the studio for a guest appearance; Omar Rodriguez commented: "Ross had been talking to Iggy because they were gonna work together. I don't know if they ever did, but they'd sort of been chatting, so Ross had passed him our previous records and he liked them. So, of course I brought up the idea, "Why not Iggy come and do something on the album?" Ross mentioned it to Iggy, and he was completely open to it. He came down to the studio for a whole day in which he sang "Rolodex Propaganda" and did the ransom note "Enfilade"".
The album's cover artwork (including the covers for the singles "One Armed Scissor," "Invalid Litter Dept." and "Rolodex Propaganda"), illustrated by Damon Locks, all revolve around imagery of the Trojan War, and the Trojan Horse in particular.

Reception

Critical reception

The album initially received generally positive reviews, with Metacritic giving the album an aggregate score of 77.
In 2005, the album was ranked number 423 in Rock Hard magazine's book of The 500 Greatest Rock & Metal Albums of All Time.

Legacy

Following the release of the album, At the Drive-In gained brief mainstream critical and commercial success, with the album being their only album to reach the Billboard 200, and also appearing in critics' end-of-year lists such as the Los Angeles Times and Rolling Stone, as well as making appearances on shows such as Late Night with Conan O'Brien and the Late Show with David Letterman. However despite this success, the band went on an indefinite hiatus in 2001, with the members splitting to form The Mars Volta and Sparta.
In an interview with Alternative Press in September 2010 (in an article praising the album 10 years later) when asked "What's your least favorite thing about the album?" Rodriguez replied: "In a heartbeat I could tell you, one of my only regrets out of everything I've ever done is the way that record was mixed. People think that was a raw and energetic record, but what they're hearing is nothing compared to what it truly was before it was glossed over and sent through the mixing mill that was Andy Wallace, who is a wonderful person and a very talented mixing engineer and has done great albums – I'm not trying to offend him....  I just find it the most passive, plastic...." The board mix of the album will be released by the band in 2013 on their 21st Chapter Records label.

Track listing

Personnel

Charts




