[[Foreign relations of Luxembourg]]

CATEGORIES: Foreign relations of Luxembourg

Luxembourg has long been a prominent supporter of European political and economic integration. In efforts foreshadowing European integration, Luxembourg and Belgium in 1921 formed the Belgium-Luxembourg Economic Union (BLEU) to create an inter-exchangeable currency and a common customs regime. Luxembourg is a member of the Benelux Economic Union and was one of the founding members of the European Economic Community (now the European Union). It also participates in the Schengen Group (named after the Luxembourg village where the agreements were signed), whose goal is the free movement of citizens among member states. At the same time, the majority of Luxembourgers have consistently believed that European unity makes sense only in the context of a dynamic transatlantic relationship, and thus have traditionally pursued a pro-NATO, pro-US foreign policy.
Luxembourg is the site of the European Court of Justice, the European Court of Auditors, the Statistical Office of the European Communities (Eurostat) and other vital EU organs. The Secretariat of the European Parliament is located in Luxembourg, but the Parliament usually meets in nearby Strasbourg.

Luxembourg maintains embassies in the following countries

Austria, Belgium, China, the Czech Republic, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, India, Italy, Japan, Malaysia, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Russia, Spain, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States

Luxembourg intends to open embassies in the following countries

Turkey and the United Arab Emirates'Déclaration sur la politique étrangère et européenne de Jean Asselborn à la Chambre des Députés, le mardi 16 novembre 2010" (Declaration on foreign and European Policy to the Chamber of Deputies by Jean Asselborn, Tuesday 16 November 2010)

The following countries maintain embassies in Luxembourg

Austria, Belgium, Canada, China, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States

Relations by country

Australia

Australia is represented in Luxembourg through its embassy in Brussels (Belgium) and an honorary consulate in Luxembourg City. Luxembourg is represented in Australia through the embassy of the Netherlands in Canberra and through an honorary consulate in East Lindfield.

Canada

Czech Republic

Denmark

Estonia

Luxembourg recognised Estonia on February 22, 1923 and re-recognised Estonia on August 27, 1991. Both countries re-established diplomatic relations on August 29, 1991.  Estonia is represented in Luxembourg through its embassy in Brussels (Belgium) and an honorary consulate in Luxembourg.  Luxembourg is represented in Estonia through its embassy in Prague (Czech Republic). 
In 1937, a prominent Estonian political leader Artur Sirk, while a fugitive in Luxembourg was found dead, having apparently committed suicide by jumping out a second-story window. Although the Luxembourg Gendarmerie report assumed suicide, because of inconsistencies in the report, the Estonian chargé d'affaires in Paris, Rudolph Mollerson was sent to investigate. Pusta, Saddiku Paevik, Gesilingen, 1964, vol. 1 and TomingasW. Tomingas, Vaikiv Ajustu Eestis, New York, 1961 have argued that the death was an act of defenestration by agents of the first President of Estonia, Konstantin Päts.
As of December 31, 2007, foreign investments made in Estonia originating from Luxembourg totaled 225 million EUR accounting for 2% of the total volume of foreign direct investments. There are about 300 Estonians living in Luxembourg. An Estonian cultural association was founded in 1998. prime minister Andrus Ansip's in 2006. The Luxembourg Prime Minister Jean-Claude Juncker visited Estonia in 1999 and 2007.

Finland

Greece

Hungary

Ireland

Israel

In November 1947, Luxembourg voted in favor of the partition plan to create a Jewish state. Israel and Luxembourg established full diplomatic relations in 1949. Due to Luxembourg's small size, the Israeli embassy is located in Brussels and Luxembourg is represented politically by the Dutch embassy and economically by the Belgian embassy.

Italy

Kosovo

Luxembourg recognized the independence of Kosovo on 21 February 2008. Luxembourg has promised to give Kosovo €30 million over the next five years. Luxembourg said that the money was mainly for focus on professional training for Pristina and Mitrovica North authorities.

Lithuania

Malta

Romania

Both countries established diplomatic relations on December 10, 1910. Since August 19, 1991, Romania has an embassy in Luxembourg City.

Russia

Luxembourg has an embassy in Moscow and an honorary consulate in Saint Petersburg. Russia has an embassy in the city of Luxembourg. 
Both countries are full members of the Council of Europe, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, and the United Nations.
In the history of bilateral relations, the first Russian president to come on an official visit to Luxembourg was Vladimir Putin on 24 May 2007. As bilateral trade had more than tripled from USD 66.6 million in 2003 to USD 228.3 million in 2006, time had come to strengthen the ties between the two countries, energy and finance being the key areas of cooperation between Russia and Luxembourg.

Turkey

Luxembourg is represented in Turkey through its embassy in Ankara, which was opened in 1987.mfa.tr/relations-between-turkey-and-the-grand-duchy-of-luxembourg.en.mfa 
There are 500 ethnic Turk's living in Luxembourg, 200 of whom have dual citizenship. The trade volume between the two States had reached $217 million in 2011.  
Luxembourg strongly supports Turkey's candidacy as a full European Union member.xinhuanet.htm

Ukraine

United Kingdom

United States

The United States, fighting on the Allied side, contributed to Luxembourg's liberation in World War I and World War II.  More than 5,000 American soldiers, including U.S. Army General George S. Patton, are buried at the Luxembourg American Cemetery and Memorial near the capital of Luxembourg City, and there are monuments in many towns to American liberators. The strong U.S.-Luxembourg relationship is expressed both bilaterally and through common membership in NATO, the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE).

Vietnam

Both countries signed diplomatic relations in 1973. Luxembourg's representation in Vietnam is through its embassy in Beijing, China."Embassy Information", EmabssyInformation. Vietnam is represented through its embassy in Brussels, Belgium."List of Vietnamese Embassies and Consulates abroad", 48th International Mathematical Olympiad, retrieved 28 April 2009.








