[[Freddo]]

CATEGORIES: Australian confectionery, Cadbury brands, Candy bars, Fictional frogs and toads, 1930 introductions, Mondelēz brands

Freddo (sometimes called Freddo Frog) is a brand of chocolate bar currently manufactured by the British confectionery company Cadbury.  The 12g bar is sold in Australia, New Zealand, Ireland, and Zimbabwe. In the United Kingdom Freddo is individually sold in a larger 18g form, with a fixed price of 20 pence printed on the wrapper.
Each chocolate is shaped like a cartoon frog, standing up and dressed. Though primarily available as solid milk fingers, certain versions of the product have a cream or caramel centered flavouring. These include Dairy Milk, white chocolate, rice crisp, strawberry, peppermint, Crunchie (with bits of Cadbury's 'Crunchie' bar put in), pineapple (Only in 'twin-packs'), "Rainbow Crunch" and "Milky Top" (the top half being white chocolate and the bottom milk chocolate, in the style of Cadbury's "Top Deck" products).

History

In 1930, the MacRobertson's chocolate company were looking to add a new product to their children's range. Initial designs for a chocolate mouse were rejected, as Harry Melbourne felt that women and children were afraid of mice and would dislike the product. It was instead decided to produce a chocolate frog, branded as "Freddo Frog".  There were four varieties available: milk chocolate, white chocolate, half milk/half white, and milk chocolate with peanuts.
Freddo Frogs became part of the Cadbury product range in 1967, when MacRobertson's were sold to Cadbury. In Australia, Freddo Frogs are manufactured in Ringwood, Victoria and Hobart. Since the success of Freddo, an alternative chocolate named Caramello Koala, also made by Cadbury, has been created. Caramello Koala is the only flavour in which the chocolate is not shaped like "Freddo", but shaped like a Koala instead.
Freddo bars were released onto the UK market in 1973 and withdrawn in 1979. After 15 years they were re-launched.
In June 2006, a scare over possible Salmonella contamination in some Cadbury products in the UK led to the recall of around a million Cadbury chocolate bars, including the standard Freddo.
In 2009, the Freddo chocolate was redesigned in the United Kingdom, featuring a new, glossier Freddo design, and a replacement Dairy Milk logo. The Caramel Freddo also got the redesign. The same year saw the launch of an online animated series, The Adventures of Freddo and the Time Machine, expanding Freddo's character in short narrative stories supported by Flash games. The first series met with enough success to launch a second in 2010, The Adventures of Freddo and the Mystery of Slater Island.
Freddo bars have suffered severely with inflation; the price of the bars has risen 100% from 10p to 20p in the UK over 5 years. There have been many campaigns for the return of the Taz Bar which had a different caramel from that of the newer redesigned Freddo caramel.
In 2009 Colin Barnett, the Premier of Western Australia, said that a Freddo frog had "held the whole police system up to ridicule" after a 12 year old boy was charged with receiving stolen goods after he had been given a Freddo stolen from a shop in Northam near Perth. The Freddo itself was not recovered because it had been eaten.



Footnotes






