[[Julie Myerson]]

CATEGORIES: 1960 births, Living people, Alumni of the University of Bristol, British journalists, British novelists

Julie Myerson (born Julie Susan Pike, 2 June 1960) is an English author and critic. As well as writing both fiction and non-fiction books, she is also known for having written a long-running column in The Guardian entitled "Living with Teenagers" based on her own family experiences. She has also appeared regularly as a panellist on the arts programme Newsnight Review.

Education and journalism

She studied English at Bristol University before working for the National Theatre.Julie Myerson
She has written a column for The Independent about her domestic trials including her partner, the screenwriter and director Jonathan Myerson, and their children Jacob (known as Jake), Chloe and Raphael. More recently she has written a column for the Financial Times about homes and houses. Myerson was a regular reviewer on the UK arts programme, Newsnight Review, on BBC Two.

Fiction

Myerson's novels are usually quite dark in mood tending towards the supernatural.
Her first novel was Sleepwalking (1994), and it was to some degree autobiographical. It deals in part with the suicide of an uncaring and abusive father (Myerson's own father committed suicide). The main character Susan is heavily pregnant and begins an affair. She also feels she is haunted by her father's mother, reliving the neglect that made him abusive.
In The Touch (1996) a group of young people try to help a tramp who preaches fundamentalist Christianity, and who turns violently against them.
In Me and the Fat Man (1999) a waitress takes to earning extra money giving oral sex in a park, though not out of necessity; she gets involved with two other men, friends who have an awkward relationship and a secret between them that turns out to be related to her own birth.
Laura Blundy (2001) is set in the Victorian period, and Julie Myerson tries to bring out the freshness and modernity of the period as it would have appeared at the time.
Something Might Happen (2003) is about a murder in a Suffolk seaside town.

Family controversies

Julie Myerson was the anonymous author of 'Living with Teenagers',  After the Guardian confirmed the author of the series it removed the articles from its website to 'protect their privacy'.
She was at the centre of a media controversy in March 2009 when details of her book 'The Lost Child: a True Story' emerged; commentators criticised Myerson for what Minette Marrin in The Sunday Times, called her "betrayal not just of love and intimacy, but also of motherhood itself".
Myerson stated she may also sell the film rights at some point in the future, "maybe in 20 years."
Her son described her as "slightly insane" and the publication as "obscene", and declared his intention to change his name to "Jake Karna". The last name refers to Karna, a Hindu warrior who, in the Mahabharata, is rejected by his mother.

Novels

Non-fiction

Awards






