[[National Research Council (Canada)]]

CATEGORIES: National Research Council of Canada, Canadian federal departments and agencies, Government agencies established in 1916, Industry Canada, Scientific organizations based in Canada, Scientific institutions, Research organizations

The National Research Council (NRC) is the primary national research and technology organization (RTO) of the Government of Canada,

Mandate

In the NRC's Annual Report 2007-2008 listed its authority and objectives,

Flagship programs

In 2011, NRC President John R. McDougall, began to oversee a change in research focus away from basic research and towards industrial-relevant research. This included the development of several "flagship programs", shifting research budget out of existing research and into a few focused programs.

Algal Carbon Conversion Pilot Project

The Algal Carbon Conversion Pilot Project,
In 2008 researchers from five I-CAN organizations were developing a Carbon Algae Recycling System (CARS) to "feed waste heat and flue gas containing CO2 from industrial exhaust stacks to micro-algae growing in artificial ponds." The NRC was not involved in this area of research prior to the arrival of Mr. McDougall.

The Canadian Wheat Alliance, (CWA)

The Canadian Wheat Alliance, (CWA) is a "strategic collaboration with Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada (AAFC), the University of Saskatchewan's Crop Development Centre and the province of Saskatchewan."

Governance

The NRC is managed by a governing council. Current members of the council are: Patricia Béretta, PhD. Biomedical Engineer; Louis Brunel, President International Institute of Telecommunications Montreal, Quebec;  John McDougall (President and Chairman), CEO of I-CAN, former petroleum engineer; Delwyn Fredlund, Senior Geotechnical Engineering Specialist, Golder Associates Ltd; Dr. Wayne Gulliver, dermatologist, President Newlab Clinical Research Inc.; James P. Hatton, a commercial solicitor specializing in intellectual property assets; Joseph Hubert, PhD, Dean, Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Université de Montréal; Pascale Michaud, PhD, President of Business Families Foundation; Gilles Patry, PhD, Rector and Vice-Chancellor University of Ottawa; Alan Pelman, PhD, Former Vice-President, Technology Canada, Weyerhaeuser Ltd.; Louise Proulx, PhD, Vice-President, Product Development, Topigen Pharmaceuticals Inc.; René Racine, OC, PhD, professor emeritus with the physics department at the University of Montreal, director of the Canada-France-Hawaii telescope project; Salma Rajwani, CIO of Acrodex, president of Arcspan Solutions, (PSA) program; Inge Russell, PhD, brewing yeast and fermentation scientist, London, Ontario; Barbara Stanley, corporate solicitor; President BESCO Holdings 2002 Inc. Rothesay, New Brunswick; Howard Tennant, PhD, President Emeritus University of Lethbridge; Jean-Claude Villiard, Special Advisor, Privy Council Office, Government of Canada and Louis Visentin, PhD, President Brandon University, Brandon, Manitoba.

Employment

Close to 4,000 people across Canada are employed by the NRC. In addition, the Council also employs guest workers from universities, companies, and public and private-sector organizations.  

History

The NRC was established in 1916 under the pressure of World War I to advise the government on matters of science and industrial research. In 1932, laboratories were built on Sussex Drive in Ottawa.
With the impetus of World War II, the NRC grew rapidly and for all practical purposes became a military science and weapons research organization. It undertook a number of important projects, which included participation with the United States and United Kingdom in the development of chemical and germ warfare agents, the explosive RDX, the proximity fuse, radar, and submarine detection techniques. A special branch known as the Examination Unit was involved with cryptology and the interception of enemy radio communications.
According to the Canadian Security Intelligence Service website, the NRC headquarters in Ottawa "was a prime espionage target" during the Cold War.
The NRC was also engaged in atomic fission research at the Montreal Laboratory, then the Chalk River Laboratoriesin Ontario.
Post-WWII, the NRC reverted to its pre-war civilian role and a number of wartime activities were spun off to newly formed organizations. Military research continued under a new organization, the Defence Research Board. Atomic research went to the newly createdAtomic Energy of Canada Limited. Foreign signals intelligence gathering officially remained with the agency when, by Order in Council, the Examination Unit became the Communications Branch of the NRC in 1946. The CBNRC was transferred to the Department of National Defence in 1975, and renamed the Communications Research Establishment. During the 1950s, the medical research funding activities of the NRC were handed over to the newly formed Medical Research Council of Canada.
In the 1960s, Nestor Burtnyk, who worked as a NCR scientist since 1950, began Canada's first substantive computer graphics research project while at the NCR's Division of Radio and Electrical Engineering's Data Systems Group.
Finally, on May 1, 1978, with the rapid post-war growth of Canadian universities the NRC's role in university research funding in the natural sciences was passed to the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada.
Under financial pressure in the 1980s, the federal government produced what popularly became known as the Neilson Report, which recommended across-the-board financial cuts to all federal government organizations, including the NRC. This led to staff and program cutbacks.
In 2000, there were about 1000 NCR researchers with Ph.D.s conducting research in a many areas.
Recovery was slow, but the NRC has managed to regain its status as Canada's single most important scientific and engineering research institution among many other Canadian government scientific research organizations.
As President of the National Research Council Canada, chemist Arthur Carty, revitalized the organization. In 2004 he left the NRC when then prime minister Paul Martin appointed him as independent, non-partisan advisor on science and technology.

Minister of State for Science and Technology, Gary Goodyear 2008-

Today, much of the NRC's focus is on developing partnerships with private and public-sector technology companies, both nationally and internationally. Under the federal Minister of State for Science and Technology, Gary Goodyear, the NRC became a "toolbox for industry" and dented basic-research infrastructure. "Goodyear, the minister of state for science and technology, has presided over the most retrograde federal Science and Technology policy in memory. During his tenure, the government shuttered the office of the National Science Adviser, blocked asbestos from a UN hazardous chemicals list on which it clearly belongs, gutted the Fisheries Act, gutted the Navigable Waters Protection Act, set out to weaken the Species at Risk Act, killed the long-form census, eroded Environment Canada's ability to monitor climate change, earned an international reputation for muzzling scientists and, at a great potential cost, defunded the world's leading freshwater research centre... At the same time, changes to our science-funding regime and a makeover of the National Research Council, Canada's science agency, into a tool box for industry have dented our basic-research infrastructure and damaged our prospects for innovation (Himelfarb 2014)."

Planning and reporting

The NRC reports yearly within the Treasury Board Secretariat's Results-Based Management Framework.  The NRC is currently guided by a strategic plan for 2006-2011: Science at Work for Canada.A Strategy for the National Research Council 2006 – 2011, Science at Work For Canada, National Research Council Canada

Industrial Research Assistance Program (NRC IRAP)

The National Research Council of Canada Industrial Research Assistance Program (NRC-IRAP) was introduced in the 1950s to support product developments in small to medium-sized businesses. The NRC provides grants and financial support to business' looking to bring new and innovative technologies to the market.
Some of the many innovations by NRC personnel included the artificial pacemaker, development of canola (rapeseed) in the 1940s, the Crash Position Indicator in the 1950s, and the Cesium Beam atomic clock in the 1960s.
Since 1974 Paul Barton of PSB Speakers used the NRC's world-class measurement facilities, their anechoic chamber. By the 1980s more companies began to use this incredible resource and began to develop at the NRC. Even small companies had access to these facilities for loudspeaker measurements of high quality, offering them a competitive edge.
From 2002 to 2006, John R. McDougall, who was appointed President of NRC in 2010, was a member of the NRC-Industrial Research Assistance Program (NRC-IRAP) Advisory Board.
In 2011 Bev Oda Minister of International Cooperation and Gary Goodyear, Minister of State (Science and Technology) announced the grant recipients. These included small to medium-sized businesses, such as, Nortek Solutions a privately owned Canadian software company. They received a $30,000 grant from NCR to hire a young graphics design graduate to work on their "CUROS" people management software. Oasys Healthcare, a company that provides "innovative audio and video solutions for the medical marketplace" received a $13,000 NCR grant for its new technology for operation rooms. Jeffrey Ross Jewellery's product called Dimples, imprints fingerprints in silver using an innovative process and material, developed through a NCR $35,750 grant.

NRC Institute for Research in Construction

In 2009 the Institute for Research in Construction, NRC-IRC's lighting group worked with an industry consortium to study the potential applications of LEDs and OLEDs in office environments.

Transition of NRC to industry-driven, program-based research

In a press conference held in Ottawa, 7 May 2013, with Gary Goodyear, Minister of State (Science and Technology) and Deputy Leader of the Government at the Senate, Claude Carignan, John R. McDougall announced the transition of the NRC to an industry-driven, program-based research and technology organization.

Controversies

Restriction on government scientists to communicate with the public 2008

Under the tenure of Prime Minister Stephen Harper, Canadian Government research organizations began to restrict the ability of government scientists to communicate with the public. This includes restricting scientists within the NRC to communicate with the public through non-scientist communications personnel. Harper's focus as an economist was on his action plan, creating jobs and building the economy. There were widespread concerns that the progress in development was at the cost of the environment.

Appointment of John McDougall as NRC Director 2010

The appointment of John McDougall ad Director of NRC, who has a long and successful career in partnering science and technology research and development with industry partners, was a very cause of concern.

Bill C-38

Bill C-38 raised the ire of many who opposed unfettered industrial growth and who argued that science was being gutted and silenced to open the way for development in ecologically sensitive areas in the north.
In June, 2012, the federal opposition made a motion in parliament,

Agencies with special relationships with the NRC

Specialized agencies and services which have branched out of the NRC include:

Institutes

Scientific Research

Engineering Research

Support Institutes

NRC Aerospace Fleet

The NRC has a fleet of aircraft for their research purposes:NRC Flight Research Centre

Research Aircraft



Notes

Citations





NRC and Its Institutes

Other


