[[Magnetic flux quantum]]

CATEGORIES: Superconductivity, Quantum magnetism, Metrology, Physical constants

The magnetic flux . However, if one deals with the superconducting loop or a hole in a bulk superconductor, it turns out that the magnetic flux threading such a hole/loop is quantized'''.
The single magnetic flux quantum 
. Its value is, therefore, the same for any superconductor.
The phenomenon of flux quantization was discovered experimentally by B. S. Deaver and W. M. Fairbank and, independently, by R. Doll and M. Nabauer, in 1961. The quantization of magnetic flux is closely related to the Little–Parks effect, but was predicted earlier by Fritz London in 1948 using a phenomenological model.
The inverse of the flux quantum, 1/Φ0, is called the Josephson constant, and is denoted KJ. It is the constant of proportionality of the Josephson effect, relating the potential difference across a Josephson junction to the frequency of the irradiation. The Josephson effect is very widely used to provide a standard for high-precision measurements of potential difference, which (since 1990) have been related to a fixed, "conventional" value of the Josephson constant, denoted KJ–90.

Introduction

The superconducting properties in each point of the superconductor are described by the complex quantum mechanical wave function  as one goes around the hole/loop and comes to the same starting point. If this is so, then one has n magnetic flux quanta trapped in the hole/loop.
Due to Meissner effect the magnetic induction  inside superconductor.
It is important to note that the magnetic flux frozen in a loop/hole (plus its .
The flux quantization is a key idea behind a SQUID, which is one of the most sensitive magnetometer available.
Flux quantization also play in important role in the physics of a type II superconductors. When such a superconductor (now without any holes) is placed in a magnetic field with the strength between the first critical field  are stable as the real hole cannot split itself into several smaller holes.

Measuring the magnetic flux

The magnetic flux quantum may be measured with great precision by exploiting the Josephson effect. In fact, when coupled with the measurement of the von Klitzing constant RK = h/e2, this provides the most precise values of Planck's constant h obtained to date. This is remarkable since h is generally associated with the behavior of microscopically small systems, whereas the quantization of magnetic flux in a superconductor and the quantum Hall effect are both collective phenomena associated with thermodynamically large numbers of particles.






