[[Clotted cream]]

CATEGORIES: British products with protected designation of origin, Cornish cuisine, Dairy products, Devonshire cuisine, Spreads (food)

Clotted cream (sometimes called scalded, clouted, Devonshire or Cornish cream) is a thick cream made by indirectly heating full-cream cow's milk using steam or a water bath and then leaving it in shallow pans to cool slowly. During this time, the cream content rises to the surface and forms 'clots' or 'clouts'.
Although its  origin is uncertain, the cream's production is commonly associated with dairy farms in South West England and in particular the counties of Cornwall and Devon. The current largest commercial producer in the UK is Rodda's in Redruth, Cornwall, which can produce up to 25 tons (25,000 kg; 55,000 lb) of clotted cream a day. In 1998 the term Cornish clotted cream became a Protected Designation of Origin (PDO) by European Union directive, as long as the milk is produced in Cornwall and the minimum fat content is 55%.

Description

Clotted cream has been described as having a "nutty, cooked milk" flavour, Despite its popularity, virtually none is exported due to its short shelf life.
Due to its high saturated fat content, the regular consumption of clotted cream is usually thought to be bad for health, though some dairy fat in the diet is considered beneficial.

History

Originally made by farmers to reduce the amount of waste from their milk, clotted cream has become so deep-rooted in the culture of South West England that it is now a tourist attraction. 
However, ancient food experts,Wood, Jacqui. Prehistoric Cooking. Stroud: Tempus, 2001. ISBN 0-752-41943-9  noting Strabo's commentaries on Britain ("They live off their herds ... As they have mines of tin and lead, they give these metals and hides from their cattle to the sea traders ... instead of olive oil they use butter."), have proposed that the early Britons would probably have clotted cream to preserve its freshness.
More recently, regional archaeologists Medieval Decon & Cornwall: Shaping an Ancient Countryside, Ed. Sam Turner, 2006 have associated the stone fogou (dial. 'fuggy-hole'), or souterrains, found across Atlantic Britain, France and Ireland as a possible form of 'cold store' for dairy production of milk, cream and cheese in particular. Similar functions are ascribed the linney (dial. 'lean-to') stone-built form, often used as a dairy in later medieval longhouses in the same regions.
It has long been disputed whether clotted cream originated in Devon or Cornwall, and which county makes it the best.The Compleat Cook. To make Clouted Cream, 1658
In the 19th century it was regarded as better nourishment than "raw" cream because that cream was liable to go sour and be difficult to digest, causing illness.
It has long been the practice for local residents in South West England, or those on holiday to send small tins or tubs of clotted cream by post to friends and relations in other parts of the British Isles.

EU directives

In 1993, an application was made for the name Cornish clotted cream to have a Protected Designation of Origin (PDO) in the European Union for cream produced by the traditional recipe in Cornwall. This was  accepted in 1998. The unique, slightly yellow, Cornish clotted cream colour is due to the high carotene levels in the grass.

Preparation

Traditionally, clotted cream was created by straining fresh cow's milk, letting it stand in a shallow pan in a cool place for several hours to allow the cream to rise to the surface, then heating it either over hot cinders or in a water bath, before a slow cooling. The clots that had formed on the top were then skimmed off with a long-handled cream-skimmer, known in Devon as a reamer or raimer.  By the mid-1930s, the traditional way of using milk brought straight from the dairy was becoming a rarity in Devon because using a cream separator actively separated the cream from the milk using centrifugal force, whereas before heating produced far more clotted cream for the same amount of milk: as a farmer's wife in Poundsgate said, "the separator saves a whole cow!"
Today, there are two distinct modern methods for making clotted cream. The "Float Cream method" includes scalding a floating layer of double cream in milk (skimmed or whole) in shallow trays. To scald, the trays are heated using steam or very hot water. After the mixture has been heated for up to an hour it is slowly cooled over 12 hours or more, before the cream is separated and packaged. As the temperatures are lower than used in standard pasteurisation, much care is needed in ensuring high standards of hygiene.
The largest UK manufacturer is Rodda's, a family-owned business based in Scorrier, Cornwall. Founded in 1890, the company was producing over  of skimmed milk is produced, which is then used in food manufacture.
One Devon manufacturer, Definitely Devon was purchased by Robert Wiseman Dairies in March 2006, closing one of the two Devon dairies and moving all production to Okehampton.
prompting an investigation by Trading Standards.
Throughout Cornwall and south-west England clotted cream manufacture is a cottage industry, with many farms and dairies producing cream for sale in local outlets. As clotted cream is not regularly available outside south-west England, there are a number of ways to create an approximation. One example is to mix mascarpone with whipped cream, a little sugar and vanilla extract.
Outside Cornwall and Devon, clotted cream is produced in Somerset,St James's Restaurant at Fortnum & Mason Dorset,Afternoon tea at the Heights - serving a traditional Dorset cream tea Herefordshire,The Teashop, Ross-on-Wye Pembrokeshire,Welsh Icons: Welsh Dairy Products  and the Isle of Wight.Calbourne Classics Isle of Wight clotted cream

Uses

Cream tea

Clotted cream is an essential part of a cream tea, a favourite with tourists in Cornwall and Devon. It is served on scones—or the more traditional 'splits' in CornwallNigel Slater's Devonshire cream tea recipes, The Guardian, 22 August 2010—with strawberry or raspberry jam, along with a pot of tea. Traditionally, there are differences in the way it is eaten in each county: in Devon, the cream is traditionally spread first on the scone, with the jam dolloped on top; in Cornwall the jam is spread first with a dollop of cream.

Confectionery

It can be used as an accompaniment to hot or cold desserts. Clotted cream, especially clotted cream from Devon, where it is less yellow due to lower carotene levels in the grass, is regularly used in baking. It is used throughout the south-west of England in the production of ice creamFor example: 

Savoury dishes

Clotted cream is used in some savoury dishes,BBC food: Clotted cream recipes and can be incorporated into mashed potato, risotto or scrambled eggs.

Historical

Cabbage cream (which does not contain cabbage) was a delicacy in the mid-17th century: layers of clotted cream were interspersed with sugar and rosewater, creating a cabbage effect when served.  It was a common accompaniment to junket, a milk-based dessert which went out of fashion in the mid-20th century.

Notable usages

During the reception following the wedding of Prince Charles and Lady Diana Spencer in 1981, one course was strawberries and Cornish clotted cream.

Literature and folklore

It was mentioned in The Shepheardes Calendar, a poem by Edmund Spenser in 1579:
 Ne would she scorn the simple shepherd swain, For she would call him often heam, And give him curds and clouted cream. 
As with many Cornish and Devonian icons, clotted cream has become entrenched in local folklore. For example, one myth tells of Jenny who enticed the giant Blunderbore (sometimes called Moran) by feeding him clotted cream. He eventually fell in love with her and made her his fourth wife.





Further reading





