[[Riverdale, Bronx]]

CATEGORIES: Irish-American neighborhoods, Neighborhoods in the Bronx, Populated places on the Hudson River

Riverdale (population: 47,850, according to the 2000 U.S. Census) is an upper middle class residential neighborhood in the northwest portion of The Bronx, New York City. Riverdale contains the northernmost point in New York City.

History

Early in its residential development, Riverdale was a 19th-century estate district where many of Manhattan's moguls built their country estates.  At the turn of the century, the new popularity of railroad commute enabled wealthy businessmen to make Riverdale their year-round residence.  The Fieldston neighborhood, owned by a private association, is a particularly intact example of a turn-of-the century upper class suburb. The Hudson Hill neighborhood retains many of its historic mansions. Riverdale's elite private schools and historic churches also reflect this past.
As the 20th century progressed, upscale apartment buildings and smaller houses were added to the neighborhood. To this day, Riverdale continues to maintain its character as an affluent enclave in the city of New York. The rich history of Riverdale has led to the creation of the Riverdale Historic District.
Leland Weintraub, the commissioner who moved for the district's creation, noted that "most of the features commonly associated with the American romantic suburb of the mid-19th century," including "a picturesque site, landscaping and architecture; connection to the city by accessible transportation and a layout adapted to the topography" are present in the area.
In May 2009, the FBI ran a sting operation to prevent a bombing plot in which two Riverdale synagogues were the suggested targets.
On July 26, 2010, the National Weather Service confirmed that an EF1 tornado had hit Riverdale the day before. There were no fatalities, but seven people were injured.

Geography

Riverdale covers about three square miles in area. Riverdale has one of the highest elevations in New York City, affording it spectacular views of the Empire State Building, George Washington Bridge, Hudson River and New Jersey Palisades. It is also remarkable for the numerous parks and expanses of lush greenery and original forest that overwhelm its hilly, serene landscape. It is bordered on the north by the city of Yonkers; to the east by Van Cortlandt Park, the Kingsbridge section east of Broadway, and the Marble Hill section of Manhattan; to the west by the Hudson River; and to the south by the Harlem River, which creates a small geographic barrier between Riverdale and upper Manhattan.
The subsections of Riverdale are:
(The precise boundaries of Riverdale subsections have been the subject of much debate.)
The leafy, scenic enclave of Fieldston, a private community, was designated as a historic district by the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission in 2006.

Demographics

As of the 2000 census, there were 47,850 people residing in Riverdale. The population density was 19,997 per square mile (7,724/km²). The racial makeup of the neighborhood was 78.74% White (71.89% White Non-Hispanic), 5.36% Asian, 0.05% Pacific Islander, 7.66% Black, 0.16% Native American, 4.85% from other races, and 3.18% from two or more races. Of those, 13.38% of the population were Hispanic of any race. Fully 24.15% of the population was foreign born; of this, 51.76% came from Europe, 22.92% from Latin America, 21.71% from Asia and 3.61% from other parts of the world. Riverdale is well known for its substantial Jewish, Irish and Russian-speaking populations.
With a median residence value of $1,921,122, Riverdale is one of the most expensive neighborhoods in New York City and is considered one of the most sought-after residential neighborhoods. Riverdale is known for its relative lack of crime, having some of lowest crime rates in New York City.

Housing

Before the wider development of Riverdale, housing consisted of large, architecturally distinguished mansions built in the early 20th century, mostly in Georgian- and Tudor-revival styles, which recall scenes of "rural Connecticut" rather than the city. These are mostly concentrated in the Fieldston section of Riverdale, known as the estate area. In addition, more affordable pre-war buildings and smaller houses are scattered throughout Riverdale.
The 1950s saw the construction of many low rise (six story) brick buildings. By the early to mid 1960s, a number of larger brick towers (10-20 stories) started popping up. Many of these full service buildings featuring doormen were designed by seasoned architect Philip Birnbaum who designed over 300 buildings in the city, including Skyview, the Windsors, and the Whitehall.
By the 1980s, most of the apartment buildings which were owned by single landlords and rented, were converted in to cooperatives. Unlike most of the Bronx, Riverdale is mostly owner-occupied housing.
Spuyten Duyvil has the greatest concentration of high rises in Riverdale with the Century, 555 Kappock, and Winston Churchill next to one another.
Since 2005, Central Riverdale has experienced a building boom with the addition of many mid- and high-rise condominium buildings which contrast with the older brick style.

Cityscape

Riverdale's ZIP codes are 10463 and 10471. While 10471 is entirely in Riverdale, 10463 also covers the adjacent neighborhoods of Kingsbridge and Marble Hill.
Riverdale is home to the modernist landmark Saul Victor house, designed by Ferdinand Gottlieb in 1967. Other famous mansions in the Hudson Hill neighborhood include: Greyston (1864), Alderbrook (1880), Stonehurst (1861) and Oaklawn (1863) Since 2005, Central Riverdale has experienced a building boom with the addition of many mid- and high-rise condominium buildings.
In August 2008, Columbia University purchased an almost-completed apartment building by Henry Hudson Parkway for use as faculty housing. In 1974, a large, fortress-like residential compound and school was established in North Riverdale by the Permanent Mission of the USSR to the United Nations (now the Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to the UN) to house diplomats and their families. The 20-story building was constructed from the top down, with the upper floors built first.
Administratively, Riverdale is part of Community Board 8. Wave Hill, a combination botanical garden and outdoor art gallery, is located in the so-called Estate Area overlooking the Hudson River.
Two weekly newspapers, the Riverdale Press and the Riverdale Review, focus on news of interest to residents of the neighborhood.
Gaelic Park, the headquarters of the New York GAA, is where Gaelic football and hurling are played in the New York metropolitan area. It is located at West 240th Street.  Bell Tower Park next to the Henry Hudson Parkway has the Riverdale Monument, a  stone war memorial built in 1930.

Education

The public schools are a part of the New York City Department of Education. The public elementary schools are the Spuyten Duyvil School (P.S. 24)  Nearby high schools that also serve the community include the Bronx High School of Science and John F. Kennedy High School.
Riverdale is home to three top-tier private schools (Horace Mann, Riverdale Country, and Fieldston, all members of the Ivy Preparatory School League) and two Roman Catholic colleges (The College of Mount Saint Vincent and Manhattan College). The Academy for Jewish Religion is one of two similarly named transdenominational rabbinical schools, the other located in Los Angeles, California.
Two important institutions of higher education are located in Riverdale: Manhattan College, a co-educational Catholic College with education in the Lasalian tradition, and in North Riverdale, the College of Mount Saint Vincent.
An increase in the Jewish population of the neighborhood late twentieth century has led to Riverdale now being home to top-ranked Jewish day schools, the SAR Academy, an elementary school, and the SAR High School, as well as the Yeshiva of Telshe Alumni and Yeshivat Chovevei Torah Rabbinical School. Kinneret Day School is a private Jewish day school in Spuyten Duyvil, serving grades K through 8 in addition to pre-school. Catholic elementary schools in the area are St. Gabriel's School and St. Margaret of Cortona School, where President John F. Kennedy received his First Holy Communion.
Also in the area are several pre-schools including BedRock Preschool, the Riverdale Temple Nursery School, Spuyten Duyvil Preschool, and Riverdale Montessori School.

Museums

Transportation

The Van Cortlandt Park – 242nd Street terminal station of the IRT Broadway – Seventh Avenue Line ( train) of the New York City Subway is located at the intersection of 242nd Street and Broadway. The tracks and stations of the line are elevated along Broadway in Kingsbridge and East Riverdale. Riverdale is accessible from Kingsbridge and from Inwood by city bus lines that run throughout the Riverdale area. Metro-North commuter railroad service is available at the Spuyten Duyvil station on the Hudson Line, located underneath the Henry Hudson Parkway and alongside the shore of the Harlem River at Edsall Avenue. Hudson Line service is also available at the Riverdale station, located between West 254th Street and West 255th Street. Metro-North commuting time from the Spuyten Duyvil station to Grand Central Terminal in Midtown Manhattan is around 22 minutes.
By car, Riverdale is commonly reached by the Henry Hudson Parkway (Route 9A), which bisects much of the neighborhood. This major thoroughfare connects it to Manhattan over the Henry Hudson Bridge to the south. One can also drive between Manhattan and Riverdale via the Broadway Bridge, which is on Broadway, by the Harlem River.
Bus Service to Riverdale includes:

In popular culture

Riverdale has often been cited in literature, film and television.  Exteriors of many of Riverdale's locations have been used in both television and movie production

Notable natives and residents

Points of interest

Fire department

The Riverdale section of New York City is protected by the FDNY Fire Station # 52 or Engine 52/Ladder 52, located at 4550 Henry Hudson Parkway East in Central Riverdale. Engine 52/Ladder 52 is the only firehouse in the Riverdale Section and the most northern fire station in the FDNY. Also, the companies of Engine and Ladder 52 are the second of two fire companies where the engine company and the ladder company each have the same number, the other being Engine and Ladder 10 on Liberty Street in Lower Manhattan. Engine Company 52 currently operates a 2003 Seagrave Commander II Custom 1000/500 Pumper Engine and Ladder Company 52 currently operates a 2006 Seagrave Commander II Custom 100' Rear-Mount Aerial Ladder Truck.

Churches and synagogues

Due to its large and diverse Jewish population, synagogues slightly outnumber churches in Riverdale. Houses of worship include:

=2009 bombing plot=

In May 2009, the FBI thwarted a terrorist plot to car bomb two local synagogues by clandestinely supplying the would-be terrorists with blanks instead of real bombs.

Community organizations

Museums

Image gallery

File:College of Mount Saint Vincent Main Entrance.jpg|College of Mount Saint Vincent
File:JFK House 5040 Independence Avenue.jpg|JFK house at 5040 Independence Avenue
File:5200 block of Palisade Avenue year 2006.jpg|Palisade Avenue
File:Lou Gehrig Home 5204 Delafield Avenue.jpg|Lou Gehrig's house
File:Henry Hudson Parkway in Riverdale.jpg|Northbound Henry Hudson Parkway
File:Russian Mission November 5, 2012.jpg|Russian Mission
File:Riverdale_Metro_North_Stop_October_2013.jpg|Riverdale Metro North platform








