[[London Underground]]

CATEGORIES: London Underground, Busking venues, Electric railways in the United Kingdom, Modes of transport in London, Organisations based in London, Rail infrastructure in London, Subterranean London, Underground rapid transit in England, 1863 establishments in the United Kingdom

The London Underground (also known as the Tube or simply the Underground) is a public metro system serving a large part of Greater London and parts of the counties of Buckinghamshire, Hertfordshire and Essex. The system serves 270 stations and has  The network has expanded to 11 lines, and in 2012/13 carried over 1 billion passengers.
The system's first tunnels were built just below the surface using the cut and cover method. Later, circular tunnels – which give rise to its nickname the Tube – were dug through the London Clay at a deeper level. The early lines were marketed as the UNDERGROUND in the early 20th century on maps and signs at central London stations. The private companies that owned and ran the railways were merged in 1933 to form the London Passenger Transport Board. The current operator, London Underground Limited (LUL), is a wholly owned subsidiary of Transport for London (TfL), the statutory corporation responsible for most elements of the transport network in Greater London.
 The Travelcard ticket was introduced in 1983 and Oyster, an electronic ticketing system, in 2003.
Today in official publicity and in general, the term 'Tube' embraces the whole Underground system, not just the lines that run in deep-level tunnels.

History

Origins

The idea of an underground railway linking the City of London with some of the railway termini in its urban centre was proposed in the 1830s,
For the first deep-level tube line, the City and South London Railway, two 
In the early 20th century, the District and Metropolitan railways needed to electrify and a joint committee recommended an AC system, the two companies co-operating because of the shared ownership of the inner circle. The District, needing to raise the finance necessary, found an investor in the American Charles Yerkes who favoured a DC system similar to that in use on the City & South London and Central London railways. The Metropolitan Railway protested about the change of plan, but after arbitration by the Board of Trade, the DC system was adopted.
A joint marketing agreement between most of the companies in the early years of the 20th century included maps, joint publicity, through ticketing and UNDERGROUND signs outside stations in Central London.

London Transport

In 1933, London's underground railways, tramway and bus operators were merged to form the London Passenger Transport Board, which became known as London Transport,
However, the District line needed new trains and an unpainted aluminium train entered service in 1953, this becoming the standard for new trains.
In 1979 another new tube, the Jubilee line, named in honour of Queen Elizabeth's Silver Jubilee, took over the Stanmore branch from the Bakerloo line
In the early years of the 21st century London Underground was reorganised in a Public-Private Partnership where private infrastructure companies (infracos) upgraded and maintained the railway. In 2003 control passed to Transport for London (TfL) that had been opposed to the arrangement.

Transport for London

Transport for London (TfL) was created in 2000 as the integrated body responsible for London's transport system. It replaced London Regional Transport. It assumed control of London Underground Limited in July 2003.
The TfL Board is appointed by the Mayor of London. The Mayor also sets the structure and level of public transport fares in London. However the day-to-day running of the corporation is left to the Commissioner of Transport for London. The current Commissioner is Peter Hendy.

Infrastructure

Railway

The Underground serves 270 stations. Fourteen Underground stations are outside Greater London, of which five (Amersham, Chalfont & Latimer, Chesham, and Chorleywood on the Metropolitan line, and Epping on the Central line), are beyond the M25 London Orbital motorway. Of the 32 London boroughs, six (Bexley, Bromley, Croydon, Kingston, Lewisham and Sutton) are not served by the Underground network, while Hackney has Old Street and Manor House only just inside its boundaries.
London Underground's eleven lines total 
The lines are electrified with a four-rail DC system: a conductor rail between the rails is energised at −210 V and a rail outside the running rails at +420 V, giving a potential difference of 630 V. On the sections of line shared with mainline trains, such as the District line from East Putney to Wimbledon and Gunnersbury to Richmond, and the Bakerloo line north of Queen's Park, the centre rail is bonded to the running rails.

Lines

Former main lines

The Underground uses a number of railways and alignments that were built by main-line railway companies.

Main line routes currently sharing track with LUL

Trains

London Underground trains come in two sizes, larger sub-surface trains and smaller deep-tube trains.
Stock on sub-surface lines is identified by a letter (such as S Stock, used on the Metropolitan line), while tube stock is identified by the year of intended introduction (for example, 1996 Stock, used on the Jubilee line).

Ventilation and cooling

When the Bakerloo line opened in 1906 it was advertised with a maximum temperature of 
In June 2006 a groundwater cooling system was installed at Victoria station. New air-conditioned trains are being introduced on the sub-surface lines, but space is limited on tube trains for air-conditioning units and these would heat the tunnels even more. The Deep Tube Programme, investigating replacing the trains for the Bakerloo and Piccadilly lines, is looking for trains with better energy conservation and regenerative braking, on which it might be possible to install a form of air-conditioning.

Lifts and escalators

Originally access to the deep-tube platforms was by a lift.
There are 426 escalators on the London Underground system and the longest, at . There are 164 lifts, and numbers have increased in recent years due to a programme to increase accessibility.

Wi-Fi and mobile phone reception

In summer 2012 London Underground, in partnership with Virgin Media, tried out Wi-Fi hot spots in many stations, but not in the tunnels, that allowed passengers free internet access. The free trial proved successful and was extended to the end of 2012

Proposed improvements and expansions

New lines

Crossrail is under construction and expected to open in 2018, providing a new underground route across central London integrated with, but not part of the London Underground system.

Line extensions

=Croxley Rail Link=

The Croxley Rail Link involves re-routing the Metropolitan line's Watford branch from the current terminus at Watford over part of the disused Croxley Green branch line to 

=Northern line extension to Battersea=

It is planned that the Northern line be extended to Battersea with an intermediate station at Nine Elms. In December 2012, the Treasury confirmed that it will provide a guarantee that allows the Greater London Authority to borrow up to £1 billion from the Public Works Loan Board, at a preferential rate, to finance the construction of the line.

=Bakerloo line extension to Camberwell=

In 1931 the extension of the Bakerloo line from Elephant & Castle to Camberwell was approved, with stations at Albany Road and an interchange at 

=Central line extension to Uxbridge=

The London Borough of Hillingdon has proposed that the Central line be extended from West Ruislip to Uxbridge via Ickenham, claiming this would cut traffic on the A40 in the area.

Infrastructure

The signalling system on the Northern line is being replaced to increase capacity on the line by 20 per cent by the end of 2014.
New S Stock trains are being introduced on the sub-surface (District, Metropolitan, Hammersmith & City and Circle) lines, and the track, electrical supply and signalling systems are being upgraded in a programme to increase peak-hour capacity, which is scheduled for completion by the end of 2018. Options for new trains for the Bakerloo and Piccadilly lines are being considered.

Travelling

Ticketing

The Underground uses Transport for London's zonal fare system to calculate fares. There are nine zones, zone 1 being the central zone, which includes the loop of the Circle line with a few stations to the south of River Thames. The only London Underground stations in Zones 7 to 9 are on the Metropolitan line beyond Moor Park, outside Greater London. Some stations are in two zones, and the cheapest fare applies.
TfL introduced the Oyster card in 2003; this is a pre-payment smartcard with an embedded contactless RFID chip.
A concessionary fare scheme is operated by London Councils for residents who are disabled or meet certain age criteria.
In addition to automatic and staffed ticket gates, the Underground is patrolled by both uniformed and plain-clothes ticket inspectors with hand-held Oyster-card readers. Passengers travelling without a valid ticket must pay a penalty fare of £80 (or £40 if paid within 21 days) and can be prosecuted for fare evasion under the Regulation of Railways Act 1889 and Transport for London Byelaws.

Hours of operation

The tube closes overnight, the first trains running from about 05:00 to just after 01:00 the following morning, with later starting times at weekends.
The Underground runs limited service on Christmas Eve with some lines closing early, and does not operate on Christmas Day.

Accessibility

Accessibility by people with limited mobility was not considered when most of the system was built, and before 1993 fire regulations prohibited wheelchairs on the underground. The stations on the Jubilee Line Extension, opened in 2000, were designed for accessibility, but retrofitting accessibility features to the older stations is a major investment that is planned to take over twenty years.
TfL produces a version of the tube map that indicates stations that are step-free from street to platforms. There can also be a step from platform to train as large as 


Delays and overcrowding

During peak hours, stations can get so crowded they need to be closed. Passengers may not get on the first train
Compared with 2003/4, the reliability of the network had increased in 2010/11, with Lost Customer Hours reduced from 54 million to 40 million.

Safety

London Underground is authorised to operate trains by the Office of Rail Regulation, and the latest Safety Certification and Safety Authorisation is valid until 2017.
In November 2011 it was reported that 80 people had committed suicide in the previous year on the London Underground, up from 46 in 2000.

Design and the arts

Map

Early maps of the Metropolitan and District railways were city maps with the lines superimposed,
Currently the standard tube map shows the Docklands Light Railway, London Overground and Emirates Air Line as well as the London Underground;

Roundel

While the first use of a roundel in a London transport context was the trademark of the London General Omnibus Company registered in 1905, it was first used on the Underground in 1908 when the UERL placed a solid red circle behind station nameboards on platforms to highlight the name.
After the UERL was absorbed into the London Passenger Transport Board in 1933, it used forms of the roundel for buses, trams and coaches, as well as the Underground. The words "London Transport" were added inside the ring, above and below the bar. The Carr-Edwards report, published in 1938 as possibly the first attempt at a graphics standards manual, introduced stricter guidelines.

Architecture

Seventy of the 270 London Underground stations use buildings that are on the Statutory List of Buildings of Special Architectural or Historic Interest, and five have entrances in listed buildings.
In the first decade of the 20th century Leslie Green established a house style for the tube stations built by the UERL, which were clad in ox-blood faience blocks.
When the Central line was extended east, the stations were simplified Holden proto-Brutalist designs,
Many platforms have unique interior designs to help passenger identification. The tiling at Baker Street incorporates repetitions of Sherlock Holmes's silhouette and at Tottenham Court Road semi-abstract mosaics by Eduardo Paolozzi feature musical instruments, tape machines and butterflies.

Typography

The first posters used a number of type fonts, as was contemporary practice,

Posters and patron of the arts

Early advertising posters proclaimed the advantages of travelling using various letter forms.
Harold Hutchison became London Transport publicity officer in 1947, after World War II and nationalisation, and introduced the "pair poster", where an image on a poster was paired with text on another. Numbers of commissions dropped, to eight a year in the 1950s and just four a year in the 1970s,  with images from artists such Harry Stevens and Tom Eckersley.

In popular culture

The Underground (including several fictitious stations
Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 3 has a level named Underground where most of the level takes place between the dockyards and Westminster while the player and a team of SAS attempt to take down cargo being shipped using London Underground.

In literature

Notable people





Bibliography




