[[Eileen Blair]]

CATEGORIES: 1905 births, 1945 deaths, British people of the Spanish Civil War, English civil servants, George Orwell, Deaths from surgical complications, Civil servants in the Ministry of Food, People educated at Sunderland High School, Alumni of University College London

Eileen Maud Blair (née O'Shaughnessy, 25 September 1905 – 29 March 1945) was the first wife of George Orwell (Eric Arthur Blair).
She was born in South Shields in the northeast of England. Her mother was Marie O'Shaughnessy and her father was Lawrence O'Shaughnessy, a customs collector.

Education and early life

O'Shaugnessy attended Sunderland Church High School. In the autumn of 1924, she entered St Hugh's College, Oxford,
In the autumn of 1934 Eileen enrolled at University College, London for a two-year graduate course in educational psychology, leading to a Master of Arts qualification. Eileen was particularly interested in testing intelligence in children "and quite early decided upon that as the subject for the thesis she would be writing". Elizaveta Fen, a fellow student who became one of O'Shaughnessy's closest friends, met her then for the first time: "She was twenty-eight years old and looked several years younger. She was tall and slender, her shoulders rather broad and high. She had blue eyes and dark brown, naturally wavy hair. George once said that she had 'a cat's face' – and one could see that this was true in a most attractive sense..."
She was very close to her elder brother Lawrence O'Shaughnessy, but even so, in a letter she described her brother as "one of nature's Fascists".

Marriage

Eileen met Eric in the spring of 1935. At the time Eric was living at 77 Parliament Hill in Hampstead, occupying a spare room in the first floor flat of Rosalind Henschel Obermeyer, a niece of the conductor and composer Sir George Henschel and a friend of Mabel Fierze.
Rosalind Obermeyer was taking an advanced course in psychology at University College, London; one evening she invited some of her friends and acquaintances to a party. One "was an attractive young woman whom Rosalind did not know especially well, although they often sat next to each other at lectures: her name was Eileen O'Shaughnessy." Elizaveta Fen recalled Orwell in her memoirs, Orwell and his friendAnd mentorRichard Rees, "draped" at the fireplace, looking, she thought, "moth-eaten and prematurely aged."
Eric Blair married Eileen O'Shaugnessy the next year, on 9 June 1936, at St Mary's Church, Wallington, Hertfordshire (as Eric Arthur Blair and Eileen Maud O'Shaugnessy; at this time he was known as Orwell only in his writing, his friends knew him as Eric or Blair; and he "never quite got around to changing it").
At the start of World War II, Eileen started work in the Censorship Department of the Ministry of War in London,  staying during the week with her family in Greenwich. Her brother Laurence was killed by a bomb during the evacuation from Dunkirk, after which, according to Elizaveta Fen, "her grip on life, which had never been very firm, loosened considerably."
In spring 1942, she changed jobs to work at the Ministry of Food. In June 1944 she and Eric adopted a three-week old boy they named Richard Horatio. In one of her last letters to Blair, Eileen wrote of arrangements for renting and decorating Barnhill, Jura, the house where Orwell would write most of Nineteen Eighty Four – but she died before she ever saw Barnhill.

Death

Eileen's brother Lawrence O'Shaughnessy had married Gwen Hunton; Gwen had a property called "Greystone" near Carlton, County Durham, that had been left empty on the death of her maiden aunt. The Blairs stayed there many times in 1944 and 1945. Gwen evacuated her children there from London when the "flying-bomb" raids began, and Richard went there when the Orwells had been bombed out of their flat in Maida Vale in June 1944.
In early 1945 Eileen, who was in very poor health, went to stay there. Joyce Pritchard, the O'Shaughnessys' nanny, said that Eileen had visited Greystone frequently between July 1944 and March 1945.
Eileen died on 29 March 1945 in Newcastle upon Tyne under anaesthetic, the cause of her death. She was thirty-nine. In the words of the inquest: "Cardiac failure whilst under anaesthetic of ether and chloroform skilfully and properly administered for operation for removal of uterus." She and Richard were living at Greystone at the time, with Orwell working in Paris as a war correspondent for The Observer. He got to Greystone on Saturday, 31  March. She is buried in Saint Andrew's and Jesmond Cemetery, West Jesmond, Newcastle upon Tyne.

Influence on Orwell's writing

Some scholars
Although the poem was written a year before she met Blair, there are some similarities between the futuristic vision of Eileen's poem and that in Nineteen Eighty-Four, including the use of mind control, and the eradication of personal freedom by a police state.

Notes

Sources

978-0094734609|year=1994|publisher=Constable|ref=harv}}






