[[Abigail Williams]]

CATEGORIES: 1680 births, People of the Salem witch trials, Year of death unknown, American children, People from Massachusetts, American colonial women

Abigail Williams (July 12, 1680 – possibly by 1697) was one of the initial accusers in the Salem witch trials of 1692, which led to the arrest and imprisonment of over 150 supposed witches.

Salem Witch Trials

Abigail and her cousin, Betty Parris, were the first two accusers in the Salem Witch trials of 1692. Williams was eleven years old at the time and she was living with her uncle Samuel Parris in Salem after a raid by Native Americans resulted in the death of her parents . According to Rev. Deodat Lawson, an eyewitness, she and Betty began to have fits in which they ran around rooms flailing their arms, ducking under chairs and trying to climb up the chimney. It is noted that her body contorted  into impossible positions.
This troubled the villagers of Salem. Samuel Parris, who was the local minister, decided to call in a doctor to determine whether or not these afflictions were medical. The physician, William Griggs, had difficulties understanding the actions of the two young girls. Griggs believed it was not a medical issue, rather, he suggested it must be witchcraft. One of Parris' slaves, Tituba, from an Arawak village in South America and later purchased in Barbados, was then asked to bake a witch cake— rye mixed with the afflicted girls' urine— and feed the mixture to a dog. The theory was that if Abigail and Betty were bewitched, the dog would exhibit similar symptoms and prove that witchcraft was indeed present and being practiced. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1974. Print. (pp. 2-3). Another reason may have been food poisoning: the girls may have eaten a "Witch's Stew" as part of their games that may have contained inedible or uncooked ingredients. In 1976, Linnda R. CaporaelErgotism: The Satan Loosed in Salem? - Science, vol. 192, April 1976 put forward the theory that these strange symptoms may have been caused by ergotism, the ingestion of fungus-infected rye.
Because of Abigail and Betty's claims to be possessed, false accusations would soon be made, resulting in 20 deaths. On February 29, 1692, three women were arrested for suspicion of witchcraft: Sarah Good, Sarah Osborne and Tituba herself. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1974. Print. (p. 3). They were all found guilty, but the only one to confess was Tituba. Since the other two women did not confess, Good was hanged, and Osborne died in prison. Tituba was released out of jail a year later, when an unknown person paid her fees for release. Witchcraft in Early North America. Plymouth: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc., 2010. Print. (p. 176). Nonetheless, Abigail and Betty's trend of accusing innocents rapidly spread throughout Salem and nearby villages (especially Andover), leading to the death of at least nineteen people. Witch Hunting in Seventeenth Century New England. Boston: Northeastern University Press, 1999. Print. (pp. 280-281). Martha Corey was hung, and her husband Giles was pressed to death for refusing to plead. John Proctor and Rebecca Nurse were also executed.

Legacy

thumb|200px|right|Nicole Ehinger portraying Abigail Williams in "The Sorcerer's Apprentice"  Abigail Williams is a major character in the play The Crucible, but she is portrayed as seventeen years old.  It is gradually revealed that she had been dancing in the woods with the girls of Salem and performing voodoo rituals with her uncle's slave, Tituba.  When rumors begin to circulate that there is witchcraft in the town, Abigail and Betty Parris began to name people as having been in league with the devil, which was the most common way a "witch" was identified, to save themselves. Later, the girls of Salem became witnesses in the court trying the "witches". An added element is that Abigail had previously worked as a maid at the Proctor household and had an affair with John Proctor. In the play and the films made from it, Abigail accuses Goody Proctor (Elizabeth), John's wife, of being a witch in order to take Elizabeth's place as his wife. In the 1957 and 1996 film adaptations of the play, Abigail was portrayed by Mylène Demongeot and Winona Ryder, respectively.
A "sequel" to The Crucible called Abigail / 1702 by Roberto Aguirre-Sacasa debuted in 2013.  The play explores the life of the character of Abigail Williams from Arthur Miller's 1953 play ten years after the events of The Crucible.
Abigail is also in the 2010 film The Sorcerer's Apprentice as a minor antagonist. Horvath, the film's main antagonist, releases her from a magical prison called "The Grimhold" and uses her to kidnap the love interest of the main protagonist Dave. After the kidnapping is complete, Horvath absorbs Abigail's powers and steals her pentagram amulet which channels her power. By doing so, Horvath becomes more powerful and is finally able to free his master, Morgana.
In the novel Deliverance from Evil by Frances Hill, Abigail is told by her uncle that she is going to be sent away like her cousin Betty Parris, so for a while she becomes depressed and accepts that she is being tormented and attacked by spectres and witches to the point where she takes a rope and licks it all over herself in a field near the Parris parsonage. It is unknown if this piece of writing in the story was actually true; others say that she died in 1697.
In 2010, LSB Theater Productions released ABIGAIL THE ROCK OPERA in San Fransico. The story is through the eyes of 12 year old Abigail as she finds personal redemption. This is a Musical,Theatrical & Cinematic experience. Green Mill Filmworks did all of the live film. It ran 3 years. In 2013, the performance took a break to work on a graphic novel by Casey Castille  ( and to also work on a feature film by John Jansen. 
There is an American black metal band named Abigail Williams which is named after her.
Metalcore Band, Motionless In White, wrote a song called Abigail. It is adapted from the story of The Crucible, written from the point of view of John Proctor.
A Spanish Punk rock group named Abigail's Cross portrays the character of Abigail Williams on both  of the bands album covers.




