[[N. Chandrababu Naidu]]

CATEGORIES: Telugu people, 1950 births, Living people, Chief Ministers of Andhra Pradesh, Telugu politicians, People from Chittoor, Telugu Desam Party, Telugu Desam Party politicians, People from Rayalaseema, Indian National Congress politicians

Nara Chandrababu Naidu (
Former Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Tony Blair and former President of the United States Bill Clinton visited Hyderabad during Naidu's tenure as chief minister, and the Governor of Illinois proclaimed a Naidu Day in his honor. He has won a number of awards, including IT Indian of the Millennium from India Today, Business Person of the Year by The Economic Times, South Asian of the Year from Time Asia and membership in the World Economic Forum's Dream Cabinet. www.com (20 May 2004). Retrieved on 16 January 2012. Ia.com (12 May 2004). Retrieved on 16 January 2012. Archives.com (19 May 2004). Retrieved on 16 January 2012. Naidu chaired the National IT Panel under the NDA government and was described as one of the "hidden seven", working wonders around the world, by Profit (Oracle Corporation's monthly magazine). The Hindu (6 September 2001). Retrieved on 16 January 2012. Cscsarchive. Retrieved on 16 January 2012.

Early life and education

Naidu was born in Naravari Palle, Chittoor district on April 20, 1950. Since his village had no school, Naidu attended primary school in Seshapuram until class five and the Chandragiri Government High School until class nine. Rediff. Retrieved on 16 January 2012. He went to Tirupati for his higher education, studying there from class 10 until he received his master's degree. Naidu completed his BA degree in 1972 before enrolling in an MA program in economics. In 1974, he began work towards a PhD under D. L. Narayana (Andhra Pradesh Finance Commission chairman), researching the economic ideas of N. G. Ranga. Naidu did not complete his PhD, instead becoming involved in politics. newsofap. Telugudesam. Retrieved on 16 January 2012.

Early political career

Naidu entered politics as a youth leader from Chandragiri. During the Emergency he was appointed Pulicherla Youth Congress president, becoming close to Sanjay Gandhi.

Legislative career, 1978–1983

Naidu received a Congress ticket in 1978 under the 20-percent quota for youth from the Chandragiri constituency. He was elected to the Andhra Pradesh assembly in 1978 by the Congress Party and became Minister of Technical Education and Cinematography in T. Anjaiah's cabinet, at age 28 the state's youngest assembly member and minister.A High-Tech Fix for One Corner of India – Page 4 – New York Times. Nytimes. Retrieved on 16 January 2012.
As Minister of State for Cinematography, Naidu met Telugu cinema star Nandamuri Taraka Rama Rao (NTR). The Nadamuri family, impressed with him, proposed marriage to NTR's daughter Bhuvaneswari and a large wedding was held in Madras.

Telugu Desam Party

In early 1982, there were rumors that NTR would enter politics by floating a regional political party. Nine months before scheduled general elections, he created the Telugu Desam Party. Naidu remained in the Congress Party, standing again in the Chandragiri constituency against TDP candidate Venkatarama Naidu. The TDP swept the election, the first defeat for the Indian National Congress in the state since independence. Naidu joined the TDP after his defeat, thinking his future would be brighter in his father-in-law's party.

Rise in the party

Naidu became NTR's trusted lieutenant. When Nadendla Bhaskara Rao staged a coup against NTR in August 1984, Naidu helped his father-in-law regain power by rallying the MLAs before the President of India at Rashtrapati BhavanRediff On The NeT: Naidu becomes fourth AP CM to return his party to power. Rediff. Retrieved on 16 January 2012. and NTR appointed Naidu general secretary of the party. He began playing an important role in the TDP after Rao's coup attempt.
NTR opted for mid-term elections after regaining the chief ministry. Although Naidu did not stand, Nadendla voters gave NTR another landslide. Naidu slowly gained power in the TDP, and was believed to be building his own group in the party.

Legislative career, 1989–1994

In the 1989 Assembly elections, Naidu stood in his native constituency of Kuppam and won by a slender margin of about 5,000 votes.

Palace coup

In 1994 the TDP regained power following an anti-Congress wave triggered by anti-liquor, anti-incumbency factions, and Naidu became Finance and Revenue Minister in NTR's cabinet.

As Chief Minister (1995-2004)

As chief minister, Naidu advocated short-term sacrifice to turn Andhra Pradesh into an Asian tiger over the next 20 years. (7 January 1998) A Coming Asian Tiger in India?. NYTimes. Retrieved on 16 January 2012. He slashed food subsidies (among other things), and raised power tariffs. BBC News (7 October 1999). Retrieved on 16 January 2012.
CNN and Time gave Naidu widespread coverage; CNN said "In just five years, he has turned an impoverished, rural backwater place into India's new information-technology hub", and Time magazine named him South Asian of the Year. TIME (13 September 1999). Retrieved on 16 January 2012. Naidu was the West's favourite Indian; Tony Blair and Bill Clinton visited him in Hyderabad, the state capital, and the Governor of Illinois proclaimed Naidu Day in his honour.

Vision 2020

Naidu produced a vision statement, "Vision 2020", with US consultants McKinsey & Company  which proposed:

1999 election victory

The Telugu Desam Party, led by Naidu, won a majority in the state legislature: 185 of 294 seats in the Assembly and 29 of 42 in the 1999 general election, making it the second-largest party in the BJP-led NDA coalition government.

Hyderabad development

Naidu said, "If you want to develop a state, you have to make its main cities a showpiece. Hyderabad is the capital of Andhra Pradesh. Naturally, when a foreign investor is coming, if I ask them to go to Warangal, Tirupati or Vijayawada they may not go. So for the key sectors like information technology, biotechnology, healthcare and various outsourcing services",'Defeat has been an eye-opener'. Rediff. Retrieved on 16 January 2012. coining the slogan "Bye-bye Banglore, hello Hyderabad". Microsoft Corporation has established a software-development centre in Hyderabad, the second such centre outside Seattle. Naidu encouraged other global IT companies (IBM, Dell, Deloitte, Computer Associates and Oracle) to move to Hyderabad, making presentations to global CEOs convincing them to invest in his state. www.com (7 September 1998). Retrieved on 16 January 2012. thumb|alt=Large round building, with cross-hatched superstructure|Hi-Tech City in Hyderabad

2003 assassination attempt

On 1 October 2003 Naidu survived a land-mine blast, escaping with a fractured left collarbone and hairline fractures of two right ribs. The blast occurred about 16:00 IST when Naidu was travelling in a convoy to the Lord Venkateswara temple in the Tirumala hills for the annual Brahmotsavam festival.A blast and its shock. Hindu. Retrieved on 24 August 2010. State Information Technology Minister B. Gopalakrishna Reddy, Telugu Desam legislators R. Rajasekhar Reddy and Ch. Krishnamurthy and driver Srinivasa Raju were also injured. After an investigation, Naidu's survival was attributed to the armoured vehicle in which he was riding and God's intervention.

2004 election defeat

The Telugu Desam Party (led by Naidu) failed to retain power after two successive wins, winning 47 of 294 seats in the state assembly and five of 42 in the Lok Sabha. While many of his ministers lost, Naidu won decisively in Kuppam.

Reasons

According to Naidu, the 2004 election loss was primarily due to a severe drought and anti-incumbency sentiment. However, he was seen to have ignored the large rural population with his policies, failing to reach poorer voters. Years of drought and increasing debt have increased the suicide rate. BBC News (11 May 2004). Retrieved on 16 January 2012.

Personal life

Naidu is married to N.T. Rama Rao's second daughter, Bhuvaneswari.

Achievements

Controversy

Assets case

In November 2011 the Andhra Pradesh High Court ordered an investigation of Naidu, petitioned by Y. S. Vijayamma (MLA and widow of Y.S. Rajasekhara Reddy, who sought an inquiry into Naidu's alleged disproportionate assets). The petition accused Naidu of doling out favours to corporations and amassing undue wealth.com News. Rediff. Retrieved on 8 May 2012.
Naidu fought to halt the investigation, challenging the high-court order before the Supreme Court; the latter refused to intervene, asking the petitioners to approach the high court for an interim order. Naidu, Ramoji Rao and others filed a vacation petition in the high court against the Central Bank of India probe. Reliance Industries impleaded in the case, and Chief Justice Madan Lokur recused himself because he owned Reliance stock. Counsel for Reliance expressed concern that the case might damage the company and its investors; allegations levelled by the petitioner against Naidu pertained to decisions about Reliance investment in the Krishna Godavari Basin and alleged kickbacks received by Naidu received through Reliance investment in Ushodaya Enterprises. On 13 December 2011 the Andhra Pradesh high court, in an interim order, stayed the investigation; on 16 February 2012 the court dismissed the petition, ruling that it did not meet the parameters of public-interest litigation.






