[[Princess Alexandra, The Honourable Lady Ogilvy]]

CATEGORIES: 1936 births, Living people, British princesses, House of Windsor, Ladies of the Garter, Dames Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, People associated with Lancaster University, The Queen's Own Rifles of Canada, Recipients of the Canadian Forces Decoration, People educated at Heathfield School, Ascot

Princess Alexandra, The Honourable Lady Ogilvy   (Alexandra Helen Elizabeth Olga Christabel; born 25 December 1936) is the youngest granddaughter of King George V and Queen Mary. She is the widow of Sir Angus Ogilvy. Prior to her marriage she was known as Princess Alexandra of Kent, being the first princess to use the territorial designation of Kent since her great-great-grandmother Princess Alexandrina Victoria of Kent's accession as Queen Victoria.
Princess Alexandra carries out royal duties on behalf of her cousin, Queen Elizabeth II. As of January 2014, she is 45th in the line of succession to the thrones of 16 states; at the time of her birth in 1936, she was sixth.

Early life

Princess Alexandra was born on 25 December 1936 at 3 Belgrave Square, London. Her father was The Prince George, Duke of Kent, the fourth son of George V and Queen Mary. Her mother was Princess Marina of Greece and Denmark, a daughter of Prince Nicholas of Greece and Denmark and Grand Duchess Elena Vladimirovna of Russia. She was named after her paternal great-grandmother, Queen Alexandra, her maternal grandmother, Princess Nicholas of Greece and Denmark, and both of her maternal aunts, Countess Karl Theodor of Törring-Jettenbach and Princess Paul of Yugoslavia. She received the name Christabel because she was born on Christmas Day like her aunt by marriage Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester.
As a male-line granddaughter of the British monarch, she was styled as a British princess with the prefix Her Royal Highness. At the time of her birth, she was sixth in the line of succession to the British throne.
The Princess was baptised in the Private Chapel of Buckingham Palace, on 9 February 1937, and her godparents were: King George VI and Queen Elizabeth (her paternal uncle and aunt); the Queen of Norway (her great-aunt); Princess Nicholas of Greece and Denmark (her maternal grandmother); Princess Olga of Yugoslavia (her maternal aunt); the Princess Beatrice (her paternal great-great-aunt); the Earl of Athlone (her paternal great-uncle); and count Karl Theodor of Toerring-Jettenbach (her maternal uncle by marriage). Of her godparents, only the King and Queen and Lord Athlone were present.
Princess Alexandra spent most of her childhood at her family's country house, Coppins, in Buckinghamshire. She lived with her grandmother Queen Mary, the widow of George V, during World War II at Badminton. She was also trained at Great Ormond Street Hospital.
She served as bridesmaid at the wedding of her cousins, the then-Princess Elizabeth and The Duke of Edinburgh, on 20 November 1947. The Queen is Princess Alexandra's paternal first cousin; The Duke of Edinburgh is Princess Alexandra's maternal first cousin once removed. The Duke and Princess Marina were first cousins.
She was also a bridesmaid at the 1962 wedding of Prince Juan Carlos of Spain and Princess Sophia of Greece and Denmark. The Spanish Queen and Princess Alexandra are second cousins.

Marriage and personal life

On 24 April 1963, she married the Hon Angus James Bruce Ogilvy (1928–2004), the second son of the 12th Earl of Airlie and Lady Alexandra Coke, at Westminster Abbey.
Ogilvy declined the Queen's offer of an earldom upon marriage. This meant that any children they might have would carry no titles at all.
Angus Ogilvy received a knighthood in 1988, and was appointed to the Privy Council in 1997. Princess Alexandra and Sir Angus had two children, James and Marina, and four grandchildren, none of whom carry out royal duties:
She resides in a royal residence, Thatched House Lodge, Richmond Park, South-West London.

Royal duties

Since the late 1950s, Princess Alexandra has carried out an extensive programme of royal engagements in support of the Queen, both in the United Kingdom and overseas. Taking part in roughly 120 engagements each year, Princess Alexandra is one of the most active members of the Royal Family.
Princess Alexandra was 15 years old when her cousin acceded to the throne. The only other princesses by birth were the Queen's sister Margaret, the Queen's young daughter, Princess Anne ,the Queen's great-aunt Princess Alice, Countess of Athlone, her aunt, The Princess Mary, Princess Royal and Countess of Harewood, The Princess Beatrice (Daughter of Queen Victoria) and The Princess Victoria (Daughter of King Edward VII and Queen Alexandra).
In 1959, she carried out an extensive tour of Australia, and attended the Queensland Centenary Celebrations. She returned to the country in 1967 for a private holiday, but also carried out engagements in Canberra and Melbourne. The Princess Alexandra Hospital in Brisbane is named in her honour.
Princess Alexandra represented the Queen when Nigeria gained its independence from the United Kingdom
Princess Alexandra served as Chancellor of Lancaster University from its foundation in 1964 until she relinquished the post in 2005 (when she also accepted an honorary degree in Music). She is also an honorary fellow of the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow, of the Royal College of Anaesthetists, the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, and the Royal College of Physicians. She is also the President of Alexandra Rose Day, which was founded in honour of her great-grandmother, Alexandra of Denmark. She was also patron of The Royal School, Hampstead.
Until it was abolished in 2013, Princess Alexandra received £225,000 per year from the Civil List to cover the cost of official expenses; although like with the other members of the Royal Family (except the Duke of Edinburgh) the Queen repaid this amount to the Treasury. Alexandra lives at Thatched House Lodge in Richmond, London, a Crown property purchased on a 150-year lease from the Crown Estate Commissioners by Sir Angus Ogilvy after their wedding in 1963.
It was reported in the London Evening Standard on 11 January 2006 that, as a widow living alone, Princess Alexandra felt that the seven-bedroom house was too full of memories and that she wanted to sell her lease. However, to date she continues to live there. She also has use of a grace-and-favour apartment at St James's Palace in London. Her husband supported Alexandra in her royal duties at times, although he also had an independent career.
She is the patron of the Blackie Foundation Trust, a charity dedicated to the promotion of research and education in homoeopathy. She is also a patron of the English National Opera; the London Philharmonic Choir; She is also the Royal Patron of Children and Families Across Borders, a charity dedicated to reuniting children who have been separated from their families. She is patron of the Royal Central School of Speech and Drama in London, which received its royal style in 2012 during The Queen's Diamond Jubilee.

Controversy

Described as "one of the most popular members of the royal family", Princess Alexandra and her family have come under media scrutiny at various times in her life. Her husband was a director at a mining company, Lonrho, when it was involved in a scandal over the breaking of trade sanctions against Rhodesia. The Prime Minister at the time, Edward Heath, criticised the company, and Ogilvy subsequently resigned his directorships from that company.

Titles, styles, honours and arms

Titles and styles

Her full style is Her Royal Highness Princess Alexandra Helen Elizabeth Olga Christabel, The Honourable Lady Ogilvy, Royal Lady of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, Dame Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order.

Honours

See also List of honours of the British Royal Family by country
The Alexandra Hospital in Redditch Worcestershire is named after the Princess which she opened on April 2, 1987.

=Honorary military appointments=

Arms

Issue

Ancestry



Bibliography



 in England and Wales and in Northern Ireland


