[[Gilbert and Ellice Islands]]

CATEGORIES: 1976 disestablishments, Former British colonies, History of Kiribati, States and territories established in 1892, British colonisation of Oceania, Former colonies in Oceania, Gilbert and Ellice Islands, History of Tuvalu

The Gilbert and Ellice Islands were a British protectorate from 1892 and colony from 1916 until 1 January 1976, when the islands were divided into two colonies which became independent nations shortly after. A referendum was held in December 1974 to determine whether the Gilbert Islands and Ellice Islands should each have their own administration. 831, ISBN 0-19-924959-8 As a consequence of the referendum, the Gilbert and Ellice Islands colony ceased to exist on 1 January 1976 and the separate British colonies of Kiribati and Tuvalu came into existence. 153–177

Location

The Gilbert Islands Reilly Ridgell. Pacific Nations and Territories: The Islands of Micronesia, Melanesia, and Polynesia. 3rd. Ed. Honolulu: Bess Press, 1995. p. 95. (formerly Kingsmill IslandsVery often, this name applied only to the southern islands of the archipelago. Merriam-Webster's Geographical Dictionary. Springfield, Massachusetts: Merriam Webster, 1997. p. 594.) are a chain of sixteen atolls and coral islands in the western Pacific Ocean that are recognised as part of the  Micronesia subregion of Oceania.  The Ellice Islands are  6 atolls and 3 coral islands located in the Pacific Ocean, midway between Hawaii and Australia that are recognised as part of the Polynesia subregion of Oceania in the central Pacific Ocean.

Naming

The Gilbert Islands were named in 1820 by a Russian admiral, Johann von Krusenstern after a British captain, Thomas Gilbert, who crossed the archipelago in 1788. French captain Louis Duperrey was the first to map the whole Gilbert Islands archipelago. He commanded La Coquille on its circumnavigation of the earth (1822–1825).
Funafuti atoll was named Ellice's Island after Edward Ellice, a British politician and merchant, by Captain Arent de Peyster,Miscellanies: by an officer, Volume 1, Ch. LXXX By John Watts De Peyster, A.E. Chasmer & Co. (1888)  who sighted the islands in 1819 sailing on the ship Rebecca. 15, Institute of Pacific Studies, University of the South Pacific and Government of Tuvalu, 1983 Ellice owned the cargo of the ship. The name Ellice was applied to all nine islands, of what is now Tuvalu, after the work of English hydrographer Alexander George Findlay (1812–1876). from the Strait of Magalhaens to the Arctic Sea
The Gilbert and Ellice Islands were formerly designated an ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 country code "GE" until 1977.

History

The protectorate was generally established on this area (but not on these islands) by the Pacific Islanders Protection ActOther acts on the same subject: Pacific Islanders Protection Act 1872; Pacific Islanders Protection Act 1875;  Pacific Island Labourers Act 1880; Pearl-Shell and Bêche-de-mer Fishery Act 1881; Native Labourers Protection Act 1884 of 1857 and then in 1877 for the Western Pacific Territories. The protectorate on the Gilbert group and on the Ellice group was formal and effective only from 1892, and a Resident Commissioner was appointed in 1893. The islands became a Crown Colony on 12 January 1916. The colony's capital was established on Banaba Island (Ocean Island) after 1902 as the operations of the Pacific Phosphate Company resulted in good shipping connections to Ocean Island. After World War II, the capital was established on Tarawa, first in Betio island then near Bairiki.
The sixteen islands of the Gilberts were declared a British protectorate by Captain Davis RN, of  Banaba Island (or Ocean Island) was included in the protectorate in 1900 and then in the colony in 1916. In the same year, Fanning Island and Washington Island were included in it together with the islands of the Tokelau or Union Islands; Christmas Island was included in 1919 but was contested by the US. Tokelau was transferred to New Zealand administration in 1926, abolishing the islands' chiefdoms. By the Tokelau Act of 1948, sovereignty over Tokelau was transferred to New Zealand. The Phoenix Islands were added in 1937 and the five islands of the Central and Southern Line Islands were added in 1972.
In 1974, ethnic differences within the colony caused the Polynesians of the Ellice Islands to vote for separation from the Micronesians of the Gilbert Islands (later Kiribati). The following year, the Ellice Islands became the separate British colony of Tuvalu.

British Western Pacific Territories

The British Western Pacific Territories (BWPT) were administered by a High Commissioner resident in Fiji, with a Resident Commissioner in the colony's administrative centre that was established on Banaba Island (Ocean Island). The Resident Commissioners were: C. R. Swayne (appointed 1893) followed by William Telfer Campbell (1896-1908).
In 1916, the administration of the BWTP ended and the islands became a Crown Colony on 12 January 1916.

Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony

The Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony continued to be administered by a Resident Commissioner. The colony's capital was on Banaba Island (Ocean Island) and after World War II on Tarawa, first in Betio island then near Bairiki.
In 1930 the Resident Commissioner, Arthur Grimble, issued revised laws, Regulations for the good Order and Cleanliness of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands, which replaced laws created during the BWTP.

Transition to  self-determination

The formation of the United Nations Organisation after World War II resulted in the United Nations Special Committee on Decolonization committing to a process of decolonization; as a consequence the British colonies in the Pacific started on a path to self-determination. The initial focus was on the development of the administration of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands. In 1947 Tarawa, in the Gilbert Islands, was made the administrative capital. This development included establishing The King George V Secondary School for boys and the Elaine Bernacchi Secondary School for girls.
A Colony Conference was organised at Marakei in 1956, which was attended by officials and representatives from each island in the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony, conferences were held every two years until 1962. The development of administration  continued with the creation in 1963 of an Advisory Council of five officials and 12 representatives who were appointed by the Resident Commissioner. In 1964 an Executive Council was established with eight officials and eight representatives. The representative members were elected in the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Advisory Council election held in 1964. The Resident Commissioner was now required to consult the Executive Council regarding the creation of laws to making decisions that affected the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony.
A Constitution was introduced in 1967, which created a House of Representatives for the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony that comprised seven appointed officials and 23 members elected by the islanders. Tuvalu elected four members of the House of Representatives. The 1967 Constitution also established the Governing Council. The House of Representatives only had the authority to recommend laws; the Governing Council had the authority to enact laws following a recommendation from the House of Representatives.
A select committee of the House of Representatives was established to consider whether the Constitution should be changes to give legislative power to the House of Representatives. It became apparent that the Tuvaluans were concerned about their minority status on the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony, and the Tuvaluans wanted equal representation to that of the I-Kiribati. A new constitution was introduced in 1971, which provided that each of the islands of Tuvalu (except Niulakita) elected one representative. However that did not end the Tuvaluan movement for independence.
In 1974 Ministerial government was introduced in the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony through a change to the Constitution.

Elections and the transition to parliamentary government

The 1967 constitution created a parliament; whose members were elected in the following elections:

Dissolution of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony

A referendum was held in December 1974 to determine whether the Gilbert Islands and Ellice Islands should each have their own administration. The Tuvaluan Order 1975 made by the Privy Council, which took effect on 1 October 1975, recognised Tuvalu as a separate British dependency with its own government. The second stage occurred on 1 January 1976 when separate administrations were created out of the civil service of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony. Kiribati attained independence on 12 July 1979 by the Kiribati Independence Order 1979 made by the Privy Council.

Postage stamps

The Islands used their own postage stamps from 1911.



Further reading


