[[Queen Fabiola of Belgium]]

CATEGORIES: 1928 births, Living people, Queens consort, Belgian royal consorts, Spanish countesses, Belgian Roman Catholics, Belgian nurses, Belgian people of Spanish descent, Collectors of fairy tales, Princesses of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, House of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha (Belgium), Nobility from Madrid, Belgian princesses, Dames Grand Cross of the Order of Isabella the Catholic, Grand Cordons of the Order of Leopold (Belgium), Grand Crosses of the Order of Christ (Portugal), Recipients of the Pro Ecclesia et Pontifice

|-
|
|}
Queen Fabiola of Belgium (née Doña Fabiola de Mora y Aragón; born 11 June 1928) is the widow of King Baudouin. She was queen consort for 33 years, between her wedding in 1960 and her husband's death in 1993. The couple were unable to have children, and the crown then passed to her husband's younger brother, King Albert II.

Early life

Fabiola de Mora y Aragón was born in Madrid, Spain, the fourth daughter of Gonzalo de Mora y Fernández, Riera y del Olmo, 4th Marquess of Casa Riera, 2nd Count of Mora (1887–1957) and his wife, Blanca de Aragón y Carrillo de Albornoz, Barroeta-Aldamar y Elío (1892–1981). She was a sister of , a Spanish actor and jet set playboy. Her godmother was Queen Victoria Eugenia of Spain.
Before her marriage she published an album of 12 fairy tales (Los doce cuentos maravillosos), one of which  ("The Indian Water Lilies") would get its own pavilion in the Efteling theme park in 1966.

Marriage

On 15 December 1960, Fabiola married Baudouin, who had been king of the Belgians since the abdication of his father, Leopold III, in 1951. At the marriage ceremony in the Cathedral of St. Michael and St. Gudula, she wore a 1926 Art Deco tiara that had been a gift of the Belgian state to her husband's mother, Astrid of Sweden, upon her marriage to Leopold III. Her dress of satin and ermine was designed by the couturier Cristóbal Balenciaga. TIME magazine, in its 26 September 1960, issue, called Doña Fabiola, who was a hospital nurse at the time of her engagement, "Cinderella Girl" and described her as "an attractive young woman, though no raving beauty" and "the girl who could not catch a man." On the occasion of her marriage, Spanish bakers set out to honor Fabiola and created a type of bread, "the fabiola", which is still made and consumed on a daily basis in many Spanish cities.
The explorer Guido Derom named Queen Fabiola Mountains – a newly discovered range of Antarctic mountains – in her honour in 1961. She also has several varieties of ornamental plants named after her.
The royal couple had no children, as the queen's five pregnancies ended in miscarriage. There are reports, however, that she had a stillborn child in the mid 1960s. Fabiola openly spoke about her miscarriages in 2008: 'You know, I myself lost 5 children. You learn something from that experience. I had problems with all my pregnancies, but you know, in the end I think life is beautiful'.

Widowhood

Baudouin died in 1993 and was succeeded by his younger brother, Albert II. Fabiola moved out of the Royal Palace of Laeken to the more modest Stuyvenbergh Castle and reduced her public appearances in order not to overshadow her sister-in-law, Queen Paola.
Admired for her devout Roman Catholicism and involvement in social causes particularly those related to mental health, children's issues and women's issues in the Third World, Queen Fabiola is a recipient of the 2001 Ceres Medal, in recognition of her work to promote rural women in developing countries. The medal was given by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). She's also honorary president of King Baudouin Foundation.

Health issues

Queen Fabiola was hospitalised with pneumonia on 16 January 2009, and spent 15 days there, with her condition being described as "serious".

Tax avoidance claims

In January 2013, Belgian prime minister Elio Di Rupo criticised Queen Fabiola for her plans to set up a private foundation, which was widely seen by the public as inheritance tax evasion (although, since the construction was admitted by Di Rupo to be legal, it would more precisely be a case of tax avoidance). The Queen denied the charges, claiming that the funds used were "her private money", and that most of her annual public stipend was used for housekeeping and staff wages.Al Jazeera: Belgium PM slams queen over inheritance plan, 11 January 2013The Telegraph: Belgian monarchy rocked by Queen Fabiola tax row, 11 January 2013

Linguistic skills

According to official sources, in addition to Spanish, Queen Fabiola is fluent in French, Dutch, English, German and Italian.

Titles

Honours

See also : List of honours of the Belgian Royal Family by country

Belgian honours

Foreign honours

Ancestry







|-


