[[John Hunyadi]]

CATEGORIES: 1407 births, 1456 deaths, Hungarian soldiers, Hunyadi family, History of Belgrade, History of Transylvania (1308–1526), History of Hungary, 15th-century deaths from plague (disease), Hungarian nobility, Burials at St. Michael's Cathedral, Alba Iulia, Hungarian Roman Catholics, 15th-century Roman Catholics, Characters in Serbian epic poetry, Christians of the Crusade of Varna, Voivodes of Transylvania, 15th-century Hungarian people, 15th-century Romanian people, Bans (title)

John Hunyadi ( 1406–11 August 1456) was a  leading Hungarian military and political figure in Central and Southeastern Europe during the 15th century. According to most contemporary sources, he was son of a noble family of Romanian ancestry. He mastered his military skills on the southern borderlands of the Kingdom of Hungary that were exposed to Ottoman attacks. Appointed voivode of Transylvania and head of a number of southern counties, he assumed responsibility for the defense of the frontiers in 1441.
Hunyadi adopted the Hussite method of using wagons for military purposes. He employed professional soldiers, but also mobilized local peasantry against invaders. These innovations contributed to his earliest successes against the Ottoman troops who were plundering the southern marches in the early 1440s. Although defeated in the battle of Varna in 1444 and in the second battle of Kosovo in 1448, his successful "Long Campaign" across the Balkan Mountains in 1443–44 and defence of Belgrade/Nándorfehérvár in 1456, against troops led personally by the Sultan established his reputation as a great general. The bells of Catholic and older Protestant churches are daily rung at noon to commemorate the Belgrade victory, although the pope had ordered this in advance, a week before the siege, in order to encourage the soldiers fighting for Christendom.
John Hunyadi was also an eminent statesman. He actively took part in the civil war between the partisans of Wladislas I and the minor Ladislaus V, two claimants to the throne of Hungary in the early 1440s, on behalf on the former. Popular among the lesser nobility, the Diet of Hungary appointed him, in 1445, as one of the seven "captains of the realm" responsible for the administration of state affairs until Ladislaus V (by that time unanimously accepted as king) came of age. The next Diet went even further, electing Hunyadi as sole regent with the title of governor. When he resigned from this office in 1452, the sovereign awarded him with the first hereditary title (perpetual count of Beszterce/Bistrița) in the Kingdom of Hungary. He had by this time become one of the wealthiest landowners in the kingdom, and preserved his influence in the Diet up until his death.
This Athleta Christi ("Christ's Champion"), as Pope Pius II referred to him, died some three weeks after his triumph at Nándorfehérvár/Belgrade, falling to an epidemic that had broken out in the crusader camp. However, his victories over the Turks prevented them from invading the Kingdom of Hungary for more than 60 years. His fame was a decisive factor in the election of his son, Matthias Corvinus, as king by the Diet of 1457. Hunyadi is still a popular historic figure among Hungarians, Romanians, Serbians, Bulgarians and other nations of the region, many of them even considering him as their own hero.

Childhood ( 1420)

A royal charter of grant issued on 18 October 1409 contains the first reference to John Hunyadi.
Antonio Bonfini was the first chronicler to have made a passing remark of an alternative story of John Hunyadi's parentage, soon stating that it was just a "tasteless tale" fabricated by Hunyadi's opponent, Ulrich II, Count of Celje.
The identification of John Hunyadi's mother is even less certain.
With regard of John Hunyadi's mother, Bonfini provides an alternative solution as well, stating that she was a distinguished Greek lady, but does not name her.
Hunyadi's year of birth is uncertain, but he seems to have born between around 1405 and 1407.

Rise of a general

Youth ( 1420–1438)

Andreas Pannonius, who served Hunyadi for five years, writes that the future commander "accustomed himself to tolerate both cold and heat in good time".
Filippo Scolari's biographer, Poggio Bracciolini writes that Scolari{–}who was Ispán, or head, of Temes County{–}educated Hunyadi from his very youth, suggesting that Hunyadi was Scolari's page around 1420.
According to the Byzantine historian Laonikos Chalkokondyles, the young Hunyadi "stayed for a time" at the court of Stefan Lazarević who died in 1427.
While still a young man, Hunyadi entered the retinue of King Sigismund and accompanied him to Italy in 1431.
Hunyadi again joined the entourage of Sigismund, who had in the meantime been crowned Holy Roman Emperor in Rome, at the very end of 1433.
Antonio Bonfini writes of Hunyadi's service in the retinue of one "Francis Csanádi" who "became so fond of him that treated him as if he were his own son".
Sigismund, who entered Prague in the summer of 1436, hired Hunyadi and his 50 lancers for three months in October 1437 for 1,250 gold florins, implying that Hunyadi had accompanied him to Bohemia.

First battles with the Ottomans (1438–1442)

The Ottomans had occupied the larger part of Serbia by the end of 1438.
King Albert proclaimed the general insurrection of the nobility against the Ottomans, but few armed noblemen assembled in the region of Titel and they refrained themselves from the fight.
King Albert died of dysentery on 27 October 1439.
Hunyadi, together with Nicholaus Újlaki, annihilated the troops of Vladislaus' opponents at Bátaszék at the very beginning of 1441.
For Nicholas Újlaki spent most time in the royal court, in practice Hunyadi administered Transylvania and the southern borderlands alone. 
Hunyadi set about repairing the walls of Nándorfehérvár, which had been damaged during an Ottoman attack.
Early next year Bey Mezid invaded Transylvania with a force of 17,000 soldiers.
Pope Eugenius IV, who had been an enthusiastic propagator of a new crusade against the Ottomans, sent his legate, Cardinal Giuliano Cesarini to Hungary. Hunyadi placed Basarab II on the princely throne of Wallachia, but Basarab's opponent, Vlad Dracul returned and forced Basarab to flee in early 1443.
Hunyadi's victories in 1441 and 1442 made him a prominent enemy of the Ottomans and renowned throughout Christendom. On the other hand, he was not afraid of employing 
irregulars mustered among local peasantry.

General and politician

The "Long Campaign" (1442–1444)

In April 1443 King Vladislaus and his barons decided to mount a major campaign against the Ottoman Empire.
Spending around 32,000 gold florins from his own treasury, Hunyadi hired more than 10,000 mercenaries.
Hunyadi commanded the vanguards and routed four smaller Ottoman forces, hindering their unification.

Battle of Varna and its aftermath (1444–1446)

Although no major Ottoman forces had been defeated, Hunyadi's "long campaign" stirred enthusiasm throughout Christian Europe.
The advance of Christian forces in Ottoman territory also encouraged the peoples of the Balkan Peninsula to revolt in periferies of the Ottoman Empire.
Đurađ Branković, who was grateful for the restoration of his realm, donated his estates at Világos (Șiria, Romania) in Zaránd County to Hunyadi on 3 July. 
King Vladislaus, whom Cardinal Cesarini urged to keep his oath, decided to invade the Ottoman Empire in autumn. 
The crusaders departed from Hungary on 22 September. 
The two armies clashed near Varna on 10 November. 
Although outnumbered by two to one, the crusaders initially ruled the battlefield against the Ottomans.
At the next Diet of Hungary, which assembled in April 1445, the Estates decided that they would unanimously acknowledge the child Ladislaus V's rule if King Vladislaus, whose fate was still uncertain, had not arrived in Hungary by the end of May. 
Hunyadi was planning to organize a new crusade against the Ottoman Empire.

Governorship (1446–1453)

The Estates of the realm proclaimed Hunyadi regent, bestowing the title "governor" upon him on 6 June 1446. 
Hunyadi attempted to pacify the border  regions.
Hunyadi persuaded John Jiskra of Brandýs{–}a Czech commander who controlled the northern regions (in present-day Slovakia){–}to sign an armistice for three years on 13 September.
Hunyadi accelerated his negotiations, which had been commenced in the previous year, with Alfonso the Magnanimous, King of Aragon and Naples. 
Hunyadi invaded Wallachia, dethroned Vlad Dracul and installed a new voivode, Vladislav II in December 1447.
Pope Eugenius suggested that the anti-Ottoman campaign should be postponed.
In order to prevent the unification of the armies of Hunyadi and Skanderbeg, Sultan Murad II joined battle with Hunyadi on Kosovo Polje on 17 October.
His defeat and his humiliating treaty with the Despot weakened Hunyadi's position.
Upon Hunyadi's demand, the Diet of March 1450 ordered the confiscation of Branković's estates in the Kingdom of Hungary.
The Austrian noblemen rose up in open rebellion against Frederick III of Germany, who governed the duchy in the name of Ladislaus the Posthumus at the turn of 1451 and 1452.
Hunyadi convoked a Diet to Buda, but the barons and the prelates preferred to visit Ladislaus V in Vienna in November.

In isolation (1453–1456)

In a letter of 28 April 1453, Aeneas Silvius Piccolomini{–}the future Pope Pius II{–}stated that King Ladislaus V's realms were administered by "three men": Hungary was ruled by Hunyadi, Bohemia by George of Poděbrady, and Austria by Ulrich of Celje.

Belgrade victory and death (1456)

Meanwhile, the Ottoman issue had again become acute, and, after the fall of Constantinople in 1453, it seemed natural that Sultan Mehmed II was rallying his resources in order to subjugate Hungary. His immediate objective was Nándorfehérvár (today Belgrade). Nándorfehérvár was a major castle-fortress, and a gate keeper of south Hungary. The fall of this stronghold would have opened a clear way to the heart of Central Europe. Hunyadi arrived at the siege of Nándorfehérvár at the end of 1455, after settling differences with his domestic enemies. At his own expense, he restocked the supplies and arms of the fortress, leaving in it a strong garrison under the command of his brother-in-law Mihály Szilágyi and his own eldest son László Hunyadi. He proceeded to form a relief army, and assembled a fleet of two hundred ships. His main ally was the Franciscan friar, Giovanni da Capistrano (known today as St. John of Capistrano), whose fiery oratory drew a large crusade made up mostly of peasants. Although relatively ill-armed (most were armed with farm equipment, such as scythes and pitchforks) they flocked to Hunyadi and his small corps of seasoned mercenaries and cavalry.
On 14 July 1456 the flotilla assembled by Hunyadi destroyed the Ottoman fleet. On 21 July, Szilágyi's forces in the fortress repulsed a fierce assault by the Rumelian army, and Hunyadi pursued the retreating Ottoman forces into their camp, taking advantage of the Turkish army's confused flight from the city. After fierce but brief fighting, the camp was captured, and Mehmet lifted the siege and returned to Constantinople. A 70-year period of relative peace on Hungary's southeastern border began with his flight. However, plague broke out in Hunyadi's camp three weeks after the lifting of the siege, and he died August 11. On his deathbed Hunyadi said Defend, my friends, Christendom and Hungary from all enemies... Do not quarrel among yourselves. If you should waste your energies in altercations, you will seal your own fate as well as dig the grave of our country.. Sultan Mehmet II paid him tribute:"Although he was my enemy I feel grief over his death, because the world has never seen such a man."

=The Noon Bell=

Pope Callixtus III ordered the bells of every European church to be rung every day at noon, as a call for believers to pray for the Christian defenders of the city of Belgrade.
The custom still exists even among Protestant and Orthodox congregations. In the history of Oxford University, the victory was welcomed with a peal of bells and great celebrations in England too. Hunyadi sent a special courier (among other), Erasmus Fullar, to Oxford with the news of the victory.)
Unlike most of his contemporaries, Hunyadi did not use his great revenues or the military and political weight of his thousands of retainers simply for his personal aggrandizement. For many years, he bore a large share of the cost of fighting the Ottomans.niif.html

Family

In 1432, Hunyadi married Erzsébet Szilágyi (c. 1410–1483), a Hungarian noblewoman. John Hunyadi had two children, Ladislaus and Matthias Corvinus.

Legacy

Along with his son Matthias Corvinus, Hunyadi is considered a Hungarian national hero and praised as its defender against the Ottoman threat.
Romanian historiography adopted Hunyadi and gives him a place of importance in the history of Romania too.
Pope Pius II writes that ''Hunyadi did not increase so much the glory of the Hungarians, but especially the glory of the Romanians among whom he was born.
The French writer and diplomat Philippe de Commines described Hunyadi as a very valiant gentleman, called the White Knight of Wallachia, a person of great honour and prudence, who for a long time had governed the kingdom of Hungary, and had gained several battles over the Turks
Hunyadi was "recognised as being Hungarian..." and "frequently called Ugrin Janko, 'Janko the Hungarian'" in the Serbian and Croatian societies of the 15th century, He is also portrayed as an ardent supporter of the Catholicization of Orthdox peoples
In Bulgarian folklore, the memory of Hunyadi was preserved in the epic song hero character of Yankul(a) Voivoda, along with Sekula Detentse, a fictitious hero perhaps inspired by Hunyadi's nephew, Thomas Székely.
Nicolaus Olahus was the nephew of John Hunyadi.google.com/books?id=Y4EsAQAAIAAJ&q=iancu+de&dq=iancu+de&hl=en&ei=CWt7TYS2M8ey8QO4xfC6Cw&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=5&ved=0CDcQ6AEwBDgy

Corvinus legend

The epithet Corvinus (referring to the raven) was first used by Antonio Bonfini the biographer of his son Matthias Corvinus, but is also applied to Hunyadi.Péter Kulcsár: A Corvinus-legenda. História (vol. 1993-01). According to a legend inventedBalázs Trencsényi (ed.), Márton Zászkaliczky: Whose Love of Which Country?: Composite States, National Histories and Patriotic Discourses in Early Modern East Central Europe (Studies in the History of Political Thought) by Gáspár Heltai said that Hunyadi was the illegitimate son of Hungarian King Sigismund of Luxembourg,



Sources

Further reading

|-


