[[List of Neon Genesis Evangelion characters]]

CATEGORIES: Lists of anime and manga characters, Neon Genesis Evangelion characters, Neon Genesis Evangelion lists

This is a list of characters in the anime Neon Genesis Evangelion and the movies Evangelion: Death and Rebirth, The End of Evangelion and the Rebuild of Evangelion tetralogy. The characters were designed by Yoshiyuki Sadamoto.

Creation and conception

According to director Hideaki Anno, Evangelion was an attempt to make all perspectives into one, creating characters that represent different things to different viewers to make it impossible for everyone to arrive at a single theory. To some viewers, the characters are psychological representations, while to others, they are philosophical, religious, historical, and even themselves.
Anno was influenced by Ryu Murakami's political economy novel , and the names "Toji Suzuhara", "Kensuke Aida", and the surname "Horaki" and "Aida" come from this book. Many of the surnames of the characters in Evangelion are named after Japanese warships in World War II.
Most of Evangelions characters' ages were plotted before broadcasting the TV series, but their birthdays were not settled.29 Neon Genesis Evangelion pp85-88, 1997, Kadokawa Shoten, ISBN 978-4-04-852700-2) After the TV series finished, GAINAX released birthdays which were similar to those of each character's voice actors, except Rei Ayanami, Toji Suzuhara, Kensuke Aida and Kaworu Nagisa.Eva Fan Club) vol.8, the liner notes bundled with Neon Genesis Evangelion Genesis0:8(VHS and LD, Sep.5,1996) This time, the characters' birth years were still unrevealed.
Adult characters' birth years were simply calculated from their age, but there was an additional aspect in determining the children's ones. According to the Japanese educational system, in 2015 second graders of junior high school (eighth graders) are basically made up of children who were born from April 2, 2001 to April 1, 2002. However these birth years did not change the children's ages of 14 in year 2015. This is the reason why Asuka Langley Soryu and Toji Suzuhara were born in December 2001 and Hikari Horaki was born in February 2002, despite all children except Kaworu are 14 in 2015.

Children

In the Japanese dialogue for the original anime, the Eva pilots were always referred to as "Children," even when referring to an individual pilot. The English translation referred to the individual pilots as First Child, etc. In the Rebuild of Evangelion series, the expression "(n)th Children" is not used. Instead, the pilots are referred to as .

Shinji Ikari

 He becomes friends with Toji Suzuhara and Kensuke Aida, in addition to his complicated relationships with Rei and Asuka.

Rei Ayanami



Asuka Langley Soryu

 In Rebuild of Evangelion series, her name is changed to Asuka Shikinami Langley (式波) and ranked as captain of the Euro airforce.Official poster (Japanese)

Toji Suzuhara

 is the Fourth Child. Toji is a tough boy, the stereotypical "jock," and is in constant conflict with Asuka. His younger sister was injured in the battle between the third Angel, Sachiel, and Unit 01, and he beats Shinji up soon after for being indirectly responsible. However, after witnessing firsthand the suffering Shinji experiences piloting Unit 01 in the battle against Shamshel, Toji comes to respect Shinji, apologizes to Shinji for beating him up (his sister was angry at him for beating him up and demanded he apologize), and the two eventually become friends. During the activation test for Unit-03, the EVA is possessed by the Angel Bardiel and the unit is destroyed by Unit-01 under the control of the Dummy Plug system when Shinji refuses to fight against the possessed EVA out of concern for the pilot. In the manga, Shinji is aware before the battle that Toji is inside Unit-03, unlike in the anime where he knew there was a pilot inside but does not discover that it was Toji until after the battle, seeing him being carried out of the wreckage of the entry plug. Additionally, Toji is actually killed when Unit-01 crushes Unit-03's entry plug, while in the anime he survives but is severely injured.  In the Rebuild of Evangelion films, he does not become a pilot; instead Asuka pilots Unit-03.

Kaworu Nagisa

 is the Fifth Child, and the seventeenth Angel, Tabris. He is sent to Nerv by Seele as a replacement pilot for Unit 02 after Asuka's synchronization ratio falls below viability; however, his true purpose is to hasten the Human Instrumentality Project's implementation. He breaks into Terminal Dogma to return to Adam and initiate the Third Impact, but upon discovering that the being there is actually Lilith, he implores Shinji to destroy him. After his death, Kaworu appears in the beginning and middle of Third Impact in The End of Evangelion.

Mari Illustrious Makinami

 is an enigmatic Evangelion pilot introduced in Rebuild of Evangelion's second installment Evangelion: 2.0 You Can (Not) Advance.
She is the confident and eccentric pilot of the Provisional Evangelion Unit-05, which differs drastically from previous incarnations, featuring four mechanical "legs" that end in wheels and a lack of hands which have been replaced with a jousting lance and "claw". Because of its unique design, Mari pilots her Eva wearing a helmet-like contraption, and the wrists of her plugsuit have several attachments that connect to tubing that apparently helps her in moving the EVA. Even while piloting Unit-02, her pink plugsuit features a symbolized 5 on the back. She has poor vision, wearing glasses at all times and having difficulty finding them when dropped after colliding with Shinji while parachuting. Mari's designation amongst the other Children is mysterious, though she is once referred to as "Problem Child". She self-destructs Unit-05 to defeat one of the Angels in the film's opening, but manages to escape unharmed. During the film's climax, she uses Unit-02 to battle the 10th Angel but is unable to, she sees Shinji who, after seeing the destruction, runs to Nerv HQ. She has a fondness for LCL, telling Shinji, "You smell good... Smell of LCL." She also differs from the other pilots as she takes things in great strides as a pilot, even the immense pains of being attacked while synced with an EVA, falling on Shinji while using a parachute, smiling when the 3rd impact seems inevitable, and even singing a song in Unit-05 when about to fight an Angel. Since Toji did not pilot an Eva in the Rebuild series, Mari is sometimes referred to as the "Fourth Child" of the series by fans, but this has not been referenced in official material.
Sadamoto designed her to look British, and added glasses as a 'simple yet effective way to set her apart from the other characters'Sadamoto interview in Osada-bon 2009, published with Young Ace;  The June 2010 issue of Newtype magazine ranked Mari #1 in its monthly top-10-character survey.

Nerv Staff

Gendo Ikari

 At the start of the series, he is the only person having an effective connection to Rei. As the series progresses, his unscrupulous past is revealed, as is the intensity with which he loved Yui. It is later revealed that he wished to use the Human Instrumentality Project as a means of reuniting with his wife inside Unit 01, where all human consciousness would be merged into one, with the initiator of the project becoming god-like. 

Kozo Fuyutsuki

 is Nerv's Deputy Commander and Gendo Ikari's right-hand man. He does not especially like Gendo, but he is the closest thing to a confidant that Gendo has in the series.
Once a professor of metaphysical biology at Kyoto University, Fuyutsuki became interested in the research and theories undertaken by Yui Ikari, and became her sponsor and mentor. Shortly thereafter, he was directed by his superiors to initiate a similar arrangement with Gendo Rokobungi. Later, after the Second Impact, Fuyutsuki traveled with Gendo to the ruins of Antarctica, and began to suspect that Gendo and his associates in Seele were more powerful and dangerous than he originally realized. In 2003, Fuyutsuki discovered for himself the true nature of the events leading up to Second Impact and Seele's involvement in initiating that catastrophe. Gendo led him into the GeoFront and Central Dogma, and asked Fuyutsuki to join him in "creating a new future for mankind."
During a flashback scene in The End of Evangelion, Fuyutsuki mentions that Seele had threatened to make him "disappear," implying that his recruitment may have been extortionary. Although Fuyutsuki was never more than a mentor and friend to Yui, it is implied that he was in love with her to some degree, as he was shocked to learn that she was marrying Gendo. In The End of Evangelion Lilith/Rei takes the form of Yui to achieve Fuyutsuki's Instrumentality.Frame-by-frame of the scene where Rei collects the souls of the main Nerv characters

Misato Katsuragi

 letting them live in her apartment rather than have them live alone. While she is professional and diligent in her duties, she is a slob and a drunkard while off-duty. She is the only survivor of the Katsuragi Expedition, the scientific study led by her father which triggered the Second Impact; the cross pendant she wears was given to her by her father just before his death. She and Ryoji Kaji were lovers during college, and slowly rekindle their romance over the course of the TV series.
She also drives an Alpine A310 V6, which serves as her personal vehicle.

Ritsuko Akagi

 is Nerv's head scientist and, along with Gendo and Fuyutsuki, is the only person at Nerv fully aware of the Evas' true nature and the purpose of the Instrumentality Project. She is a workaholic and heavy smoker, and has been friends with both Misato and Kaji since college. She is also romantically involved with Gendo, but feels betrayed by Gendo when she realizes that he was using her in the same way that he used her mother. As revenge, she destroys the Dummy Plug system and is shot dead in The End of Evangelion, when she tries and fails to activate Nerv's self-destruct mechanism to stop Gendo from initiating Third Impact.

Ryoji Kaji

 but not before giving Misato information regarding the truth of the Instrumentality Project.

Makoto Hyuga

 is a First Lieutenant at Nerv and one of the three main computer technicians directly serving under Commanders Ikari and Fuyutsuki in the command post of Central Dogma, the others being Aoba and Ibuki. Hyuga at first gives the impression of being something of a nerd, reading manga while on his break time, but is a highly skilled technician. His quick thinking and bravery help save Nerv headquarters from the attack by Matariel, and he acts as a spy for Misato, helping her obtain information regarding Nerv's machinations. The true extent of his feelings for Misato is shown in The End of Evangelion as Rei/Lilith takes the form of Misato during Instrumentality and passionately kisses him; he gets reverted to LCL.

Maya Ibuki

 is a First Lieutenant at Nerv and a computer technician who works primarily with Ritsuko Akagi. Her main role during the battles against the Angels is to constantly monitor the Eva pilots' synchronization ratios and send various emergency commands to the Evas as ordered by Misato or Gendo. In spite of her profession, Maya despises violence of any sort, and is frequently shown becoming nauseated and averting her eyes during battles with the Angels. In The End of Evangelion, Maya is the only Nerv officer who is shown refusing to fight back against the JSSDF invaders. Maya holds Ritsuko in very high regard, and always refers to her as "senpai" in the original anime; The End of Evangelion heavily implies that Maya is actually in love with Ritsuko. Rei/Lilith penetrates Maya's AT field by assuming the form of Ritsuko. Maya exclaims "Ritsuko!/Senpai!", eagerly returns "Ritsuko"'s embrace, and immediately gets reverted to LCL.

Shigeru Aoba

 is a First Lieutenant at Nerv and a computer technician. At times a stereotypical metalhead, he is a cynical nihilist and plays guitar (he can also sometimes be seen playing air guitar). Of the three technicians seen regularly in Central Dogma, his character is explored the least in the series. In The End of Evangelion, during Instrumentality, Rei/Lilith appears to him not as any loved one but rather as a bombardment of Reis which forces their way through his AT Field while he cowers and screams in horror under his desk.

Gehirn Staff

Naoko Akagi

 was Ritsuko's mother. She was the creator of the MAGI systemEvangelion, episode 13 and the former Gehirn head technician. Naoko was involved in a romantic relationship with the recently widowed Gendo Ikari while working at Gehirn. However, after Rei I called her an "old hag" and said that Gendo himself called Naoko that frequently, she realized that he had merely been using her affections to ensure her performance for him. In a fit of rage, Naoko strangled Rei to death and then  committed suicide. Soon afterward, Gehirn was disbanded and the organization Nerv was formed in its place. In vol. 10 of the manga, Naoko is shown to commit suicide after killing Rei I. Ritsuko witnesses both Rei's murder and Naoko's suicide. 

Yui Ikari

 was a student of genetic engineering at Kyoto University, where she met her future husband Gendo and her mentor and trusted friend Kozo Fuyutsuki. Afterwards, she joined the UN Artificial Evolution Laboratory (the future Gehirn) in Hakone, Japan, and played an integral role in the E Project. She served as the test subject for the Contact Experiment of Unit 01 in 2004, but "disappeared" during testing. Though proclaimed dead, a part of her (her "soul") lives on within Unit 01.Evangelion, episode 20

Kyoko Zeppelin Soryu

, Asuka's mother, was a key scientist in the German division of Gehirn (what would later become Nerv's Third Branch) and the development of Unit 02, the first Production Type (the second and third of which were later produced by the two American branches of Nerv). She was the subject of the Contact Experiment with Unit 02, but during the experiment her soul bonded with the EVA, causing severe mental damage to Kyoko. She became mentally unstable, believing that one of Asuka's dolls was her daughter. She was admitted to a mental institution shortly after the experiment. Her husband had an affair with Kyoko's own doctor, which eventually prompted Kyoko's suicide in 2005.
In the manga version, Kyoko and her husband were unable to conceive a child, and divorced after he had an affair. He remarried and had a daughter, while Kyoko visited a sperm bank and became pregnant. She tried to poison Asuka to spite her ex-husband and his other child, referring to Asuka coldly as "that girl." At one point, Kyoko tried to strangle Asuka. After the failed contact experiment, her violence was instead transferred to Asuka's doll, as she was clearly in a dissociative state from the trauma. In the Rebuild of Evangelion movies, however, her story is omitted.
According to Anno's notes on the origins of his characters' names, 

WILL-E Staff

A new fictional organization, introduced with five new characters in Evangelion: 3.0 You Can (Not) Redo, as a successor to NERV and with the goal to destroy NERV's EVA units.  The organization is led by Misato Katsuragi and includes most of NERV's adult staff, with the notable exclusions of Gendo and Fuyutsuki.

Sakura Suzuhara

A Second Lieutenant and the first member of WILL-E, Sakura is Touji's younger sister.

Kohji Takao

The second member of WILL-E.

Sumire Nagara

The third member of WILL-E.

Hideki Tama

The fourth member of WILL-E.

Midori Kitakami

The fifth member of WILL-E.

Other characters

Evangelions

Angels

Keel Lorenz

 is the leader of Seele, represented as Seele 01 in the monoliths and the main antagonist of the series. Among his most defining characteristics are his ancient appearance and the futuristic visor that he wears throughout the series. Little is revealed about him in the series, but he is believed to hold great political power in the UN. At some time between Second Impact and 2015, most of his body below the neck was replaced with cybernetic implants. Although he uses his visor to see, production drawings show that he still has eyes. The inspiration for his name (and, arguably, his character) originates from Konrad Lorenz, a zoologist known especially for his research on animal psychology. In the manga, his name is given as Lorenz Kiel.

Kensuke Aida

 is an otaku, a military buff, Toji's best friend, and one of the "Other Children," Eva pilot candidates in the same class as Shinji, Toji, Rei, Asuka, and Hikari. His hobbies include camping in the mountains surrounding Tokyo-3 and playing at simulated war reenacting - by himself. Kensuke solidifies his friendship with Shinji after Shinji saves him and Toji during the fight against the fourth Angel, Shamshel. Kensuke dreams of becoming an Eva pilot and ceaselessly begs Shinji to pull strings in Nerv so he can be selected as a pilot, despite Shinji telling him that he has no say in the matter. He also seems oblivious to the intense physical and psychological distress endured by Eva pilots. Nevertheless, Kensuke enjoys the privileges of being the friend of an Eva pilot. Like Toji, Kensuke has a crush on Misato Katsuragi. He is rarely seen without his camcorder at hand. In the PS2 Battle Orchestra game, Kensuke is the appointed pilot to the EVA Unit 04, wearing a green plugsuit.

Hikari Horaki

 is the class representative of the class that Shinji and the other Eva pilots attend. She has a by-the-book demeanor and takes her responsibilities as "class rep" seriously. Although she frequently bickers with Toji, she reveals to Asuka that she has an enormous crush on Toji but is unable to openly express her feelings to him. She also appears to be Asuka's only friend. Hikari is an accomplished cook who appears to take care of her two sisters. Like presumably every one of Shinji's classmates, Hikari's mother is dead. However, no references were ever made as to whether her father is, either. Her given name, and that of her unseen younger sister, Nozomi, and elder sister, Kodama, is also in reference to the names of the trains of the Tokaido Shinkansen line. In a Gainax artwork picture she is shown in an orange plugsuit as the pilot for EVA Unit-05.majhost.jpg She is also featured in a live action deleted scene in The End of Evangelion.

Pen Pen

 is a "hot spring penguin" and Misato's pet. He appears to be modeled after a crested penguin with some minor coloration change. He lives in a custom refrigerator in Misato's apartment, enjoys taking warm baths, eating whatever food he can get, and going to hot springs. He also appears to have a relatively high degree of intelligence, as he is also shown watching TV and reading newspapers. In the manga, he is the result of a genetics experiment at Misato's former workplace, and she adopted him after the experiment's conclusion rather than let him be euthanised. His wingtips have retractable claws, which modern birds do not have.Pen Pen Information and image (Japanese)

Mana Kirishima

Girlfriend of Steel Official Gainax page (Japanese) is the main focus of Girlfriend of Steel, a game that is like an episode of the series. She appears as a transfer student at the Children's school, and becomes the focus of Shinji's interest and Asuka's jealous ire. She is the pilot of another man-made replacement for the Evas, the Trident, whose combat skills are somewhat more on par with the Evangelions', to whom they bear a resemblance in design compared to the Jet Alone robot. She also appears in Shinji Ikari Raising Project. Like many Evangelion characters, Mana's family name, Kirishima, is taken from a World War II battleship.[ref]
</ref>
A shy female character, Mana Kirishima, starts at Shinji Ikari's school and immediately admits to finding him cute. Gradually, a relationship unfolds and they end up going on a date where they kiss. It turns out, however, that she is one of three test pilots of TRIDENT, a new competitor to the Evangelions, similar to Jet Alone (thus the name "Girlfriend of Steel"). Eventually, the other robot goes berserk and the Evas have to destroy it. Throughout the game, Asuka is constantly jealous of Shinji and Mana's relationship, consistent with her widely speculated romantic feelings for Shinji. Rei is present but plays a rather background role in the story.

Other characters from Girlfriend of Steel

These two boys are test pilots for the Trident alongside Mana Kirishima.

Mayumi Yamagishi

Mayumi Yamagishi Cover of Neon Genesis Evangelion 2nd Impression, featuring Mayumi Yamagishi (to Shinji's right) is the new character introduced in the Sega Saturn game Evangelion 2nd Impression. In the game, Mayumi is a bespectacled bookworm who somehow has the core of an Angel inside her body. She joins Shinji's class and befriends him, and like many of the Evangelion cast, has a dark history (her mother apparently committed suicide while Mayumi was a girl, much like Asuka's mother).

Miscellaneous Nerv technicians

In both the game and manga of , three new female Nerv technicians are introduced:

Reception

The character designs by Yoshiyuki Sadamoto have also contributed to the popularity of Evangelion. Sadamoto's attractive designs of the three main female leads, Asuka, Rei and Misato, led to extremely high sales of merchandise"The release in October 1995 of Neon Genesis Evangelion on Japanese TV ignited a boom in merchandise unprecedented in a country already awash with such goods. As if overnight, well over 600 different items were made to commemorate the event. Figures were the most popular, with the inimitable bandaged Rei outselling all else. The Eva girls, kitted out in swimwear and striking suggestive poses, were, overall, a huge success, and things went a bit too far…" pg 126 of Fujie 2004. See also: "Arguably, it is because of Anno's dictates on design that few Evangelion toys were initially made. But figures of Rei, in all her bandaged beauty, sold like wild fire. This is probably the first and only example of an animated  series where reproductions of the human characters outsold those of the robots." pg 98. (especially of Rei, the "Premium Girl""Rei's popularity soared in Japan, with books featuring her image on the cover selling like hot cakes. She was christened by the media, "The girl who manipulates magazine sales at will", "The fastest route to the sold-out sign!" And even, "The Premium Girl."" pg 39 of Fujie 2004), and they have been immortalized in the dōjinshi community,; see also Hiroki Azuma

Animage: Anime Grand Prix awards

The various characters of Neon Genesis Evangelion have been occasionally awarded placement in the Anime Grand Prix, an annual reader's choice award contest hosted by Animage magazine.

=19th Annual Anime Grand Prix (1996)=

The following results were published in Animage (June, 1996), volume 228, shortly after the conclusion of the original broadcast.






