[[Evo Morales]]

CATEGORIES: Evo Morales, 1959 births, Bolivian people of Aymara descent, Bolivian Roman Catholics, Bolivian socialists, Democratic socialism, Democratic socialists, Incan politicians, Living people, Movement for Socialism – Political Instrument for the Sovereignty of the Peoples politicians, People from Oruro Department, Presidents of Bolivia

Juan Evo Morales Ayma, (born October 26, 1959), popularly known as Evo (), is a Bolivian cocalero activist and politician, who has served as President of Bolivia since 2006. Widely regarded as the country's first democratically-elected President to come from the indigenous population, his administration has focused on the implementation of leftist policies, poverty reduction, and combating the influence of the United States and transnational corporations in Bolivia. A democratic socialist, he is the head of the Movement for Socialism (MAS) political party.
Born to an Aymara family of subsistence farmers in Isallawi, Orinoca Canton, Morales undertook a basic education before mandatory military service, in 1978 moving to Chapare Province. Growing coca and becoming a trade unionist, he rose to prominence in the campesino (rural laborers) union, campaigning against U.S. and Bolivian attempts to eradicate coca as a part of the War on Drugs. Often taking direct action against the government, he was arrested on multiple occasions. Entering electoral politics in 1995, he became the leader of the MAS, and began a campaign focusing on issues affecting indigenous and poor communities, advocating land reform and the redistribution of gas wealth. Gaining increasing visibility through the Cochabamba protests and gas conflict, in 2002 he was expelled from Congress, though came second in that year's presidential election.
Elected president in 2005, Morales oversaw increased taxation on the hydrocarbons industry, agrarian reform, and a program of literacy, anti-poverty, and anti-racism campaigns. He scaled back U.S. involvement in Bolivia while building relationships with other nations in the Latin American Pink Tide and joining the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas. Attempting to moderate the left-indigenous activist community, his administration also opposed the right-wing autonomist demands of the media luna. Winning a recall referendum in 2008, he instituted a new constitution before being re-elected with a landslide in 2009, furthering leftist policies and joining the Bank of the South and Community of Latin American and Caribbean States. He is seeking reelection in the 2014 general election.
Morales is a controversial and divisive world figure, lauded by his supporters as a champion of indigenous rights, anti-imperialism, and environmentalism. Leftist critics have condemned him for failing to implement socialism, while rightist critics have accused him of being authoritarian in suppressing eastern Bolivia's autonomist movements.

Early life and activism

Childhood, education and military service: 1959–78


Morales was born in the small rural village of Isallawi in Orinoca Canton, part of western Bolivia's Oruro Department, on 26 October 1959.
Morales's family were farmers and from an early age he aided them in planting and harvesting crops and guarding their herd of llamas and sheep, taking a homemade soccer ball to amuse himself.
After finishing primary education, Morales attended the Agrarian Humanistic Technical Institute of Orinoca (ITAHO), completing all but the final year.

Early cocalero activism: 1978–83

Following his military service, Evo returned to his family, who had escaped the agricultural devastation of 1980's El Niño storm cycle by relocating to the Tropics of Cochabamba in the eastern lowlands.
In El Chapare, Morales joined a trade union of cocalero (coca growers), being appointed local Secretary of Sports. Organizing soccer tournaments, among union members he earned the nickname of "the young ball player" because of his tendency to organize matches during meeting recesses.
Fighting their War on Drugs, the U.S. government hoped to stem the cocaine trade by preventing the production of coca; they pressured the Bolivian government to eradicate it, sending troops to Bolivia to aid the operation.

General Secretary of the Cocalero Union: 1984–94

From 1984 to 1985 Morales served as Secretary of Records for the movement,
From 1984 to 1991 the sindicatos embarked on a series of protests against the forced eradication of coca, occupying local government offices, setting up roadblocks, going on hunger strike, and organizing mass marches and demonstrations.
In his speeches, Morales presented the coca leaf as a symbol of Andean culture that was under threat from the imperialist oppression of the U.S. In his view, the U.S. should deal with their domestic cocaine abuse problems without interfering in Bolivia, arguing that they had no right trying to eliminate coca, a legitimate product with many uses which played a rich role in Andean culture.
Morales presented the coca growers as victims of a wealthy, urban social elite, who had bowed to U.S. pressure in implementing neoliberal economic reforms to the detriment of the majority of Bolivians, in this way arguing that the representative democratic system in Bolivia failed to reflect the true democratic will of the majority.
In August 1994 Morales was arrested; reporters present documented that he was beaten and accosted with racial slurs by civil agents. Accused of sedition, in jail he began a dry hunger strike to protest his arrest.

Political Rise

The ASP, IPSP, and MAS: 1995–99

Members of the sindicato social movement first suggested a move into the political arena in 1986. This proved controversial, as meany feared that the social movement would be co-opted for personal gain by politicians, who were widely mistrusted by the activists.
Nonetheless, the National Electoral Court (Corte Nacional Electoral - CNE) refused to recognize the ASP, citing minor procedural infringements.
Rising electoral success was accompanied by factional in-fighting, with a leadership contest emerging in the ASP between the incumbent Alejo Véliz and Evo Morales, who had the electoral backing of the social movement's bases.
Morales came to an agreement with David Añez Pedraza, the leader of a defunct yet still registered party named the Movement for Socialism (MAS); under this agreement, Morales and the Six Federaciónes could take over the party name, with Pendraza stipulating the condition that they must maintain its own acronym, name and colors. Thus the defunct right wing MAS became the flourishing left wing vehicle for the coca activist movement known as the Movement for Socialism – Political Instrument for the Sovereignty of the Peoples.
In the December 1999 municipal elections, the MAS secured 79 municipal council seats and 10 mayoral positions, gaining 3.27% of the national vote, although 70% of the vote in Cochabamba.

Cochabamba protests: 2000–02

In 2000, protests against the privatization of water facilities in Cochabamba broke out, resulting in the Water War. The Tunari Waters corporation had doubled the price of water, resulting in a backlash from activist groups, among them the cocalero movement, who fought with police and the armed forces, resulting in 6 dead and 175 wounded. The violence led the government to remove the contract from Tunari and appoint a cooperative to control the utility instead.
Morales had not taken a leading role in these protests, but did use them to get across his message that the MAS was not a single-issue party, and that rather than simply fighting for the rights of the cocalero it was arguing for structural change to the political system and a redefinition of citizenship in Bolivia.
In August 2001, Banzer resigned due to terminal illness, and Jorge Quiroga took over as President.
The MAS gained increasing popularity as a protest party, relying largely on widespread dissatisfaction with the existing mainstream political parties among Bolivians living in rural and poor urban areas.
Morales was now the leader of the political opposition, although largely protested against government policies rather than suggesting alternatives.

Rise to power: 2003–05

In 2003, the Bolivian gas conflict broke out as activists – including coca growers – protested against the privatization of the country's natural gas supply and its sale to the U.S. below the market value. Activists blocked off the road into La Paz, resulting in clashes with police. 80 were killed and 411 injured, among them officers, activists, and civilians, including children.
Morales led calls for President Sánchez de Lozada to step down over the death toll, gaining widespread support not only from the MAS, other activist groups, and the middle-classes; with pressure building, Sánchez resigned and fled to Miami, Florida.
In March 2005, Mesa resigned, citing the pressure of Morales and the cocalero road blocks and riots.
With a turnout of 84.5%, the election saw Morales gain 53.7% of the vote, while Quiroga came second with 28.6%; Morales' was the first victory with an absolute majority in Bolivia for 40 years.

Presidency

First presidential term: 2006–09


Morales' inauguration took place on January 22 in La Paz. It was attended by various heads of state, including Kirchner, Chávez, Brazil's Lula da Silva, and Chile's Ricardo Lagos.

=Economic and social issues=

In their National Development Plan (PDN) for 2006–10, Morales' government adhered largely to the country's previous liberal economic model.
Bolivia had South America's second largest reserves of natural gas, a major component of its economy.
Upon his election, Bolivia had an illiteracy rate of 16%, with Morales enlisting the aid of Cuba and Venezuela to eradicate the problem; Cuba helped Morales' government launch a literacy campaign, while Venezuela invited 5000 Bolivian high school graduates to study in Venezuela for free.
Morales' government increased the legal minimum wage by 50%,
Morales' administration ensured the legality of coca growing, but also introduced measures to regulate the production and trade of the crop. Measures were implemented to ensure the industrialization of coca production, with Morales inaugurating the first coca industrialization plant in Chulumani, which produced and packaged coca and trimate tea; its creation was funded largely by Venezuela, who had donated $125,000 under the People's Trade Agreement.
Morales announced that one of the top priorities of his government was to eliminate racism against the country's indigenous population.
Conversely, the opposition accused Morales' administration of aggravating racial tensions between indigenous, white, and mestizo populations,

=Foreign visits=

Morales' government sought to build strong links with the hard left governments of Cuba and Venezuela.
In December 2006, he attended the first South-South conference in Abuja, Nigeria, there meeting Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi, whose government had recently awarded Morales the Al-Gaddafi International Prize for Human Rights.

=Domestic unrest and the new Constitution=

During his presidential campaign, Morales had supported calls for regional autonomy for Bolivia's departments. As president, he changed his position, viewing the calls for autonomy – which came from Bolivia's four eastern departments of Santa Cruz, Beni, Pando, and Tarija – as an attempt for the wealthy bourgeoisie living in these regions to preserve their economic position.
In July 2006, an election to form a Constitutional Assembly was held, with MAS winning 137 of the 155 seats in the new Assembly, which was inaugurated in August.
In May 2008, the eastern departments pushed for greater autonomy, but Morales' government rejected the legitimacy of their position.
Unrest then broke out across Eastern Bolivia, as increasingly radicalized autonomist activists set-up blockades, occupied airports, attacked pro-government demonstrations, police, and armed forces, as well as bombing state companies, indigenous NGOs, and human rights organisations, and launching armed racist attacks on indigenous communities, culminating in the Pando Massacre of MAS activists.
In September 2008, Morales accused the U.S. ambassador to Bolivia, Philip Goldberg, of "conspiring against democracy" and encouraging civil unrest, ordering him to leave the country.
Although unable to quell the autonomist violence, Morales' government refused to declare a state of emergency, believing that the opposition was attempting to provoke them into doing so.
Instead, they decided to compromise, entering into talks with the parliamentary opposition. As a result, 100 of the 411 elements of the Constitution were changed, with both sides compromising on certain issues.
Following the approval of the new Constitution, the 2009 general election was called. The opposition sought to delay the election by demanding a new biometric registry system, hoping that it would give them time to form a united front against MAS. 
In response to his victory, Morales proclaimed that he was "obligated to accelerate the pace of change and deepen socialism" in Bolivia, seeing his re-election as a mandate to further his reforms.

Second presidential term: 2009–14

During his second term, Morales began to speak openly of "communitarian socialism" as the ideology that he desired for Bolivia's future.
In April 2010, the departmental elections saw further gains for MAS.
Following the victory of Barack Obama and the Democratic Party in the 2008 U.S. presidential election, relations between Bolivia and the U.S. improved, although remained strained. After the U.S. backed the 2011 military intervention in Libya by NATO forces, Morales condemned Obama, calling for his Nobel Peace Prize to be revoked. In November 2011, the Bolivian and U.S. governments agreed to restore diplomatic relations,BBC News 2011a. although Morales refused to allow U.S. agents of the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) back into the country.
In 2010, the World's People Conference on Climate Change and the Rights of Mother Earth was held in Cochabamba, at which Morales blamed capitalism for environmental degradation.

=Protests=

In May 2010, Morales' government announced a 5% rise in the minimum wage. The Bolivian Workers' Central (COB) dealt this insufficient given the rise in the cost of living, and called a general strike. Protesters clashed with police, although the government refused to increase the rise, accusing protesters of being pawns of the right.
Bolivia faced national protests after the announcement of a supreme decree to cut government subsidies for gasoline and diesel fuels, increasing the prices of those commodities on December 28, 2010. The measures triggered widespread protests throughout the country, among groups including Morales's own political base.
He also faced protests in 2011 from indigenous groups for his plan to build a highway through the Amazon Basin that would encroach on the tribal lands of lowland indigenous tribes. He responded to the protests by initially calling them American lackeys, but later acceded to holding a referendum on the matter. A government crackdown later led to the resignation of his Defense Minister María Chacon.
In August 2011, police violence on peaceful protesters became international news. Morales denied giving the police the order to attack the protesters, but the event tarnished his approval ratings. He issued a public apology and continued to claim the officers acted on their own.

=July 2013 flight diversion=

On 2 July 2013, Bolivia's foreign minister said that the diversion of Morales's presidential plane (FAB-001, a Dassault Falcon 900EX), when Portuguese, French, Spanish and Italian authorities denied access to their airspace due to suspicions that Edward Snowden was on board the aircraft, had put the president's life at risk."Bolivia: Presidential plane forced to land after false rumors of Snowden onboard." France apologized for the incident the next day."France apologises to Bolivia over jet row." The presidents of Argentina, Ecuador, Suriname, Uruguay and Venezuela, Morales's political allies in the region, gathered to demand an explanation of the incident."Bolivia Threatens U.S. Embassy Closing After Snowden Search."

Political ideology


Figures in the Morales government have described the President's approach to politics as "Evoism" or "Evismo".
Economically, Morales' policies have sometimes been termed "Evonomics" and have focused on creating a mixed economy.
Morales' presidential discourse has revolved around distinguishing between "the people", of whom he sees himself as a representative, and the oppressive socio-economic elite and the old political class, whom he believes have mistreated "the people" for centuries.
Various far left figures have argued against categorizing the Morales administration as socialist. Bolivia's Marxist Vice President Álvaro García Linera asserts that Bolivia lacks the sufficiently large industrialized working class, or proletariat, to enable it to convert into a socialist society in the Marxist understanding of the word. Instead, he terms the government's approach "Andean and Amazonian capitalism".

Personal life

Morales identifies as ethnically Aymara, and has been widely described as Bolivia's first democratically-elected President from the indigenous majority. Although Morales has sometimes been described as the first indigenous president to be democratically elected in Latin America, this description in fact goes to Benito Juarez, a Mexican of the Zapotec ethnic group, who was elected President of Mexico in 1858.
Morales is un-married and, before the election, shared a flat with other MAS officers. Consequently, his older sister, Esther Morales Ayma, fulfills the role of First Lady. He has two children from different mothers, Eva Liz Morales Alvarado and Álvaro Morales Paredes; politician Juan del Granado is Eva Liz's godfather.
Morales's unorthodox behavior contrasts with the usual manners of dignitaries and other political leaders in Latin America. For example, on taking the presidency he cut his salary by 57%.

Influence and legacy

Morales' government has been seen as part of the pink tide of left-leaning Latin American governments, becoming particularly associated with the hard left current of Venezuela and Cuba.
Opposition to Morales' governance has centered in the wealthy eastern lowland province of Santa Cruz. His policies often antagonized middle-class Bolivians, who deemed them too radical and argued that they threatened private property. Morales' discourse of "the people" against the socio-economic elites has led to a deep social polarization in Bolivia.
Some analysts and human rights organizations have stated that many of the actions and policies of his government have eroded the rule of law and threaten to weaken the situation of human rights in Bolivia.



Footnotes

Bibliography



|-



