[[Canada Act 1982]]

CATEGORIES: 1982 in law, 1982 in Canada, Constitution of Canada, Political history of Quebec, United Kingdom Acts of Parliament 1982, 1982 in international relations, Acts of the Parliament of the United Kingdom concerning Canada, Canada–United Kingdom relations

The Canada Act 1982 (1982 c. 11) is an Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom that was passed at the request of the Canadian federal government to "patriate" Canada's constitution, ending the necessity for the country to request certain types of amendment to the Constitution of Canada to be made by the British parliament.  The Act also formally ended the "request and consent" provisions of the Statute of Westminster 1931 in relation to Canada, whereby the British parliament had a general power to pass laws extending to Canada at its own request.
Annexed as Schedule B to the Act is the text of the Constitution Act, 1982, in both of Canada's official languages (i.e. English and French).  Because of the requirements of official bilingualism, the body of the Canada Act itself is also set out in French in Schedule A to the Act, which is declared by s. 3 to have "the same authority in Canada as the English version thereof". 3.  As a result, the Canada Act is the only British legislation forming a part of the Constitution of Canada that has an official text in both languages, rather than just in English. It is also the only law passed by the British legislature in French since the Middle Ages.

History

Canada's political history began with the British North America Act, 1867 (currently officially called the Constitution Act, 1867). This act created the modern state of Canada by combining the Province of Canada (now Ontario and Quebec), Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick into a dominion within the British Empire. From this Canada adopted a Westminster style government with a Parliament of Canada. A Governor General fulfilled the constitutional duties of the British Sovereign on Canadian soil.
Despite this, the United Kingdom still had the power to legislate for Canada. The Statute of Westminster 1931 removed this power of the British Parliament for Canada,

Enactment of the Act

The Canada Act was the last request of the Canadian government to amend the country's constitution.
Aside from some objections from British MPs who protested Canada's past mistreatment of Quebec and Aboriginal peoples (as recalled with frustration by Jean Chrétien in his memoirs Straight from the Heart), there was little opposition from the British government to passing the Act.  However, new research into documents of the Thatcher government indicate that Britain had serious concerns about the inclusion of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms within the Canada Act.  Part of this concern stemmed from letters of protest the British received about it from provincial actors, but also because the Charter undermined the principle of parliamentary supremacy, which until that time had always been a core feature of every government practicing the Westminster system.  [ref]Frédéric Bastien. 2010. ―Britain, the Charter of Rights and the spirit of the 1982 Canadian 
Constitution.‖ Commonwealth & Comparative Politics 48 (3): 320–347.[/ref] 
Through section 2 of the Canada Act 1982, the United Kingdom ended its involvement with further amendments to the Canadian constitution.

Proclamation by the Queen of Canada

While the Canada Act 1982 received royal assent on March 29, 1982 in London, it was not until the Queen came to Canada that the Constitution Act, 1982, its Canadian equivalent, was proclaimed by letters patent as a statutory instrument by the Queen during her presence in Canada.
The Constitution Act, 1982 was signed into law by Elizabeth II as Queen of Canada on April 17, 1982 on Parliament Hill in Ottawa. Queen Elizabeth's constitutional powers over Canada were not affected by the Act, and she remains Queen and Head of State of Canada.








