[[Murs (rapper)]]

CATEGORIES: Warner Bros. Records artists, Underground rappers, African-American male rappers, Rappers from Los Angeles, California, 1978 births, Living people, West Coast hip hop musicians, African-American songwriters, Songwriters from California

Nick Carter (born March 16, 1978), better known by his stage name Murs, is an American rapper. His name is an acronym (or backronym) that he himself has created multiple meanings for such as "Making the Universe Recognize and Submit" or "Making Underground Raw Shit."
Murs is a member of hip hop groups such as Living Legends along with Luckyiam, Sunspot Jonz, The Grouch, Scarub, Eligh, Aesop, Bicasso and Arata, 
On June 11, 2013, Murs released an album as lead vocalist of a band called The White Mandingos. The album is titled The Ghetto is Tryna Kill Me. "The White Mandingos: Music That Defies Definition". National Public Radio.

Career

Murs formed 3 Melancholy Gypsys with fellow Alexander Hamilton High School classmates Scarub and Eligh.
Murs has worked with Slug under the name Felt since 2002.
Murs released Varsity Blues 2, a follow-up to his Varsity Blues EP, with production duties handled by Aesop Rock, Terrace Martin and Droop-E in 2011.
Murs was invited by Sacha Jenkins, a hip hop journalist, to join the group The White Mandingos, a collaboration between Jenkins and Bad Brains bassist Daryl Jenifer. "The White Mandingos Analyze Adam Yauch's Role In Their Formation". Hip Hop DX. They released their first album, The Ghetto is Tryna Kill Me, on June 11, 2013 under the Fat Beats record label. "Murs and New Group "The White Mandingos" Announce New Concept Album". All Hip Hop. Murs has stated that the recording is a loose concept album about a man from "the hood" who struggles to maintain his identity while recording as a rock artist. The band members have acknowledged that the album is partially based on their own experiences.
On February 7, 2014, it was announced via Tech N9ne's Facebook page that Murs was signed to his record label Strange Music.xxlmag.com/news/2014/02/murs-signs-tech-n9ne-strange-music/

Discography

Solo albums

Collaborative albums

EPs

Singles

Mixtapes

Compilations

DVDs

Guest appearances

Video game appearances






