[[Murdoch University]]

CATEGORIES: Chiropractic schools, Murdoch University, Universities in Western Australia, Educational institutions established in 1973, Education in Perth, Western Australia, 1973 establishments in Australia

Murdoch University is a public university based in Perth, Western Australia. It began operations as the state's second university in 1973, and accepted its first students in 1975. Its name is taken from Sir Walter Murdoch (1874–1970), the Founding Professor of English and former Chancellor of the University of Western Australia.

Rankings

According to the Times Higher Education Supplement 2013, Murdoch University was ranked within the top 301–350 universities worldwide.

Strengths and affiliations

Murdoch University is a research intensive institution and a member of Innovative Research Universities Australia (IRU Australia).
According to The Australian newspaper ("What makes a good school of journalism"), The Graduate Careers Council of Australia found that Murdoch journalism graduates rated satisfaction with their course at a level within the top five nationally.
Murdoch University is the founder of the ACICIS (Australian Consortium for 'In-Country' Indonesian Studies) Study Indonesia program, a non-profit consortium of Australian universities that was established in 1994 to coordinate semester-long study programs at partner universities in Yogyakarta and Malang in Indonesia, for Australian university students.

Student demographics

Murdoch University is home to over 18,500 students including 3,000 international students from over 100 countries.
Murdoch University partners with other educational institutions, such as KDU University College in Malaysia, to provide university degrees to off-shore students.
Murdoch University has an international offshore campus in Singapore. It is known as Murdoch University International Study Centre Singapore.
In November 2008 H.E. Sheikh Nahayan Bin Murbarak Al Nahayan (Minister of Higher Education and Research) opened the Murdoch International Study Centre in Dubai, United Arab Emirates.

Faculties and schools

There are four faculties and fourteen schools at Murdoch University: 

Asia Research Centre

The Asia Research Centre, founded in 1991, produces multi-disciplinary research in politics, political economy, modes of governance, social change and policy making. Its distinctive contribution to the research debate is based on the proposition that these factors have their roots in broader processes of conflict and change in society that are connected to the advance of market economies.murdoch.au/about.html
The Centre encompasses researchers from across Murdoch University. It also regularly engages in collaboration with researchers from other universities around the world.
The Director of Asia Research Centre is Associate Professor Caroline Hughes, Associate Professor of Governance Studies in the School of Social Sciences and Humanities.

Campuses

Murdoch University has three Australian campuses: South Street Campus, Rockingham Campus, and Peel Campus.

South Street

The main campus is on South Street, Perth, in the suburb of Murdoch, near the Kwinana Freeway ( Most of the southern part of the university consists of paddocks of livestock, farms and renewable energy facilities.
The original group of buildings surround an open court, known as "Bush Court", in the northern part of Murdoch campus, which rises to the highest altitude on campus. Features of the campus include the Chinese garden and the Joglo Rahayu (Peace Pavilion), a semi-enclosed pavilion near the Education and Humanities building. A monument to the ongoing association between Murdoch University and Indonesian academic institutions in Java, it acts as storage for the Western Australian Gamelan Orchestra.

Rockingham Campus

The Rockingham Campus is located ). Opened in 1996, it is co-located with Rockingham Challenger Institute of Technology campus, and features an arts and commerce building.

=Rockingham Regional Campus Community Library=

Rockingham Regional Campus Community Library, located at the Rockingham Campus, is a joint venture between the university, the City of Rockingham and Challenger Institute of Technology. Members of all of these groups have free access to library membership.
Membership entitles all patrons to access to Challenger Institute of Technology, university and public library resources at Rockingham.

Peel Campus

The Peel Campus is located ). Opened in 2004, it is the home of the School of Nursing and Midwifery. Murdoch University shares the campus with Challenger Institute and Mandurah Senior College.

International Study Centres

Murdoch University in Dubai

Murdoch University Dubai is a Branch Campus of Murdoch University in Perth, Western Australia.
The campus was established in 2008 in Dubai International Academic City to cater for the expanding Dubai Media and Financial sectors, and support Dubai's ambitions in providing an ongoing reserve of regional graduates connected to the demands of the region's booming industries.

Murdoch University International Study Centre Singapore

The Murdoch University International Study Centre (MUISC) in Singapore was officially opened in June 2008 by Australian High Commissioner Mr Miles Kupa.

Feeder institutions

Murdoch College

On the north east corner of the South Street campus, Murdoch College was established by the university and the Alexander Education Group in 2000 to cater for secondary students in a university environment and to enrich their academic, social and personal potential.

Notable faculty and alumni







 
 
 

