[[Melatonin]]

CATEGORIES: Antioxidants, Circadian rhythm, Hormones of the pineal gland, Tryptamine alkaloids, Treatment of bipolar disorder, Acetamides, Phenol ethers, Drugs acting on the nervous system

Melatonin 
Many biological effects of melatonin are produced through activation of melatonin receptors,
The full effects of long-term exogenous supplementation in humans have not yet been ascertained.

Plants

Melatonin has been identified in many plants including feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium), St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum), rice, corn, tomato and other edible fruits.
Melatonin has been reported in foodstuffs including cherries to about 0.17–13.46 ng/g, and beer.
When birds ingest melatonin-rich plant feed, such as rice, the melatonin binds to melatonin receptors in their brains.

Animals

Many animals use the variation in duration of melatonin production each day as a seasonal clock.
In mammals, melatonin is biosynthesized in four enzymatic steps from the essential dietary amino acid tryptophan, with serotonin produced at the third step. Melatonin is secreted into the blood by the pineal gland in the brain.  Known as the "hormone of darkness," it is secreted in darkness in both day-active (diurnal) and night-active (nocturnal) animals. It may also be produced by a variety of peripheral cells such as bone marrow cells, lymphocytes, and epithelial cells. Usually, the melatonin concentration in these cells is much higher than that found in the blood, but it does not seem to be regulated by the photoperiod.

Mammals

Melatonin, produced in the pineal gland which is outside of the blood–brain barrier, acts as an endocrine hormone since it is released into the blood.
Melatonin can suppress libido by inhibiting secretion of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) from the anterior pituitary gland, especially in mammals that have a breeding season when daylight hours are long. The reproduction of long-day breeders is repressed by melatonin and the reproduction of short-day breeders is stimulated by melatonin.  During the night, melatonin regulates leptin, lowering its levels.
Light/dark information reaches the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) from retinal photosensitive ganglion cells, which are intrinsically photosensitive photoreceptor cells that are distinct from those involved in the primary (at least, from one point of view) image formation function of the eye (that is the rods and cones of the retina). These cells represent approximately 2% of all retinal ganglion cells in humans and express the photopigment melanopsin.
Melanopsin, often confused with melatonin because of its similar name, is structurally unrelated to the hormone. It is a conventional 7-transmembrane opsin protein with the usual vitamin A-like cis-retinal cofactor having a peak absorption at 484 nm, in the blue light part of the visible spectrum.

Humans

Circadian rhythm

In humans, melatonin is produced by the pineal gland, a small endocrine gland rather than the melatonin signal (as was once postulated).
Infants' melatonin levels become regular in about the third month after birth, with the highest levels measured between midnight and 8:00 AM.
In humans, 90% of melatonin is cleared in a single passage through the liver, a small amount is excreted in urine, and a small amount is found in saliva.
Human melatonin production decreases as a person ages.

=Light dependence=

Production of melatonin by the pineal gland is inhibited by light to the retina and permitted by darkness. Its onset each evening is called the dim-light melatonin onset (DLMO).
It is principally blue light, around 460 to 480 nm, that suppresses melatonin,
When used several hours before sleep according to the phase response curve for melatonin in humans, small amounts (0.3 mg) of melatonin shift the circadian clock earlier, thus promoting earlier sleep onset and morning awakening.

=Antioxidant=

Besides its function as synchronizer of the biological clock, melatonin is a powerful free-radical scavenger and wide-spectrum antioxidant as discovered in 1993.

Immune system

While it is known that melatonin interacts with the immune system,
In rheumatoid arthritis patients, melatonin production has been found increased when compared to age-matched healthy controls.

Dreaming

Some supplemental melatonin users report an increase in vivid dreaming. Extremely high doses of melatonin (50 mg) dramatically increased REM sleep time and dream activity in people both with and without narcolepsy. It has been suggested that nonpolar (lipid-soluble) indolic hallucinogenic drugs emulate melatonin activity in the awakened state and that both act on the same areas of the brain.

Autism

Melatonin might help people with intellectual disabilities such as autism spectrum disorders (ASD) get a good night's sleep.

Aging

Research has supported the anti-aging properties of melatonin. Younger children hit their peak melatonin production at night, and some researchers believe that the level of melatonin peaks earlier as people get older.
Some studies have shown that melatonin plays a crucial part in the aging process and that it may act as an anti-aging agent when administered to older mice. It has been reported in one study that administration of melatonin in elderly mice may reverse this change in expression of some 13 genes, thus making them similar to those of younger mice.

Diabetes

Single-nucleotide polymorphisms of the human melatonin MT2 receptor have been linked to an increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes.

Pediatrics

While the packaging of melatonin often warns against use in children, at least one long-term study does assess effectiveness and safety in children.  No serious safety concerns were noted in any of the 94 cases studied by means of a structured questionnaire for the parents.  With a mean follow-up time of 3.7 years, long-term medication was effective against sleep onset problems in 88% of the cases. Other studies warn against potential side effects

Medical uses

Melatonin has been studied as a potential treatment of gastroesophageal reflux disease,
A 2004 review found that melatonin significantly increased total sleep time in people suffering from sleep restriction.
For many types of sleep disorders, melatonin is not effective.  A 2006 review found that although it is safe for short term use (of three months or less), there is "no evidence that melatonin is effective in treating secondary sleep disorders or sleep disorders accompanying sleep restriction, such as jet lag and shiftwork disorder."
In a 2005 study, researchers concluded that while "there is some evidence to suggest that melatonin is effective in treating delayed sleep phase disorder (DSPD), there is evidence to suggest that melatonin is not effective in treating most primary sleep disorders with short-term use (4 weeks or less)."

Circadian rhythm disorders

Exogenous melatonin taken in the evening is, together with light therapy upon awakening, the standard treatment for delayed sleep phase disorder (DSPD) and non-24-hour sleep–wake disorder where circadian rhythms are not entrained to the environmental cycle.  It appears to have some use against other circadian rhythm sleep disorders as well, such as jet lag and the problems of people who work rotating or night shifts.  Melatonin reduces sleep onset latency to a greater extent in people with DSPD than in people with insomnia.
A very small dose taken several hours before bedtime in accordance with the phase response curve for melatonin in humans (PRC) doesn't cause sleepiness but, acting as a chronobiotic (affecting aspects of biological time structure),

Learning, memory and Alzheimer's

Melatonin receptors appear to be important in mechanisms of learning and memory in mice,
Melatonin has been shown to prevent the hyperphosphorylation of the tau protein in rats. Hyperphosphorylation of tau protein can also result in the formation of neurofibrillary tangles. Studies in rats suggest that melatonin may be effective for treating Alzheimer's disease. This may suggest a possible connection to melatonin production.

Delirium

A randomized placebo-controlled trial showed that low-dose melatonin supplementation to 72 elderly patients admitted to acute medicine services significantly reduced delirium.

Stimulants

Research shows that after melatonin is administered to ADHD patients on methylphenidate, the time needed to fall asleep is significantly reduced. Furthermore, the effects of the melatonin after three months showed no change from its effects after one week of use.

Headaches

Several clinical studies indicate that supplementation with melatonin is an effective preventive treatment for migraines and cluster headaches.

Mood disorders

Melatonin has been shown to be effective in treating seasonal affective disorder,

Cancer

A systematic review of unblinded clinical trials involving a total of 643 cancer patients using melatonin found a reduced incidence of death but that blinded and independently conducted randomized controlled trials are needed.

Gallbladder stones

Melatonin presence in the gallbladder has many protective properties, such as converting cholesterol to bile, preventing oxidative stress, and increasing the mobility of gallstones from the gallbladder.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

In animal models, melatonin has been shown to ameliorate glutamate-induced neuronal death, it is presumed due to its antioxidant effects. In a clinical safety study involving 31 ALS patients, high-dose rectal melatonin (300 mg/day for 2 years) was shown to be tolerated well.

Obesity

Melatonin is involved in energy metabolism and body weight control in small animals. Many studies show that chronic melatonin supplementation in drinking water reduces body weight and abdominal fat in experimental animals, especially in the middle-aged rats

Protection from radiation

Both animal

Tinnitus

Several medical studies involving adult patients indicate that melatonin can be beneficial in the treatment of tinnitus.

Other

Melatonin was used to treat periodic limb movement disorder, a common neurological condition, which, when severe, adversely affects sleep and causes excessive daytime fatigue, in a small trial conducted by Kunz D and Bes F.  In this condition, the sufferer is affected by mini arousals during sleep and limb movements that occur in a frequent rhythmic fashion.  This often involves leg kicking, but sometimes also involves arm movement.  Those affected are often not aware of the condition, and partners are often the first to notice the condition. 7 out of the 9 participants in the trial showed significant improvement.
In recent trial for use in irritable bowel syndrome treatment, melatonin relieved some symptoms, as published in 2010.
A research team in Italy has found that melatonin supplementation in the evening in perimenopausal women produces an improvement in thyroid function and gonadotropin levels, as well as restoring fertility and menstruation and preventing the depression associated with the menopause.

Adverse effects

Melatonin appears to cause very few side-effects in the short term, up to three months, when healthy people take it at low doses. A systematic review in 2006 looked specifically at efficacy and safety in two categories of melatonin usage: first, for sleep disturbances that are secondary to other diagnoses and, second, for sleep disorders such as jet lag and shift work that accompany sleep restriction.
The study concluded that "There is no evidence that melatonin is effective in treating secondary sleep disorders or sleep disorders accompanying sleep restriction, such as jet lag and shiftwork disorder. There is evidence that melatonin is safe with short term use".
A similar analysis by the same team a year earlier on the efficacy and safety of exogenous melatonin in the management of primary sleep disorders found that: "There is evidence to suggest that melatonin is safe with short-term use (3 months or less)."
Unwanted effects in some people may include nausea, next-day grogginess, irritability,
While no large, long-term studies that might reveal side-effects have been conducted, there do exist case reports about patients having taken melatonin for months.
Melatonin can cause somnolence (drowsiness), and, therefore, caution should be shown when driving, operating machinery, etc.
In individuals with auto-immune disorders, there is conflicting evidence whether melatonin supplementation may either ameliorate or exacerbate symptoms due to immunomodulation.
Individuals experiencing orthostatic intolerance, a cardiovascular condition that results in reduced blood pressure and blood flow to the brain when a person stands, may experience a worsening of symptoms when taking melatonin supplements, a study at Penn State College of Medicine's Milton S. Hershey Medical Center suggests. Melatonin can exacerbate symptoms by reducing nerve activity in those experiencing the condition, the study found.
Melatonin has been found to lower FSH levels.
Melatonin was thought to have a very low maternal toxicity in rats.
In animal models, interventions that increase the bioavailability of melatonin seem to increase the severity of parkinsonian symptoms,
whereas reduction in melatonin by pinealectomy or exposure to bright light can improve recovery from parkinsonisms symptoms.

Availability

Legal availability of melatonin varies in different countries, ranging from being available without prescription (e.g. in most of North America and Finland) to being available only on prescription (e.g. in the UK) or not at all (although its possession and use may not be illegal). It is widely available on the Internet.
The hormone may be administered orally, as capsules, tablets or liquid, sublingually, or as transdermal patches.
The use of melatonin derived from animal pineal tissue may carry the risk of contamination or the means of transmitting viral material. The synthetic form of this medication does not carry this risk.

Dietary supplement

In the US it is sold as a dietary supplement (sometimes combined with other ingredients, such as vitamins and herbal extracts) and not as a drug.  The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulations applying to medications are not applicable to melatonin. However, new FDA rules required that by June 2010 all production of dietary supplements must comply with "current good manufacturing practices" (cGMP) and be manufactured with "controls that result in a consistent product free of contamination, with accurate labeling."

Food products

As reported in the New York Times in May 2011,

Prolonged release

Melatonin is available as a prolonged-release prescription drug, trade-name Circadin, manufactured by Neurim Pharmaceuticals. The European Medicines Agency (EMA) has approved Circadin 2 mg (prolonged-release melatonin) for patients aged 55 or over, as monotherapy for the short-term treatment (up to 13 weeks) of primary insomnia characterized by poor quality of sleep.Medical News Today Circadin (Prolonged-Release Melatonin) For Primary Insomnia Recommended For Approval In The EU (27 Apr 2007)

History

Melatonin was first discovered in connection to the mechanism by which some amphibians and reptiles change the color of their skin.





Further reading




