[[Dee Dee Myers]]

CATEGORIES: 1961 births, Living people, White House Press Secretaries, Santa Clara University alumni, Clinton Administration personnel, People from North Kingstown, Rhode Island, CNBC people

Dee Dee Myers (born Margaret Jane Myers, September 1, 1961), a political analyst, was the White House Press Secretary during the first two years of the Clinton administration, from January 1993 to December 1994. She was the first woman and the second-youngest person to hold that position.
Myers later co-hosted the news program Equal Time on CNBC, and was a consultant on The West Wing. She was the inspiration for fictional White House Press Secretary C.J. Cregg. She is also the author of the 2008 New York Times best-selling book, Why Women Should Rule The World. In 2010, she became a managing director of public affairs at The Glover Park Group.

Personal life

Margaret Jane "Dee Dee" Myers was born in 1961 in Quonset Point, Rhode Island, to Stephen and Judy Myers. She spent most of her formative years in Valencia, California. Her father was a Navy pilot who completed two tours of duty in the Vietnam War, and her mother worked as a real estate agent.
She met her husband, Todd Purdum, the national editor for Vanity Fair, former White House correspondent, and Los Angeles bureau chief for the New York Times, during the 1992 presidential campaign. The couple married in 1997, have two children and live in Washington, D.C.

Political career

Myers' career in political communications began shortly after graduating college, taking a full-time role on the 1984 presidential campaign of Walter Mondale.

Clinton years

Myers joined Bill Clinton's presidential campaign team in 1991
According to the Detroit Free Press, Myers earned a reputation for her "humour and patience" in handling the White House press corps, often delivering "quick one-liners" while issuing daily press briefings.

Post-White House career

After the Clinton administration, she became a political analyst and commentator, appearing on television and speaking at events on politics and the media.

Television and popular culture

In May 1995, Myers became the co-host of political talk show Equal Time on CNBC. She hosted the show opposite Mary Matalin initially, and ABC's Nightline.
Writer Aaron Sorkin recruited Myers to serve as a consultant and script advisor on the Emmy Award-winning TV series The West Wing, beginning in 1999. The character of C. J. Cregg (played by Allison Janney), the White House Press Secretary on the series, was partially inspired by Myers.

Commentator

Myers has contributed to Vanity Fair since July 1995, originally as a Washington editor, and since 1997 as a contributing editor. In 2011, she became a brand ambassador for Jones New York's Empower your Confidence campaign, and appeared as a model in advertisements for the brand.

Public affairs consulting

Myers joined the Glover Park Group in September 2010, as a managing director of public affairs.






