[[Gnjilane]]

CATEGORIES: Municipalities of Kosovo, Populated places in Kosovo, Cities in Kosovo

Gnjilane or Gjilan (

Geography

Gnjilane is located in the southern Binačka Morava river basin (Binačko Pomoravlje).

History

Middle Ages and Ottoman period

In 1342, a place called Morava was visited by Serbian King Stefan Dušan (later Emperor, r. 1331-1355). 126 

Modern history

In 1915, in and around the city, the Serbian army made a futile stand against the 1st Army of Bulgaria, during the World War I Battle of Kosovo. That battle resulted in the ultimate defeat of the Serbian military, and the occupation by the forces allied with the then German Empire.
In World War II there was a significant amount of activity in and around Gnjilane by the Partisans fighting against Nazi Germany and her allies. Monuments to these actions can still be found today, one of which is located in the middle of the village of Koretište.
In 1999, Camp Monteith was established outside the city as a base of operations for KFOR during Operation Joint Guardian, on the site of a destroyed Serbian military base which is handed over to Kosovo Protection Corps in 2007 after U.S. Military downsized their troops. Gnjilane has also served as the regional headquarters of the UNMIK International Police task force from 1999.

Population

In March 2011, the Gnjilane municipality was estimated to have over 90,015 residents. The vast majority of the population is Albanian, followed by Serbs, and a small number of minorities.

Languages

In Gnjilane Municipality Albanian, Serbian and Turkish languages are official languages.[ref]OSCE Implementation of the Law on the Use of Languages by
Kosovo Municipalities[/ref]
In the municipality according to the 2011 census there are 978 Turks or 1% of the municipality population.

Education

Education in Gjilan includes primary, secondary education, and a public university. Currently there are 23608 Albanian students and 881 minority students enrolled in educational institutions around Gjilan.

Economy

There are 3,700 registered private businesses in the municipality employing 7,900 people. Before 1999, Gnjilane was an important industrial centre in Kosovo. Still in operation are the radiator factory and tobacco factory, which has been recently privatized. The new city business incubator, supported by the European Agency for Reconstruction, was inaugurated in Summer 2007.

Culture

Flaka e Janarit

Flaka e Janarit is a cultural event that starts on the 11th of January in Gjilan, Kosovo with symbolic opening of the flame, to keep up with various cultural activities to 31 January of each year. In this city, it gathers thousands of artists and art lovers from all the Albanian territories, who for three consecutive weeks transform the city into a culture metropolis. The nation's martyrs are honored through values of art by this event, which began before the 10th anniversary of the assassination of the writer, the activist and the patriot Jusuf Gërvalla, along with Kadri Zeka and Bardhosh Gërvalla. 
It was exactly the 10th anniversary without these three martyrs of freedom and from coincidence of these murders in a same date on 11th of January, this event got this name "Flaka e Janarit". Moreover, this month has "eaten" lots of devout patriots.

Features

Gnjilane is now the administrative center of the District of Gnjilane of Kosovo. Since February 15, 2003, it is the headquarters of the Local Democracy Agency in Kosovo of the Council of Europe.

Sports

Gnjilane is home to the basketball club Drita Gjilan, the football clubs KF Gjilani and KF Drita and volleyball club KV Drita, male and female- the most successful club in Gnjilane's history.

Notable people

International relations

Twin towns – Sister cities

Gnjilane is twinned with:

Annotations



Sources




