[[Prince Leopold, Duke of Albany]]

CATEGORIES: Alumni of Christ Church, Oxford, Bailiffs Grand Cross of the Order of St John, Burials at St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, Chess patrons, Dukes of Albany, British Freemasons, House of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha (United Kingdom), Knights Grand Commander of the Order of the Star of India, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George, Knights of the Garter, Knights of the Thistle, People with hemophilia, People from Westminster, Princes of the United Kingdom, Grand Crosses of the House Order of the Wendish Crown, 1853 births, 1884 deaths

The Prince Leopold, Duke of Albany (Leopold George Duncan Albert; 7 April 1853 – 28 March 1884) was the eighth child and fourth son of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha.  Leopold was later created Duke of Albany, Earl of Clarence, and Baron Arklow. He had haemophilia, which led to his death at the age of 30.

Early life

Leopold was born on 7 April 1853 at Buckingham Palace, London. During labour, Queen Victoria chose to use chloroform and thus sanctioned the use of anesthesia in childbirth, recently developed by Professor James Young Simpson. The chloroform was administered by Dr. John Snow. 333-334 As a son of the British sovereign, the newborn was styled His Royal Highness The Prince Leopold at birth. His parents named him Leopold after his grand-uncle, King Leopold I of Belgium.
He was baptised in the Private Chapel of Buckingham Palace on 28 June 1853 by the Archbishop of Canterbury, John Bird Sumner. His godparents were his first cousin once removed, King George V of Hanover; his fourth cousin once removed, Princess William of Prussia; his first cousin once removed, Princess Mary Adelaide of Cambridge; and his maternal uncle by marriage, Prince Ernst of Hohenlohe-Langenburg.
Leopold inherited the disease haemophilia from his mother, Queen Victoria, and was a delicate child.  Evidence exists  that Leopold also suffered mildly from epilepsy, like his grand-nephew Prince John of the United Kingdom.

Education and career

The Prince's intellectual abilities were evident as a boy; Poet Laureate, Alfred, Lord Tennyson and his friend, philosopher Dr James Martineau, were familiar with the Queen's children and had noted that Leopold, who had often "conversed with the eminent Dr. Martineau, was considered to be  a young man of a very thoughtful mind, high aims, and quite remarkable acquirements".

Oxford University

In 1872, Prince Leopold, entered Christ Church at Oxford University where he studied a variety of subjects and became president of the Oxford University Chess Club. He left the university with an honorary doctorate in civil law (DCL) in 1876. Prince Leopold travelled in Europe. In 1880, he toured Canada and the United States with his sister, Princess Louise, whose husband John Campbell, Marquess of Lorne was the Governor General of Canada.   He was a prominent chess patron, and the London 1883 chess tournament was held under his patronage.   Later he pursued vice-regal appointments in both Canada and Australia, but was rejected in part due to his health problems.

British Army

Despite his inability (through illness) to pursue an active military role, he had an honorary association with the 72nd Regiment, Duke of Albany's Own Highlanders, and from 1881 served as the first Colonel-in-Chief of the Seaforth Highlanders, when that regiment was formed through the merger of the 72nd regiment with the 78th (Highlanders) Regiment of Foot. A portrait of Prince Leopold in military uniform is held in the Royal Collection. The Seaforth Highlanders paraded at Prince Leopold's funeral, a fact recorded by William McGonagall in his poem "The Death of Prince Leopold".

Freemasonry

Prince Leopold was an active Freemason, being initiated in the Apollo University Lodge, Oxford, whilst resident at Christ Church. He was proposed for membership by his brother, Albert Edward, Prince of Wales,"Apollo University Lodge No 357, History 1819 - 1969", privately published 1969, page 19. who was at the time the Worshipful Master of the Lodge,"Apollo University Lodge No 357, History 1819 - 1969", privately published 1969, appendix page i. and was initiated in a joint ceremony with Robert Hawthorne Collins, his friend and tutor, who later became Comptroller of his Household."Apollo University Lodge No 357, History 1819 - 1969", privately published 1969, page 20. He served as Master of the Lodge from 1876-1877, and was later the Provincial Grand Master for Oxfordshire, still holding that office at the time of his death.

Duke of Albany

Prince Leopold was created Duke of Albany, Earl of Clarence and Baron Arklow on 24 May 1881.

Marriage

Prince Leopold, stifled by the desire of his mother, Queen Victoria, to keep him at home, saw marriage as his only hope of independence. Due to his haemophilia, he had difficulty finding a wife.  Heiress Daisy Maynard was one of the women he considered as a possible bride. He was acquainted with Alice Liddell, the daughter of the Vice-Chancellor of Oxford for whom Lewis Carroll wrote Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, and was godfather of Alice's second son, who was named for him. It has been suggested that he considered marrying her, though others suggest that he preferred her sister Edith (for whom he later served as pall-bearer on 30 June 1876).
Leopold also considered his second cousin Princess Frederica of Hanover for a bride; they instead became lifelong friends and confidantes.  Other aristocatic women he pursued included Victoria of Baden and Princess Karoline Mathilde of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Augustenburg.
After rejection from these women, Victoria stepped in to bar what she saw as unsuitable possibilities. Insisting that the children of British monarchs should marry into other reigning Protestant families, Victoria suggested a meeting with Princess Helene Friederike, the daughter of Georg Viktor, reigning Prince of Waldeck-Pyrmont. On 27 April 1882, Leopold and Helena were married, at St George's Chapel at Windsor Castle. Leopold and Helena enjoyed a happy (although brief) marriage. In 1883, Leopold became a father when his wife gave birth to a daughter, Alice. He died shortly before the birth of his son, Charles Edward.

Later life

Prince Leopold had haemophilia, diagnosed in childhood and in early years had various physicians in permanent attendance, including John Wickham Legg. In February 1884, Leopold went to Cannes on doctor's orders: joint pain is a common symptom of haemophilia and the winter climate in England was always difficult for him. His wife, pregnant at the time, stayed at home but urged him to go. On 27 March, at his Cannes residence, the 'Villa Nevada', he slipped and fell, injuring his knee and hitting his head. He died in the early hours of the next morning, apparently from a cerebral haemorrhage. He was buried in the Albert Memorial Chapel at Windsor. His posthumous son, Prince Charles Edward, succeeded him as 2nd Duke of Albany upon birth four months later.
Having died six years after his older sister Alice, he was the second of Queen Victoria's children to die. His mother outlived him by seventeen years, by which time she had outlived a third child, Alfred.
In 1900, Charles Edward succeeded his uncle Alfred as Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha.
His passing was lamented by the Scottish "poet and tragedian" William McGonagall in the poem "The Death of Prince Leopold".
Through Charles Edward, Leopold is the great-grandfather of Carl XVI Gustaf, the current King of Sweden.
The haemophilia gene is carried on the X chromosome, and is normally passed through female descent, as in the past few haemophiliac men survived to beget children. Any daughter of a haemophiliac is a carrier of the gene. Leopold's daughter Alice inherited the haemophilia gene, and passed it to her son Rupert.

Titles, styles, honours and arms

Titles

Honours

Arms

In 1856, at the age of three, Prince Leopold was granted a personal coat of arms — the arms of the kingdom, with an inescutcheon of the shield of Saxony (representing his father), and all differenced by a label argent of three points, the first and third bearing hearts gules, and the second a cross gules.

Ancestors

Legacy

In the romantic comedy film, Kate & Leopold, the latter is a British Duke who goes to New York. He also holds the title Duke of Albany. However, his family surname is Mountbatten, a surname which only entered the royal family through the husband of the present queen. However, it was first borne by Leopold's niece (ditto). The Leopold character is credited with having invented the passenger lift, and having a butler called Otis.
Leopold is also frequently mentioned in stories based on Alice in Wonderland, such as the Looking Glass Wars trilogy.




