[[IBM PCjr]]

CATEGORIES: 8086-based home computers, Home computers, IBM personal computers, 1984 introductions

The IBM PCjr (read "PC junior") was IBM's first attempt to enter the home computer market.  The PCjr, IBM model number 4860, retained the IBM PC's 8088 CPU and BIOS interface for compatibility, but various  design and implementation decisions led the PCjr to be a commercial failure.

Description

Announced November 1, 1983, and first shipped in late January 1984, in present-day terms).  It was manufactured for IBM in Lewisburg, Tennessee by Teledyne. The PCjr promised a high degree of compatibility with the IBM PC, which was already a popular business computer, in addition to offering built-in color graphics and 3 voice sound that were better than the standard PC speaker sound and color graphics of the standard IBM PC and compatibles of the day.
The graphics were produced via a graphics chip known as the Video Gate Array (VGA), an upward-compatible extension of CGA which added three new graphics modes to CGA's seven. The PCjr was also the first PC compatible machine that supported page flipping for graphics operation.  Since the PCjr used system RAM to store video content and the location of this storage area could be changed, the PCjr could perform flicker-free animation and other effects that were either difficult or impossible to produce on contemporary PC clones.
The PCjr's 4.77 MHz Intel 8088 CPU was faster than other computers aimed at the home market, though the PCjr did not run at the full rated 4.77 MHz because every 4th clock cycle of the 8088 CPU was designated to refresh the PCjr's dynamic RAM as it had no dedicated memory controller; the computer's effective clockspeed was therefore 3.58 MHz. The detached wireless infrared keyboard promised a degree of convenience none of its competitors had, eliciting visions of word-processing wirelessly from one's couch with the computer connected to a TV set as a display.

Differences from the IBM PC

With a built-in RF modulator, the PCjr could send video and audio to a TV; it also had an audio output jack to connect to a stereo or amplifier. Cartridge BASIC enhanced the standard IBM BASIC with commands to support the new video and audio functionality. Two joystick ports were also evidence of IBM's goal for marketing the PCjr as a home-friendly machine. Other than the Tandy 1000 and Amstrad IBM PC compatible lines a few years later, the dual built-in joystick ports introduced by the PCjr never became standard on IBM PC compatibles, and have not been seen since. Also, in addition to the joystick ports having a different connector from PC game ports, they required joysticks that had a different electrical resistance range in their X/Y axis controllers, necessitating the use of PCjr-compatible joysticks.
The PCjr's video used 16K of RAM as shared graphics memory, which prevented using additional memory with the built-in 128K in a flat model.
Further reinforcing the "home-friendly" goal, the PCjr also introduced two ROM cartridge slots on the front of the unit, meant to load software quickly and easily.  The cartridge(s) would be plugged in from the front, prompting the computer to automatically reboot and run the software. This was more user-friendly than other home computer systems, which had to be powered off when a cartridge was removed or inserted and came with dire warnings about damage to the computer's main board if this requirement was ignored. Loading and saving data from cartridge software was possible via the floppy drive. The cartridge BASIC for the PCjr, in particular, gave programmers the advantage of a real programming language always ready without taking up system memory, as it was firmware, with its own address space. Being stored in ROM, the BASIC would load very quickly, not needing access to the floppy disk or other storage.
Cartridges could also replace the system BIOS and other firmware. A number of patches from various vendors were included on a single "combo-cartridge", licensed and sold by PC Enterprises, to support add-on hardware, bypass certain limitations of design, and keep up with changing OS requirements.
Expansions (such as additional parallel ports, serial ports, memory, etc.) to the PCjr were provided via add-on "sidecars" that attached to the side of the PCjr. Multiple expansions were stacked together, increasing the width of the machine.

Differences from other personal computers

The PCjr was shipped with a wireless chiclet keyboard called the "Freeboard", powered by four AA batteries to provide infrared line-of-sight wireless communication. The keycaps were blank; labels appeared between keys to permit overlays. The keyboard could also operate with an optional modular telephone-style cable if so desired, eliminating battery usage.  The PCjr also had a lightpen port; it was later used in combination with the serial port to supply voltage to a Mouse Systems optical mouse of the same design as Sun workstations.

History

"Peanut Panic"

IBM in the early 1980s was the world's largest computer company. With 70% of the mainframe market, it had larger revenues than Apple, Compaq, DEC, HP, and TI combined. When it introduced its first personal computer in August 1981, IBM did so to defend itself against Apple and other companies' newly popular microcomputers. Within two years the IBM PC created a large new ecosystem of PC clones and software. Surprising even company executives, it became a market leader
For a year before the PCjr's announcement the computer industry discussed rumors of a new product, code named "Peanut", that would repeat the PC's success. Peanut was allegedly a $600 to $1,000 home computer with 64K of memory that was compatible with the large IBM PC software library, benefit from IBM's service network, and less expensive than the Apple IIe. Customers waited for the rumored IBM product, crippling competitors' sales, and other companies' product plans and stocks reacted to the officially nonexistent computer in what the press called "Peanut Panic" or "The Great Peanut Roast".

Release

IBM launched the PCjr at its New York City headquarters in November 1983 with an enormous amount of advance publicity, including live news-broadcast coverage of the product announcement. Compute! wrote "Never before in the history of personal computing (admittedly a brief history) has a product been so eagerly awaited by so many".
Observers believed that, as PC reported, IBM did not "face substantial competition on the home front" from computers that many considered "mere gadgets or expensive toys". Many hoped that a home computer with, as the magazine wrote,

would stabilize and bring credibility to the chaotic market,
No longer facing a long-running antitrust suit by the United States government, IBM likely timed its announcement to hurt competitors' sales during Christmas although PCjr was not yet available.

"One of the biggest flops in the history of computing"

When the PCjr became available in early 1984, sales were below expectations from the beginning, even with discounts. Time wrote in April, in part due to the launch early that year of the "exciting" Apple Macintosh. By December it stated that the PCjr "looked like one of the biggest flops in the history of computing...

=Keyboard=

At the PCjr's announcement, journalists reportedly "gaspin dismay" when they saw its chiclet keyboard, which had 62 keys versus the IBM PC's 83. The New York Times described it as "not suitable for serious long-term typing",

=Cost=


The PCjr's cost was its biggest disadvantage, even more so than the keyboard. IBM did not say whether the target market was the home, schools, or executives working at home, confusing software developers,

=Not fully PC compatible=

Norton estimated that the PCjr had about 85% of the IBM PC's capability for a smaller fraction of its price.
Many potential customers believed that the smaller computer could run most IBM PC software, and an important market for the PCjr was executives who took data home to work on,

=Limited hardware expansion=

Along with the lack of software, computer dealers quickly identified the PCjr's limited hardware expansion capability as a major disadvantage.

Death


In July 1984—by which time PCjr sales had declined to only a few thousand a month—IBM replaced the chiclet keyboard for free with a new model with conventional typewriter keys. The act was unusually generous for the company, and the industry;
One large dealer stated in November 1984 that "it could be a PCjr Christmas", as the better keyboard and lower prices greatly increased demand;

Legacy


Tandy Corporation released a clone of the PCjr, the Tandy 1000, in November 1984.
From mid-1985, what Compute! described as a "wave" of inexpensive clones from American and Asian companies caused prices to decline; by the end of 1986, the equivalent to a $1600 real IBM PC with 256K RAM and two disk drives cost as little as $600, lower than the price of the Apple IIc. Consumers began purchasing DOS computers for the home in large numbers; Radio Shack estimated that half of Tandy 1000 sales went to homes, not offices. The inexpensive clones succeeded with consumers where the PCjr had failed; unlike the IBM product, they were as fast as or faster than the IBM PC and highly compatible.
King's Quest, a popular adventure game series, was originally developed for the PCjr, as IBM had commissioned Sierra On-Line for a game that would take advantage of the PCjr's expanded graphics and sound capabilities (16-color 320x200 graphics and 3-voice+noise sound) for the product's launch.
IBM returned to the home market in 1990 with the IBM PS/1 line. Unlike the PCjr's departure from the IBM PC standard, the PS/1 line concentrated on IBM brand-name compatibility and affordability.
Several upgrades for the PCjr were designed by IBM/Teledyne but never reached the store shelves before the IBM PCjr was canceled. These included a wireless joystick and various memory/drive upgrades. PC Enterprises became the last of the major third party vendors to supply full service, parts, and add-ons, extending the functional life of the PCjr to about 10 years, often buying out inventory and rights for PCjr support.

Technical specifications








