[[Leon M. Lederman]]

CATEGORIES: 1922 births, American atheists, American mathematicians, American Nobel laureates, American people of Russian-Jewish descent, American physicists, City College of New York alumni, Columbia University alumni, Columbia University faculty, Enrico Fermi Award recipients, Experimental physicists, Guggenheim Fellows, Illinois Institute of Technology faculty, Recipients of the Great Cross of the National Order of Scientific Merit (Brazil), Jewish American scientists, Jewish atheists, Jewish physicists, Living people, National Medal of Science laureates, Nobel laureates in Physics, Particle physicists, University of Chicago faculty, Wolf Prize in Physics laureates, Jewish inventors, American skeptics, Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences, Foreign Members of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Fellows of the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry

Leon Max Lederman (born July 15, 1922) is an American experimental physicist who received, along with Martin Lewis Perl, the Wolf Prize in Physics in 1982, for their research on quarks and leptons, and the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1988, along with Melvin Schwartz and Jack Steinberger, for their research on neutrinos. He is Director Emeritus of Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (Fermilab) in Batavia, Illinois, USA.  He founded the Illinois Mathematics and Science Academy, in Aurora, Illinois in 1986, and has served in the capacity of Resident Scholar since 1998. In 2012, he was awarded the Vannevar Bush Award for his extraordinary contributions to understanding the basic forces and particles of nature.National Science Board - Honorary Awards - Vannevar Bush Award Recipients

Early life and career

Lederman was born in New York City, New York, the son of Minna (née Rosenberg) and Morris Lederman, a laundryman. Kolb, Catherine Westfall - Google Books Lederman graduated from the James Monroe High School in the South Bronx. He received his bachelor's degree from the City College of New York in 1943, and received a Ph.D. from Columbia University in 1951.  He then joined the Columbia faculty and eventually became Eugene Higgins Professor of Physics. He took an extended leave of absence from Columbia in 1979 to become director of Fermilab. Resigning from Columbia (and retiring from Fermilab) in 1989 to teach briefly at the University of Chicago, he then moved to the physics department of the Illinois Institute of Technology, where he currently serves as the Pritzker Professor of Science. In 1991, Lederman became President of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.
Lederman is also one of the main proponents of the "Physics First" movement. Also known as "Right-side Up Science" and "Biology Last," this movement seeks to rearrange the current high school science curriculum so that physics precedes chemistry and biology.
A former president of the American Physical Society, Lederman also received the National Medal of Science, the Wolf Prize and the Ernest O. Lawrence Medal. Lederman serves as President of the Board of Sponsors of The Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. He also served on the board of trustees for Science Service, now known as Society for Science & the Public, from 1989 to 1992.
Among his achievements are the discovery of the muon neutrino in 1962 and the bottom quark in 1977. These helped establish his reputation as among the top particle physicists.
As the director of Fermilab and subsequent Nobel physics prizewinner, Leon Lederman was a very prominent early supporter – some sources say the architect The increasingly moribund project was finally shelved that same year after some $2 billion of expenditure.
In 1988, Lederman received the Nobel Prize for Physics along with Melvin Schwartz and Jack Steinberger "for the neutrino beam method and the demonstration of the doublet structure of the leptons through the discovery of the muon neutrino". Lederman also received the National Medal of Science (1965), the Elliott Cresson Medal for Physics (1976), the Wolf Prize for Physics (1982) and the Enrico Fermi Award (1992).
In 1995, he received the Chicago History Museum "Making History Award" for Distinction in Science Medicine and Technology.
Lederman was an early supporter of Science Debate 2008, an initiative to get the then-candidates for president, Barack Obama and John McCain, to debate the nation's top science policy challenges.  In October 2010, Lederman participated in the USA Science and Engineering Festival's Lunch with a Laureate program where middle and high school students got to engage in an informal conversation with a Nobel Prize-winning Scientist over a brown bag lunch.usasciencefestival.

Personal life

Lederman was born in New York to a family of Jewish immigrants from Russia.. His father operated a hand laundry while encouraging Leon to pursue his education. He went to elementary school in New York City, continuing on to college and his doctorate in the city. "Leon M. Lederman – Autobiography."  Retrieved 06 April 2009. Published 1988, The Nobel Foundation.
In his book,The God Particle: If the Universe Is the Answer, What Is the Question?, Lederman writes that, although he was a chemistry major, he became fascinated with physics, because of the clarity of the logic and the unambiguous results from experimentation. His best friend during his college years, Martin Klein, convinced him of "the splendors of physics during a long evening over many beers." After that conversation he became resolute and unwavering regarding his desire to pursue physics. When he joined the Army  with a B.S. in Chemistry, he was determined to become a physicist following his service.The God Particle: If the Universe is the Answer, What is the Question – page 5  by Leon Lederman with Dick Teresi (copyright 1993) Houghton Mifflin Company
After three years in the U.S. Army during World War II, he took up physics
at Columbia University, and received his Masters in 1948.
Lederman began his Ph.D research working with Columbia's Nevis synchro-cyclotron,see High Energy Physics section on this page:  which was the most powerful particle accelerator in the world at that time.  Dwight D. Eisenhower, then the president of Columbia University, and future president of the United States, cut the ribbon dedicating the synchro-cyclotron in June 1950.columbia.jpeg These atom smashers were just coming of age at this time and created the new discipline of particle physics.
After receiving his Ph.D and then becoming a faculty member at Columbia University he was promoted to full professor in 1958.The God Particle: If the Universe is the Answer, What is the Question – page 296  by Leon Lederman with Dick Teresi (copyright 1993) Houghton Mifflin Company
In "The God Particle" he once wrote "The history of atomism is one of reductionism – the effort to reduce all the operations of nature to a small number of laws governing a small number of primordial objects." The God Particle: If the Universe is the Answer, What is the Question – page 87  by Leon Lederman with Dick Teresi (copyright 1993) Houghton Mifflin Company And this was the quest he undertook. This book shows that he pursued the quark, and hopes to find the Higgs boson. The top quark, which he and other physicists realized must exist according to the standard model, was, in fact, produced at Fermilab not long after this book was published.aps.org/abstract/PRL/v74/i14/p2626_1
He is known for his sense of humor in the physics community.S. city, answering questions from passersby.discovermagazine.
He has three children with his first wife, Florence Gordon, and now lives with his second wife, Ellen (Carr), in Batavia, Illinois. "Leon M. Lederman – Autobiography."  Retrieved 29.7.2008. Published 1988, The Nobel Foundation.
He is an atheist.

Publications

Honorary degrees and awards








