[[Leslie speaker]]

CATEGORIES: Loudspeakers, Instrument amplifiers, American inventions

The Leslie speaker is a combined amplifier and loudspeaker that modifies the sound of an instrument as well as amplifying it, by rotating sound waves. It is most commonly associated with the Hammond organ, though it was later used for the guitar and other instruments. A typical Leslie speaker contains an amplifier, treble and bass speaker, though specific components depend on the model. Control is achieved either by an external half-moon switch, or by a foot pedal, that alternates between two settings known as "chorale" and "tremolo".
The speaker is named after its inventor, Donald Leslie. Leslie began working in the late 1930s to get a speaker for a Hammond organ that had a closer emulation of a pipe or theatre organ, and discovered that rotating sound gave the best effect. Hammond was not interested in marketing or selling the speakers, so Leslie sold them himself as an add-on, targeting other organs as well as Hammond. The first speaker was made in 1941. The sound of the organ being played through his speakers received national radio exposure across the US, and it became a commercial and critical success as an essential part of any jazz organist. He eventually sold his business to CBS in 1965, who in turn sold it to Hammond in 1980. Today, the Hammond and Leslie brands are owned by Suzuki Musical Instrument Corporation.
Because the Leslie is a sound modification device in its own right, various attempts have been made to emulate the effect using electronics. The Univox Uni-Vibe was used by a number of notable musicians, while the Neo Ventilator has received critical praise, and Hammond-Suzuki now manufacture their own simulator in a box.

History

Leslie worked as a radio service engineer at Barker Brothers Department Store in Los Angeles, which sold and repaired Hammond organs.
By 1940, Leslie decided his prototype was ready to market, and went to the Hammond Organ Company to demonstrate it. Laurens Hammond, however, was not impressed with Leslie's attempt to better his own organ design, and declined to market it.
Leslie manufactured the speaker to work with a variety of different organs aside from Hammond, including Wurlitzer, Conn, Thomas and Baldwin. He had never particularly liked Hammond organs, once remarking "I hate those damn things".
In 1965, Leslie sold the company to CBS, which had also acquired Fender.

Features

A Leslie speaker consists of a number of individual components. The audio signal enters the amplifier from the instrument. Once amplified, the signal travels to an audio crossover, where it is split into separate frequency bands that can be individually routed to each loudspeaker. Different models have different combinations of speakers, but the most common model, the 122, consists of a single woofer for bass and tweeter for treble.
The only control common to all Leslie speakers is a dial controlling the master volume. This is normally set up once and then left, since the volume is designed to be controlled by the organ's expression pedal. Leslie recommended playing the organ at full volume with all stops or drawbars pulled out and adjusting the volume just before distortion occurs.
Control of a Leslie speaker is normally catered for by an external two way switch, between two settings marked "chorale" and "tremolo". The switch is mounted onto the controlling instrument, so the player can easily switch settings. Some earlier models were limited to "off" and "tremolo", and some later models had all three settings.
Unlike most popular music amplifiers, that use jack plugs to connect to instruments, Leslie speakers use an amphenol connector to interface directly to an organ via a console connector. The type and design of the connector depends on the organ and model of Leslie speaker.
Older models that used tube power amplifiers used a variety of 6-pin connectors, while later models used a 9-pin connector. It is also possible to connect multiple Leslie speakers to a single organ, by using a power relay that provides the necessary AC current.

A separate device known as the combo preamp is necessary to connect a vintage Leslie to another instrument such as a guitar. This combines a separate AC input and line level input onto a single amphenol connector, and provide a footswitch to select between the speeds of the Leslie.
Modern Leslie speakers have an 11-pin interface that is safer to service, as the mains power is carried separately using a standard IEC mains connector. The Hammond-Suzuki Leslie 2101 also includes line in and line out jacks, so a combo preamp is no longer required. Its settings can also be controlled via MIDI.

Models

Single speed

The initial models of Leslie speakers did not have the "chorale" setting. The control switch was simply a choice between "off" and "tremolo". The first model of Leslie produced was the 30A. It emulated Hammond's DXR-20 tone cabinet, which used moving drums but only produced amplitude modulation, not frequency modulation. It contained a 
The next models to be produced were the 21H and the 22H, which had a cabinet in a similar styling to the better known 122, with the same dimensions and louvres. They were powered by a 40 watt tube amplifier.

Dual speed

The 122 is the most popular Leslie. It was specifically designed for the Hammond organ and is the model most commonly identified with it. It is 
The 147 is the "universal" version of the 122, designed for any organs, and has a different amplifier input and motor speed control, but is otherwise identical. The signal input is unbalanced, allowing a simpler connection to organs that have a built-in speaker system, such as the Hammond A100, or a Wurlitzer. The motor speed switching uses a separate AC signal, rather than the DC voltage control of the 122. In operation, the noticeable differences between the 122 and the 147 are the 122's lower susceptibility to induced noise, and a delay between operation of the speed control and the actual change in speed. As with the 122 and 142, the 145 is identical to the 147, except that it is housed in a 
The model X-77, released in 1968, was designed to accompany Hammond's new tonewheel / transistor organ, the X-66. It contained seven different tab controls and six speakers. It has a completely different interface from other Leslies, using a 12-pin amphenol connector.

Pro-Line

By the late 1960s, gigging musicians were finding that older Leslies like the 122 were not loud enough to be heard on stage, which led to the introduction of the "Pro Line" series. These Leslies had louder solid-state power amplifiers, and were mounted on casters for ease of portability. The first models to be manufactured were the 900 and 910,
The Pro-Line series proved to be durable and fault-tolerant, with many models lasting for years.
The smallest Leslie is the Model 16, made in 1970. It has a Fender-like speaker body and a rotating foam dispersion block. It was built for guitarists, portable, and had "Leslie" written on the front.

Hammond-Suzuki

As well as the 122A and 147A reissues, Hammond-Suzuki now make smaller and transportable Leslies using modern technology. The 2101 is 

Sound generation

The Leslie is specifically designed, via reproduction of the Doppler effect, to alter or modify sound. As the sound source is rotated around a specific pivot point, it produces tremolo (the modulation of amplitude) and a variation in pitch. This produces a sequence of frequency modulated sidebands.
Much of the Leslie's unique tone is due to the fact that the system is at least partially enclosed, whereby linear louvres along the sides and front of the unit can vent the sound from within the box after the sound has bounced around inside, mellowing it. The crossover is deliberately set to 800 Hz to give the optimum balance between the horn and the drum, and is considered an integral part of the speaker.

Miking

Because a Leslie speaker modifies as well as amplifies the sound, the output cannot simply be connected to a larger PA system if the volume onstage from the built-in amplifier is too quiet. This is particularly problematic for an older Leslie like the 122 or 147, which only has a 40 watt RMS power amplifier.
Miking a Leslie is also important in a recording studio, as the choice and positioning of microphones determines the overall recorded sound. A popular recommendation is two Shure SM57s on the horn and a Sennheiser MD421 on the drum.

Clones and simulations

While the Leslie speaker is still made and sold, similar effects can now be obtained via analogue electronic devices and digital emulation. Chorus and phase shifter devices can give an approximation of the sounds produced by a Leslie speaker. The Univox Uni-Vibe, a four-stage phase shifter, was specifically marketed as a low-cost Leslie substitute for guitarists, and used a foot-operated fast/slow switch similar to the combo preamp. The pedal was popular, and notable users included Jimi Hendrix, David Gilmour and Robin Trower, but vintage units tend not to be in good condition now due to the degradation of capacitors in the unit.
Most modern keyboards that emulate the Hammond organ also include a Leslie simulator, including Hammond's own XK-3c and the Nord Electro. while Keyboard Magazine claimed to be "blown away by how authentic the Ventilator sounds". In 2013, Hammond-Suzuki started manufacturing their own Leslie simulator in a stomp box.

Notable users

Leslie never advertised his speakers. After demonstrating a prototype with Bob Mitchell, an organist with radio station KFI in Los Angeles, a contract was made to install another prototype in the station's studios, where Mitchell would be the only organist authorized to use it. Mitchell was so impressed, that he even tried to patent the speaker, but discovered that he couldn't. Soon afterwards, Mitchell became an organist with the Mutual Broadcasting System, and played a Hammond with the Leslie on its shows, thus gaining national exposure.
In 1965, Buddy Guy's guitar amplifier stopped working while he was recording Junior Wells' album Hoodoo Man Blues. Recording engineer Stu Black rewired the Leslie speaker in the studio to work with Guy's guitar, which became a significant use of the guitar with the speaker.
The Beatles first recorded using a Leslie during the sessions for Revolver in 1966. After John Lennon had asked for his voice to sound "as though I'm the Dalai Lama singing from the highest mountain top",








