[[Foreign relations of Nauru]]

CATEGORIES: Foreign relations of Nauru, Nauru and the Commonwealth of Nations

Nauru, following independence from the United Kingdom, became a sovereign, independent republic on 31 January 1968. Nauru has established diplomatic relations with a number of nations, including most of its Pacific neighbors with which it maintains economic, cultural and administrative ties with its regionally.

Membership in international organizations

Nauru was admitted to the United Nations on 14 September 1999. Nauru's application to the United Nations was questioned by the People's Republic of China due to Nauru's close diplomatic and trade links to Taiwan. Nevertheless, Nauru was granted UN full membership.
Nauru became a full member of the Commonwealth of Nations in May 1999. Since independence, Nauru had been a special member of the Commonwealth prior to 1999, but having fallen behind in payments, reverted to Special Member Status on 1 July 2005, with no authoritative power. It then returned to be a full member again on June 2011.
Additionally outside the region, Nauru is a member or participant of the ACP (Lomé Convention),  the Alliance of Small Island States, the Asian Development Bank, the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the G-77,  the International Civil Aviation Organization,  the International Olympic Committee, and the ITU
Nauru is notable for its lack of membership in several major international organizations. For example, Nauru is one of only three UN-recognized nations with a sea border that is not a member of the International Maritime Organization (the others are the Federated States of Micronesia and Niue).  Similarly, Nauru is one of only seven UN members that is not a member of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, one of 8 not part of the International Monetary Fund, and one of 12 not part of the International Finance Corporation. Nauru also is not a member of the International Development Association and has no society associated with the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement. Finally, as with many other nations in Oceania, Nauru is not a member of Interpol or of the  International Hydrographic Organization.

Membership in regional organizations

Regional cooperation through various multilateral organizations is a key element in Nauru's foreign policy. The country also hosted the regional meeting that resulted in the Nauru Agreement Concerning Cooperation In The Management Of Fisheries Of Common Interest whose eight signatories (including Naurua) collectively controls 25-30% of the world's tuna supply and approximately 60% of the western and central Pacific tuna supply.no/2011/04/13/pacific-islands-fighting-for-their-tuna/  Additionally, Nauru is a full member of the Pacific Islands Forum, the South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission,  the Pacific Regional Environment Programme and the Secretariat of the Pacific Community.

Hosting Refugees

In 2001 Nauru became host to approximately 867 refugees, mostly Afghan, who were intercepted while attempting to enter Australia illegally. This exchange was one of many which were collectively known as Australia's Pacific Solution. In February 2008, the last of the refugees were resettled in Australia.

Bilateral Relations

Australia


Australia administered Nauru as a dependent territory from 1914 to 1968, and has remained one of Nauru's foremost economic and aid partners thereafter. Relations between the two countries are, at present, cordial, with Australia having committed itself to assisting Nauru's economic development.

China (PRC and ROC)

On 21 July 2002, then President Rene Harris of Nauru signed a joint communiqué in Hong Kong to establish diplomatic relations with the People's Republic of China.  The declaration also contained an undertaking by Nauru to close its embassy in Taipei within one month, despite the fact Nauru had never had a diplomatic mission in Taiwan.  This move followed the PRC's promise to provide more than $130 million USD in aid.
That same day, the Republic of China government issued an ultimatum, demanding that the communiqué be withdrawn within 24 hours or it would take the initiative and sever ties.  There was much dissension within the Nauruan government over the move by Harris, which the President was alleged to have made on his own initiative. 
In April 2005, during a state visit to the Marshall Islands, ROC President Chen Shui-bian met and spoke with the Nauruan President Ludwig Scotty. On 14 May 2005, the two countries signed the necessary documents to restore formal ties and reopen embassies. The People's Republic of China consequently severed ties two weeks later on 31 May.

Cuba


In the late 2000s, Nauru began to strengthen its relations with Cuba. Cuba provides medical aid to Nauru; an unspecified number of Cuban doctors are serving in Nauru.
In June 2007, Nauru adopted the "Cuban literacy method", reportedly used also in several other countries. At approximately this time, Nauru-US relations underwent tensions for reasons which were not completely clear (See also: Foreign relations of Nauru#Ties with the United States of America, above).
In September 2008, Nauru's foreign minister attended the first Cuba-Pacific Islands ministerial meeting in Havana, aimed at "strengtening cooperation" between Nauru and Cuba, notably on coping with the impact of climate change."Kiribati's Tong Meets Castro, Heads To UN", Pacific Magazine, 18 September 2008"1st Cuba-Pacific Islands Ministerial Meeting opens in Havana", Xinhua, 16 September 2008

India


India established relations with the country since its independence in 1968 and have had numerous visits by presidents of Nauru to the Republic since then. India is one of the largest Donors to the island by helping the education ministry and revamping the island's parliament facilities to its MP's and its Speaker. India has also reserved 5 slots for naruran citizens for training courses under the Indian Technical & Economical Cooperation (ITEC) programme in the year 2010-11.3 One scholarship slot is also offered under General Cultural Scholarship of ICCR (Commonwealth Scheme).mea.in/Portal/ForeignRelation/Nauru-January-2012.pdf   

Israel


Between Israel and the Republic of Nauru are official diplomatic relations in 2013, and a collaboration on various subjects. Israel represents the non-resident ambassador to Nauru, Nauru whereas Israel represents a consul general and the Israeli media, David Ben-Bassat. State is considered, similar to other Pacific islands such as the Marshall Islands, Micronesia and Palau, a consistent supporter of Israel in international bodies, including the United Nations.

Russia


Russia is represented in Nauru through its embassy in Canberra (Australia). Russia's ambassador to Australia Alexander Blokhin serves concurrently as Russia's non-resident ambassador to Nauru (as well as to Fiji and Vanuatu).
Nauru's banks are said to have provided services to the mafia in Russia during the 1990s; over the course of the 1990s, approximately 70 billion U.S. dollars owned by Russian mafia were held in Nauru banks.Pacific nation Nauru on brink of collapse The Age, 18 April 2004
In 2009 Nauru became the fourth country to recognize the states of Abkhazia and South Ossetia, breakaway regions of Georgia. Only three other UN member states have done so. Russia was reported to be giving Nauru $50M in humanitarian aid in exchange.

United Kingdom


The Nauruan government maintains an Honorary Consul, Martin W I Weston, who has served in this role for a number of years. The British Government had ceased to exercise any direct role in the governance of Nauru by 1968.

United States


The Nauruan government has a very complex relationship with the United States; the government of Bernard Dowiyogo agreed to stop passport sales and offshore banking in return for an extensive aid package. 
The U.S. has no consular or diplomatic offices in Nauru. Officers of the American Embassy in Suva, Fiji, are concurrently accredited to Nauru and make periodic visits.
In September 2007, David Adeang, Nauru's Foreign Minister, made a number of public statements in relation to the United States. He extolled Cuba and criticized US foreign policy, during a visit to the Caribbean island.  This criticism was included in the State Department's report, despite the fact that police, having undertaken an investigation of allegations of wrongdoing, made no attempt to prosecute Adeang. Shortly after Adeang's public pronouncements, a crisis, with himself at the centre, led to the collapse of President of Nauru Ludwig Scotty's government.
Trade between the United States and Nauru is limited by the latter's small size and economic problems. The value of two-way trade in 2005 was US$1.6 million.
In October 2008 the new US Ambassador to Fiji, also accredited to Nauru, pledged efforts to assist Nauru's economic development.

Other countries

Nauru has diplomatic relations with most states in Oceania. including the Holy See (Vatican City).06.1992
Nauru has established diplomatic relations also with Chile, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Maldives, North Korea,DPRK Diplomatic Relations with Nauru since 2/25/1982 Philippines, Singapore and the United Arab Emirates.
In 1995, Nauru broke off relations diplomatic relations with France to protest French nuclear testing in the Pacific. Relations were resumed in 1997.AFP news agency 12 December 1997 Micronesian state of Nauru re-establishes diplomatic relations with France
Nauru established diplomatic relations with Brazil in November 2005.
Nauru established diplomatic relations with Vietnam on 23 June 2006.
Nauru established diplomatic relations with the Czech Republic on 19 February 2007.
Nauru established diplomatic relations with Kosovo on 23 April 2008.

Nauru established diplomatic relations with Malta on 19 November 2008.The government of Malta, Nauru establish diplomatic relations
Nauru established diplomatic relations with Lithuania in 2009.
Nauru established diplomatic relations with Abkhazia on 15 December 2009.International recognition of Abkhazia and South Ossetia#States which formally recognise Abkhazia or South Ossetia as independent
Finland recognised Nauru on 29 March 1968 and established diplomatic relations on 24 March 2009.MFA of Finland
On 11 March 2010 Nauru established diplomatic relations with Slovenia.The Republic of Slovenia and the Republic of Nauru established diplomatic relations
On 21 May 2010 Nauru established diplomatic relations with Luxembourg.Luxembourg and Nauru establish diplomatic relations
On 11 April 2011 Nauru established diplomatic relations with Romania.Romania and Nauru establish diplomatic relations
On 21 April 2011 Nauru established diplomatic relations with the Seychelles.Seychelles strengthens ties with small island states and establishes diplomatic relations with Nauru
In 2011, Nauru established diplomatic relations with Montenegro to the United Nations in New York: the ambassadors of respective countries were Milorad Šćepanović (Montenegro) and Marlena Moses (Nauru).
On 24 June 2011 Nauru established diplomatic relations with Slovakia.Establishment of Diplomatic Relations between the Slovak Republic and the Republic of Nauru 
On 21 March 2012 Nauru established diplomatic relations with Estonia.Estonia Established Diplomatic Relations with Nauru
On 3 October 2012 Nauru established diplomatic relations with The Gambia.
In 2013, Nauru will begin relations with Palau.

Relations with partially recognised states

Nauru has used its position as a member of the United Nations to gain financial support from both the Republic of China (ROC) and the People's Republic of China (PRC) by changing its position on the political status of Taiwan. During 2002, Nauru signed an agreement to establish diplomatic relations with the PRC on 21 July. Nauru accepted $130m from the PRC for this action.



Missions in Nauru

Nauru and the Commonwealth of Nations

Nauru has been an independent Commonwealth republic since 1968.






