[[Chevron Corporation]]

CATEGORIES: Companies established in 1879, Companies based in San Francisco, California, Companies based in Contra Costa County, California, Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange, Companies in the Dow Jones Industrial Average, Multinational companies, Oil companies of the United States, Chemical companies of the United States, Automotive companies of the United States, Automotive fuel brands, Peabody Award winners, Chevron Corporation, Algal fuel producers, Gas stations in Canada, San Ramon, California



Chevron Corporation (
Chevron's downstream operations manufacture and sell products such as fuels, lubricants, additives and petrochemicals. The company's most significant areas of operations are the west coast of North America, the U.S. Gulf Coast, Southeast Asia, South Korea, Australia and South Africa. In 2010, Chevron sold an average 3.1 million barrels per day (490×103 m3/d) of refined products like gasoline, diesel and jet fuel.
Chevron's alternative energy operations include geothermal, solar, wind, biofuel, fuel cells, and hydrogen. In 2011–2013, the company plans to spend at least $2 billion on research and acquisition of renewable power ventures.  Chevron has claimed to be the world's largest producer of geothermal energy.  In October 2011, Chevron launched a 29-MW thermal solar-to-steam facility in the Coalinga Field to produce the steam for enhanced oil recovery. The project is the largest of its kind in the world.
Chevron has been involved in controversies and environmental and safety incidents. In 2012, a large fire due to aging equipment and lack of oversight erupted at a Chevron refinery in Richmond, California. In Ecuador, Chevron has been involved in an ongoing class action lawsuit filed by indigenous residents.

History

Predecessors

One of Chevron's early predecessors, Star Oil, was founded after it discovered oil at the Pico Canyon north of Los Angeles in 1876. According to geophysicist Marius Vassiliou, the 25 bpd well was considered the beginning of the oil industry in California and the start of Newhall field. Energy analyst Antonia Juhasz has said that while Star Oil's founders were influential in establishing an oil industry in California, Union Matolle Company discovered oil in the state eleven years prior.
Another predecessor, Texas Fuel Company, was founded in Beaumont, Texas in 1901 by "Buckskin Joe" as an oil equipment vendor. The founder's nickname came from being harsh and aggressive. Texas Fuel worked closely with Chevron. It began oil mining operations in 1936, when it formed a join venture called Caltex with Chevron to mine oil in Saudi Arabia. The Texas Fuel Company was renamed as the Texas Company and later Texaco.

Formation of the Chevron name

In 1911, Standard Oil Co. (California) was severed from its parent corporation, Standard Oil, as a result of the federal government's successful lawsuit against Standard Oil under the Sherman Antitrust Act. It went on to become part of the "Seven Sisters", which dominated the world oil industry in the early 20th century.
Standard Oil Company of California ranked 75th among United States corporations in the value of World War II military production contracts. & Scherer, Frederic M. The Weapons Acquisition Process: An Economic Analysis (1962) Harvard Business School p.619
In 1933, Saudi Arabia granted SoCal a concession to find oil, which led to the discovery of oil in 1938. In 1948, SoCal discovered the world's largest oil field (Ghawar) in Saudi Arabia.
Standard Oil of California and Gulf Oil merged in 1984, which was the largest merger in history at that time. To comply with U.S. antitrust law, SoCal divested many of Gulf's operating subsidiaries, and sold some Gulf stations and a refinery in the eastern United States. (The refinery is currently owned by Sunoco.) Among the assets sold off were Gulf's retail outlets in Gulf's home market of Pittsburgh, where Chevron lacks a retail presence but does retain a regional headquarters there as of 2013, partially for Marcellus Shale-related drilling.

Recent history

In 1996 Chevron transferred its natural gas gathering, operating and marketing operation to NGC Corporation (later Dynegy) in exchange for a roughly 25% equity stake in NGC.
On October 15, 2000, Chevron announced acquisition of Texaco in a deal valued at $45 billion, creating the second-largest oil company in the United States and the world's fourth-largest publicly traded oil company with a combined market value of approximately $95 billion.
On October 10, 2001, Texaco purchased General Motors' share in GM Ovonics, which in 2003, was restructured into Cobasys, a 50/50 joint venture between Chevron and Energy Conversion Devices Ovonics. In 2009, both Chevron and Energy Conservation Devices sold their stakes in Cobasys to SB LiMotive Co.
In 2005, Chevron purchased Unocal Corporation for $18.4 billion, increasing the company's petroleum and natural gas reserves by about 15%.
Chevron and the Los Alamos National Laboratory started a cooperation in 2006 to improve the recovery of hydrocarbons from oil shale by developing a shale oil extraction process named Chevron CRUSH.  In 2006, the United States Department of the Interior issued a research, development and demonstration lease for Chevron's demonstration oil shale project on public lands in Colorado's Piceance Basin.  In February 2012, Chevron notified the Bureau of Land Management and the Department of Reclamation, Mining and Safety that it intends to divest this lease.
In July 2011, Chevron ended retail operations in the Mid-Atlantic United States, removing the Chevron and Texaco names from 1,100 stations.
In September 2013, Total S.A and its joint venture partner agreed to buy Chevron's retail distribution business in Pakistan for an undisclosed amount.

Operations

Chevron employs approximately 62,000 people (of which approximately 31,000 are employed in U.S. operations).

Upstream

Chevron's oil and gas exploration and production operations are primarily in the US, Australia, Nigeria, Angola, Kazakhstan, and the Gulf of Mexico.  As of December 31, 2010, the company had .
In the United States, the company operates approximately 11,000 oil and natural gas wells in hundreds of fields occupying  The Gulf of Mexico is where the company's deepest offshore drilling takes place at Tahiti and Blind Faith. It also explores and drills the Marcellus Shale formation under several North Eastern US states.
Chevron's largest single resource project is the $43 billion Gorgon Gas Project in Australia. It also produces natural gas from West Australia.  The $43 billion project was started in 2010 and is expected to be brought online in 2014.
In the onshore and near-offshore regions of the Niger Delta, Chevron operates under a joint venture with the Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation, operating and holding a 40% interest in 13 concessions in the region. In addition, Chevron operates the Escravos Gas Plant and the Escravos gas-to-liquids plant.
Chevron has interests in four concessions in Angola, including offshore two concessions in Cabinda province, the Tombua–Landana development and the Mafumeira Norte project, operated by the company.  It is also a leading partner in Angola LNG plant.
In Kazakhstan, Chevron participate the Tengiz and Karachaganak projects.
As of 2013 the Rosebank oil and gas field west of Shetland was being evaluated by Chevron and its partners. Chevron drilled its discovery well there in 2004. Production is expected in 2015 if a decision is made to produce from the field. The geology and weather conditions are challenging.

Downstream

Chevron's downstream operations manufacture and sell products such as fuels, lubricants, additives and petrochemicals. The company's most significant areas of operations are the west coast of North America, the U.S. Gulf Coast, Southeast Asia, South Korea, Australia and South Africa.  In 2010, Chevron sold in average 
In 2010, Chevron processed 
Chevron's chemicals business includes 50% ownership in the Chevron Phillips Chemical Company, which manufactures petrochemicals, and the Chevron Oronite Company, which develops, manufactures and sells fuel and lubricant additives.
Chevron Shipping Company, a wholly owned subsidiary, provides the maritime transport operations, marine consulting services and marine risk management services for Chevron Corporation.

Alternative energy

The Chevron's alternative energy operations include geothermal, solar, wind, biofuel, fuel cells, and hydrogen. In 2011–2013, the company plans to spend at least $2 billion on research and acquisition of renewable power ventures.
Chevron has claimed to be the world's largest producer of geothermal energy.  The company's geothermal operations are primarily located in Southeast Asia, where  1,273 MW of power generation facilities are installed.
Chevron operates geothermal wells in Indonesia providing power to Jakarta and the surrounding area, and plans to potentially open a 200 MW geothermal facility in South Sumatra. In the Philippines, Chevron also operates geothermal wells at Tiwi field in Albay province, the Makiling-Banahaw field in Laguna and Quezon provinces.
In 2007, Chevron and the United States Department of Energy's National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) started collaboration to develop and produce algae fuel, which could be converted into transportation fuels, such as jet fuel.  In 2013, the Catchlight plan was downsized due to competition with fossil fuel projects for funds."Chevron Defies California On Carbon Emissions" Bloomberg. April 18, 2013.
Between 2006 and 2011 Chevron contributed up to $12 million to a strategic research alliance with the Georgia Institute of Technology to develop cellulosic biofuels and to create a process to convert biomass like wood or switchgrass into fuels.
Additionally, Chevron holds a 22% stake in Galveston Bay Biodiesel LP, which produces up to 
In 2010, the Chevron announced a 740 kW photovoltaic demonstration project in Bakersfield, California, called Project Brightfield, for exploring possibilities to use solar power for powering Chevron's facilities. It consists of technologies from seven companies, which Chevron is evaluating for large-scale use.

Corporate affairs

Finance

For the fiscal year 2011, Chevron reported earnings of 

Headquarters

Chevron's corporate headquarters are located in a 92-acre campus in San Ramon, California. The company moved there from its earlier headquarters at 555 Market Street in San Francisco, California, where it was located since its inception in 1879. The building will stand 50-stories and 832 feet. Upon completion, it'll be the fourth tallest building in Houston and the first 50-story building constructed there in nearly 30 years.

Political contributions

Since January 2011 Chevron has contributed almost $15 million on Washington lobbying. On October 7, 2012 Chevron donated $2.5 million to the Republican Congressional Leadership Fund super PAC that is closely tied to House Speaker John Boehner.

Board of directors

{{columns-list|2|
Condoleezza Rice is a former member of the board of directors, and also headed Chevron's committee on public policy until she resigned on January 15, 2001, to become National Security Advisor to President George W. Bush.
On September 30, 2009, John Watson, age 52, was elected Chairman of the Board and CEO, effective at the December 31, 2009 retirement of David J. O'Reilly.

Controversies

Environmental damage in Ecuador

Texaco and Gulf Oil began operating in the Oriente region of Ecuador in 1964 as a consortium.  NPR, April 30, 2009. Retrieved December 17, 2012 Texaco operated the Lago Agrio oil field from 1972 to 1993 and the Ecuador state oil company continued to operate the same oil fields after Texaco left. In 1993 Texaco was found responsible for dumping billions of gallons of toxic waste and they spent $40m cleaning up the area during the 1990s.  In 1998 the Ecuadorean government signed an agreement with Texaco accepting the clean-up as complete and absolving Texaco of any further responsibility. In 1998 an Ecuadorean scientific team took water and soil samples after Texaco left and found petroleum hydrocarbons at unsafe levels in almost half.  The clean up was called "a sham" by critics.
In 2003 a class action lawsuit against Chevron was filed in Ecuadorian court for $28 billion by indigenous residents, who accused Texaco of making residents ill and damaging forests and rivers by discharging 
In 2011, Ecuadorian  residents were awarded $8.6 billion, based on claims of loss of crops and farm animals as well as increased local cancer rates. The award was later revised to $19 billion on appeals, which was then appealed again to the Ecuadorean National Court of Justice. Reuters, October 9, 2 . Retrieved January 25, 2013  The action is considered the first time that indigenous people have successfully sued a multinational corporation in the country where the pollution took place.
Chevron described the lawsuit as an "extortion scheme" and refused to pay the fine. Since Chevron Corporation has no substantive assets in Ecuador, plaintiffs filed actions to enforce the judgment against Chevron Corporation subsidiaries in Brazil, Argentina and Canada. "Chevron's $19 Billion 'Disaster' Gets Hearing". Businessweek, November 29, 2012. Retrieved January 15, 2013 In February 2013, a three-person tribunal, acting under The Hague's Permanent Court of Arbitration, said the Ecuador government should have stopped plaintiffs in the case from going to courts in Brazil, Argentina and Canada to try to collect the judgment handed down by an Ecuadorean court in 2011.  A spokesperson for the plaintiffs said the "courts hearing enforcement actions would likely pay little attention to the tribunal since it was not binding on the rain-forest communities".
In May 2013, Justice David Brown of the Ontario Superior Court stayed the action, but ruled that the Canadian courts have no jurisdiction to enforce the award ruled by an Ecuadorian court.CTV "Judge dismisses $19B Ecuador judgment against Chevron's Canadian subsidiary"
In June 2013, Argentina's Supreme Court revoked an embargo on the assets and future income of Chevron's Argentina subsidiary.wsj.html"Argentina's Top Court Unfreezes Chevron Assets"
In September 2013, The Hague arbitration panel ruled in favor of Chevron finding that an agreement signed in 1995 by the government of Ecuador released Texaco Corporation from financial responsibility from any claims of "collective damage."  However, the panel left open the possibility that Chevron could still be liable for damages incurred by individuals.Panel Rules for Chevron in Ecuador Amazon Case - ABC News
In March 2014, a United States district court judge ruled that the Ecuadorian plaintiff's lead attorney, Steven Donziger, had used "corrupt means," including "coercion, bribery, money laundering and other misconduct," to obtain the 2011 court verdict in Ecuador. The judge did not rule on the underlying issue of environmental damages. While the US ruling does not affect the decision of the court in Ecuador, it has blocked efforts to collect damages from Chevron in US courts. Donziger promised to appeal. 2014.

Pollution in Richmond, California

Chevron's activities at its century-old Richmond refinery have been the subject of ongoing controversy. The project generated over 11 million pounds of toxic materials and caused more than 304 accidents.

Oil spills in Angola

Chevron's operations in Africa have also been criticized as environmentally unsound.

Violation of the Clean Air Act in the USA

On October 16, 2003, Chevron U.S.A. settled a charge under the Clean Air Act, which reduced harmful air emissions by about 10,000 tons a year. Chevron also had implemented programs that minimized production of hazardous gases, upgraded leak detection and repair procedure, reduced emissions from sulfur recovery plants, and adopted strategies to ensure the proper handling of harmful benzene wastes at refineries. Chevron also spent about $500,000 to install leakless valves and double-sealed pumps at its El Segundo refinery, which could prevent significant emissions of air contaminants.
Defenders of Chevron's environmental record point to recent changes in the corporation, particularly its pledge in 2004 to combat global warming.

NiMH battery technology for automobiles

Chevron was accused to be limiting access to large NiMH batteries through its stake in Cobasys corporation and control of patent licenses in order to remove a competitor to gasoline.  This culminated in a lawsuit against Panasonic and Toyota over production of the EV-95 battery used in the RAV4 EV.shareholder.cfm?filingID=950123-10-82515 
In addition, Chevron maintained the right to seize all of Cobasys' intellectual property rights if ECD Ovonics does not fulfill its contractual obligations."ECD Ovonics Amended General Statement of Beneficial Ownership". Shareholder. for the period ending September 30, 2007
In October 2007, International Acquisitions Services and Innovative Transportation Systems filed suit against Cobasys and its parents for refusing to fill an order for large-format NiMH batteries to be used in the electric Innovan.S. International filed suit against Cobasys, on the ground Cobasys did not tender the batteries it agreed to build for Mercedes-Benz's planned hybrid SUV."Mercedes sues Cobasys over battery deal" Automotive News Europe

Niger Delta shootings

On May 28, 1998, activists staged a demonstration and took several individuals hostage on a company oil platform in the Niger Delta, Nigeria. Nigerian police and soldiers were allegedly flown in with Chevron helicopters. In December 2008, a federal jury cleared Chevron of all charges brought against them in the case.  Chevron had claimed that the military intervention was necessary to protect the lives of its workers and considers the jury's decision vindication for the accusations of wrongdoing.S.F. jury clears Chevron of protest shootings. Bob Egelko, sfgate.  Published December 2, 2008.  Last accessed December 3, 2008.

UN sanctions

US Embassy Cable BAGHDAD 000791 relates to company negotiations re investment in Iran in contravention of UN sanctions.

2012 fire at Richmond, California refinery

On August 6, 2012, a large fire erupted at a Chevron refinery in Richmond, California.
On April 15, 2013, the US Chemical Safety Board released their preliminary report citing Chevron for a chronic failure to replace aging equipment and called for an overhaul of regulatory oversight of the industry to prevent such accidents from happening again. Around the same time the settlement was announced, the Richmond city council voted to file suit against Chevron. The reasons for the suit included "a continuation of years of neglect, lax oversight and corporate indifference to necessary safety inspection and repairs."

Oil spill off the coast of Rio de Janeiro

On November 8, 2011, Chevron came under fire by Brazilian authorities for its role in the spill of crude oil off of the southeastern coast of Brazil.

KS Endeavor explosion

The KS Endeavor jackup rig exploded on January 16, 2012 while drilling an exploration well for Chevron in the Funiwa field in Nigeria.  The explosion resulted in the death of two of the 154 workers on board and a fire that burned for 46 days before the well was sealed on June 18.   According to a Reuters news report, workers on the KS Endeavor were ignored by Chevron when they requested evacuation due to concerns of increasing smoke billowing from the drilling borehole.  A senior worker said the blowout was triggered by a massive build-up of pressure.  A witness said that rig engineers advised Chevron to stop drilling and evacuate staff but Chevron told them to continue with drilling.   Expecting an explosion, the rig manager, one of the two that later died, kept the lifeboats at hand and ready for use.  A witness reported: "This is the reason so many of us survived because we were all aware that it was going to happen, but just didn't know when."
In an email response to Reuters, Chevron said it did not receive requests to evacuate the  rig and that staff on board had the right to call a halt to work if they believed conditions were unsafe.

Destruction of natural forest in Bangladesh

On June 26, 2008, a fire in Lawachara National Park (a natural forest; a major national park, rare of its kind in the region, and crucial to maintain the biodiversity of Bangladesh's flora & fauna) had broken out as Chevron Corp. carried out a 3D seismic survey that was to be six-months long. The company had violated the conditions of the government's environment clearance certificate by not informing the ministry about the cracks that had occurred in nearby residents' properties due to explosions caused by their activities.

Polish gas exploration

Chevron has experienced mass protests aimed at the company by local communities in Southern Poland when they started gas exploration in the region. Their complaint is that Chevron didn't provide all of the documents required for gas exploration in Poland, and that the company has not promised to share a percentage of the revenues with the local landholders. The landholders of the region view Chevron's presence in the region negatively since they may be forced to sell their properties at a low cost if gas is discovered in the region.  As well, potential environmental disasters are a concern for local farmers.  Another of the residents' primary concern is water pollution from the chemicals used in fracking. In response to some of the protests Chevron has sued some of the protesters from Żurawlów for disrupting their operations.gazeta.html
According to gas and oil expert Andrzej Szczesniak, one of the main reasons for the protest is the difference between Polish and American law. In the USA property owners typically receive 15-20% from the income of gas exploration.  In Poland, the discovery of gas on private property usually results in a forced sale of the property, with the owner receiving only the prior value of the land and no percentage of the gas revenue. This is the result of outdated, Communist Era laws that are still on the books and which are often exploited by municipal governments if they can get a 'kick back' from a larger company.eko-unia.pl/ekounia/index.php/de/strona-glowna/lupki/wiadomosci/765-przez-upki-premier-tusk-moe-straci-dziak

Romanian gas exploration

In October 2013, Chevron suspended its drilling plans in Pungești, Vaslui County, where villagers had been opposing shale gas exploration due to fears of ground water contamination. Thousands more protested throughout Romania, and in December protests became violent when Chevron announced plans to resume exploration. Following the incident, Chevron said it was again suspending activities in the area.canalblog.html

Argentina agreement, repression of environmentalists, workers and Native Americans

After the 2012 decision of the Argentine government to regain  control of the biggest oil company of the country, YPF, the search for foreign investors for exploitation of unconventional oil started. Finally in 2013, YPF and Chevron signed an agreement for the Vaca Muerta oil field, the world's second-largest shale gas deposit . In August 2013, the Congress of Neuquén province voted on the agreement. A massive peaceful protest of between 5,000  and 10,000  Plastic and traditional bullets were fired.occupy.argentinaindependent.com/tag/ypf/









