[[Vranje]]

CATEGORIES: Populated places in Pčinja District, Municipalities and cities of Southern and Eastern Serbia

Vranje () is a city located in southern Serbia. The population of the city administrative area is 83,524, while the urban area has 55,138 people. It is the administrative center of the Pčinja District of Serbia.

Name and history

There is no reliable information when and where the settlement on which foundations was build Vranje. It is assumed that it happened during Roman or Greek period and the region itself was inhabited by various Ilyrian and Thracian tribes. One thing was clear, that region where Vranje is located was very important, because many caravan roads and armies who went north passed through Vranje valley.
The Romans conquered the region in the 2nd or 1st centuries BC. Vranje was part of Moesia Superior and Dardania during the Roman rule. The Roman fortresses in the Vranje region was abandoned during the Hun attacks in 539–544 AD, these include the localities of Kale at Vranjska Banja, Gradište in Korbevac and Gradište in Prvonek.
Modern name stems from the old word for "black" ("vran") in the Serbian language and first appears in the Alexiad by Byzantine princess and scholar Anna Comnena (1083–1153):

In the 1193. Vranje was seized by the Grand Prince Stefan Nemanja from the Byzantines. However, soon afterward he retreated. Vranje definitely entered Serbian state in 1207 when it was conquered by Stefan the First-Crowned.
During the fall of the Serbian Empire, Vranje was independent under Uglješa Vlatković, ''the Lord of Vranje, Preševo and Kumanovo.'' Uglješa Vlatković became vassal of Stefan Lazarević, after the Battle of Tripolje, so Vranje became part of Serbian Despotate.
Ottomans conquered Vranje on 14. June 1455. The town held important position during their rule and many wealthy Muslims lived in Vranje and they had built several mosques, Amam and residence of the pashas – Pašin konak. The town was part of the Sanjak of Niš. Vranje was under Ottoman rule for 422 years and was liberated by the Serbian army under the command of general Jovan Belimarković. During this time city had around 8000 residents, mostly Serbs.
In the early 20th century, Vranje had around 12000 inhabitants. As a border town of the Kingdom of Serbia, it was used as the starting point for the Četniks and Komitas who fought against the Ottomans in the Old Serbia.
In the First Balkan war, Main headquarters of the Serbian army was situated in the town and King Peter I Karađorđević, Prime Minister Nikola Pašić and the Chief of staff General Radomir Putnik stayed in the town.
In the First World War, Vranje was conquered by the Kingdom of Bulgaria on 16/17 October 1915. Bulgarians implemented Bulgarisation against non-Bulgarian population of Vranje and committed numerous war crimes.
After the war, Vranje was part of the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes in one of the 33 oblasts and in 1929, it became part of the Vardar Banovina. During the Second World War, German Nazis entered the town on 9. April 1941 and transferred it to Bulgarian fascists on 22. April 1941. During the Bulgarian rule, 400 Serbs was shot and around 4000 Serb patriots was interned. Vranje was liberated by the Yugoslav People's Army on 7. September 1944.
Vranje became part of the Pčinja District in the new Yugoslavia and in the 1960s and 1970s it was industrialized. During the 1990s, the economy of Vranje was heavily affected by the Sanctions against Yugoslavia and 1999 NATO bombing.

Geography

Vranje is the economic, political and cultural center of Pčinja District consisting of Bosilegrad, Bujanovac, Vladičin Han, Preševo, Surdulica, Trgovište and Vranje municipalities. The city is located in the southwest of Vranje valley, on the left bank of the South Morava river. The river and the city are divided by the main road and railway line, which leads: to the north Leskovac (70 km), Niš (110 km) and Belgrade (347 km), and to the south: Kumanovo (56 km), Skopje (91 km) and Thessalonica (354 km).
Vranje is located at base of the mountains Pljačkovica (1231 m), Krstilovice (1154 m) and Pržar (731 m) and it is located  from the border with the Macedonia.
Eparchy of Vranje is located in the city and the 4th Land Force Brigade of the Serbian army is stationed is located there.

Culture

Vranje was an important Ottoman trading site. The White Bridge is a symbol of the city and is called "most ljubavi" (Lovers bridge) after the tale about the forbidden love between the Muslim girl Ajša and Christian Stojan that resulted in the father killing the couple. After that, he built the bridge where he had killed her and had the story in-scripted in Ottoman Arabic. The 11th century Markovo kale fortress is in the north of the city. The city has traditional Balkan architecture as well as Ottoman.
The well-known theater play "Koštana" by Bora Stanković is placed in Vranje.
Vranje is famous for its popular, old music, lively and melancholic at the same time. The best known music is from the theater piece with music, "Koštana", by Bora Stanković. This original music style has been renewed recently by taking quite different and quite specific, and more oriental form, with the contribution of rich brass instruments. It is played particularly by the Vranje Gypsies

Institutions

Tourism

Vranje is the seat of Pčinja District and as such is a major center for cultural events in the district. Most notable annual events are: Borina nedelja, Stari dani, Dani karanfila (in Vranjska Banja)...
Vranje lies close to Besna Kobila mountain and Vranjska Banja, two locations with high potential which are currently underdeveloped. Other locations in and around Vranje with some tourist potential include Prohor Pčinjski monastery, Kale-Krševica, Markovo kale, Pržar, birth-house museum of Bora Stankovic...
Largest hotels are Hotel "Vranje", located near the center and Hotel "Pržar" overlooking the city and the valley. The city has numerous traditional Serbian cuisine as well as international cuisine restaurants and many cafes and bars.

Economy

Vranje is located in southern Serbia, on Corridor X near the border with Macedonia and Bulgaria. Distance from Thessalonica international harbor is . Thanks to the excellent transport connections of Vranje, anyone can easily access the markets of southeastern Europe (CEFTA) and the European Union, with all the tax reliefs that Serbia have with these markets. Vranje has a long tradition of industrial production, trade, and tourism and is rich in natural resources, such as forests and geothermal resources.Агенција за страна улагања и промоцију извоза Републике Србије (СИЕПА) – Град Врање
Until the second half of the 20th century Vranje was a craftsman town. The crafts included: weaving, water-milling, and carriages craft. With the beginning of industrialization in the 1960s, many of these crafts disappeared. In those years, many factories were opened, such as the Tobacco Industry of Vranje (Дуванска индустрија Врање), Simpo, Shoe factory Koštana, cotton plant Yumco, industry of technical goods Alfa Plam, SZP Zavarivač Vranje. In 1961 there were 1525 employees, in 1971, 4374 employees and in 1998, a total of 32,758 employees, of which 28,347 were in business and 4,411 outside of it.
After the Bulldozer revolution in 2000, the number of employees began to drop, due to the closure of many factories like Yumco and Koštana. Employees in 2010 numbered 18,958 and there were 7559 unemployed people. The entire city of Vranje has 59,278 available workers. In Vranje the most common industries are: timber industry, clothing, footwear and furniture, food and beverages, agricultural, textile industry, chemical industry, construction industry, machinery and equipment, and business services. In Vranje there are more than 2,500 small and medium size companies. To potential investors there several industrial sites are available, with plan documents and furnished infrastructure. Among the companies with business locations in the city are: British American Tobacco, Simpo, Sanch, Kenda Farben, Danny style, OMV and Hellenic Petroleum.
In 2010 the City council passed the "Strategy of sustainable development of the city of Vranje from 2010 to 2019," for the achievement of objectives through a transparent and responsible business partnership with industry and the public.

Famous or notable citizens

Demographics

Population of Vranje has been permanently refreshed by the newcomers from its surroundings as well by the Serb refugees who emigrated from Kosovo and Metohija during the last 2 decades. The last wave of emigration was in 1999, following the 1999 NATO bombing of Yugoslavia.
Ethnic composition of the municipality:
Population of the municipality in history:

International relations

Twin towns – sister cities

Vranje is twinned with:

Municipalities

The city of Vranje includes two municipalities: Vranje and Vranjska Banja.popis2011.rs/2011/prvi_rezultati.pdf
Municipal area of two municipalities of Vranje includes the following settlements:








