[[New Jersey Institute of Technology]]

CATEGORIES: New Jersey Institute of Technology, Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities, Public universities, Public universities in the United States, Technical universities and colleges, Universities and colleges in New Jersey, Educational institutions established in 1881, Education in Newark, New Jersey, Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools, Universities and colleges in Essex County, New Jersey, Universities and colleges in Newark, New Jersey, Business incubators of the United States, Land-grant universities and colleges

The New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT) is a public research university located in the University Heights neighborhood of Newark, New Jersey, United States. NJIT is New Jersey's Science & Technology University.
Founded in 1881 with the support of Newark's 19th-century industrialists and inventors especially Edward Weston
NJIT opened with 88 students most of whom attended part-time. As of fall 2013, the university enrolls over 10,000 students, more than 2,200 of whom live on campus, including 600 in Warren Street Village.
NJIT offers 126 degree programs including 48 undergraduate (Bachelor of Science/Arts) majors,  These include: a program in medicine (M.D.) with New Jersey Medical School (Rutgers); an accelerated engineering + law dual degree (BS, JD) with Seton Hall Law School; and a program in Optometry (O.D.) with the SUNY College of Optometry in Manhattan.
The university is organized into 27 academic departments. Three departments, Biological Sciences, History, and Theater Arts, are federated with Rutgers–Newark whose campus borders NJIT's.
Research at NJIT has grown substantially in the past decade, exceeding $107 million in 2013.
NJIT is a member of the Association of Public and Land-grant Universities. It is also a sea-grant college, and a member of the Association of Collegiate Schools of Architecture. A leader in attracting first-generation, low-income, and underrepresented students into STEM fields, the university has participated in the Ronald E. McNair Post-Baccalaureate Achievement Program since 1999.

History

The New Jersey Institute of Technology has a history dating back to the industrial age.
In 1881, an act of the New Jersey State Legislature essentially drew up a contest to determine which municipality would become home to the state's urgently needed technical school. The challenge was straightforward: the state would stake "at least $3,000 and not more than $5,000" and the municipality that matched the state's investment would earn the right to establish the new school.
The Newark Board of Trade, working jointly with the Newark City Council, launched a feverish campaign to win the new school. Dozens of the city's industrialists, along with other private citizens, eager for a work force resource in their home town, threw their support behind the fund-raiser. By 1884, the collaboration of the public and private sectors produced success. Newark Technical School was ready to open its doors.
The first 88 students, mostly evening students, attended classes in a rented building at 21 West Park Street. Soon the facility became inadequate to house an expanding student body. To meet the needs of the growing school, a second fund-raiser—the institution's first capital campaign—was launched to support the construction of a dedicated building for Newark Technical School. In 1886, under the leadership of the school's dynamic first director, Dr. Charles A. Colton, the cornerstone was laid at the intersection of High Street and Summit Place for the three-story building later to be named Weston Hall, in honor of the institution's early benefactor. A laboratory building, later to be called Colton Hall, was added to the campus in 1911.
Dr. Allan R. Cullimore led the institution from 1920 to 1949, transforming Newark Technical School into Newark College of Engineering (name adopted in 1930). Campbell Hall was erected in 1925, but due to the Depression and World War II, only the former Newark Orphan Asylum, now Eberhardt Hall, was purchased and renovated by the college in the succeeding decades. Cullimore left an unpublished history of the institution dated 1955.
As of 1946, about 75% of the freshman class had served in the armed forces. Cullimore Hall was built in 1958 and two years later the old Weston Hall was razed and replaced with the current seven-story structure. Doctoral level programs were introduced and six years later, in 1966, an , four building expansion was completed.
In 1975, with the addition of the New Jersey School of Architecture, the institution had evolved into a technological university, emphasizing a broad range of graduate and undergraduate degrees and dedication to significant research and public service. While Newark College of Engineering remains, a new university name—New Jersey Institute of Technology—was chosen to represent the institution's expanded mission.
thumb|right|Eberhardt Hall  The establishment of a residential campus and the opening of NJIT's first dormitory (Redwood Hall) in 1979 began a period of steady growth that continues today under the 2005 Landscape Master Plan. Two new schools were established at the university during the 1980s, the College of Science and Liberal Arts in 1982 and the School of Industrial Management in 1988. The Albert Dorman Honors College was established in 1994, and the newest school, the College of Computing Sciences, was created in 2001. As of Fall 2013 there are 5 residence halls on campus: Redwood Hall, Cypress Hall, Oak Hall, Laurel Hall, and the Dorman Honors Residence, in addition to several Greek houses.
In 2003, the launch of the new Campus Center on the site of the former Hazell Hall centralized campus social events. Construction of a new Atrium, Bookstore, Information Desk, Dining Hall, computer lab, and new student organization offices continued into 2004. In 2005, a row of automobile chop shops adjacent to campus were demolished. In 2006, construction of a new off-campus residence hall by American Campus Communities commenced in the chop shops' prior location. The new hall which opened in 2007 is dubbed the University Centre.
Robert A. Altenkirch was inaugurated as president on May 2, 2003 and retired in 2012. He succeeded Saul K. Fenster, who was named the university's sixth president in 1978.
Also in 2005, Eberhardt Hall was fully renovated and re-inaugurated as the Alumni Center and the symbolic front door to the university. Its restored tower was the logo of the former Newark College of Engineering and was designed by Kevin Boyajian and Scott Nelson. A rebranding campaign with the current slogan, "NJIT – New Jersey's Science and Technology University – The Edge in Knowledge", was launched to emphasize NJIT's unique position as New Jersey's preeminent science-and-technology-focused research university.
Recently, the school has changed its accredited management school into AACSB-accredited business school. The business school focuses on utilizing technology to serve business needs. The school benefits from its close location to New York City; the financial capital of the world. It is located 25 minutes from Wall Street. The school has also strong academic collaboration with Rutgers business school. NJIT has a tie-up with Heritage Institute of Technology for summer internships.
In 2009, the New Jersey School of Architecture was transformed into the College of Architecture and Design (CoAD).  Within the college, the New Jersey School of Architecture continues, and it is joined by the newly established School of Art + Design.NJIT Press Release 2009-055
In June 2010, NJIT officially completed its purchase of the old Central High School building'NJIT: Status of Central High (by NJIT President Robert A. Altenkirch)' which sits in between NJIT and Rutgers–Newark campus.  With the completion of the purchase, Summit Street (from Warren Street to New Street) would be totally converted into a pedestrian walkway from a public street. The existing old 'Central High School' building is earmarked to be extensively renovated, preserved and used as classrooms as per the Campus Master Plan'NJIT: Campus Master Plan 2008' which includes tearing down of Kupfrian Hall to create more greenery.
Travel and Leisure's October 2013 issue named the university among America's ugliest college campuses, citing the 2013 Princeton Review survey which rated it as the least beautiful college campus in the country, and noting that the university "suffers from a mishmash of architectural styles" ranging from the "Gothic" Eberhardt Hall, a former orphans' asylum, to the "crematorium Modernism" Redwood residence hall."America's Ugliest College Campuses", Travel & Leisure October 2013
As of the fall of 2013, the university has 7,286 undergraduate students, 2,844 graduate students  The male-to-female student ratio is about 3.2:1  Enrollment is currently 10,130 

Admissions

The average SAT score (math + verbal only) for enrolling freshmen in Fall 2013 was 1,163 (614 Math, 549 Verbal). 
The average SAT score (math + verbal only) for enrolling freshmen to Honors College in 2008 is 1323 and a GPA of 3.65.njit.php
The minimum SAT score (math + verbal only) for enrolling freshmen to the Accelerated BS/MD program (combined with University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey) is 1400. 

Schools and Colleges within NJIT

Albert Dorman Honors College

Albert Dorman Honors College, the honors institution at NJIT, was formed in 1985 with the intention to help high achieving students perform to their full potential.  Students in the Honors College have a chance to study and interact with other high achieving students as well as distinguished faculty members.NJIT: Albert Dorman Honors College: About the Albert Dorman Honors College

Research

thumb|180px|left|Big Bear Solar Observatory  The university is known foremost for its research capabilities in many fields, especially nanotechnology, solar physics, polymer science, and the development of a smart gun technology. The university research centers include the National Center for Transportation and Industrial Productivity and SmartCampus. The university hosts the Metro New York FIRST Robotics office. The university also hosts the Center for Solar-Terrestrial Research which owns and operates the Big Bear Solar Observatory, the world's largest solar observatory, located in Big Bear Lake, California, and operates the Owens Valley Solar Array, near Bishop, California.
thumb|150px|right| Owens Valley Solar Array  In the past, NJIT was home to the Computerized Conferencing and Communications Center,(CCCC), a premier research center for furthering the state of the art in Computer-mediated communication. The systems that resulted from this research are the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES), as well as the continuations: The Electronic Information Exchange System 2 (EIES2), and the Tailorable Electronic Information Exchange System (TEIES). One of the foremost developments of EIES was that of the Virtual Classroom (TM), a term coined by Dr. Starr Roxanne Hiltz. This was the first e-learning platform in the world, and was unique in that it evolved onto an existing communications system, rather than having a system created specifically for it. Their missions completed, the CCCC and EIES were terminated in the mid-90s.
The university currently operates a Class-10 cleanroom and a Class-1000 cleanroom on campus for academic and research purposesNJIT : MFC Facilities including counter-bioterrorism research.NJIT : A new phase in fighting terrorism
The university also maintains an advanced 67-node supercomputer cluster in its Mathematics Department for research purposes.

Student life

Student government

=Student Senate=

Purpose
Duties/Objectives

=Graduate Student Association=

Purpose
Duties/Objectives

Student organizations

thumb|180px|right|NJIT is located in the vibrant University Heights section of Newark. 'A campus gateway redevelopment plan' is expected to bring about a great transformation to the adjacent neighborhood in the next few years. thumb|180px|right|NJIT plays club-level ice hockey at the Prudential Center in the Great Northeast Collegiate Hockey Conference. 
 

Honor societies

Greek life

=Fraternities=

=Sororities=

=Service/Professional Fraternities=

Athletics

NJIT's sports teams are called the NJIT Highlanders. The school colors are red and white, with navy.  NJIT's athletic teams compete in the NCAA Division I (full membership officially 1 September 2009'NJIT : NJIT Officially Gains Active NCAA Division I Membership'). The men's volleyball team plays in the Eastern Intercollegiate Volleyball Association (EIVA) conference, the men's swimming and diving team plays in the Coastal Collegiate Swimming Association, the men's soccer team plays in the Sun Belt Conference, the women's tennis team plays in the America East Conference, and the rest of the teams play as independents after the demise of the Great West Conference after the 2012–13 season.  The club-level ice hockey team plays in the Great Northeast Collegiate Hockey Conference. In December 2013, NJIT announced intentions to form a Division I Men's Lacrosse program for the 2015 season.NJIT: News: NJIT Names Travis Johnson to Lead New Division I Men's Lacrosse Program
The sports available at NJIT are:

Residence life

Mission statement

"To collaborate with students, faculty and staff in providing residential services that support students' academic and personal development by fostering diverse, engaging and responsible learning communities."ResLife Main Page

Living on campus

Over 70% of NJIT students commute to campus. Since 1978 students have been able to live on the NJIT campus. The Residence Life community consists of 1,666 students currently. 
There are five residence halls on the NJIT campus. Redwood Hall was the first constructed in 1978 followed by Cypress, Oak and Laurel halls. Each hall has a unique character with Cypress and Redwood being primarily freshman halls and Laurel and Oak designated upperclassmen halls.  The Warren Street Village opened in the Fall 2013 semester, including housing in the Dorman Honors Residence and several Greek houses which together add space for nearly 600 students.  The Dorman Honors Residence also houses the Albert Dorman Honors College and several dining facilities.com
A new almost-on-campus resident hall completed in 2007 known as 'University Center' (run by American Campus Communities) just beside the InfoTech building also accommodates students from NJIT and neighboring Rutgers–Newark, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey and Seton Hall University.
Food services on campus are provided by Gourmet Dining Services or GDS. Taco Bell, Spice Cafe, a salad shop (Leafs & Grains), coffee shop (Tech Café), sandwich shop (Part of Leafs & Grains) and a convenience store (The C-Store) are also all available on campus. GDS also operates The Highlander Club (also known as The Pub) on the third floor of the campus center. Here, students can order take-out food of different varieties such as burgers, wings, and personal pizzas. A special 21 and over section also offers alcohol for sale. There are also "grease" trucks, that are located on campus, which serve food.

Noteworthy events on campus

Traditions

Notable alumni and faculty

Since its founding in 1881, NJIT has issued degrees to approximately 70,000 graduates.

Architecture

Business

Politics and military

Science and engineering

Sports and entertainment

NJIT university presidents

NJIT professors and administrators

Professors and administrators at other universities

Student Exchange Programme

NJIT has a summer student exchange programme with Heritage Institute of Technology, Kolkata. Every summer in the month of June, students from HITK visit NJIT to do summer training/internship as part of their university (Wbut's) course curriculum.

Ranking

NOTE: The Princeton Review ranking statistics are based on the best 371 colleges of more than 2500 colleges in USA.



Notes

Footnotes




