[[Novi Pazar]]

CATEGORIES: Populated places in Raška District, Sandžak, Municipalities and cities of Šumadija and Western Serbia, Novi Pazar

Novi Pazar (Serbian Cyrillic: Нови Пазар,  A multicultural area of Muslims and Orthodox Christians, many monuments of both communities like the Church of St. Apostles Peter and Paul and the Altun-Alem mosque are found in the region. As of the 2011 census, the population of the municipal area of Novi Pazar was 100,410, while the city itself had a population of 66,527.popis2011.rs/2012/Nacionalna%20pripadnost-Ethnicity.pdf

Name

Novi Pazar means "new marketplace", which in turn was derived from Slavic placename Trgovište 'market', found near the modern city. During the Ottoman rule, it was known as Yeni Pazar (meaning "new market" in Turkish), which is derived from bazaar (

Geography

Novi Pazar is located in the valleys of the Jošanica, Raška, Deževska, and Ljudska rivers at the elevation of 496m, in southeast Sandžak (Raška) region. The city is surrounded by Golija and Rogozna mountains; Pešter plateau lies southeast from the city. The total area of the municipality is 742 km². It contains over 100 settlements, mostly small and spread over hills and mountains surrounding the city. The largest surrounding village is Mur with over 3000 residents.
List of villages in the municipality, with population from the 2002 census:

History

One of the oldest monuments of the area is the Church of the Apostles Peter and Paul first built in the Roman era.
The capital city of the Principality of Serbia, Ras, which was ruled by the Vlastimirović dynasty from 768 to 980 is found near the city and has been designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site. In the next centuries, the region of modern Novi Pazar served as the principal province of the Serbian realm. It was an administrative division under the direct rule of the monarch and sometimes as an appanage. It was the crownland, seat or appanage of various Serbian states throughout the Middle Ages, among the Serbian Kingdom (1217-1345) and the Serbian Empire (1345-1371). In 1427, the region and the remnant of Ras, as part of the Serbian Despotate was ruled by Serbian despot Đurađ Branković. One of the markets was called "despotov trg" (Despot's square). In 1439, the region was captured by Ottoman Empire, but was reconquered by the Serbian Despotate in 1444. In the summer of 1455, the Ottomans annexed the region again, and named the settlement of Trgovište Eski Bazar (Old Market).
Novi Pazar was formally founded as a city in its own right in 1461 by Ottoman general Isa-Beg Isaković, the Bosnian governor of the district (sanjak) and founder of Sarajevo. Isa-Beg Isaković decided to establish a new town on the area of Trgovište as an urban center between Raška and Jošanica, where at first he built a mosque, a public bath, a marketplace, a hostel, and a compound.
It was the chief town of the Ras province (vilayet until its disestablishment in 1463, when it became part of the Jeleč Vilayet. The first written document which mentions Novi Pazar dates from the 15th century, and describes the decision of the Republic of Ragusa to appoint a consul there. Thus the town was already developed at that time, being at the intersection of important routes leading to Dubrovnik, Niš, Sofia, Constantinople, Salonica, Sarajevo, Belgrade and Budapest. The town also remained the capital of the Sanjak of Novi Pazar, which continued until the 20th century as a constitutive unit of Bosnia Eyalet. The sanjak was occupied and administered by Austria-Hungary from 1878. In 1908 it was returned to the Ottoman Empire, but taken over by Serbia in 1912 during the First Balkan War.  Nikola Bošković (1642–1721), the father of the famous Ragusan scientist Ruđer Bošković (1711–1787), migrated to Novi Pazar, where he spent the last years of his life.
Today, Novi Pazar is the main economic and cultural centre, as well as the largest town, in the south Raška region.

Demographics

From the 15th century to the Balkan Wars, Novi Pazar was the capital of the sanjak of Novi Pazar. Typically, like other centres of the wider area, its composition was multiethnic, with Albanians, Serbs and Slavic-speaking Muslims (Bosniaks) as the main communities. when the entire Jewish population of Novi Pazar - 221 individuals, were imprisoned, sent to the concentration camp Staro Sajmište and killed during the rule of Aćif Hadžiahmetović.48

Municipality Data

Urban area data

According to the data of Red Cross and NGOs, the city hosts about 6,000 Serb refugees from Kosovo, Bosnia, and Croatia.

Politics

Novi Pazar is governed by a city assembly composed of 47 councillors, a mayor and vice-mayor. After the last legislative election held in 2012, the local assembly is composed of the following groups:Skupština grada

Economy

Lying on crossroads between numerous old and new states, Novi Pazar has always been a strong trade center. Along with the trade, the city developed manufacturing tradition. During the 20th century, it became a center of textile industry.
Paradoxically, during the turbulent 1990s and, Novi Pazar prospered, even during the UN sanctions, boosted by the strong private initiative in textile industry. Jeans of Novi Pazar, first of forged trademarks, and later on its own labels, became famous throughout the region. However, during the relative economic prosperity in Serbia of 2000s, the Novi Pazar economy collapsed, with demise of large textile combines in mismanaged privatization, and incoming competition from the import.

Culture

The old Serb Orthodox monastery of Sopoćani, the foundation of St. King Uroš I, built in the second half of the 13th century and located west of Novi Pazar, is a World Heritage Site since 1979 accompanying with Stari Ras (Old Ras), a medieval capital of the Serbian great župan Stefan Nemanja.
The city also houses an old church from the 9th-century Church of St. Peter. The main mosque of the city, the Altun-Alem mosque, is the largest in this region of the Balkans and dates from 16th century. There are various other historic Ottoman buildings, such as the 17th-century Amir-agin Han, a 15th-century Hammam, and the 15th-century Turkish fortress (all gone but the walls, the site of which is now a walled park in the city centre).

Education

Novi Pazar is home to two universities, the University of Novi Pazar and the State University of Novi Pazar.

Sport

The city's football club FK Novi Pazar was founded in 1928, under the name "FK Sandžak", which later changed to "FK Deževa". The club has played under its current name since 1962, when Deževa and another local football club, FK Ras, unified under this name. The club was a SFRJ amateur champion, and a member of the Yugoslav Second League. FK Novi Pazar qualified for a promotional play-off twice, but lost both times (to FK Sutjeska Nikšić in 1994, and to FK Sloboda Užice in 1995). FK Novi Pazar is the oldest second-league team in Serbia. Football is still extremely popular sport in Novi Pazar and city stadium is always full. The President of FK Novi Pazar is Rasim Ljajic, a minister in the government of the Republic of Serbia.
Volleyball clubs in the city are OK Novi Pazar (second league) and OK Koteks.
Handball club is in second league and used to have name "Ras" but it was changed in RK Novi Pazar in 2004.
Famous athletes from the city include Mirsad Jahović Türkcan, Turkish basketball national team player, Sead Halilagić, former football player of Besiktas, handball-player Mirsad Terzić (who represents Bosnia-Herzegovina) and young football players Adem Ljajić (represents Serbia), Ediz Bahtiyaroğlu, and alpinist Basar Čarovac who climbed all seven continents' highest peaks.

Notable residents








