[[Mighty River Power]]

CATEGORIES: Government-owned companies of New Zealand, Power companies of New Zealand

Mighty River Power Limited () is a New Zealand electricity generation and electricity retailing company.  It was formed from  the breakup of the Electricity Corporation of New Zealand (ECNZ) in 1999 as a result one of the reforms of the New Zealand Electricity Market and corporatised to become a state-owned enterprise with its own board of directors and Ministerial shareholders. A state-owned enterprise from its founding, it was partially privatised by the Fifth National Government in May 2013, with the government retaining a 51.78 percent shareholding and the remaining 48.22 percent listed on the stock market.
The company owns and operates the hydroelectric generating stations on the Waikato River as well as geothermal plants in the Taupo area, the gas fired (combined cycle) Southdown plant in south Auckland and the largely unused plant (Marsden A and Marsden B) at Marsden Point near Whangarei.
In 2012, Mighty River Power produced 17% of the country's electricity.

History

Mighty River Power was established on 1 April 1999, when the 1998 reform of the electricity sector took effect. The Electricity Corporation of New Zealand (ECNZ) was broken up into three state-owned generating companies - Mighty River Power, Genesis Energy and Meridian Energy. Mighty River Power took over the ownership and operation of the eight hydroelectric power stations on the Waikato River, New Zealand's longest, and also inherited the assets of two largely decommissioned oil-fired power stations at Marsden Point, near Whangarei.
In addition, the 1998 reforms forced the separation between lines (transmission and distribution) and supply (generation and retailing). On 1 April 1999, Mercury Energy, then the major lines and supply company for Auckland, New Zealand's largest city, was split between lines and supply. Mighty River Power inherited Mercury Energy's retail base and its share in the Southdown Power Station (in conjunction with the Natural Gas Corporation). Mercury Energy then became the name of Mighty River's retail business, and the sub-transmission and distribution business of Mercury Energy was renamed Vector.
In 2000, Mighty River purchased into the Rotokawa geothermal power station, to operate and maintain the station, and own the geothermal turbines in a joint venture with the Tauhara North No.2 Trust. Also that year, Mighty River Power commissioned the Mokai geothermal power station in a joint venture with the Tuaropaki Trust. One aspect that sets Mighty River Power apart from other geothermal generators is that it works in partnership with Māori landowners (the tāngata whenua) to benefit both Mighty River power and the tāngata whenua.
In September 2002, Mighty River gained 100 percent ownership of the Southdown power station.
In 2004, Mighty River announce plans to refurbish the Marsden B plant to fire it on coal to increase supply security north of Auckland. Marsden B had been mothballed since it was completed in 1978 due to rising oil prices following the 1973 oil crisis and there being cheaper alternatives available. Greenpeace staged a nine-day occupation of the site in 2005, and after the Northland Regional Council granted consent, appealed to both the Environment Court and High Court, eventually overturning the consent. Mighty River appealed the High Court decision to the Court of Appeal, but in March 2007 dropped the proposal.
In 2008, Mighty River increased its generating capacity by opening the 100 MW Kawerau geothermal power station, increasing supply security to the eastern Bay of Plenty, a large timber processing area. In 2010, it opened the 140 MW Nga Awa Purua geothermal station near Taupo, complete with the largest single-shaft geothermal turbine in the world. The commissioning of Nga Awa Purua increased Mighty River's geothermal capacity to 385 MW, becoming the nation's largest geothermal electricity generator with 52.7 percent of all installed geothermal capacity.

Partial privatisation

In December 2011, the National Government announced plans to reduce its shareholding in Mighty River Power, as well as in the three other state-owned energy companies, from 100 percent to 51 percent and to sell off the remaining 49 percent as part of its controversial "mixed-ownership model" plan. Mighty River Power was to be the first company to be partially sold in September 2012, pursuant to legislative changes and market conditions. 
The Government began taking registrations of interest from the public in Mighty River Power shares on 5 March 2013.
In anticipation of the sale, in April 2013 State Owned Enterprises Minister Tony Ryall said director fees would be increasing from $49,000 a year to $85,000, and the chair's fees from $98,000 to $150,000, despite still being majority-owned by taxpayers.
The Financial Markets Authority approved the sale of Mighty River Power on 12 April, with the initial public offering (IPO) opening on 15 April.
By September, shares had slumped to $2.16, well below the float price,MightyRiverPower pair snap up shares. 3 News NZ. 30 September 2013. and in October the company announced it would be buying back up to $50 million in shares. 3 News NZ. 10 October 2013.

Power stations

Mighty River Power operates 13 power stations, all in Auckland, Waikato, and the Bay of Plenty. In total, the company has 1638 MW of generating capacity - composed of 1078 MW hydroelectric, 385 MW geothermal, and 175 MW natural gas.

Generation developments

International developments

Subsidiaries

In addition to its generation assets, Mighty River Power also incorporates or has major shareholdings in:

Investments

Mighty River Power is a founding shareholder in GeoGlobal Energy LLC, which is actively exploring and developing geothermal areas in USA, Chile and Germany.








