[[Lift (force)]]

CATEGORIES: Fluid dynamics, Aerodynamics, Aircraft wing design, Force, Wind power

A fluid flowing past the surface of a body exerts a force on it.  Lift is the component of this force that is perpendicular to the oncoming flow direction.  It contrasts with the drag force, which is the component of the surface force parallel to the flow direction.  If the fluid is air, the force is called an aerodynamic force.  In water, it is called a hydrodynamic force.
Lift is the force generated by propellers and wings to propel aircraft and keep them in the air. Birds, bats, insects, fish, flying reptiles, and even falling plant seeds have usefully exploited lift for millions of years.



Lift is most commonly associated with the wing of a fixed-wing aircraft, although lift is also generated by propellers, kites, helicopter rotors, rudders, sails and keels on sailboats, hydrofoils, wings on auto racing cars, wind turbines and other streamlined objects. Lift is also exploited in the animal world, and even in the plant world by the seeds of certain trees. While the common meaning of the word "lift" assumes that lift opposes weight, lift in its technical sense can be in any direction since it is defined with respect to the direction of flow rather than to the direction of gravity. When an aircraft is flying straight and level (cruise) most of the lift opposes gravity. A side thrust line will result in some lift opposing side thrust as well. However, when an aircraft is climbing, descending, or banking in a turn the lift is tilted with respect to the vertical.J., Aerodynamics, Section 14.6 Lift may also be entirely downwards in some aerobatic manoeuvres, or on the wing on a racing car. In this last case, the term downforce is often used. Lift may also be largely horizontal, for instance on a sail on a sailboat.
An airfoil is a streamlined shape that is capable of generating significantly more lift than drag.J., Aerodynamics, Section 5.2 Non-streamlined objects such as bluff bodies and flat plates  may also generate lift when moving relative to the fluid, but will have a higher drag coefficient dominated by pressure drag.[ref]Drag of Blunt Bodies and Streamlined Bodies


Description of lift on an airfoil

There are several ways to explain how an airfoil generates lift. Some are more complicated or more mathematically rigorous than others; some have been shown to be incorrect."There are many theories of how lift is generated. Unfortunately, many of the theories found in encyclopedias, on web sites, and even in some textbooks are incorrect, causing unnecessary confusion for students." NASA  of the texts present the Bernoulli formula without derivation, but also with very little explanation. When applied to the lift of an airfoil, the explanation and diagrams are almost always wrong. At least for an introductory course, lift on an airfoil should be explained simply in terms of Newton's Third Law, with the thrust up being equal to the time rate of change of momentum of the air downwards." Cliff Swartz et al. Quibbles, Misunderstandings, and Egregious Mistakes - Survey of High-School Physics Texts THE PHYSICS TEACHER Vol. 37, May 1999 pg 300  explanation of how a wing of an airplane gives lift is that as a result of the shape of the airfoil, the air flows faster over the top than it does over the bottom because it has farther to travel.  Of course, with our thin-airfoil sails, the distance along the top is the same as along the bottom so this explanation of lift fails." The Aerodynamics of Sail Interaction by Arvel Gentry Proceedings of the Third AIAA Symposium on the Aero/Hydronautics of Sailing 1971    This explanation is wrong." A comparison of explanations of the aerodynamic lifting force Klaus Weltner  Am. J. Phys. Vol.55 No..... ... And it's confusing for a fluid because the mass can move and redistribute itself (unlike a solid), but can only do so in ways that conserve momentum (mass times velocity) and energy (mass times velocity squared)... A change in velocity in one direction can cause a change in velocity in a perpendicular direction in a fluid, which doesn't occur in solid mechanics... So exactly describing how the flow turns is a complex problem; too complex for most people to visualize. So we make up simplified "models". And when we simplify, we leave something out. So the model is flawed. Most of the arguments about lift generation    come down to people finding the flaws in the various models, and so the arguments are usually very legitimate."  Tom Benson of NASA's Glenn Research Center in an interview with AlphaTrainer.alphatrainer.htm For example, there are explanations based directly on Newton's laws of motion and explanations based on Bernoulli's principle.  Either can be used to explain lift."Both approaches are equally valid and equally correct, a concept that is central to the conclusion of this article."  Charles N. Eastlake An Aerodynamicist's View of Lift, Bernoulli, and Newton'' THE PHYSICS TEACHER  Vol. 40, March 2002 

Newton's laws: lift and the deflection of the flow

=Deflection=

Lift is a reaction force—an airfoil deflects the air as it passes the airfoil... The reaction force of the deflected air mass must then act on the wing to give it an equal and opposite upward component." In: 
