[[Underwater basket weaving]]

CATEGORIES: Academia, Basket weaving, Pejoratives, Criticism of academia

Underwater basket weaving is an idiom referring in a negative way to supposedly easy and/or worthless college or university courses, and used generally to refer to a perceived decline in educational standards. The Guardian, 13 May 2003
The term also serves as an intentionally humorous generic answer to questions about an academic degree.  It is also used to humorously refer to any non-academic elective course, specifically one that does not count towards any graduation requirements.

Possible origin of the phrase

In weaving willow baskets, a trough of water is needed in which to soak the dried willow rods. They are then left to stand until pliable and ready to be used in weaving. The weaving is, however, not done under water. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Information Sheet C6 An issue of The American Philatelist from 1956 refers to an Alaskan village where "Underwater basket weaving is the principal industry of the employables among the 94 Eskimos here. By way of explanation – the native reeds used in this form of basketry are soaked in water and the weavers create their handiwork with their hands and raw materials completely submerged in water throughout the process of manufacture".70, American Philatelic Association, 1956

Early use

The phrase in its pejorative sense has been used since at least the mid-1950s. In a letter to the editor of the LA Times in 1956, a correspondent bemoaned an alleged decline in academic standards among college football programs and mentioned "majoring in underwater basket weaving, or the preparation and serving of smorgasbord, or, particularly at Berkeley, the combined course of anatomy and panty-raiding". Los Angeles Times, June 4, 1956 The following year, an article in the National Review mentioned that "the bored students in the educationists' courses call those dreary subjects 'underwater basket-weaving courses'",Russell Kirk: A Stranglehold on Education. National Review 1957 and another year on a newspaper column noted that "One seaside university is bowing to the stern educational demands of the times by eliminating its popular course in underwater basket weaving". Appleton Post Crescent, May 14, 1958 An article in the Daily Collegian at Penn State University in 1961 refers to a parody in which "a 'typical' Miami coed majoring in underwater basketweaving was interviewed". Sunshine Scholars Mimed at Pep Rally. Daily Collegian. September 28, 1961 An article from 1976 refers to football players so dumb that they had to take underwater basket weaving,Black, Darrell. Brawn, and brainRome News-Tribune, January 21, 1976, Rome, Georgia and another 1976 article refers to underwater basket-weaving as "an old old family joke". Prints Framed, Draperies Hung Evening Independent, St. Petersburg, Florida, March 16, 1976

Notable uses

The phrase was used during the Vietnam War era to describe the sort of major that many young men who would otherwise not have entered college undertook to escape the draft. Published by Henry Holt and Co., 1999. ISBN 0-8050-6291-2, ISBN 978-0-8050-6291-5. 608 pages US Senator Gordon L. Allott referred in 1968 to "the situation that we were in after World War II where we had universities setting up courses in underwater basketweaving, and all this sort of thing". United States Congress, Senate Committee on Appropriations, Published by U.S. G.P.O., 1968 Senator Robert Byrd used the phrase in 1969 when questioning the use of funds to offer professional training to Cuban refugees.port.ac.htm and another joke syllabus proposal was posted by a University of Central Arkansas student magazine.Shinnie, Ferri: New degree to be offered The Vino 2003 Volume 21 - Issue 4
US Punk band NOFX referred to an underwater basket weaving course in their song Anarchy Camp.
Linkedin adopted "skill endorsement" in 2012, and in response to the arbitrary nature of those skill attributions, some LinkedIn participants began to list "Advanced Underwater Basket Weaving" as a skill, thereby exercising some control over their online profile.

As a taught course

Since 1980, Reed College in Portland, Oregon has offered an underwater basket weaving class during Paideia, its festival of learning that offers informal, non-credit courses.Reed Orientation August 22–September 1, 2008
The Student Resource Center at the University of Arizona offered a submerged snorkeling basket-weaving course in spring 1998. Jones: Build your own basket... underwater Arizona Daily Wildcat, November 24, 1997Watery Weaving 101 - Frustration turns pupil into basket case. Arizona Daily Star, April 14, 1998 In early 2009, a Rutgers University scuba diving instructor offered a one-off course.,United States Patent and Trademark Office Serial No. 75217070 which offers a specialty class designed to improve or more fully enjoy diving skills from which participants can "take home a memorable souvenir."US Scuba Center Inc.: Specialty Classes
As an April Fools joke, Coursera offered an online course on underwater basketweaving as of April 1, 2013. The class was supposed to "consist of short lecture and demonstration videos, between 8 and 10 minutes in length, short quizzes, and practical weaving exercises." However, the joke is seen by some as being disrespectful of indigenous cultures, and the joke designer issued an apology which was posted on the Coursera class page for "Aboriginal Worldviews and Education." The apology read, in part, "By posting the course and video, we were not intending to be disrespectful to indigenous cultures, and we sincerely apologize to anyone we offended by the content of our video."








