[[Olympia Brown]]

CATEGORIES: 1835 births, 1926 deaths, American suffragists, Antioch College alumni, Mount Holyoke College alumni, People from Kalamazoo, Michigan, St. Lawrence University alumni, Clergy of the Universalist Church of America, Coolidge family, 19th-century Christian Universalists, 20th-century Christian Universalists, Theological School of St. Lawrence University alumni

Olympia Brown (January 5, 1835 – October 23, 1926) was an American suffragist. She is regarded as the first woman to graduate from a theological school, as well as becoming the first full-time ordained minister. Brown was also one of the few first generation suffragists who were able to vote with the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment.

Biography

Early life and education

Olympia Brown was born on January 5, 1835 in Prairie Ronde Township, Michigan. Brown was the oldest of four children. Her parents, Lephia and Asa Brown, were farmers in what was then considered frontier land. They were the great-great-aunt and -uncle, respectively, of U.S. President Calvin Coolidge. Lephia raised her children in a household that regarded religion and education as very important. This is evident from the building of a schoolhouse on the Brown territory.
The drive for education instilled by Olympia's mother had compelled her to finish high school and advance to the university level.  Olympia and her younger sister Oella decided to attend Mount Holyoke Female Seminary.  Mount Holyoke and a college education were what Olympia had hoped for.  Her excitement was tempered by the restrictions placed on women at Mount Holyoke.  These restrictions included a list of forty rules, the abolition of a literacy society founded by the Browns, and religious restrictions.  Perhaps the best example of thinking were the words of a Chemistry professor, "You are not expected to remember all of this, but only enough to make you intelligent in conversation."Cote, Charlotte. (1988). Olympia Brown The Battle for Equality. Mother Courage Press, 34.  Olympia, who already knew she could meet the challenges of a higher education, looked elsewhere.
Putting aside her experiences at Mount Holyoke, Olympia enrolled at Antioch College.  Once Olympia began her education at Antioch, she realized she had to catch up to higher standards. Olympia also learned that despite the progressive nature at Antioch, there were still forms of discrimination.  For example, in Olympia's English class, women were not required to have speeches memorized.  In a defiant act, Olympia delivered her speeches from memory, just as the men had. Perhaps the crowning achievement of Olympia's time at Antioch was her ability to persuade her hero, Antoinette Brown, to speak at Antioch.
Once Olympia Brown finished her schooling at Antioch, she decided her calling was to be a minister. After countless rejections, she was accepted to the Theological School of St. Lawrence University. Once again, Brown faced opposition from many sides. This included fellow students and the wives of the faculty.  Brown took it all as a challenge.  After her first year, Brown had gained acceptance and finished her schooling;

Religious career

Despite finishing her schooling, Brown still met opposition to her ordination.  She believed to be ordained, she needed to appeal to the Universalist Council.  Brown traveled to nearby Malone, New York, to present her case. Brown's appeal was a simple plea for equality.  The board, which had already heard some of Brown's sermons, agreed with her.  On June 25, 1863, Olympia Brown became the first fully ordained woman minister.  She went on to pastor in churches at Marshfield and Montpelier, Vermont; Weymouth, Massachusetts; Bridgeport, Connecticut; and Racine, Wisconsin.

Women's suffrage

From Brown's childhood and the abolition movement to Brown's own experiences with discrimination, Brown had always been aware of the quest for equal rights. Due to Brown's strong speaking skills and beliefs, Susan B. Anthony continually sought the involvement of Brown. With the encouragement of Lucy Stone and her husband,  Henry Blackwell, Brown decided to travel to Kansas in order to speak on women's rights. Over the course of the summer, Brown delivered more than 300 speeches despite facing many hardships. Even though this was a great experience, Brown decided to return to ministry, until a change of heart in 1887.
Now that Brown had dedicated her life to the movement, she looked to do all she could. This included forming the New England Women's Suffrage Association, leading the Wisconsin Suffrage Association and becoming the president of the Federal Suffrage Association from 1903 to 1920.
Despite all this action, Brown saw few changes take place. Brown believed that the second generation of suffragists suffered from poor leadership and erroneously focused their efforts at the state level. It was not until 1913 when Brown was invited to join the newly formed Congressional Union for Woman Suffrage, which would later be called the National Woman's Party, by Alice Paul and Lucy Burns. This group looked to pass an amendment at the federal level and also vowed to use a more radical approach.
These new tactics led to the women's right to vote amendment being presented to Congress and marches in front of the White House. President Wilson met the two marches in front of the White House with displeasure. As a result, these women were to be jailed. The mistreatment of these women coupled with the massive press exposure led to more support for the movement. 
Eventually, Congress passed the bill. However, with ratification still needed, Brown along with others hit the campaign trail one last time. Olympia Brown's last march was at the 1920 Republican National Convention. The 19th Amendment would finally be ratified on August 25, 1920, marking the first time that Olympia Brown along with countless other women were able to vote.

Marriage and children

Olympia Brown was married to John Henry Willis in 1873. Olympia, who chose to keep her maiden name, and Willis, reared two children: Henry and Gwendolyn. Both of their children grew up to become teachers.

Death

Olympia Brown spent her last years with her family in Racine, Wisconsin. Brown continued to support women's rights and the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom. Olympia Brown died in Baltimore on October 23, 1926.

Published works

Remembrance

In 1963 to honor the centennial of Brown's ordination, the Theological School of St. Lawrence University mounted a plaque at the church she pastored at in Racine, Wisconsin. The inscription concludes, "The flame of her spirit still burns today." In 1989 the church was renamed the Olympia Brown Unitarian Universalist Church.
An elementary school in Racine was named in Brown's honor in 1975.
In 1999 she was inducted into the Michigan Women's Hall of Fame. 
Olympia Brown's own papers and documents relating to her work are held at the Schlesinger Library in Cambridge, Massachusetts, the State Historical Society of Wisconsin, and in the papers of the National Woman's Party at the Library of Congress.








