[[Lupin III]]

CATEGORIES: Lupin III, 1967 manga, 1971 anime television series, 1977 anime television series, 1977 manga, 1984 anime television series, 1997 manga, 1998 manga, 2004 manga, 2009 manga, 2012 anime OVAs, 2012 anime television series, Action anime and manga, Adventure anime and manga, Comedy-drama anime and manga, Crime anime and manga, Funimation Entertainment, Futabasha manga, Geneon Universal Entertainment, Kaitō anime and manga, Manga adapted into films, Nippon Television shows, Seinen manga, TMS Entertainment, Tokyopop titles

{{Infobox animanga/Other
| title           = Theatrical films
| content         =

, also written as Lupin the Third or Lupin the 3rd, is a Japanese manga series written and illustrated by Monkey Punch. It follows the escapades of master thief Arsène Lupin III, the grandson of Arsène Lupin, the gentleman thief of Maurice Leblanc's series of novels.
The Lupin III manga, which first appeared in Weekly Manga Action on August 10, 1967, spawned a media franchise that includes numerous manga, four anime television series, five animated feature films, two live-action films, three OVAs, yearly television specials since 1989, music CDs, video games, and a musical. Many different companies have owned the English-language distribution rights to various Lupin III properties at various times, with just the first two movies having been released by over 10 companies alone. Tokyopop acquired the license to the original manga in 2002, and later the second series in 2004. Funimation Entertainment purchased the rights to several of the television specials and films in 2002, and the fourth television series in 2012. Geneon licensed and dubbed 79 episodes of the second television series, 26 of which were broadcast on Cartoon Network's Adult Swim during 2003. Discotek Media licensed the entire first television series and the live-action film, they also own the rights to several other Lupin titles, including some previously released by other companies.
Over forty years after its creation, Lupin III remains popular, with several different manga series currently being published, yearly television specials and a fourth anime series which aired in 2012. For several years, issues relating to the copyright of Maurice Leblanc's intellectual property meant that the Lupin name was removed from its releases outside of Japan, usually changed to "Rupan" or "Wolf". However, the copyright has since expired, allowing foreign releases to use the Lupin name.

Plot

Arsène Lupin III, the grandson of the fictional gentleman thief, Arsène Lupin, is considered the world's greatest thief, known for announcing his intentions to steal valuable objects by sending a calling card to the owners of his desired items. His right-hand man and closest ally is Daisuke Jigen, an expert marksman who can accurately shoot a target in 0.3 seconds. Although Lupin and Jigen frequently work as a two-man team, they are often joined by Goemon Ishikawa XIII, a master swordsman whose sword can cut anything, or Fujiko Mine, a femme fatale and Lupin's love interest. Although Fujiko usually works together with the others, she occasionally exploits Lupin's interest in her to steal the treasure for herself. Lupin and his gang are constantly chased by Inspector Koichi Zenigata of the ICPO, who has made it his life's work to arrest them, chasing Lupin across the globe.

Production

Monkey Punch's inspiration for the series was the fictional French gentleman thief Arsène Lupin, created by Maurice Leblanc. Monkey Punch did not ask permission to use the character's name, at the time Japan did not enforce trade copyrights, however, this led to copyright issues with the Leblanc estate once Lupin's popularity spread to North America and Europe. Several foreign releases of Lupin III media were forced to drop the Lupin name, with the character himself renamed to "Rupan" or "Wolf", or "Edgar de la Cambriole" (Edgar of Burglary) in the French version.
When Monkey Punch began Lupin III, he was already working on another series, Pinky Punky. Monkey Punch enjoys writing outlaw characters, and both Lupin III and Pinky Punky made use of outlaws as central characters. According to him, this made it easy for him to write two series without much pressure. Monkey Punch enjoys puzzles and mysteries such as Columbo and Agatha Christie novels, and was also inspired by The Three Musketeers. He believes the characters of Lupin and Fujiko are similar to the characters of D'Artagnan and Milady de Winter, and describes them as "Not necessarily lovers, not necessarily husband and wife, but more just having fun as man and woman with each other". The appeal of drawing Lupin comes from being able to go anywhere without obstacles and being able to do whatever he wants, whenever he wants. However, this is contrasted by the appeal of Zenigata's strict personality. Originally the series was only expected to last three months, but due to its popularity, Monkey Punch continued to draw it. However, despite his happiness at its success, he has expressed confusion over its popularity.
At the beginning of the series, many of the women Lupin encounters are all named Fujiko, but are treated different characters from chapter to chapter. This concept was later changed to make Fujiko a single character who changes style frequently.
Monkey Punch has said that he believes the story can never end but that if he had to end it both Zenigata and Lupin would have to end as equals. They would either both fall, both win or both get very old.

Media

Manga

The original manga series was written and illustrated by Monkey Punch. It was serialized by Futabasha in Weekly Manga Action in 94 chapters from August 10, 1967 to May 22, 1969.  In 1971, Monkey Punch continued the series, referred to as Lupin III: The New Adventures, until April 27, 1972.
In Europe, the series was licensed by Star Comics in Italy and Ediciones Mangaline in Spain.
Monkey Punch began publishing the second Lupin manga, Shin Lupin III on June 23, 1977. This series ran for 188 chapters until 1981. Tokyopop licensed the second series, and released the first 9 volumes as Lupin III – World's Most Wanted between September 7, 2004 and July 10, 2007, Like the first series, the Tokyopop release was based on the Chuokoron Shinsha edition from 1990. Tokyopop later cancelled the series due to low sales.
A third manga series, Lupin III S, began in January 1997. The story was written by Satosumi Takaguchi and illustrated by Shusay, under the supervision of Monkey Punch. Five stories were published in Weekly Manga Action and 2 Action, then collected by Futabasha in a single volume.
The fourth manga series, Lupin III Y, was written by Monkey Punch and illustrated by Manatsu Yamakami. The series was serialized in Weekly Manga Action from 1998 to 2003, and the chapters were collected into 20 volumes published between May 27, 1999 and August 28, 2004.
The fifth manga series was Lupin III M, with story by Monkey Punch and art by Yukio Miyama. 8 volumes were released between January 27, 2005 and September 12, 2008.
A sixth work titled Lupin III H is written by Monkey Punch and illustrated by Naoya Hayakawa. The first volume was released on October 12, 2010 and a fifth volume was released on November 28, 2013.

Anime

=Pilot film=

Following the success of the manga series, TMS Entertainment and Toho produced a 12-minute Lupin III anime film adaptation featuring Lupin wearing a red jacket outfit. Masaaki Ōsumi directed the movie, which was made in two different versions: a CinemaScope version intended for theatrical release and a 4:3 television version. The animation for the two versions was mainly the same, but the voice cast was different, with only Kiyoshi Kobayashi and Eiko Masuyama, voicing Daisuke Jigen and Fujiko Mine respectively, in both versions. By the time the pilot was completed in 1969, because of budget concerns and a disagreement between Toho and TMS, the film was never released. Masaaki Ōsumi then moved on to direct several episodes of the first Lupin III television series. Discotek Media included both versions in their 2012 release of the first TV series.

=Television series=

On October 24, 1971, ytv began airing the first Lupin III television series.
The second Lupin III television series began airing on NTV on October 3, 1977. This series, was broadcast for 155 episodes, with the last one airing on October 6, 1980. Episodes 145 and 155 were written and directed by Hayao Miyazaki under the pseudonym Terekomu, and they marked his final involvement with the Lupin franchise.
In 1982, an animated television series called Lupin VIII was planned as a French-Japanese co-production, featuring the descendants of Lupin, Goemon, Jigen, and Zenigata, but was never completed. Created by DiC Animation, with Rintaro directing, and character designs by Shingo Araki; two scripts were written, and one episode was fully animated with a music and sound effects track, but the voice-overs were never recorded. It has been suggested that the project was stopped due to Leblanc's estate wanting a large amount of money for use of the Lupin name. The single episode was later included in the 2012 Lupin III Master File box set.
The third Lupin III television series, called Lupin III Part III, began airing on ytv on March 3, 1984. This series was broadcast for 50 episodes and ended on November 6, 1985. In 2009, the Southern California based United Television Broadcasting network began airing subtitled episodes from all three series on their UTBHollywood channel.
The fourth series, titled Lupin the Third: The Woman Called Fujiko Mine, aired on NTV between April 4, 2012 and June 27, 2012.

=Films=

During the broadcast run of the second television series, an animated feature film was also produced titled simply Lupin III (later known as Lupin III: Lupin vs. the Clone), which was released in Japanese theaters on December 16, 1978. The movie received four different English language dubs. The first dub, created in 1978, received experimental screenings in the United States by TMS, while the next two dubs were created for home releases and were retitled The Mystery of Mamo and Secret of Mamo.
Hayao Miyazaki directed the next feature film, The Castle of Cagliostro, which was released in Japanese theaters on December 15, 1979. This movie was loosely based on Maurice Leblanc's Arsène Lupin novel La Comtesse de Cagliostro ("The Countess of Cagliostro"). Ten years after Babylon was released, Die! Nostradamus entered Japanese theaters on April 22, 1995.
The fifth anime feature film, Dead or Alive, was directed by the creator of the series, Monkey Punch, and released in Japanese theaters on April 20, 1996. Although he was credited as chief director for the production, Monkey Punch said that he left most of the work to his assistant directors and only directed the opening and ending sequences while acting as consultant for everything else. Following the production of the movie, he stated that the process was so exhausting he would not like to direct another anime again.
In April 2013, an announcement in Weekly Shōnen Sunday magazine revealed that a Lupin the 3rd vs. Detective Conan: The Movie was in production, four years after the two series had a crossover TV special together.

=Original video animations=

The first Lupin III original video animation (OVA) was The Plot of the Fuma Clan, was shown in theatres in Japan on December 26, 1987 before being released to video on April 5, 1998. Because of budget problems, TMS decided not to employ the regular voice cast from the television series and theatrical movies; instead, they hired a different cast to save money. Yasuo Yamada, the voice actor for Lupin, had always taken pride in his role as the title character and after the voice cast replacement, he mistakenly thought that Monkey Punch had lobbied the producers for a new voice actor. After the release, Monkey Punch tried to reassure Yamada that he had nothing to do with the producers' decision to use a new cast, and the regulars were reinstated for the first television special, Bye-Bye Liberty Crisis. Despite this, relations between Yamada and Monkey Punch were permanently strained by the affair. AnimEigo owned the North American distribution rights to the OVA until 2006, when it was taken over by Discotek.
The second OVA, Return of the Magician, was released on April 3, 2002, created as a part of the 30-year anniversary of the first television series and features the return of one of the original villains of the series, the magician Pycal
The Lupin III Master File box set released in 2012 included a new short animation titled 

=Television specials=

On April 4, 1989, an animated television special titled Bye-Bye Liberty Crisis aired on NTV,
2007's Elusiveness of the Fog was broadcast on July 27 as part of the 40th anniversary celebration of the original manga, featuring the return of a villain from the original television series, Kyousuke Mamo.

Live-action

Because the pilot anime film was never released in theaters, the first Lupin III theatrical feature was a live-action movie produced in 1974 during the hiatus between the first and second television series. 
WhiteLight Entertainment, a production company owned by Gerald R. Molen, purchased the live-action theatrical rights to Lupin III in 2003.

Video games

Several Lupin III video games have been created. The first was released to arcades in Japan by Taito in 1980 asLupin III. In 2010, Lupin III: Shijō Saidai no Zunōsen was released for the Nintendo DS.

Soundtracks

Columbia Music Entertainment and VAP have both released numerous Lupin III music CDs in Japan. These include over 48 soundtrack albums by Takeo Yamashita and Yuji Ohno for the TV series, movies, and specials, as well as 15 collections of jazz arrangements by the Yuji Ohno trio, the Lupintic Five, and the Lupintic Sixteen.
Geneon Entertainment has released two of the music CDs in the United States. Lupin the 3rd: Sideburn Club Mix is a collection of thirteen remixed themes from the first television series, which was released in conjunction with the first DVD volume on January 28, 2003.
To celebrate the 40th anniversary of the series, a live concert was held on September 8, 2007 performed by Yuji Ohno and the Lupintic Sixteen; a concert DVD was released in Japan on December 21, 2007.

Reception

The Lupin III franchise still remains popular in Japan; the manga was listed in 38th place on Japan's Agency for Cultural Affairs' 2007 list of the top 50 manga series.
In Manga: The Complete Guide, Jason Thompson referred to Monkey Punch's original manga as "a crazy, groovy 1960s world of dynamite and backstabbing, hippies and gangsters", and considered it "a fascinating homage to Mad magazine and a four star example of comics as pure comedy." He rated the series four out of four stars.
In Anime Classics Zettai!, Brian Clamp and Julie Davis compare the first two anime adaptions. They note that the first series is of a serious style, closer to the original manga with a dark tone and that it focuses on disputes between Lupin and other criminals. In contrast they sum up the second series as a caper comedy with a more comedic tone and style.
Both of Manga Entertainment's releases of The Castle of Cagliostro received DVD Talk Collector Series recommendation status, the highest status given by the review website DVD Talk.
The Lupin III television specials released by Funimation have received reviews varying from positive to mixed. The most well-received seems to be Island of Assassins, with Chris Beveridge of Mania... since The Castle of Cagliostro", Mania.

Legacy

Cowboy Bebop and Samurai Champloo director Shinichirō Watanabe revealed during an interview with Newtype Japan that he was heavily influenced by the work of director Masaaki Ōsumi on the first Lupin television series.
In 2009, Japanese-Canadian rock band Monkey Majik created an animated music video in which its members meet the Lupin III cast. The video, that is set to the band's version of the anime's theme song, promoted the Lupin the Third Dance & Drive official covers & remixes CD.
In celebration of the anime's 40th anniversary, the "This is the World of Lupin III" event was held at the Matsuya store in Ginza. From August 10 to August 22, 2011, over 300 items related to Lupin III were exhibited, including original manuscripts by Monkey Punch and animation cels from the feature films.
In 2012, the Hokkaido Railway Company unveiled Lupin III-themed trains on their Hanasaki Line between Kushiro and Nemuro station, in honor of Monkey Punch, who is a native of Hokkaido.






