[[Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula]]

CATEGORIES: Lie groups, Mathematical physics, Combinatorics

In mathematics, the Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula is the solution to
for noncommutative . This formula links Lie groups to Lie algebras by expressing the logarithm of the product of two Lie group elements as a Lie algebra element in canonical coordinates, a significant guiding connection appreciated (Hausdorff 1906)F. Hausdorff, "Die symbolische Exponentialformel in der Gruppentheorie", Ber Verh Saechs Akad Wiss Leipzig 58 (1906) 19–48.  before the full development of the theory.
It is named for Henry Frederick Baker, John Edward Campbell, and Felix Hausdorff. It was first noted in print by CampbellJ. Campbell, Proc Lond Math Soc 28 (1897) 381–390; ibid 29 (1898) 14–32. (1897); elaborated by Henri PoincaréH. Poincaré, Compt Rend Acad Sci Paris 128 (1899) 1065–1069; Camb Philos Trans 18 (1899) 220–255. (1899) and Baker (1902);H. Baker, Proc Lond Math Soc (1) 34 (1902) 347–360; ibid (1) 35 (1903) 333–374; ibid (Ser 2) 3 (1905) 24–47. and systematized geometrically, and linked to the Jacobi identity by Hausdorff (1906).

The Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula: existence

of all non-commuting formal power series in non-commuting variables X and Y has a ring homomorphism Δ from S to the completion of
called the coproduct, such that
and similarly for Y. (The definition of the coproduct is extended recursively by the rule ). This has
the following properties:
The existence of the Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula can now be seen as follows:
The elements X and Y are primitive, so exp(X) and exp(Y) are grouplike, so their product  is primitive, and hence can be written as an infinite sum of elements of the Lie algebra generated by X and Y.
The universal enveloping algebra of the free Lie algebra generated by X and Y is isomorphic to the algebra of all non-commuting polynomials in X and Y. In common with all universal enveloping algebras, it has a natural structure of a Hopf algebra, with a coproduct Δ. The ring S used above is just a completion of this Hopf algebra.

An explicit Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula

be the exponential map.
The following general combinatoric formula was introduced by Eugene Dynkin (1947):
The first few terms are well-known, with all higher-order terms involving X,Y and commutator nestings thereof (thus in the Lie algebra):

Note the X ↔ Y (anti-)/symmetry in alternating orders of the expansion, since .

Selected tractable cases

There is no expression in closed form for an arbitrary Lie algebra, though there are exceptional tractable cases, as well as efficient algorithms for working out the expansion in applications.
For example, if  is a scalar (central, cf. the nilpotent Heisenberg group), then all but the first three terms on the right-hand side of the above vanish.  This is the degenerate case utilized routinely in quantum mechanics, as illustrated below.
Other forms of the Campbell–Baker–Hausdorff formula, emphasizing
expansion in terms of the element ), might serve well:
as is evident from the integral formula below. (The coefficients of the nested commutators linear in  are normalized Bernoulli numbers, outlined below.) 
Thus, when the commutator happens to be , which then leads to braiding identities such as
or adjoint dilation,
There are numerous such well-known expressions applied routinely in physics. A popular integral formula isW. Miller, Symmetry Groups and their Applications,  Academic Press, New York, 1972, pp 159–161. ISBN 0-12-497460-0
involving the generating function for the Bernoulli numbers,
utilized by Poincaré and Hausdorff.  Recall
for the Bernoulli numbers, B0 = 1, B1 = 1/2, B2 = 1/6, 
B4 = −1/30,  ...

Matrix Lie group illustration

When one solves for Z in
one obtains a simpler formula:
The first, second, third, and fourth order terms are:

The Zassenhaus formula

A  related combinatoric expansion that is useful in dual applications is
where exponents of higher order in t are likewise nested commutators.
As a corollary of this, the Suzuki-Trotter decomposition  follows.

An important lemma

Let Ln be the space of all complex n×n  matrices, and let . A standard combinatorial lemma which is utilized in producing the above explicit expansions is
This formula can be proved by parametric induction: evaluation of the derivative with respect to s of .
The following braiding identity also follows readily,

Application in quantum mechanics

A degenerate form of the Campbell–Baker–Hausdorff formula is useful in quantum mechanics and especially quantum optics, where X and Y are  Hilbert space operators,
generating the Heisenberg group.
A typical example is the annihilation and creation operators, .   As indicated above, the expansion then collapses to the semi-trivial degenerate form:
where   is just a complex number.
This example illustrates the resolution of the displacement operator, ,  into exponentials of annihilation and creation operators and scalars.L. Mandel, E. Wolf Optical Coherence and Quantum Optics (Cambridge 1995).  
This degenerate Campbell–Baker–Hausdorff formula then displays the product of two displacement operators as another displacement operator (up to a phase factor), with the resultant displacement equal to the sum of the two displacements, 
since the Heisenberg group they provide a representation of is nilpotent.





Bibliography




