[[Jennifer Beals]]

CATEGORIES: 1963 births, Living people, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, Actresses from Chicago, Illinois, African-American Buddhists, African-American female models, American people of Irish descent, American triathletes, Converts to Buddhism, Female triathletes, LGBT rights activists from the United States, Yale University alumni, African-American actresses, American television actresses, American film actresses, American voice actresses

Jennifer Beals (born December 19, 1963) is an American actress and a former teen model. She played the role of Alexandra "Alex" Owens in the 1983 film Flashdance, and appeared as Bette Porter on the Showtime drama series The L Word.  She earned an NAACP Image Award and a Golden Globe Award nomination for the former. She has appeared in more than 50 films.

Early life

Beals was born on the South Side of Chicago,), to convince her boss she was 16.
Beals was inspired to become an actress by two events: doing a high school production of Fiddler on the Roof and seeing Balm in Gilead with Joan Allen while volunteer-ushering at the Steppenwolf Theatre.
Beals graduated from the progressive Francis W. Parker School. She also was chosen to attend the elite Goodman Theatre Young People's Drama Workshop. Beals attended Yale University, receiving a B.A. in American literature in 1987; While at Yale, Beals was a resident of Morse College.

Career

Film

Beals had a minor role in the 1980 film My Bodyguard,
After she filmed Flashdance, Beals resumed her studies, making only one film during that time: playing the titular character The Bride with singer-actor Sting, a gothic horror film loosely based on the 1935 classic Bride of Frankenstein,
Starring opposite Nicolas Cage, the actress portrays a lusty and thirsty vampire in 1989's Vampire's Kiss.
In 1995, Beals and Denzel Washington co-starred in Devil in a Blue Dress, a period film based on a Walter Mosley novel featuring L.A. private detective, Easy Rawlins. Beals plays a biracial woman passing for white. That same year she appeared with Tim Roth in two segments of the four-story anthology Four Rooms, one of which was directed by her then-husband, Alexandre Rockwell.
Rockwell had previously directed her in the 1992 independent film In the Soup, which was a Grand Prize winner at the Sundance Film Festival. In 2003, she played one of the sequestered jury members in the film adaptation of Runaway Jury.
She had a leading role in 2006's The Grudge 2, sequel to the hit horror film of two years earlier. In 2010, Beals reunited with Denzel Washington in the post-Apocalyptic action drama, The Book of Eli, where she played a blind woman who is the mother of Mila Kunis' character and a servant of Gary Oldman's.

Television

In 1992, she appeared in 2000 Malibu Road as attorney Perry Quinn. It was her first ongoing television series; she said she had been leery as she previously had not "found a character I wanted to live with for several years".
In 2004, Beals made a brief cameo in the final episode of Frasier. In 2007, she appeared in the small TV drama My Name Is Sarah, in which she plays Sarah Winston, a sober woman who joins Alcoholics Anonymous to conduct research for her book but finds herself falling in love with a recovering alcoholic and - as a result - having to deal with her original deception in joining the group.
Beals starred in Showtime Network's The L Word, wherein she played Bette Porter, an Ivy League-educated lesbian. At Beals' request, Bette was made biracial, enabling Pam Grier's Kit Porter character to become Bette's half-sister. The series ran for six seasons and ended in March 2009.
She also appears alongside Tim Roth in Lie to Me, as Cal Lightman's ex-wife, Zoe Landau.
Beals is the female lead in Fox's TV drama The Chicago Code. Her character Teresa Colvin is Chicago's first female police superintendent. The series was canceled after its first season."Chicago Code Canceled: Fox Scraps Crime Drama After One Season" May 11, 2011, Huffington Post
Beals turned down an offer to appear on Dancing with the Stars, saying: "I am not a dancer. They asked me and I said 'no.' You could back up a truck to my door filled with cash and I wouldn't do it."
In 2013, Beals signed on for the main role of the ABC drama pilot Westside produced by McG and developed by Ilene Chaiken.
On March 10, 2014, it was announced that Beals would star as Dr. Kathryn Russo in "Proof," a TNT supernatural medical drama about a hard-nosed surgeon struggling with the loss of her teenage son who begins to investigate that there may be life after death. The series will be produced by Kyra Sedgwick. 

Web series

Beals is also well known for her support of women's rights and for her strong feminist character. In August 2012, she appeared alongside Troian Bellisario in the web series Lauren on the YouTube channel, WIGS.
In January 2013, Troian Bellisario confirmed on her twitter and instagram, that she and Beals were filming more Lauren web episodes.

Personal life

Beals was married to Alexandre Rockwell from 1986 to 1996. In 1998, she married Ken Dixon, a Canadian entrepreneur. Her husband also has two children from a previous marriage.
Beals has described herself as a "spiritual person".
She has been a vocal advocate for gay rights saying, "I think after playing Bette Porter on The L Word for six years I felt like an honorary member of the community." In October 2012, she received the Human Rights Campaign's Ally For Equality Award, in recognition of her outstanding support to the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community."Jennifer Beals receives Ally for Equality Award" October 22, 2012, JenniferBeals.com
Beals is a photographer, who has had shows of her work under her married name, Dixon.
She is also a triathlete.
In 2010, Beals served as the Grand Marshal of the McDonald's Thanksgiving Parade in Chicago,"77th McDonald's Thanksgiving Parade" November 28, 2010. ABC News during which she spoke of the two charities important to her, the Matthew Shepard Foundation and The Pablove Foundation."Jennifer Beals represents Pablove in the McDonald's Thanksgiving Day Parade" November 25, 2010, Pablove web site

Filmography

Film

Television






