[[Peace symbols]]

CATEGORIES: Peace symbols, Counterculture of the 1960s

A number of peace symbols have been used many ways in various cultures and contexts. The dove and olive branch were used symbolically by Jews and early Christians and then eventually became a secular peace symbol, popularized by Pablo Picasso after the Second World War. In the 1950s the "peace sign", as it is known today, was designed as the logo for the British Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament and adopted by anti-war and counterculture activists in the United States and elsewhere. The V hand signal and the peace flag also became international peace symbols.

The olive branch

Classical antiquity

The use of the olive branch as a symbol of peace in Western civilization dates at least to the 5th century BC. The olive tree represented plenty, but the ancient Greeks believed that it also drove away evil spirits.7  The olive branch was one of the attributes of Eirene,  For example, the reverse of a tetradrachm of Vespasian from Alexandria, 70–71 AD, shows Eirene standing holding a branch upward in her right hand.Keith Emmett Collection of Roman Egypt
The Roman poet Virgil (70–10 BC) associated "the plump olive"Virgil, Georgics, 2, pp.425ff (trans. Fairclough) with Pax and he used the olive branch as a symbol of peace in his Aeneid:
The Romans believed there was an intimate relationship between war and peace. Mars, the god of war, had another aspect, Mars Pacifer, Mars the bringer of Peace, who is shown bearing an olive branch on coins of the later Roman Empire. AD 260–295", Studia Numismatica Upsaliensia, 5, University of Uppsala, 2008  (See Gallery.) Appian describes the use of the olive-branch as a gesture of peace by the enemies of the Roman general Scipio Aemilianus in the Numantine War and by Hasdrubal of Carthage.Rivington, 1823

Later representations

Poets of the 17th century associated the olive branch with peace.  Throughout the 18th century, English coins show Brittania with a spear and olive branch.
The Old Royal Naval College, Greenwich, contains an allegorical painting by James Thornhill, Peace and Liberty Triumphing Over Tyranny (1708–1716), in which the royals William and Mary accept an olive branch from Peace.  In July that year, the American Continental Congress adopted the "Olive Branch Petition" in the hope of avoiding a full-blown war with Great Britain.
On the Great Seal of the United States (1782), the olive branch denotes peace, as explained by Charles Thomson, Secretary to Congress: "The Olive branch and arrows denote the power of peace & war which is exclusively vested in Congress."

The dove and olive branch

Christianity

The story of Noah in the Torah ends with a passage describing a dove bringing a freshly plucked olive leaf (Hebrew: עלה זית alay zayit), Christians adopted Noah's dove and olive leaf as symbols of peace although Jews had never given them that meaning.
right|thumb|Wall painting from the early Christian Catacombs of Marcellinus and Peter in Rome, showing Noah, in the Orante attitude of prayer, the dove and an olive branch. Early Christians portrayed baptism accompanied by a dove holding an olive branch in its beak and used the image on their sepulchres as an allegory of peace.James Elmes, A General and Bibliographical Dictionary of the Fine Arts, London: Thomas Tegg, 1826
Christians derived the symbol of the dove and olive branch from two sources: Greek thought, including its use of the symbol of the olive branch,Graydon F. Snyder, "The Interaction of Jews with Non-Jews in Rome", in Karl P. Donfreid and Peter Richardson, Judaism and Christianity in Early Rome, Grand Rapids: Wm B. Ferdman, 1998 and the story of Noah and the Flood.
Written with full knowledge of the Jewish Bible, the New Testament has a comparison between a dove and the Spirit of God that descended on Jesus during his baptism.
In the earliest Christian art, the dove represented the peace of the soul rather than civil peace. From the third century, the dove began to be shown in art that portrayed Biblical conflict from the Old Testament, such as Noah and the Ark, and the books of the Apocrypha (recognized as canon by early Christians and later Catholics, but excluded after the Protestant Reformation from Protestant translations): Daniel and the lions, the three young men in the furnace, and Susannah and the Elders. Snyder, Ante Pacem: archaeological evidence of church life before Constantine, Macon: Mercer University Press, 2003
Before the Peace of Constantine (313 AD), in which Rome ceased its persecution of Christians after Constantine's conversion, Noah is normally shown in an attitude of prayer, a dove with an olive branch nearly always flying toward him or alighting on his outstretched hand. According to Graydon Snyder, "The Noah story afforded the early Christian community an opportunity to express piety and peace in a vessel that withstood the threatening environment" of Roman persecution. For Ludwig Budde and Pierre Prigent, the dove refers to the descending of the Holy Spirit rather than the peace associated with Noah. After the Peace of Constantine, Noah appeared only occasionally in Christian art.
Medieval illuminated manuscripts, such as the Holkham Bible, showed the dove returning to Noah with a branch. In the Middle Ages, some Jewish illuminated manuscripts also showed Noah's dove with an olive branch, for example, the Golden Haggadah (about 1420). 22British Library, Online Gallery, Sacred Texts. The Golden Haggadah, p.3, lower left hand panel.
English Bibles from the 17th-century King James Bible onwards, which translated the story of Noah direct from Hebrew, render the Hebrew alay zayit as "olive leaf" rather than "olive branch", but by this time the association of the dove with an olive branch as a symbol of peace in the story of Noah was firmly established.

Secular representations

The broken rifle

The broken rifle symbol is used by War Resisters' International (WRI) and its affiliates but predates the foundation of WRI in 1921.  The first known example of the symbol is in the masthead of the January 1909 issue of De Wapens Neder (Down With Weapons), the monthly paper of the International Antimilitarist Union in the Netherlands.  In 1915 it appeared on the cover of a pamphlet, Under det brukne Gevær (Under the Broken Rifle), published by the Norwegian Social Democratic Youth Association. The (German) League for War Victims, founded in 1917, used the broken rifle on a 1919 banner.
In 1921, Belgian workers marching through La Louvrière on 16 October 1921, carried flags showing a soldier breaking his rifle.  Ernst Friedrich, a German who had refused military service, founded the Anti-Kriegs Museum in Berlin, which featured a bas-relief broken rifle over the door.  The Museum distributed broken-rifle badges, girls' and women's brooches, boys' belt buckles, and men's tie pins.Bill Hetheringon, ''Symbols of Peace, Housmans Peace Diary 2007,' London: Housmans, 2006

The white poppy

In 1933, during a period in which there was widespread fear of war in Europe, the Women's Co-operative Guild began the practice of distributing white poppies as an alternative to the red poppies distributed by the Royal British Legion in commemoration of servicemen who died in the First World War. In 1934 the newly formed Peace Pledge Union (PPU), which was the largest British peace organization in the inter-war years, joined in distributing white poppies and laying white poppy wreaths "as a pledge to peace that war must not happen again". In 1980, the PPU revived the symbol as a way of remembering the victims of war without glorifying militarism.

Roerich's peace banner

Nicholas Roerich (1874–1947), a Russian artist, cultural activist, and philosopher, founded a movement to protect cultural artifacts. Its symbol was a maroon-on-white emblem consisting of three solid circles in a surrounding circle. It has also been used as a peace banner. In 1935 a pact initiated by Roerich was signed by the United States and Latin American nations, agreeing that "historic monuments, museums, scientific, artistic, educational and cultural institutions" should be protected both in times of peace and war.
According to the Roerich Museum, 
 "The Banner of Peace symbol has ancient origins. Perhaps its earliest known example appears on Stone Age amulets: three dots, without the enclosing circle. Roerich came across numerous later examples in various parts of the world, and knew that it represented a deep and sophisticated understanding of the triune nature of existence. But for the purposes of the Banner and the Pact, Roerich described the circle as representing the totality of culture, with the three dots being Art, Science, and Religion, three of the most embracing of human cultural activities. He also described the circle as representing the eternity of time, encompassing the past, present, and future. The sacred origins of the symbol, as an illustration of the trinities fundamental to all religions, remain central to the meaning of the Pact and the Banner today.""Pact and Banner Of Peace Through Culture", Nicholas Roerich Museum, New York 

The peace sign

The internationally recognized symbol for peace ( The original design is in the Peace Museum in Bradford, England.
The symbol is a combination of the semaphore signals for the letters "N" and "D," standing for "nuclear disarmament". In semaphore the letter "N" is formed by a person holding two flags in an inverted "V," and the letter "D" is formed by holding one flag pointed straight up and the other pointed straight down. Superimposing these two signs forms the shape of the centre of the peace symbol.
Holtom later wrote to Hugh Brock, editor of Peace News, explaining the genesis of his idea: 
 "I was in despair. Deep despair. I drew myself: the representative of an individual in despair, with hands palm outstretched outwards and downwards in the manner of Goya's peasant before the firing squad.  I formalised the drawing into a line and put a circle round it." 
Ken Kolsbun, a correspondent of Holtom's, says that the designer came to regret the symbolism of despair, as he felt that peace was something to be celebrated and wanted the symbol to be inverted.  Eric Austen is said to have "discovered that the 'gesture of despair' motif had long been associated with 'the death of man', and the circle with 'the unborn child',". Some time later, Peggy Duff, general secretary of CND between 1958 and 1967, repeated this interpretation in an interview with a US newspaper, saying that the inside of the symbol was a "runic symbol for death of man" and the circle the "symbol for the unborn child"."Symbol explained", The Eugene Register-Guard, 12 February 1971

The symbol became the badge of CND and wearing it became a sign of support for the campaign urging British unilateral nuclear disarmament.  An account of CND's early history described the image as "a visual adhesive to bind the Aldermaston March and later the whole Campaign together ... probably the most powerful, memorable and adaptable image ever designed for a secular cause."Christopher Driver, The Disarmers: A Study in Protest, London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1964
Not patented or restricted, the symbol spread beyond CND and was adopted by the wider disarmament and anti-war movements. It became widely known in the United States in 1958 when Albert Bigelow, a pacifist protester, sailed a small boat fitted with the CND banner into the vicinity of a nuclear test. crossing national and cultural boundaries in Europe and other regions.The Peace Museum, Bradford
In 1970, two US private companies tried to register the peace symbol as a trade mark: the Intercontinental Shoe Corporation of New York and Luv, Inc. of Miami. Commissioner of Patents William E. Schuyler Jr, said that the symbol "could not properly function as a trade mark subject to registration by the Patent Office".29
Ken Kolsbun in his history of the peace symbol wrote that, "In an attempt to discredit the burgeoning anti-war movement, the John Birch Society published an attack on the peace symbol in its June 1970 issue of American Opinion", calling the symbol "a manifestation of a witch's foot or crow's foot", supposedly icons of the devil in the Middle Ages. A national Republican newsletter was reported to have "noted an ominous similarity to a symbol used by the Nazis in World War II"."What's in a Symbol?", Time Magazine,  2 November 1970

Rainbow flag

The international peace flag in the colours of the rainbow was first used in Italy on a 1961 peace march from Perugia to Assisi organised by the pacifist and social philosopher Aldo Capitini (1899–1968).  Inspired by the peace flags used on British peace marches, Capitini got some women of Perugia hurriedly to sew together coloured strips of material.  The original flag was kept by Capitini's collaborator, Lanfranco Mencaroni, at Collevalenza, near Todi. In 2011, plans were announced to transfer it to the Palazzo dei Priori in Perugia.Perugia Today (In Italian)
The flag commonly has seven rainbow-colored stripes with the word "Peace" in the center. It has been explained as follows: 
 "In the account of the Great Flood, God set the rainbow to a seal the alliance with man and nature, promising that there will never be another Flood.  The rainbow thus became a symbol of Peace across the earth and the sky, and, by extension, among all men." 
The flag usually has the colours violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange and red from top to bottom, but some have the violet stripe below the blue one (as in the picture below) or a white one at the top.  A picture of Capitini's first peace flag, carried by Anna Capitini and Silvana Mencaroni, shows the colours red, orange, white, green, violet, indigo, and lavender.
In 2002, renewed display of the flag was widespread with the Pace da tutti i balconi ("Peace from every balcony") campaign, a protest against the impending war in Iraq planned by the United States and its allies. In 2003, the Italian newspaper Corriere della Sera reported leading advertising executives saying that the peace flag had become more popular than the Italian national flag.

The V sign

The V sign ( in Unicode) is a hand gesture, palm outwards, with the index and middle fingers open and all others closed. It had been used to represent victory during the Second World War. During the 1960s in the USA, activists against the Vietnam War and in subsequent anti-war protests adopted the gesture as a sign of peace."The Japanese Version (the Sign of Peace)", Icons website. Retrieved 29 July 2007

Paper cranes

The crane, a traditional symbol of luck in Japan, was popularized as a peace symbol by the story of Sadako Sasaki (1943–1955), a girl who died as a result of the atomic bomb exploded over Hiroshima in 1945.  According to the story, popularized through the book Sadako and the Thousand Paper Cranes,Eleanor Coerr, Sadako and the Thousand Paper Cranes, 1977 in her last illness she started folding paper cranes, inspired by the Japanese saying that one who folded a thousand paper cranes was granted a wish.

Shalom/Salaam

A wordmark of the three words, Hebrew word "Shalom" (Hebrew:  Shalom and Salaam mean "peace" and are cognates of each other, derived from the Semitic triconsonantal of S-L-M (realized in Hebrew as Š-L-M and in Arabic as S-L-M).  The symbol has come to represent peace in the Middle East and an end to the Arab-Israeli conflict. Wall plaques, signs, T-shirts, and buttons are sold with only those words. (See Gallery)

Gallery

Image:Antoninianus Aemilianus-RIC 0015.jpg|Mars celebrated as peace-bringer, bearing an olive branch, on the reverse of a coin struck under Aemilianus
Image:Baptism - Marcellinus and Peter.
Image:Fiery furnace 01.jpg|Wall painting from the early Christian Catacomb of Priscilla in Rome, 3rd/4th century CE, showing the figures of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego in a fire above whom flies a dove with a branch in its beak
Image:Pax250.
Image:William and Mary.  Painting by James Thornhill, c.1700, Old Royal Naval College, Greenwich
Image:1719 George I farthing lighter.jpg|George I farthing, 1719, showing Brittania with a sword and olive branch
Image:WWIposter12.jpg|A German war loan poster, 1917
Image:Punch_dove_and_branch.  "OVERWEIGHTED.  President Wilson: 'Here's your olive branch.  Now get busy.' Dove of Peace: 'Of course I want to please everybody; but isn't this a bit thick?'"
Image:Fotothek df roe-neg 0006331 028 Delegationen.jpg|Picasso's Dove reproduced in a banner at the 1952 World Peace Congress in Berlin
File:Fotothek df roe-neg 0003139 002 Teilnehmer einer Demonstration mit Spruchbannern, Friedenstauben und einem Bildn.1950, with dove symbols inscribed, "Für den Frieden" (For Peace)
Image:Anzac poppies.JPG|A white poppy among red poppies placed on the Waitati cenotaph on Anzac Day, 2009
Image:In money we lust.
Image:USVietPeace. Springman, U.S. Army, wearing a peace symbol necklace, speaking with a North Vietnamese Army officer, 18 February 1973, after the Paris Peace Accords
Image:Peace flame in Tokyo.  The shrine also shows a dove in flight
Image:ShalomSalamPeaceIsraelisPalestinians.png|Tri-lingual wordmark used to represent peace between Israel and Palestine: the Hebrew word "Shalom" in blue, the Arabic word "Salaam" in green and the English word "Peace" in orange
Image:Madrid peace dove graffiti.jpg|The Spanish word for peace and a peace dove; graffiti in Madrid
Image:LennonWallImagine.jpg|Lennon Wall in Prague, Czech Republic
Image:Peace symbol.svg|The peace sign
Image:Peace web.jpg|Arborsculpture achieved by grafting
Image:EdBishop1.JPG|Grave of actor Ed Bishop, who campaigned against the Military–industrial complex






