[[Mustique]]

CATEGORIES: Islands of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines

 
Mustique  is a small private island that is part of St Vincent and the Grenadines. The island is one of a group of islands called the Grenadines, most of which are part of St Vincent and the Grenadines, in the West Indies. The island is located within Grenadines Parish, an administrative area of the country.
The island covers  and it has several coral reefs. The land fauna includes tortoises, herons and many other species. Its year-round population of about 500 mostly live in the villages of Lovell, Britannia Bay, and Dover.
The island of Mustique is owned by the Mustique Company, which in turn is owned by the island's home owners. The island has approximately 100 private villas, many of which are rented out through the Mustique Company. In addition there is one hotel called the Cotton House, owned by the Mustique Company, and one privately owned four-bedroom hotel called Firefly.

Residents and guests

Mustique has, over the years, attracted a number of celebrities such as Amy Winehouse,[ref]

The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge vacation in Mustique often.

Early history

The history of the island of Mustique, and of the Grenadines in general, dates back to the 15th century, when Spanish sailors first sighted this more or less linear group of small rocky islands and named them "Los Pájaros" or "the birds", because they resembled a small flock of birds scattered across the sea in flight. During the 17th century the islands were renamed the Grenadines by pirates, who used the sheltered bays to hide their ships and treasure. The islands were later used by European planters to grow sugar cane. This lucrative industry lasted until the nineteenth century, when the extraction of sugar from European-grown sugar beet dramatically lessened the worldwide demand for tropical sugar. 
Mustique's sugar plantations were abandoned and eventually swallowed up by scrub, leaving remnants such as the sugar mill at "Endeavor" and its "Cotton House". The Plantation House was built in the 18th century.

Later history

Mustique was purchased in 1958 by Colin Tennant, 3rd Baron Glenconner, under whose guidance the island began to be developed. In 1960, Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon, the sister of Queen Elizabeth II, accepted as a wedding present his gift of a 
In 1971, the 

Mustique pictures

image:Mqsairport.jpg|Mustique International Airport
image:Mustiquefoodstore.jpg|The general store
image:Mustiquebeaches.jpg|Beaches on the east coast
image:Mustiquevilla.jpg|A villa

Further reading






