[[Prokuplje]]

CATEGORIES: Populated places in Toplica District, Municipalities and cities of Southern and Eastern Serbia, Roman sites in Serbia

Prokuplje (Serbian Cyrillic: Прокупље, ) is a town and municipality located in Serbia at 43.24° North, 21.59° East. According to 2011 census, the town has a total population of 27,163 inhabitants, while population of municipality is 43,631. It is the administrative center of the Toplica District of Serbia. It is one of the Roman sites of Serbia. It was a kaza center in Niš sanjak as "Ürgüp" during Ottoman rule and was incorporated in Kingdom of Serbia in 1878.

Geography

The Prokuplje municipality is located between municipalities of Blace, Kuršumlija, Bojnik, Žitorađa, Merošina, Aleksinac, and Kruševac.

History

The traces of early settlements can be found on neolithic localities such as: Macina (near Zitni Potok), Kavolak . from Prokuplje), on the left side of Prokuplje –Kursumlija road. The earliest known metalworking in Europe was found in Pločnik in 2007 dating to 5500 BC making the Copper Age several centuries older than previously thought.blogspot.html Those agricultural settlements were replaced by the emerging Thracians and then the invading Celtic Scordisci in 279 BC. Pieces of ceramics found by the Latin church are traces of those tribes movement on their way to Greece.
Between 73-75 B.C., after the Romans subjugated the tribes of the region, this part of Serbia became a part of the Roman province of Moesia. It was part of the Roman „via militaris" (connecting the central Balkans with the Adriatic) from Niš, the town was known as Hammeum, or Hameo; the first known name of the settlement. At the end of 4th century A.D., when the Roman empire was divided, all settlements in Toplica region belonged to (Byzantine Empire). The name of the place was Komplos or Komblos (village-town). Some historians believed that Komplos was rebuilt by Emperor Justinian.
When South Slavic tribes first settled in this area in the 6th century, Komplos was rendered as the Slavic Prokuplje.
The first written document about today's town name is from 1395 A.D. when the Duchess Milica gave away as a present two houses and some belongings from the town of St. Prokopius to St. Panteleimon monastery on holy Mount Athos in modern-day Greece. Today's name of the town of Prokuplje was first seen in use after the replacement of St. Prokopius' relics from Nis in the year 1396 A.D.
In early middle age, during the rule of Stefan Nemanja, Prokuplje is not mentioned in any written documents. The settlement gain its importance in Tsar Lazar's period, before the Turkish invasion, when the fortress on Hisar Hill was rebuilt. Prokuplje was besieged in 1454 and during 423 years of Turkish rule the name of the place was Urcub or Okrub. It was part of the Sanjak of Niš.
Prokuplje was liberated from the Turks on the 19th of December, 1877 and the whole Toplica region was liberated in 1877. During the First and Second World War Prokuplje was completely destroyed, but in the post-war period it became an industrial town.

Archaeological findings

In July 2008 a major Roman spa was unearthed.b92.php?nav_id=52063
On October 9, 2008, Serbian archaeologists at Pločnik found a copper axe believed to be 500–800 years older than the actual beginning of the Copper Age, suggesting that the human use of metal is older than believed.serbianna.shtml

Economy of Prokuplje

Prokuplje has a weak economy, with most of the employed people working in public sector. In 2009, LEONI Wiring Systems  opened a factory in Prokuplje, employing 1500 people.

Demographics (2002 census)

Ethnic groups in the Prokuplje municipality

Ethnic groups in the Prokuplje town

International relations

Twin towns – Sister cities

Prokuplje is twinned with:








