[[Cuyahoga River]]

CATEGORIES: American Heritage Rivers, Cuyahoga River, Greater Cleveland, Rivers of Ohio, Waste disposal incidents, Geography of Cuyahoga County, Ohio, Geography of Geauga County, Ohio, Geography of Portage County, Ohio, Geography of Summit County, Ohio, Cuyahoga Valley National Park

The Cuyahoga RiverUnited States Geological Survey Hydrological Unit Code: 04-11-00-02 ( is located in Northeast Ohio in the United States and feeds Lake Erie. The river is famous for being "the river that caught fire," helping to spur the environmental movement in the late 1960s. Native Americans called this winding water "Cuyahoga," which means "crooked river" in an Iroquoian language.

Course

The Cuyahoga watershed begins its  of land in portions of six counties.
The river is a relatively recent geological formation, formed by the advance and retreat of ice sheets during the last ice age.  The final glacial retreat, which occurred 10,000–12,000 years ago, caused changes in the drainage pattern near Akron. This change in pattern caused the originally southward-flowing Cuyahoga to flow to the north. As its newly reversed currents flowed toward Lake Erie, the river carved its way around glacial debris left by the receding ice sheet, resulting in the river's winding U-shape. These meanderings stretched the length of the river (which was only 30 miles (50 km) when travelled directly) into a 100-mile (160 km) trek from its headwaters to its mouth. The depth of the river  (except where noted below) ranges from .

History

Moses Cleaveland, a surveyor charged with exploring the Connecticut Western Reserve, first arrived at the mouth of the Cuyahoga River in 1796, and subsequently decided to locate a settlement there, which became Cleveland, Ohio.
The river was one of the features along which the "Greenville Treaty Line" ran beginning in 1795, per the Treaty of Greenville that ended the Northwest Indian War in the Ohio Country, effectively becoming the western boundary of the United States and remaining so briefly.

Environmental concerns

The Cuyahoga River, at times during the 20th century, was one of the most polluted rivers in the United States. The reach from Akron to Cleveland was devoid of fish. A 1968 Kent State University symposium described one section of the river:
  From 1,000 feet below Lower Harvard Bridge to Newburgh and South Shore Railroad Bridge, the channel becomes wider and deeper and the level is controlled by Lake Erie. Downstream of the railroad bridge to the harbor, the depth is held constant by dredging, and the width is maintained by piling along both banks. The surface is covered with the brown oily film observed upstream as far as the Southerly Plant effluent. In addition, large quantities of black heavy oil floating in slicks, sometimes several inches thick, are observed frequently. Debris and trash are commonly caught up in these slicks forming an unsightly floating mess. Anaerobic action is common as the dissolved oxygen is seldom above a fraction of a part per million. The discharge of cooling water increases the temperature by . The velocity is negligible, and sludge accumulates on the bottom. Animal life does not exist. Only the algae Oscillatoria grows along the piers above the water line.  The color changes from gray-brown to rusty brown as the river proceeds downstream. Transparency is less than 0.5 feet in this reach. This entire reach is grossly polluted."The Cuyahoga River Watershed: Proceedings of a symposium commemorating the dedication of Cunningham Hall." Kent State University, November 1, 1968.  
At least 13 fires have been reported on the Cuyahoga River, the first occurring in 1868. (2003). "Fables of the Cuyahoga: Reconstructing a History of Environmental Protection". Fordham Environmental Law Journal, Vol. XIV, p. 89. The largest river fire in 1952 caused over $1 million in damage to boats and a riverfront office building.
The 1969 Cuyahoga River fire helped spur an avalanche of water pollution control activities, resulting in the Clean Water Act, Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement, and the creation of the federal Environmental Protection Agency and the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency (OEPA). As a result, large point sources of pollution on the Cuyahoga have received significant attention from the OEPA in recent decades. These events are referred to in Randy Newman's 1972 song "Burn On," R.E.M.'s 1986 song "Cuyahoga," and Adam Again's 1992 song "River on Fire." Great Lakes Brewing Company of Cleveland, Ohio named their Burning River Pale Ale after the event.
Water quality has improved and, partially in recognition of this improvement, the Cuyahoga River was designated as one of 14 American Heritage Rivers in 1998. navigation channel still preclude a robust fishery in that reach. Recreation water quality standards (using bacteria as indicators) are generally met during dry weather conditions, but are often exceeded during significant rains due to nonpoint sources and combined sewer overflows.

Modifications

The lower Cuyahoga River has been subjected to numerous changes.  Originally, the Cuyahoga river met Lake Erie approximately , from its mouth up to the Mittal Steel Cleveland Works steel mills, to accommodate Great Lakes freighter traffic which serves the bulk (asphalt, gravel, petroleum, salt, steel, and other) industries located along the lower Cuyahoga River banks in Cleveland's Flats district.  The Corps of Engineers has also straightened river banks and widened turning basins in the Federal Navigation Channel on the lower Cuyahoga River to facilitate maritime operations.

=Ice-breaking=

The United States Coast Guard sometimes conducts fall and spring ice-breaking operations along Lake Erie and the lower Cuyahoga River to prolong the Great Lakes shipping season, depending on shipping schedules and weather conditions.

=Flooding=

Some attempts (including dams and dredging) have been made to control flooding along the Cuyahoga River basin. As a result of speculative land development, buildings have been erected on many flat areas that are only a few feet above normal river levels.  Sudden strong rain or snow storms can create severe flooding in these low-lying areas.
The upper Cuyahoga River, starting at  at the mouth on Lake Erie, resulting in relatively slow moving waters that can take a while to drain compared to the upper Cuyahoga River.

 
Some tributary elevations above are higher than the Cuyahoga River elevation, because of small waterfalls at or near their confluences; and distances are measured in "river miles" along the river's length from its mouth on Lake Erie.

Dams

Ohio and Erie Canal diversion dam

The Brecksville Dam

Gorge Metropolitan Park Dam

The largest dam is the Gorge Metropolitan Park Dam, also known as the FirstEnergy Dam, on the border between Cuyahoga Falls and Akron. This 57-foot dam has for over 90 years submerged the falls for which the City of Cuyahoga Falls was named; more to the point of water quality, it has created a large stagnant pool with low dissolved oxygen. Retrieved June 20, 2007.
The FirstEnergy Dam was built by the Northern Ohio Traction and Light Co. in 1912 to serve the dual functions of generating hydropower for its local streetcar system and providing cooling-water storage for a coal-burning power plant; however, the hydropower operation was discontinued in 1958, and the coal-burning plant was decommissioned in 1991.Kent Environmental Council, Newsletter June 2005. Retrieved June 21, 2007. Others contend such an effort would be expensive and complicated, for at least two reasons: first, the formerly hollow dam was filled in with concrete in the early 1990s, and second, because of the industrial history of Cuyahoga Falls, the sediment upstream of the dam is expected to contain hazardous chemicals, possibly including heavy metals and PCBs. The Ohio EPA estimated removal of the dam would cost $5–10 million, and removal of the contaminated sediments $60 million. The dam is licensed through 2041.
Advanced Hydro Solutions (AHS), a company based in Fairlawn, Ohio, filed a notice of intent to use the dam to generate hydropower. The company contends hydropower is a cleaner source of power and the emissions saved by the plant will be the equivalent of taking 10,000 cars off the road.  Citing concerns with erosion, dewatering of the scenic river reach below the dam, and use that is inconsistent with the Gorge MetroPark's purpose, opponents to this plan include, in addition to environmental and recreational groups, some governmental agencies, including Metro Parks, Serving Summit County, the U.S. Department of the Interior, and the Ohio EPA. At public meetings held on July 27, 2005, the proposed project, which would generate enough electricity to power 2000 homes, encountered substantial opposition. On May 25, 2007, AHS suffered a setback in its effort to develop the site. The United States Court of Appeals for the sixth circuit denied its application to conduct tests at the site, refusing to overturn a lower court's ruling that the MetroParks had the right to deny AHS access to conduct the tests.

Dams in Cuyahoga Falls

Two dams in Cuyahoga Falls, the Sheraton and LeFever Dams, were scheduled for demolition in late 2012. This will bring about a mile of the river back to its natural state, remove 35 feet of structures, and expose an equivalent quantity of whitewater for recreation.  As of August 20, 2013, both small dams had effectively been totally removed, and there is essentially no impoundment of water now.  Cleanup and remediation of the general area within downtown Cuyahoga Falls remains to be completed.

Munroe Falls Dam

Two other dams, in Kent and in Munroe Falls, though smaller, have had an even greater impact on water quality due to the lower gradient in their respective reaches. For this reason, the Ohio EPA required the communities to mitigate the effects of the dams.
The Munroe Falls Dam was modified in 2005. Retrieved June 20, 2007. Work on this project uncovered a natural waterfall. Retrieved June 20, 2007. Given this new knowledge about the riverbed, some interested parties, including Summit County, campaigned for complete removal of the dam. The revised plan, initially denied on September 20, 2005, was approved by the Munroe Falls City Council on a week later. The 11.5 foot sandstone dam has since been removed, and in its place now is a natural ledge with a 4.5 foot drop at its greatest point. Dam removal to return Cuyahoga to natural, free-flowing state. Posted September 29, 2005; retrieved October 6, 2005.

Kent Dam

The Kent Dam was bypassed in 2004. Retrieved June 20, 2007.

Lists

Variant names

According to the United States Geological Survey Geographic Names Information System,
the Cuyahoga River has also been known as:
 
 

Dams

Tributaries

Generally, rivers are larger than creeks, which are larger than brooks, which are larger than runs.
Runs may be dry except during or after a rain, at which point they can flash flood and be torrential.
Default is standard order from mouth to upstream:



Notes



General references




