[[Military of Croatia]]

CATEGORIES: Military of Croatia

Croatian military is officially called Armed Forces of the Republic of Croatia ( - OSRH) and it consists of three branches:

Strength

The total number of active military personnel in Croatian Armed Forces stands at 17,500  and 6,000 reserves working in various service branches of the armed forces., March 07, 2011.
Total available male manpower aged 16–49 number 1,035,712, of which 771,323 are technically fit for military service. Male citizens are now no longer subject to compulsory military service since January 1, 2008. However, the last generation of 2007 servicemen was also absolved of compulsory service by an act from then Minister of Defense Berislav Rončević.

Budget

The Croatian military budget for the past 6–7 years was kept below 2% of GDP, a vast difference from the 1990s when defense expenditure represented a major stake in Croatian Budgetary expenditure due to the Croatian War of Independence. For example, 1995 Croatian defense budget stood at 12.4 billion Croatian Kuna or just over 12% of GDP, which was also the highest defense expenditure ever.
Defense Expenditures in recent years (example years - source Croatian MOD);
Croatian Armed Forces have faced issues with maintaining readiness level due to lack of funds, training and planned modernization have been lackluster and sporadic at best and equipment that is currently in service faces significant shortfalls in level of readiness and preparedness due to lack of maintenance which is associated with the lack of funds.
Budget from year to year has been decreasing yet overall costs have been rising with the inflation and pay increases, however Croatian armed forces have been able to maintain some level of military readiness and participate in major NATO exercises in Croatia and overseas.
Modernization, although sporadic at best has provided Armed forces with desperately needed new equipment, albeit insufficient quantities to maintain NATO levels, something that should be remedied over coming years.   
A long term modernization plan, 2013-2023 is yet to be published, but according to government Croatian Armed Forces are set to receive vitally needed new equipment, including a battalion of PzH2000 155mm self-propelled howitzers, new infantry fighting vehicles, at least 8 brand new NATO made helicopters and a squadron of much delayed aircraft fighters. Currently Croatian Air Force is to keep 12 Mig 21Bis fighters that received an general overhaul in Ukraine that should see them flying for another 4 at best 5 years.
A downsizing of armed forces has allowed for more funds to be allocated to modernization over past few years with an average of 1.6 billion kuna spent on modernization, infrastructure and construction of new facilities.hrvatski-vojnik.asp

Petar Zrinski Military Academy

Petar Zrinski military academy acts as an school of higher learning responsible for training and educating future generations of military personal,. 
Academy consists of several schools, including "Ban Josip Jelačić"; "Blago Zadro"; "Katarina Zrinska"; The officer's Academy, and school for non commissioned officers. In all Academy at any time has 300 full-time staff and is only Military Academy in Croatia. Annually some 100-120 foreign nationals attend the academy.

Commander

The Commander-in-Chief of all Croatian armed forces in peace and war is the President of the Republic. The Commander-in-Chief prescribes the organization of the Croatian Armed Forces at the proposal of the Chief of General Staff, with consent of the Minister of Defence.
The Armed Forces consist of peacetime and wartime component. The peacetime component is composed of active military officers, civil servants and employees in the Croatian Armed Forces, cadets, and conscripts serving a 6-month national service and reservists when on military exercise. The wartime component of the Armed Forces is additionally composed of all other reservists.
The General Staff is part of the Ministry of Defense in charge of commanding, training and use of the Armed Forces. It also has a number of units under its direct command, including the Special Operations Battalion, Honor Guard Battalion and several others.
In peace, the Commander-in-Chief exercises his command through the Minister of Defense. In war and in cases where the Minister of Defense is not fulfilling orders, the Commander-in-Chief exercises his command directly through the General Staff Commander.
The Croatian Parliament exercises democratic control over the Armed Forces by adopting defense strategy, defense budget and defense laws.

Special Forces and Honour Guard

Special Operations Battalion ( or BSD) was founded on September 8, 2000 with merging of the Special Combat Skills Center and some personnel from the 1st Croatian Guards Corps (1. Hrvatski Gardijski Zdrug). The Battalion has 300 men. Today, it is one of the most elite units of the Croatian military, as well as being one of the best trained and equipped special forces units in the region.morh.pdf
The Croatian General Staff exercises direct command over the battalion which thus elevated the unit to strategic level for quicker reaction and overall better and faster tactical and strategic situations. Also, this means that members of all three branches of the Croatian armed forces can apply for selection.
Other special operations units are Military Intelligence Battalion (Vojno-obavještajna bojna or VOB) and Special Military Police Company (Satnija specijalne vojne policije or SSVP).
Duties of Honour Guard are performed by Počasno zaštitna bojna (300 men), located at Zagreb in Tuškanac military base.

Projects

$3 Billion Kuna modernization plan proposed by than Ivica Racan SDP lead Government in 2003, with planned modernization starting in 2006 and ending in 2015 has been delayed due to subsequent economic recession, but also due to serious corruption that has cost Croatian MOD several billion kuna since 2006. A New Plan under current Prime minister Zoran Milanović should define exactly how and what Croatian armed forces should look like by 2023. Defence White paper should be published by the end of 2013 with emphasis placed on modernization of Army.
Proposed Defence Programs and updates/upgrades:

Army

Air Force

Navy

Navy plans are still being worked on but present plans call for a medium expansion of the naval force.

Programs under revision

Arms Exports

Croatian Arms exports.
Croatia as a small country has a relatively well developed arms industry that is highly competitive internationally with significant annual arms exports. In 2012, Croatia managed to export nearly €120 million.novilist. As a result of arms sales Croatian government ordered immediate withdrawal of Croatian UN Golan Heights contingent.
in 2013 Croatia exported €143 million worth of arms, however it is not clear if this also includes $36.5 million worth of illicit arms Croatia exported to Jordan for Syrian rebels. Croatia was the top supplier of arms to Syrian Rebels in 2013, but much of it through illicit channels and without Croatian Government approval or knowledge, much of arms were exported via Jordan.novilist.hr/Vijesti/Hrvatska/Hrvatska-trgovala-preko-Jordana-Siriji-prodano-oruzje-vrijedno-200-milijuna-kuna

International cooperation

On April 1, 2009 Croatia joined NATO and on July 1, 2013 it became the 28th member of the European Union. The Croatian Armed Forces participate in many (military) aspects of both organizations as well as actively participate in many United Nations peacekeeping operations worldwide.

Gallery

File:Patria AMV Karlovac 2009 5.jpg| Patria AMV
File:M-84 Dan OSRH 270511 1.jpg| M-84A4 main battle tank
File: D-30J howitzer.jpg | D-30 howitzer
File:Mi-171Sh Karlovac 2009.jpg| Mi-171Sh
File:MiG-21bis&F-14B-Croatia-2002-1.jpg| Croatian MiG-21 and US F-14
File:Krila Oluje Karlovac 2009 14.jpg| Wings of Storm aerobatic team
File:Canadair CL-415 Kroatien 2.JPG| Bombardier 415
File:AirTractor AT-802A FireBoss 5 DanOSRH 2011.JPG| AirTractor AT-802A
File:Rubni pozdrav na RTOP-41.jpg| Helsinki class missile boat
File:RTOP Kralj Petar Kresimir IV 11 170909.jpg| Kralj class missile boat








