[[Cinclosomatidae]]

CATEGORIES: Cinclosomatidae, Bird families

Cinclosomatidae is a family of passerine birds native to Australia and nearby areas. It has a complicated taxonomic history and different authors vary in which birds they include in the family. It includes at least the quail-thrushes (Cinclosoma), 5 species of ground-dwelling birds found in Australia and New Guinea. The jewel-babblers (Ptilorrhoa), 4 species found in rainforest in New Guinea, also seem to belong in this family. 
The whipbirds and wedgebills (Psophodes and Androphobus) are often included in which case the name Psophodidae has priority as the name of the family. The Malaysian Rail-babbler (Eupetes macrocerus) was formerly sometimes placed in this family which would then be called Eupetidae.

Taxonomy

The quail-thrushes, jewel-babblers, whipbirds and wedgebills were traditionally included with the logrunners (Orthonyx) in the family Orthonychidae. Accessed 4 January 2010. Sometimes the Malaysian Rail-babbler and Blue-capped Ifrit (Ifrita kowaldi) were also included in the family., Oxford University Press, Oxford. In 1985, Sibley and Ahlquist found that the logrunners were not related to the others and included only the logrunners in the Orthonychidae. They treated the others as the subfamily Cinclosomatinae within their expanded family Corvidae. Accessed 4 January 2010.
A numbers of authors later treated the quail-thrushes and allies as the family Cinclosomatidae, a name first coined by Gregory Mathews in 1921–1922. However, if the whipbirds are included in the family, the older name Psophodidae Bonaparte, 1854 has priority. If the Malaysian Rail-babbler is also included, the name Eupetidae Bonaparte, 1850 has priority.
The Malaysian Rail-babbler has now been shown to be unrelated to the others, probably being an early offshoot of the Passerida.Jønsson, K.A., J. Fjeldså, P.G.P. Ericson, and M. Irestedt (2007) Systematic placement of an enigmatic Southeast Asian taxon Eupetes macrocerus and implications for the biogeography of a main songbird radiation, the Passerida, Biology Letters 3(3):323–326. Another study found the quail-thrushes and jewel-babblers to be related to each other but did not show them to have a close relationship with Psophodes or Ifrita., Per G.P. Ericson, Knud A. Jønsson, Jon Fjeldså & Les Christidis (2009) A multi-gene phylogeny reveals novel relationships for aberrant genera of Australo-Papuan core Corvoidea and polyphyly of the Pachycephalidae and Psophodidae (Aves: Passeriformes), Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution, 52:488–497.

Description

The quail-thrushes and jewel babblers are medium-sized songbirds, 17–28 cm in length. & William S. Peckover (2001), Birds of New Guinea and the Bismarck Archipelago: a photographic guide, Dove Publications, Alderley, Australia. They have strong legs and bills. Males and females often differ in plumage markings. The quail-thrushes are largely brown above, the colour varying to provide camouflage against the soil, but are more boldly marked with black and white below. Jewel-babblers usually have extensive blue in their plumage. Most species have loud, distinctive songs. (2004) The New Encyclopedia of Birds, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Whipbirds and wedgebills are 19–31 cm long. They are mainly olive-green or brown in colour and have a crest.

Distribution and habitat

Jewel-babblers are found on New Guinea and the neighbouring islands of Yapen, Batanta, Misool and Salawati. They occur in forest, generally replacing each other at different altitudes. The Painted Quail-thrush is also found in the forests of New Guinea. The other quail-thrushes are restricted to Australia where they are found in drier habitats, occurring in open forest, scrub and on stony ground. None of the species are thought to be threatened but one subspecies of the Spotted Quail-thrush is possibly extinct. Accessed 4 January 2010.
The whipbirds and wedgebills are all found in Australia, occurring in a range of habitats from rainforest to arid scrub. The Western Whipbird is considered to be Near-threatened because of habitat loss and fires while the Papuan Whipbird is classed as Data Deficient. Downloaded from  on 4 January 2010. Downloaded from  on 4 January 2010.

Behaviour

They are terrestrial birds which fly fairly weakly and prefer to squat or run when disturbed. They forage on the ground feeding mainly on insects and other invertebrates. In the desert, quail-thrushes also eat some seeds.
They build a cup-shaped nest among shrubs or on the ground. Two or three eggs are laid.

Species list

If the following species are included, the family becomes Psophodidae:






