[[True crime]]

CATEGORIES: Literary genres, Non-fiction crime books, Non-fiction crime writers, True crime


True crime is a non-fiction literary and film genre in which the author examines an actual crime and details the actions of real people. The genre has been described as infotainment and as factional—a mix of fact and fiction.
The crimes most commonly include murder, with tales of serial killers dominating the genre Others may reflect years of thoughtful research and inquiry and may have considerable literary merit. Still others revisit historic crimes (or alleged crimes) and propose solutions, such as books examining political assassinations, well-known unsolved murders, or the deaths of celebrities.

Origins of the genre

According to Joyce Carol Oates:
An American pioneer of the genre was Edmund Pearson, who was influenced in his style of writing about crime by Thomas De Quincey. Pearson published a series of books of this type starting with Studies in Murder in 1924 and concluding with More Studies in Murder in 1936. Before being collected in his books, Pearson's true crime stories typically appeared in "high-class magazines such as Liberty, The New Yorker, and Vanity Fair"; this aspect distinguished Pearson's crime narratives from those found in the penny press.
The works of author Yseult Bridges about British cases; Inspector Dew's I Caught Crippen (1938); and the Notable British Trials series were all works that can be regarded as true crime. and the one that rocketed it to enormous profitability.

The modern genre

Many works in this genre recount high-profile, sensational crimes such as the JonBenét Ramsey killing, the O. J. Simpson murder case, and the Pamela Smart murder, while others are devoted to more obscure slayings. Prominent true crime accounts include Helter Skelter by lead Manson family prosecutor Vincent Bugliosi and Curt Gentry; Ann Rule's The Stranger Beside Me, about Ted Bundy; Harry N. MacLean's In Broad Daylight about the killing of Ken Rex McElroy; Cathy Scott's The Killing of Tupac Shakur; and Joe McGinniss' Fatal Vision.
The modern genre, which often focuses on murders, is frequently marked by biographical treatment of the criminals and victims, attempts to explain criminal psychology, and descriptions of police investigations and trial procedures. An example of a modern true crime book is Mark Coakley's Tip and Trade: How Two Lawyers Made Millions from Insider Trading.
A milestone of the genre was Norman Mailer's The Executioner's Song (1979) which was the first book in the genre to win a Pulitzer prize.
Although true crime books often center on sensational, shocking, or strange events, a secondary part of their appeal is social realism, which describes events too mundane, risqué, or deviant for other non-fiction media, including descriptions of the lifestyles of working-class or socially marginal people.
After the success of the movie, The Silence of the Lambs, a subgenre of true crime has focused on methods of profiling unidentified criminals, especially serial killers.
Serial killers have been a highly profitable sub-genre. An informal survey conducted by Publishers Weekly in 1993 concluded that:
In the early 1990s, a boom of true crime films began in Hong Kong. These films ranged from graphic Category III-rated films such as The Untold Story and Dr. Lamb (based on serial killers Wong Chi Hang and Lam Kor-wan respectively) to more general audience fare such as the film Crime Story (based on the kidnapping of businessman Teddy Wang Tei-huei) which featured action star Jackie Chan.
According to Associated Content (2006), "True Crime writing is the fastest growing genre since the turn of the century." Much of this is due to the ease of recycling materials and the publication of numerous volumes by the same authors differing only by minor updates.

Fictionalization

Christiana Gregoriou analyzing several books of the genre concluded that tabloidization and fictionalization are pervasive in the works of some of the authors of true crime literature. Even books by the same author disagree on specifics about the same killer or events.

Reality police TV shows





Further reading


