[[Landsknecht]]

CATEGORIES: Warfare of the Early Modern era, Landsknechts, Military units and formations of the Early Modern era, 16th- and 17th-century warrior types, German words and phrases

The German ), meaning "servants of the land", were colourful mercenary soldiers with a formidable reputation who took over the Swiss forces' legacy and became an important military force of the late 15th- and throughout 16th-century Europe. Consisting predominantly of German and Swiss mercenary pikemen and supporting foot soldiers, they achieved the reputation for being the universal mercenaries of early modern Europe.Landsknecht Soldier 1486-1560, Author: John Richards, Publisher Osprey Publishing, Great Britain, 2002, ISBN 1841762431.

Etymology

The term is from German Land (land or country) and Knecht (servant, cognate to 'knight'), recorded from ca. 1480. It was originally coined by Peter von Hagenbach and intended to indicate soldiers of the Swabian part of the Holy Roman Empire as opposed to the Swiss mercenaries. As early as 1500, the misleading spelling of  became common because of the association with Lanze "lance".
The term Landser is directly based on Landsknecht, as is the name of the French card game Lansquenet.

History

Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor from 1493 to 1519, formed the first mercenary Landsknecht regiments in 1487. He called upon Georg von Frundsberg (1473–1528), sometimes referred to as the Father of the Landsknechte, to assist him in their organization. Landsknechte later went on to fight in almost every 16th-century military campaign, sometimes on both sides of the engagement.
The Landsknechte, formed in conscious imitation of the Swiss mercenaries (and, initially, using Swiss instructors), eventually contributed to the defeat of the redoubtable Swiss, whose battle formations – over-dependent on hand-to-hand fighting – became vulnerable to the increased firepower of arquebus and artillery. French artillery or Spanish firepower dealt serious blows to the Swiss formations, and the Landsknecht pike blocks were there to fight off the depleted Swiss attack columns once this had occurred.
The Landsknechte were conservative in their usage of weapons and contained a large majority of pikemen. However, they inclined more to the tactical use of firearms than the Swiss because Landsknechte relied less on the precipitous rush to close combat. As Imperial soldiers, they often fought in formations mixed with Spaniards during the reign of King of Spain and Holy Roman Emperor Charles V. These Spaniards made a good widespread use of the arquebus and later, of the musket.
Landsknechte typically came from Swabia, Alsace, Flanders, and the Rhineland, but ultimately the regiments were made up of men from all parts of Europe.
Their battlefield behavior was variable.  Landsknecht Paul Dolstein wrote of the siege of Älfsborg in July 1502, fighting for the King of Denmark: "We were 1800 Germans, and we were attacked by 15000 Swedish farmers ... we struck most of them dead". 51
At the Battle of Pavia (1525), they performed exceptionally well, fighting to the death on both sides of the conflict, even after their employers fled the field, as was the case for the Landsknechts on the French side. The Imperial Landsknechte were instrumental in the Emperor's victory. However, on other occasions, (such as in the later Italian Wars, French Wars of Religion and the Eighty Years War) their bravery and discipline came under severe criticism, and the Spanish elements of the Imperial army regularly deprecated the battlefield usefulness of the Landsknechte—it was said that the Duke of Alba hired them only to deny their services to the Dutch enemy, and put them on display to swell his numbers, not intending to fight with them. 
They are attested as deployed in the armies of Kings John III of Navarre and successor Henry II of Navarre during their campaigns to reconquest Navarre (1512-1524). In the same context, they are found fighting on Charles V's side too (battle for Hondarribia, 1521-1524). The Huguenots scorned their Landsknecht mercenaries after these were immediately routed by the battered Swiss mercenary pike-block they had been sent to finish off at the Battle of Dreux (1562).

Sack of Rome

The army of the Holy Roman Emperor defeated the French army in Italy, but funds were not available to pay the soldiers. The 34,000 Imperial troops mutinied and forced their commander, Charles III, Duke of Bourbon and Constable of France, to lead them towards Rome. The Sack of Rome in 1527 was executed by some 6,000 Spaniards under the Duke, 14,000 Landsknechts under Georg von Frundsberg, some Italian infantry and some cavalry.

Organization

The regiments often expanded from 4,000 to 10,000 men according to circumstances, or even larger, e.g. the 12,000 Landknechts raised by Frundsberg in 1526 for his campaign in Italy. It was this flexibility which allowed them to be used in various battle conditions. Oberste (colonels) were given recruiting commissions by the Emperor to form regiments, with a lieutenant-colonel and various regimental staff, and units divided into Fähnleins (companies) with a Hauptmann (captain) in charge, as well as lieutenants and Fähnriche (ensigns). Other ranks included majors of the court-martial and officers in charge of camp followers.
The Tross were the camp followers or "baggage train" who traveled with each Landsknecht unit, carrying the military necessities, the food and the belongings of each soldier and his family. The Tross was made up of women, children and some craftsmen.

Weapons

Landsknechte were trained in the use of the famous long pikes and used the pike square formations developed by the Swiss. The majority of Landsknechte would use pikes, but others, meant to provide tactical assistance to the pikemen, accordingly used different weapons. For example, an experienced Landsknecht could be designated a Doppelsöldner, an armoured soldier who served as the backbone for the formation and in addition to the pike as more recent recruits, they could also be alternatively employed wielding a 
However, the primary use of the two-handed sword would be to serve as the guard for the standard bearer, as it is a weapon that allows for a few to oppose many.thearma.html Bidenhander sword The Swiss adversaries to the Landsknechte had specifically prohibited the use of these swords during the late 15th century, as they deemed them unsuitable for the constricted manner of pike warfare, though they continued to use the shorter longswords into and throughout the 16th century. "Doppelsöldner" meant "double pay man", because they were paid double the wages of their less-experienced counterparts. Landsknechte also used Kriegsmesser longswords (German for War knife) a long curved sword clasped to the belt, the blade shown naked without a scabbard in some woodcuts from 1500–1520.
Other Landsknechte would use the arquebus, the precursor to the musket. When the Landsknechte were first formed, arquebusiers composed up to an eighth of the total number of soldiers, but the number gradually grew to be about a quarter.
The universal Landsknecht weapon was a short sword called a Katzbalger, carried in addition to the Landsknecht's main weapon. Indeed, the Katzbalger was seen as the very symbol of the Landsknecht, Swiss illustrators being careful to depict it to indicate that a mercenary was a Landsknecht rather than a Reisläufer.

Clothes

What made the Landsknechte so conspicuous was their elaborate dress, which they adopted from the Swiss, but later took to even more dramatic excess. Maximilian I exempted them from the prevalent sumptuary laws as an acknowledgement of their "... Maximilian granted them this dispensation because their lives tended to be so 'short and brutish.'"
Doublets () with tall feathers; and broad flat shoes, made them bodies of men that could not be mistaken.

Camp

Landsknechte adopted the Hussite tactic of creating a ring of limbers and wagons, surrounded by cannon, with the encampment in the middle. While in strong positions like this, many Landsknechte lived in tents; however, in more makeshift situations, they would often build crude huts made of straw and mud supported by Pikes and Halberds. Commissioned officers would always sleep in tents on campaign. Quarrels and disease would go about the camp, and if the Landsknechte had been defeated in the battle the camp followers had little time to escape before rape and plunder took place. However, it was usually secure from the enemy.

Modern image

There are Landsknecht associations in various European countries, as well as in the United States, which promote interest in the Renaissance tradition of the Landsknechte and who often stage revivals and festivals. The action film Flesh & Blood portrays a group of Landsknechte and their fictional adventures in Italy. In the games Age of Empires III, Europa Universalis 4, Medieval 2: Total War, and Civilization V, Landsknechte can be hired to fight for one's own use. In Civilization IV, Landsknecht act as the unique unit for the Holy Roman Empire. In Rise of Nations Landsknechte are the unique unit of Germany, replacing pikemen. In the For the Glory, the first level unit sprite of German nations is a Landsknecht with zweihander. In the Etrian Odyssey series, Landsknecht is a playable class. The Warhammer Fantasy Battle Imperial Greatswords have been modelled after the Landsknechte. They also feature in the game Bladestorm: The Hundred Years' War. The Original Renaissance Pleasure Faire in Irwindale, California, also has a group of Landsknechte. There is also a unit of Landsknecht re-enactors known as Das Geld Fahnlein at the Connecticut Renaissance Faire,Das Geld Fahnlein and some of Das TeufelsAlpdrücken Fahnlein at the Maryland Renaissance Festival.








