[[Susannah Constantine]]

CATEGORIES: 1962 births, Living people, English television presenters, English people of Dutch descent, Fashion journalists, British Book Award winners, English non-fiction writers, English fashion designers, People educated at Queen's Gate School, People educated at Heathfield School, Ascot, Fashion stylists

Susannah F Constantine (born 3 June 1962 in Hammersmith, London)Dean and Collateral Ancestors of Edward D. Bradford. Scroll to page 77 of 361 – rootsweb. Retrieved 14 June 2007. is an English  fashion journalist, advisor, television presenter, author and designer. Her second book, entitled What Not to Wear, has won her a prestigious British Book Award and sold 670,000 copies.
Constantine was born into a wealthy family; her father was successful in property and shipping sectors. She was privately educated as a child and went on to date British royalty, David, Viscount Linley, during the 1980s. Constantine has been involved in fashion for a long period, originally working in America for Giorgio Armani and then John Galliano in London. She met Trinny Woodall in 1994 who both proceeded to write a weekly fashion column, Ready to Wear. They founded Ready2shop. From there they were commissioned to BBC Two to host the style series, What Not to Wear, from 2001 to 2005. She made regular appearances as a style advisor on The Oprah Winfrey Show and following her success on the shows, she went on to co-host Trinny & Susannah Undress... on ITV in 2006 and Undress the Nation in 2007. Constantine and Woodall have now dressed over 5,000 women.
She has co-written many fashion advice books with Woodall, some of which have become best-sellers in the United Kingdom and United States. It is estimated that her various style advice books have sold 2.5 million copies in Britain and the United States.com Website – pr. Retrieved 11 April 2007. Constantine and Woodall have designed their own clothing range for Littlewoods which made its debut in 2007, followed by the release of their latest fashion advice book, The Body Shape Bible.

Education

Constantine was privately educated at boarding schools including Queen's Gate School in South Kensington, LondonFiona Neill. Retail therapists (Pages 1, 2 & 3) – timesonline.co.uk. Retrieved 16 July 2007. and the £20,000-per-year St Mary's School in Wantage, Oxfordshire which was run by Anglican nuns. What not to say to your old school, by Susannah – dailymail.co.uk. Retrieved 15 July 2007. Her time at St Mary's School was described by herself as "miserable" due to her homesickness and insecurity, meaning she was not able to make friends. She was first sent to boarding school at the age of 11 years, and recalls her first night away from home: "I sobbed uncontrollably into my pillow."Trinny Woodall and Susannah Constantine: In bed with the first ladies of fashion, www.co.uk. Retrieved 25 February 2008.
In mid-2007, Constantine spoke about how she received a letter from St Mary's School, inviting her to come back to the school to talk about her career and success to current pupils. Constantine immediately declined the offer with a four-letter refusal and wrote "No fucking way" on the letter she had received. "Susannah tells nuns 'No f***ing way'", www.co.uk. Retrieved 28 August 2007. Her personal assistant, who was left to deal with the situation, wrongly sent the original letter of invitation (containing Constantine's hand-written note) back to the school. The school then wrote a letter back, stating that she is not welcome near the school.

Early career

Constantine originally did a year of Montessori training after she had left school but she then moved onto other projects such as studying sculpture in Brussels. She later said of this time that she "lost her virginity, went a bit mad."Barbara Ellen. God's gift to women – guardian.co.uk. Retrieved 16 September 2007. Constantine had taught children for three years,Rachelle Thackray Me And My Partner: Trinny Woodall and Susannah Constantine – sundaymirror.co.uk. Retrieved 18 September 2007. Constantine's love for horses had inspired her to become a mounted policewoman in London, but was deterred when she found she was required to do four years walking the beat. She wrote a book about present giving, which prompted The Daily Telegraph to write a hostile article implying she had never done a day's work in her life, something which deeply upset her.co.uk. Retrieved 28 August 2007. She has stated defiantly "I've always worked."
She is now best known as a fashion guru and style advisor. Her fashion career started when she worked for many years as a shop girl in America for Giorgio Armani. She later came back to London with the hope of securing a job with Armani but ended up working for designers such as Richard James, Patrick Cox, Alistair Blair and John Galliano which gained her an even greater understanding of fashion, providing an in depth knowledge of how a garment progresses from a sketch. She then started working with the British Brain and Spine Foundation and consequently met the sports editor of The Daily Telegraph. Whilst doing a piece for GMTV, he asked Constantine to report the women's World Cup Final in cricket on finding out that it was her passion. She proceeded to write about cars and then fashion.
In 1994, she first met Trinny Woodall at a party hosted by David, Viscount Linley. Though they did not like each other at first, the two women proceeded to write Ready to Wear, a weekly style guide for The Daily Telegraph which ran successfully for seven years. The column promoted affordable high-street fashion and they used themselves to illustrate which clothing suited which figure. Constantine and Woodall also became the co-founders of Ready2shop.Neil Tweedie. No, seriously . . . does my cheque look big in this? – telegraph.co.uk. Retrieved 8 March 2007. It was during their time running the internet business that they had a serious argument that almost ended their friendship. Susannah's shock at husband's plastic surgery suggestion – dailymail.co.uk. Retrieved 25 June 2007.
Constantine made her television debut when Granada Sky Broadcasting signed her and Woodall to present a daytime shopping show called Ready to Wear, and they soon released their first fashion advice book, Ready 2 Dress in 2000. The book was unsuccessful and resulted in the pulping of 13,000 copies. Fashion 'makeover queens' land £1m book deal – guardian.co.uk. Retrieved 17 March 2007. Soon after the start of their television career, they secured a frequent makeover slot on the show Richard & Judy. It ensured that they had further exposure in television and gained attention from Jane Root, controller of BBC Two, who took a risk and signed them up after their book venture and their internet business had failed badly.

Television

2001—03

Constantine began co-hosting What Not to Wear with Trinny Woodall in 2001, which required using her fashion advice and expertise in order to reform participants' appearances and fashion style. Constantine and Woodall hosted What Not to Wear until 2005 and became renowned for their tactile behaviour with the participants, direct advice,Sarah Lyall. They Skewer Your Wardrobe In Public – nytimes. Retrieved 26 September 2007. and frequently referring to breasts as tits which has become something of a trademark. Mammary mia! – sundayherald.co.uk. Retrieved from findarticles. Never one to hold back, a notorious moment arose when Constantine spontaneously pulled a female candidate's underwear down during filming as her knicker line was visible. Critics of What Not to Wear argued that the duo were too patronising to their subjects, a claim which they strongly disagree with. Constantine said that the comments come "from the heart",What NOT to wear: Susannah looks all lumpy up top as she arrives Down Under — dailymail.co.uk. Retrieved 28 February 2008. and insists that their subjects "see we have a genuine love of women. We love women and they can see that. Women just know." She also stated "Ultimately, what we're doing is giving people confidence. We're probably the only people who have an opinion, who care how ordinary people dress. No one at Vogue magazine gives a shit. They work with the designers, it's more creative and artistic – they are creating something beautiful. But they don't care about how their readers end up looking – whereas we do!" The show made Constantine and Woodall household names and they are now known together as Trinny and Susannah. One reporter has simply referred to Constantine as "the one with 'big tits'." Constantine and Woodall have even considered taking insurance out on their partnership should something unforeseen happen, although Constantine was against the move.
Constantine has the belief that "anyone can achieve style. It doesn't matter who you are or where you're from." She also says that she finds dressing other women easy, but finds it difficult when dressing herself.com. Retrieved 1 June 2007.  Constantine and Woodall share the belief that dressing to flatter body shape is vital, stating "For us, it's all about shape, and how that is going to cure a bodily defect. We're like clothing doctors."
During her time co-hosting What Not to Wear for five series, she and Woodall gained recognition for their work on the show, winning a Royal Television Society Award in 2002 for being the best factual presenters.co.uk. Retrieved 30 August 2007. just one of the shows on which Constantine's character has been spoofed.
For charity, in 2002 during the BBC's Children in Need programme, both Constantine and Woodall performed their own version of Madonna's hit single "Vogue" with a group of celebrity backing singers. The Big Night on BBC Television – bbc.co.uk. Retrieved 18 August 2007. They became the faces of Nescafé in 2003 in which they were featured in television advertisements promoting the brand of coffee. As part of their contract, Constantine and Woodall gave a Nescafé competition winner a £10,000 makeover. NESCAF: Trinny and Susannah take us al for mugs – independent.co.uk. Retrieved from findarticles.

2004—05

Following its ratings success, What Not to Wear was promoted from BBC Two to BBC One in 2004, and secured even larger audiences. The format was changed slightly, to a 60-minute show with two makeovers instead of a 30-minute show with only one makeoverJason Deans. Makeover queens switch to BBC1 – guardian.co.uk. Retrieved 23 August 2007. and also saw Constantine spending a day as one of her subjects. What Not to Wear soon gained her international fame when it was aired in countries such as Spain and Portugal as well as in the American continent.
Constantine appeared on Children in Need in 2004, which included a special segment in which she gave the fictional EastEnders characters Little Mo and Mo Harris a makeover in the style of What Not to Wear, commenting on them with her usual "no nonsense" approach. Children In Need 2004 – bbc.co.uk. Retrieved 16 February 2007. In 2005, Constantine voiced a robot version of herself in the science fiction series, Doctor Who. In the episode "Bad Wolf", Trine-e and Zu-Zana were two robots acting out a deadly futuristic version of What not to Wear, offering a makeover to Jack Harkness in a most gruesome form. Dr Who is TV medicine – thesun.co.uk. Retrieved 18 August 2007.
The Oprah Winfrey Show has also seen Constantine and Woodall appearing regularly as a makeover and style experts giving fashion advice and guidelines on how to better overall appearances and giving numerous American women fashion makeovers.com. Retrieved 13 October 2007. Reflecting on differences in women's style and willingness to submit to makeovers between the UK and America, she stated that although there is not much difference, "The Americans are slightly less adventurous," and that "American women are more open to change and slightly more receptive victims."

2006—present

In 2006, Constantine and Woodall moved from the BBC to ITV in a deal reputedly worth £1.2 million to start a new show, Trinny & Susannah Undress..., on 3 October. The second series of Trinny & Susannah Undress... was transmitted in June 2007, and it maintained the format of series one which saw Constantine and Woodall advising couples who were finding problems within their marriage. Trinny & Susannah prefer to be nice – digitalspy.co.uk. Retrieved 27 June 2007. Laid Bare – mirror.co.uk. Retrieved 29 August 2007. alt=Two young women examining merchandise in a clothing store.|200px|left|thumb|Constantine (right) and Woodall on Trinny & Susannah Undress. Constantine found it warming that people could open up to them as confidantes, and also said "It's been fascinating to see how looking good and having faith in your appearance makes you into a sexier person, which makes you attractive to your partner again." Constantine stated in an interview that filming the show was very emotionally draining, and as a result, she often went home crying. The programme did not come without its critics who questioned the depth at which Constantine and Woodall could deal with serious issues raised during the programme. On 16 October 2006, they both appeared on NBC's The Today Show and performed makeovers on three women especially for the show.msn. Retrieved 4 November 2007.
The new series on ITV saw a change in format, confronting the main fashion issues in Britain. ITV1 Undress the Nation With reference to their personal website, they state that their satisfaction remains with the many women they have helped and inspired and not so much with the success of book sales and viewing figures.
In 2003, when Constantine and Woodall were interviewed for the first time on Parkinson, actress Meg Ryan had a controversial interview with Michael Parkinson, which resulted in negative publicity for Ryan. Parkinson said that he felt Ryan's behaviour to his fellow guests Constantine and Woodall, whom she turned her back on, was "unforgivable". Parky was a 'nut', says Meg Ryan – scotsman. Retrieved 26 January 2007.

Beyond television work

To coincide with Constantine's move from the BBC to ITV1 in 2006, she co-launched an underwear range with Woodall called "Trinny and Susannah Magic Pants". Made of nylon, they're designed to flatten the tummy, buttocks and thighs. Trinny and Susannah show what not to underwear – mailonsunday.co.uk. Retrieved 14 May 2007. Constantine even wore them after giving birth to her third child. Meg Ryan talks to Parkinson – bbc.co.uk. Retrieved 15 February 2007. She currently co-writes a weekly column for The Sun with Woodall.

Online

The Guardian reports Trinny and Susannah are in a new online series – produced by t5m Studios – "What Trinny and Susannah Did Next is a mockumentary – an elaborately knowing spoof – part Alan Partridge, part The Office, part The Thick of It. There's even a touch of Borat."
"The cast consists of professional actors and standup comics, the dialogue is part-scripted, part-ad-libbed and the overall effect is weirdly postmodern and surprisingly successful. The biggest surprise of all is Trinny and Susannah's acting ability, which is astonishingly convincing, even though, as they cheerfully point out, they're only playing hyperbolised versions of themselves."
Celebrity cameos are to include Lulu, David Guest, DJ Neil Fox, Vanessa Feltz and the Scissor Sisters.
Episode 1, part 1 aired Monday 21 June 2010 with daily updates, Mon-Thurs until 16 July, at www.com.
An announcement was made that Constantine and Woodall would be touring New Zealand and Australia where they made a series of public appearances at shopping malls owned by the Westfield Group to perform live styling sessions for the company's customers. British reality show comes to Australia — news.au. Retrieved 26 December 2007.co.nz. Retrieved 18 February 2008. Television's fashion police head Down Under — news.au. Retrieved 28 December 2007. Their appearances often attracted thousands of spectators.co.nz. Retrieved 29 February 2008. "Fashionistas' magic makeovers". The Courier-Mail/'Courier Mail, 8 March 2008. Retrieved 8 March 2008.  Before the tour, Constantine said "We don't know how New Zealanders dress but we are looking forward to getting over there and finding out."Cathrin Schaer. Mistresses of the makeover — nzherald.co.nz. Retrieved 29 February 2008.

Littlewoods

With Woodall, Constantine became the face of the home shopping company, Littlewoods Direct, after orders rose by thirty per cent when Littlewoods sponsored their ITV programme Trinny & Susannah Undress. Littlewoods signs up Trinny and Susannah – timesonline.co.uk. Retrieved February 2007. The pair produced a twelve page fashion advice section within the Littlewoods catalogue and made a booklet called The Golden Rules, which was distributed to all Littlewoods customers with fashion advice to suit a range of body shapes. They have also produced online style guidelines for Littlewoods.
The first series of Littlewoods television advertisements featured Constantine and Woodall as themselves dressed as two agents trying to rob a Littlewoods designer warehouse,Josh Burt. Trinny in undercover op – thesun.co.uk. Retrieved 20 October 2007. 
On 20 September 2007, Constantine and Woodall launched their own exclusive Littlewoods women's clothing range which consists of trousers, coats and tops which like their underwear range, are designed to make certain areas appear slimmer. A series of eight dresses, cashmere knitwear, faux fur and sequinned shrugs also feature in the range. What to wear: Trinny and Susannah get to grips with Lorraine Kelly – dailymail.co.uk. Retrieved 20 September 2007. She commented "If you want to create a waist, there's a dress that's going to do that for you too. We've designed it very much around the female body."Maria Croce. Scots Are So Stylish.. And Ewan Mcgregor Looks Fab In A Kilt – dailyrecord.co.uk. Retrieved 20 September 2007. She also stated "It's not about what size you are, it's about how you can minimise or accentuate parts of your body with clothing. That's what we've created."Jessica Johnson. These Girls Could Save Your Marriage – express.co.uk. Retrieved 27 September 2007. 200px|right|thumb|Constantine (right) and Woodall on What Not to Wear cover (2002).

Books

Constantine has co-written several style advice books with her fashion partner Trinny Woodall, which have sold over an estimated 2½ million copies worldwide. The fashion advice books have been number one bestsellers in Britain and the United States, appearing on both the Sunday Times bestseller listSearch results for Trinny and Susannah bestsellers – timesonline.co.uk. Retrieved 30 May 2007. and The New York Times best-seller list,Search results for Trinny and Susannah bestsellers – nytimes. Retrieved 30 May 2007. and have been translated throughout the world.com. Retrieved 26 January 2007.
Their most successful book to date, What Not to Wear, was published in 2002 which displayed striking chapters such as "Big Tits", "No Tits" and "Big Bum" with fashion advice for each category. Trinny and Susannah: Frock; stars Despite the book becoming an instant hit, Constantine and Woodall were only given an advance of £10,000. It was then reported that Constantine and Woodall secured a £1 million book deal to write more of their fashion books. The makeover millionaires – timesonline.co.uk. Retrieved 22 February 2007.
The pair's latest book, The Body Shape Bible, was published on 18 September 2007. Through a survey about different body shapes conducted amongst women, Constantine and Woodall were able to discover the twelve most common women's body shapes. Exclusive Trinny and Susannah Interview. – femalefirst.co.uk. Retrieved 20 September 2007. They used this information to write The Body Shape Bible which highlights these twelve shapes which have all been named in ways such as 'cornet' or 'brick'. In the fashion advice book, women can interpret which shape they are, and can then be given adequate fashion advice on their own individual shape. A few pages in the book are also devoted to illustrating some of Constantine and Woodall's own fashion disasters.

Personal life

Constantine grew up in an old priory in the Leicestershire village of Knipton and went hunting from the age of seven. Acne, alcohol … and non-stop sex – dailymail.co.uk. Retrieved 17 March 2007. She had a close relationship with her father, Joseph Constantine, who was successful in the property and shipping sectors, was an Old Etonian pupil and served in the Coldstream Guards. When she was young, Constantine would rely on her father for fashion advice and has commented that any style that she has, she learned from him. He was a talented artist and was offered worldwide art exhibitions, although he was too modest to accept. His death came suddenly and was a milestone for Constantine.
Constantine became a fixture in 1980s British gossip columns and newspapers as the result of her relationship with Princess Margaret's son, David, Viscount Linley which lasted for eight years. Princess Margaret thought highly of Constantine and even called her "my daughter-in-law". Constantine admitted that her relationship with Linley undeniably opened doors for her, but after they broke up, she was keen to put the episode behind her and become well known in her own right. She has also had a relationship with Pakistan cricket captain Imran Khan, but she is now married to Danish entrepreneur and businessman Sten Bertelsen, who launched Death cigarettes, and with whom she has three children; Joe, Esme and CeCe. Lulu is godmother to one of her children,Louise Compton. I'd take music over men property in Sussex. Constantine is estimated to be worth £5 million. What not to bare, Trinny! – dailymail.co.uk. Retrieved 7 May 2007.
After having her first child, Constantine suffered from severe postnatal depression and panic attacks. Upon discovering that she was pregnant for a third time, as well as being overcome with delight, she felt despair as it came at a time when best friend Trinny Woodall was struggling to conceive and undergoing IVF treatment. In an interview Constantine said that she "couldn't bear to tell her." A short time later however, Woodall became pregnant.
Constantine has spoken of the pressure to look good in public but affirms "We're as much in the business of dressing ourselves – but more importantly helping other women to do that." Constantine has admitted to a fear of growing older: "I just don't want to get old. Old women are invisible, and I don't want to be invisible," she has said.
In 2002, while on a visit to the Cannes Film Festival, Constantine and Woodall were the victims of gem thieves. The thieves broke into the villa on the French Riviera where they were staying, rendered Constantine and Woodall unconscious with chloroform, and then continued to steal money and jewellery. TV duo drugged and robbed – scotsman. Retrieved 20 June 2007. Carol Vorderman was involved in a feud with Constantine and Woodall in 2003. Vorderman commented harshly about the double-act, after they had called her an "overdone Eighties nightmare" and named Vorderman in their list of the 20 worst-dressed celebrities. Carol Vorderman launches fashion attack – news.co.uk. Retrieved 17 February 2007.

Bibliography

Television appearances








