[[Prizren]]

CATEGORIES: Populated places in Kosovo, Prizren, Gegëri, Municipalities of Kosovo, Cities in Kosovo

Prizren (

History

Ancient

The RomanTHERANDA (Prizren) Yugoslavia, The Princeton Encyclopedia of Classical Sites, A Roman town about  It is thought that its modern name comes from old Serbian Призрѣнь, from при-зрѣти, indicating fortress which could be seen from afarDETELIć, Mirjana: Градови у хришћанској и муслиманској епици, Belgrade, 2004, ISBN 86-7179-039-8. (compare with Czech Přízřenice or mount Ozren).

Medieval

Konstantin Jireček through the use of the correspondence of Demetrios Chomatenos, bishop of Ohrid concluded that Prizren was one of the areas of Albanian settlement in the era prior to the Slavic migrations/expansions.
Bulgarian rulers controlled the Prizren area from the 850s, and Slav migrants arriving in the area were influenced by the Bulgarian orthodox church; Prizren had a bishopric subordinate to the archbishop in Ohrid. Bulgarian rule was replaced by Byzantine rule in the early eleventh century.
In 1180–90, the Serbian prince Stefan Nemanja conquered "the district of Prizren". Stefan regained control of Prizren some time between 1208 and 1216. In 1220, the Byzantine Greek Orthodox bishop of the city was expelled as the Serbian rulers tried to impose their own ecclesiastical jurisdiction. In the next centuries before the Ottoman conquest the city would pass to the Mrnjavčević, Balsić and Dukagjini families.
The Catholic church retained some influence in the area; 14th-century documents refer to a catholic church in Prizren, which was the seat of a bishopric between the 1330s and 1380s. Catholic parishes supported Ragusan merchants and Saxon miners. Contemporary land-grants by the Serb monarchy refer to Vlach and Albanian populations, both peasants and noblemen, in the area around Prizren.

Ottoman

After several years of attack and counterattack, the Ottomans made a major invasion of Kosovo in 1454; Đurađ Branković retreated to the north and asked for help from John Hunyadi. On 21 June 1455, Prizren surrendered to the Ottoman army..  Later it became a part of the Ottoman province of Rumelia. It was a prosperous trade city, benefiting from its position on the north-south and east-west trade routes across the Empire. Prizren became one of the larger cities of the Ottomans' Kosovo Province (vilayet).
Prizren was the cultural and intellectual centre of Ottoman Kosovo. It was dominated by its Muslim population, who composed over 70% of its population in 1857. The city became the biggest Albanian cultural centre and the coordination political and cultural capital of the Kosovar Albanians. In 1871, a long Serbian seminary was opened in Prizren, discussing the possible joining of the old Serbia's territories with the Principality of Serbia.
Prizren was an important part of Kosovo Vilayet between 1877 and 1912.
During the late 19th century the city became a focal point for Albanian nationalism and saw the creation in 1878 of the League of Prizren, a movement formed to seek the national unification and liberation of Albanians within the Ottoman Empire.
The Young Turk Revolution was a step in the dissolving of the Ottoman empire that led to the Balkan Wars.
The Third Army (Ottoman Empire) had a division in Prizren, at the time called Pirzerin,
the 30th Pirzerin Reserve Infantry Division (Otuzuncu Pirzerin Redif Fırkası).

Modern

The Prizren attachment was part of the İpek Detachment in the Order of Battle, October 19, 1912 in the First Balkan War.
During the First Balkan War the city was seized by the Serbian army and incorporated into the Kingdom of Serbia
After the First Balkan War of 1912, the Conference of Ambassadors in London allowed the creation of the state of Albania and handed Kosovo to the Kingdom of Serbia, even though the population of Kosovo remained mostly Albanian.
With the invasion of the Kingdom of Serbia by Austro-Hungarian forces in 1915 during the First World War, the city was occupied by the Central Powers. The Serbian Army pushed the Central Powers out of the city in October 1918. By the end of 1918, the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes was formed. The Kingdom was renamed in 1929 to the Kingdom of Yugoslavia and Prizren became a part of its Vardar Banovina.

=World War II=

The Axis Italian forces conquered the city in 1941 during World War II; it was annexed to the Italian puppet state of Albania. In 1943 with the help of the German Wehrmacht Bedri Pejani created the Second League of Prizren.

=Federal Yugoslavia=

In 1944, German forces were driven out of Kosovo by a combined Russian-Bulgarian force, and then the Communist government of Yugoslavia took control. In 1946, the town was formulated as a part of Kosovo and Metohija which the Constitution defined the Autonomous Region of Kosovo and Metohija within the People's Republic of Serbia, a constituent state of the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia.
The Province was renamed to Socialist Autonomous Province of Kosovo in 1974, remaining part of the Socialist Republic of Serbia, but having attributions similar to a Socialist Republic within the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The former status was restored in 1989, and officially in 1990.
For many years after the restoration of Serbian rule, Prizren and the region of Dečani to the west remained centres of Albanian nationalism. In 1956 the Yugoslav secret police put on trial in Prizren nine Kosovo Albanians accused of having been infiltrated into the country by the (hostile) Communist Albanian regime of Enver Hoxha. The "Prizren trial" became something of a cause célèbre after it emerged that a number of leading Yugoslav Communists had allegedly had contacts with the accused. The nine accused were all convicted and sentenced to long prison sentences, but were released and declared innocent in 1968 with Kosovo's assembly declaring that the trial had been "staged and mendacious."

=Kosovo War=

The town of Prizren did not suffer much during the Kosovo War but its surrounding municipality was badly affected 1998–1999. Before the war, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe estimated that the municipality's population was about 78% Kosovo Albanian, 5% Serb and 17% from other national communities. During the war most of the Albanian population were either forced or intimidated into leaving the town. Tusus Neighborhood suffered the most. Some twenty-seven to thirty-four people were killed and over one hundred houses were burned. ISBN 1-56432-264-5
At the end of the war in June 1999, most of the Albanian population returned to Prizren. Serbian and Roma minorities fled, with the OSCE estimating that 97% of Serbs and 60% of Romani had left Prizren by October. The community is now predominantly ethnically Albanian, but other minorities such as Turkish, Ashkali (a minority declaring itself as Albanian Roma) and Bosniak (including Torbesh community) live there as well, be that in the city itself, or in villages around. Such locations include Sredska, Mamuša, the region of Gora, etc. 
The war and its aftermath caused only a moderate amount of damage to the city compared to other cities in Kosovo. ISBN 1-56432-264-5 Serbian forces destroyed an important Albanian cultural monument in Prizren, the League of Prizren building,Andras Riedlmayer, Harvard University Kosovo Cultural Heritage SurveyThe Human Rights Centre, Law Faculty, University of Pristina, 2009 Ending Mass Atrocities: Echoes in Southern Cultures, page 3 but the complex was rebuilt later on and now constitutes the Albanian League of Prizren Museum.
On March 17, 2004, during the Unrest in Kosovo, all Serb cultural monuments in Prizren were damaged, burned or destroyed, such as old Orthodox Serb churches:
Also, during that riot, entire Serb quarter of Prizren, near the Prizren Fortress, was completely destroyed, and all remaining Serb population was evicted from Prizren.

=21st century=

The municipality of Prizren is still the most culturally and ethnically heterogeneous of Kosovo, retaining communities of Bosniaks, Turks, and Romani in addition to the majority Kosovo Albanian population live in Prizren. Only a small number of Kosovo Serbs remains in Prizren and area, residing in small villages, enclaves, or protected housing complexes.osce.pdf.

Official languages

In Prizren Municipality, the Albanian, Serbian, Bosnian and Turkish languages are official languages.Diplomatic Observer Official LanguageOSCE Implementation of the Law on the Use of Languages by Kosovo Municipalities

Culture

Prizren is the seat of a summer documentary film festival called Dokufest. The city is home to numerous mosques, Orthodox and Catholic churches and other monuments. Among them:

Monuments

These monuments, part of the historic center of the city, have recently been threatened by development pressures. In addition, war, fires, general dilapidation and neglect have taken their toll on this unique architectural landscape.Cultural Heritage Without Borders, Workshop "Integrated conservation"; preservation and urban Planning" in Prizren November 2002

Events and festivals

=NGOM Fest=

NGOM Fest is a music festival established in Prizren. The word "Ngom" is written in Gheg Albanian dialect and it means "Listen to me" whereas the word "Fest" represents the abbreviation of the word "Festival". This Festival originates from a group of young and creative people who are active in the social life of Prizren and Kosovo. The first edition of the festival was held on June 2011 and due to its major success, the activists were more committed in organizing this event. The main objectives of this festival are to promote new bands and artists, build a new perspective for music festivals in Kosovo, and to connect different ethnic groups in Kosovo and in the region.southeast-europe.php?id=1884

Public services

Infrastructure

The overall status of infrastructure in the municipality of Prizren is assessed as good. All the main roads connecting the major villages with the urban centre are asphalted. The water supply is functional in Prizren town and in approximately 30 villages. There is no sewage system in the villages. Power supply is still a problem, especially during the winter and in the villages (source: local public water company "Hidroregjioni").

Health

The primary health care system includes 14 municipal family health centres and 26 health houses. The primary health sector has 475 employees, including doctors, nurses and support staff, 264 female and 211 male. Regional hospital in Prizren offers services to approximately 250,000 residents. The hospital employs 778 workers, including 155 doctors, and is equipped with emergency and intensive care units.

Education

There are 48 primary schools with 28,205 pupils and 1,599 teachers; six (6) secondary schools with 9,608 students and 503 teachers; kindergartens are privately run. There is also a public university in Prizren, offering lectures in Bosnian, Albanian and Turkish languages 
(source: municipal directorate of education and science).

Economy

For a long time the economy of Kosovo was based on retail industry fueled by remittance income coming from a large number of immigrant communities in Western Europe. Private enterprise, mostly small business, is slowly emerging food processing. Private businesses, like elsewhere in Kosovo, predominantly face difficulties because of lack of structural capacity to grow.  Education is poor, financial institutions basic, regulatory institutions lack experience. Central and local legislatures do not have an understanding of their role in creating legal environment good for economic growth and instead compete in patriotic rhetoric.  Securing capital investment from foreign entities cannot emerge in such an environment. Due to financial hardships, several companies and factories have closed and others are reducing personnel. This general economic downturn contributes directly to the growing rate of unemployment and poverty, making the financial/economic viability in the region more tenuous.[ref]
 [/ref]
Many restaurants, private retail stores, and service-related businesses operate out of small shops. Larger grocery and
department stores have recently opened. In town, there are eight sizeable markets, including three produce markets,
one car market, one cattle market, and three personal/hygienic and house wares markets. There is an abundance of
kiosks selling small goods. Prizren appears to be teeming with economic prosperity, but appearances are deceiving as
the international presence is reduced and repatriation of refugees and internally displaced persons is expected to further strain the local economy. Market saturation, high unemployment, and a reduction of financial remittances from abroad are ominous economic indicators.
There are three agricultural co-operatives in three villages. Most livestock breeding and agricultural production is private,
informal, and small-scale. There are five operational banks with branches in Prizren, the Micro Enterprise Bank (MEB), the Raiffeisen Bank, the Nlb Bank, the Teb Bank
and the Payment and Banking Authority of Kosovo (BPK).

Geography

Climate

Demographics

As in other cities of the Balkans that went under Ottoman urban development, the population largely converted to Islam in the 16th century, although part of the former Catholic converts professed a form of crypto-Christianity (laramanë). An aspect of this new urban character is evidenced by the demographics of workshop owners; 227 of 246 workshops of Prizren were run by Muslims in 1571. The Ottoman census of 1876, placed the total population at around 44,000.

International relations

Twin towns – Sister cities

Prizren is twinned with:

Notable people



Notes and references

Notes:






