[[Australian National University]]

CATEGORIES: Australian National University, National universities, 1946 establishments in Australia, Educational institutions established in 1946, Universities in the Australian Capital Territory, Buildings and structures in Canberra

The Australian National University (ANU) is a public university in Canberra, Australian Capital Territory. Located in the suburb of Acton, the main campus encompasses seven teaching and research colleges, in addition to several national institutes.
Founded in 1946, it is the only university to have been created by the Parliament of Australia. Originally a postgraduate research university, ANU commenced undergraduate teaching in 1960 when it integrated the Canberra University College, which had been established in 1929 as a campus of the University of Melbourne. The university's endowment stood at A$1.237 billion in 2010.
ANU is ranked 1st nationally (27th in the world) by the 2013 QS World University Rankings,
ANU counts six Nobel laureates among its faculty and alumni.
ANU is a member of the Group of Eight and the International Alliance of Research Universities. As Australia's only member of this prestigious association, ANU enjoys close relationships and exchange partnerships with the University of Cambridge, University of Oxford, University of California, Berkeley, Yale University, Peking University, National University of Singapore, University of Tokyo, University of Copenhagen and ETH Zurich.iaruni.anu.au/applications/partners.php

History

Post-war origins

Calls for the establishment of a national university in Australia began as early as 1900. After the location of the nation's capital, Canberra, was determined in 1908, land was set aside for the university at the foot Black Mountain in the city designs by Walter Burley Griffin. Planning for the university was disrupted by World War II but resumed with the creation of the Department of Post-War Reconstruction in 1942, ultimately leading to the passage of the Australian National University Act 1946 by the Parliament of Australia on 1 August 1946.
A group of eminent Australian scholars returned from overseas to join the university, including Sir Howard Florey (co-developer of medicinal penicillin),  Sir Mark Oliphant (a nuclear physicist who worked on the Manhattan Project), Sir Keith Hancock (the Chichele Professor of Economic History at Oxford) and Sir Raymond Firth (a professor of anthropology at LSE). Economist Sir Douglas Copland was appointed as ANU's first Vice-Chancellor and former Prime Minister Stanley Bruce served as the first Chancellor. ANU was originally organised into four centres—the Research Schools of Physical Sciences, Social Sciences and Pacific Studies and the John Curtin School of Medical Research.
The first resident's hall, University House, was opened in 1954 for faculty members and postgraduate students. Mount Stromlo Observatory, established by the federal government in 1924, became part of ANU in 1957. The first locations of the ANU Library, the Menzies and Chifley buildings, opened in 1963. The Australian Forestry School, located in Canberra since 1927, was amalgamated by ANU in 1965.

Canberra University College

Canberra University College (CUC) was the first institution of higher education in the national capital, having been established in 1929 and enrolling its first undergraduate pupils in 1930. CUC was affiliated with the University of Melbourne and its degrees were granted by that university. Academic leaders at CUC included historian Manning Clark, political scientist Finlay Crisp, poet A. D. Hope and economist Heinz Arndt.
In 1960, CUC was integrated into ANU as the School of General Studies, initially with faculties in arts, economics, law and science. Faculties in Oriental studies and engineering were introduced later. Bruce Hall, the first residential college for undergraduates, opened in 1961.

Modern era

The Canberra School of Music and the Canberra School of Art were amalgamated by ANU in 1992.
ANU established its Medical School in 2002, after obtaining federal government approval in 2000.
On 18 January 2003, the Canberra bushfires largely destroyed the Mount Stromlo Observatory.
In February 2013, financial entrepreneur and ANU graduate Graham Tuckwell made the largest university donation in Australian history by giving $50 million to fund an undergraduate scholarship program at ANU.

Academics

ANU is governed by a 15-member Council, whose members include the Chancellor and Vice-Chancellor. Ian Chubb, Vice-Chancellor from 2001 to 2011, is presently the Chief Scientist of Australia.
Undergraduate students are represented by the Australian National University Students' Association (ANUSA) and postgraduates by the Postgraduate and Research Students' Association (PARSA). The Australian National University Union manages catering and retail outlets and function amenities on behalf of all students.
In its most recent disclosure at the end of 2010, ANU recorded an endowment of A$1.237 billion.

Rankings

ANU is consistently ranked 1st or 2nd in Australia by all major university rankings. In the 2013 QS World University Rankings, ANU placed 1st overall in Australia, with the university also ranked 1st in the fields of politics and international studies, history, philosophy, sociology, modern languages, mathematics, electrical engineering, earth and marine sciences, and geography.anu.au/2013/05/08/anu-subjects-leading-the-way/ Five subjects also attained top ten world rankings, with politics and international studies placing 6th in the world, history 7th, geography 8th, linguistics 9th and philosophy 10th. In both the 2013 Times Higher Education World University Rankings and Academic Ranking of World Universities, ANU was ranked 2nd nationally.
ANU is also consistently ranked among the world's top universities. In 2013, the university was placed 27th, 48th and 66th in the world by the QS, Times, and Shanghai rankings respectively.

Colleges

ANU was reorganised in 2006 to create seven Colleges, each of which conducts both teaching and research.

=Arts and Social Sciences=

The ANU College of Arts and Social Sciences is divided into the Research School of Social Sciences (RSSS) and the Research School of Humanities and the Arts (RSHA). Within RSSS there are schools dedicated to history, philosophy, sociology, political science and international relations, Middle Eastern studies and Latin American studies. In 2013, ANU ranked 9th in the world in linguistics and 16th in the world for modern languages.anu.au/about-us

=Asia and the Pacific=

The ANU College of Asia and the Pacific is a specialist centre of Asian and Pacific studies and languages, with the largest number of experts in these fields of any university in the English-speaking world. It also houses the Crawford School of Public Policy and CSCAP Australia.cap.edu.au/sdsc/aus-cscap

=Business and Economics=

The ANU College of Business and Economics comprises four Research Schools, which in turn conduct research and teaching in economics, finance, accounting, actuarial studies, statistics, marketing and management. The college is professionally accredited with the Institute of Chartered Accountants, CPA Australia, the Australian Computer Society, the Actuaries Institute Australia, the Institute of Public Accountants, the Association of International Accountants and the Chartered Financial Analyst Institute.anu.au/cbe/current-students/undergraduate-graduate-coursework/enrolment/professional-organisations-accreditation/

=Engineering and Computer Science=

The ANU College of Engineering and Computer Science is divided into two Research Schools, which study a range of engineering and computer science topics respectively. ANU is home to the National Computational Infrastructure National Facility and was a co-founder of NICTA, the chief information and communications technology research centre in Australia. Research groups in ANU College of Engineering and Computer Science include Algorithms and Data, Applied Signal Processing, Artificial Intelligence, Centre for Sustainable Energy Systems, Computer Systems, Computer Vision and Robotics, Data-Intensive Computing, Information and Human Centred Computing, Logic & Computation, Materials and Manufacturing, Semiconductor and Solar Cells, Software Intensive Systems Engineering, Solar Thermal Group, Systems and Control.anu.au/research/groups

=Law=

The ANU College of Law conducts legal research and teaching, with centres dedicated to commercial law, international law, public law and environmental law. Students are given the chance to spend three weeks in Geneva concerning the institutional practice of International Law.anu.au/course/LAWS6258

=Medicine, Biology and Environment=

The ANU College of Medicine, Biology and Environment encompasses the John Curtin School of Medical Research (JCSMR), the ANU Medical School, the Fenner School of Environment & Society and Research Schools of Biology, Psychology and Population Health. Three further Nobel Prizes have been won as a result of research at JCSMR—in 1963 by John Eccles and in 1996 by Peter Doherty and Rolf M. Zinkernagel.

=Physical and Mathematical Sciences=

The ANU College of Physical & Mathematical Sciences comprises the Research Schools of Astronomy & Astrophysics, Chemistry, Earth Sciences, Mathematical Sciences and Physics. Under the direction of Mark Oliphant, nuclear physics was one the university's most notable early research priorities, leading to the construction of a 500 megajoule homopolar generator and a 7.7 megaelectronvolts cyclotron in the 1950s. Professor Brian Schmidt received the 2011 Nobel Prize for Physics for his work on the accelerating expansion of the universe.

Campus

The main campus of ANU extends across the Canberra suburb of Acton, which consists of 
With over 10,000 trees on its campus,
Four of Australia's five learned societies are based at ANU—the Australian Academy of Science, the Australian Academy of the Humanities, the Academy of the Social Sciences in Australia and the Australian Academy of Law. The Australian National Centre for the Public Awareness of Science and the National Film and Sound Archive are also located at ANU, while the National Museum of Australia and CSIRO are situated next to the campus.
ANU occupies additional locations including Mount Stromlo Observatory on the outskirts of Canberra, Siding Spring Observatory near Coonabarabran, a campus at Kioloa on the South Coast of New South Wales and a research unit in Darwin.

Library

The library of ANU originated in 1948 with the appointment of the first librarian, Arthur McDonald. Presently the library holds over 2.5 million physical volumes

Residential halls and colleges

Eight residential facilities are affiliated with ANU—Bruce Hall, Ursula Hall, Burgmann College, John XXIII College, Toad Hall, Burton & Garran Hall, Graduate House and Fenner Hall. In 2010, the non-residential Griffin Hall was established for students living off-campus. Recently another off-campus student accommodation was launched by UniGardens Pty, University GardensUniGardens Canberra ANU student accommodation, official website located in neighbour suburb of Belconnen.

Notable alumni and faculty

Notable past faculty include Mark Oliphant, Keith Hancock, Manning Clark, Derek Freeman, H. C. Coombs, Hedley Bull and Frank Fenner. Nobel Prizes have been awarded to former ANU Chancellor Howard Florey and faculty members John Eccles, John Harsanyi, Rolf M. Zinkernagel, Peter Doherty and Brian Schmidt. Notable present scholars include Hilary Charlesworth, Ian McAllister, Warwick McKibbin, Keith Dowding, Amin Saikal and Jeremy Shearmur.
ANU alumni are especially visible in government. Bob Hawke and Kevin Rudd, former Australian Prime Ministers, both attended the university, as did senior politicians Barry O'Farrell, Nick Minchin, Kim Beazley Sr, Peter Garrett, Craig Emerson, Stephen Conroy, Gary Gray, Warren Snowdon, Joe Ludwig and Catherina King. ANU has produced 30 current Australian Ambassadors and more than 10 current heads of Australian Public Service departments, including Treasury secretary Martin Parkinson, Education secretary Lisa Paul, ASIS director-general Nick Warner and ACCC chairman Rod Sims. Graduates also include Prime Minister of the Solomon Islands Gordon Darcy Lilo, Indonesian Foreign Minister Marty Natalegawa, former Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Don Brash, former former British cabinet minister Patricia Hewitt and former U.S. Ambassador to Israel Martin Indyk.
Other notable alumni include High Court of Australia judge Stephen Gageler, Chief Federal Magistrate John Pascoe, human rights lawyer Jennifer Robinson, Kellogg's CEO John Bryant, former Singapore Airlines CEO Cheong Choong Kong, Indiana University president Michael McRobbie, University of Melbourne Vice-Chancellors Alan Gilbert and Glyn Davis, mathematician John H. Coates, public intellectual Clive Hamilton and economists Ross Garnaut, Peter Drysdale and John Quiggin.

Awards and prizes

Phoenix Prize for spiritual art

The Phoenix Prize for spiritual art is a biennial open art prize with a value of A$5,000, based at the Australian National University, awarded first in 2005. The exhibition is at the ANU School of Art Gallery.
The Phoenix Prize for spiritual art arose from the winding up of the Christian Media Association ACT Inc., an organization that provided video advertisements on local, commercial television channels that were played in the nature of public service announcement. In 2003, the committee of the Christian Media Association ACT Inc. decided to fund an ongoing cultural prize for artists, managed by the ANU. It is intended to be complementary to the Blake Prize for Religious Art.








