[[Beautiful Dreamer]]

CATEGORIES: 1864 songs, American songs, Bing Crosby songs, Jerry Lee Lewis songs, Jim Reeves songs, Parlor songs, Roy Orbison songs, Songs released posthumously, Songs written by Stephen Foster, The Beatles songs

"Beautiful Dreamer" is a parlor song by Stephen Foster (1826–1864). It was published after Foster's death in March 1864 by Wm. A. Pond & Co. of New York. The first edition states on its title page that it is "the last song ever written by Stephen C. Foster. Composed but a few days prior to his death."Catalogue of first editions of Stephen C. Foster (1826–1864). Library of Congress. p. 9. However, Carol Kimball, the author of Song, points out that the first edition's copyright is dated 1862, which suggests, she writes, that the song was composed and readied for publication two years before Foster's death. There are at least 20 songs, she observes, that claim to be Foster's last, and it is unknown which is indeed his last. The song is set in 9/8 time with a broken chord accompaniment. Song: a guide to art song style and literature.  Hal Leonard Corporation. p. 248. 2000. Perspectives on American music, 1900-1950 Taylor & Francis. p. 382.
The song tells of a lover serenading a "Beautiful Dreamer" who is oblivious of worldly cares and may actually be dead. Foster's works feature many dead young women, including his sister Charlotte and "Jeanie". Helen Lightner writes, "This sentimental ballad is folk-like in character with its repetitious but lovely melody and its basic harmonic accompaniment… The quiet and calm of this mood is portrayed by the monotony of the arpeggiated accompaniment, by the repetitiveness of the melodic pattern, and by the strophic form itself."Helen Lightner. Class voice and the American art song: a source book and anthology. Scarecrow Press. p. 32.

Lyrics

 
 1.
Beautiful dreamer, wake unto me,
Starlight and dewdrops are waiting for thee;
Sounds of the rude world, heard in the day,
Lull'd by the moonlight have all pass'd away!
Beautiful dreamer, queen of my song,
List while I woo thee with soft melody;
Gone are the cares of life's busy throng,
Beautiful dreamer, awake unto me!
Beautiful dreamer, awake unto me!
2.
Beautiful dreamer, out on the sea,
Mermaids are chanting the wild lorelei;
Over the streamlet vapors are borne,
Waiting to fade at the bright coming morn.
Beautiful dreamer, beam on my heart,
E'en as the morn on the streamlet and sea;
Then will all clouds of sorrow depart,
Beautiful dreamer, awake unto me!
Beautiful dreamer, awake unto me!

Recordings, film, and television

The song has been recorded by Bing Crosby with John Scott Trotter & his Orchestra; Steve Conway with Jack Byfield & his Orchestra; Thomas Hampson with Jay Ungar (mandolin), David Alpher (piano), and Molly Mason (guitar); John Leyton; Jerry Lee Lewis;Jerry Lee Lewis, Rocket Retrieved April 8, 2012. Slim Whitman; and Roy Orbison on the album In Dreams (a top ten Australian single in 1964). Brian Wilson subtittled his musical work  "Smile", "Beautiful Dreamer " and this is one of the songs on this work . "Smile" was mainly written in the 1960s but not recorded until 2004 .
In an unusual twist, Jim Reeves recorded a version while on tour in South Africa in 1962. Reeves sang in Afrikaans under the title "Bolandse Nooientjie". (A brief translation is fraught; "lass of the hinterland" is one possibility). Although Reeves could not speak Afrikaans, this was remedied by South African composer and songwriter Gilbert Gibson, who stood behind Reeves and whispered the words of the song to him, who would then sing the same words into the microphone.   
The song has been heard in various forms in many films, including Gone with the Wind; Duel in the Sun; The Night of the Grizzly; Mighty Joe Young; The Death Collector; Batman (1989); The Secret Life of Walter Mitty; the animated An American Tail; Drop Dead Gorgeous; Friends 'Til The End; Office Space; the Marx Brothers's Go West; The Old Chisholm Trail; and The Naked Spur. In Young Frankenstein (1974), the song is also referenced, when the ghoulish Marty Feldman, hearing a shrill and anguished female wail from a remote dungeon, smiles and (almost) sings "beautiful screamer...".
Gerry Goffin and Jack Keller wrote a doo-wop version for Tony Orlando A recording of a 1963 Beatles performance of the song on the BBC was released in 2013 on their album On Air – Live at the BBC Volume 2. Rory Storm and The Hurricanes also featured the song in their live performances.
In television, the song has been heard in episodes and programs that include The Berenstain Bears and the Talent Show; The Berenstain Bears and the Female Fullback; Rawhide; Garfield and Friends; The Care Bears; Dr. Quinn, Medicine Woman; Saved by the Bell; All That; Kenan & Kel; Drake and Josh, SpongeBob SquarePants, That's So Raven; Rugrats; Johnny Bravo;Cat in the Hat; Peter Gunn; Little House on the Prairie; Our Gang; The Twilight Zone; Wind at My Back; Leonardo; Bonanza; Shining Time Station; Lonesome Dove (TV miniseries); Petticoat Junction; Car 54, Where Are You? and in Gerry Anderson's 1970 series UFO, where Paul Foster sings it in a sauna at the end of the episode "Ordeal".  It has also be included in BBC America's  Copper and is featured on the Copper: Original Soundtrack.
It has also been used for background music on spoken recordings.youtube.com/watch?v=yKkazr8M-n4&feature=related




