[[Lawrence Eagleburger]]

CATEGORIES: 1930 births, 2011 deaths, Ambassadors of the United States to Yugoslavia, American Lutherans, Deaths from pneumonia, George H. W. Bush administration cabinet members, Infectious disease deaths in Virginia, International Republican Institute, People from Milwaukee, Wisconsin, Presidential Citizens Medal recipients, Reagan Administration personnel, United States Career Ambassadors, United States Deputy Secretaries of State, United States Secretaries of State, University of Wisconsin–Madison alumni, Wisconsin Republicans, Virginia Republicans

Lawrence Sidney Eagleburger (August 1, 1930 – June 4, 2011), also known as Lawrence of Macedonia, was an American statesman and career diplomat, who served briefly as the Secretary of State under President George H. W. Bush. Previously, he had served in lesser capacities under Presidents Richard Nixon, Jimmy Carter, Ronald Reagan, and as Deputy Secretary of State under George H. W. Bush. 
Eagleburger is the only career Foreign Service Officer to have served as Secretary of State.

Education and personal life

Eagleburger was born in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, the son of Helen (née Van Ornum), an elementary school teacher, and Leon Sidney Eagleburger, a physician.google. During his time at Wisconsin, he joined Alpha Sigma Phi Fraternity.  On May 6, 1995, he delivered the commencement address to the 1995 graduating class of James Madison University."JMU Graduation Speakers"
He was formerly a member of the Board of Visitors at the College of William and Mary.
Eagleburger also served in the United States Army (1952–1954), attaining the rank of First Lieutenant.
He had three sons, all of whom are named Lawrence Eagleburger, though they have different middle names. The eldest is from his first marriage, which ended in divorce. The other two are from his second marriage, which was to Marlene Heinemann from 1966 until her death in 2010.Telegraph obituary

Governmental career

In 1957, Eagleburger joined the United States Foreign Service, and served in various posts in embassies, consulates, and the Department of State. From 1961 to 1965 he served as a staffer at the U.S. Embassy in Belgrade, Yugoslavia. He was known as the person who handled the Skopje 1963 earthquake crisis, and managed the first US-Soviet humanitarian cooperation, after which he was nicknamed Lawrence of Macedonia.
Starting in 1969, he served in the Nixon administration as an assistant to National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger. He stayed in this appointment until 1971; thereafter he took on several positions, including advisor to the U.S. Mission to North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in Brussels, and, following Kissinger's appointment as Secretary of State, a number of additional posts in the State Department.
Following Nixon's resignation, he briefly left government service, but was soon appointed as ambassador to Yugoslavia by President Jimmy Carter, a post he held from 1977 to 1980.
In 1982, Reagan appointed him as Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs (the State Department's third-ranking position), a position he held for several years. He then became president of Kissinger Associates, a consultancy firm which provided firms with advice on international politics. W. Bush appointed him Deputy Secretary of State (the Department's second-ranking position); he also served as the President's primary advisor for affairs relating to the quickly disintegrating Yugoslavia. On August 23, 1992, James Baker resigned as Secretary of State (to head up Bush's unsuccessful re-election campaign), and Eagleburger served as Acting Secretary of State until Bush gave him a recess appointment for the remainder of the Bush administration.
His period as advisor for Yugoslavian affairs from 1989 to 1992 was highly controversial. He gained a reputation for being a strong Serbian partisan, most controversially denying that Serbian paramilitaries and the Yugoslav National Army had committed atrocities in the breakaway republic of Croatia. This perceived partisanship led the European press to dub him Lawrence of SerbiaI Kathimerini, Ο «Λόρενς της Σερβίας» section (a reference to Lawrence of Arabia).
In 1991, President Bush awarded him the Presidential Citizens Medal.  He was a member of the board of directors of the International Republican Institute.

International Commission on Holocaust-Era Insurance Claims

Eagleburger became chairman of the International Commission on Holocaust Era Insurance Claims, or ICHEIC, which was set up in 1998. The purpose of the Commission was to resolve unpaid Nazi-era insurance claims for survivors of the Holocaust. In 2005, Eagleburger announced that the ICHEIC was offering approximately 16 million dollars to Holocaust victims and their heirs, noting as he did so the research ability of the ICHEIC staff which allowed them to evaluate claims from companies which no longer existed.Webpage of Representative Henry Waxman, Justice delayed and justice denied, accessed May 31, 2006  Eagleburger responded to these accusations by saying, among other things, that it was difficult to work quickly when many of the claimants lacked basic information such as the name of the insurance company involved.Holocaust insurance body blasted for not paying claims, accessed May 31, 2006

Stance on Middle Eastern conflict

After serving in the Foreign Service for 27 years, Eagleburger retained an interest in foreign policy and was a familiar figure on current events talk shows. He caused some discussion with public comments about President George W. Bush's foreign policy. In August 2002, Eagleburger questioned the timing of possible military action in Iraq, saying, "I am not at all convinced now that this is something we have to do this very moment."Eagleburger questions possible Iraqi move, accessed May 31, 2006  He did indicate he believed that Iraqi regime change could be a legitimate U.S. endeavor at some point, but that at that time he did not believe the administration was fully prepared for such a conflict."Bush's call to Syrians, accessed May 31, 2006
On January 5, 2006, he participated in a meeting at the White House of former Secretaries of Defense and State to discuss United States foreign policy with Bush administration officials. On November 10, 2006 it was announced that he would replace Secretary of Defense designate Robert Gates in the Iraq Study Group."Eagleburger to join U.S. Iraq study group", Reuters, November 10, 2006. Retrieved November 10, 2006.
After the election of Iranian president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, Eagleburger seemed to think that Iran was moving in a direction which may at some point call for military action, saying in an interview that while "we should try everything else we can first", at some point it would probably be necessary to use force to ensure that Iran did not obtain or use nuclear weapons.Interview With Former Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger, accessed May 31, 2006
He was Chairman of the Board of Trustees for The Forum for International Policy, and a member of the Washington Institute for Near East Policy (WINEP) Board of Advisors.

2008 Presidential election

Before Republican primaries, Eagleburger endorsed John McCain for President.johnmccain. He also stated that many Vice Presidents have not been ready.[ref]
.[/ref]  The next day, in an interview on Fox News, he retracted his comments about Palin.Huffpost Politics
On October 30, 2008, on the Fox News Channel, Eagleburger referred to Democratic presidential nominee Barack Obama as a "charlatan", citing his fundraising methods and other aspects of his presidential campaign.youtube.com/watch?v=kt0FrgAA0cw

Death

Eagleburger died of pneumonia at the University of Virginia Medical Center in Charlottesville, Virginia. Eagleburger, diplomat and onetime secretary of state dies, at 80 The Washington Post, June 4, 2011 He was 80 and had lived outside Charlottesville since 1990. He is survived by his three sons.
President Barack Obama described Eagleburger as a "distinguished diplomat and public servant who devoted his life to the security of our nation and to strengthening our ties with allies and partners." Former President George H. W. Bush described Eagleburger as "a tireless patriot, principled to the core, selflessly devoted to America and his duty."



Sources




