[[Woody Herman]]

CATEGORIES: Big band bandleaders, Cool jazz clarinetists, Swing clarinetists, Clarinetists, Cool jazz saxophonists, Swing saxophonists, American jazz bandleaders, American jazz clarinetists, Vaudeville performers, Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award winners, People from Milwaukee, Wisconsin, Musicians from Wisconsin, Capitol Records artists, Decca Records artists, Kent Records artists, 1913 births, 1987 deaths, Concord Records artists, Burials at Hollywood Forever Cemetery

Woodrow Charles "Woody" Herman (May 16, 1913 – October 29, 1987) was an American jazz clarinetist, alto and soprano saxophonist, singer, and big band leader.  Leading various groups called "The Herd," Herman was one of the most popular of the 1930s and 1940s bandleaders. His bands often played music that was experimental for its time. He was a featured halftime performer for Super Bowl VII.

Early life and career

Herman was born Woodrow Charles Thomas Herrman in Milwaukee, Wisconsin on May 16, 1913.
His parents were Otto and Myrtle Herrman.  His father had a deep love for show business and this influenced Woody Herman at an early age. they married on September 27, 1936.Clancy 15
Herman also performed with the Harry Sosnick orchestra,Clancy 16 Gus Arnheim and Isham Jones.  Jones wanted to live off the residuals of his songs; Woody Herman saw the chance to lead his former band,Clancy 20 and eventually acquired the remains of the orchestra after Jones' retirement.

The Band That Plays The Blues and the First Herd 1936-1946

Woody Herman's first band became known for its orchestrations of the blues and was sometimes billed as "The Band That Plays The Blues".  This band recorded for the Decca label, at first serving as a cover band, doing songs by other Decca artists. In January 1937, George T. Simon closed a review of the band with the words: "This Herman outfit bears watching; not only because it's fun listening to in its present stages, but also because its bound to reach even greater stages." After two and a half years on the label, the band had its first hit, "Woodchopper's Ball" recorded in 1939.  "It was really a sleeper. But Decca kept re-releasing it, and over a period of three or four years it became a hit. Eventually it sold more than five million copies—the biggest hit I ever had."[ref]
</ref>
Other hits for the band include "The Golden Wedding" and "Blue Prelude".
In jazz, swing was gradually being replaced by  bebop.  Dizzy Gillespie, a trumpeter and one of the originators of bop, wrote three arrangements for Woody Herman, "Woody'n You", "Swing Shift" and "Down Under".  These were arranged in 1942.  "Down Under" was recorded November 8, 1943.  The fact that Herman commissioned Dizzy Gillespie to write arrangements for the band and that Herman hired Ralph Burns as a staff arranger, heralded a change in the style of music the band was playing.Visser 19-21
In February 1945, the band started a contract with Columbia Records. The first side Herman recorded was "Laura", the theme song of the 1944 movie of the same name.[ref]
