[[John Stevens, Baron Stevens of Kirkwhelpington]]

CATEGORIES: 1942 births, Living people, Commissioners of Police of the Metropolis, Crossbench life peers, Deputy Lieutenants of the County of London, British Chief Constables, People educated at St. Lawrence College, Ramsgate, Knights Bachelor, Knights of the Order of St John, Alumni of the University of Leicester, Alumni of the University of Southampton, People associated with Northumbria University, Recipients of the Queen's Police Medal, Place of birth missing (living people)

John Arthur Stevens, Baron Stevens of Kirkwhelpington KStJ QPM DL FRSA (born 21 October 1942) was Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis (head of the Metropolitan Police Service) from 2000 until 2005. From 1991 to 1996, he was Chief Constable of Northumbria Police before being appointed one of HM Inspectors of Constabulary in September 1996. He was then appointed Deputy Commissioner of the Met in 1998 until his promotion to Commissioner in 2000. He was a writer for the News of the World, for £7,000 an article, until his resignation as the hacking scandal progressed.Channel Four News, 6 March 2012

Police career

Stevens was educated at St. Lawrence College, Ramsgate, the University of Leicester where he took an LL.B and the University of Southampton, where he did his MPhil. Before becoming Chief Constable of Northumbria, he served as Assistant Chief Constable of the Hampshire Constabulary (1986–88) and Deputy Chief Constable of the Cambridgeshire Constabulary (1988–91). 
He presided over an external police inquiry into allegations in Northern Ireland of collusion between the British Army, the Royal Ulster Constabulary and loyalist terrorists in the murders of Irish nationalists. Stevens's third report, published on 17 April 2003, upheld the claim and explicitly said that collusion leading to the murder of nationalists (and some unionists wrongly thought to be Catholic or nationalist) had  taken place. In the aftermath of the report, David Trimble, then-leader of the Ulster Unionist Party, called for a parliamentary inquiry into the collusion, while the leaders of the SDLP and Sinn Féin called for a full public inquiry. A subsequent government ordered review by Sir Desmond de Silva, QC, announced in December 2012, confirmed the findings of the Stevens 1, 2 and 3 Inquiries regarding collusion between loyalist paramilitary groups and British intelligence which played in murders in Northern Ireland which resulted in 97 convictions, and a large number of recommendations were accepted. 

After the Police

After his retirement as Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, on 6 April 2005 he was created a life peer as Baron Stevens of Kirkwhelpington, of Kirkwhelpington in the County of Northumberland. He headed a Metropolitan Police inquiry, Operation Paget, into the deaths of Diana, Princess of Wales and Dodi Fayed, which reported its findings on 14 December 2006.
Lord Stevens was asked by the Conservatives, under David Cameron, to be their candidate for the London Mayoral elections. He declined this offer.Rentoul, John "The day Boris became Mayor was the beginning of the end for Dave", The Independent, 4 May 2008
On 29 June 2007, having become one of the UK's leading security experts, in-coming Prime Minister Gordon Brown appointed Lord Stevens as his Senior Advisor on International Security Issues. David Cameron appointed Stevens as Chair of the Borders Policing Committee in 2007, a position he held for 9 months focussing on the reorganisation and policing of the UK's borders.
In 2011, he was appointed by Yvette Cooper MP, Shadow Secretary of State for Home Affairs to Chair an Independent Commission Policing Commission in to the Future of Policing in  England and Wales. The Commission, due to report its findings in Spring 2013, was set up in place of a Royal Commission and is made up of nearly 40 members all of whom are experts in the fields of academia, politics, national and international policing/security as well as key figures from community initiatives and  business. In addition the Commission has secured contributions from 35 academics from 25 Universities from around the world including, Oxford University, Cambridge University, Northumbria University and Harvard University. 

Affiliations

Lord Stevens is the Executive Chairman of Quest, a global Corporate Intelligence, Investigations and Risk Mitigation Company. In this role, he led the Inquiry for the Premier League into alleged irregular payments in football player transfers and Chaired the Federation Equestre Internationale Ethics Panel on behalf of HRH Princess Haya Bint Al Hussein,  titled the Stevens' "Linquist Commission". He is also Chairman of the Advisory Board to the International Centre for Sport Security (ICSS), a not-for-profit organisation headquartered in Qatar. 
Lord Stevens is also Chairman of forensic experts Axiom International, of Skills for Security, a skills and standards setting body for the security business sector and Buddi an organisation providing technology to improve the safety and security of the elderly. Lord Stevens is also non-executive Director at Protector Group, a security services company headquartered in Tyne and Wear. He holds a number of non-executive directorships. He is a non-executive director  of Travelex and also sits on the board of LGC, the UK's leading analytical laboratory providing chemical, biochemical and DNA-based analysis. 
In addition to his commercial activities Lord Stevens is actively involved in numerous public interest and charitable organisations. He is the patron of the UK Defence Forum and the Security Institute. He has upheld over the years his duties as a Patron to a number of charitable organisations.

Honours

He was knighted in the New Year Honours of 2000 and made Deputy Lieutenant of London in 2001. In 2002 he was made a Knight of Saint John and given Freedom of the City of London. 

In April 2007 Lord Stevens became Honorary Air Commodore of No 3 (Royal Auxiliary) Air Force Police Squadron. He is the Honorary Colonel of Northumbria Army Cadet Force. On 28 November 2005, he was appointed Chancellor of Northumbria University. 
He holds an Honours Degree in Law, a Master Degree of Philosophy, a Doctor of Law, Honorary Degrees of Doctor in Civil Law, Doctor of Letters and a Doctor of Philosophy. 
He is a Fellow  of Wolfson College, Cambridge, and was a visiting Professor at City University of New York (CUNY). 
Lord Stevens holds a Commercial Pilot's Licence and is part owner of several aircraft. 

Styles and honours

Arms








