[[Elite (video game)]]

CATEGORIES: 1984 video games, Acorn Archimedes games, Acornsoft games, Amiga games, Amstrad CPC games, Apple II games, Atari ST games, BBC Micro and Acorn Electron games, Cancelled Dreamcast games, Cancelled Game Boy games, Cancelled Sega Genesis games, Cancelled Super Nintendo Entertainment System games, Commodore 64 games, DOS games, Imagineer games, MSX games, Nintendo Entertainment System games, SAM Coupé games, Science fiction video games, Space trading and combat simulators, Superior Software games, Tatung Einstein games, Virtual economies, ZX Spectrum games, Video games developed in the United Kingdom

Elite is a seminal space trading video game, originally published by Acornsoft in 1984 for the BBC Micro and Acorn Electron computers.  The game's title derives from one of the player's goals of raising their combat rating to the exalted heights of "Elite". It was written and developed by David Braben and Ian Bell, who had met while they were both undergraduates at Jesus College, Cambridge. Non-Acorn versions of the game were each first published by Firebird, Imagineer and Hybrid.
Elite was one of the first home computer games to use wire-frame 3D graphics with hidden line removal. Another novelty was the inclusion of The Dark Wheel, a novella by Robert Holdstock which influenced new players with insight into the moral and legal codes to which they might aspire.
Elite's open-ended game model, advanced game engine and revolutionary 3D graphics ensured that it was ported to virtually every contemporary home computer system, and earned it a place as a classic and a genre maker in gaming history. Elite was a hugely influential game, serving as a model for more recent games such as Space Rogue, Eve Online, Freelancer, Jumpgate, Infinity: The Quest for Earth, Wing Commander: Privateer, Pardus, the Escape Velocity series and the X series of space trading games.

Influences, development and launch

According to Braben and Bell, Elite was inspired by a range of sources.  The developers cite 2001: A Space Odyssey, Star Wars, Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy and the original Battlestar Galactica as influences. Braben also cites the works of Larry Niven, Jerry Pournelle, Arthur C. Clarke, Robert L. Forward, Isaac Asimov and Orson Scott Card as influences. Wilson, High Score!: the illustrated history of electronic games, p. 340-341 It was thought that much of the game's content was derived from the Traveller tabletop role-playing game, including the default commander name Jameson,
When the developers met at Jesus College, Cambridge, Bell was already working on a game for Acornsoft called Freefall. Braben had started writing a game called Fighter, but he had not yet completed it. The two projects were sufficiently similar that Braben and Bell compared notes, and after seeing Star Raiders on the Atari 800 they decided to collaborate to produce what eventually became Elite. The project was initially offered to Thorn EMI, with whom Braben already had a contract, but it was rejected. The developers went to Acornsoft instead, and Acornsoft's managing director David Johnson-Davies agreed to publish it.
The game took two years to write and was written in Assembly language, giving much care to maximum compactness of code. The last part added was the 3D radar display fitted into the last few unused bytes in their computer.30-8.00 pm 22 August 2008
Elite received very good reviews on its launch and the BBC Micro version eventually sold 107,898 copies.
In 1999/2000, a dispute occurred between Ian Bell and David Braben regarding Bell's decision to make available all versions of the original Elite. The dispute has now ended and the various versions are available on Bell's site. The two Frontier games are available for download from Braben's Elite Club website.

Gameplay

Elite has often been treated as the yardstick by which subsequent space trading games have been measured. However, it was not the first such game; the genre-defining Star Trader had been written as long ago as 1974. The space trading genre combines space-borne combat with a "buy low, sell high" freight transport system and the ability to use the profits to purchase ship upgrades.
The player initially controls the character "Commander Jameson", though the name can be changed after the game is saved. The player starts at Lave Station with 100 credits and a lightly armed trading ship, a Cobra Mark III. Most of the ships that the player encounters are similarly named after snakes or other reptiles. Credits can be accumulated through a number of means. These include piracy, trade, military missions, bounty hunting and  asteroid mining. The money generated by these enterprises allows players to upgrade their ships with enhancements such as better weapons, increased cargo capacity, an automated docking system, an extra energy bank and more.
In the game universe, stars have single planets, each with a space station in its orbit (in contrast to the complex planetary systems that have since been observed). Stars are always separated by interstellar distances. Travel between planets is accomplished by hyperspace jumps, and is constrained to those within range of the ship's limited fuel capacity (7 light years).
Fuel can be replenished after docking with a space station (although this is a challenging task without a docking computer, since it requires matching the ship's rotation to that of the station). Players can upgrade their equipment with a fuel scoop, which allows raw fuel to be skimmed from the surface of stars—being described by the manual as "a dangerous and difficult activity", but in practice a fairly simple process—and collecting free-floating cargo canisters and escape capsules liberated after the destruction of other ships.
While making a hyperspace jump between star systems, the antagonistic Thargoid insect race may intercept the player, forcing his ship to remain in "witch-space" to do battle with their smaller invasion ships. If the player has insufficient fuel to hyperspace jump to a nearby planet, he is trapped in witch-space forever. 
An extremely expensive one-shot galactic hyperspace upgrade permits travel between the eight galaxies of the game universe. There is little practical difference between the different galaxies. However, in some versions it is necessary to travel to at least the second galaxy in order to access the game's missions.
Elite includes several optional paid missions for the Galactic Navy. One requires tracking down and destroying a stolen experimental ship; the other involves transporting classified information on the Thargoids' home planet, with Thargoid invasion ships doing their best to see that you do not succeed.

Technical innovations

The Elite universe contains eight galaxies, each with 256 planets to explore.  Due to the limited capabilities of 8-bit computers, these worlds are procedurally generated. A single seed number is run through a fixed algorithm the appropriate number of times and creates a sequence of numbers determining each planet's complete composition (position in the galaxy, prices of commodities, and even name and local details— text strings are chosen numerically from a lookup table and assembled to produce unique descriptions for each planet). This means that no extra memory is needed to store the characteristics of each planet, yet each is unique and has fixed properties. Each galaxy is also procedurally generated from the first.
However, the use of procedural generation created a few problems. There are a number of poorly located systems that can be reached only by galactic hyperspace— these are more than 7 light years from their nearest neighbour, thus trapping the traveller. Braben and Bell also checked that none of the system names were profane - removing an entire galaxy after finding a planet named "Arse".Gamespot Q&A Interview
The original BBC Micro disk version used a non-standard disk-format to stop disk-to-disk copying.  This relied on specific OSWORD &7F DFS opcodes in the Intel 8271 Disk Controller to directly access the disk, and produce a non-standard sector/track-layout.   This, however, also caused issues for legitimate customers that were using the Western-Digital 1770 Disk-controller (DFS) ROMs from third-party manufacturers such as Watford Electronics.  Acorn subsequently released alternative versions of the BBC disks that were compatible with the WD1770.  This BBC Disk-copy-protection was subsequently used by Superior Software in their 'Exile' game.Exile Disk Copy protection
In addition to this, the code also included self-modifying code as part of the protection system, created by Rob Northen.Rob Northen Interview

Conversions

Originally there were 3 versions of Elite released:  Acorn Electron Tape, BBC B Tape and BBC B Disk.  The BBC version used a split screen to show four colours; the upper two thirds of the screen were displayed in Mode 4 while the lower part was in Mode 5. The Electron version ran entirely in Mode 4, and therefore displayed only black and white.  The Electron's limitations meant several game features were cut including Thargoids and suns. Neither the BBC nor the Electron tape versions featured missions.  Additionally, the original tape version for the Electron contained a bug that stopped Galactic Hyperspace from working.  Acorn provided a mail-in tape-replacement service to upgrade to v1.1 (marked as such on the tape label) that fixed this bug. The BBC B Disk version, referred to as Classic Elite, would load a new set of ships after every hyperspace jump or space station launch, meaning a larger number of ships were available. A new disc version released by Superior Software in 1986 was enhanced to take advantage of the BBC Micro Model B's successors including the BBC Micro Model B+, Master 128 computers, the optional 6502 Second Processor or sideways RAM, if they were fitted. In this case, the game used Modes 1 and 2 to make more colours available.
Elite was converted to a wide range of home computer platforms, including the Amiga, Atari ST, Apple II, Amstrad CPC, Commodore 64, ZX Spectrum, MSX, Tatung Einstein and IBM PC compatible. The only console version was released in 1991 for the Nintendo Entertainment System. Some of the versions had slightly altered gameplay or other characteristics, such as the number of missions offered to the player.
The ZX Spectrum version was a bestseller in the Gallup chartsWorld of Spectrum - Archive - Magazine viewer and was voted number 7 in the Your Sinclair Readers' Top 100 Games of All Time.
The Amstrad CPC conversion (itself a port of the ZX version) has fewer ships than other platforms, lacking the Anaconda and Transport, along with some minor differences in missions and titles.
The Commodore 64 conversion introduced Trumbles (creatures based on the tribbles in Star Trek: The Original Series). When the docking computer is activated in the Commodore 64 version and some other versions, a musical rendition of The Blue Danube Waltz is played, as a nod to a space docking sequence in Stanley Kubrick's 1968 film 2001: A Space Odyssey. This music was arranged by David Dunn.
Some versions feature a new title, "Archangel", for the player to earn that substitutes the rank of Commander. Archangel is reached by undertaking a special mission to destroy a space station in a system invaded by the Thargoids. The player's reward for completing the mission is to receive the title Archangel and obtain a device that is capable of emulating anti-ECM broadcast
The Acorn Archimedes version, ArcElite (1991), written by Warren Burch & Clive Gringras and regarded by some as the best conversion of the original game,
Many attempts to develop clones of Elite have been made, but most have been abandoned before completion or have otherwise failed to come to fruition. The open source Oolite is a notable exception. Elite: The New Kind, was developed by Christian Pinder by reverse-engineering the original BBC Micro version of Elite, but was withdrawn from the main distribution at David Braben's request.
Elite Plus was released for DOS in 1991. Whereas the original Elite for the PC used CGA graphics, Elite Plus  was upgraded to take advantage of EGA, VGA and MCGA. It was coded entirely in assembly language by Chris Sawyer, who later wrote RollerCoaster Tycoon. Section 3.18 and 3.19. Elite Plus had a ninth galaxy that can only be reached by hyperspacing into Witch Space. Elite Plus was published by Microplay Software.
A variant of the original BBC Micro Elite with many extra features, originally titled Elite III but now known as Elite A to minimize confusion, was created by Angus Duggan in the late 1980s by disassembling and modifying the 6502 code from the commercial release.  It includes many more ship types, more ship types flyable by the player (who begins in the less capable Adder), cargo delivery missions, some extra equipment items and numerous gameplay improvements.  Elite A was released publicly in 1997. Like the original game, it can be downloaded free from Ian Bell's web site and played under emulation.
In 2004, a commercial product called Elite Starfighter was released in Germany. Starfighter is an Elite clone that features modern graphics. Since it duplicates the original gameplay, it has been criticized as being somewhat dull by today's standards, but it is recommended to Elite enthusiasts who might consider taking a look.

Packaging and marketing

Acornsoft set in motion a large-scale publicity campaign and commissioned a presentational package for the game that was far more elaborate than normal.  Acornsoft packaged Elite in a box larger than their usual releases, complete with a novella by Robert Holdstock called The Dark Wheel, Space Trader's Flight Training Manual, reference card and a ship identification poster.
The Dark Wheel was the first novella to be included for distribution with a video game. The original Acornsoft version promised on its back cover that "a sequel to the novella is planned for publication in 1985", but no direct sequel was ever written. A second novella, Imprint by Andy Redman, was included with the IBM PC release of Elite Plus, but despite being set in the same universe it is in no way connected to the original story.
Marketing activities included a launch party at the Thorpe Park theme park (holding such an event for a video game was almost unheard of at the time) and a competition to be among the first to achieve the status of "Elite".

The Dark Wheel plot synopsis

The story tells of a young starship pilot named Alex Ryder, whose father Jason is killed when their merchant ship is attacked by a notorious pirate. In trying to understand and avenge his father's death and achieve an "iron ass" (a space-trader's term for a well armed- and armoured spaceship), Alex encounters the basics of the Elite universe—including combat, hyperdrive and hyperspace and the deadly aliens called Thargoids. Finally Alex discovers the truth about his father and his combat rank. He also acts as an acceptable face of trading, since his female co-pilot, Elissia Fields, is an alien species, wanted in several systems. Alex wants to avenge his Father's death, but must exercise caution in tracking down the assassin. By trading commodities, he slowly improves the arms and armour of his ship. When he is competent at using the spaceship for combat, but before he feels ready, he makes a trade that is sure to bring his father's killer to him.
Alex also learns who the "Dark Wheel" are and what it takes to join their ranks.Ian Bell's Elite site including the full text of The Dark Wheel

Reception

Elite is credited as being the breakthrough title that defined the modern space flight simulation genre,
Elite was ranked #14 top game of all time by Next Generation in 1996,Next Generation 21 (September 1996), p.70. #12 on IGN's 2000 "Top 25 PC Games of All Time" list,
The game was a significant source of inspiration for later games in its genre.

Sequels

Two official sequels have been created: Frontier: Elite II (1993) and Frontier: First Encounters (1995), both produced by Braben's company Frontier Developments.  A third sequel, Elite: Dangerous (conceived in 1998, provisionally titled Elite 4 and thereafter through a dedicated website.frontier.co.
Bell had limited involvement in the first sequel, and was not involved in the production of the second. Both games were a considerable advance on the original Elite, with filled 3D graphics, missions and a complex economy. This time, the player was not confined to orbit but could land on and explore or mine planets. The number of flyable ships was greatly increased, and a new political backstory was introduced enabling the player to gain ranks in competing interstellar empires. The games appeared on the Commodore Amiga, Atari ST and IBM PC.
Both existing sequels were significantly flawed in a number of respects. Both games had many bugs, First Encounters in particular, due apparently to being published in an incomplete state, and First Encounters had to be extensively patched; this became the subject of a three-year lawsuit between the publisher — GameTek — and Braben.
The existing sequels employed a realistic flight model based on Newtonian mechanics rather than the original arcade-style engine. While this was more realistic, many players also found it frustratingly difficult, particularly in combat. Most space trading games since Elite have stuck to an arcade-style flight model, in which the ships behave as though they are flying in an atmosphere.
Elite: Dangerous promises to add a multiplayer option and to extend the use of procedural generation - perhaps allowing players to fly down into a unique cloudscape for every planet of every size in a galaxy containing billions of stars.








