[[Lady and the Tramp]]

CATEGORIES: 1950s romantic comedy films, 1955 animated films, American animated films, Disney animated features canon, English-language films, Films about animals, Films about dogs, Films directed by Clyde Geronimi, Films directed by Wilfred Jackson, Films featuring anthropomorphic characters, Films set in the 1900s, Films set in the United States, Films shot in CinemaScope, Romantic musical films, Walt Disney Pictures films

Lady and the Tramp is a 1955 American animated romantic comedy film produced by Walt Disney and released to theaters on 22 June 1955, by Buena Vista Distribution. The 15th animated film in the Walt Disney Animated Classics series, it was the first animated feature filmed in the CinemaScope widescreen film process.

Plot

On Christmas morning in 1909, Jim Dear gives his wife Darling an American cocker spaniel puppy that they name Lady. Lady enjoys a happy life with the couple and her friends, Jock, a Scottish terrier, and Trusty, a bloodhound. Meanwhile, across town living by the railway, a stray mutt named Tramp enjoys his stray life, begging for scraps from Tony's restaurant and protecting his fellow strays Peg (a Maltese) and Bull (an English bulldog) from the local dog catcher. Later, Lady is saddened after her owners begin treating her rather coldly. Jock and Trusty visit her and determine that their change in behavior is due to Darling expecting a baby. While Jock and Trusty try to explain what a baby is, Tramp offers his own thoughts on the matter, making Jock and Trusty take an immediate dislike to the stray and order him out of the yard. As Tramp leaves, he reminds Lady that "when the baby moves in, the dog moves out."
Eventually, the baby arrives and the couple introduces Lady to the infant, to whom Lady grows fond. Soon after, the two decide to go on a trip together, leaving their Aunt Sarah to look after the baby and the house. However Aunt Sarah dislikes dogs, refusing to let Lady near the baby. When Lady clashes with Aunt Sarah's two trouble-making Siamese cats, Si and Am, she takes Lady to a pet shop to get a muzzle. Lady flees, but is pursued by some strays. After Tramp rescues her, the two visit a local zoo, where Tramp tricks a beaver into removing the muzzle. Later, Tramp shows Lady how he lives "footloose and collar-free", eventually leading into a candlelit Italian dinner with the famed "Spaghetti Kiss". Lady begins to fall in love with Tramp, and the two spend the night together on a hilltop in the park. As Tramp escorts Lady back home the next day, Tramp stirs up trouble in a chicken coop. As the two dogs flee, Lady is caught by the dogcatcher. At the pound, the other dogs admire Lady's license, as it is her way out of the pound, and reveal Tramp's relationships and how he is unlikely to ever settle down. Eventually, Lady is claimed by Aunt Sarah and is chained to the backyard doghouse. Jock and Trusty visit to comfort her but when Tramp arrives to apologize, Lady angrily confronts him about his past girlfriends and failed attempts to rescue her, after which Tramp leaves. Moments later, as it starts to rain, Lady sees a rat trying to sneak into the house with an intention of harming the baby. Lady barks frantically, but Aunt Sarah tells her to be quiet. Tramp hears her barking and rushes to help, entering the house and confronting the rat in the nursery. Lady breaks free and races to the nursery, finding the rat on the baby's crib. Tramp manages to kill the rat but knocks over the crib in the process, waking the infant. When Aunt Sarah comes to the baby's aid, she sees both dogs and thinks they are responsible. She forces Tramp into a closet and Lady into the basement and then calls the pound to take Tramp away. Jim Dear and Darling return as the dogcatcher departs. They release Lady, who leads them and Aunt Sarah to the dead rat, vindicating Tramp. Overhearing everything and realizing Tramp's intentions, Jock and Trusty chase after the dogcatcher's wagon. Jock is convinced Trusty has long since lost his sense of smell, but Trusty is able to find the wagon. They bark at the horses, who rear up and topple the wagon onto a utility pole. Jim Dear arrives in a taxi with Lady, and she reunites with Tramp. However, Trusty is injured in the struggle and Jock howls in sorrow.
That Christmas, Tramp, now a part of the family, has his own collar and license. Aunt Sarah has also reconciled with Lady by sending her a box of dog biscuits. Lady and Tramp raise four puppies together: three resemble Lady (Annette, Danielle and Collette) and one resembles Tramp (Scamp). Jock comes to see the family along with Trusty, who is carefully walking on his still-mending leg. Thanks to the puppies, Trusty has a fresh audience for his old stories, but he has forgotten them.

Cast

Production

Story development

In 1937 Disney story man Joe Grant came up with an idea inspired by the antics of his English Springer Spaniel Lady, and how she got "shoved aside" by Joe's new baby. He approached Walt Disney with sketches of Lady. Disney enjoyed the sketches and commissioned Grant to start story development on a new animated feature Lady. Through the late 1930s and early 1940s, Joe Grant and other artists worked on the story, taking a variety of approaches, but Disney wasn't pleased with any of them, primarily because he thought Lady was too sweet, and there wasn't enough action.
In the early 1940s, Walt read the short story written by Ward Greene, "Happy Dan, The Whistling Dog", in Cosmopolitan Magazine. He thought Grant's story would be improved if Lady fell in love with a cynical dog character like the one in Greene's story and bought the rights to it.
The finished film is slightly different from what was originally planned. Lady was to have only one next-door neighbor, a Ralph Bellamy-type canine named Hubert. Hubert was later replaced by Jock and Trusty. Aunt Sarah was the traditional overbearing mother-in-law. In the final film, she's softened to a busybody who, though antagonistic towards Lady, is well-meaning (she sends a packet of dog biscuits to Lady at Christmas to apologize for mistreating her). Aunt Sarah's Nip and Tuck were later renamed Si and Am. Originally, Lady's owners were called Jim Brown and Elizabeth. These were changed to highlight Lady's point of view. They were briefly referred to as "Mister" and "Missis" before settling on the names "Jim Dear" and "Darling". To maintain a dog's perspective, Darling and Jim's faces are rarely shown, similar to Mammy Two Shoes in the Tom and Jerry cartoons. The rat was a somewhat comic character in early sketches, but became a great deal more frightening, due to the need to raise dramatic tension. A scene created but then deleted was one in which after Trusty says "Everybody knows, a dog's best friend is his human". This leads to Tramp describing a world where the roles of both dogs and humans are switched; the dogs are the masters and vice-versa. There was a love triangle among Lady, Tramp, and a Russian wolfhound named Boris (who appears in the dog pound in the final version). Story development continued after the war.
The film's opening sequence, in which Darling unwraps a hat box on Christmas morning and finds Lady inside, is based on an incident when Walt Disney presented his wife Lily with a Chow puppy as a gift in a hat box.
In 1947, the Spanish writer María Lejárraga arrived in the US and sent a couple of screenplays to Disney, one of them with the title Merlín y Viviana o la gata egoísta y el perro atontado which the company returned to María. Afterwards, she was surprised to find numerous similarities with her original text and The Lady and the Tramp, simply changing Viviana, the cat, to a dog, Lady. María Lejárraga: Una mujer en la sombra. Madrid, EDAF, 1992, p. 18.
In 1949, Grant left the studio, yet Disney story men were continually pulling Grant's original drawings and story off the shelf to retool. A solid story began taking shape in 1953, based on Grant's storyboards and Greene's short story. Greene later wrote a novelization of the film that was released two years before the film itself, at Walt Disney's insistence, so that audiences would be familiar with the story. Grant didn't receive film credit for his story work, an issue that animation director Eric Goldberg hoped to rectify in the Lady and the Tramp Platinum Edition's behind-the-scenes vignette that explained Grant's role.

Animation

As they had done with deer on Bambi, the animators studied many dogs of different breeds to capture the movement and personality of dogs. Although the spaghetti eating sequence is probably now the best known scene from the film, Walt Disney was prepared to cut it, thinking that it would not be romantic and that dogs eating spaghetti would look silly. Animator Frank Thomas was against Walt's decision and animated the entire scene himself without any lay-outs. Walt was impressed by Thomas's work and how he romanticised the scene and kept the scene in. On viewing the first take of the scene, the animators felt that the action should be slowed down, so an apprentice trainee was assigned to create "half numbers" in between many of the original frames.
Originally, the background artist was supposed to be Mary Blair and she did some inspirational sketches for the film. However, she left the studio to become a children's book illustrator in 1953. Claude Coats was then appointed as the key background artist. Coats made models of the interiors of Jim Dear and Darling's house, and shot photos and film at a low perspective as reference to maintain a dog's view. Eyvind Earle (who later became the art director of Disney's Sleeping Beauty) did almost 50 miniature concept sketches for the Bella Notte sequence and was a key contributor to the film.

=CinemaScope=

Originally, Lady and the Tramp was planned to be filmed in a regular full frame aspect ratio. However, due to the growing interest of widescreen film amongst movie-goers, Disney decided to animate the film in CinemaScope making Lady and the Tramp the first animated feature made in the process. This new innovation presented additional problems for the animators: the expansion of space created more realism but gave fewer closeups. It also made it difficult for a single character to dominate the screen so that groups had to be spread out to keep the screen from appearing sparse. Longer takes become necessary since constant jump-cutting would seem too busy or annoying. Layout artists essentially had to reinvent their technique. Animators had to remember that they had to move their characters across a background instead of the background passing behind them. Yet the animators overcame these obstacles during the action scenes, such as the Tramp killing the rat.
More problems arose as the premiere date got closer, since not all theaters had the capability to show CinemaScope at the time. Upon learning this, Walt issued two versions of the film: one in widescreen, and another in the Academy ratio. This involved gathering the layout artists to restructure key scenes when characters were on the edges of the screen.

Release

The film was originally released in theaters on 22 June 1955. At the time, the film took in a higher figure than any other Disney animated feature since Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs,

Home media

The movie was released on VHS and Laserdisc in 1987 (this was in Disney's The Classics video series) and 1998 (this was in the Walt Disney Masterpiece Collection video series). A Disney Limited Issue series DVD was released on 23 November 1999.
Lady and the Tramp was remastered and restored for DVD on February 28, 2006, as the seventh installment of Disney's Platinum Editions series.
The film was released February 7, 2012 on Blu-ray combo pack as a part of Disney's Diamond Editions series.

Critical reception

Lady and the Tramp received generally positive reviews from several review aggregation websites; based on the Internet Movie Database (IMDb), the film received a weighted positive average rating of 7.4 out of 10 from a total of 49,625 IMDb users. Similarly, the film garnered generally positive reviews from 98 IMDb critics, praising it for its "charm, humor, songs and great animation." Also, the film gained generally favorable reviews from Rotten Tomatoes. The film received 38 critical reviews, from which 34 voted for Fresh and 4 were Rotten, giving it a positive total rating of 89% and an average rating of 7.6 out of 10. Retrieved December 2012
The film has since been regarded as a classic. The sequence of Lady and the Tramp sharing a plate of Italian spaghetti – climaxed by an accidental kiss as they swallow opposite ends of the same piece of spaghetti – is considered an iconic scene in an American film.
Lady and the Tramp was named number 95 out of the "100 Greatest Love Stories of All Time" by the American Film Institute in their 100 Years...100 Passions special, as one of only two animated films to appear on the list, along with Disney's Beauty and the Beast which ranked 34th.
Yet, despite being an enormous success at the box office, the film was also initially panned by critics: one indicated that the dogs had "the dimensions of hippos," another that "the artists' work is below par".

=Accolades=

Soundtrack

Lady and the Tramp is the film's soundtrack, released through Walt Disney Records. The score for the soundtrack was composed by Oliver Wallace, Peggy Lee, the Disney Studio Chorus, and "Home Sweet Home". The soundtrack was released on 9 September 1997 and was released as a digital download on 26 September 2006.

Track listing

Peggy Lee

Recording artist Peggy Lee wrote the songs with Sonny Burke and assisted with the score as well. In the film, she sings: "He's a Tramp", "La La Lu", "The Siamese Cat Song" and "What Is a Baby?". She helped promote the film on the Disney TV series, explaining her work with the score and singing a few of the film's numbers. These appearances are available as part of the Lady and the Tramp Platinum Edition DVD set.
On 16 November 1988, Peggy Lee sued the Walt Disney Company for breach of contract, claiming that she retained the rights to transcriptions of the music, arguing that videotape editions were transcriptions.

Sequel

On February 27, 2001, a direct-to-video sequel of the film was released by Disney Television Animation, entitled Lady and the Tramp II: Scamp's Adventure. Filmed 46 years after its predecessor, the film centers around the adventure of Lady and Tramp's only son, Scamp, who happens to have the desire to be a wild dog. He runs away from his family and joins a gang of junkyard dogs to fulfill his longing for freedom and a life without rules.






