[[Midland Metro]]

CATEGORIES: Midland Metro, Electric railways in the United Kingdom, Light rail in the United Kingdom, Tram transport in England, Transport in Wolverhampton, Transport in Birmingham, West Midlands

The Midland Metro is a light-rail/tram line in the West Midlands of England between  Birmingham and Wolverhampton via West Bromwich and Wednesbury. It is owned and promoted by Centro, and operated by West Midlands Travel Limited, a subsidiary of the National Express Group (NEG), under the brand name National Express Midland Metro.
It opened in 1999, mostly using a disused railway trackbed. In Birmingham, it terminates at Snow Hill station. An extension into Birmingham city centre, was approved in 2012, and is expected to be operational by 2015. Various other extensions, including entirely new lines, have been proposed but not yet approved. These include a line from Wednesbury to the Merry Hill Shopping Centre, again making use of a disused railway trackbed, on a line shared with heavy rail.

History

Birmingham once had an extensive tram network run by Birmingham Corporation Tramways, however, as in most British cities, the network was abandoned, with the last tram running in 1953.

1984 Proposals

There had been proposals for a light rail or Metro system in Birmingham and the Black Country put forward as early as the 1950s and 1960s, ironically at a time when some of the region's lines and services were beginning to be cut back.
The scheme suffered from several drawbacks, one being that three of the proposed routes, from Birmingham to Sutton Coldfield, Shirley, and Dorridge would take over existing railways, and would have included the conversion into a tramway of the Cross-City Line, between Aston and Blake Street, ending direct rail services to Lichfield. The northern section of the North Warwickshire Line was also to be converted as far as Shirley station, leaving a question mark over existing train services to Stratford-upon-Avon. Tram tracks would also run alongside the existing line to Solihull and Dorridge, with local train services ended.
The most serious drawback however, which proved fatal to the scheme, was that the first proposed route of the network, between Five Ways and Castle Bromwich via the city centre would have involved the demolition of 238 properties. This invoked strong opposition from local residents. The scheme was spearheaded by Wednesfield Labour councillor Phil Bateman,

1988 Proposals

Following the abolition of the West Midlands County Council and establishment of a new Passenger Transport Authority in 1986, a new light-rail scheme under the present name "Midland Metro" was revived with a different set of lines. The first of up to 15 lines was intended be operating by the end of 1993, and a network of 200 kilometres was planned to be in use by 2000.
In February 1988 it was announced that the first route, Line 1 would be between Birmingham and Wolverhampton, using much of the disused trackbed of the former Birmingham Snow Hill to Wolverhampton Low Level Line, a route not included in the 1984 recommended network, partly as at that stage the section between Wednesbury and Bilston was still in use, not closing until 1992. The Wednesbury to Birmingham section had closed back in 1972, and the section between Bilston and Wolverhampton was last used in 1983.
A Bill to give Centro powers to build the line was deposited in Parliament in November 1988, and became an Act of Parliament a year later, with completion expected by the mid 1990s.
A three line network was initially planned, and powers were also obtained to build two further routes. Firstly an extension of Line 1 through the city-centre to Five Ways, then a second line, Midland Metro Line 2, running to Chelmsley Wood. and then Birmingham Airport. A third line, Line 3 was also proposed, running from Line 1 at Wolverhampton to Walsall, using much of the disused trackbed of the Wolverhampton and Walsall Railway, and then, using the Wednesbury to Brierley Hill trackbed of the South Staffordshire Line (which would close in 1993) running southwards to Dudley intersecting with Line 1 along the route. This would provide a direct link with the new Merry Hill Shopping Centre, which was built between 1984 and 1989.
Some 25 years later, Line 2 and Line 3 have not been built. In 1997 Centro accepted that they were unable to get funding for the proposed lines, and therefore adopted a strategy of expanding the system in "bite-sized chunks", with the city-centre extension of Line 1 as the first priority. The intention was that the first decade of the 21st century would see the completion of the first of these projects.
Work on the Birmingham Metro tram extension began in June 2012 (during the second decade of the 21st century), launched by transport minister Norman Baker. The dig was begun as the junction of Corporation Street and Bull Street, with work to move water pipes and power cables.

Construction

A contract for the construction and operation of Line 1 was awarded to the Altram consortium in August 1995, and construction began three months later.
The estimated construction cost in 1995 was £145 million (approximately £236 million in 2012 prices).1m and Altram contributed £11.4m.

Line One

Line 1, the 
At the southern end the terminus is Birmingham Snow Hill station, which allows interchange with the National Rail network. Platform 4 was taken out of use to make space for the tram. From Snow Hill, the line runs north-west, and for the first few miles it runs alongside the Birmingham to Worcester railway line, before the two diverge. Two stations on this stretch (Jewellery Quarter and The Hawthorns) are also tram/railway interchange stations.
At the northern end trams leave the railway trackbed at Priestfield to run along Bilston Road to St Georges terminus in Bilston Street, Wolverhampton city centre. St Georges has no direct interchange with other public transport, but the bus and railway stations can be reached on foot in a few minutes.
The original proposal was to run into the former Wolverhampton Low Level station, but this was abandoned, giving the terminus a link to the very centre of Wolverhampton.

Service Pattern

Mondays to Saturdays, services run at eight minute intervals during the day, and at fifteen minute intervals during the evenings and on Sundays.

Fares

Cash fares are distance-related. The scale was originally intended to be broadly comparable with buses, but this proved to be unfinanceable.

Usage

Usage averages about five million passengers annually, and this number appears to have reached a plateau.

Infrastructure

=Track, Signalling, and Depot=

Line 1 is a 1435mm double-track tramway, apart from a short section of single track at the approach to Snow Hill. Trams are driven manually under a mix of line-of-sight and signals. Turnback crossovers along the line, including in the street section, have point indicators.
On the trackbed section Birmingham to Priestfield, signals are at the Snow Hill single line extremities, Black Lake level crossing, and Wednesbury Parkway and Metro Centre. The street section has signals at every set of traffic lights, tied into the road signals to allow tram priority.
The Metro Centre control room, stabling point and depot is near Wednesbury, Great Western Street tram stop, and occupies land once used as railway sidings.

=Power=

The line is electrified at 750 V DC using overhead lines. The system was renewed in 2010/2011, requiring short-term closures.

=Stops=

The tram stops are unstaffed raised platforms with two open-fronted cantilever shelters equipped with seats, a 'live' digital display of services, closed circuit television, and an intercom linked to Metro Centre.

Extensions

An extension of Line One into Birmingham city centre has been approved, with an extension through Wolverhampton city centre proposed.

=Phase One Expansion=

==Line One (Birmingham City Centre) Extension==

The fact that the existing line does not run into Birmingham city centre has been identified as one of the reasons why it has failed to attract the predicted patronage. The Birmingham City Centre Extension (BCCE) will extend Line 1 into the streets of central Birmingham. Originally it was planned to terminate the extension at Stephenson Street, adjacent to New Street railway station.
The extension will diverge from the existing line between Snow Hill and St Paul's stops. A viaduct has been constructed to carry the line into the streets.
From Snow Hill the tramway will run along Colmore Circus, Upper Bull Street, Corporation Street and Stephenson Street, with three stops. The second phase of the extension to Centenary Square will then run from Stephenson Street along Pinfold Street, turning into Victoria Square where a new stop will be located alongside the Town Hall. It will then run along Paradise Street to Paradise Circus then turn onto Broad Street, where it will continue to its terminus on Centenary Square.
An order authorising the BCCE was made in July 2005.
On 14 June 2012 works on the extension officially began. Initial works include the relocation of underground services on Bull Street and Corporation Street.
The current extension is a shortened version of the original proposal to extend the line to Edgbaston Shopping Centre, Five Ways.
The council commissioned Jacobs Engineering and Deloitte to look into the feasibility of underground trams, but in June 2005 the Birmingham Post reported that tunnelling would be unaffordable and not meet government funding criteria. Mr Whitby stated that he would challenge the way the studies had been carried out, but the eventual outcome was acceptance of a street tramway. By September 2008, the council's interest had shifted from the full BCCE to a shortened version between New Street and Snow Hill stations, which do not have connecting trains.

==Line One Wolverhampton City Centre Loop==

An extension from the existing terminus in Wolverhampton running through Market Street and Lichfield Street and then serving Wolverhampton bus station and Wolverhampton railway station, part of the Phase Two Extensions, was made a separate project following stagnation of the project to build a line to Walsall. It was to take the form of a mainly single-track loop-and-spur extension to Line 1, with an estimated cost of £30 million.
Centro hoped to complete the scheme by 2014,
The plan entailed southbound trams from Wolverhampton first going around the city centre to the railway station. In July 2010, Centro Director General Geoff Inskip hinted that the scheme would be reworked by taking it to "places people need to go, such as the University", and not taking passengers to the railway station and back "if they don't actually need to go there". The reworked scheme, costing £50 million instead of £30 million, might be routed over part of the ring road.
In March 2014, it was announced that the Wolverhampton Extension would go ahead as part of a £2bn connectivity package. The new line would see two new stops built at Piper's Row and Wolverhampton Railway Station, which will see trams terminate alternately at the Rail station and at the existing St George's stop. The new stops will be constructed between 2015 and 2019.birminghampost.co.uk/business/commercial-property/mipim-2014-2bn-greater-birmingham-6803522

==Line Two Eastside Extension==

In November 2013, Birmingham City Council leader Sir Albert Bore announced that a task group was considering the construction of a second metro line from Birmingham City Centre, along Fazeley Street to Birmingham Airport and terminating at Coventry. Simultaneously, Centro released a proposed map of the route, taking in a loop between the interchange at the airport, Small Heath and Lea Hall.
In February 2014, it was announced that funding had been secured for the first phase of Midland Metro's Line Two extension to Eastside, including three new stops at either Moor Street or Albert Street, and Curzon Street, before a terminus at Adderley Street.birminghampost.co. If the latter option were favoured, it would mark the achievement of what has long been regarded as a major aim for the Metro, namely to connect all three (four when Curzon St opens) city-centre stations by rapid transit. Any extension would have to be completed before the projected commencement of HS2 services in 2026.

==Present Confirmed Expansion Plans==

The extension projects with confirmed funding will produce a network as follows:

Rolling stock

Metro operates 16 Ansaldobreda T69 articulated two-section trams, built in Caserta,Boynton (2001), p.80. Italy. The 38 tonne trams rest on three bogies, and have a top speed of 
The centre portion of the tram, 0.35 metres above track level, is wheelchair accessible: the extremities, 0.85 metres above track level, are reached by a steps. An on-board loudspeaker is used to deliver messages from the driver and Metro Centre, and a recorded announcement of every stop.
All of the trams originally had a livery of a blue body, red fronts, grey skirt and yellow doors, but several have been refurbished and repainted in Network West Midlands silver and magenta livery.
Each tram includes a dead man's handle and three braking systems. Using the hazard brake, 15 metres is required to stop from a speed of 30 kilometres per hour. In the Rail Accident Investigation Branch report into an accident at New Swan Lane Level Crossing, it emerged that tram drivers were reluctant to use a rapid deceleration brake because of the potential for injury to passengers.

Access

=Cycling=

Carriage of bicycles is not permitted except for foldable bikes that have been fully compacted.
As of June 2010, no stop had cycle lockers except from The Hawthorns, shared with National Rail.

=Wheelchair=

Each tram has two spaces for wheelchair users. All stops have been designed to be fully accessible, with level, ramped, or lift access to all platforms. Metro

Replacement fleet

Centro announced that it was planning a £44.2-million replacement of the entire fleet.

Extension Proposals

Wednesbury – Merry Hill Extension

From Line 1 in Wednesbury, the Brierley Hill Extension (WBHE) would follow the disused South Staffordshire Line, through Tipton to the vicinity of the former Dudley Town station (which closed in 1964 and was later the site of a freightliner terminal), then on-street into Dudley town centre. It would leave Dudley alongside the Southern Bypass to access the railway corridor, leaving it at the approach to the Waterfront/Merry Hill area and Brierley Hill.
Centro has stated that the WBHE would provide 10 trams per hour, alternately serving Wolverhampton and Birmingham. Journey time from Brierley Hill to West Bromwich was stated as 31 minutes.
However, these plans have been complicated by the desire of Network Rail to reopen the South Staffordshire Line for the use of freight trains, which last used the route in 1993. Various proposals have been put forward as to how trams and freight trains could coexist on the same corridor, early proposals involved trams and freight trains using different tracks. But since 2008 Centro has favoured the use of tram-trains, which can share the tracks with freight trains.
In October 2010, the 'Black Country Joint Core Strategy'
In March 2011, the business plan for the reopening of the South Staffordshire Line between Walsall and Stourbridge for the Midland Metro was submitted to Network Rail.

Historic Planned Extensions

In 2004, the proposed Phase Two expansion included five routes:

Birmingham City Centre to Great Barr

A , 17-stop route from the city centre through Lancaster Circus and along the A34 corridor to the Birmingham/Walsall boundary, terminating  near the M6 motorway junction 7.

Birmingham City Centre to Quinton

A  route from the BCCE terminus at Five Ways along the Hagley Road to Quinton.

Wolverhampton City Centre to Wednesfield, Willenhall, Walsall and Wednesbury

This  "5Ws" route would connect Wolverhampton city centre to Wednesfield, Willenhall, Walsall and Wednesbury, and provide direct access to New Cross and Manor Hospitals, partially using the trackbed of the former Wolverhampton and Walsall Railway.

Birmingham City Centre to Birmingham Airport

Accidents and Service Disruptions

There have been several instances of trams colliding with road vehicles at crossings, including one collision in February 2003 in Wolverhampton where the car driver was killed.
Technical and maintenance failures, severe weather and vandalism have led to some service disruptions. In summer 2001 the Wolverhampton section was temporarily closed because of a risk of electrocution posed by drooping power cables.

Evaluations of Success

Since its opening in 1999, Midland Metro's existing line has not been as successful hoped, attracting far fewer passengers than initially predicted. At the planning stage it was projected that the line would carry 14 to 20 million passengers per year, but it has actually carried around five million.
Numerous reasons have been suggested for the relative under performance of the line, including that the line has lacked visibility, being confined to Snow Hill station at the edge of Birmingham city centre, and is therefore relatively unknown. Other grounds for the line's underwhelming performance include the fact that there are quicker trains running between Birmingham and Wolverhampton and that the line does not serve New Street station, or any of Birmingham's major visitor attractions except for the Jewellery Quarter, which is already well-served by suburban trains. It is hoped that the extension of Line One to New Street, due for completion in 2015, will greatly increase the number of passengers using the tram service to other destinations between Birmingham and Wolverhampton.

Economics

At Line 1's opening, it was operated by a for-profit company Altram owned by John Laing, Ansaldo, and National Express. Soon after opening it became evident to all three partners that operating revenue would not cover costs. In February 2003, The Times reported that the Metro's auditors had refused to sign off its accounts as a going concern.
Ansaldo and Laing decided to withdraw from involvement in the Midland Metro, which they felt would not be profitable, and had ceased practical involvement as early as 2003, but their official exit took place in 2006. Day-to-day operation has since been in the hands of National Express Midland Metro, with losses largely covered by cross-subsidies from other parts of National Express's business.
The Commission for Integrated Transport (CfIT) gave an overall cost estimate for British systems of £3.79 per light-rail vehicle-kilometre in 2003–2004, compared with £0.94 per bus kilometre in 2002–2003, according to Rapid Transit Monitor 2004. CfIT estimated that the fare required for Midland Metro to break even was twice that of Manchester Metrolink, London Tramlink and the Tyne and Wear Metro.



Bibliography

  | last = Boynton
  | first = John
  | year = 2001
  | title = Main Line to Metro: Train and tram on the Great Western route: Birmingham Snow Hill – Wolverhampton
  | publisher = Mid England Books
  | location = Kidderminster
  | isbn = 978-0-9522248-9-1
  | ref = harv
  }}




