[[Hernando de Soto Polar]]

CATEGORIES: 1941 births, Living people, Development economists, Peruvian economists, People from Arequipa, Peruvian writers

Hernando de Soto Polar (or Hernando de Soto; born 1941) is a Peruvian economist known for his work on the informal economy and on the importance of business and property rights. He is the president of the Institute for Liberty and Democracy (ILD), located in Lima, Peru. (accessed 16 March 2013)

Childhood and education

Hernando de Soto was born in 1941 in Arequipa, Peru. His father was a Peruvian diplomat. After the 1948 military coup in Peru, his father chose exile in Europe, taking his wife and two young sons with him. De Soto was educated in Switzerland, where he attended the International School of Geneva and then did post-graduate work at the Graduate Institute of International Studies in Geneva. He later worked as an economist, corporate executive and consultant. He returned to Peru at the age of 38. Page A4. Leaders & Success. Article by IBD Reinhardt Kraus. His younger brother Álvaro served in the Peruvian diplomatic corps in Lima, New York and Geneva and was seconded to United Nations in 1982; he retired from the U.N. in 2007 with the title of Assistant Secretary General. He is very well known as an international adviser.

Reforms in Peru and elsewhere

Between 1988 and 1995, he and the Institute for Liberty and Democracy (ILD) were responsible for some four hundred initiatives, laws, and regulations that changed Peru's economic system.The Globalist | Biography of Hernando de Soto
In particular, ILD designed the administrative reform of Peru's property system which has given titles to more than 1.2 million families and helped some 380,000 firms which previously operated in the black market to enter the formal economy.2004–2005 Frank Porter Graham Lecture This latter task was accomplished through the elimination of bureaucratic "red-tape" and restrictive registration, licensing and permit laws that made the opening of new businesses very time-consuming and costly.
Yale University political scientist Susan C. Stokes believes that de Soto's influence helped change the policies of the recently elected Alberto Fujimori from a Keynesian to a neoliberal approach. De Soto convinced then-president Fujimori to travel to Chicago, where Fujimori met with several important figures within the International Monetary Fund, the US Department of State, and the Chinese embassy, who convinced him that he had to abide by the rules set by the international financial institutions. These policies led to a reduction in the rate of inflation. Are Parties What's Wrong with Democracy in Latin America?, April 1997
The Cato Institute and The Economist magazine have argued that de Soto's policy prescriptions brought him into conflict with and eventually helped to undermine the Shining Path (Sendero Luminoso) guerrilla movement. By granting titles to small coca farmers in the two main coca-growing areas, he deprived the Shining Path of safe haven, recruits and money, they have argued, and the leadership was forced to cities where they were arrested.De Soto, Hernando. The Other Path: The Economic Answer to Terrorism. 2002
After the split with Fujimori, he and his institute designed similar programs in El Salvador, Haiti, Tanzania, and Egypt and has gained favor with the World Bank, the World Bank-allied international NGO Slum Dwellers International and the government of South Africa.
Since its work in Peru in the 1980s, his institute, the ILD, has worked in 23 countries. Heads of state in 35 countries have sought the ILD's services, and ILD staff has personally met with 29 of them to discuss precisely what the ILD might do to help their economies prosper.
The impact of de Soto's institute in the field of development -- on political leaders, experts and multi-lateral organizations -- is widespread and acknowledged. For example:
In 2009, the ILD turned its attention back to Peru and the plight of the indigenous peoples of the Peruvian Amazon jungle. In response to Peru's President García's call to all Peruvians to present their proposals toward solving the problems leading to the bloody incidents in Bagua, the ILD has assessed the situation and presented its preliminary findings. ILD has published a short videotaped documentary, The Mystery of Capital among the Indigenous Peoples of the Amazon, summarizing its findings from indigenous communities in Alaska, Canada and the Peruvian jungle. The Mystery of Capital among the Indigenous Peoples of the Amazon, video documentary with findings from indigenous communities in Alaska, Canada and the Peruvian jungle 

Main thesis

The main message of de Soto's work and writings is that no nation can have a strong market economy without adequate participation in an information framework that records ownership of property and other economic information."The Destruction of Economic Facts", by Hernando de Soto. April 28, 2010. Bloomberg BusinessWeek. Accessed online May 2, 2011  They cannot seek legal remedies to business conflicts in court, since they do not have legal ownership. Lack of information on income prevents governments from collecting taxes and acting for the public welfare. 
"The existence of such massive exclusion generates two parallel economies, legal and extra legal. An elite minority enjoys the economic benefits of the law and globalization, while the majority of entrepreneurs are stuck in poverty, where their assets –adding up to more than US$10 trillion worldwide – languish as dead capital in the shadows of the law." 
To survive, to protect their assets, and to do as much business as possible, the extralegals create their own rules. But because these local arrangements are full of shortcomings and are not easily enforceable, the extralegals also create their own social, political and economic problems that affect the society at large.
Since the fall of the Berlin Wall, responsible nations around the developing world have worked hard to make the transition to a market economy, but have in general failed. Populist leaders have used this failure of the free market system to wipe out poverty in the developing world to beat their "anti-globalization" drums. But the ILD believes that the real enemy is within the flawed legal systems of developing nations that make it virtually impossible for the majority of their people –and their assets– to gain a stake in the market. The people of these countries have talent, enthusiasm, and an astonishing ability to wring a profit out of practically nothing.
What the poor majority in the developing world do not have is easy access to the legal system which, in the advanced nations of the world and for the elite in their countries, is the gateway to economic success, for it is in the legal system where property documents are created and standardized according to law. That documentation builds a public memory that permits society to engage in such crucial economic activities as identifying and gaining access to information about individuals, their assets, their titles, rights, charges and obligations; establishing the limits of liability for businesses; knowing an asset's previous economic situation; assuring protection of third parties; and quantifying and valuing assets and rights.), The Mystery of Capital and the Construction of Social Reality, Chicago: Open Court, 2008, 35–51. These public memory mechanisms in turn facilitate such opportunities as access to credit, the establishment of systems of identification, the creation of systems for credit and insurance information, the provision for housing and infrastructure, the issue of shares, the mortgage of property and a host of other economic activities that drive a modern market economy."Institute for Liberty and Democracy, The ILD's war against exclusion, p. 19. 2009

Praise for work

Time magazine chose De Soto as one of the five leading Latin American innovators of the century in its special May 1999 issue Leaders of the New Millennium, and included him among the 100 most influential people in the world in 2004. In January 2000, Entwicklung und Zusammenarbeit, the German development magazine, described De Soto as one of the most important development theoreticians. 1, S. 15—18. In October 2005, over 20,000 readers of Prospect magazine of the UK and Foreign Policy magazine of the U.S. ranked him as number 13 on the joint survey of the world's Top 100 Public Intellectuals Poll.
U.S. presidents from both major parties have praised De Soto's work. Bill Clinton, for example, called him "The world's greatest living economist",The University of North Carolina news release George H. W. Bush declared that "De Soto's prescription offers a clear and promising alternative to economic stagnation…"Source for President George H. W. Bush's remarks: Text of Remarks by the President to the World Bank/International Monetary Fund Annual Meeting, 27 September 1989, announcing NAFTA. Press release. Bush's predecessor, Ronald Reagan said, "De Soto and his colleagues have examined the only ladder for upward mobility. The free market is the other path to development and the one true path. It is the people's path… it leads somewhere. It works."The Cato Institute His work has also received praise from two United Nations secretaries general Kofi Annan—"Hernando de Soto is absolutely right, that we need to rethink how we capture economic growth and development"Annan, Kofi. Transcript of Press Conference By Secretary-General Kofi Annan at International Labour Organization, Geneva, 16 July 2001—and Javier Pérez de Cuéllar—"A crucial contribution. A new proposal for change that is valid for the whole world."Transworld Publishers

Prizes

Among the prizes he has received are:

World Justice Project

Hernando de Soto serves as an honorary co-chair for the World Justice Project. The World Justice Project works to lead a global, multidisciplinary effort to strengthen the rule of law for the development of communities of opportunity and equity.

Criticism and responses

De Soto has been criticized by some academics for methodological and analytical reasons, while some activists have criticized de Soto for being a representative figure of the movement for prioritizing property rights.
In his 'Planet of Slums'Mike Davis, Planet of Slums, Verso, 2006 pp.79–82 Mike Davis argues that de Soto, who Davis calls 'the global guru of neo-liberal populism', is essentially promoting what the statist left in South America and India has always promoted – individual land titling. Davis argues that titling is incorporation into the formal economy of cities which benefits more wealthy squatters but is disastrous for poorer squatters, and especially tenants who simply cannot afford incorporation into the fully commodified formal economy.
Grassroots controlled and directed shack dwellers movements like Abahlali baseMjondolo in South Africa and the Homeless Workers' Movement (Movimento dos Trabalhadores Sem Teto - MTST)MTST – Movimento dos Trabalhadores Sem TetoBrazil's Landless Workers Movement in Brazil have strenuously argued against individual titling and for communal and democratic systems of collective land tenure because this offers protection to the poorest and prevents 'downward raiding' in which richer people displace squatters once their neighborhoods are formalized.
An article by Madeleine Bunting for The Guardian (UK) claimed that de Soto's suggestions would in some circumstances cause more harm than benefit, and referred to The Mystery of Capital as "an elaborate smokescreen"  used to obscure the issue of the power of the globalized elite. She cited de Soto's employment history as evidence of his bias in favor of the powerful. In response, de Soto told Gravois that this proximity to power would help de Soto educate the elites about poverty. Ivan Osorio of the Competitive Enterprise Institute has refuted Gravois's allegations pointing out how Gravois has misinterpreted many of de Soto's recommendations. Will the Real Hernando de Soto Please Stand Up?, originally published as Osorio Op-ed in Tech Central Station, February 2, 2005
Robert J. Samuelson has argued against what he sees as de Soto's "single bullet" approach and has argued for a greater emphasis on culture and how local conditions affect people's perceptions of their opportunities. "The Spirit of Capitalism", Foreign Affairs. January/February 2001. The risk that titling will undermine customary forms of tenure and insufficiently protect the rights of land users that depend on the commons, as well as the fear that titling schemes may lead to further reconcentration of land ownership unless strong support is provided to smallholders, has also led the UN Special Rapporteur on the right to food, Olivier De Schutter, to question the insistence on titling as a means to protect security of tenure : while security of tenure matters, he stated in a report to the UN General Assembly presented in October 2010, this should be achieved by registering the rights of landusers and by the adoption of anti-eviction and tenancy laws, rather than by promoting the creation of a market for land rights that could in fact lead to depriving the poor, priced out from such markets, of access to land.
In the World Development journal, a 1990 article by R. G. Rossini and J. J. Thomas of the London School of Economics questioned the statistical basis of de Soto's claims about the size of the informal economy in his first book The Other Path. G. and J. J. Thomas. "The size of the informal sector in Peru: A critical comment on Hernando de Soto's El Otro Sendero", in World Development, Volume 18, Issue 1, January 1990, Pages 125–135. However, the ILD pointed out, in the same journal, that Rossini and Thomas' observations "neither addressed the central theme of the book, nor it address the main body of quantitative evidence displayed to substantiate the importance of economic and legal barriers that give rise to informal activities. Instead, focused exclusively on four empirical estimates that the book mentioned only in passing". "A reply", in World Development, Volume 18, Issue 1, January 1990, Pages 137–145.
In the Journal of Economic Literature, Christopher Woodruff of the University of California, San Diego criticized de Soto for overestimating the amount of wealth that land titling now informally owned property could unlock, and argues that "de Soto's own experience in Peru suggests that land titling by itself is not likely to have much effect. Titling must be followed by a series of politically challenging steps. Improving the efficiency of judicial systems, rewriting bankruptcy codes, restructuring financial market regulations, and similar reforms will involve much more difficult choices by policymakers.
"Woodruff, Christopher. Review: Review of de Soto's "The Mystery of Capital", Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 39, No. 4 (Dec., 2001), pp. 1215–1223Clift, Jeremy. "People in Economics: Hernando de Soto" – Finance & Development – December 2003.
This criticism is viewed by some to misjudge de Soto's official opinion. His book Mystery of Capital devotes the majority of its contents to the theory that legal reform is by far the most significant element of property reform.
Roy Culpepper notes that it is often very difficult to establish who owns what among the poor. He also notes that the titling is biased against those who are completely landless and propertyless.
Alan Gilbert finds that in Bogotá, for example, giving legal titles has not created a better housing market or better supply of credit for the poor.
Legal scholar Jonathan Manders has argued that de Soto's vision of property rights reform is the correct one, but that the sequencing of proposed reforms will affect their sustainability over the long term. Sequencing Property Rights in the Context of Development: A Critique of the Writings of Hernando De Soto, 37 CORNELL INT'L L.J. 177 (2004).
Empirical studies by Argentine economists Sebastian Galiani and Ernesto Schargrodsky have taken issue with de Soto's link between titling and the increase in credit to the poor, but have also pointed out that families with titles "substantially increased housing investment, reduced household size, and improved the education of their children relative to the control group". Property Rights for the Poor: Effects of Land Titling – Ronald Coase Institute, Working Paper Series, revised January 2009,  A study commissioned by DFID, an agency of the U.K. government, further summarized many of the complications arising from implementing de Soto's policy recommendations when insufficient attention is paid to the local social context. Land: Changing Contexts, Changing Relationships, Changing Rights (for DFID's Urban-Rural Change Team) September 2005
There are many explanations regarding how and what in capitalism causes growth, according to de Soto. In an interview with The Economist, he emphasizes the primary role of institutions, and points to successful examples of now-developed countries that reformed their legal system in defense of his property rights-oriented policy recommendations. De Soto's conclusions have inspired other work on microcredit, and the importance of property and business rights. For instance, the World Bank's popular "Doing Business" series (launched in 2004) that provides data for over 175 countries worldwide on opening and closing businesses, obtaining credit, labor laws, and fulfilling contract and property rights, was inspired by the ILD's work in Peru and elsewhere.Home – Doing Business – The World Bank Group
De Soto himself has often pointed out that his critics mistakenly claim that he advocates land titling by itself as sufficient for effective development: For example, in the ILD's new brochure he is quoted as saying, "The ILD is not just about titling. What we do is help Governments build a system of public memory that legally identifies all their people, their assets, their business records and their transactions in such a way that they can unleash their economic potential. No economy can develop and prosper without the benefits that clearly registered public documents bestow."Institute for Liberty and Democracy, The ILD's war against exclusion, p.21. 2009
In 2011, de Soto claimed that land titling helped "capture Osama Bin Laden.".De Soto: "Titling helped capture Osama Bin Laden (in Spanish)
On January 31, 2012, de Soto was fined by state intellectual property rights organization INDECOPI for not including the term "coordinator" in addition to his role as author of the The Other Path.

Publications

Books

De Soto has published two books about economic development: The Other Path: The Invisible Revolution in the Third World in 1986 in Spanish (with a new edition in 2002 titled The Other Path, The Economic Answer to Terrorism) and in 2000, The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails Everywhere Else. Both books have been international bestsellers, translated into some 30 languages.
The original Spanish-language title of The Other Path is El Otro Sendero, an allusion to de Soto's alternative proposals for development in Peru, countering the attempts of the "Shining Path" ("Sendero Luminoso") to win the support of Peru's poor. Based on five years worth of ILD research into the causes of massive informality and legal exclusion in Peru, the book was also a direct intellectual challenge to the Shining Path, offering to the poor of Peru not the violent overthrow of the system but "the other path" out of poverty, through legal reform. In response, the Senderistas added de Soto to their assassination list, In July 1992, the terrorists sent a second car bomb into ILD headquarters in Lima, killing 3 and wounding 19.
In addition, he has written, with Francis Cheneval, Swiss Human Rights Book Volume 1: Realizing Property Rights, published in 2006 – a collection of papers presented at an international symposium in Switzerland in 2006 on the urgency of property rights in impoverished countries for small business owners, women, and other fragile human groups, such as the poor and political refugees. The book includes a paper on the ILD's work in Tanzania delivered by Hernando de Soto. Swiss Human Rights Book Volume 1: Realizing Property Rights, 2006.

Articles

Over the years, De Soto has also published a number of articles on the importance of inclusive property and business rights, legally empowering the poor, and the causes of the global financial crisis of 2008–09 in leading newspapers and magazines around the world. In 2001, Time magazine published "The Secret of Non-Success,"De Soto, Hernando. "The Secret of Non-Success", Time magazine, 16 April 2001 – published in New horizons for foreign direct investment, Issue 548 – Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development,Global Forum on International Investment the New York Times ran his post-September 11 op-ed essay "The Constituency of Terror,"De Soto, Hernando. "The Constituency of Terror", The New York Times, 15 October 2001. and the IMF's Finance & Development magazine published "The Mystery of Capital", a condensed version of the third chapter of his eponymous book. "The Mystery of Capital", in Finance & Development, March 2001 In 2007, Time magazine published "Giving the Poor their Rights", an article written with former Secretary of State, Madeleine Albright, on the legal empowerment of the poor. In 2009, Newsweek International published his essay on the financial crisis, "Toxic Paper"De Soto, Hernando. "Toxic Paper", Newsweek, 21 Feb. 2009. – along with an on-line interview with him, "Slumdogs and Millionaires."Sheridan, Barrett . "Slumdogs vs. Millionaires", Newsweek, 20 Feb. 2009. That was soon followed by two more articles on the crisis, in the Wall Street Journal ("Toxic Assets Were Hidden Assets")De Soto, Hernando. "Toxic Assets Were Hidden Assets", The Wall Street Journal, 25 March 2009 and The Los Angeles Times ("Global Meltdown Rule #1: Do the Math"). "Global Meltdown Rule No. 1: Do the math", Los Angeles Times, 12 April 2009 Versions of these articles also appeared in newspapers in France, Switzerland, Germany and Latin America. In 2011, Bloomberg published "The Destruction of Economic Facts",De Soto, Hernando. "The Destruction of Economic Facts", Bloomberg Businessweek, 28 April 2011 and The Washington Post recently ran "The cost of financial ignorance".  "The cost of financial ignorance", The Washington Post, 7 October 2011 When protests began in Cairo at the beginning of 2011, The Wall Street Journal published De Soto's "Egypt's Economic Apartheid",De Soto, Hernando. "Egypt's Economic Apartheid", The Wall Street Journal, 3 February 2011 and Financial Times later published "The free-market secret of the Arab Revolution". "The free-market secret of the Arab Revolution", Financial Times, 8 November 2011








