[[Methotrexate]]

CATEGORIES: Mammalian dihydrofolate reductase inhibitors, Immunosuppressants, Antirheumatic products, Antifolates, Benzamides, IARC Group 3 carcinogens, Requests for audio pronunciation (English)

Methotrexate (INN, AAN, BAN and USAN) [ref]
[/ref]
It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines, a list of the most important medication needed in a basic health system.

Medical uses

Chemotherapy

Methotrexate was originally developed and continues to be used for chemotherapy either alone or in combination with other agents. It is effective for the treatment of a number of cancers including: breast, head and neck, leukemia, lymphoma, lung, osteosarcoma, bladder, and trophoblastic neoplasms.

Autoimmune disorders

It is used as a treatment for some autoimmune diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis, Juvenile dermatomyositis, psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, lupus, sarcoidosis, Crohn's disease (although a recent review has raised the point that it is fairly underused in Crohn's disease It has also been used for multiple sclerosis but is not approved by the Food and Drug Administration.

Abortion

Methotrexate is commonly used (generally in combination with misoprostol) to terminate pregnancies during the early stages (i.e., as an abortifacient). It is also used to treat ectopic pregnancies.

Administration

It can be taken orally or administered by injection (intramuscular, intravenous, subcutaneous,  or intrathecal). Oral doses are taken weekly not daily. Routine monitoring of the complete blood count, liver function tests, and creatinine are recommended. Measurements of creatinine are recommended at least every 2 months.

Adverse effects

The most common adverse effects include: ulcerative stomatitis, low white blood cell count and thus predisposition to infection, nausea, abdominal pain, fatigue, fever, dizziness, acute pneumonitis, rarely pulmonary fibrosis and kidney failure.
Central nervous system reactions to methotrexate have been reported, especially when given via the intrathecal route which include myelopathies and leucoencephalopathies. It has a variety of cutaneous side effects,  particularly when administered in high doses.

Drug interactions

Penicillins may decrease the elimination of methotrexate and thus increase the risk of toxicity. While they may be used together increased monitoring is recommended. The aminoglycosides, neomycin and paromomycin, have been found to reduce GI absorption of methotrexate. Probenecid inhibits methotrexate excretion, which increases the risk of methotrexate toxicity. Likewise retinoids and trimethoprim have been known to interact with methotrexate to produce additive hepatotoxicity and haematotoxicity, respectively. Other immunosuppressants like ciclosporin may potentiate methotrexate's haematologic effects, hence potentially leading to toxicity. NSAIDs have also been found to fatally interact with methotrexate in numerous case reports. Nitrous oxide potentiating the haematological toxicity of methotrexate has also been documented. Proton-pump inhibitors like omeprazole and the anticonvulsant, valproate, have been found to increase the plasma concentrations of methotrexate, as have nephrotoxic agents such as cisplatin, the GI drug, colestyramine and dantrolene. Caffeine may antagonise the effects methotrexate on rheumatoid arthritis by antagonising the receptors for adenosine.

Mechanism of action

Methotrexate is thought to affect cancer and rheumatoid arthritis by two different pathways.  For cancer, methotrexate competitively inhibits dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR), an enzyme that participates in the tetrahydrofolate synthesis. The affinity of methotrexate for DHFR is about one thousand-fold that of folate. DHFR catalyses the conversion of dihydrofolate to the active tetrahydrofolate. Folic acid is needed for the de novo synthesis of the nucleoside thymidine, required for DNA synthesis. Also, folate is needed for purine base synthesis, so all purine synthesis will be inhibited. Methotrexate, therefore, inhibits the synthesis of DNA, RNA, thymidylates, and proteins.
For the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, inhibition of DHFR is not thought to be the main mechanism, but rather multiple mechanisms appear to be involved including: the inhibition of enzymes involved in purine metabolism, leading to accumulation of adenosine; inhibition of T cell activation and suppression of intercellular adhesion molecule expression by T cells; increasing CD95 sensitivity of activated T cells; inhibition of methyltransferase activity, leading to (de)-activation of enzyme activity relevant to immune system function.

History

In 1947, a team of researchers led by Sidney Farber showed aminopterin, a chemical analogue of folic acid developed by Yellapragada Subbarow of Lederle, could induce remission in children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. The development of folic acid analogues had been prompted by the discovery that the administration of folic acid worsened leukemia, and that a diet deficient in folic acid could, conversely, produce improvement; the mechanism of action behind these effects was still unknown at the time.
Other analogues of folic acid were in development, and by 1950, methotrexate (then known as amethopterin) was being proposed as a treatment for leukemia. Animal studies published in 1956 showed the therapeutic index of methotrexate was better than that of aminopterin, and clinical use of aminopterin was thus abandoned in favor of methotrexate.
In 1951, Jane C. Wright demonstrated the use of methotrexate in solid tumors, showing remission in breast cancer.






