[[Lyra]]

CATEGORIES: Lyra (constellation), Constellations, Northern constellations, Constellations listed by Ptolemy

Lyra (; Latin for lyre, from Greek λύρα)Lesley Brown: The New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary. Vol. 1: A−M. Clarendon Press, Oxford 1993, p. 1651 is a small constellation. It is one of 48 listed by the 2nd century astronomer Ptolemy, and is one of the 88 constellations recognized by the International Astronomical Union. Its principal star, Vega (Abhijit in Sanskrit), a corner of the Summer Triangle, is one of the brightest stars in the sky. Beginning at the north, Lyra is bordered by Draco, Hercules, Vulpecula, and Cygnus.
Lyra is visible from the northern hemisphere from spring through autumn, and nearly overhead, in temperate latitudes, during the summer months. From the southern hemisphere, it is visible low in the northern sky during the winter months.

Notable features

Stars

Lyra's brightest stars include the following:Autostar Suite Astronomer Edition. CD-ROM. Meade, April 2006.

Deep-sky objects

M57, also known as the "Ring Nebula" and NGC 6720,
Kuiper 90 is also known as 17 Lyrae C (Gliese 747AB), a red dwarf system near 17 Lyrae, but 26 light years from the Sun. Its period is 5 years, and its magnitude is 11.26 in the V band.
BD +36 3317  a white star in the young open cluster Stephenson 1, was discovered as a binary eclipsing system by Violat-Bordonau in 2008; its period is 4.30216 days; its other name is VSX J185422.2+365107.
NGC 6745 is an irregular spiral galaxy in Lyra that is at a distance of 208 million light-years. Several million years ago, it collided with a smaller galaxy, which created a region filled with young, hot, blue stars. Astronomers do not know if the collision was simply a glancing blow or a prelude to a full-on merger, which would end with the two galaxies incorporated into one larger, probably elliptical galaxy.

Exoplanets

Exoplanets including WASP-3b, HAT-P-5b, GJ 758 b and c, HD 178911 Bb, HD 177830 b, TrES-1, and HD 173416 b have been discovered in Lyra. In January 2010 the Kepler Mission announced the discovery of the additional planets Kepler-7b, Kepler-8b, and three planets around Kepler-9 are expected to be the first of many discovered by the mission, which has a significant part of its field of view in Lyra.
In April 2013, it was announced that of the five planets orbiting Kepler-62, at least two -- Kepler-62e and Kepler-62f—are within the boundaries of the habitable zone of that star, where scientists think liquid water could exist, and are both candidates for being a solid, rocky, earth-like planet. The exoplanets are 1.6 and 1.4 times the diameter of Earth respectively, with their star Kepler-62 at a distance of 1,200 light-years.

History

In the past, Lyra was often represented on star maps as a vulture or an eagle carrying a lyre, either enclosed in its wings, or in its beak. It was sometimes referred to as Aquila Cadens or Vultur Cadens (falling eagle or falling vulture).[ref]
</ref> This historical association is preserved in the name of its brightest star, Vega, which is derived from an Arabic term meaning "swooping eagle." <ref>Ian Ridpath (2002) Stars and Planets, p. 108 [ISBN 0-7894-8988-0].</ref>

Mythology

In Greek mythology, Lyra was associated with the myth of Orpheus, the musician who was killed by the Bacchantes. After his death, his lyre was thrown into the river; Zeus sent an eagle to retrieve the lyre, and ordered both of them to be placed in the sky. In Wales, Lyra is known as King Arthur's Harp (Talyn Arthur), and King David's harp  The Persian Hafiz called it the Lyre of Zurah.uchicago.html 
It has been called the Manger of the Infant Saviour, Praesepe Salvatoris 
In Japan, Vega is sometimes called Tanabata (or Orihime), a celestial princess or goddess. She falls in love with a mortal, Kengyu (or Hikoboshi), represented by the star Altair. But when Tanabata's father finds out, he is enraged and forbids her to see this mere mortal. Thus the two lovers are placed in the sky, where they are separated by the Celestial River, known to us as Milky Way. Yet the sky gods are kind. Each year, on the 7th night of the 7th moon, a bridge of magpies forms across the Celestial River, and the two lovers are reunited. Sometimes Kengyu's annual trip across the Celestial River is treacherous, though, and he doesn't make it. In that case, Tanabata's tears form raindrops that fall over Japan.
Many Japanese celebrations of Tanabata are held in July, but sometimes they are held in August. If it rains, the raindrops are thought to be Tanabata's tears because Kengyu could not meet her. Sometimes the meteors of the Perseid shower are said to be Tanabata's tears.


Equivalents in other astronomical systems

Vega and its surrounding stars are also treated as a constellation in other cultures.
In Australian Aboriginal astronomy, Lyra is known by the Boorong people in Victoria as the Malleefowl constellation.[ref]
 </ref>
Lyra was known as Urcuchillay by the Incas and was worshipped as an animal deity.

In History

In popular culture

Namesakes

USS Lyra (AK-101) was a United States Navy Crater-class cargo ship named after the constellation.

Citations


