[[Space Patrol (1950 TV series)]]

CATEGORIES: American radio drama, 1950s American television series, American science fiction television series, Live television programs, Science fiction radio programs, Solar System in fiction, 1950s American radio programs, Television series set in the future, Space adventure television series

Space Patrol is a science fiction adventure series that was originally aimed at juvenile audiences of the early 1950s via television, radio, and comic books.Bassior, Jean-Noel. Space Patrol – Missions of Daring in the Name of Early Television. Jefferson, North Carolina USA: McFarland & Company, Incorporated, 2005. ISBN 0-7864-1911-3 pp. 238–242

Broadcasting background

The Space Patrol television show began broadcasting March 9, 1950, starting as a daily 15-minute show on a local Los Angeles station. However, on December 30, 1950, the American Broadcasting Company (ABC) added the show as a new half-hour program to its Saturday schedule. It became an overnight sensation such that the new weekly show broadcast and the 15-minute shows continued daily on a local basis, and was seen via kinescope in other cities.S. experimental 3D television broadcast on April 29 in Los Angeles on ABC affiliate KECA-TV.com
The series also made history by being the first regular live West Coast morning network program beamed to the East Coast.Space Patrol Memories Space Patrol
The ABC television Space Patrol broadcasts became one of the nation's first mass media phenomena, such that it was quickly moved to an ABC radio series of the same name. The radio program was popular and ran from September 18, 1950 until March 19, 1955 producing approximately 129 thirty-minute episodes.spacemensluck.html
The televised Space Patrol aired continuously until July 2, 1954; after a short break, it reappeared on September 4, 1954, before finally disappearing from the air on February 26, 1955. 210 half-hour shows and close to 900 15-minute shows were made over Space Patrol's 5-year run. In addition, around 129 thirty-minute radio shows were produced. Space Patrol – Missions of Daring in the Name of Early Television. Jefferson, North Carolina USA: McFarland & Company, Incorporated, 2005. ISBN 0-7864-1911-3 pp. 1–15Space Patrol History

Premise

The stories followed the 30th-century adventures of Commander-in-Chief Buzz Corry (Ed Kemmer) of the United Planets Space Patrol and his young sidekick Cadet Happy (Lyn Osborn), as they faced nefarious interplanetary villains with diabolical schemes. Not surprisingly for the time, some of these villains had Russian- or German-sounding accents. Cmdr. Corry and his allies were aided by such nifty sci-fi gadgets as ray guns, "miniature space-o-phones" and "atomolights." Most episodes carried such pulp-magazine titles as "Revolt of the Space Rats" and "The Menace of Planet X." Originally, the Space Patrol's purpose was that of "clearing the space lanes" but gradually evolved into an intergalactic space police and military force charged with keeping the peace. Later day comparisons between the much earlier 1950s Space Patrol and the later years' Star Trek film and television series are inevitable.
The show played directly to children but attracted a sizable adult audience. Many episodes merchandised various toys and mail-order premiums tied into the series during their commercial breaks. Many of the ads for corporate sponsor Ralston-Purina's Chex cereals used the show's space opera motif in their pitches. A unique feature of the TV and radio adventures was that the premium of the month was often worked intricately into the action of the live adventures. This permitted young viewers to feel that they were participating in the radio or televised adventures. Space Patrol – Missions of Daring in the Name of Early Television. Jefferson, North Carolina USA: McFarland & Company, Incorporated, 2005. ISBN 0-7864-1911-3 pp. 238–242Jarris, Judy, A Space Patrol Reminiscence Space Patrol's most remembered premium was a "Name the Planet" Contest wherein the winner was awarded the program's Terra IV Space Ship.  One of the many commercial Name the Planet commercials may be viewed at Name the Planet Commercial.
Perhaps the cleverest outcome of the program's advertising was their sponsorship of a Space Patrol club, in which viewers could become members. Continuing merchandise and program tie-ins perpetuated the connection producing such a sizable following that many of the nation's magazines chronicled the phenomenon.Time Magazine: Interplanetary CopSwapsale: Space Patrol at Life Magazine
Many, but not all, of the 30-minute TV episodes are currently available in various video formats.

The Radio Series

The success of the TV show spawned an almost instant radio version, which ran from 4 October 1952 to 19 March 1955 producing approximately 129 episodes.spacemensluck.html The same cast of actors performed on both shows. The writers, scripts, adventures and director had some crossover between the radio and TV incarnations however; the radio broadcasts were not limited by the studio sets and became more expansive in scope and story than the television versions. Space Patrol – Missions of Daring in the Name of Early Television. Jefferson, North Carolina USA: McFarland & Company, Incorporated, 2005. ISBN 0-7864-1911-3 pp. 215–225 Although there was seldom any deliberate crossing-over of storylines, some of the television villains regularly appeared on the radio (notably Prince Bacarratti), and during the Planet X story both the TV and radio versions explored the rogue planet's invasion of the Space Patrol universe.
While the radio series lacked the adult sophistication of sci-fi shows such as the later day X Minus One, it was enjoyed as a Golden Age space opera popularized in the 1930s, the days of science fiction's infancy, by pioneering magazine editor Hugo Gernsback and it is prized by "Old Time Radio" collectors today as one of radio's most enjoyable and fascinating adventures. Unfortunately only around 117 of the original broadcasts survive. 97 are on the OTR site Space Patrol OTR.

Production

Space Patrol was the first West Coast morning network program broadcast to the East Coast via a massive network of cable and electronic interchanges. The program was televised from the original soundstage where the Lon Chaney motion picture, Phantom of the Opera had been filmed. While other televised science fiction programs such as Captain Video and Tom Corbett, Space Cadet had continually dwindling sets, Space Patrol sets grew larger and larger. 1-3, Los Angeles 1966, 1976, 1977, self-published.  (Ms. Linke was Nina Bara, who portrayed Tonga a regularly appearing character during the early episodes of Space Patrol)  The Studio had catwalks high above the stage that were utilized for many of the scenes, especially those requiring large castle-like sets. Likewise, cast members could be suspended in "space" outside their spacecraft without the problems of studio cramping.
Space Patrol's creator was William "Mike" Moser, a United States Naval Aviator World War II veteran. In frequent interviews such as one given to Time Magazine in March 1952, Moser stated that he developed the series idea while flying across the Pacific. He was determined to create a children's television program that was as exciting to them as Buck Rogers and Flash Gordon had been to him during his youth. They bought the concept and Space Patrol began airing in March 1950.The Space Patrol Story
Glen Denning was originally cast in the lead as Commander-in-Chief Kit Corry and comedian Lyn Osborn as the youthful sidekick Cadet Happy. Denning had continual problems remembering lines and delivering them and was replaced. Osborn, like Kemmer, studied at the Playhouse and had introduced Kemmer to Mike Moser. Kemmer's seriousness and military bearing brought a maturity to the role that helped to increase the popularity of the series.Space Patrol History
Both the 30-minute and 15-minute programs were performed and broadcast live. If a line was flubbed or an accident happened, the actors recovered as quickly as possible and soldiered on. The pressure of memorizing lines for a new live 15-minute show every day was onerous enough, but became even more burdensome when the 30-minute weekly show was added. The actors' tasks were increasingly difficult because they faced the complexity of coordinating their on-camera movements with intricate special effects,Ed Kemmer Interview which also had to be created live and in real-time. For example, pistols that shot invisible rays necessitated pre-positioning small electrically wired explosive charges on the surface they were supposed to strike. An actor would aim the prop ray gun at that location and squeeze the trigger, whereupon a special effects worker off-scene would throw the detonation switch.
A practical videotape system was not available until after Space Patrol's run, so for distribution to distant stations the image on a small, bright TV monitor was filmed using a motion picture camera with a specially modified and synchronized shutter mechanism, creating kinescope recordings on 16 mm or 35 mm film. Most of the Saturday half-hour TV broadcasts survived in this form and so are still available today. The 15-minutes-every-weekday version of the program was at first seen mainly in the Los Angeles broadcast area, but was later also seen nationwide by syndication via kinescope films. Space Patrol – Missions of Daring in the Name of Early Television. Jefferson, North Carolina USA: McFarland & Company, Incorporated, 2005. ISBN 0-7864-1911-3 pp. 1–3Ed Kemmer Interview

Cast

Regular Series Cast
Cast with Recurring Roles
Space Patrol hired many actors who later became well known in their own right. The included such personalities as Ray Bolger, Gene Barry, Bill Baldwin, Lee Van Cleef, I. Stanford Jolley, Carlton Young and Ed Nelson. Space Patrol – Missions of Daring in the Name of Early Television. Jefferson, North Carolina USA: McFarland & Company, Incorporated, 2005. ISBN 0-7864-1911-3 pp. 312–325Internet Movie Database: Space Patrol The following cast members are some of those actors who appeared in multiple episodes:

Other Media

There were at least two records available in the early 1950s, featuring "prequel" situations involving Commander Corry and Cadet Happy, and starring the radio/TV cast, although the 'origin' story for Cadet Happy contradicted both the 15-minute and 30-minute TV show versions.
Columbia Gramaphone (Aust) Pty. Ltd released a 78 record in the 1950s KO1015, 'Space Patrol Adventures' No.1 of a series, "Cadet Happy Joins Commander Corry". Happy wins the Corry Scholarship and is then practically adopted by Commander Corry to train as his aide on the side of right and justice. It is based in the 31st century. Buzz Corry is played by Ed Kemmer, Cadet Happy by Lyn Osborn, Gaff Carter by Roy Engel, and Carol Carlyle by Virginia Hewitt; the narrator is Dick Tufeld, and the Control Tower voice is Norman Jolley.

Comic books and other publications

A comic book tie-in, Space Patrol, published by Ziff-Davis in 1952, ran two issues. It featured cover paintings by Norman Saunders and Clarence Doore. Bernard Krigstein illustrated the scripts by Phil Evans.  Unlike Tom Corbett, Space Cadet, Space Patrol was never featured in a daily or Sunday newspaper comic strip, nor was there a series of juvenile novels recounting Space Patrol adventures. However, in 2008, Swapsale Magazine produced an online book titled The Original Exploits of the Space Patrol written by Warren Chaney.  The book started with Chapter One and continued thereafter with periodic continuing chapters.Chaney, Warren, Mission to Pluto, Swapsale Magazine
Jean-Noel Bassior authored an extensive book in 2005 titled Space Patrol. Space Patrol — Missions of Daring in the Name of Early Television. Jefferson, North Carolina USA: McFarland & Company, Incorporated, 2005. ISBN 0-7864-1911-3 pp. 215–225 The book from McFarland & Company, Inc., Publishers was well received and created new interest in the television and radio show.The Thunder ChildSpace Patrol Book
There was a three-issue Space Patrol comic series in the early 90s which purported to be of the TV series, but whose writer and artist admitted they had never seen the show. This adaptation suffered greatly because of this.Space Patrol Issue One, Author's Notes

Recent Space Patrol Activity

Actor Ed Kemmer attended many of the important film festivals during the late 90s and early 2000s and discovered a renewed Space Patrol popularity that continued up until the time of his death in 2004. This stimulated new interest and in turn, production of new publications and merchandise for Space Patrol fans.





Listen to




