[[Self-organization]]

CATEGORIES: Cybernetics, Self-organization, Sociocultural evolution, Systems theory, Concepts in physics

Self-organization is a process where some form of global order or coordination arises out of the local interactions between the components of an initially disordered system. This process is spontaneous: it is not directed or controlled by any agent or subsystem inside or outside of the system; however, the laws followed by the process and its initial conditions may have been chosen or caused by an agent. It is often triggered by random fluctuations that are amplified by positive feedback. The resulting organization is wholly decentralized or  distributed over all the components of the system. As such it is typically very robust and able to survive and self-repair substantial damage or perturbations. In chaos theory it is discussed in terms of islands of predictability in a sea of chaotic unpredictability.
Self-organization occurs in a variety of physical, chemical, biological, social and cognitive systems. Common examples are crystallization, the emergence of convection patterns in a liquid heated from below, chemical oscillators, swarming in groups of animals, and the way neural networks learn to recognize complex patterns.



The most robust and unambiguous examplesGlansdorff, P., Prigogine, I. (1971). Thermodynamic Theory of Structure, Stability and Fluctuations, Wiley-Interscience, London. ISBN 0-471-30280-5 of self-organizing systems are from the physics of non-equilibrium processes. Self-organization is also relevant in chemistry, where it has often been taken as being synonymous with self-assembly. The concept of self-organization is central to the description of biological systems, from the subcellular to the ecosystem level. There are also cited examples of "self-organizing" behaviour found in the literature of many other disciplines, both in the natural sciences and the social sciences such as economics or anthropology. Self-organization has also been observed in mathematical systems such as cellular automata.
Sometimes the notion of self-organization is conflated with that of the related concept of emergence, because "the order from chaos, presented by Self-Organizing models, is often interpreted in terms of emergence". Self-organization and Emergence in Life Sciences. pp. 1. Properly defined, however, there may be instances of self-organization without emergence and emergence without self-organization, and it is clear from the literature that the phenomena are not the same. The link between emergence and self-organization remains an active research question.
Self-organization usually relies on three basic ingredients:Eric. Bonabeau, Marco Dorigo, and Guy Theraulaz (1999). Swarm intelligence: from natural to artificial systems. pp. 9–11.

Principles of self-organization

The original "principle of the self-organizing dynamic system" was formulated by the cybernetician Ashby in 1947. R. (1947). Principles of the self-organizing dynamic system. Journal of General Psychology, 37, 125–128.[ref]
Ashby, W. R. (1962). Principles of the self-organizing system. In: Principles of Self-Organization, 255–278. Retrieved from  As such it will leave behind all non-attractor states (the attractor's basin), and thus select the attractor out of all others. Once there, the further evolution of the system is constrained to remain in the attractor. This constraint on the system as a whole implies a form of mutual dependency or coordination between its subsystems or components. In Ashby's terms, each subsystem has adapted to the environment formed by all other subsystems.
The principle of "order from noise" was formulated by the cybernetician Heinz von Foerster in 1960. (1960). On self-organizing systems and their environments. Self-organizing systems (pp. 31–50). Retrieved from  This increases the chance that the system would arrive into the basin of a "strong" or "deep" attractor, from which it would then quickly enter the attractor itself. A similar principle was formulated by the thermodynamicist Ilya Prigogine as "order through fluctuations"Nicolis, G., & Prigogine, I. (1977). Self-organization in nonequilibrium systems: From dissipative structures to order through fluctuations. Wiley, New York. or "order out of chaos"., & Stengers, I. (1984). Order out of chaos: Man's new dialogue with nature. Bantam Books. It is applied in the method of simulated annealing that is used in problem solving and machine learning

History of the idea

The idea that the dynamics of a system can tend by itself to increase the inherent order of a system has a long history.  One of the earliest statements of this idea was by the philosopher Descartes, in the fifth part of his Discourse on Method, where he presents it hypothetically.  Descartes further elaborated on the idea at great length in his unpublished work The World.
The ancient atomists (among others) believed that a designing intelligence was unnecessary, arguing that given enough time and space and matter, organization was ultimately inevitable, although there would be no preferred tendency for this to happen.
What Descartes introduced was the idea that the ordinary laws of nature tend to produce organization  (For related history, see Aram Vartanian, Diderot and Descartes).
The economic concept of the "invisible hand" can be understood as an attempt to describe the influence of the market as a spontaneous order on people's actions.
Beginning with the 18th century naturalists, a movement arose that sought to understand the "universal laws of form" in order to explain the observed forms of living organisms. Because of its association with Lamarckism, their ideas fell into disrepute until the early 20th century, when pioneers such as D'Arcy Wentworth Thompson revived them. The modern understanding is that there are indeed universal laws (arising from fundamental physics and chemistry) that govern growth and form in biological systems.
Sadi Carnot and Rudolf Clausius discovered the Second Law of Thermodynamics in the 19th century. It positively states that lower entropy, sometimes understood as order, cannot arise spontaneously from higher entropy, sometimes understood as chaos, in an isolated system.
Originally, the term "self-organizing" was used by Immanuel Kant in his Critique of Judgment, where he argued that teleology is a meaningful concept only if there exists such an entity whose parts or "organs" are simultaneously ends and means. Such a system of organs must be able to behave as if it has a mind of its own, that is, it is capable of governing itself.
The term "self-organizing" was introduced to contemporary science in 1947 by the psychiatrist and engineer W. Ross Ashby.R., (1947): Principles of the Self-Organizing Dynamic System, In: Journal of General Psychology 1947. volume 37, pages 125–128 It was taken up by the cyberneticians Heinz von Foerster, Gordon Pask, Stafford Beer and Norbert Wiener himself in the second edition of his "Cybernetics: or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine" (MIT Press 1961).
Self-organization as a word and concept was used by those associated with general systems theory in the 1960s, but did not become commonplace in the scientific literature until its adoption by physicists and researchers in the field of complex systems in the 1970s and 1980s. There were 17 in the years 1971–1980; 126 in 1981–1990; and 593 in 1991–2000. After Ilya Prigogine's 1977 Nobel Prize, the thermodynamic concept of self-organization
received some attention of the public, and scientific researchers started to migrate
from the cybernetic view to the thermodynamic view.

Developing views

Other views of self-organization in physical systems interpret it as a strictly accumulative construction process, commonly displaying an "S" curve history of development.  As discussed somewhat differently by different researchers, local complex systems for exploiting energy gradients evolve from seeds of organization, through a succession of natural starting and ending phases for inverting their directions of development.  The accumulation of working processes which their exploratory parts construct as they exploit their gradient becomes the "learning", "organization" or "design" of the system as a physical artifact, such for an ecology or economy.  For example, A. Bejan's books and papers describe his approach as "Constructal Theory". 4 (2006), pp. 041301  P. F. Henshaw's work on decoding net-energy system construction processes termed "Natural Systems Theory", uses various analytical methods to quantify and map them such as System Energy AssessmentHenshaw, King & Zarnikau 2011 System Energy Assessment (SEA), Defining a Standard Measure of EROI for Energy Businesses as Whole Systems, Sustainability 2011, 3(10), 1908–1943;  for taking true quantitative measures of whole complex energy using systems, and for anticipating their successions, such as Models Learning ChangeP. F. Henshaw 2010 Models Learning Change, Cosmos and History, Vol 6, No 1(2010) to permit adapting models to their emerging inverted designs.
G. Y. Georgiev's work is utilizing the principle of least (stationary) action in Physics, to define organization of a complex system as the state of the constraints determining the total action of the elements in a system. Organization is then defined numerically as the reciprocal of the average action per one element and one edge crossing, if the system is described as a network. The elementary quantum of action, Planck's constant, is used to make the measure dimensionless and to define it as inversely proportional to the number of quanta of action expended by the elements for one edge crossing. The mechanism of self-organization is the interaction between the elements and the constrains, which leads to constraint minimization. This is consistent with the Gauss' principle of least constraint. More elements minimize the constraints faster, another aspect of the mechanism, which is through quantity accumulation. As a result, the paths of the elements are straightened, which is consistent with Hertz's principle of least curvature. The state of a system with least average sum of actions of its elements is defined as its attractor. In open systems, where there is constant inflow and outflow of energy and elements, this final state is never reached, but the system always tends toward it. This method can help describe, quantify, manage, design and predict future behavior of complex systems, to achieve the highest rates of self-organization to improve their quality, which is the numerical value of their organization. It can be applied to complex systems in physics, chemistry, biology, ecology, economics, cities, network theory and others, where they are present.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/1203/1203.6681. A. Kuipers and P. E. Heegaard (Eds.): IFIP International Federation for Information Processing, Proceedings of the Sixth International Workshop on Self-Organizing Systems (IWSOS 2012), pp. 90–95, Springer-Verlag (2012).org/ftp/arxiv/papers/1004/1004.3518. 371–380 (2002)

Examples

The following list summarizes and classifies the instances of self-organization found in different disciplines. As the list grows, it becomes increasingly difficult to determine whether these phenomena are all fundamentally the same process, or the same label applied to several different processes. Self-organization, despite its intuitive simplicity as a concept, has proven notoriously difficult to define and pin down formally or mathematically, and it is entirely possible that any precise definition might not include all the phenomena to which the label has been applied.
The farther a phenomenon is removed from physics, the more controversial the idea of self-organization as understood by physicists becomes. Also, even when self-organization is clearly present, attempts at explaining it through physics or statistics are usually criticized as reductionistic.
Similarly, when ideas about self-organization originate in, say, biology or social science, the farther one tries to take the concept into chemistry, physics or mathematics, the more resistance is encountered, usually on the grounds that it implies direction in fundamental physical processes. However the tendency of hot bodies to get cold (see Thermodynamics) and by Le Chatelier's Principle—the statistical mechanics extension of Newton's Third Law—to oppose this tendency should be noted.

Self-organization in physics

There are several broad classes of physical processes that can be described as self-organization.   Such examples from physics include:

Self-organization vs. entropy

A laser can also be characterized as a self organized system to the extent that normal states of thermal equilibrium characterized by electromagnetic energy absorption are stimulated out of equilibrium in a reverse of the absorption process.  "If the matter can be forced out of thermal equilibrium to a sufficient degree, so that the upper state has a higher population than the lower state (population inversion), then more stimulated emission than absorption occurs, leading to coherent growth (amplification or gain) of the electromagnetic wave at the transition frequency.""Lasers", Zeiger, H. J. and Kelley, P. L. The Encyclopedia of Physics, Second Edition, edited by Lerner, R. and Trigg, G., VCH Publishers, 1991.  Pp. 614–619.

Self-organization in chemistry

Self-organization in chemistry includes:

Self-organization in biology

According to Scott Camazine.. al.:
The following is an incomplete list of the diverse phenomena which have been described as self-organizing in biology.

Self-organization in mathematics and computer science

As mentioned above, phenomena from mathematics and computer science such as cellular automata, random graphs, and some instances of evolutionary computation and artificial life exhibit features of self-organization. In swarm robotics, self-organization is used to produce emergent behavior. In particular the theory of random graphs has been used as a justification for self-organization as a general principle of complex systems. In the field of multi-agent systems, understanding how to engineer systems that are capable of presenting self-organized behavior is a very active research area.

Self-organization in cybernetics

Wiener regarded the automatic serial identification of a black box and its subsequent reproduction as sufficient to meet the condition of self-organization. Recent developments in information and decision processes, Macmillan, N. Y., 1962. The importance of phase locking or the "attraction of frequencies", as he called it, is discussed in the 2nd edition of his "Cybernetics". 2nd Edition 1962 "Chapter X "Brain Waves and Self-Organizing Systems"pp 201–202. Drexler sees self-replication as a key step in nano and universal assembly.
By contrast, the four concurrently connected galvanometers of W. Ross Ashby's Homeostat hunt, when perturbed, to converge on one of many possible stable states."Design for a Brain" Chapter 5 Chapman & Hall (1952) and "An Introduction to Cybernetics" Chapman & Hall (1956) Ashby used his state counting measure of variety"An Introduction to Cybernetics" Part Two Chapman & Hall (1956) to describe stable states and produced the "Good Regulator"Conant and Ashby Int. J. Systems Sci., 1970, vol 1, No 2, pp 89–97 and in "Mechanisms of Intelligence" ed Roger Conant Intersystems Publications (1981) theorem which requires internal models for self-organized endurance and stability (e.g. Nyquist stability criterion).
Warren McCulloch proposed "Redundancy of Potential Command""Embodiments of Mind MIT Press (1965)" as characteristic of the organization of the brain and human nervous system and the necessary condition for self-organization.
Heinz von Foerster proposed Redundancy, R = 1 − H/Hmax, where H is entropy."A Predictive Model for Self-Organizing Systems", Part I: Cybernetica 3, pp. 258–300; Part II: Cybernetica 4, pp. 20–55, 1961 with Gordon Pask. In essence this states that unused potential communication bandwidth is a measure of self-organization.
In the 1970s Stafford Beer considered this condition as necessary for autonomy which identifies self-organization in persisting and living systems. Using Variety analyses he applied his neurophysiologically derived recursive Viable System Model to management. It consists of five parts: the monitoring of performance"Brain of the Firm" Alan Lane (1972) see also Viable System Model also in "Beyond Dispute " Wiley Stafford Beer 1994 "Redundancy of Potential Command" pp 157–158. of the survival processes (1), their management by recursive application of regulation (2), homeostatic operational control (3) and development (4) which produce maintenance of identity (5) under environmental perturbation. Focus is prioritized by an alerting "algedonic loop" feedback:see "Brain.." and "Beyond Dispute" a sensitivity to both pain and pleasure produced from under-performance or over-performance relative to a standard capability.
In the 1990s Gordon Pask pointed out von Foerster's H and Hmax were not independent and interacted via countably infinite recursive concurrent spin processes* 1996, Heinz von Foerster's Self-Organisation, the Progenitor of Conversation and Interaction Theories, Systems Research (1996) 13, 3, pp. 349–362 (he favoured the Bohm interpretation) which he called concepts (liberally defined in any medium, "productive and, incidentally reproductive"). His strict definition of concept "a procedure to bring about a relation"Conversation, Cognition and Learning Elesevier (1976) see Glossary. permitted his theorem "Like concepts repel, unlike concepts attract""On Gordon Pask" Nick Green in "Gordon Pask remembered and celebrated: Part I" Kybernetes 30, 5/6, 2001 p 676 (a.k.a. Pask's self-described "Last Theorem") to state a general spin based Principle of Self-organization. His edict, an exclusion principle, "There are No Doppelgangers"proof para. 188 Pask (1992) and postulates 15–18 in Pask (1996) means no two concepts can be the same (all interactions occur with different perspectives making time incommensurable for actors). This means, after sufficient duration as differences assert, all concepts will attract and coalesce as pink noise and entropy increases (and see Big Crunch, self-organized criticality). The theory is applicable to all organizationally closed or homeostatic processes that produce enduring and coherent products (where spins have a fixed average phase relationship and also in the sense of Rescher Coherence Theory of Truth with the proviso that the sets and their members exert repulsive forces at their boundaries) through interactions: evolving, learning and adapting.
Pask's Interactions of Actors "hard carapace" model is reflected in some of the ideas of emergence and coherence. It requires a knot emergence topology that produces radiation during interaction with a unit cell that has a prismatic tensegrity structure. Laughlin's  contribution to emergence reflects some of these constraints.

Self-organization in Algorithms

Many optimization algorithms can be considered as a self-organization system because the aim of the optimization is to find the optimal solution to a problem.
If the solution is considered as a state of the iterative system, the optimal solution is essentially the selected, converged state or structure of the system, driven by the algorithm based on the system landscape[ref]X. S. Yang, 
S. Deb, M. Loomes, M. Karamanoglu, A framework for self-tuning optimization algorithm, Neural Computing and Applications, vol.23, no.7-8, pp. 2051-2057(2013).[/ref]X. S. Yang, Nature-Inspired Optimization Algorithms, Elsevier, (2014). In fact, one can view all optimization algorithms as a self-organization system.

Self-organization in networks

Self-organization is an important component for a successful ability to establish networking whenever needed. Such mechanisms are also referred to as Self-organizing networks. Intensified work in the latter half of the first decade of the 21st century was mainly due to interest from the wireless communications industry. It is driven by the plug and play paradigm, and that wireless networks need to be relatively simpler to manage than they used to be.
Only certain kinds of networks are self-organizing. These are known as small-world networks, or scale-free networks. These emerge from bottom-up interactions, and appear to be limitless in size. In contrast, there are top-down hierarchical networks, which are not self-organizing. These are typical of organizations, and have severe size limits.

Self-organization in human society

The self-organizing behaviour of social animals and the self-organization of simple mathematical structures both suggest that self-organization should be expected in human society. Tell-tale signs of self-organization are usually statistical properties shared with self-organizing physical systems (see Zipf's law, power law, Pareto principle). Examples such as critical mass, herd behaviour, groupthink and others, abound in sociology, economics, behavioral finance and anthropology.nbi.
In social theory the concept of self-referentiality has been introduced as a sociological application of self-organization theory by Niklas Luhmann (1984). For Luhmann the elements of a social system are self-producing communications, i.e. a communication produces further communications and hence a social system can reproduce itself as long as there is dynamic communication. For Luhmann human beings are sensors in the environment of the system.{p410 Social System 1995} Luhmann developed an evolutionary theory of Society and its subsytems, using functional analyses and systems theory. {Social Systems 1995}.
Self-organization in human and computer networks can give rise to a decentralized, distributed, self-healing system, protecting the security of the actors in the network by limiting the scope of knowledge of the entire system held by each individual actor.  The Underground Railroad is a good example of this sort of network. The networks that arise from drug trafficking exhibit similar self-organizing properties. The Sphere College Project seeks to apply self-organization to adult education. Parallel examples exist in the world of privacy-preserving computer networks such as Tor. In each case, the network as a whole exhibits distinctive synergistic behavior through the combination of the behaviors of individual actors in the network.  Usually the growth of such networks is fueled by an ideology or sociological force that is adhered to or shared by all participants in the network.

=In economics=

In economics, a market economy is sometimes said to be self-organizing. Paul Krugman has written on the role that market self-organization plays in the business cycle in his book "The Self Organizing Economy"."The Self Organizing Economy". 1996.  Friedrich Hayek coined the term catallaxyHayek, F. "Law, Legislation and Liberty, Volume 2: The Mirage of Social Justice". University of Chicago Press, 1976. to describe a "self-organizing system of voluntary co-operation", in regards to the spontaneous order of the free market economy. Neo-classical economists hold that imposing central planning usually makes the self-organized economic system less efficient. On the other end of the spectrum, economists consider that market failures are so significant that self-organization produces bad results and that the state should direct production and pricing. Most economists adopt an intermediate position and recommend a mixture of market economy and command economy characteristics (sometimes called a mixed economy). When applied to economics, the concept of self-organization can quickly become ideologically imbued. Marshall, The Unity of Nature, Imperial College Press, 2002

=In collective intelligence=

Non-thermodynamic concepts of entropy and self-organization have been explored by many theorists.  Cliff Joslyn and colleagues and their so-called "global brain" projects. Marvin Minsky's "Society of Mind" and the no-central editor in charge policy of the open sourced internet encyclopedia, called Wikipedia, are examples of applications of these principles – see collective intelligence.
Donella Meadows, who codified twelve leverage points that a self-organizing system could exploit to organize itself, was one of a school of theorists who saw human creativity as part of a general process of adapting human lifeways to the planet and taking humans out of conflict with natural processes.  See Gaia philosophy, deep ecology, ecology movement and Green movement for similar self-organizing ideals. (The connections between self-organisation and Gaia theory and the environmental movement are explored in A. Marshall, 2002, The Unity of Nature, Imperial College Press: London).

Self-organization in psychology and education

=Self-organised learning=

Enabling others to "learn how to learn"Rogers.C. (1969). Freedom to Learn. Merrill  is usually misconstrued as instructing themFeynman.RP. (1987)Elementary Particles and the Laws of Physics. The Dyrac 1997  Memorial Lecture. Cambridge University Press how to successfully submit to being taught. Whilst fully accepting that we can always learn from others, particularly those with more and/or different experience than ourselves; self-organised learning (SOL) repudiates any ideaIllich. I. (1971)  A Celebration of Awareness. Penguin Books. that this reduces to accepting that "the expert knows best" or that there is ever "the one best method." It offers an alternative definition of learning as "the construction of personally significant, relevant and viable meaning."
This more democratic 'bottom up' approach to learning is to be frequently tested experientiallyHarri-Augstein E.S. (2000) The University of Learning in transformation by the learner(s) as being more "meaningful, constructive and creatively effective for me or us."
Since human learning may be achieved by one person,E.F. W. (1982) The Origins and Growth of Action Learning Chartwell-Bratt, Bromley SOL is not only a more rewarding and effective way of living one's personal life; it is also applicable in any group of people living, playing and/or working together.
As many young children, pupils, students and lifelong learners eventually become ruefully aware, this 'testing out of what I have learned' needs to be carried out in each learner(s) whole process of living, and so it extends well beyond the confines of specific learning environments (home, school, university, etc.), and eventually beyond the reaches of the controllers of these environments (parents, teachers, employers, etc.)Thomas L.F.& Harri-Augstein S. (1993)  'On Becoming a Learning Organisation':  Report of a 7 year Action Research Project with the Royal Mail Business. CSHL Monograph
SOL needs to be tested, and intermittently revised, through the on-going personal experienceRogers C.R., (1971) On Becoming a Person, Constable, London of the learner(s) themselves in their ever-expanding outer and inner lives.
Whilst internal life may cease to expand, the external environment does not. If a learner allows themselves to become progressively more other-organised, they become less able to recognise and respond to varying needs for change. Unfortunately this is often the current reported experience of many during, and hence after their parenting, schooling and/or higher education.
But, this SOL way of understanding the learning process need not be restricted by either consciousness or language. & Sengers I. (1985) Order out of  Chaos Flamingo Paperbacks. London Nor is it restricted to humans, since analogous directional self-organizing (learning?) processes are reported variously within the life sciences and even within the less-living sciences, for example, of physics and chemistry: (as is clearly articulated in other sections of this 'Self-organization' Section).
Since SOL is as yet only very superficially recognised within psychology and education, it is useful to place it more firmly within the human public mind-poolCapra F (1989) Uncommon Wisdom  Flamingo  Paperbacks.  London of achievement, knowledge, experience and understanding. SOL can also be placed within a hierarchy of scientific explanatory concepts, for example:

Methodology

In many complex systems in nature, there are global phenomena that are the irreducible result of local interactions between components whose individual study would not allow us to see the global properties of the whole combined system.  Thus, a growing number of researchers think that many properties of language are not directly encoded by any of the components involved, but are the self-organized outcomes of the interactions of the components.
Building mathematical models in the context of research into language origins and the evolution of languages is enjoying growing popularity in the scientific community, because it is a crucial tool for studying the phenomena of language in relation to the complex interactions of its components.  These systems are put to two main types of use: 1) they serve to evaluate the internal coherence of verbally expressed theories already proposed by clarifying all their hypotheses and verifying that they do indeed lead to the proposed conclusions ; 2) they serve to explore and generate new theories, which themselves often appear when one simply tries to build an artificial system reproducing the verbal behavior of humans.
As it were, the construction of operational models to test proposed hypotheses in linguistics is gaining much contemporary attention. An operational model is one which defines the set of its assumptions explicitly and above all shows how to calculate their consequences, that is, to prove that they lead to a certain set of conclusions.

=In the emergence of language=

The emergence of language in the human species has been described in a game-theoretic framework based on a model of senders and receivers of information (Clark 2009,Clark 2009 following Skyrms 2004Skyrms 2004). argues that through one evolutionary step, the ability to sustain culture, the groundwork for the evolution of human language was laid.  The ability to ratchet cultural advances cumulatively allowed for the complex development of human cognition unseen in other animals.

=In language acquisition=

Within a species' ontogeny, the acquisition of language has also been shown to self-organize.  Through the ability to see others as intentional agents (theory of mind), and actions such as 'joint attention,' human children have the scaffolding they need to learn the language of those around them (Tomasello 1999).Tomasello 1999

=In articulatory phonology=

Articulatory phonology takes the approach that speech production consists of a coordinated series of gestures, called 'constellations,' which are themselves dynamical systems.  In this theory, linguistic contrast comes from the distinction between such gestural units, which can be described on a low-dimensional level in the abstract.  However, these structures are necessarily context-dependent in real-time production.  Thus the context-dependence emerges naturally from the dynamical systems themselves. This statement is controversial, however, as it suggests a universal phonetics which is not evident across languages. The realization of the perceptual contrasts by means of articulatory movements means that articulatory considerations do play a role,Lindblom, B. (1999). "Emergent phonology.", doi=10.1.1.10.9538 but these are purely secondary.

=In diachrony and synchrony=

Several mathematical models of language change rely on self-organizing or dynamical systems.  Abrams and Strogatz (2003)Abrams and Strogatz (2003) proposed a variant of this model that incorporates spatial dynamics into language contact transactions in order to describe the emergence of creoles.  Both of these models proceed from the assumption that language change, like any self-organizing system, is a large-scale act or entity (in this case the creation or death of a language, or changes in its boundaries) that emerges from many actions on a micro-level.  The microlevel in this example is the everyday production and comprehension of language by speakers in areas of language contact.

Self-organization in traffic flow

The self-organizing behaviour of drivers in traffic flow determines almost all traffic spatiotemporal phenomena observed in real traffic data like traffic breakdown at a highway bottleneck, highway capacity, the emergence of moving traffic jams, etc. Self-organization in traffic flow is extremely complex spatiotemporal dynamic process. For this reason, only in 1996–2002 spatiotemporal self-organization effects in traffic have been understood in real measured traffic data and explained by Boris Kerner's three-phase traffic theory.

Criticism

Heinz Pagels, in a balanced, but ultimately negative 1985 book review of Ilya Prigogine and Isabelle Stengers' Order Out of Chaos in Physics Today, writes:Pagels, 1985, Is the irreversibility we see a fundamental property of nature?, Physics Today, Jan 1 1985
From theology, one assertion against the idea that something can be a self-sufficient cause of its own organization is that of Thomas Aquinas,
"The body of the Article" consists of the quinque viae.





Further reading



Dissertations and theses on self-organization


