[[Gregor Gysi]]

CATEGORIES: 1948 births, German people of Jewish descent, German people of Russian descent, The Left (Germany) politicians, Living people, Members of the Bundestag

Gregor Gysi (

Family background

Gysi was born in East Berlin, Soviet Zone of Germany. His father,  One of his maternal great-grandmothers was Russian.
His sister, Gabriele, is an actress, who escaped from East Germany in 1985. Today, she is chief dramaturge at the Volksbühne in Berlin.

Career

Pre-1989

Gysi's political career started in the then-ruling Socialist Unity Party of Germany (SED) of East Germany, to which he was admitted in 1967. In 1971 he became a licensed attorney, and during the 1970s and 1980s defended several prominent dissidents, including Rudolf Bahro, Robert Havemann, Ulrike Poppe, and Bärbel Bohley.
In addition to his legal work, Gysi emerged as one of East Germany's leading Gorbachev-inspired political reformists within the SED, especially towards the end of the 1980s.  In 1989, he and a group of lawyers presented a counter-draft to the government's Travel Bill, which authorised mass public demonstrations.  This led to a rally on 4 November in which he spoke and called for various reforms, including free elections.  In December 1989, he became a member of a special SED party session investigating official corruption and abuse of power.

Fall of Communism

In December 1989, Egon Krenz, the last Communist leader of East Germany, resigned all of his posts.  Gysi was elected as the party's chairman.  He did not, however, become the leader of East Germany; the SED had abandoned its monopoly of power on 1 December.  In his first speech, Gysi admitted that the SED had brought the country to ruin, repudiating everything it had done since 1949.  He declared that the party needed to adopt a new form of socialism.
To that end, he immediately set about transforming the SED into a democratic socialist party.  Before the year was out, the last hardliners in the SED leadership had either resigned or been pushed out.  On 16 December, the SED was renamed the Socialist Unity Party – Party of Democratic Socialism (SED-PDS), it later became simply the Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS).  Gysi remained as party chairman, and in March 1990 was elected to the Volkskammer in the first free election of that body, serving there until it was dissolved upon German reunification on 3 October 1990.

Post-unification

In the first post-reunification all-German elections, he was elected to the Bundestag from Berlin Hellersdorf – Marzahn, and served there until 2000.  He remained chairman of the PDS through 1998, and then from 1998 to 2000 served as chairman of the party's parliamentary group.
In 1992 allegations were brought against him of having been an "unofficial collaborator" (Inoffizieller Mitarbeiter, IM) or informant of East Germany's Ministry for State Security (the Stasi).  He denied these allegations, and the matter was largely dropped due to his parliamentary immunity. In 1995 the Hamburg regional court ruled in Gysi's favour in  a complaint against Bärbel Bohley, Gysi's former client, who had accused him of Stasi collaboration. However, the allegations were raised again in 1996, and this time the Bundestag voted to revoke his immunity and proceed with an investigation.  In 1998 the Bundestag's immunity committee concluded that Gysi had been a collaborator with the Stasi from 1978 to 1989 under the name IM Notar, and fined him 8,000 Deutsche Marks. However, both the Free Democratic Party and his own PDS disputed the verdict, and Gysi appealed against the finding. Despite the affair, he retained his seat in the Bundestag in the 1998 elections.
In 2000 he resigned as chairman of the PDS's parliamentary group, but continued as an active member of the party.  Following the victory in Berlin's 2001 municipal elections of a coalition of the PDS and the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD), he was elected Senator for Economics, Labour, and Women's Issues and Deputy Mayor. He emphasised practical issues and advocated the reinstitution of some of what he sees as the better aspects of East Germany's system, such as extended child-care hours and a longer school day. After a scandal involving his use of airline "bonus miles" he had acquired on trips as a Bundestag member, he resigned on 31 July 2002 from the Berlin city government. The resignation was a blow to his public "can-do" image, but he has recovered from that to some extent in the wake of increasing public opposition to a number of new policies of the federal government, like the Hartz reforms lowering  unemployment benefits to the levels of mere subsistence welfare, which he strongly opposes.
In late 2004 he survived brain surgery and a heart attack. Formerly a heavy smoker, Gysi quit smoking after the crisis on his doctors' advice.
Gysi remained the PDS undisputed front man in many people's minds and continued to appear in public. In May 2005, when Federal Chancellor Gerhard Schröder announced plans to call an early election in September, many prominent PDS leaders including chair Lothar Bisky called on Gysi to front their campaign. He was a lead candidate of the PDS, and returned to the Bundestag as the member for Berlin Treptow – Köpenick. The PDS fought the election in an alliance with the new western-based Labour and Social Justice – The Electoral Alternative (WASG), under the new name The Left Party. In June 2007, the PDS and WASG formally merged to form a united party called The Left.






