[[Maprotiline]]

CATEGORIES: Norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, Tetracyclic antidepressants, Anthracenes, Amines

Maprotiline (sold as Deprilept, Ludiomil, Psymion) is a tetracyclic antidepressant (TeCA). However, Maprotiline's fourth ring is spurious, as formed by a bridge across the central tricyclic ring. It is a strong norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor with only weak effects on serotonin and dopamine reuptake.
It exerts blocking effects at the following postsynaptic receptors:
The pharmacologic profile of Maprotiline explains its antidepressant, sedative, anxiolytic, and sympathomimetic activities. In accordance to the pharmacological characteristics it is used in the treatment of  depression, such as depression associated with agitation or anxiety. Additionally, it shows a strong antagonism against Reserpine-induced effects in animal studies, as do the other 'classical' antidepressants. Although Maprotiline behaves in most regards as a 'first generation antidepressant' it is commonly referred to as 'second generation antidepressant'.

History

Maprotiline was developed and has been marketed by the Swiss manufacturer Geigy (now operated by Novartis) since the early 1980s under the brand name Ludiomil. Generics are widely available.

Pharmacokinetics

After oral use absorption is good. It binds to plasma proteins 80-90 %. Maximal plasma concentration is reached 6 hours after use. The mean time to peak is 12 hours. The half-life of elimination averages 51 hours. 

The mechanism of action

The postulated mechanism of Maprotiline is that it acts primarily by potentiation of central adrenergic synapses by blocking reuptake of norepinephrine at nerve endings. This pharmacologic action is thought to be responsible for the drug's antidepressant and anxiolytic effects. It is a strong norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor with only weak effects on serotonin and dopamine reuptake. At higher doses, however, maprotiline increases serotonergic transmission and increases the level of serotonin available. Pharmacokinetics of maprotiline and its demethylated metabolite in serum and specific brain regions of rats after acute and chronic administration of maprotiline. J Pharm Sci.;80(12):1114-8.

Indications

Maprotiline is used in the treatment of depression, such as depression associated with agitation or anxiety and has similar efficacy to the antidepressant drug moclobemide.
N.B. The use of maprotiline in the treatment of enuresis in pediatric patients has so far not been systematically explored and its use is not recommended.

Side effects

The side-effect profile is comparable to other tri-/tetracyclic antidepressants and many of the following are due to anticholinergic (which are less prominent than those of most tricyclic antidepressants) and antihistaminergic effects. Most often seen are:
Maprotiline causes a strong initial sedation (first 2 to 3 weeks of therapy) and is therefore indicated to treat agitated patients or those with suicidal risks. It causes anticholinergic side effects (dry mouth, constipation, confusion, tachycardia) with a lower incidence than amitriptyline. Originally, the manufacturer claimed that maprotiline is better tolerated than other tri-/tetracyclic drugs. However, seizures, leukopenia and skin reactions occur more often with maprotiline than with comparable drugs like amitriptyline.

Necessary examinations during therapy

All patients should have frequent blood pressure checks and periodic white blood cell counts. At-risk patients need regular EKG and EEG monitoring as well.

Drug abuse and dependence

Maprotiline has no known potential for abuse and psychological dependence.
Withdrawal symptoms frequently seen when treatment with maprotiline is stopped abruptly (agitation, anxiety, insomnia, sometimes activation of mania or rebound depression) are not indicative of addiction and can be avoided by reducing the daily dose of Maprotiline gradually by approximately 25% each week. If treatment has to be stopped at once due to medical reasons, the use of a benzodiazepine (e.g. lorazepam, clonazepam, or alprazolam) for a maximum of 4 weeks as needed will usually suppress withdrawal symptoms.

Contraindications

Maprotiline may worsen psychotic conditions like schizophrenia and should be given with caution. The antipsychotic treatment should be continued.
Patients with bipolar affective disorder should not receive antidepressants whilst in a manic phase, as antidepressants can worsen mania.

Absolute

Special caution needed

Suicidal patients

Same as other antidepressants, Maprotiline increased the risk compared to placebo of suicidal thinking and behavior (suicidality) in children, adolescents and young adults in short-term studies of major depressive disorder (MDD) and other psychiatric disorders. Anyone considering the use of Maprotiline or any other antidepressant in a child, adolescent, or young adult must balance this risk with the clinical need. Short-term studies did not show an increase in the risk of suicidality with antidepressants compared to placebo in adults beyond age 24; there was a reduction in risk with antidepressants compared to placebo in adults aged 65 and older. Depression and certain other psychiatric disorders are themselves associated with increases in the risk of suicide. Patients of all ages who are started on antidepressant therapy should be monitored appropriately and observed closely for clinical worsening, suicidality, or unusual changes in behavior. Families and caregivers should be advised of the need for close observation and communication with the prescriber. Maprotiline is not approved for use in pediatric patients.nlm.gov/medlineplus/druginfo/meds/a682158. Retrieved 29 September 2013

Special populations

Pregnancy

Reproduction studies have been performed in female laboratory rabbits, mice, and rats at doses up to 1.3, 7, and 9 times the maximum daily human dose respectively and have revealed no evidence of impaired fertility or harm to the fetus due to Maprotiline. There are, however, no adequate and well controlled studies in pregnant women. Because animal reproduction studies are not always predictive of human response, this drug should be used during pregnancy only if clearly needed.

Nursing Mothers

Maprotiline is excreted in breast milk. At steady-state, the concentrations in milk correspond closely to the concentrations in whole blood. Caution should be exercised when Maprotiline hydrochloride is administered to a nursing woman.

Pediatric Use

Safety and effectiveness in the pediatric population have not been established. Anyone considering the use of Maprotiline in a child or adolescent must balance the potential risks with the clinical need.

Elderly Patients

In general, lower dosages are recommended for patients over 60 years of age. Dosages of 50 mg to 75 mg daily are usually satisfactory as maintenance therapy for elderly patients who do not tolerate higher amounts.nlm.gov/medlineplus/druginfo/meds/a682158. Retrieved 29 September 2013.drugs.html. Retrieved 29 September 2013.

Necessary examinations during therapy

All patients should have frequent blood pressure checks and periodic white blood cell counts. At-risk patients need regular EKG and EEG monitoring as well.

Interactions

Maprotiline has a wide range of possible interactions. Some are typical for tri-/tetracyclic antidepressants, others are caused by specific metabolic effects (e.g. high plasma-protein-binding) of Maprotiline:
Increased drug actions:
Decreased drug actions:
Other types of interaction:

Chemistry

600px 
The first step in the preparation of the antidepressant maprotiline takes advantage of the acidity of anthrone protons for incorporation of the side chain. Thus treatment of (1) with ethyl acrylate and a relatively mild base leads to the Michael adduct; saponification of the ester group gives the corresponding acid (2). The ketone group is then reduced by means of zinc and ammonium hydroxide. Dehydration of the first-formed alcohol under acidic conditions leads to the formation of fully aromatic anthracene (3). Diels–Alder addition of ethylene under high pressure leads to the addition across the 9,10 positions and the formation of the central 2,2,2-bicyclooctyl moiety (4). The final steps involve the construction of the typical antidepressant side chain. The acid in (4) is thus converted to an acid chloride and that function reacted with methylamine to form the amide. Pharmacokinetics of maprotiline and its demethylated metabolite in serum and specific brain regions of rats after acute and chronic administration of maprotiline. J Pharm Sci.;80(12):1114-8.; Schmidt, P.; Helv. Chim. Acta 1969, 52, 1385.

Overdose

Symptoms of overdose may include flushing, fast or irregular heartbeat, dry mouth, drowsiness, confusion, agitation, enlarged pupils, seizures, and loss of consciousness.
Drugs commonly used to treat overdose are Physostigmine to counteract central and peripheral anticholinergic effects and Diazepam to control convulsion. Symptomatic measures are stabilization of blood pressure and correction of water- and electrolyt-deficits. Lidocaine can be given intravenously in small doses against cardial arrhythmias.
Due to milder anticholinergic and cardiotoxic effects of Maprotiline the acute lethal dose may be higher compared with other classical antidepressants (e.g. Amitriptyline, Doxepin). Maprotiline is more toxic than the other tetracyclic drugs Mianserin and Mirtazapine.

Dosage

Dose forms

Brand names






