[[Coleco Adam]]

CATEGORIES: Z80-based home computers, Home computers

The Coleco Adam is a home computer, and expansion for the ColecoVision (port 3), released in 1983 by American toy manufacturer Coleco. It was an attempt to follow on the success of the company's ColecoVision video game console.  The Adam was not very successful, partly because of early production problems.

Introduction

Coleco announced the Adam at the Summer Consumer Electronics Show (CES) in June 1983, and executives predicted sales of 500,000 by Christmas 1983.  From the time of the computer's introduction to the time of its shipment, the price increased, from USD $525 to $725.
The Adam is famous for an incident connected with its showing at the June, 1983 CES.  To showcase the machine, Coleco decided to demonstrate a port of its ColecoVision conversion of Donkey Kong on the system.  Nintendo was in the midst of negotiating a deal with Atari to license its Famicom for distribution outside of Japan, and the final signing would have been done at CES.  Atari had exclusive rights to Donkey Kong for home computers (as Coleco had for game consoles), and when Atari saw that Coleco was showing Donkey Kong on a computer, its proposed deal with Nintendo was delayed.  Coleco had to agree not to sell the Adam version of Donkey Kong.  Ultimately, it had no bearing on the Atari/Nintendo deal, as Atari's CEO Ray Kassar was fired the next month and the proposal went nowhere, with Nintendo deciding to market its system on its own.

Failure

Coleco had originally gotten good press after the unveil in 1983, and had promised to deliver 500,000 units to buyers by the end of that year. However, by December 1983, Coleco could not fulfill its promise and only shipped 95,000 units. After multiple technical issues, Coleco partnered with Honeywell information systems to open up repair chain stores around the nation.google.com
On Dec.29th Wednesday, 1984, after continuing complaints about Adam failures and low sales, Coleco announced the discontinuation of the Adam, and would be selling off its inventory.
Coleco shared that it lost $35 million in late 1983, the time of the Adam's launch. Along with a loss of $13.4 million in the first 9 months of 1984. Coleco did not reveal which company they were selling the inventory to only to say that, "they had worked with this partner before", no final sales numbers were revealed of the Adam computer and Expansion.

Technical details

In its favor, the Adam had a large software library from the start.  It was derived from and compatible with the ColecoVision's software and accessories, and, in addition, the popular CP/M operating system was available as an option.  Its price gave a complete system: an 80 kB RAM computer, tape drive, letter-quality printer, and software including the Buck Rogers: Planet of Zoom video game.  The IBM PCjr sold for $669 but included no peripherals, and although the popular Commodore 64 sold for around $200, its price was not much lower after the purchase of a printer, tape or disk drive, and software.
Like many home computers of its day, the Adam was intended to use a television set for its display.  The SmartWriter electronic typewriter loaded when the system was turned on.  In this mode, the system operated just like a typewriter, printing letters as soon as the user typed them.  Pressing the Escape/WP key put SmartWriter into word processor mode, which functioned similarly to a modern word processor.
A less expensive version of the Adam plugged into a ColecoVision, which delivered on one of ColecoVision's launch commitments that owners would one day be able to upgrade their game system to a fully featured computer system.

Problems

The Adam was not without weaknesses: 
|url=
|title=Coleco's Adam: A Hands-On Report
|author=Bateman, Selby and Halfhill, Tom R. 
|year=1984
|accessdate=April 29, 2007
|publisher=Compute! Magazine}}[/ref]  Making this problem worse, some of the Coleco manuals instructed the user to put the tape in the drive before turning the computer on; presumably these were printed before the issue was known.

Games

Software

Colecovision software that was not built in, were mostly on Rom Catridges, with Adam Calculator, Personal Checkbook, and Smart Filer Programs also being on Floppy Disk.

Selected software programs

Reception

BYTE reported in September 1983 that the Adam's introduction had "dominated" the Consumer Electronics Show in Chicago, and compared its potential impact on the home-computer industry to that of the Osborne 1.
The Adam received some good reviews based on the quality of its keyboard and printer, and offered competitive sound and graphics.  Its BASIC interpreter, called SmartBASIC, was largely compatible with Applesoft BASIC, which meant that many type-in programs from computer books and magazines would work with the Adam with little or no modification.
However, sales were weak, especially after the technical issues became obvious. Coleco lost $35 million in the fourth quarter of 1984 as returns flooded in. Officially, Coleco blamed "manuals which did not offer the first-time user adequate assistance." Coleco reintroduced Adam with a new instruction manual, lower price, and a $500 college scholarship along with each unit for use by a young child (to be paid when the child reached college). Fewer than 100,000 units ultimately sold.
Ketchum Advertising, a NYC marketing agency, won the assignment of promoting the computer. The agency staffed up to handle the work, and the prestige, of the new business. However, agency executives opened their New York Times on a morning in January 1985 to read, with no previous warning, that Coleco was abandoning the computer. Agency employees branded this news the Adam Bomb.
The Adam was permanently discontinued in 1985, less than two years after its introduction.

Legacy

A group of Adam enthusiasts gather every year at the annual AdamCon.  The 23rd AdamCon (AdamCon23) was held in Grand Rapids, Minnesota from July 14 thru July 17, 2011.
Third-party developers contributed to the overall success of the ADAM after Coleco abandoned the ADAM.  Developers such as Orphanware, In House Reps, Thomas Electronics, Oasis Pensive, Eve, E&T, Micro Innovations, Microfox Technologies and others added multiple-density disk drives, memory expanders, speech synthesizers, serial cards, printer cards, IDE cards and other hardware so the ADAM could follow other computers into a newer modern age.  In 2012, most of this hardware is still available to upgrade the ADAM.

Specifications






