[[Uttaradit Province]]

CATEGORIES: Uttaradit Province, Provinces of Thailand

Uttaradit () is one of the northern provinces (changwat) of Thailand. Neighboring provinces are (from south clockwise) Phitsanulok, Sukhothai, Phrae and Nan. To the east it borders Xaignabouli of Laos.

History

Uttaradit means northern landing, as it was formerly a trade center on the Nan river.
In the Sukhothai era several city states (Mueang) subject to the king were located in the area of the modern province. Mueang Fang was in modern day Mueang Uttaradit district, Mueng Thung Yang in Laplae, and Mueang Ta Chuchok in Tron district.
During the Ayutthaya kingdom, Mueang Phichai was one of the 16 main Mueang of the Thai kingdom. In the reign of King Naresuan, the ruler of Phichai rebelled, joined by the ruler of Sawankhalok. Their revolt was suppressed and the inhabitants of both cities were forced to move south to Phitsanulok.
Following the fall of the city of Ayutthaya to the Burmese in 1767, Phichai was the site of several battles against the invaders. The ruler of Phichai succeeded in driving back the Burmese and was awarded the title Phraya Phichai Dabhak - the "Lord of Pichai with a Broken Sword", as he had broken one of his swords in fierce hand to hand combat with the enemy.
In the reign of King Rama III Mueang Phichai controlled several Mueang of northern Siam like Nan or Phrae, and even Luang Prabang and Vientiane. At the point where the Nan river became shallow a port was established. As this town grew in importance as an important trade point, in 1887 it was made a Mueang subordinate of Phichai. 1899 the center of Phichai was moved to this new location, which was renamed to Uttaradit in 1915.

Geography

The province is located in the valley of the Nan River. About 45 kilometers north of the city Uttaradit is the Queen Sirikit Dam, which created a 250 km² artificial lake from the Nan. The Phi Pan Nam Range reaches the northwest of the province.
Most of the province was once covered with teak forests, then the major product of Uttaradit. The largest Teak tree in the world is found at the Ton Sak Yai Park in the Luang Prabang Range. ดร.กระมล ทองธรรมชาติ และคณะ, สังคมศึกษา ศาสนาและวัฒนธรรม ม.1, สำนักพิมพ์ อักษรเจริญทัศน์ อจท. จำกัด, 2548, หน้า 24-25 The 1500 year old tree measures 9.87 m in circumference and 37 m in height - originally it was 48.5 m high, but it was damaged in a storm.
Three National Parks are located in the province—Klong Tron, Lam Nam Nan and Phu Soi Dao.

Climate

Symbols

The provincial seal shows the mondop at the temple Wat Phra Thaen Sila At, in Baan Phra Thaen in the Laplae district. The main item of worship in the temple is a laterite block, which is believed to have been used by Buddha to seek enlightenment. The mondhop is built upon this block.
The seal was first designed in 1940, later a garuda as the symbol of Thailand and the name of the province were added.
The provincial tree is the Teak (Tectona grandis).

Administrative divisions

The province is subdivided in 9 districts (amphoe). These are further subdivided into 67 communes (tambon) and 562 villages (muban).

Transportation

Uttaradit is served by a station on the State Railway of Thailand. Beside the Railway, you can access Uttaradit by driving a car, riding a bus from Bus Terminal of Thailand. If you wish to fly to Bangkok or vice versa, the nearest airports are located in either Phitsanolok or Sukhothai. Thai airways and Nok air play from BKK - P'Lok and Bangkok Air fly through Sukhothai.

Tourism

Sights

Sak Yai (สักใหญ่)Uttaradit Official Website situated at Ban Pang Klua, Tambon Namkrai about 53 km. away from the province with an area of about 20,000 Rai and consists of various unsorted woods. Most important of all this Botanical forest has a biggest teak tree in the world, it has a height of 47 meters and the circumference of the tree stem is measured to be 9.58 m. It is about 1,500 years old by comparison of the size and the number of years from the teak stumps in nearby area. At present there is a height of about 37 meters left because the top of the tree was broken by strong wind, but the stem in general is still left in.
Klong Tron (คลองตรอน) national park has a very natural forest covering areas in Tambon Saentor and Tambon Namkrai of Nam Pat district, Tambon Tham Chalong of Mueang Uttaradit district, Tambon Phaluad of Tha Pla district, Tambon Nam Phi, Tambon Phak Kuang, Tambon Borthong of Thong Saen Khan district in Uttaradit province. Total area is 324,240.80 Rai or about 518.80 km2. It consists of high and low hills.
Pooh Meaing (ภูเมี่ยง) located at Tambon Nam Pai, Phumieng mountains divide Uttaradit province and Phitsanulok province. They are about 1,656 meters above sea level. At the peak, you can view both provinces and can even see Sirikit dam. Moreover, lots of ferns like Kaluang, Dongtao, and Khanmakpa and other plants are found along the way leading to the peak. Klong Tron waterfall of 8 levels is also there but it's suitable for those who only enjoy adventure and those nature lovers.
Chan cave (ถ้ำจัน) located at Tambon Nam Krai. It is the middle cave of the mountains where 5 of them are located. The way to the cave is very steep and the cave entrance has semicircle shape. Inside we can see a huge room; ceiling is about 20 meter high and in the middle of the cave of front area a Buddha image is located. Stalagmite and stalactite are lovely while weather is very comfortable and cool.
Tao cave (ถ้ำเต่า) located at Tambon Nam Krai. It is on another mountain and about 620 meters away from Tham Chan Cave. Cave entrance has several big stones; you have to notice in order to recognize the cave. From the cave entrance, a walk way has an excavation which looks like a stone sculpture. The way to the cave is a bit complicated; on the left side has a 17meter long hollow being steep until the first room. From here, there is a tiny hole where you can go through. Another room is linked with the right walk way. From here, you can walk to the large room where a 6-meter high stone pillar is in the middle. In the cave, are beautiful stalagmite and stalactite; weather is comfortable and cool.
Phu Soi Dao (ภูสอยดาว) with an area of 125,110 Rai covering Nam Pad district of Uttaradit and Chat Trakan district of Phitsanulok, the park, particularly at the height 1428 metre in Ban Rom Klao, used to be the stronghold of the communist terrorists. Located in the mountainous area with over 1,800 meters height above sea level, the topography of the park is like that of Phu Kradung. It is cold throughout the year. Beside interesting natural attractions in the park, carrier and tent are available for tourists.
Phu Soi Dao Waterfall, located near the office of the park, is very shady with trees and plants. The 5 level fall houses a tourist service center, No accommodation, but camping site, is available. From the fall to atop the hill takes about 4 – 5 hrs' walk.
Sai Tip Waterfall (น้ำตกสายทิพย์) located in the middle of the pinery, is one of the most beautiful falls in the park. It has 7 levels, which can be reached by walking from camping area down to the 7th level, each level is not too high, so high so, tourist can admire the beautiful white and clear water falling down along the rocks, covered with moss and lichen which looks like green velvet.
Wat Thamma Thipatai (วัดธรรมาธิปไตย) is where the door panels of the large and ancient Vihan of Wat Phra Fang are kept. The carved design is of the graceful style of the Late Ayutthaya Period. They are rated as the second best such creation next only to those at Wat Suthat in Bangkok.
Wat Tha Thanon (วัดท่าถนน) houses Luang Pho Phet (หลวงพ่อเพชร), the principal Buddha statue of the province. It is of the Chiang Saen style and cast in bronze.
Wat Yai Tha Sao (วัดใหญ่ท่าเสา) It features and old Vihan with beautiful wood-carved door panels and lintels.
The Phraya Phichai Dap Hak Memorial (อนุสาวรีย์พระยาพิชัยดาบหัก) As governor of Muang Phichai (south of Uttaradit) about 200 years ago during the Thon Buri Period, the valiantly fought with Burmese evaders until one of his swords broke in two. But he prevailed over them. Hence the sobriquet "Phichai of the Broken Sword".
the Uttaradit Provincial Cultural Hall (หอวัฒนธรรมจังหวัดอุตรดิตถ์) houses important historical relics. A major item is the "Yan Mat" (ยานมาศ), a carved wooden carrying pole made by Late Ayutthaya Period craftsmen.
Wat Klang (วัดกลาง) is an old temple with beautiful plaster bas-reliefs over the Ubosot. Inside are rare wall murals of the Early Rattanakosin Period style depicting the Jataka and assemblage of celestial beings.
The Phra Si Phanommat Memorial (อนุสาวรีย์พระศรีพนมมาศ) commemorates a community leader who was highly repeated by the townspeople. The Chinese-descended tax collector on alcohol products contributed tremendously to the development of the community and was rewarded with the rank of Phra Si Phanommat from King Rama V.
Wat Phra Borom That Thung Yang (วัดพระบรมธาตุทุ่งยั้ง) An old temple, it was once called Wat Mahathat. There is a large, circular-shaped, Ceylonese-style Chedi enshrining a Holy Relic.
Wat Phra Yun Phutthabat Yukhon (วัดพระยืนพุทธบาทยุคล) features a Chiang Saen-style Mondop which covers a pair of holy Footprint. It also houses a Sukhothai-style Buddha statue cast in bronze.
Wat Phra Thaen Sila Art (วัดพระแท่นศิลาอาสน์) The major feature is the base of a sermon platform built with laterite. The square slab with pattern is believed to have been made during the Sukhothai Period.	
Namtok Mae Phun (น้ำตกแม่พูล), located at Ban Ton Klua, is about 20 kilometres from town. The dam-like barrier creates multi-level cascades amid pleasant natural surroundings.
Bo Lek Nam Phi (บ่อเหล็กน้ำพี้) is the source of the best quality steel which was used to fashion swords and weapons in the past. Today, there are still two "wells" in existence. Ores from these two sources are believed to have been used to make swords for kings only.
Lam Nam Nan National Park (อุทยานแห่งชาติลำน้ำน่าน) It is a complex mountain range comprising various kinds of abundant forests. It covers a total area of 624,468 rai and consists of mixed deciduous forest, dry  evergreen forest, hill evergreen forest and deciduous dipterocarp forest, where the leaves will transform into beautiful colours during winter and is a habitat of various types of animals such as barking deer, deer, wild boars, bears and more than 200 kinds of birds.
Places of interest in Lam Nam Nan National Park are as follows:

Local Products

Interesting items include woven materials (ผลิตภัณฑ์จากผ้าพื้นเมือง) with their lovely designs and colours, and preserved edibles made from local fruits such as chewy candy-like Kluai Kuan (กล้วยกวน) which is made from banana.

Culture

Festivals

Phraya Phichai Dap Hak and Red Cross Fair (งานพระยาพิชัยดาบหักและงานกาชาด) is organized to commemorate the heroic deeds of Phraya Phichai during 7–16 January every year at Phraya Phichai Dap Hak Stadium. There are the Provincial Red Cross Centre's booths selling products, traditional and cultural performances, various forms of entertainment and a ceremony to worship Phraya Phichai Dap Hak.
The Tradition of Buddha Cremation (ประเพณีถวายพระเพลิงพระบรมศพพระพุทธเจ้า), a religious ritual seen nowhere else, is held at Wat Phra Borom That Thung Yang after Visakha Bucha day in May. It features the re-enactment the funeral ceremony for the Lord Buddha.
Durian festival is held each year around the beginning of June in Laplae district. The province is most famous for two new varieties of durian which lack the usual, and to some people offensive, odour: Longlaplae and Linlaplae, both named after Laplae District. Durian production in Uttaradit province is estimated to be around 20,000 tonnes in 2012. The province has approximately 10,600 acres of durian orchards.pattayamail.com: Ordourless, seedless durians developed in Uttaradit, retrieved: 2012-06-21
Langsat festival is held each year around the middle to end of September. The langsat (Lansium domesticum), for which Uttaradit is famous, is a fruit that is similar in taste to the longan.thaifestivalblogs.html

Climate





Gallery

File:Thurian long laplae.JPG|Thurian long laplae, the famous durian from Uttaradit province
File:Khao phan phak.jpg|Khao phan is only found in Thailand in Uttaradit province
File:Luang Pho Buddharangsi.jpg|The bronze Buddha of Wat Phra Yun Phutthabat Yukhon
File:Sirikitdam 01.jpg|The Sirikit Dam
File:Nan river in Uttaradit.jpg|The Nan river going through the city of Uttaradit
File:Naun 1428.jpg|Hill 1428, scene of the Thai–Laotian Border War, December 1987 – February 1988 


