[[Henri Coandă International Airport]]

CATEGORIES: Transport in Bucharest, Airports in Romania, Ilfov County

Henri Coandă International Airport ( northwest of the city of Bucharest, within Otopeni city limits. One of two airports serving the capital, the other being Băneasa, it is named after Romanian flight pioneer Henri Coandă, builder of Coandă-1910 aircraft and discoverer of the Coandă effect of fluidics. Until May 2004, the official name was Bucharest Otopeni International Airport (Romanian: Aeroportul Internațional București Otopeni), which remains the name by which it is generally known. The military section of the airport is used by the 90th Airlift Flotilla of the Romanian Air Force.
Henri Coandă International Airport serves as headquarters for TAROM, the country's national airline, and Țiriac Air."TAROM S.A. – Identification DataAbout Țiriac Air It also serves as a base of operations for charter or low-cost airlines Air Bucharest, Blue Air and Wizz Air. It is managed by The National Company Bucharest Airports S.A. (Compania Națională Aeroporturi București S.A.)."Contact." Henri Coandă International Airport. Retrieved on 1 December 2011. "The National Company "Bucharest Airports" S.A. Calea Bucurestilor nr. 224 E Otopeni, Ilfov County Postal code 075150 Romania" – Address in Romanian: "Compania Nationala "Aeroporturi Bucuresti" S.A. Calea Bucurestilor nr. 224 E Otopeni, județul Ilfov Cod postal 075150 Romania"

History

During World War II, the airport in Otopeni was used as an airbase by the German air force. Up to 1965, it was restricted for military use and was one of the major bases of the Romanian Air Force, with a runway of , making it one of the longest in Europe at that time.ro
In August 1969, when President Nixon of the United States visited Romania, a VIP lounge was inaugurated. A new passenger terminal (designed by Cezar Lăzărescu), with a capacity of 1,200,000 passengers per year, was opened on 13 April 1970, for domestic and international flights. The airport slowly became more and more used by airlines, with a growing number of passengers. In 1986, it entered a new phase of development. A second 3500-metre runway was constructed, as well as related taxiways. The airport lighting system was improved and the capacity was increased to 35 airport movements per hour.
In 1992, Otopeni Airport became a regular member of Airports Council International (ACI). In the same year a long-term, multi-stage upgrade plan was devised, anticipating a sharp increase in traffic as traveling restrictions to and from Romania were lifted.
The first stage of the plan (Phase I), taking place between 1994 and 1998, involved the construction a new departures terminal and of a new airside concourse with five jetways and nine gates (referred to as 'the Finger') as well as the extension of airport ramps and of their associated taxiways.mt.htm
 Romanian Ministry of Transportation – Descriptive Note – Otopeni Airport Development Strategy[/ref]
The second phase (labeled Phase II/IIe) of the plan led to the construction of a terminal dedicated to domestic flights and of a multi-story car park (2003), the complete overhaul of the control tower (between 2005–2007) as well as the transformation of the old terminal building in a dedicated arrivals hall (in 2000). During the same phase, two high-speed taxiways (Oscar and Victor) were constructed. Phase II was completed in 2007.
The third stage of the plan (Phase III), started in 2009, involves the extension of the airside concourse ('the Finger') with 15 new gates (of which nine jetways), as well as the expansion of Departure Hall (eight new gates) and Arrivals Hall. The airside concourse, designed by Studio Capelli Architettura & Associati, was inaugurated on 29 March 2011."The Bucharest Airport at a10.New Departing Hall extension opened 
The airport has ILS CAT III status on all runways.LROP Technical Information - Romanian Air Traffic Services Administration

Current and future development

The airport is undertaking Phase III of its development program, a €150 million investment, which consist of the expansion of Departure Hall, Arrivals Hall and the concourse. At the end of this phase, the terminal will have a processing capacity of 4,500 passengers per hour,Bucharest Henri Coandă Airport – Development&Modernization – Phase III and capacity is expected to rise to 6 million passengers annually on domestic and international routes.Extensions to the Coandă Airport 
Beyond Phase III, a new terminal building (Henri Coandă 2), at the eastern end of the current location is envisaged. Henri Coandă 2 will be of a modular design, consisting of four separate buildings, each capable of handling 5 million passengers annually. Each module will be built as traffic demands dictate. Thus, by 2023, Terminal 2 alone should be able to handle the 20 million passengers per year indicated by estimates. The terminal will be directly connected to A3 motorway, to the railway system, and to the Bucharest Metro system as Bucharest Metro Line M6.mt.ro  The Romanian Ministry of Transportation

Terminals

The airport's facilities consist of a single terminal with two main buildings (occasionally considered to be separate terminals). These buildings are the Departures Hall (formerly known as International Departures Hall) and the Arrivals Hall (formerly known as International Arrivals/Domestic Hall).Bucharest Otopeni Airport, the last frontier 
The airport has 32 gates (of which 14 equipped with jetways).

Airlines and destinations

Passenger scheduled flights

Passenger charter flights

Passenger destination maps

Cargo

Services

Services for passengers

The International Departure area hosts a variety of shops, cafes, lounges, Internet cafes and many more. There is also a chapel at the first level of the International Departures Hall. The facilities inside the airport are easily accessible for the persons with disabilities.
Airlines distribute Romanian- and English-language newspapers at the departure gates.

Ancillary services

The main handling agent in the airport is Globeground, the second being Menzies. The catering services are provided by Alpha Rocas 

Traffic and statistics

In 2013, Henri Coandă International received 7,643,467 passengers, an increase of 7.6% compared to 2012.

Ground transportation

Train

A direct train service to the main railway station, Gara de Nord, runs from the Airport railway station, about 900 m from the airport. Shuttle buses connect this station with the departures and arrivals halls; the tickets are valid for the train and for the transfer bus.Henri Coanda Express trains
The next phase of the expansion aims to locate the train station in the airport itself.

Bus

Henri Coandă Airport is connected to the public transport company RATB system. The 780 route provides express bus service to Gara de Nord railway station in Bucharest, and the 783 route provides express bus service to the city center 24 hours a day.Public transport at Henri Coandă International

Taxi

As of May 2013, taxis serving Henri Coandă Airport can be ordered using a touch screen system in the arrivals terminal, allowing the taxi drivers to enter the pick-up area. This measure was taken after many complaints from passengers who were being ripped off when using illegal, high-price taxis. 

Car Rental

Companies such as Avis, Hertz, Europcar and Sixt are located between international departures hall (upper floor) and arrivals hall.Rent-a-car services at Henri Coandă International

Car

The airport is  north of central Bucharest, to which it is connected by route DN1. The A3 motorway will connect the airport and the city, when finished.

Underground

Construction of the M6 line will start in 2014, connecting Henri Coanda Intl. to Gara de Nord train station.

In popular culture

Season 14 of The Amazing Race was filmed here during the first portion of the third leg. The nine teams present arrived at the airport on three flights before they completed the rest of the leg.








