[[Sarcoidosis]]

CATEGORIES: Ailments of unknown etiology, Lung disorders, Abdominal pain, Rare diseases, Monocyte- and macrophage-related cutaneous conditions, Autoimmune diseases

Sarcoidosis (from sarc meaning "flesh", -oid, "like", and -osis, "diseased or abnormal condition"), also called sarcoid, is a disease involving abnormal collections of inflammatory cells (granulomas) that can form as nodules in multiple organs. In most cases it clears up by itself without any medical intervention, despite this some cases do go on to affect the person long-term or become life-threatening and require medical intervention, most often with medications. With an average mortality rate of less than 5% in untreated cases.
Treatment is usually designed to help relieve the symptoms and hence do not directly alter the course of the disease. This treatment usually consists of drugs like ibuprofen or aspirin. In cases where the condition develops on a progressive and/or life-threatening course the treatment is most often steroid treatment with prednisone or prednisolone. Alternatively, drugs that are most commonly used to treat cancer and suppress the immune system, such as methotrexate, azathioprine and leflunomide may be used.
In the United States it most commonly affects people of Northern European (especially Scandinavian or Icelandish) or African (especially African American) ancestry between the ages of 20 and 29, although any race or age group can be affected. Japan has a lower rate of sarcoidosis than the United States, although in these people the disease is usually more aggressive in its course with the heart often affected. Japanese individuals also have a different peak age for sarcoidosis, namely 25–40 years of age. It occurs more commonly in women too, with the female-to-male being roughly 2:1, it also usually takes a more aggressive course in women. In developing countries it often goes misdiagnosed as tuberculosis (TB) as its symptoms often resemble those of TB.
It was first described in 1877 by an English doctor named Dr. Jonathan Hutchinson as a skin disease causing red, raised lesions on the arms, face and hands.

Signs and symptoms

Sarcoidosis is a systemic inflammatory disease that can affect any organ, although it can be asymptomatic and is discovered by accident in about 5% of cases.
The combination of erythema nodosum, bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy, and joint pain is called Löfgren syndrome which has a relatively good prognosis. This form of the disease occurs significantly more commonly in Scandinavian patients, than in those of non-Scandinavian origin.

Respiratory tract

Localization to the lungs is by far the most common manifestation of sarcoidosis. Less commonly, the upper respiratory tract (including the larynx, pharynx and sinuses) may be affected, which occurs in between 5 and 10% of cases.
Sarcoidosis of the lungs can be divided into four stages.  Stage 0 — No intrathoracic involvement.  Stage I — Bilateral hilar adenopathy. Stage II — Pulmonary parenchyma involved.  Stage III — Pulmonary infiltrates with fibrosis. Stage 4 is end-stage lung disease with pulmonary fibrosis and honeycombing. Chapter 12. Sarcoidosis. In: Hanley ME, Welsh CH, eds. CURRENT Diagnosis & Treatment in Pulmonary Medicine. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2003.

Skin

Sarcoidosis involves the skin in between 9 and 37% of persons and is more common in African Americans than in their white counterparts. The skin is the second most commonly affected organ, after the lungs. The most common lesions are erythema nodosum, plaques, maculopapular eruptions, subcutaneous nodules and lupus pernio.

Heart

The frequency of cardiac involvement varies and is significantly influenced by race; in Japan over 25% of persons with sarcoidosis experience symptomatic cardiac involvement, whereas in the US and Europe only about 5% of cases present with cardiac involvement. Autopsy studies in the US have revealed an frequency of cardiac involvement of about 20–30%, whereas autopsy studies in Japan have shown a frequency of 60%. The presentation of cardiac sarcoidosis can range from asymptomatic conduction abnormalities to fatal ventricular arrhythmia.

Eye

Eye involvement occurs in about 11–83% of cases. Manifestations in the eye include uveitis, uveoparotitis, and retinal inflammation, which may result in loss of visual acuity or blindness.

Nervous system

Any of the components of the nervous system can be involved. The latter can lead to changes in body temperature, mood and prolactin (see the endocrine and exocrine section for details).

Endocrine and exocrine

Prolactin is frequently increased in sarcoidosis, between 3% and 32% of cases have hyperprolactinemia Hypercalciuria (excessive secretion of calcium in one's urine) and hypercalcemia (an excessively high amount of calcium in the blood) are seen in Parotid enlargement occurs in about 5–10% of persons. Bilateral involvement is the rule. The gland is usually not tender, but firm and smooth. Dry mouth can occur; other exocrine glands are affected only rarely. The eyes, their glands or the parotid glands are affected in 20%-50% of cases.

Gastrointestinal and genitourinary

Symptomatic GI involvement occurs in less than 1% of persons (note that this is if one excludes the liver), and most commonly the stomach is affected, although the small or large intestine may also be affected in a small portion of cases. Studies at autopsy have revealed GI involvement in less than 10% of people. These cases would likely mimic Crohn's disease, which is a more commonly intestine-affecting granulomatous disease. About 1–3% of people have evidence of pancreatic involvement at autopsy. Symptomatic kidney involvement occurs in just 0.7% of cases, although evidence of kidney involvement at autopsy has been reported in up to 22% of people and occurs exclusively in cases of chronic disease. Testicular involvement has been reported in about 5% of people at autopsy. In males, sarcoidosis may lead to infertility.
Around 70% of people have granulomas in their livers, although only in about 20–30% of cases liver function test anomalies reflecting this fact are seen. About 5–15% of persons exhibit hepatomegaly, that is an enlarged liver. Only 5–30% of cases of liver involvement are symptomatic. Usually, these changes reflect a cholestatic pattern and include raised levels of alkaline phosphatase (which is the most common liver function test anomaly seen in persons with sarcoidosis), while bilirubin and aminotransferases are only mildly elevated. Jaundice is rare.

Hematologic and immunologic

Abnormal clinical blood tests are frequent, accounting for over 50% of cases, but is not diagnostic. Lymphopenia is the most common hematologic anomaly in sarcoidosis. Anemia occurs in about 20% of people with sarcoidosis. Leukopenia is less common and occurs in even fewer persons but is rarely severe. Thrombocytopenia and hemolytic anemia are fairly rare. In the absence of splenomegaly, leukopenia may reflect bone marrow involvement, but the most common mechanism is a redistribution of blood T cells to sites of disease.
Lymphadenopathy (swollen glands) is common in sarcoidosis and occurs in 15% of cases. Intrathoracic nodes are enlarged in 75 to 90% of all people; usually this involves the hilar nodes, but the paratracheal nodes are commonly involved. Peripheral lymphadenopathy is very common, particularly involving the cervical (the most common head and neck manifestation of the disease), axillary, epitrochlear, and inguinal nodes. Approximately 75% of cases show microscopic involvement of the spleen, although only in about 5–10% of cases does splenomegaly appear.

Bone, joints and muscles

Bone involvement in sarcoidosis has been reported in 1–13% of cases. About 5–15% of cases affect the bones, joints or muscles.

Causes

The exact cause of sarcoidosis is not known. The current working hypothesis is, in genetically susceptible individuals, sarcoidosis is caused through alteration to the immune response after exposure to an environmental, occupational, or infectious agent.

Genetics

The heritability of sarcoidosis varies according to race, about 20% of African Americans with sarcoidosis have a family member with the condition, whereas the same figure for whites is about 5%.

Infectious agents

Several infectious agents appear to be significantly associated with sarcoidosis, but none of the known associations is specific enough to suggest a direct causative role.

Autoimmune

Association of autoimmune disorders has been frequently observed. The exact mechanism of this relation is not known, but some evidence supports the hypothesis that this is a consequence of Th1 lymphokine prevalence.

Pathophysiology

Granulomatous inflammation is characterized primarily by accumulation of monocytes, macrophages and activated T-lymphocytes, with increased production of key inflammatory mediators, TNF, IFN-γ, IL-2, IL-8, IL-10, IL-12, IL-18, IL-23 and TGF-β, indicative of a Th1-mediated immune response. B cells also likely play a role in the pathophysiology of sarcoidosis. Serum levels of soluble HLA class I antigens and ACE are higher in persons with sarcoidosis. Likewise the ratio of CD4/CD8 T cells in bronchoalveolar lavage is usually higher in persons with pulmonary sarcoidosis (usually >3.5), although it can be normal or even abnormally low in some cases. Serum ACE levels have been found to usually correlate with total granuloma load.
Cases of sarcoidosis have also been reported as part of the immune reconstitution syndrome of HIV, that is, when people receive treatment for HIV their immune system rebounds and the result is that it starts to attack the antigens of opportunistic infections caught prior to said rebound and the resulting immune response starts to damage healthy tissue.

 Image:Sarcoidosis_(1)_lymph_node_biopsy.jpg |Sarcoidosis in a lymph node
