[[Micheál Martin]]

CATEGORIES: 1960 births, Living people, Alumni of University College Cork, Ministers for Foreign Affairs (Ireland), Irish schoolteachers, Leaders of Fianna Fáil, Lord Mayors of Cork, Members of the 26th Dáil, Members of the 27th Dáil, Members of the 28th Dáil, Members of the 29th Dáil, Members of the 30th Dáil, Members of the 31st Dáil, Ministers for Education (Ireland), Ministers for Health (Ireland), Politicians from County Cork, Teachtaí Dála

Micheál MartinMartin spells his first name Micheál, that is without an acute accent, or síneadh fada over the i. See Martin's official website Micheál Martin TD. The Irish language version of the name Michael is usually spelt Mícheál. ( Prior to becoming party leader, Martin served as Minister for Education and Science (1997–2000), Minister for Health and Children (2000–04), Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment (2004–08) and Minister for Foreign Affairs (2008–11).
As Minister for Health and Children in 2004, he introduced a ban on tobacco smoking in all Irish workplaces and established the Health Service Executive (HSE). Ireland was the first country to introduce a full workplace smoking ban. As Minister for Foreign Affairs in 2009, Martin travelled to Latin America for the first time, and made the first official visit to Cuba by an Irish government minister. That same year, he travelled to Khartoum following the kidnapping of Sharon Commins and Hilda Kawuki. In 2010 he became the first Western foreign minister to visit Gaza since Hamas took control there in 2007. On 18 January 2011 Brian Cowen accepted his resignation as Foreign Minister. On 26 January 2011 Fianna Fáil announced that Micheál Martin had been elected as the eighth leader of the party, following Brian Cowen's resignation as party leader four days previously. In the 2011 general election, Martin led the party to its worst showing in its 85-year history with a loss of 57 seats and a drop in its share of the popular vote to 17.4%.

Early life

Born and raised in the Turner's Cross area of Cork, Martin was the son of Paddy Martin (1923–2012), a former Irish international boxer and CIÉ employee, and Eileen "Lana" Corbett (1929–2010). The third child in a family of five, Martin's eldest brother Seán and his twin brother Pádraig subsequently became involved in local politics in Cork.
It was during his time at university that Martin became involved in politics. He was a prominent member of the cumann of Ógra Fianna Fáil, the youth wing of the party before later serving as national chairman of Ógra.
In 2009, he published his masters thesis as a book: Freedom to Choose: Cork and Party Politics in Ireland 1918–1932.ISBN 184889001X

Early political career

Martin's time as a teacher was short-lived as he left after just one year to become a full-time politician when he secured election to Cork Corporation as a Fianna Fáil candidate in 1985. He became a member of the Fianna Fáil national executive in 1988.
In 1989, Taoiseach Charles Haughey called a snap election and Martin was once again added to the Fianna Fáil ticket in Cork South–Central. On that occasion, he secured the most first preference votes out of any Fianna Fáil candidate and secured election to Dáil Éireann.
In his first few years as a TD, he served on a number of Oireachtas committees, including those dealing with Irish language, crime and finance.

Cabinet career (1997–2011)

Minister for Education and Science  (1997–2000)

When Fianna Fáil returned to power following the 1997 general election, Martin was appointed to the newly-expanded position of Minister for Education and Science. At 36, he was the youngest member of Bertie Ahern's first cabinet.

Minister for Health and Children (2000–04)

In a cabinet reshuffle in January 2000, Martin was appointed Minister for Health and Children. Martin's predecessor, Brian Cowen, described the position as 'like being in Angola', because landmines can go off at any time.
In spite of tough opposition, Martin introduced a ban on tobacco smoking in all Irish workplaces, including pubs and restaurants. The Minister announced on 30 January 2003 his intention to have the ban in place on 1 January 2004.
He introduced the first overhaul
In October 2003, he promised to examine cases of symphysiotomy in Irish hospitals which occurred during the 1940s and 1950s and offered free health care to those affected.

Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment (2004–08)

In September 2004, Martin exchanged government positions with Mary Harney to become Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment. In September 2005 the government's economic record on the cost of living came under scrutiny from the RTÉ television programme Rip-Off Republic. This led to Martin abolishing the controversial Groceries Order 1987, a piece of legislation which prohibited the sale of groceries below cost price.
Letters containing death threats and shotgun cartridges, from a group calling itself the Irish Citizens Defence Force, were posted to Martin on 29 February 2008 at a prominent Dublin fertility clinic.

Minister for Foreign Affairs (2008–11)

On the resignation of Bertie Ahern in May 2008, Martin supported Brian Cowen.
In a cabinet reshuffle in May 2008, following the election of Brian Cowen as Taoiseach, Martin became Minister for Foreign Affairs. One of the first issues that he had to deal with was the referendum on the Treaty of Lisbon.
In February 2009, he travelled to Latin America for the first time, with stopovers in Mexico and Havana, the first time an Irish Government Minister had made an official visit to Cuba.
In September 2009, he travelled to Khartoum to discuss the kidnapping of Sharon Commins and Hilda Kawuki with the Sudanese government.
On 7 February 2010, he defended the €4.4 million redevelopment of the Irish embassy in Ottawa.
On 17 March 2010, he met President of the United States Barack Obama in the White House, alongside Taoiseach Brian Cowen.
On 26 May 2010, he met with senior Chinese leaders in Beijing to discuss relations between China and Ireland before travelling onward to Shanghai.
On 28 June 2010, he began a five-day trip to Uganda and Ethiopia where he visited buildings and met ministers and businesspeople.

=Criticism of Gaza blockade=

As Minister for Foreign Affairs Martin was critical of the blockade of Gaza, particularly after being denied access to the area in 2009. He wrote to Spain (as President of the EU) to suggest that the body send a team of foreign ministers to the area in 2010. He was accompanied by United Nations vehicles.

Martin wrote about his experience in the International Herald Tribune the following week.
Martin was Minister for Foreign Affairs during the Gaza flotilla raid and the aftermath of this incident. He told Dáil Éireann that he had requested that the Israeli government allow the MV Rachel Corrie to deliver its cargo of aid to Gaza instead of involving itself in "further bloodshed".

Leadership of Fianna Fáil and 2011 general election

In September 2010, doubts about Brian Cowen's abilities and political judgement as Taoiseach and party leader emerged following a disastrous early-morning radio interview on Morning Ireland. Cowen survived, however, that same month Martin admitted that he and other cabinet members, namedly Brian Lenihan and Dermot Ahern, harboured ambitions to lead the party should a vacancy arise.
On 16 January 2011, Martin announced that he would vote against Brian Cowen in the upcoming confidence motion in his leadership of the party. He offered to resign as Minister for Foreign Affairs, but his resignation was initially refused by Cowen. Following the result of the motion, which Cowen won, the resignation was accepted.
On 22 January 2011, just days after winning a vote of confidence, Brian Cowen announced that he was stepping down as leader of Fianna Fáil but would remain as Taoiseach. On a special RTÉ News programme that day, a number of Fianna Fáil TDs came on the air and publicly backed Martin for the leadership. Later that evening, Martin formally announced his intention to seek support for the leadership of Fianna Fáil.
On 26 January 2011, the Fianna Fáil parliamentary party met to elect their new leader. Martin was proposed by Dara Calleary and seconded by Áine Brady and received 33 first preference votes.
Martin led the party into the 2011 general election, which saw Fianna Fáil swept from power in the worst defeat of a sitting government in the history of the Irish state. The party saw its first-preference vote more than halved, and lost 57 seats, representing a decline of 75%, being the worst electoral performance in its 85-year history.
Martin and other Fianna Fáil leaders concluded early on that they would not be reelected to another term in government, and had hoped to hold onto at least 30 seats. In the wake of what has been described as "defeat on a historic scale", Martin pledged to renew the party "at every level".
During the Seanad elections, Martin recommended support for 10 candidates, in an attempt to bring new blood into the parliamentary party. This caused resentment from Fianna Fáil councillors and incumbent Fianna Fáil senators.
In August 2011, Martin approached Gay Byrne as a possible nominee for the Presidential election, but this approached caused controversy within his party, who favoured an internal candidate, Brian Crowley, which was exacerbated on the declining of the nomination by Byrne and the withdrawal from the process by Crowley.
In an opinion poll in September 2011, Martin's party, Fianna Fáil's popularity fell to 10%, several points lower than their performance in the February 2011 election.
Martin is also party spokesperson on Northern Ireland.

Personal life

Martin is married to Mary O'Shea, whom he met at university, and together the couple have had five children. In October 2010, Martin's youngest daughter, Léana, died in Great Ormond Street Hospital after suffering from a heart condition.

Publications



Sources




