[[Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport]]

CATEGORIES: Airports in Mumbai

Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport (CSIA) , formerly Sahar International Airport, is the primary international airport in Mumbai, India, and is named after the 17th century Maratha emperor, Chhatrapati Shivaji. The Airport's IATA code – "BOM", is derived from Bombay, Mumbai's former name.
Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport is second busiest airport in India and was ranked 48th busiest airport in world by Airports Council International in 2013.panynj.pdf. Aci. Retrieved on 2014-04-10. The airport has five operating terminals spread over an operational area of 

History

The Juhu Aerodrome functioned as Mumbai's sole airport until 1942. Due to operational constraints imposed by its low-level location and proximity to the Arabian Sea coastline making it vulnerable during the monsoon season, a move further inland became necessary.
RAF Santacruz was set up in 1942. It was a bigger airfield than Juhu and was home to several RAF squadrons during World War II from 1942 to 1947. The apron existed on the south side of runway 09/27, and the area, referred to today as the "Old Airport", houses, among others, maintenance hangars of Air India, Air Works India and MIAL's General Aviation Terminal.
By 1946, when the RAF began the process of handing over the airfield to the Director General of Civil Aviation for Civil operations, two old abandoned hangars of the Royal Air Force had been converted into a terminal for passenger traffic. One hangar was used as a domestic terminal and the other for international traffic. It had counters for customs and immigration checks on either side and a lounge in the centre. Air India handled its passengers in its own terminal adjoining the two hangars. In its first year, it handled six civilian services a day.
Traffic at the airport increased after Karachi was partitioned to Pakistan and as many as 40 daily internal and foreign services operated by 1949, prompting the Indian Government to develop the airport, equipping the airport with a night landing system comprising a Radio range and a modernised flare path lighting system Construction of a new passenger terminal and apron began in 1950 and was commissioned in 1958,. Named after the neighbourhood in which it stood and initially under the aegis of the Public Works Department, the new airport was subsequently run by the Ministry of Civil Aviation. After a major fire gutted the Santa Cruz terminal in 1979, a temporary departure extension or "Gulf Terminal" became functional in October that year.
With the dawning of the Jumbo Jet era in the 1970s, Santacruz, despite several extensions, began suffering from insufficient operational capacity. The Tata committee, set up in 1967 to examine the issues concerning the airport, had recommended the construction of a new international terminal to meet the requirements of traffic in the seventies. The Santa Cruz terminal was to be used for domestic traffic alone. The International Airport Authority of India (IAAI), which was set up in 1972, started planning the construction of a new terminal building for handling international passenger traffic, to be completed by 1981. Accordingly construction of the new International terminal at Sahar to the north-east of Santacruz was taken up at an estimated cost of Rs. 110 million.
Designed by Aéroports de Paris and opened in January 1981, Terminal 2 was built in three modular phases as 2-A, 2-B, and 2-C. Each module had a capacity of 2.5 million passengers. This terminal had an area of . The original terminal was a convex shaped single concourse building with 14 Code E contact stands. The greater T2 apron also provided a further 15 Code D/E and 6 Code C remote stands. This gave a total of 35 stands on the existing apron.
AAI had been considering the modernization of Mumbai airport in 1996 although the AAI board approved a modernisation proposal only in 2003. By then, Mumbai and Delhi airports were handling 38% of the country's aircraft movement and generating one third of all revenues earned by AAI. At that time, Mumbai airport handled 13.3 million passengers, 60% of which were domestic travellers. The airport faced severe congestion for both aircraft and passengers as it was handling twice as many aircraft movements per day than it was originally designed for. The bidding process for its modernisation eventually began in May 2004 with the decision by the Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM) was announced in January 2006.
The GVK led consortium won the bid to manage and operate CSIA. To accomplish this task, Mumbai International Airport Private Limited (MIAL), a Joint Venture between the consortium (74%) and the Airports Authority of India (26%) was formed. Since then, MIAL has made several improvements in the aesthetics, design and passenger conveniences at CSIA.

Structure

The airport consists of two passenger terminals: Terminal 1 at Santacruz for domestic flights and Terminal 2 at Sahar for international flights. These terminals use the same airside facilities but are physically separated on the cityside, requiring a 15–20-minute (airside) drive between them. MIAL operates coach shuttle services between the domestic and international terminals for transit passengers. Over the past few years, the older Terminal 2 was demolished and a newer terminal has been partially completed and opened to traffic. Work is in progress on the other part of this new terminal and it is due to be completed in 2015 which is when it will be used for both international and domestic airlines.

Runways

Mumbai has two intersecting runways. Both runways have been upgraded to Code F, which means they can accommodate larger aircraft like the Airbus A380."Common Agreement Document of the A380 Airport Compatibility Group Version 2.1" page 8, European Civil Aviation Conference, December 2002. Retrieved: 4 December 2012. Following a presentation in March 2011 by UK's air traffic service provider NATS on how the capacity of the airport can be increased, MIAL set a target of 48 aircraft movements an hour in an effort to reduce congestion at the airport. Both runways were operated simultaneously especially during peak hours to try and attain this target.
The existing 
Further issues with utilising 14/32 are:
Parallel runway
MIAL was considering constructing a second parallel runway as part of its master plan. However, the construction of this runway would necessitate a large-scale relocation of either Air-India's hangars and maintenance facilities or the airport's flight kitchens and the Sahar police station, among others, depending on its alignment. The parallel runway remains an active part of the expansion plan but in the meantime the cross runways are being upgraded as much as possible.

Expansion

In October 2006, MIAL unveiled the master plan The graphic design and ambientation of the airport has mainly been created by Argentinan design studio Steinbranding. Landscape improvements were designed by Design Cell, a firm specialising in landscape architecture.
The implementation will be undertaken in two stages:
New taxiways have been developed to reduce the runway occupancy time by aircraft after landing. The airport has five rapid exit taxiways. By 2013, 11 rapid exit taxiways will be constructed. MIAL is undertaking the installation of a centralised data system which will provide information about domestic as well as international flights to all display devices at both terminals instead of just one or the other as at present. There are plans to extend the scope of the system to the air traffic control (ATC) and apron control areas, the airport website and even to leading hotel chains. A centralised call centre to provide flight details is also envisaged.
A Wi-Fi service is available free of charge throughout the airport.

Project facts

Air Traffic Control Tower

India's tallest Air Traffic Control Tower with a height of 
The tower was inaugurated on 18 October 2013
From the new tower, air traffic controllers are able to see five miles beyond the thresholds of both runways. The tower and its associated technical block and mechanical plant building covers 2,884 square metres.
The cost of the fully equipped tower is estimated at 
The previous ATC tower began functioning in 1999 and was built by the Airports Authority of India (AAI) at an overall project cost of about  Many airlines such as Singapore International Airlines, Saudi Airways, Qantas and United avoid landing at Mumbai airport when the secondary runway is in use as the old tower is not in compliance with ICAO Standards. The tower penetrates runway 14/32's transitional obstacle limitation surfaces by over 50 metres (for instrument approaches).
 The old tower also obstructs the path of a parallel taxiway under construction for the secondary runway. The old tower will be demolished in late 2014 and the taxiway will be completed.

Sahar Elevated Access Road

Despite the fact that T2 is located in Sahar close to Mumbai's arterial Western Express Highway, passengers travelling to the terminal had a harrowing road traffic experience. The impending shift of all domestic air traffic to T2 would worsen the situation during the daytime and evening peak traffic hours.
In order to avoid these traffic bottlenecks, a dedicated, direct elevated corridor was envisaged. This elevated corridor, also called the Sahar Elevated Access Road, runs roughly east-west between the Western Express Highway near Hanuman Mandir to the airport's forecourt bypassing the crowded Chakala, Sahar Road and Jog flyover areas of Andheri (east). MIAL is contributing a major share of the project cost.
The 
On the WEH end, the project comprises 1,050 metres of elevated road, a 98-metre long tunnel with ramps measuring 261 metres, three vehicular underpasses each of 48, 22 & 30 metres and a 641-metre long 6 lane road at Grade. A 48-metre long pedestrian cum 2 wheeler underpass on the WEH was also built as part of the plan. The airport end of the elevated road has four ramps totally measuring 2,200 metres to connect to the arrivals and departure sections of the airport forecourt. The road has been operational from Valentine's Day, 2014.

Challenges

=Slum relocations=

The Airport's expansion plans, however, have been repeatedly thwarted by slums encroaching onto the airport area.. Approximately 308 acres of airport land is encroached upon by about 85,000 hutments housing a population of around 400,000 persons,
In 2007, MIAL awarded the airport slum rehabilitation project, the largest urban rehabilitation scheme in the country, to Housing Development and Infrastructure Limited (HDIL). The project entailed shifting people living on 276 acres of encroached airport land to enable airport expansion. As part of the deal, HDIL was expected to build and provide eligible slumdwellers free housing on its own land within a radius of 2 km from the airport within seven years. In return, HDIL was to get a couple of crore square feet of land in the form of Transfer of Development Rights (TDR). However, less than 500 of the 85,000 slum families were relocated to new houses and in February 2013, MIAL terminated its agreement HDIL following a decision taken by the MIAL board. citing non-completion of the project on time.
According to MMRDA, these 500 families were the ones moved to facilitate the Sahar Elevated Access Road. None of the encroached 276 acres has been freed up partly because 40% to 50% of the slumdwellers on airport land were ineligible for rehabilitation. The state had extended the cut-off date for these slum residents from January 1995 to January 2000. This meant that only the slumdwellers residing at the spot prior to 2000 are eligible for free housing under the project.
In August 2012, the State Government admitted its inability to clear encroachments and excluded nearly 200 acres of encroached land from the modernization and expansion plans for the airport. Hence, only 104 acres of the encroached land required for aeronautical purposes will be cleared.

=Statue Relocation=

A 17-month delay in the relocation of the statue of Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj, whose location fell in the footprint of the new common user terminal, cost 
MIAL had proposed to construct a grand memorial of Chhatrapati Shivaji on the Western Express Highway near the airport. In addition, it proposed to relocate the statue to a garden near the airport and undertake beautification. The proposals failed to deter the protesters. The change of government in the state further delayed the decision making process. The delay in approval affected work on approximately 50,000 square feet of land and has led to delay in project completion. The Statue was relocated on 27 August 2011 and the area was handed over for construction.

Terminals, airlines and destinations

The airport consists of four terminals:

Terminal 1

Terminal 1 comprises three adjacent structures, designated 1A, 1B and 1C.

New Terminal 2

Larsen & Toubro was awarded the contract to construct the new Terminal 2 which was designed by Skidmore, Owings and Merrill (SOM). The terminal covers a land area of 210,000 square metres and will replace the existing International Terminal (part of which has already been demolished). The entire project was estimated to cost  and employ over 12,000 workers.CSIA press release
The X-shaped terminal has a total floor area of 450,000 square metres across four floors and will eventually handle both domestic and international passengers. It will include new taxiways and apron areas for aircraft parking designed to cater to 40 million passengers annually.
The iconic structure will have boarding gates on two piers extending southwards from a central processing building featuring a 42-metre high roof employing over 20,000 metric tonnes of fabricated steel covering 30 acres.Geodesic Techniques
The new T2 terminal building operates Multiple Aircraft Ramp System (MARS) stands and swing gates, so that a single stand can accommodate either one wide body aircraft or two narrow body aircraft, in either domestic or international configuration.airporttech.tc.gov/ATT2010/Pavements/Session4a/McCullagh-A%20Case%20Study%20Upgrade%20of%20the%20Terminal%20Apron.pdf CSIA airport apron Case Study
The new terminal is connected by the six-lane Sahar Elevated Access Road to the Western Express Highway. A metro rail link to the terminal is also planned.com
The new terminal has around 21,000 square meters of retail space, lounges and travel services, over 5,000 square meters of landscaping and a multi level car park for 5,000 cars. The parking Management System and Revenue control system for the entire MLCP has been designed and supplied by SKIDATA.   To transfer passengers across its four levels, the building has 48 escalators and 75 elevators. The terminal also features 42 travelators.
In the initial phase of development, the apron adjoining T2 will provide a total of 48 stands including 3 Code F stands (for the A-380). In the final phase of development a total of 38 Code E/F contact stands, 14 Code E/F remote stands and 20 Code C remote stands will be provided (total 72 stands).
International operations from the building commenced on 12 February 2014, while the domestic operations will be transferred from the Santacruz terminal to T2 by the last quarter of 2014. The first arrival at T2 was AI343 from Singapore via Chennai. It arrived just in the nick of time before Emirates 506 from Dubai. The first departure from the new terminal was Jet Airways flight 118. The old international terminal was closed permanently at 1 pm on 12 February 2014. Construction is underway to build the remaining pier of T2 and is expected to open to the public in 2015.thetimesofindia

=Jaya He art exhibit=

Terminal 2 hosts the world's largest public art programme to be located in an airport, with 6,000 pieces of Indian art from all over India.  The majority of the art originates from the 8th to the 19th Centuries, with some 100 commissioned contemporary works, including by renowned Indian artists.
The exhibits are being displayed on 18-foot high walls along the terminal's corridors and other standalone display areas totalling 1.2 kilometres in length and encompassing a total area of 7,430sqm. It has also been referred to by the BBC as "India's largest museum".India's largest museum takes flight - Shanon Fernandes, BBC Travel
With 40 million passengers annually, the area will surpass the number of visitors to the Louvre (9m) in Paris.

General Aviation Terminal

CSIA's GA Terminal for private and non-scheduled flight operators (NSOPs) is located at Kalina on the south-west side of the airfield. The terminal was approved for international operations in April 2011, making CSIA the first airport in India to have a self-contained terminal for handling round the clock domestic and international flight operations for private and NSOPs. The terminal offers facilities for passengers departing and arriving on private aircraft and business jets. The terminal has two exclusive lounges, two conference halls, two crew rest rooms and a cafe bar.MIAL General Aviation Terminal – Press release

Cargo Facility

The Air Cargo Complex, located west of the International Passenger Terminal (T2), has been in operation since 1977.MIAL Air Cargo Complex
The cargo apron is capable of handling five wide-bodied aircraft.
In 2009–10, the airport handled 385,937 metric tones of International Cargo and 165,252 metric
tones of Domestic Cargo.MIAL Air Cargo Performances
Air India (AI) and Mumbai International Airport Pvt Ltd (MIAL) have been appointed as custodians of cargo by the Central Board of Excise and Customs at Mumbai. MIAL handles 33 airlines while AI handles 11. Apart from handling 65% of the international volumes at CSIA, MIAL also operates the Common User Domestic Cargo Facility since November 2009 handling Deccan 360 and IndiGo. The common user facility for exports is 7,500 m2 and handles 11,000 tonnes per month. The Common User Express Terminal for couriers is operated by the Express Industry Council of India. Small shipments are handled via the International Passenger Terminal or the Domestic Passenger Terminal while larger express parcels are handled through the general cargo warehouses.
The Cargo Terminal has a Centre for Perishable Cargo(CPC) with an area of 1844 m2 for perishable and temperature sensitive international export shipments, strong rooms of 115 m2 for storage of valuable cargo and storage areas for dangerous goods in both import and export warehouses, dedicated Unaccompanied Baggage handling and clearance areas and 9 coloured X-ray cargo screening machines for export cargo.MIAL Cargo Facilities

Passenger airlines

Cargo airlines

Access

Ville Parle, a railway station on the Western line and Harbour line is the closest station of the Mumbai Suburban Railway network.  The Mumbai Metro is also planned to connect to the airport in the future.

Statistics

Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport is the second-busiest airport in the Indian Subcontinent,
The Mumbai-Delhi route was recently ranked by Official Airline Guide (OAG) as the seventh-busiest domestic route in the world, based on the number of flights per week. This airport, along with Delhi's Indira Gandhi International Airport, is the primary international gateway to India and served by approximately 50 international airlines. It is the primary hub for Jet Airways and GoAir and also serves as a secondary hub for a few other airlines, including Air India, IndiGo, JetLite and SpiceJet. International traffic peaks late in the night, whilst peak domestic traffic is before 10:00. Nevertheless, at least 45% of traffic flows between 10:00 and 18:30 daily.
In July 2010, the Airport was ranked fourth best in the world for having aerobridges, food courts, spas and salons.. In 2008, for the second year in a row, it was the world's most-delayed airport in terms of arrivals. Only 49.95% of arrivals were on time. About 58% of its late arrivals in 2008 were delayed by 30 minutes or more, although the delay in these arrivals is largely attributed to air congestion at a flight's origin.com – The World's Most-Delayed Airports for 2008

Airport services

Fixed base operators (FBO)

There are several fixed base operators at the airport and they include:

=Caterers=

=Fuellers=

=Ground handlers=

Accidents and incidents

1950s

1960s

1970s

2000s

[/ref]

2010s

Awards and honours






