[[Michael Woods (politician)]]

CATEGORIES: 1935 births, Living people, Alumni of University College Dublin, Fianna Fáil politicians, Harvard Business School alumni, Members of the 21st Dáil, Members of the 22nd Dáil, Members of the 23rd Dáil, Members of the 24th Dáil, Members of the 25th Dáil, Members of the 26th Dáil, Members of the 27th Dáil, Members of the 28th Dáil, Members of the 29th Dáil, Members of the 30th Dáil, Ministers for Health (Ireland), Politicians from County Wicklow, Teachtaí Dála, Ministers for Education (Ireland), Ministers for Agriculture (Ireland), Ministers for Social Affairs (Ireland), Ministers of State of the 21st Dáil

Michael Woods (born 8 December 1935) is a former Irish Fianna Fáil politician, who served in a wide range of cabinet positions, most notably as Minister for Agriculture and Food, Minister for Education and Science and Minister for Health.

Life

Woods was born in County Wicklow in December 1935. He was educated at Christian Brothers in Synge Street, Dublin; University College Dublin and Harvard Business School. He qualified with a degree in Agricultural science and a PhD in science.  
Woods joined Fianna Fáil in 1968. At the 1977 general election he stood for the Dáil in the Dublin Clontarf constituency as a Fianna Fáil candidate and was elected alongside Fianna Fáil stalwart George Colley. From 1981 to 2011, he was elected for the Dublin North–East constituency. In 1979 Jack Lynch appointed him as Minister of State at the Department of the Taoiseach (Government Chief Whip). That same year Woods supported Colley in his leadership bid, but the other candidate, Charles Haughey, was successful.
Despite Woods' support for the opponent, Haughey appointed him Minister for Health and Social Welfare. He held that post until 1981 and again in the short-lived 1982 government. In 1987 Fianna Fáil returned to power and Woods returned as Minister for Social Welfare. In 1991, he became Minister for Agriculture and Food. In 1992 Woods entered the leadership contest to succeed Haughey as leader. He received little support and withdrew from the contest. The eventual victor, Albert Reynolds, retained Woods as Minister for the Marine in his new Cabinet. Following the formation of the Fianna Fáil–Labour Party coalition in 1993 Woods remained in the Cabinet and was appointed Minister for Health.
In 1997 Fianna Fáil returned to power after three years in opposition. Woods was appointed Minister for the Marine and Natural Resources.  He introduced a £70 million overhaul of Ireland's fishing fleet and also launched a new maritime college. In the Cabinet reshuffle in 2000 Woods replaced Micheál Martin as Minister for Education. He failed to be retained in the Cabinet following the 2002 general election. He was Chairman of the Joint Oireachtas Committee on Foreign Affairs from 2002–2007.
He retired from politics at the 2011 general election.

Controversies

While serving as Minister for Education, Woods signed a controversial agreement with 18 Irish religious orders involved in child sex-abuse scandals which limited their compensation liability to the victims of abuse to only €128 million. This compensation scheme is projected to eventually cost the Irish government €1.35 billion. The agreement was signed just before the 2002 general election, and consequently was not laid before the cabinet for its approval. It then remained unpublished for several months. 
In 2003 after brokering the deal, Woods claimed his strong Catholic faith made him the most suitable person to negotiate the deal. He also denied allegations that he was a member of Opus Dei or the Knights of Saint Columbanus after the group Survivors of Child Abuse alleged he was a member of the former.
After the publication of the report of the Commission to Inquire into Child Abuse (CICA), Michael Woods defended the deal, claiming the Department of Education and Science had the management role in the schools in question and that the state knew all the details when making the deal.




