[[Nonpartisan League]]

CATEGORIES: Political parties established in 1915, History of North Dakota, Defunct political parties in the United States, United States regional and state political parties, Political parties of North Dakota, Democratic socialist and social democratic parties and organizations in the United States, 1915 establishments in the United States

The Nonpartisan League (NPL) was a political organization founded in 1915 in the United States by former Socialist Party organizer A. C. Townley. The Nonpartisan League advocated state control of mills, grain elevators, banks and other farm-related industries in order to reduce the power of corporate political interests from Minneapolis, Minnesota.
The NPL originated in North Dakota, but eventually spread throughout the American Midwest and Pacific Northwest during the Progressive Era and was briefly organized as a national party.  It also spread northward into Canada, running in provincial elections and providing some of the basis for the Cooperative Commonwealth Federation in Saskatchewan and the Progressive Party of Canada. The NPL goat served as the League's mascot.  It was known as "The Goat that Can't be Got."[ref]
[/ref]

History

Its origins date from 1915, a time when small farmers in North Dakota felt exploited by out-of-state companies. One author later described the wheat-growing state as "really a tributary province of Minneapolis-St. Paul". Minnesota banks made its loans, Minnesota millers handled its grain, and Alexander McKenzie, North Dakota's political boss, lived in St. Paul.
Townley, a failed flax farmer
Proposing that the state of North Dakota create its own bank, warehouses, and factories,
During World War I Townley demanded the "conscription of wealth", blaming "big-bellied, red-necked plutocrats" for the war. He and fellow leader William Lemke received support for the League from isolationist German Americans.
The decade of the 1920s was relatively prosperous for farmers, and the NPL's popularity receded. But the populist undercurrent that fueled its meteoric growth resurged with the coming of the Great Depression and the Dust Bowl conditions of the 1930s. The NPL's William "Wild Bill" Langer was elected to the governorship in 1932 and 1936 (the two terms separated by his declaration of North Dakota's secession from the United States in 1934, and a jail term), and served in the U.S. Senate from 1940 until his death in 1959.
Many remnants of the NPL's short reign continue today, including North Dakota Mill and Elevator and the Bank of North Dakota. Perhaps the most radical of the populist reforms, prohibition of corporate farming, or indeed even of corporate ownership of farmland, was enacted in 1932 by statewide initiative and remains a cornerstone of the state's economic landscape.

Legacy

Although it began as a faction within the Republican Party in 1915, the NPL merged with the Democratic Party of North Dakota in 1956.  The Executive Committee of the NPL still formally exists within the party structure of the North Dakota Democratic-NPL headed by former State Senator S. F. "Buckshot" Hoffner (D-NPL, Esmond), Chairman and former Lt. Governor Lloyd B. Omdahl, Secretary.
A fairly accurate portrayal of the founding of the NPL was dramatized in the 1978 film Northern Lights, starring Joe Spano, which won the 1980 Camera d'Or award for best first film at the Cannes Film Festival.
The Fred and Gladys Grady House and the Oliver and Gertrude Lundquist House, both in Bismarck, North Dakota, are listed on the U.S. National Register of Historic Places as examples of the work of the Nonpartisan League's Home Building Association.



Footnotes

Further reading




