[[Kristanna Loken]]

CATEGORIES: 1979 births, Living people, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, Actresses from New York, American female models, American film actresses, American film producers, American people of German descent, American people of Norwegian descent, American television actresses, American video game actresses, Bisexual actors, Bisexual women, LGBT entertainers from the United States, LGBT models, LGBT people from New York, LGBT producers, People from Columbia County, New York

Kristanna Sommer Loken (born October 8, 1979) is an American model and actress. She is best known for her roles in Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines, BloodRayne, and Painkiller Jane.

Early life

Loken was born in Ghent, New York, the daughter of Rande (née Porath), a model, and Merlin "Chris" Loken, a writer and apple farmer.

Career

After her mother encouraged her to become a model,"Kristanna Loken: Fashion Model: Profile with photos, biography and more". Fashion Model Directory. Retrieved June 14, 2012. Loken participated at the 1994 Elite Model Look in which she placed 3rd runner-up."Look of the Year: 2002-2001". Elite Model Look. Retrieved June 14, 2012. Loken started her acting career in 1994, playing "Danielle 'Dani' Andropoulos #3"  on an episode of As the World Turns,SoapCentral. and she appeared in several television shows and films, including regular appearances on the television shows Philly, Unhappily Ever After, and Boy Meets World.
In 1998 she starred in Mortal Kombat: Conquest as Taja. She is probably best known for her performance as the cyborg T-X (Terminatrix) in the 2003 movie Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines.D. Hagberg, Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines, 2003, p.56 In 2004, she appeared in a German television movie, Die Nibelungen (also known as "Dark Kingdom: The Dragon King" or "Sword of Xanten"), which aired as a 2-part mini-series and set a ratings record. She starred as the leading character in the 2006 film version of the video game BloodRayne, and appeared in director Uwe Boll's film version of the video game Dungeon Siege, called In the Name of the King.
She appeared in 10 episodes of the fourth season of The L Word, which debuted in January 2007. Additionally, she starred as the title character in the Sci-Fi Channel's series Painkiller Jane which aired from April to September 2007. In December 2011, Loken appeared in the fifth-season finale of the USA Network TV series Burn Notice as CIA agent Rebecca Lang, and would reprise that role in three sixth-season episodes during mid-2012.

Personal life

Loken stated in an interview with Curve magazine: "I have dated and have had sex with men and women, and have to say that the relationships I have had with certain women have been much more fulfilling, sexually and emotionally, than of those with certain men... I connect with an aura, with energy. And if the person with whom I connect happens to be a female, that's just the way it is. That's what makes my wheels turn."
In November 2006, Loken's comments to The Advocate were widely interpreted and reported by the media as an admission that she was in a relationship with her Bloodrayne co-star Michelle Rodriguez, though the relationship was never officially confirmed by either actress.advocate. The couple were married at her family's farm on May 10, 2008. "Kristanna & Noah Wed!". Archived at Internet Archive. In an interview published on November 16, 2009, she announced that she had separated from Danby and was now in a relationship with a woman. "Exclusive Interview: Catching Up with Kristanna Loken". After Ellen.

Filmography

Film

Television

Video games

Awards and nominations






