[[Lesser Flamingo]]

CATEGORIES: Phoenicopteridae, Flamingos, Birds of Africa, Birds of Pakistan, Birds of India, Birds of Tanzania, Birds of Oman, Birds of Yemen, Birds of Iran, Birds of Afghanistan, Birds of Mauritania, Birds of the Gambia, Birds of Senegal, Birds of Guinea, Birds of Sierra Leone, Birds of Liberia, Birds of Guinea-Bissau, Birds of Ghana, Birds of Togo, Birds of Benin, Birds of Nigeria, Birds of Niger, Birds of Chad, Birds of Cameroon, Birds of Egypt, Birds of Ethiopia, Birds of Eritrea, Birds of Sudan, Birds of Djibouti, Birds of Somalia, Birds of Kenya, Birds of Burundi, Birds of Rwanda, Birds of Malawi, Birds of Mozambique, Birds of Zambia, Birds of Zimbabwe, Birds of Swaziland, Birds of Lesotho, Birds of South Africa, Birds of Namibia, Birds of Botswana, Birds of Angola, Birds of the Republic of the Congo, Birds of Gabon, Birds of Madagascar, Articles containing video clips, Birds of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Birds of Ivory Coast, Animals described in 1798

The Lesser Flamingo (Phoenicopterus minor) is a species of flamingo occurring in sub-Saharan Africa with another population in India. Birds are occasionally reported from further north, but these are generally considered vagrants.

Characteristics

The Lesser Flamingo is the smallest species of flamingo, though it is a tall and largish bird by most standards. The species can weigh from 
Most of the plumage is pinkish white. The clearest difference between this species and the Greater Flamingo, the only other Old World species of flamingo, is the much more extensive black on the bill. Size is less helpful unless the species are together, since the sexes of each species also differ in height.
The Lesser Flamingo may be the most numerous species of flamingo, with a population that (at its peak) probably numbers up to two million individual birds. This species feeds primarily on Spirulina, algae which grow only in very alkaline lakes. Presence of flamingo herds near water bodies is indication of sodic alkaline water which is not suitable for irrigation use.  Although blue-green in colour, the algae contain the photosynthetic pigments that give the birds their pink colour. Their deep bill is specialised for filtering tiny food items. The lesser flamingo also feeds on shrimp.
Lesser Flamingos are prey to a variety of species, including Marabou Storks, Baboons, African Fish Eagles, and Wildcats.

Breeding

In Africa, where they are most numerous, the Lesser Flamingos breed principally on the highly caustic Lake Natron in northern Tanzania. Their other African breeding sites are at Etosha Pan, Sua Pan and Kamfers Dam. The last confirmed breeding at Aftout es Saheli in coastal Mauritania was in 1965. Breeding occurred at Lake Magadi in Kenya in 1962 when Lake Natron was unsuitable due to flooding. In the early 20th century, breeding was also observed at Lake Nakuru.
The species also breeds in southwestern and southern Asia. In 1974, they bred at the Rann of Kutch, but since then only at the Zinzuwadia and Purabcheria salt pans in north-western India.
Like all flamingos, they lay a single chalky white egg on a mound they build of mud. Chicks join creches soon after hatching, sometimes numbering over a hundred thousand individuals. The creches are marshalled by a few adult birds who lead them by foot to fresh water, a journey that can reach over .

Conservation

Despite being the most numerous species of flamingo, it is classified as near-threatened due to its declining population and the low number of breeding sites, some of which are threatened by human activities.
The population in the two key east African lakes, Nakuru and Bogoria, have been adversely affected in recent years by suspected  heavy metal poisoning, while its primary African breeding area in Lake Natron is currently under threat by a proposed soda ash plant by Tata Chemicals.
The Lesser Flamingo is one of the species to which the Agreement on the Conservation of African-Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds (AEWA) applies.

Media

Image:Lesser Flamingos I - Chilika IMG 9298.
Image:Lesser Flamingos I3 - Chilika IMG 9295.
Image:Lesser Flamingoes I IMG 9294.
Image:Phoeniconaias minor.jpg| At Disney's Animal Kingdom
Image:Flamingo00. G. Finch-Davies
Image:Phoeniconaias minor3.jpg|Lake Nakuru, Kenya
Image:Phoeniconaias minor.ogg|Video taken at Disney's Animal Kingdom
Image:Lesser Flamingos, 2000 adults, Kamfersdam.jpg|Breeding colony at Kamfers Dam
Image:Lesser Flamingo Iran.JPG






