[[INSEAD]]

CATEGORIES: INSEAD, Business schools in France, Business schools in Singapore, Management education, Management science, Educational institutions established in 1957

INSEAD is a graduate business school with campuses in Europe (Fontainebleau, France), Asia (Singapore) and the Middle East (Abu Dhabi). INSEAD offers various academic programmes including a full-time Master of Business Administration (MBA) programme, a Master of Finance programme, a PhD in management programme, and several executive education programmes (including an executive MBA).
INSEAD, widely considered one of the best business schools in the world,
With three campuses, one in Europe, another in Asia and the other in the Middle East, INSEAD has been a pioneer in setting up a multi-campus as a way to push the globalization of its faculty and curriculum. An HBS case study, for instance, explores INSEAD's approach to business education in a global context and how it functions with a multi-campus setting.

History

INSEAD was founded in 1957 by Harvard professor Georges Doriot along with a group of his former MBA students. The name INSEAD was originally an acronym for the French "Institut Européen d'Administration des Affaires" or European Institute of Business Administration.

Campuses

The original campus (Europe Campus) is located in Fontainebleau, near Paris, France. INSEAD's second campus (Asia Campus) is in the Buona Vista district of the city-state of Singapore. The third and newest campus (Middle East Campus) is located in Abu Dhabi.

Degree Programmes

MBA

The INSEAD MBA curriculum comprises a range of required core courses and electives. The core courses cover traditional management disciplines including finance, economics, organizational behaviour, accounting, ethics, marketing, statistics, operations management, international political analysis, supply chain management, leadership and corporate strategy.
There are approximately 80 electives on offer in the Accounting and Control, Decision Sciences, Economics and Political Science, Entrepreneurship and Family Enterprise, Finance, Marketing, Organisational, Strategy and Technology and Operations Management areas.
The INSEAD MBA starting in September only takes 10 months to complete. INSEAD also offers a 12 month MBA starting in January for students who want the opportunity to complete a summer internship.

=Rankings=

INSEAD's MBA programme is consistently ranked as one of the top global programmes by several leading publications including the Financial Times (#5 MBA),  and Bloomberg Business Week (#2 MBA Non-US Schools)

PhD Programme

INSEAD's fully funded doctoral degree (PhD) in Management requires four to five years of full-time study and it is offered in both Europe and Asia campuses. 
The first two years of the programme are devoted to coursework, while from the third and fourth (or sometimes fifth) years are dedicated to research and dissertation.

Executive Degrees

=Executive MBA=

Three EMBA sections (Europe, Asia, Middle East)with approximately 200 participants for both GEMBA (Global EMBA programme) and TIEMBA (dual-degree EMBA programme offered by INSEAD and Tsinghua University in China).

=Master in Finance=

Approximately 30 participants (mainly on Asia campus; one module taught in Europe).

=Executive Master in Consulting and Coaching for Change=

36 participants per year in two intakes (Europe and Asia campus).

Executive Education

INSEAD holds both company/firm specific and open enrolment executive education programmes at its campuses in Europe and Asia and at its Executive Education centre in Abu Dhabi, as well as in partnership with corporate universities. Participants usually come from senior or top management, with many years of experience within their company or industry and younger 'high-potentials' identified as being key in succession strategies within their companies. Approximately 12,000 executives from over 125 countries undertake courses or programmes at INSEAD each year.
In 2011, INSEAD launched a new Executive Certificate in Global Management which is awarded to participants who complete at least three INSEAD global management and leadership programmes.

Partnerships and Alliances

Brazil
• Fundação Dom Cabral in Brazil (Executive Education programme - launched in 1990)
U.S.
• Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania (Alliance - launched in 2001)
• Kellogg School of Management (MBA exchange programme - launched in 2010)
• The Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies at Johns Hopkins University in Washington, D.C. (Dual-Degree MA and MBA programme - launched in 2011)
• Yale SOM (School of Management) of Yale University (a post-MBA degree Master of Advanced Management (MAM) programme - launched in 2012)
China
• Tsinghua (Dual EMBA programme - launched in 2006)
• CEIBS (China Europe International Business School) (Executive Education programme - launched in 2012;
MBA exchange programme launched in 2013)
France
• Sorbonne University (alliance) - INSEAD is a founding partner in the multidisciplinary Sorbonne University created in 2012.

Post MBA Careers

The INSEAD Career Development Centre assists companies wishing to recruit INSEAD MBAs and participants.  Approximately 120 companies/firms visit the Asia and Europe campuses during each recruitment season. Career Services organises company presentations and bi-annual career fairs on both campuses, sources jobs on its internal platform CareerLink and publishes a CV book for each graduating class.
Traditionally, McKinsey & Company is the main employer of INSEAD graduates, and they take the largest hire of MBA students annually from INSEAD, either through sponsorship or new hires. The main employers of the 2012 class MBA participants and the number of graduates employed were McKinsey & Company (108), Boston Consulting Group (80), Bain & Company (52), Booz & Company (24), Google (18), Roland Berger Strategy Consultants (15), A.T. Kearney (14), Amazon. 8, L'Oreal (8), Credit Suisse (8), Accenture (6), etc.
INSEAD has a reciprocal agreement with Harvard Business School, Stanford Graduate School of Business and Kellogg School of Management to share career services. Alumni of the four schools have access to job opportunities database of each
other.
INSEAD also participates in the MBA Global Career Forum, together with other leading business schools.

Research

INSEAD has 15 Research Centres conducting research in different business and geographical areas, including:

Teaching methods

Teaching methods at INSEAD include case studies, lectures, peer-to-peer learning, tutorials, group work, simulations and role-plays.

Case studies

The Case method is largely used in the classroom as a teaching method. Business case studies authored by INSEAD professors are the second most widely used in classrooms by business schools globally, after Harvard Business School's case studies.2008 European Case Awards
The Business cases that have been designed at INSEAD have received many awards, are made available in Case clearing houses, and used by many other business schools.

Business simulation games

Business simulation games are largely used by INSEAD. Many of them have been designed by INSEAD faculties
Examples of Business simulation games that have been designed by INSEAD faculties and used in many institutions:

Innovation in education

A number of researches and initiatives are conducted at INSEAD to incorporate innovative learning approaches.
In particular centers conduct research in learning technologies and approaches such as:
 | last=Murray| first=Sarah
 | date=October 27, 2008
 | title=Technology: Networking widens EMBA net
