[[Ford Crown Victoria]]

CATEGORIES: Ford vehicles, Full-size vehicles, Rear-wheel-drive vehicles, Sedans, 1950s automobiles, 1990s automobiles, 2000s automobiles, 2010s automobiles, Flexible-fuel vehicles, Vehicles introduced in 1955, Vehicles introduced in 1992, Goods manufactured in Canada, Taxicab vehicles, Ford Panther platform



The Ford Crown Victoria (or simply Crown Vic) is a rear-wheel drive full-size sedan that was marketed and manufactured by Ford Motor Company; it was produced from the 1992 to the 2012 model years over two generations. The name "Crown Victoria" was first used for a 1955 version of the Fairlane. Discontinued in the 2011 model year, it had been in production since 1991 at Ford's St. Thomas Assembly plant in Talbotville, Ontario, Canada.  Dropping its previous LTD prefix, Crown Victoria revived a nameplate used by Ford on a two-door version of the Fairlane sold in the North American market during the mid-1950s.
The Crown Victoria shared the Ford Panther platform and major powertrain and suspension components with the Lincoln Town Car and Mercury Grand Marquis.  Along with its rebadged Mercury and Lincoln variants, the Crown Victoria was the final full-frame rear-wheel-drive passenger sedan produced in North America.  The durability associated with its layout popularized the use of the Crown Victoria with taxicab and fleet owners going on to become one of the most commonly used police patrol/pursuit vehicles in North America.

1955–1956

The first "Crown Victoria" appeared in 1955; it was a two-door six-seater coupe, part of the Ford Fairlane range. It differed from the regular Victoria model (named after a type of carriage) by having a stainless steel band that 'crowned' the roofline passing right over the car as an extension of the B-pillar line.  The model was produced in 1955 and 1956. In 1956, Ford added its Lifeguard safety package.
One version called Ford Crown Victoria Skyliner had the front part of the roof (in front of the steel band) in acrylic glass. This made the car difficult to sell, especially in the southern states in USA. Thus few Skyliners were made. Most of them ended up in Sweden, possibly because the climate was more suitable for an acrylic glass roof.

LTD Crown Victoria

1979–1980

Downsized two years after its main rival, the Chevrolet Caprice, the new 1979 LTD was fifteen inches shorter than its 1978 predecessor and ten inches shorter than the LTD II.  The clean-sheet redesign marked the introduction of the  Ford Panther platform; the reduced width, size, and bulk all led to improved road manners and maneuverability, which had been major drawbacks in the previous LTD.  Ride quality improved as well with the new car, as did fuel economy.  On the inside, the interior space remained just as large as the previous LTD, as the Panther design made better use of passenger space than before.
Originally, the LTD was offered with the ).  Most 1979-1980 LTDs were sold with the three-speed C6 automatic transmission, with the AOD four-speed optional.

1982–1991

In 1983, the LTD range was split in two as part of a shift in the Ford product lineup.  The standard LTD was "downsized" into a mid-size car that replaced the Granada; the 1983 LTD was facelifted version of its predecessor.  For 1983, full-size Ford sedans took on the LTD Crown Victoria nameplate.  Police models were common to see (like most Crown Victorias). Civilian models were powered by a fuel-injected 302 cu in (5.0L) V8, while police vehicles used a 351 cu in (5.8L) V8 with Ford's Variable venturi carburetor.  Station wagons were available as both body-colored LTD Crown Victoria and woodgrained Country Squire models.
As the 1980s progressed, the LTD Crown Victoria underwent many gradual changes.  1983 saw the introduction of central fuel injection (CFI) on the 302 cu in (5.0L) models (identifiable by a fender badge reading "Electronic Fuel Injection"), which was replaced with sequential electronic fuel injection (SEFI) in 1986 (accompanied by the deletion of said fender badge).  Many mechanical changes were made during this time as well, but most important, it should be noted that all 302 cu in (5.0L) engines from 1985-on were equipped with a hydraulic roller valvetrain that allowed the use of improved camshaft profiles across the production line.  1987 marked the final year of production of two-door sedans.  The Crown Victoria, along with its cousin, the Mercury Grand Marquis, received exterior facelifts for the 1988 model year to improve aerodynamics, followed by an all-new dash, door panels, standard power windows, and standard driver's side airbag and revised steering column in 1990. 

First generation (1991–1997)

1992–1994

Released in March 1991 as an early 1992 model, the Crown Victoria sedan (which dropped the LTD prefix) was completely redesigned with a rounder, eight-window roofline (which shared many design cues with its contemporary, the newly redesigned 1992 Taurus). The redesign reduced the coefficient of drag from 0.42 to 0.34; the suspension setup was also heavily revised.  To focus on satisfying consumer demand, fleet sales were put on hold for 14 months.  As a result of changing tastes in family vehicles, the Country Squire station wagon was discontinued; its role would largely be fulfilled by the Aerostar minivan and Explorer mid-size SUV.  Additionally, Ford still offered the Taurus and Mercury Sable station wagon with a third row of seating.    
A significant introduction with this generation was the overhead-cam, fuel-injected 4.6 L Modular engine as the replacement for both the 5.0L and 5.8L Windsor V8s.  Aside from its Mercury Grand Marquis and Lincoln Town Car stablemates, no other American sedan in the Crown Victoria's price range offered such an engine. This engine was introduced in the 1991 Lincoln Town Car.  Its stated redesign purpose was to increase fuel mileage and increase power over the 302 cu. in./5.0 liter of the day.  The lighter Modular engine, along with an aluminum hood, contributed to the reduced weight of the 1992 model.
By continuing Canadian production,
Critics disapproved of the Taurus-like front end, with no grill; consequently, it was given a front grille for the 1993 model year.  Although cooling was never a problem without a grill, apparently looks were. In the rear, a reflector strip between the taillights was added.

=Touring Sedan=

Also new for 1992, a performance-oriented "Touring Sedan" trim was added. The model featured dual exhausts for an increased engine output of , wider tires, rear air suspension, and various suspension components shared with the police package model for improved handling.  Actually, it turned out that the Touring Sedan could be optioned-out with components such as speed sensitive steering and larger dia. sway bars, and lack of electronic speed limiter, that were superior to the Police Package.  
Not all Touring Sedans were optioned superior to the Police Package, but the possibility did exist, so the Touring Sedan was discontinued for the 1993 model year, as Police sales became more important. The Touring Sedan also came with a standard two-tone exterior paint scheme, unique leather interior, special alloy wheels, and every luxury feature available for that year. The "Handling and Performance" package were also available separately for a reduced price without the luxury features of the "Touring Sedan", as was a tow package. The Touring Sedan was dropped after 1992, though the "Handling and Performance" package continued, albeit a watered down version of what was possible in the 1992 Touring Sedan.

1994–1997

Another minor restyle followed suit in 1994 for the 1995 model year, with a new grille, taillights, and dash. To accommodate the design of the new taillights, the rear license plate was moved from the bumper to the trunklid, fitted between the taillights.  The restyle was better received than General Motors' more radical restyle of the Chevrolet Caprice which may have contributed to its exit and Ford's ultimate dominance of this segment.
Two trim levels were available for the 1996 model year: Crown Victoria (base) and LX. In addition to the available anti-lock brake system (ABS), a traction control system was optional as well. A single-key entry system became standard, along with a hidden audio antenna, rear window defroster and tinted glass. A Handling and Performance Package with touring tires was optional and radial-spoke wheel covers were available on the base model. Automatic climate control and a JBL audio system became available on the LX.
For 1997, only slight adjustments were made in anticipation of a 1998 restyle. They included increased responsiveness and improved steering control.

Second generation (1998–2012)

For the 1998 model year, the second (and final) generation of the Crown Victoria was introduced.  Following the lack of acceptance of the radical styling of the 1991-1996 Chevrolet Caprice, the Crown Victoria moved further away from its 1992 redesign.  Instead of borrowing design cues from the Taurus, the Crown Victoria shared many of its body parts, including its entire roofline, with the more popular Mercury Grand Marquis.  To differentiate itself from Mercury, the Crown Victoria was given larger headlights, different bumpers, and a rectangular grille.  The interior design saw little change aside from a new steering wheel.
Mechanically, a revised four-link suspension with a Watt's linkage was added to the rear axle; while not a change to independent rear suspension, general road handling manners improved at the expense of towing capacity.  Larger brakes necessitated the standardization of 16-inch wheels.  Police cars (P71/P72) switched from full wheel covers and dog-dish covers held onto the wheel by four nubs (on HD Steel Wheels) to a design with center caps that attached onto the lug nuts; these were sourced from the Explorer SUV.  Under the hood, coil-on-plug ignition replaced the traditional spark plug wires; a first for the 4.6 L Modular V8, this was a design borrowed from the 3.4 L V8 used in the 1996-1999 Ford Taurus SHO.
In 2005, the Crown Victoria was replaced as Ford's flagship sedan with the introduction of the Five Hundred.  However, the 5,424 Crown Victorias sold in January 2007 far exceeded the 3,526 of the newer Five Hundred (rebranded as the Taurus in 2008) which was a more technically advanced full-size car with similar passenger space and better fuel economy.

Yearly changes

Not much changed for the 1999 model year, with the Crown Victoria receiving three more exterior colors and the previously optional ABS brakes became standard.
2000 brought an emergency trunk release system, child seat anchor brackets in the back seat, the "Belt Minder" chime to the Crown Victoria.
For the 2002 model year, heated exterior side mirrors became available, along with standard floor mats, improved cloth upholstery, and a new trunk storage system option on the LX.

2003: Major mechanical revisions

For the 2003 model year, the chassis was again redesigned with hydroformed steel. The front and rear suspension were also completely overhauled. New inverted monotube shocks were now used (replacing the old twin-tube shocks that had been used since the 1960s). In the front, new aluminum control arms, and rack and pinion steering (replacing the recirculating ball units) have been implemented. The rear suspension was redesigned for durability in police-duty applications and the rear shocks were moved outboard of the frame rails for better handling and ease of maintenance. As a result, the road-handling manners of the Panther platform cars had improved significantly. The engine output increased due to the addition of a knock sensor for more aggressive timing. 2003 models also received optional seat-mounted combination head and torso side airbags.

=Yearly changes=

For 2004, Ford altered the transmission, revised the torque converter for better acceleration, and updated the layout of the optional overhead console.
The Crown Victoria retained the same exterior styling, but 2005 models received a rear whip radio antenna rather than an integrated rear defroster antenna. 2005 models also received a new steering wheel, optional power moonroof and 6-CD changer.  2005 also saw the addition of electronic throttle control. It was also the last model Ford offered with an analogue odometer.   
The rear whip antenna was removed from the 2006 models in favor of the integrated rear defroster antenna. 2006 models also received a redesigned instrument cluster featuring a more modern speedometer (though again 
For the 2007 model year, the LX Sport trim was dropped leaving the Standard and LX. Most of the LX Sport's components were then made available with the new optional Premium Sport-Handling and Performance Package.

2008–2011: Fleet sales

In 2006, retail sales of the Crown Victoria dwindled to just 3,000, compared to 38,280 of its stablemate Mercury Grand Marquis in the first nine months of 2007.  Starting with the 2008 model year, the Crown Victoria became available solely through Ford Fleet and the retail version was succeseded with its submate the Mercury Grand Marquis which was still sold for retail sales except the Middle East where this and the Mercury Grand Marquis are all retail cars; As of June 21, 2007, the Crown Victoria was removed from the Ford retail website, most likely to promote the 2008 Ford Taurus. This has been the case in Canada since the 2000 model year (see below). Also, with the descent into fleet-only sales across North America, the LX Premium Sport and Handling Package and the Handling and Performance Package (the only Crown Victorias produced for the North American market with dual exhaust, save for the Police Interceptor) were officially discontinued by Ford.
Ford had reportedly announced that it would freshen both the Crown Victoria and the Mercury Grand Marquis for the 2009 model year. Ford had told the Canadian Auto Workers that it would invest $200 million in the vehicles, which are assembled at the St. Thomas Assembly Plant in St. Thomas, Ontario. Retrieved February 20, 2008. However, Ford released the 2009 Crown Victoria with few if any changes from the 2008 model, with no announced plans for changes in the future. Retrieved May 17, 2009
For 2009, Ford narrowed the available Crown Victorias in North America by one more model. The Standard (P73) model designation was discontinued in favor of the LX. To make the LX more appealing to future buyers (those who buy the cars after their service in rental fleets) it now uses the 5-spoke alloy wheels once used specifically for the LX Premium Sport and Handling package. These wheels are used in favor of the 9-spoke design the LX has used since 2003, purportedly due to the Lincoln Town Car using 17" wheels standard, as well as the Police Interceptor and the Taxi/Commercial (P72) model. The Grand Marquis underwent a similar change to 17" Lincoln Town Car wheels. Also, the LX Sport wheels were used on all Crown Victorias sent to the Middle East(save for the LX).  For the Police Interceptor, there are two pieces of standard equipment added to its list. The power pedals are now standard on all models, presumably to cut manufacturing costs (Crown Victoria LX, Grand Marquis LS and Lincoln Town Car all had them as standard equipment previously) and side impact airbags are also standard. There are also new, federally mandated recessed window switches. 2011 would mark the final year of the Crown Victoria in the United States, as its lack of stability control made it illegal for sale for the 2012 model year; all 2012 models would be produced for Middle East export.

Discontinuation

As early as 1999, the availability of the Crown Victoria became reduced.  As Ford discontinued the Mercury brand in Canada, the Crown Victoria was relegated to fleet-only sales there as Ford dealerships adopted the Mercury Grand Marquis wearing Ford badging.  After the 2007 model year, this version of the Grand Marquis was replaced by the new full-size Ford Taurus.  From 2000 to 2011, the sole market outside of the United States for the Crown Victoria was the Middle East, largely Saudi Arabia and Kuwait.
In the early 2000s, Ford developed the Volvo-derived Five Hundred to replace the Crown Victoria in the retail marketplace.  As Ford dominated the market for police cars and taxi vehicles at the time, Ford chose to continue the Crown Victoria for the purposes of securing fleet sales; retail customers still interested in full-size rear-wheel drive cars would be marketed towards Mercury and the Grand Marquis.  Sales of the Crown Victoria to retail customers plummeted as a result; only 3,000 were sold in 2006 (outselling only the Ford GT, and only by 1000 cars).  When the Five Hundred was updated and rechristened as the 2008 Ford Taurus, the decision was made to end retail sales of the Crown Victoria in the United States entirely.  A year later, as part of The Way Forward, Ford announced the closure of the St. Thomas, Canada facility where the Crown Victoria and Grand Marquis were assembled; production of the Lincoln Town Car had been relocated there as part of another factory closure.  Production of all three cars would cease by the end of 2011; only the Ford Crown Victoria Police Interceptor would have a direct replacement (a modified version of the Ford Taurus).  With the end of production of the full-size rear wheel drive body-on-frame platform for the Crown Victoria and Lincoln Town Car, Ford is promoting the Ford Taurus and Lincoln MKS flagships for consumers.  Ford is also promoting the Transit Connect Taxicab to replace the Crown Victoria for urban taxi cab usage.A Taxi Trend: Ford Transit Connect Compressed Natural Gas Taxis Heading to Los Angeles and Chicago - Ford Media Press Release - 16 June 2011  Some taxi operators have expressed concerns about replacing the roomy Crown Victoria with smaller, more compact vehicles, due to a "bumpier, more cramped ride" and "knee-bumping back seats and flimsier frames".  For police pursuit use, Ford is promoting the Ford Taurus Police Interceptor and the Ford Explorer interceptor to replace the Ford Crown Victoria Police Interceptor.All-New Ford Police Interceptors to Deliver Higher Fuel Economy with Significant Fuel Savings for Cities Ford Media Press Release - 23 March 2011
All Crown Victorias built after August 31, 2011 are 2012 model year cars. For the 2012 model year the US government required that electronic stability control be fitted on all new cars.
On September 15, 2011, the final Crown Victoria rolled off the assembly line.  It was destined for export to Saudi Arabia.com - September 15, 2011
Ford's discontinuation of the Panther platform cars led to the closure of the St. Thomas plant in Canada and the loss of over a thousand jobs, as well as job losses at suppliers in the USA.

Export

Change of Canadian availability

In Canada, 1999 was the last year the Crown Victoria was individually available to civilians from Ford dealerships. Since 2000, the Crown Victoria has only been available in Canada as a Police Interceptor for law enforcement, or as a taxi or Special Service Vehicle for commercial fleets.  The Mercury Grand Marquis and Lincoln Town Car, which also use the Ford Panther platform, however, were still available at Ford & Lincoln dealerships in Canada through the 2007 model year. Starting with the 2008 models, Ford stopped selling the Grand Marquis in the Canadian market, but continued to sell the Town Car.

Middle East market

Large American sedans have always been part of the landscape in the Middle East.  After the discontinuation of the American-produced Chevrolet Caprice in 1996, the Crown Victoria and its twin, the Mercury Grand Marquis became the car of choice for buyers of large American cars in the region.  Consequently, the loss of General Motors market share in the region led to the 1999 reintroduction of the Caprice as a badge-engineered Australian Holden Statesman/Caprice (in left hand drive form).  Despite their age, and more modern competition from General Motors, sales of the Ford Panther platform remained strong, especially in Kuwait and Saudi Arabia.  As stability control was not required for export for this region, the Middle East was the sole region the 2012 Crown Victoria was legal for sale; the final models were all produced for export to this region.

=Models and Specifications=

Vehicles destined for the Middle East are referred to as "GCC Spec" vehicles, and the Crown Victoria is available in five different trim levels in Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries: 
As far as the market in Kuwait is concerned, where Mercury Grand Marquis sales exceeded that of the Crown Victoria, only the Standard and Standard Long-Wheelbase models were sold. Other models have not been imported as of the year 2000; 1999 was the last year for the LX trim level. This was part of the authorized dealer/importer's decision to focus on the Grand Marquis due to the smaller market size.
While options and standard features vary from country to country in the region, the following is listed as standard equipment on 2011 models:
The warranty for the Crown Victoria was 5 years/200,000 kilometers (125,000 miles) – whichever came first.
A driver's side spotlight assembly was optional on Standard and Standard Long-Wheelbase models, while a monochromatic paint job is optional on Sport, LX and LX Sport models. Choice of colors on monochromatic paint jobs include Dark Toreador Red, Silver Birch, Tungsten and Black. A Mercury Marauder rear spoiler was standard equipment on Sport and LX Sport models, optional on the LX and Standard trim. LX and LX Sport models also come with power 8-way driver and front passenger seats.
Worthy of note, the American Handling and Performance Package (HPP) was changed to "Export Handling Package" for the Middle East. The only differences between the two is that GCC Spec models have a 2.73 rear axle ratio (as opposed to 3.27) and as a true dual exhaust system was standard equipment, it was not part of the package. Vehicles equipped with this package also come with a monochromatic paint job. The Export Handling Packages (EHP) comes with a tuned rear air suspension, revised coil springs, handling shock absorbers and an upsized rear stabilizer bar. EHP is standard on Sport and LX Sport models and is only an option on the LX trim. It is not available on Standard and Standard Long-Wheelbase models.
A DVD entertainment system (marketed as "Export DVD Entertainment System") was added for the 2007 model year; it was optional on Sport, LX and LX Sport models.

=2008 "Special Edition"=

With no major redesign since 1998, in order to remain competitive, Ford designed a trim package for the Crown Victoria in the Middle East for the 2008 model year. Known as the Special Edition, it was only available on the P72 Standard model; this cosmetic package adds the following:
Everything else on this vehicle is identical to the Standard model. While this vehicle was not listed in any sales literature, in Saudi Arabia it was available with a choice of different colors. In Kuwait, this model was only available in black (due to market size); the price was approximately KWD 6,000 (approximately $22,000 USD).

Variants

Police Interceptor (1998–2012)

Starting with the 1998 model year, the police version of the Crown Victoria, previously named Crown Victoria P71, was changed to Police Interceptor and new rear badging was assigned instead of the civilian Crown Victoria badge. Though, to date, the Crown Victoria badge is still affixed to Police Interceptors equipped with the Street Appearance package for vehicles that require civilian styling (undercover cars, office/city motor pool, fire departments, etc.). Police Interceptor models come with a black front grille and a black rear fascia on the trunk lid, with black trim under the tail lights on 2000+ models. 1999 through 2000 models have a blacked out version of the standard chrome bar grille, while 2001+ models have a black honeycomb type grille. 1999 models continued with the chrome trim under the tail lights. They also have several "heavier-duty" mechanical upgrades and newer models have additional safety features to deal with fuel tank safety concerns. Ford has begun development of the next-generation Police Interceptor, based on the 2010 Ford Taurus. A seamless transition is planned as the Crown Victoria will end production by late 2011.

Long-wheelbase commercial version (2002–2012)

In 2002, Ford introduced a long-wheelbase version of the Crown Victoria, available only to commercial fleets (mostly used by taxi companies) in North American markets. This version gives six extra inches of wheelbase length, made possible by a new frame and extended body.
This version is not available to the general public, nor is there a stretched version of the Police Interceptor.  However, there was a special service version available for the police market from 2002 to 2006, with an available street appearance trim option from 2002 to 2004, due to its targeted use mostly in the taxi and livery market.
In the Middle East, long-wheelbase versions of both the Mercury Grand Marquis and Crown Victoria are available to the general public.

Safety concerns

Fuel tank

While the car has been highly rated for safety, there was some controversy and lawsuits in the 1990s and 2000s over Ford Crown Victoria (and its Mercury and Lincoln counterparts) gas tank leaks after certain types of high speed impacts, specifically when being hit in the rear end  at high speeds.  These impacts did cause fuel tank failures in the Crown Victoria. The leaking fuel in combination with friction between the vehicle and the road was found to be the cause of fires.
The reports that the cars were more prone to fires during a rear collision was a simple combination of three things. First, most law enforcement agencies rely heavily on the Crown Victoria as their primary vehicle, meaning that any police-related auto accident is very likely to involve a Crown Victoria. Second, the accidents occurred as the result of the officers intentionally parking their vehicles close to active traffic to shield a stopped motorist—something most civilians would never do. Third, the impacting vehicle was often traveling at, or above, the posted legal limit ( in most jurisdictions).
The condition was exacerbated by police equipment installers drilling over the package tray in the luggage compartment. Due to the gas tank's orientation, drilling through the package tray may result in drilling into the gas tank. Installers also used screws set directly into the bulkhead and facing the fuel tank. In the event of a high-energy collision, these screws could be forced into the tank, both rupturing the tank and possibly acting as a spark source. Long bolts for mounting heavier equipment were also directly suspect. The manufacturer provided an aftermarket shield to help prevent these items from puncturing the tank during impact. Further, many investigations, both performed by federal/state agencies, and the police department themselves, have found that removable items in the trunk were improperly stowed. These items became tank-piercing projectiles during the rear-collision scenarios.  Ford's second solution came in the form of a recall kit including patterns to mark unsafe areas (to drill) in the luggage compartment. Also included were rubberized kevlar and hard ballistic nylon shields for the differential cover lower shock bolts. They also included a kevlar-based trunk liner.
Despite numerous court cases charging Ford with partial liability for fires caused in accidents, the company has never been found liable in a Crown Victoria accident.
Notably, only the Ford Crown Victoria and new Ford police car have been certified for high speed rear impact collisions, adding credibility to Ford's statement that fiery crashes are a result of extreme and unfortunate situations.

Intake manifold defect

Model years 1996 to 2001 inclusive, using an all-composite intake manifold, are subject to coolant leaks.  Late in 2005 Ford settled a class action lawsuit.  See Intake Manifold Defect for details.

Sales






