[[Owen Wister]]

CATEGORIES: 19th-century American novelists, 20th-century American novelists, American male novelists, Western (genre) writers, Writers from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Writers from Wyoming, St. Paul's School (Concord, New Hampshire) alumni, 1860 births, 1938 deaths, Pennsylvania Republicans, Harvard Lampoon people, Members of The Philadelphia Club, Members of the American Philosophical Society, Wister family, Burials in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

Owen Wister (July 14, 1860 – July 21, 1938) was an American writer and "father" of western fiction.

Biography

Early life

Owen Wister was born on July 14, 1860,Nelson, Randy F. The Almanac of American Letters. Los Altos, California: William Kaufmann, Inc., 1981: 44. ISBN 0-86576-008-X in Germantown, a well-known neighborhood in the northwestern part of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.  His father, Owen Jones Wister, was a wealthy physician, one of a long line of Wisters raised at the storied Belfield estate in Germantown. Butler, The Remarkable Wisters at Belfield, La Salle University, 1994.  He was a distant cousin of Sally Wister.  His mother, Sarah Butler Wister, was the daughter of Fanny Kemble, a British actress, and Pierce (Mease) Butler."Owen Wister: Brief Life of a Mythmaker," Harvard Magazine, 2002. by Castle Freeman, Jr.

Education

Wister briefly attended  schools in Switzerland and Britain, and later studied at St. Paul's School in Concord, New Hampshire and Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachusetts, where he was a classmate of Theodore Roosevelt, a member of Hasty Pudding Theatricals, an editor of the Harvard Lampoon, and a member of Delta Kappa Epsilon (Alpha chapter). As a senior Wister wrote the Hasty Pudding's then most successful show, Dido and Aeneas, whose proceeds aided in the construction of their theater. Wister graduated from Harvard in 1882.
At first he aspired to a career in music and spent two years studying at a Paris conservatory. Thereafter, he worked briefly in a bank in New York before studying law; he graduated from Harvard Law School in 1888. Following this, he practiced with a Philadelphia firm but was never truly interested in that career. He was interested in politics, however, and was a staunch supporter of U.S. president Theodore Roosevelt. In the 1930s, Wister opposed President Franklin D. Roosevelt and his New Deal.

Writing career

He began his literary work in 1891. Wister had spent several summers out in the American West, making his first trip to Wyoming in 1885. Like his friend Teddy Roosevelt, Wister was fascinated with the culture, lore and terrain of the region. On an 1893 visit to Yellowstone, Wister met the western artist Frederic Remington; who remained  a lifelong friend. When he started writing, he naturally inclined towards fiction set on the western frontier. Wister's most famous work remains the 1902 novel The Virginian, the loosely constructed story of a cowboy who is a natural aristocrat, set against a highly mythologized version of the Johnson County War and taking the side of the large land owners. This is widely regarded as being the first cowboy novel and was reprinted fourteen times in eight months. The Almanac of American Letters. Los Altos, California: William Kaufmann, Inc., 1981: 287. ISBN 0-86576-008-X The book was written in the library of The Philadelphia Club, where Wister was a member, and is dedicated to Theodore Roosevelt.
He was a member of several literary societies and was a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and a member of the Board of Overseers of Harvard University.

Personal life

In 1898, Wister married Mary Channing, his cousin. Augenstein, Biography of Mary Channing Wister, La Salle University. The couple had six children. Wister's wife died during childbirth in 1913.

Death

Wister died at his home in Saunderstown, Rhode Island.

Legacy

Since 1978, University of Wyoming Student Publications has released the annual literary and arts magazine Owen Wister Review. The magazine was published bi-annually until 1996. It became an annual publication in the spring of 1997.
Just within the western boundary of the Grand Teton National Park in Wyoming, there is a 11,490-foot mountain named Mount Wister named for Owen Wister.
Near a home that Wister built near La Mesa, California, but never occupied due to his wife's death, is a street called "Wister Drive."  In the same neighborhood are found "Virginian Lane" and "Molly Woods Avenue."Kathleen Crawford, "God's Garden": The Grossmont Art Colony, Journal of San Diego History, Fall 1985.

Bibliography

Novels

Non-Fiction

Story collections

Short Stories

 
 

Essays

Poetry

Operas

Plays

Films & TV Series Inspired by The Virginian



Bibliography




