[[Free German Youth]]

CATEGORIES: Organisations based in East Germany, Historical youth organisations based in Germany, Historical youth wings of political parties in Germany, Youth wings of communist parties, 1936 establishments in Germany, Organizations established in 1936

The Free German Youth, also known as the FDJ (
The organization was meant for young people, both male and female, between the ages of 14 and 25 and comprised about 75% of the young population of former East Germany.
The FDJ was intended to be the "reliable assistant and fighting reserve of the Worker's Party", or Socialist Unity Party of Germany, was a member of the National Front and had representatives in the People's Chamber.
While the movement was intended to promote Marxist-Leninist ideology among East Germany's young people, it did not concentrate on this to the exclusion of other activities. It arranged thousands of holidays for young people through its Jugendtourist agency, and ran discos and open-air rock concerts.  The Festival of Political Songs was an officially sponsored event from 1970 to 1990.

History

FDJ was founded in January 1936 through the merger of the  Young Communist League of Germany, Socialist Youth League of Germany and the Socialist Workers Youth. Geschichte des Ausschusses zur Vorbereitung einer Deutschen Volksfront. Berlin: Akad.-Verl, 2004. p. 119 as an underground anti-fascist movement to oppose Hitler and the Nazi Party's rule. However, the Gestapo of the Third Reich effectively prevented pro-communist groups such as the FDJ from operating within the country and the group was subsequently pushed out of Nazi Germany. During the same year, the organization moved its headquarters to Paris, to Prague in 1938 and later to London. In the United Kingdom the Organization eventually succeeded to build a stable network of groups that also extended to Scotland and other regions and operated there until 1946. I/2009 (German language). 
After the defeat of Hitler and the Nazi Party, the FDJ headquarters moved to the Soviet occupation zone of Germany. The organization once again became active in German politics in 1946.
When Germany was partitioned into the eastern German Democratic Republic and the western Federal Republic of Germany, supported by the Soviet Union and the United States respectively, the FDJ assumed a role in the GDR which resembled that of the Soviet Komsomol. It was recognized as part of the World Federation of Democratic Youth at its annual meeting in Otwock, Poland, on August 21, 1948.
The West German government treated the FDJ with suspicion because of its pro-communist orientation and of its links to East Germany.  In 1951 the government of Konrad Adenauer banned the FDJ along with the Communist Party of Germany (KPD).
In May 1952, Phillip Müller, a member of the FDJ, was shot by the Volkspolizei during a demonstration.444
The FDJ's official newspaper, Junge Welt, at one time was the largest-circulation paper in East Germany. It continues publication  on a smaller scale without FDJ affiliation.jungewelt.php (automated translation into English: 
Members of the FDJ took part in the gala celebrations of East Germany's 40th anniversary on 7 October 1989.  However, at a torchlight parade to cap off the festivities, many began chanting, "Gorby, help us! Gorby, save us!" within earshot of all the Communist dignitaries gathered to watch.  This came as a rude shock to the SED establishment, since the FDJ was supposed to be the party's future.
Between 1989 and the reunification of Germany in 1990, the organization lost much of its membership. 
New South Wales Greens Senator Lee Rhiannon was a member while on exchange in the DDR in the mid 1960s. She was noted for her zeal.
In 2007, the organization was reported to be canvassing for new members. The German domestic intelligence agency - the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution - which tracks "extremist" behavior, holds the FDJ's activities and movements under observation.

Chairman








