[[Star Alliance]]

CATEGORIES: Airline alliances, OpenTravel Alliance, Star Alliance, Organizations established in 1997, 1997 in aviation

Star Alliance is the world's largest global airline alliance, headquartered in Frankfurt am Main, Germany, and Avianca Brazil who will join in the first half of 2014. (They are an affiliate of the Avianca brand). Star Alliance has since grown considerably and the current members with more than 18,000 daily departures combined. These flights reach 1,269 airports in more than 190 countries, with an annual passenger number of 637.6 million.

Membership history

1997–1999: The first three years

On 14 May 1997, five airlines from three continents – Scandinavian Airlines, Thai Airways International, Air Canada, Lufthansa, and United Airlines. came together to launch Star Alliance. The five airlines shared the traditional star logo from the beginning with the five points representing the five founding airlines. The alliance also adopted their first slogan "The Airline Network for Earth", with the goal being to have "an alliance that will take passengers to every major city on earth".
VARIG joined the Star Alliance network, on 22 October 1997 making it the alliance's first "new" member and its gateway airline into South America.
In 3 May 1999, Ansett Australia and Air New Zealand both became members of the alliance, connecting the alliance to Australia and the Pacific. Upon the joining of the two carriers, Star Alliance served 720 destinations in 110 countries with a combined fleet of 1,650 aircraft.
All Nippon Airways joined the alliance in 15 October 1999, and became the group's second Asian airline.All Nippon Airways Joins Star Alliance Network

2000: Major expansion

The new millennium started off with the significant admission of The Austrian Airlines Group (Austrian Airlines, Tyrolean Airways and Lauda Air) in 26 March.
In September 2001, Ansett Australia left the alliance due to bankruptcy which subsequently handed over a majority of the Australian market to Qantas, a rival Oneworld Alliance member. During this year Star Alliance also announced the appointment of their new CEO, Jaan Albrecht.
2003 saw the admission of three new airlines to the alliance. Asiana Airlines joined on 1 March,
In March 2004, Mexicana Airlines left Star Alliance after deciding not to renew a codeshare deal with United Airlines and later joined Oneworld. US Airways then joined the alliance in May, becoming the alliance's second US-based airline.  Finally, in November, Adria Airways, Blue1, and Croatia Airlines joined the alliance as the first three regional members.
In 2005, Star Alliance invited Lineas Aereas Azteca to join the alliance in mid-2007, but the airline went bankrupt and never joined the alliance.  Then Star Alliance saw the admission of TAP Portugal on 14 March, thereby adding new African destinations to Star Alliance's network. After merging with US Airways under the US Airways name, America West Airlines joined, working through US Airways original membership, but would never be considered an individual member.
In April 2006 Swiss International Air Lines joined the alliance as its 17th member and its 6th airline from Europe. SWISS' predecessor, Swissair was due to join the alliance in 2001, but the airline went bankrupt in October of that year and went through an extensive restructuring process before joining 5 years later. April also saw the admission of South African Airways, who joined the alliance as the 18th member.

Tenth anniversary

In May 2007, Star Alliance and its members celebrated the alliance's 10th anniversary. During the previous decade, Star Alliance had grown from a membership of five airlines to include 17 carriers around the world.

Other significant events which took place included the ejection of VARIG from the alliance on 31 January.

2008–2010: Expansion and 2nd decade of operations

On 1 April 2008, Turkish Airlines joined the alliance after an 18-month integration process since December 2006, becoming the seventh European airline becoming the second African airline. The airline joined following its 75th anniversary the previous year, an event which EgyptAir used to subsequently relaunch its image and brand.
On 27 October 2009, Continental Airlines became the 25th full member of the alliance after leaving SkyTeam on 24 October. At a joining ceremony in New York City, Jaan Albrecht, former CEO of Star Alliance, said, "Bringing Continental Airlines into Star Alliance has been a truly unique experience. This is the first time an airline has moved directly from one alliance to another and I would like to thank all those involved in ensuring a smooth switch". At the time, it was rumoured that the switch was part of Continental's initial move in its plan of a United-Continental merge.
On 9 December 2009, the integration of Brussels Airlines into the Star Alliance was effective. Company.com. Retrieved on 2013-08-16.
On 13 May 2010, leading Brazilian carrier TAM Airlines was admitted following a joining ceremony in São Paulo, Fellow Greek airline Olympic Air originally intended to apply to join the alliance if their merger with Aegean Airlines was approved by the EU.
Shanghai Airlines left the alliance on 31 October 2010, due to its merger with China Eastern Airlines, a future member of Star Alliance's rival SkyTeam.
As of September 2010, Star Alliance flew to 1,172 airports in 181 countries, with approximately 21,200 daily departures.

Expansion during 2011 and beyond

The new decade saw the Star Alliance adding new members, but also losing some due to corporate restructuring and collapse.
In August, 2011, after continued delays, Air India was finally rejected for membership after failing to meet the requirements for membership. Member-airlines of the world's largest airline alliance were not able to come to a unanimous decision to allow Air India, whose application had been put on hold earlier.   Later that year, on 13 December 2011, Ethiopian Airlines joined, adding five new countries and 24 destinations to the alliance's route map.
2012 was a year filled with several departures, new members, and restructurings.  In the beginning of January 2012 Continental Airlines completed its merger with United Airlines, thus formally ending its existence and membership in the alliance.  Shortly after this, on 27 January, longtime member Spanair left the alliance after suffering financial collapse and ceasing operations.  bmi then left on 20 April after its acquisition by International Airlines Group (IAG), a parent company of Oneworld Members Iberia and British Airways.  On 21 June 2012 Avianca, TACA Airlines and Copa Airlines all simultaneously joined the alliance, significantly increasing the alliance's presence in Latin America.
On 8 March 2013 TAM Airlines officially announced its departure, long expected after its merger with LAN Airlines to become LATAM Airlines Group. Later during the year, with the addition of EVA Air on 18 June and TACA's integration into Avianca, the alliance now had 28 members, making it the largest of the three main airline alliances.  On 13 December 2013, Air India was officially invited to join Star Alliance again, and the integration process was recommenced. After TAM Airlines and US Airways left Star Alliance, the alliance had 26 airlines.

Member airlines

Full members and their member affiliates

Founding member. 

Airlines operating under the Air Canada Express, Air New Zealand Link, Lufthansa Regional, Tyrolean Airways and United Express brands are not necessarily members of Star Alliance. However, flights are operated on behalf of the respective member airlines, carry their designator code and are Star Alliance flights. 

Members of Lufthansa Regional that are fully owned by Deutsche Lufthansa AG.

Former member airlines and member affiliates

 Collapsed on 12 September 2001. 

 Left the alliance on 1 November 2012 after SAS took over mainline operations, now a member affiliate of Scandinavian Airlines. 

 Left the alliance on 20 April 2012 as a result of its merger with International Airlines Group. IAG's subsidiaries British Airways and Iberia are Oneworld members, bmi merged with British Airways on 27 October 2012. 

 Merged with United Airlines on 3 March 2012. 

 Left the alliance in 2004 after deciding not to renew a codeshare alliance with United Airlines, opting instead to codeshare with American Airlines, and joined Oneworld on 10 November 2009. Collapsed on August 28, 2010. 

 Left the alliance on 31 October 2010 as a result of its merger with China Eastern Airlines, a SkyTeam member. 

 Collapsed on 27 January 2012. 

 Merged with Avianca on 27 May 2013. 

 Left the alliance on 31 March 2014 as a result of its merger with LAN Airlines, a Oneworld member. 

 Left the alliance on 31 March 2014 as a result of its merger with American Airlines, a Oneworld member. 

 Ceased operations on 20 July 2006. 

 Air Canada Tango was dissolved and now is part of Air Canada. 

 United Shuttle's operations ceased and became part of United Airlines.

Future members and future member affiliates

Customer service

Codeshare flights between these airlines are, for the most part, seamless. This tight cooperation led to suspicions of anti-competitive behaviour, and the alliance was investigated by the European Union as a virtual merger of its members. Indeed, some speculated that if government regulations were relaxed, the members would merge into a single corporation, although no evidence has yet materialized. Prior to Star Alliance, Northwest Airlines and KLM were operating together as the forerunners of the modern airline alliance system since 1993, although there had been even earlier pairings and groupings of airlines for decades on a less formal level. The creation of Star Alliance was a milestone in airline history because of its size. It sparked the formation of rivals, notably SkyTeam and Oneworld.
The alliance developed the "Regional" concept in 2004, which helped Star Alliance penetrate individual markets with the regional participation of smaller carriers. Regional Star Alliance members had to be sponsored by an existing full Star Alliance member. However, Star Alliance has stopped designating airlines as "Regional" members and now refers to all the 25 airlines as just "members".
Star Alliance members now fly over 21,200 daily flights to 1,172 airports in 181 countries with a fleet of 4,025 aircraft. Its members carried a total of 627.52 million passengers with a turnover of US$156.8 billion, €145 billion. The alliance's market share is 28% of the global market based on revenue passenger kilometers (RPK), which is greater than the combined market share of all airlines that are not in any of the three major alliances. All Star Alliance carriers combined employ over 405,000 pilots, flight attendants, and other staff. Star Alliance was voted best airline alliance in the Skytrax 2007 World Airline Awards.

Members' hubs

Co-location at Airports (move under one roof)

Premium status

Star Alliance has two premium levels, Silver and Gold, based on a customer's tier status in a member carrier's frequent flyer program. Each of the member and regional airlines recognizes Star Silver/Gold status, with a few exceptions (mainly pertaining to airport lounge access). The statuses have no specific requirements of their own; membership is based solely on the frequent flyer programs of individual member airlines. Many member airlines also have an additional premium status beyond Gold which is not recognised across Star Alliance.

=Star Alliance Silver=

Star Alliance Silver status is awarded to customers who have reached a premium level of a member carrier's frequent flyer program.
Benefits of Star Alliance Silver membership:
Some airlines also offer the following to Silver members:

=Star Alliance Gold=

Star Alliance Gold status is awarded to customers who have reached a high level of a member airline's frequent flyer program.
Benefits of Star Alliance Gold membership:
Some airlines also offer the following to Gold members:

=Qualifying tiers by airline=

Livery and logo

Some Star Alliance members paint some of their planes with the Star Alliance livery, usually featuring a white fuselage with "Star Alliance" signature written across and a black tailfin with the Star Alliance logo while the color or design of the engine cowlings or winglets remains depending on the members livery. Singapore Airlines is the only exception, formerly opting to paint the tails of the aircraft with the airline's logo; and now applying the Star Alliance logo sans the black tailfin painting, leaving it white. Asiana Airlines was the first Star Alliance member to paint their aircraft in the current Star Alliance livery.
Aircraft painted in the airlines' own livery have the Star Alliance logo painted behind the cockpit. Currently, 80 aircraft are painted in the Star Alliance livery.






