[[Land's End]]

CATEGORIES: Headlands of Cornwall, Penwith, Visitor attractions in Cornwall

Land's End ( or Pedn an Wlas)An English-Cornish Glossary in the Standard Written Form (gives both Penn an Wlas and Pedn an Wlas) is a headland and holiday complex in western Cornwall, England. It is the most westerly point of mainland Cornwall and England, is within the Penwith peninsula and is about eight miles (13 km) west-southwest of Penzance at the starting and finishing point of the A30 road.Ordnance Survey: Landranger map sheet 203 Land's End ISBN 978-0-319-23148-7

Geography

Land's End has a particular resonance because it is often used to suggest distance. Land's End to John o' Groats in Scotland is a distance of  by road and this Land's End to John o' Groats distance is often used to define charitable events such as end-to-end walks and races in the UK.
There are two varieties of granite represented at Land's End. Adjacent to the hotel the granite is course grained with large phenocrysts of orthoclase, sometimes more than  southwest — are part of the mythical lost land of Lyonesse, referred to in Arthurian literature.
The headland has been designated part of an Important Plant Area, by the organisation Plantlife, for rare species of flora.

History

In 1769, the antiquarian William Borlase wrote:
 "Of this time we are to understand what Edward I. says (Sheringham. p. 129.) that Britain, Wales, and Cornwall, were the portion of Belinus, elder son of Dunwallo, and that that part of the Island, afterwards called England, was divided in three shares, viz. Britain, which reached from the Tweed, Westward, as far as the river Ex; Wales inclosed by the rivers Severn, and Dee; and Cornwall from the river Ex to the Land's-End". 
In 1987 Peter de Savary purchased Land's End for almost £7 million from David Goldstone.. Attractions at the theme park include children's playgrounds and recorded music. Twice a week in August there are firework displays. within the complex is the Land's End Hotel. Leicester: Matador; pp. 123–24
In May 2012, Land's End received worldwide publicity as the starting point of the 2012 Summer Olympics torch relay.

Climate

Land's End has an oceanic climate, similar to most of south-west England, only slightly milder winters and slightly cooler summers with a mean temperature of 11 °C. Wind levels in winter reach around 20–25 knots, which is windier than most of England. The highest temperature recorded is 28.9 °C, the warmest day should reach 25.4 °C and one day should reach or exceed 25.1 °C. The lowest temperature recorded is −3.4 °C. And just 10 to 20 days should record frost.

Gallery

File:Land's End, Cornwall, England.jpg|Cliffs at Land's End
File:Lands-End-Village.jpg|The tourist centre at Land's End
File:Lands End Tourist Centre.jpg|The tourist centre at Land's End
File:Lands-End.jpg|The Longships lighthouse off Land's End
File:Land's End (looking south).jpg|Looking south from Land's End
File:Land's End (looking west).jpg|Looking west from Land's End
File:Land's End (looking north).jpg|Looking north from Land's End
File:Signpost at Land's End.JPG|Signpost at Land's End






