[[Louise Erdrich]]

CATEGORIES: 1954 births, Living people, People from Little Falls, Minnesota, 20th-century American novelists, 21st-century American novelists, 20th-century women writers, 21st-century women writers, American children's writers, American poets, American short story writers, American women writers, American women novelists, Dartmouth College alumni, Magic realism writers, Members of the American Academy of Arts and Letters, Native American children's writers, Native American novelists, Native American poets, Native American writers, O. Henry Award winners, Writers from North Dakota, The New Yorker people, Writers from Minnesota, Postmodern writers, American people of French descent, American people of German descent, People from Wahpeton, North Dakota, National Book Award winners, Ojibwe people, American women poets, Guggenheim Fellows, Women short story writers

Louise Erdrich (born Karen Louise Erdrich, June 7, 1954, Little Falls, Minnesota, United States)
Erdrich is widely acclaimed as one of the most significant writers of the second wave of the Native American Renaissance. In 2009, her novel The Plague of Doves was a finalist for the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction. In November 2012, she received the National Book Award for Fiction for her novel The Round House. She was married to author Michael Dorris and the two collaborated on a number of works.
She is also the owner of Birchbark Books, a small independent bookstore in Minneapolis that focuses on Native American literature and the Native community in the Twin Cities.

Early and personal life

Erdrich was born in Little Falls, Minnesota, the first of seven children to Ralph Erdrich, a German-American, and his wife Rita (née Gourneau), half French-American and half Ojibwe. Both parents taught at a boarding school in Wahpeton, North Dakota, set up by the Bureau of Indian Affairs, and her maternal grandfather, Patrick Gourneau, served as tribal chairman for the Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians for many years."Faces of America: Louise Erdrich", PBS, Faces of America series, with Professor Henry Louis Gates, Jr., 2010. As a child, Erdrich's father paid her a nickel for every story she wrote.  Her sister Heidi is a poet who also lives in Minnesota and publishes under the name Heidi E. Erdrich. Another sister, Lise Erdrich, has written children's books and collections of fiction and essays.
Erdrich attended Dartmouth College from 1972 to 1976 as part of its first co-ed class, and earned the B.A. in English. There she met her future husband, anthropologist and writer Michael Dorris, then-director of the new Native American Studies program. Erdrich earned the Master of Arts in the Writing Seminars at Johns Hopkins University in 1979. 
Erdrich married Michael Dorris in 1981 and they raised three adopted children and three biological children until their separation in 1995 and Dorris' suicide in 1997. Erdrich lives in Minnesota.
She returned to Dartmouth in 2009 to receive an honorary Doctorate of Letters and to deliver the commencement address.
Erdrich and her two sisters have hosted writers' workshops on the Turtle Mountain Indian Reservation in North Dakota.

Work

Her heritage from both parents is not only influential to all aspects of her life, but prominent to her work.poetryfoundation.org/bio/louise-erdrich
In 1979 she wrote "The World's Greatest Fisherman", a short story about June Kashpaw, a divorced Ojibwe woman whose death by hypothermia brought her relatives home to a fictional North Dakota reservation for her funeral. It won the Nelson Algren Short Fiction prize and eventually became the first chapter of her debut novel, Love Medicine, published by Holt, Rinehart, and Winston in 1984.
Love Medicine won the 1984 National Book Critics Circle Award. Erdrich followed Love Medicine with The Beet Queen (1986), which continued her technique of using multiple narrators, yet surprised many critics by expanding the fictional reservation universe of Love Medicine to include the nearby town of Argus, North Dakota. Native characters are very much kept in the background in The Beet Queen, while Erdrich focuses on the German-American community. The action of the novel takes place mostly before World War II. The Beet Queen was subject to a bitter attack from Native novelist Leslie Marmon Silko, who accused Erdrich of being more concerned with postmodern technique than with the political struggles of Native peoples. 179-190. However, Erdrich and Silko appear to have overcome that disagreement and are now on more friendly terms, possibly because Erdrich has more firmly cemented herself in the Native Community with her bookstore and printing press.
Tracks (1988) goes back to the early 20th century at the formation of the reservation and introduces the trickster figure of Nanapush, who owes a clear debt to Nanabozho. Gross  The Bingo Palace (1994) updates, yet does not resolve, various conflicts from Love Medicine. Set in the 1980s, it describes the good and bad effects of a casino and a factory on the reservation community. Finally, Tales of Burning Love (1997) finishes the story of Sister Leopolda, a recurring character from all the previous books, and introduces a new set of white people into the reservation universe.
The Antelope Wife (1998), Erdrich's first novel after her divorce from Dorris, was the first of her novels to be set outside the continuity of the previous books. Among these are The Last Report on the Miracles at Little No Horse (2001) and The Master Butchers Singing Club (2003), a macabre mystery that again draws on Erdrich's Native American and German-American heritage. Both novels have geographic and character connections with The Beet Queen.  In 2009, Erdrich's novel The Plague of Doves was named a finalist for the Pulitzer Prize in Fiction. The narrative focuses on the historical lynching of four Native people wrongly accused of murdering a Caucasian family, and the effect of this injustice on the current generations. 
Erdrich's complexly interwoven series of novels have drawn comparisons with William Faulkner's Yoknapatawpha novels.  Like Faulkner's, Erdrich's successive novels created multiple narratives in the same fictional area and combined the tapestry of local history with current themes and modern consciousness.g., Powell's Books (book review), Christian Science Monitor, August 2, 2004

Birchbark Books

The bookstore hosts literary readings and other events, including the release of each of Erdrich's new works as well as the works and careers of other writers, particularly local Native writers. Erdrich and her staff consider Birchbark Books to be a "teaching bookstore". In addition to books, the store sells Native art and traditional medicines, and Native American jewelry. A small nonprofit publisher founded by Erdrich and her sister, Wiigwaas Press, is affiliated with the store.

Works

Novels

Story collections

Children's literature

Poetry

Non-fiction

As editor or contributor

Interviews

Awards



Further reading

Monographs

Essay collections

Teaching Guides






