[[Benzophenone]]

CATEGORIES: Printing materials, Endocrine disruptors, Benzophenones

Benzophenone is the organic compound with the formula (C6H5)2CO, generally abbreviated Ph2CO.  Benzophenone is a widely used building block in organic chemistry, being the parent diarylketone.

Uses

Benzophenone can be used as a photo initiator in UV-curing applications such as inks, imaging, and clear coatings in the printing industry. Benzophenone prevents ultraviolet (UV) light from damaging scents and colors in products such as perfumes and soaps. It can also be added to the plastic packaging as a UV blocker. Its use allows manufacturers to package the product in clear glass or plastic. Without it, opaque or dark packaging would be required.
In biological applications, benzophenones have been used extensively as photophysical probes to identify and map peptide–protein interactions.

Synthesis

Benzophenone can be prepared by the reaction of benzene with carbon tetrachloride followed by hydrolysis of the resulting diphenyldichloromethane,

Organic chemistry

Benzophenone is a common photosensitizer in photochemistry. It crosses from the S1 state into the triplet state with nearly 100% yield. The resulting diradical will abstract a hydrogen atom from a suitable hydrogen donor to form a ketyl radical.

Benzophenone radical anion

Sodium reduces benzophenone to the deeply colored radical anion, diphenylketyl:
Although inferior in safety and effectiveness relative to molecular sieves,Williams, D. B. G., Lawton, M., "Drying of Organic Solvents: Quantitative Evaluation of the Efficiency of Several Desiccants", The Journal of Organic Chemistry 2010, vol. 75, 8351.  The ketyl is soluble in the organic solvent being dried, so it accelerates the reaction of the sodium with water and oxygen. In comparison, sodium is insoluble, and its heterogeneous reaction is much slower. The ketyl radical generally appears blue or purple, depending on the solvent.

Commercially significant derivatives

Substituted benzophenones such as oxybenzone and dioxybenzone are used in some sunscreens. The use of benzophenone-derivatives which structurally resemble a strong photosensitizer has been strongly criticized (see sunscreen controversy).
Michler's ketone has dimethylamino substituents at each para position.
The high-strength polymer PEEK is prepared from derivatives of benzophenone.

Pharmacological activity of Benzophenone analogs

Benzophenone derivatives are known to be pharmacologically active molecules against various pathological conditions, like anti-tumor, anti-inflammatory and anti-angiogenic activity. One of the benzophenone analogs, was found to inhibit angiogenesis, thereby preventing angiogenesis-dependent disorders, such as mammary carcinoma and rheumatoid arthritis, where it down-regulated the Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) gene expression responsible for angiogenesis.
Benzophenone tagged with coumarin have showed significant reduction in tumour – growth in both Dalton's Lymphoma, and murine ascites carcinoma, by inducing DNA degradation, leading to apoptosis, and by inhibiting angiogenesis.



Gallery

Image:Benzophenone bottle.
Image:Toluene with sodium-benzophenone.
Image:Toluene with sodium-benzophenone - brown.
Image:Toluene with sodium-benzophenone - intense blue.
Image:Distillation of dry and oxygen-free toluene.
Image:Solvent pot.


