[[Géza I of Hungary]]

CATEGORIES: 1040s births, 1077 deaths, 11th-century Hungarian people, 11th-century monarchs in Europe, House of Árpád, Hungarian monarchs



Géza I (25 April 1077) was King of Hungary from 1074 until his death. He was the eldest son of King Béla I. His baptismal name was Magnus. When his father died in 1063, Géza's cousin Solomon acquired the crown with German assistance, forcing Géza to leave Hungary. Géza returned with Polish reinforcements and signed a treaty with Solomon in early 1064. In the treaty, Géza and his brother, Ladislaus acknowledged the rule of Solomon, who granted them their father's former duchy, which encompassed one-third of the Kingdom of Hungary.
Géza closely cooperated with Solomon, but their relationship became tense from 1071. The king invaded the duchy in February 1074 and defeated Géza in a battle. However, Géza was victorious at the decisive battle of Mogyoród on 14 March 1074. He soon acquired the throne, although Solomon maintained his rule in the regions of Moson and Pressburg (Bratislava, Slovakia) for years. Géza initiated peace negotiations with his dethroned cousin in the last months of his life. Géza's sons were minors when he died and he was succeeded by his brother Ladislaus.

Life

Early years (before 1064)

Géza was the eldest son of the future King Béla I of Hungary and his wife Richeza or Adelhaid, a daughter of King Mieszko II of Poland.
In about 1048, Géza's father returned to Hungary and received one third of the kingdom with the title of duke from his brother, King Andrew I.
Géza accompanied his father, who left for Poland to seek assistance against King Andrew.
The king died during the civil war; his partisans took Solomon to the Holy Roman Empire and Géza's father Béla was crowned king on 6 December 1060.
Following his father's death, Géza offered to accept Solomon's rule if he received his father's former duchy.

Duke in Hungary (1064–1074)

According to Ján Steinhübel 
Géza closely cooperated with the king between 1064 and 1071.
The conflict between the king and his cousins was sharpened by Solomon's main advisor, Count Vid who wanted to acquire the dukes' domains for himself.
From the battlefield, Géza and his retinue hastened towards Vác where he came upon his brother, Ladislaus and their brother-in-law, Duke Otto I of Olomouc.

His reign (1074–1077)

According to the Illuminated Chronicle, Géza accepted the throne "at the insistence of the Hungarians" after Solomon had taken refugee in Moson.
In early 1074, Géza had approached Pope Gregory VII to obtain international recognition of his rule.
Géza married married a niece of Nikephoros Botaneiates, a close advisor of Emperor Michael VII.

Family



Géza married twice.
It is uncertain which wife bore Géza's children, but the historians Gyula Kristó and Márta Font say that Sophia was their mother.
The following family tree presents Géza's ancestors and some of his relatives who are mentioned in the article.
*Whether Géza's first or second wife was his children's mother is uncertain. **Géza had at least two further children, but their names are unknown.



Sources

Primary sources

Secondary sources

 

|-


