[[Heinz College]]

CATEGORIES: Schools and departments of Carnegie Mellon, Educational institutions established in 1968, Public administration schools in the United States, Public policy schools, Information schools

The H. John Heinz III College (Heinz College or HC) at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States is a private graduate college that consists of one of the nation's top-ranked public policy schools—the Network of Schools of Public Policy, Affairs, and Administration-accredited School of Public Policy & Management—and information schools—the School of Information Systems & Management. It is named for the late United States Senator H. John Heinz III (1938-1991) from Pennsylvania. The Heinz College is also a member of the Institute for Information Infrastructure Protection and the iSchools.
The Heinz College educational process integrates policy analysis, management, and information technology. Coursework emphasizes the applied and interdisciplinary fields of empirical methods and statistics, economics, information systems and technology, operations research, and organizational behavior. In addition to full-time, on campus programs in Pittsburgh, Washington, DC, Los Angeles, and Adelaide, the Heinz College offers graduate-level programs to non-traditional students through part-time on-campus and distance programs, customized programs, and executive education programs for senior managers.

History

Richard King Mellon and his wife Constance had long been interested in urban and social issues. In 1965, they sponsored a conference on urban problems, in which they began discussions with the University of Pittsburgh and Carnegie Mellon University to create a school focused on public affairs. In 1967, Carnegie Mellon President H. Guyford Stever, Richard M. Cyert, Dean of the Tepper School of Business, and Professors William W. Cooper and Otto Davis met and formed a university-wide committee to discuss creating a school that would train leaders to address complex problems in American urban communities. Davis was asked to draft a proposal to create such a school and focused on applying the Tepper School of Business' pioneering quantitative and skill-based approach to management education as well as technology to public sector problems.
In 1968, William Cooper and Otto Davis presented the final proposal for the School of Urban and Public Affairs (SUPA) to the Richard King Mellon Foundation. The proposal found favor with R. K. Mellon and he became strongly committed to creating such a school. The R. K. Mellon Foundation sent a proposal to President Stever to finance it with an initial grant of $10 million, and on 1 November 1968, President Stever created the School of Urban and Public Affairs with William Cooper as the first Dean. The school initially drew much of its faculty from the Tepper School of Business and was based in the Margaret Morrison Carnegie Hall. Eventually, the school became independent of other colleges within the university and moved to its current location in historic Hamburg Hall when the facility was acquired by the university from the U.S. Bureau of Mines. Subsequent Deans include Otto Davis, Brian Berry, Joel A. Tarr, Alfred Blumstein, current Carnegie Mellon Provost Mark Kamlet, Linda C. Babcock, Jeffrey Hunker, Mark Wessel, and current Dean Ramayya Krishnan.
In 1992, Teresa Heinz donated a large sum of money to the school, which was then renamed as the H. John Heinz III School of Public Policy and Management in honor of Mrs. Heinz's late husband, Senator H. John Heinz III. Senator Heinz, heir to the H. J. Heinz Company fortune, had been killed when his small private plane crashed one year before.
In 2007, the Heinz School received a grant from the Heinz Foundations that transformed the school into a college and formalized the School of Information Systems & Management alongside the School of Public Policy & Management under the college's administration. The official launch of the H. John Heinz III College was held on October 24, 2008 during Carnegie Mellon's Homecoming weekend and was led by Dean Krishnan, Teresa Heinz, and former United States Secretary of the Treasury Paul O'Neill.
The Heinz College regularly collaborates with the nearby Pittsburgh office of the RAND Corporation for research and educational programs.
The Heinz College focuses on the application of quantitative analysis, statistics, economics, operations research, decision science, and information technology to solve public sector problems in a practical manner. The faculty of Heinz College is often considered the best in the country in such application.

Facilities

Heinz College is headquartered in Hamburg Hall and has a branch campus in Adelaide, South Australia, which offers masters degrees in Public Policy and Management and Information Technology. Heinz College also maintains a North Hollywood Center in Los Angeles, CA as part of the masters degree program in Entertainment Industry Management, and an academic and research center in Washington, DC on Capitol Hill for students in the Public Policy and Management masters program. 
Carnegie Mellon is in the process of renovating and expanding the Heinz College's Pittsburgh facilities through a four-phased process across Forbes Avenue from the 2013-announced Tepper Quadrangle. The ultimate plan for Hamburg Hall is to capture new space – approximately 20,000 square feet – by enclosing the courtyard between the rotunda, the East and West Wings, and the adjacent Smith Hall with a soaring glass roof structure. This new space will include a large, multi‐purpose Classroom of the Future, lounges, meeting/study space, and a café. Phase I of renovations and expansion of Hamburg Hall was entirely financed by Heinz College and was completed in September 2013. Heinz College students immediately benefited from convenient access to the new student services and computing services suites. The construction of new career services interview rooms provides up‐to‐date facilities for on‐campus recruiters. 
A December 2013 gift from The Heinz Endowments combined with gift commitments from other donors will enable Heinz College to expedite the final architectural design of Phase II elements, finalize necessary construction planning, commence renovations and expansion, and complete a structure that will add additional value to the college. A new 150-seat auditorium in the courtyard between Hamburg Hall and Smith Hall will be constructed, and both levels of the rotunda will be transformed into student study and lounge spaces. The new auditorium will allow the college to host high profile speakers. The second phase of construction is anticipated to commence in summer 2014 and to be completed by December 2015.
During Phase III the addition to Hamburg Hall, including a glass roof, end walls, café, and study space, will be constructed.  Fire protection and elevator improvements will also be addressed.  The addition of 20,000 square feet to Hamburg Hall will allow the Heinz College to continue to grow student enrollment.  This Phase is planned for completion by 2017. 
The final phase, Phase IV, is scheduled for the future. The new additions and renovations will be designed to achieve LEED Silver certification.

Rankings

In the most recent U.S. News & World Report Graduate School rankings, the Heinz College was ranked 9th amongst schools of public affairs. The Heinz College has ranked in the top 10 since U.S. News & World Report began ranking schools of public affairs in 1995. Of the 253 schools of public affairs across the nation that were surveyed in 2013, Heinz College ranked:
Heinz College also ranked 2nd in the Faculty Scholarly Productivity Index listing for the top performing programs in public administration and 9th in the listing for the top performing programs in public policy.
The PhD program in Public Policy and Management at the Heinz College was ranked in the top 5 overall and in the top 3 in faculty research activity by the National Research Council in 2010.
The Medical Management program was ranked 4th by Modern Healthcare Magazine in the 2009 rankings of the top management graduate schools for physician executives.
InformationWeek named the Heinz College's Master in Information Systems Management with Business Intelligence & Data Analytics concentration as one of the top 20 in big data analytics.

Education

The Heinz College has an international reputation for excellence in its educational programs:
While Heinz College is the only college at Carnegie Mellon that does not have undergraduate degree programs, it does offer accelerated masters programs for exceptional undergraduates. The Heinz College participates in the minor in Health Care Policy and Management jointly with the Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences and the Mellon College of Science. Additionally Heinz College offers several executive education programs such as the CIO Institute in Arlington, Virginia, a joint data analytics certificate program with UPMC, and the Carnegie Mellon Leadership and Negotiation Academy for Women. The Heinz College is also a partner in the Tepper School of Business' Master of Science in Computational Finance program, the Carnegie Institute of Technology's Master of Science in Engineering and Technology Innovation Management program, and the School of Architecture's Master of Urban Design program.
The hallmark of every Heinz College education is the quantitative and skills-based curriculum, the integration of technology, and the required capstone final project: "the system synthesis." This final project is done instead of a traditional thesis and allows the students to apply their problem solving skills to a real-world client's problem. Graduates of Heinz College are successful in the public sector, private sector, and nonprofit sector.

Research

Heinz College maintains an international reputation of excellence in the fields of social entrepreneurship, crime and drug policy, health policy and IT, art and entertainment industry management, information systems and economics, management science, data analytics, policy analysis, organizational behavior, information security and privacy, and social welfare policy. Heinz College is also affiliated the following centers, programs, labs, and initiatives:
The Heinz College offers several experiential learning centers:
The Heinz College is also affiliated with the following research journals:

Notable associated people








