[[Triborough Bridge]]

CATEGORIES: Suspension bridges in the United States, Vertical lift bridges, Bridges in New York City, Toll bridges in New York City, Bridges completed in 1936, Robert Moses projects, East River, Tolled sections of Interstate Highways, Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority, Interstate 78, Historic American Engineering Record in New York, Historic Civil Engineering Landmarks, Bridges in the Bronx, Robert F. Kennedy, Road bridges in New York, Bridges by Othmar Ammann, Bridges in Manhattan, Bridges in Queens, New York, Bridges on the Interstate Highway System

The Triborough Bridge, renamed the Robert F. Kennedy Bridge in 2008, and sometimes referred to as the RFK Triborough Bridge, is a complex of three separate bridges in New York City, United States, carrying Interstate 278 and New York State Route 900G. Spanning the Harlem River, the Bronx Kill, and the Hell Gate (a strait of the East River), the bridges connect the boroughs of Manhattan, Queens, and the Bronx via Randalls and Wards Islands, which are joined by landfill.
The bridge is owned and operated by the MTA Bridges and Tunnels, part of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority.

History

Plans for connecting Manhattan, Queens and the Bronx were first announced by Edward A. Byrne, chief engineer of the New York City Department of Plant and Structures, in 1916. While such a bridge complex's construction had long been recommended by local officials, the project failed receive funding until 1925, when the city appropriated money for surveys, test borings and structural plans.
Construction began on Black Friday in 1929, but soon the Triborough project's outlook began to look bleak. Othmar Ammann, who had collapsed the original design's two-deck roadway into one, requiring lighter towers, and thus, lighter piers, saving $10 million on the towers alone, was enlisted again to help guide the project. Using New Deal money, it was resurrected in the early 1930s by Robert Moses, who created the Triborough Bridge Authority to fund, build and operate it.  The completed structure was opened to traffic on July 11, 1936.
The total cost of the bridge was more than $60 million, one of the largest public works projects of the Great Depression, more expensive even than the Hoover Dam.
The American Society of Civil Engineers designated the Triborough Bridge Project as a National Historic Civil Engineering Landmark in 1986.
At some point in the past, a sign on the bridge informed travelers, "In event of attack, drive off bridge," New York Times columnist William Safire wrote in 2008. The "somewhat macabre sign", he wrote, must have "drawn a wry smile from millions of motorists."
On November 19, 2008, the Triborough Bridge was officially renamed after Robert F. Kennedy at the request of the Kennedy family.
On May 5, 2010, the New York City Police Department closed the bridge and sent in the bomb squad to investigate a U-Haul truck from which a man had reportedly fled. This investigation came days after a failed attempt at a car bombing in Times Square. A short time later, the NYPD deemed this incident nonthreatening and reopened the bridge.

Usage

The toll revenues from the Triborough Bridge pay for a portion of the public transit subsidy for the New York City Transit Authority and the commuter railroads. The bridge carries approximately 200,000 vehicles per day.
The bridge has sidewalks in all three legs where the TBTA officially requires bicyclists to walk their bicycles across

Public transportation

The Triborough Bridge carries the M35, M60 and X80 bus routes operated by MTA New York City Transit, and nine express bus routes operated by the MTA Bus Company, the BxM1, BxM2, BxM6, BxM7, BxM8, BxM9, BxM10, BxM11, BxM18, and X81.

The three sections of the bridge

East River suspension bridge (I-278)

Harlem River lift bridge (NY 900G)

Bronx Kill crossing (I-278)








