[[Graceland (album)]]

CATEGORIES: 1986 albums, Paul Simon albums, Grammy Award winners for Album of the Year, Albums produced by Roy Halee, Warner Bros. Records albums, United States National Recording Registry recordings, Grammy Hall of Fame Award recipients, Worldbeat albums, World music albums by American artists, English-language albums, Albums produced by Paul Simon

Graceland is the seventh studio album by American musician Paul Simon, released in August 1986.
It was a hit, topping the UK Album Chart, and reaching number three on the US Billboard 200. The album won the  1987 Grammy Award for Album of the Year, while the title song won the 1988 Grammy Award for Record of the Year.  In 2007, the album was added to the United States National Recording Registry, along with another 24 significant recordings that year.  It is included in many "best of" and "greatest" album lists including both Rolling Stone and Time.



Background

Coming at a time when Simon's musical career was at something of a low ebb following the disappointing public response to Hearts and Bones, the project was originally inspired, as Simon explained on the album notes of the first release of the record, when he listened to a cassette lent to him by Heidi Berg, a singer-songwriter who Simon was working with as a producer. The cassette,an instrumental called "Gumboots- Accordion Jive Hits Number 1", was from a South African band, The Boyoyo Boys. In an interview, Simon described the Boyoyo Boys track as "instrumental music with an accordion, electric guitar, bass, and drums." He said it reminded him of "a certain kind of fifties rock 'n' roll."  Simon later wrote lyrics to sing over a re-recording of the song, which became the fourth track on the album, beginning with the structure and then adding the melody.

Music

Graceland features an eclectic mixture of musical styles including pop, a cappella, isicathamiya, rock, and mbaqanga. The album was strongly influenced by the earlier work of South African musicians Johnny Clegg and Sipho Mchunu, and the Zulu-Western pop cross-over music realized in their band Juluka.  Juluka was South Africa's first integrated pop band.  Simon includes thanks to Johnny Clegg, Juluka and Juluka's producer Hilton Rosenthal in the "Special Thanks" citation included in Graceland's liner notes.
Much of the album was recorded in South Africa, and it features many South African musicians and groups. Simon faced accusations by organisations such as Artists United Against Apartheid, that he had broken the cultural boycott imposed by the rest of the world against the apartheid regime in South Africa, which was in its final years at the time. Although supported by the United Nations Anti-Apartheid Committee, as the album showcased the talents of the black South African musicians while offering no support to the South African government, even the ANC protested the collaboration as a break in the cultural boycott. However Simon also received praise for encouraging South African music from Hugh Masekela, one of South Africa's most prominent musicians and an exiled opponent of apartheid, who subsequently toured alongside Simon and Miriam Makeba. The worldwide success of the album introduced some of the musicians, especially the vocal group Ladysmith Black Mambazo, to global audiences of their own. The song Homeless was written jointly by Paul Simon and Joseph Tshabalala, the lead singer of Ladysmith Black Mambazo, to a melody from a traditional Zulu wedding song. . . Somebody cry, why, why, why?"
Simon included American 'roots' influences with tracks featuring Zydeco musicians such as Clifton Chenier and Tex-Mex musicians. The Everly Brothers sing harmony on the title track. Linda Ronstadt appears on the track "Under African Skies", the second verse of which Simon wrote based on her childhood experiences.

Reception

Graceland was Paul Simon's highest charting album in the U.S. in over a decade, reaching #3 in the national Billboard charts, receiving a certification of 5× Platinum by the RIAA and eventually selling over 14 million copies, making it Simon's most commercially successful album. Critics welcomed its eclectic mix of sounds and broad, quirky subject matter and it regularly shows up in critic polls and "recommended" lists. The album also helped to draw worldwide attention to the music of South Africa.
The album drew accolades from the beginning.  Rolling Stone called it "lovely, daring and accomplished" and Robert Christgau enthused it was "so strange, so sweet, so willful, so radically incongruous and plainly beautiful."  It was so acclaimed by other critics that he later anticipated that it would top The Village Voice Pazz & Jop critics poll for that year (1986).

In the Graceland Classic Albums video, Simon states that he considers the title track the best song he has ever written. A popular music video starring Simon and Chevy Chase was made for the hit song "You Can Call Me Al". Simon toured the album extensively, featuring many of the artists from the album in addition to exiled South Africans Hugh Masekela and Miriam Makeba. Two concerts in Harare, Zimbabwe, were filmed in 1987 for release as "The African Concert". The audience was a multi-racial mix with many travelling from South Africa.
The success of the album earned Paul Simon the Best International Solo Artist award at The Brit Awards in 1987.
In 1998, Q magazine readers voted it the 56th greatest album of all time.  In 2006, Q magazine placed the album at #39 in its list of "40 Best Albums of the '80s".Q August 2006, Issue 241 It was also ranked #84 in a 2005 survey held by British television's Channel 4 to determine the 100 greatest albums of all time. In 1989, it was rated #5 on Rolling Stone magazine's list of the 100 Best Albums of the Eighties.
A 2012 documentary film, Under African Skies, directed by Joe Berlinger celebrates the 25th anniversary of the album's release, and includes archival footage, interviews, discussion of the controversy associated with the original release, and coverage of an anniversary reunion concert."Under African Skies: Paul Simon's Graceland Journey", paulsimon.com"THIRTEEN's Great Performances Chronicles Paul Simon's Graceland Journey", press release, WNET THIRTEEN, New YorkMcCall, Tris, "Paul Simon's 'Graceland' boxed set revisits controversial and brilliant album", The Star-Ledger, June 03, 2012
In 2012, American Songwriter gave the 25th anniversary re-issue 5 stars, describing the album as "a cultural experiment that changed the way the western world viewed South Africa." In 2012 the 25th Anniversary edition of the album entered the UK top 10 once again.

Track listing

Additional tracks

Credits

Songwriting credit dispute with Los Lobos

The group Los Lobos appear on the last track, "All Around the World or The Myth of Fingerprints." According to Los Lobos's saxophone player Steve Berlin, Simon stole the song from Los Lobos, giving them no songwriting credit:
Paul Simon answered:

Accolades

Grammy Awards

|-
|  style="width:35px; text-align:center;" rowspan="3"|1987|| rowspan="2"|Graceland || Album of the Year
|-
|Best Pop Vocal Performance, Male || 
|-
|rowspan="2"|"Graceland"|||Song of the Year
|-
| style="text-align:center;"|1988 || Record of the Year
|-

Charts

Peak positions

Year-end charts

Decade-end charts

Certifications






