[[Perfect Blue]]

CATEGORIES: 1990s mystery films, 1990s thriller films, 1997 anime films, Directorial debut films, Films directed by Satoshi Kon, Japanese films, Japanese thriller films, Japanese-language films, Madhouse (company), Psychological thriller films

 is a 1997 Japanese animated psychological thriller film directed by Satoshi Kon and written by Sadayuki Murai based on the novel of the same name by Yoshikazu Takeuchi. Junko Iwao voiced Mima Kirigoe, a member of a Japanese pop-idol group called "CHAM!", who decides to pursue her career as an actress. Some of her fans are displeased with her sudden career change, particularly a stalker named Me-Mania, voiced by Masaaki Ōkura. As her new career proceeds, Mima's world becomes increasingly reminiscent of the works of Alfred Hitchcock: reality and fantasy spiral out of control, and Mima discovers that Me-Mania is the least of her troubles.

Plot

Mima Kirigoe, the lead singer of the J-pop group "CHAM!", decides to leave the band to become an actress. Her first project is a direct-to-video crime drama series called Double Bind. Some of her fans are upset by her change in career and persona, including a stalker known as "Me-Mania." Shortly after leaving CHAM!, Mima receives an anonymous fax calling her a traitor. She also finds a website called "Mima's Room", which features public diary entries that seem to be written by her that discuss her life in great detail. She brings the site to the attention of her manager, ex-pop star Rumi Hidaka, but is advised to ignore it.
Meanwhile, on the set of Double Bind, Mima succeeds in getting a larger part. However, the producers decide to cast her as a rape victim in a strip club. Rumi warns Mima that it will ruin her reputation, but Mima accepts the part voluntarily. Though it is apparent that Mima is indecisive, the atmosphere of the scene traumatizes her to the point that she increasingly becomes unable to separate reality from fantasy. She can no longer distinguish real life from her work in show business.
Several people who had been involved in creating the scene are murdered. She finds evidence that makes her appear to be the prime suspect, and her increasing mental instability makes her doubt her own innocence. It turns out that the diarist of "Mima's Room" is delusional and very manipulative, and that an intense folie à deux has been in play. The faux diarist and serial killer, who believes herself to be a Mima who is forever young and graceful, has made a scapegoat of stalker Me-Mania.
Mima knocks Me-Mania unconscious with a hammer in self-defense when he attempts to rape her, and she then runs to her only support she has left alive, her manager Rumi. Later on, back in "Mima's room", Mima tries to call Mr. Tadakoro but he has also been murdered, along with Mr. Me-Mania. When Mima encounters Rumi, however, her manager is wearing a replica of Mima's CHAM! costume and crazily singing Mima's pop songs.  Rumi is in fact the false diarist, who believes she is the "real Mima". Rumi is angry that Mima has been ruining the "real Mima's" reputation, and decides to save "Mima's" pristine pop idol image through the same means she has been using all along: murder. Mima manages to incapacitate Rumi in self-defense after a chase through the city despite being wounded herself. Rumi remains permanently delusional and institutionalized. Mima has grown from her experiences and has moved on with her life with newfound independence and confidence.

Cast

The actors in the English adaptation are listed in the credits without specification to their respective roles: Ruby Marlowe, Wendee Lee, Gil Starberry, Lia Sargent, Steve Bulen, James Lyon, Frank Buck, David Lucas, Jimmy Theodore, Elliot Reynolds, Sparky Thornton, Bambi Darro, Melissa Williamson, Dylan Tully, Kermit Beachwood, Sam Strong, Carol Stanzione, Ty Webb, Billy Regan, Dari Mackenzie, George C. Cole, Syd Fontana, Sven Nosgard, Bob Marx, Devon Michaels, Robert Wicks and Mattie Rando. - closing credits

Production

Originally the film was supposed to be a live action direct to video series, but after the Kobe earthquake of 1995 damaged the production studio, the budget for the film was reduced to an original video animation. Katsuhiro Otomo was credited as "Special Supervisor" to help the film sell abroad and as a result the film was screened in many film festivals around the world. While touring the world it received a fair amount of acclaim, jump-starting Kon's career as a filmmaker.
Kon and Murai did not think that the original novel would make a good film and asked if they could change the contents. This change was approved so long as they kept a few of the original concepts from the novel. A live action film Perfect Blue: Yume Nara Samete was later made (released in 2002) that is much closer to the novel. This version was directed by Toshiki Satō from a screenplay by Shinji Imaoka and Masahiro Kobayashi.
Like much of Kon's later work, such as Paprika, the film deals with the blurring of the lines between fantasy and reality in contemporary Japan.

Analysis

Susan Napier's uses feminist film theory to analyze the film, stating that, "Perfect Blue announces its preoccupation with perception, identity and performance - especially in relation to the female - right from its opening sequence." The perception of reality cannot be trusted, with the visual set up only to not be reality, especially as the psychodrama heights towards the climax. Napier also sees themes related to pop idols and their performances as impacting the gaze and the issue of their roles. Mima's madness results from her own subjectivity and attacks on her identity. The ties to Alfred Hitchcock's work is broken with the murder of her male controllers. Otaku described the film as "critique of the consumer society of contemporary Japan."

Reception

The film was critically well received in the festival circuit, winning awards at the 1997 Fantasia Festival in Montréal, and Fantasporto Film Festival in Portugal.
Critical response in the United States upon its theatrical release was mixed. Some critics did not understand why Perfect Blue was done as an animated film 
Time included the film on its top 5 anime DVD list,5 Top Anime Movies on DVD, 07/31/2005 and Terry Gilliam, of whom Kon was a fan
Perfect Blue ranked #25 on Total Film's all-time animated films.
It also made the list for Entertainment Weeklys best movies never seen from 1991-2011.com/news/1028208/entertainment-weekly-names-perfect-blue-one-of-the-50-best-movies-youve-never-seen

Influence

Madonna incorporated clips from the film into a remix of her song "What It Feels Like for a Girl" as a video interlude during her Drowned World Tour (2001).
In 2010 Darren Aronofsky acknowledged there being similarities between Perfect Blue and his film Black Swan (only as a director), but said that it was not an influence.

Release

UMD

For the Region 1 UMD video release of Perfect Blue, Manga Entertainment featured the movie in cinema widescreen, leaving the movie kept within black bars on the PSP's 16:9 screen. This release also contains no special features and a single audio track (English).

Television

In the US, Perfect Blue aired on the Encore cable television network and was featured by the Sci Fi Channel on December 10, 2007 as part of its Ani-Monday block. In Australia, Perfect Blue aired by the SBS Television Network on April 12, 2008 and previously sometime in mid 2007 in a similar timeslot.



Notes






