[[Geezer Butler]]

CATEGORIES: Black Sabbath members, English heavy metal bass guitarists, English rock bass guitarists, Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductees, 1949 births, Living people, The Ozzy Osbourne Band members, English Roman Catholics, English pacifists, Musicians from Birmingham, West Midlands

Terence Michael Joseph "Geezer" Butler (born 17 July 1949 in Birmingham, England) is an English musician and songwriter. Butler is best known as the bassist and primary lyricist of heavy metal band Black Sabbath. He was also involved in Heaven & Hell from 2006 to 2010.

Bio

Butler received the nickname "Geezer" at approximately age eight, because "I used to call everybody Geezer" at school. "It was just a slang term for a man. You know, like in America you say 'guy'. In England, the term for that is either 'bloke' or 'geezer'. I used to call everybody else geezer and then eventually everybody started calling me geezer."The Geezer Butler Interview 
Butler grew up in an Irish Catholic family 
Inspired by John Lennon, Butler played rhythm guitar in his pre-Sabbath days, including with Rare Breed. When Sabbath was formed, Iommi made it clear that he would not want to play with another guitarist, so Butler moved to bass. Butler lists Jack Bruce of Cream as his biggest influence as a bassist. Iommi described Butler as being "from another planet" in the band's early days; he took LSD, wore Indian hippie dresses, and was very peaceful. At the time Black Sabbath was formed, Butler was studying to become an accountant, and this training resulted in him managing the band's finances in the early days.
Butler briefly left Black Sabbath during the recording of their 1980 album Heaven and Hell. He again left the band in 1984 after touring in support of their 1983 album, Born Again.  In 1988 he joined his former Sabbath bandmate Osbourne to take part in the No Rest For The Wicked World Tour. Butler re-joined Black Sabbath in 1991 for the reunion of the Mob Rules line-up, but again quit the group after the Cross Purposes tour in 1994.
In 1995 Butler joined with Osbourne to play on the Ozzmosis album.

Personal life

Butler is married to Gloria Butler, who managed Heaven & Hell. He also shares his Los Angeles home with several cats, of whom he has posted pictures on his website. His son, Biff Butler, was the frontman in the Nu Metal band Apartment 26.
According to Ozzy Osbourne's autobiography I Am Ozzy, Geezer "never uses foul language". An avowed vegan, Butler appeared in an advertisement for People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals in 2009.
Geezer is a passionate fan of Aston Villa football club and can be seen attending games along with fellow Sabbath member Tony Iommi. In 2006, when Black Sabbath were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, Butler was quoted as saying into the microphone "Up The Villa".
He urged fans to boycott Fortnum and Mason's until they remove foie gras from their shelves. Geezer said,"I've seen some outrageous things in my time, but watching those poor birds suffer simply so that their diseased livers can be sold on your shop floor is horrific!""Black Sabbath's Geezer ButlerCalls for Foie Gras Boycott," Karrang Radio, 1 March, 2013.

Style and legacy

Butler is noted as being one of the first bassists to use a wah pedal and to down-tune his instrument (from the standard E-A-D-G to the lower C#-F#-B-E), as exemplified on Black Sabbath's Master of Reality album, in order to match Iommi who had started tuning his guitar to C# (a minor third down). During the band's Ozzy Osbourne era Butler wrote almost all of the band's lyrics, drawing heavily upon his fascination with religion, science-fiction, fantasy and horror, and musings on the darker side of human nature that posed a constant threat of global annihilation.
Butler is regarded as one of the most influential bassists in heavy metal. Billy Sheehan of Mr. Big said: "He's a founding father of a whole genre of music and a man who really set the bar early on to be such an integral part of the sound and song structure of Sabbath". In Mick Wall's biography of Iron Maiden entitled "Run to the Hills", founder Steve Harris recalls: "I distinctly remember trying to play along to Black Sabbath's "Paranoid" - at first I just could not get it. I threw the guitar on my bed and walked out in a huff, but the the next day I came back, picked it up and played it all the way through note-for-note! Once I got going, I started getting into bass-lines with a bit more subtlety to them...".
Former Metallica bassist Jason Newsted, who defined him his "number 1 influence", stated: "All true metal bassists look up to Geezer as a pioneer and Godfather of our chosen instrument. The best, ever". cited Butler as a significant influence on their style.

Equipment

Butler currently endorses Lakland basses and has his own signature model. For amplification Butler is endorsed by Hartke bass amplification, Kilo bass head and 4X10 HyDrive cabinet. In the past, he has been known to use Ampeg SVT & B-15 bass amps and Fender, Dan Armstrong Plexi, Rickenbacker, Yamaha BB, and Vigier Basses.

Discography






