[[Theatrical superstitions]]

CATEGORIES: Theatre, Superstitions, Curses

Theatrical superstitions are superstitions particular to actors or the theatre.

The Scottish play

Shakespeare's play Macbeth is said to be cursed, so actors avoid saying its name (the euphemism "The Scottish Play" is used instead). Actors also avoid even quoting the lines from Macbeth before a performance, particularly the Witches' incantations. Outside a theatre and after a performance the play can be spoken of openly. If an actor speaks the name "Macbeth" in a theatre prior to a performance, he or she is required to leave the theatre building, spin around three times, spit, curse, and then knock to be allowed back in.
There is also a legend that the play itself was cursed because the first time it was ever performed, the actor playing Macbeth died shortly before or after the production (accounts vary). Another version of this legend claims that it was the actor who played Lady Macbeth who died during the play's first production run and that Shakespeare himself had to assume the role.  There is no evidence that either version of this legend is factual.  "Mystery surrounds roots of the Macbeth curse", MPR News, Minnesota Public Radio website, published 2010-02-05, retrieved 2012-06-14.  
Another legend states that Macbeth was cursed by witches because the play revealed their secrets. Another explanation claims that the original production of the play used actual witches and witchcraft, and so the play is cursed.

Not wishing "good luck"

Generally, it is considered bad luck to wish someone "good luck" in a theatre. Prior to performances, it is traditional for the cast to gather together to avert the bad luck by wishing each other bad luck or cursing – in English-speaking countries, the expression "break a leg" replaces the phrase "good luck". The exact origin of this expression is unknown, but some of the most popular theories are the Shakespearean Theory or Traditional Theory, and the Bowing Theory.
The Term "Hals- und Beinbruch!" in German is equivalent to the expression "Break a leg (and neck)" and used for the same purpose in theatres as well as in other acting circles. 
In Australian theatrical circles saying "good luck" is also avoided, but the replacement is often "chookas!"."Chookas!", By Colin Peasley, manager, Education Programme for The Australian Ballet
In Portuguese and Spanish-speaking countries, before each performance, director and actors gather on the stage, join hands and scream "Muita Merda!"/"¡Mucha mierda!" ("A bunch/a lot of shit!").

Ghosts

One ghost-related superstition is that the theatre should always be closed one night a week to give the ghosts a chance to perform their own plays. This is traditionally on Monday nights, conveniently giving actors a day off after weekend performances.
Theatres that have stood for more than a few decades tend to have lots of associated ghost stories, more than other public buildings of similar age.

Thespis

One specific ghost, Thespis, holds a place of privilege in theatre lore. Some historians once believed that Thespis of ancient Athens (6th Century BCE) was the first person to speak lines as an individual actor on stage (hence the term "thespian" to refer to an individual actor). Any unexplainable mischief that befalls a production is likely to be blamed on Thespis, especially if it happens on November 23 (the date he supposedly uttered the first lines).

Ghost light

One should always leave a light burning in an empty theatre. Traditionally, the light is placed upstage centre. That is, farthest from the audience, centre stage. Several reasons are given for this, all having to do with ghosts:
Though it's a superstition, it does have practical value: the backstage area of a theatre tends to be cluttered, so someone who enters a completely darkened space is liable to be injured while hunting for a light switch.

Ghosts in Broadway Theatres

In 2005, Playbill ran an article about Broadway theatres that were believed haunted.  "The Ghosts of Broadway", Playbill website, published 2005-06-10, retrieved 2012-06-14.  The following is a list of hauntings from that article:

Whistling

Related to a similar rule for sailing ships, it is considered bad luck for an actor to whistle on or off stage. As original stage crews were hired from ships in port (theatrical rigging has its origins in sailing rigging), sailors, and by extension theatrical riggers, used coded whistles to communicate scene changes. Actors who whistled would confuse them into changing the set or scenery and could result in injury or death. In today's theatres, the stage crew normally uses an intercom or cue light system.

Miscellaneous








