[[Fuerzas Armadas de Liberación Nacional Puertorriqueña]]

CATEGORIES: Guerrilla organizations, Military in Puerto Rico, Defunct American political movements, National liberation movements, Nationalist terrorism

The Fuerzas Armadas de Liberación Nacional (English: Armed Forces of National Liberation, FALN) was a Puerto Rican clandestine paramilitary organization that, through direct action, advocated complete independence for Puerto Rico. At the time of its dissolution, the FALN was responsible for more than 120 bomb attacks on United States targets between 1974 and 1983. Pérez. Fuerzas Armadas de Liberación Nacional (FALN). Encyclopedia of Chicago. Retrieved on 2007-09-05 The United States Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) classifies the FALN as a terrorist organization.
The FALN was led by Filiberto Ojeda Ríos, who was one of the FBI's most wanted criminals.

Political position

The organization's ideological basis consisted of five reforms that they expected to implement, these were:
{{bquote|

History

The Fuerzas Armadas de Liberación Nacional was founded in the 1960s under the leadership of Filiberto Ojeda Rios. They were one of several organizations established during this decade that promoted "clandestine armed struggles" against the United States government that the movement described as the "colonial forces of the United States". The group was founded following decades of alleged harassment, attacks, illegal imprisonments and assassination against members of the Puerto Rican independence movement. The group was part of a movement that included other clandestine organizations, including the Movimiento Independentista Revolucionario Armado, Organización de Voluntarios por la Revolución Puertorriqueña and Los Comandos Armados de Liberación, and served as predecessor for what would become the Boricua Popular Army. The organization's intention was to draw attention to what they descried as the "colonial condition" of Puerto Rico through armed action against the United States government and military.
The modus operandi of the FALN was to perform bombing and incendiary actions and then admit responsibility through press releases. The first of these news releases announced the group's intention; in this document they admitted responsibility for attacks on several locations in New York to weaken the "Yanki capitalist monopoly", and demanded the release of five political prisoners, these were: Lolita Lebrón, Oscar Collazo, Rafael Cancel Miranda, Andres Figueroa and Irvin Flores. In this communique the organization warns that they had opened two fronts, in Puerto Rico and the United States respectively, the goal of these were to organize a People's Revolutionary Army which they expected would "rid Puerto Rico of Yanki colonialism". Both fronts were supported and maintained by allies within Puerto Rico and North America.
The group openly expressed their opposition towards any government that was guided by any other system besides the Marxist-Leninist principles and rejected any kind of support or solidarity towards the Puerto Rican independence coming from the government of these countries. Of these countries they accused the governments of Mexico and Venezuela directly, expressing that the actions taken by these governments were hypocritical in origin, citing that while the Venezuelan government supported the independence of Puerto Rico they also supported the regime led by José Napoleón Duarte in El Salvador. The group went further and claimed that the Venezuelan government was a "protector and enforcer of the Yankee imperialist plans to expand their grip in the Caribbean and Central America" and claimed that Venezuelan Army was receiving modern weapons in exchange.
In their fifth communique the FALN expressed their dislike for several agencies of the United States government, they mentioned the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Central Intelligence Agency and the Department of Immigration. They said that the reason for this was that the American working class was being pushed out of work forced to unemployment while the nation's corporations where gaining billions of dollars in profits. The FALN used some of their communiques to advertise other causes that they felt were fair, including support towards the government of Panama when this country wanted the control of the Panama Canal.

FALN Pardons of 1999

On August 11, 1999, Bill Clinton commuted the sentences of sixteen members of FALN who allegedly set off bombs several times in New York City and Chicago, convicted for conspiracy to commit robbery, conspiracy to bomb-making, and sedition, as well as for firearms and explosives violations.

Incidents

Notable group members





Notes

Bibliography


