[[LaTeX]]

CATEGORIES: Declarative markup languages, Free TeX software, Free typesetting software, SRI International software

LaTeX (   LaTeX uses the TeX typesetting program for formatting its output, and is itself written in the TeX macro language.  LaTeX is not the name of a particular editing program, but refers to the encoding or tagging conventions that are used in LaTeX documents.
LaTeX is widely used in academia. Its syntax is also used as the primary method of displaying formulas on Wikipedia. LaTeX can be used as a standalone document preparation system, or as an intermediate format.  In the latter role, for example, it is often used as part of a pipeline for translating DocBook and other XML-based formats to PDF. The typesetting system offers programmable desktop publishing features and extensive facilities for automating most aspects of typesetting and desktop publishing, including numbering and cross-referencing of tables and figures, chapter and section headings, the inclusion of graphics, page layout, indexing and bibliographies.
Like TeX, LaTeX started as a writing tool for mathematicians and computer scientists, but from early in its development it has also been taken up by scholars who needed to write documents that included complex non-Latin scripts, such as Arabic, Sanskrit and Chinese.
LaTeX is intended to provide a high-level language that accesses the power of TeX. LaTeX comprises a collection of TeX macros and a program to process LaTeX documents. Because the plain TeX formatting commands are elementary, it offers authors ready-made commands for common requirements such as chapter headings, footnotes, cross-references and bibliographies.
LaTeX was originally written in the early 1980s by Leslie Lamport at SRI International.). LaTeX is free software and is distributed under the LaTeX Project Public License (LPPL).

Typesetting system

LaTeX follows the design philosophy of separating presentation from content, so that authors can focus on the content of what they are writing without attending simultaneously to its visual appearance.  In preparing a LaTeX document, the author specifies the logical structure using simple, familiar concepts such as chapter, section, table, figure, etc., and lets the LaTeX system worry about the formatting and layout of these structures.  It therefore encourages the separation of layout from content while still allowing manual typesetting adjustments where needed. This concept is similar to the mechanism by which many word processors allow styles to be defined globally for an entire document or the use of Cascading Style Sheets to style HTML.  The LaTeX system is a markup language that also handles typesetting and rendering.
LaTeX can be arbitrarily extended by using the underlying macro language to develop custom formats. Such macros are often collected into packages, which are available to address special formatting issues such as complicated mathematical content or graphics. Indeed, in the example below, the align environment is provided by the amsmath package.
In order to create a document in LaTeX, you first write a file, say foobar.  Then you give your foobar.PDF output it common, but TeX can output other formats such as DVI ("Device independent" format).  See below for more detail about outputs.  This write-format-preview cycle is one of the chief ways in which working with LaTeX differs from what-you-see-is-what-you-get word-processing.  It is similar to the code-compile-execute cycle familiar to computer programmers.  Today, many LaTeX-aware editing programs make this cycle a simple matter of pressing a single key, while showing the output preview on the screen beside the input window.

Examples

The example below shows the LaTeX input and corresponding output:

}
  \end{align}
\end{document}

|
}}
The square root is denoted by "sqrt" and fractions by "frac".

Pronouncing and writing "LaTeX"

LaTeX is usually pronounced ).
The characters T, E, X in the name come from capital Greek letters tau, epsilon, and chi, as the name of TeX derives from the )Donald E. Knuth, The TeXbook, Addison–Wesley, Boston, 1986, p. 1. (that is, with a voiceless velar fricative as in Modern Greek, similar to the ch in loch).  Lamport, on the other hand, has said he does not favor or discourage any pronunciation for LaTeX.
The name is traditionally printed in running text with a special typographical logo: .
In media where the logo cannot be precisely reproduced in running text, the word is typically given the unique capitalization LaTeX. The TeX, LaTeX and XeTeX[ref]
