[[Annette Lu]]

CATEGORIES: 1944 births, Amnesty International prisoners of conscience, Democratic Progressive Party Members of the Legislative Yuan, Harvard Law School alumni, Living people, Magistrates of Taoyuan County, Members of the 2nd Legislative Yuan, National Taiwan University alumni, People from Taoyuan City, Taiwan independence activists, Taiwanese feminists, Taiwanese Hakka people, Taiwanese women in politics, Taoyuan County Members of the Legislative Yuan, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign alumni, Vice Presidents of the Republic of China on Taiwan

Annette Lu Hsiu-lien (born June 7, 1944) was the Vice President of the Republic of China (Taiwan) from 2000 to 2008, under President Chen Shui-bian.  She announced her intentions to run for President of Taiwan on March 6, 2007, but withdrew in order to support DPP presidential nominee, Frank Hsieh. Lu announced on February 25, 2011, that she would seek the DPP nomination for President of the Republic of China in 2012, but later withdrew her bid.  Tsai Ing-wen, chairwoman of the DPP, finally won the nomination.ntdtv.html Lu is a member of the Democratic Progressive Party and one of Taiwan's independence advocates. Lu is also a prominent feminist activist.

Early life

Lu was born in Taoyuan County, in northern Taiwan, during Japanese rule. After graduating from Taipei First Girls' High School, she studied law at the National Taiwan University. Graduating in 1967, she went on to gain a master's degree from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and another degree from Harvard University.

Rise in politics

During the 1970s, Lu established herself as a prominent feminist advocate in Taiwan, which included writing of New Feminism or Xin Nüxing Zhuyi (
Due to the male-dominated culture and combative nature of Taiwan politics, Lu, like several other female politicians subsequently, was nicknamed a "small chili pepper." She was elected to the Legislative Yuan in 1993. In 1997, she won an election to be a magistrate in Taoyuan.

Novel

Lu completed her novel entitled "These Three Women" while in prison. To evade the surveillance of the detention facility, she wrote part of the novel on toilet paper using washbasin as a desk. In 2008, the novel was adapted into a screenplay for TV drama of the same name. The drama was broadcast on November 24, 2008 on the Chinese Television System.

Vice Presidency, 2000–2008

On March 18, 2000, Lu was elected Vice President. She was awarded the World Peace Corps Mission's World Peace Prize in 2001. Controversy erupted over this in Taiwan, with Lu's political opponents accusing her of vastly overstating the significance and value of that award. She was also the ROC's first elected vice president to adopt a Western first name. In her interview with TIME Asia Magazine,Lu said that the KMT never thought that they will transfer their regime to her on behalf of the freedom fighters.
In the months leading to the ROC presidential election, 2004 there was intense speculation as to whether she would be again chosen Chen's running mate, as party leaders had pressured him to choose someone else, presumably less controversial and outspoken to appeal to voters. But on December 11, 2003, Chen officially nominated Lu to run for a second term as he could not find a suitable partner.
Lu was a contender for the 2008 presidential election; she announced her candidacy on March 6 and faced Yu Shyi-Kun (former DPP chairman and executive premier), Frank Hsieh (former DPP chairman, former premier, former Kaohsiung mayor), and Su Tseng-Chang (former DPP chair, former premier) for the nomination. After receiving only 6.16% of the votes cast in the DPP primary, Lu withdrew from the race."VP quits race for Taiwan presidency", Al Jazeera May 7, 2007"Frank Hsieh Confirmed as DPP Standard Bearer", The China Post May 8, 2007

Assassination attempt

On March 19, 2004, Lu was shot in the right kneecap during a campaign trip to Tainan.  Chen was shot in the abdomen at the same event. Both survived the shooting and left Chi-mei Hospital on the same day. The Pan-Blue Coalition suggested that the shooting was not an assassination attempt but that it was staged to a self-inflicted wound in order to gain sympathy votes. The Chen/Lu ticket won the election on the following day with a 0.228% margin, a figure significant to those who related it to the assassination incident.
After the election, she continued to make statements which contributed to a public impression that she was a political chatter box. In a June 2004 meeting with expatriates in San Francisco, she proposed to officially rename her country "Taiwan Republic of China" to pacify domestic disputes over Taiwan's identity. However, this drew heat from both sides, ranging from those who wanted to drop the "Republic of China" completely and those who pointed out that her proposal violated the Five Noes. Lu was careful to state that this was just her personal opinion and not an official proposal. She drew more controversy after flooding in Taiwan, in which she made statements which were portrayed as an attack on native Taiwanese living in flood prone areas.
Unlike her running mate she was never implicated in money laundering and is considered to be a honest politician.

Cross-strait relations

Lu has been more outspoken in favor of Taiwan independence than President Chen Shui-bian, and as such has been more heavily attacked than Chen both by the government of the People's Republic of China as well as by supporters of Chinese reunification.
She often appears at odds with Chen, particularly with regard to cross-Strait policy. While Chen initially sent conciliatory signals, Lu consistently made inflammatory comments to the media. Her confrontational remarks have led state newspapers in mainland China to accuse her of provoking "animosity between the people on both sides of the Taiwan Straits"."What Is Annette Lu Up To?", People's Daily, 4/17/00 PRC state media has also labeled Lu as "insane" and a "scum of the earth.
In 2010 Lu visited South Korea and advocated Taiwan's use of what she called "soft power," meaning peaceful economic and political development, as a model for the resolution of international conflicts.Soft power lets Taiwan overcome poverty, survive despotism: Lu, Taiwan News, February 18, 2010
In mid April 2013 speaking at George Washington University, Lu called for the DPP to have a better understanding about Mainland China because Taiwan's future depends on the development on the mainland. She stated that cross-strait relations should be defined as not only a distant relative, but also a near neighbor. And she stressed that there should be no hatred nor war between Taiwan and Mainland China, and both side should pursue peaceful coexistence, industrial cooperation and cultural exchanges.chinapost.tw/taiwan/china-taiwan-relations/2013/04/14/375995/Ex-VP-Lu.htm
Speaking at the founding ceremony of Anti-One China Principle Union in Taipei on 29 April 2013, Lu warned on silent annexation of Taiwan into China since the introduction of Anti-Secession Law in 2005 and the gradual erosion of Taiwan's sovereignty. However, she said that Taiwan doesn't oppose that there is one China in the world, but Taiwan is not part of China. She criticized ROC President Ma Ying-jeou for making Taiwan becomes more and more dependent on China. She even reiterated her 1996 Consensus consensus to oppose Kuomintang's 1992 Consensus in dealing with the PRC, in which she said Taiwan has been an independent sovereign country after the 1996 ROC Presidential Election.taipeitimes.com/News/taiwan/archives/2013/04/30/2003561080

Alleged charges

On September 21, 2007, Vice President Lu was indicted on charges of corruption by the Supreme Prosecutor's Office of Taiwan. Lu faces charges of embezzlement and of using false receipts to write-off expenses totalling over US$165,000 from a special governmental account. Yu Shyi-Kun was also indicted on the same day and immediately resigned his chairmanship of the Democratic Progressive Party, he promised he would resign if indicted. On the same day, DPP member and National Security Office Secretary-General Mark Chen was also indicted on corruption charges.








