[[Takeda Pharmaceutical Company]]

CATEGORIES: Companies of Japan, Pharmaceutical companies of Japan, Companies based in Osaka Prefecture, Companies listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange, Companies listed on the Fukuoka Stock Exchange, Companies listed on the Pink Sheets, Companies based in Deerfield, Illinois, Pharmaceutical companies established in 1781, 1781 establishments in Japan

 Its headquarters is located in Chuo-ku, Osaka, and it has an office in Nihonbashi, Chuo, Tokyo."FAQ." Takeda Pharmaceutical Company. "Q : Where is Takeda located? A : The Head Office is located in Osaka, Japan, and the Tokyo Head Office is located in Tokyo, Japan.""Overview." Takeda Pharmaceutical Company. "Headquarters Head Office 1-1, Doshomachi 4-chome, Chuo-ku, Osaka 540-8645" and "Tokyo Head Office 12-10, Nihonbashi 2-chome, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 103-8668"
In January 2012, Fortune Magazine ranked the Takeda Oncology Company as one the 100 best companies to work for in the United States.

History

Takeda Pharmaceuticals was founded on June 12, 1781 and was incorporated on January 29, 1925.
In 1977, Takeda first entered the U.S. pharmaceutical market by developing a joint venture with Abbott Laboratories called TAP Pharmaceuticals. Through TAP Pharmaceuticals, Takeda and Abbott launched the blockbusters Lupron (leuprolide) in 1985 and Prevacid (lansoprazole) in 1995.
One of the firm's mainstay drugs is Actos, a compound in the thiazolidinedione class of drugs used in the treatment of type 2 diabetes. Launched in 1999, Actos has become the best-selling diabetes drug in the world with $4 billion USD in sales during the 2008 fiscal year.
In February 2005, Takeda announced its acquisition of San Diego, California-based Syrrx, a company specializing in high-throughput X-ray crystallography, for $270 million.
In February 2008, Takeda acquired the Japanese operations of Amgen and rights to a dozen of the California biotechnology company's pipeline candidates for the Japanese market.
In March 2008, Takeda and Abbott Laboratories announced plans to conclude their 30-year old joint venture, TAP Pharmaceuticals, that had over $3 billion in sales in its final year. The split resulted in Abbott acquiring U.S. rights to Lupron and the drug's support staff. On the other hand, Takeda received rights to Prevacid and TAP's pipeline candidates. The move also increased Takeda's headcount by 3,000 employees.
In April 2008, Takeda announced that it was acquiring Millennium Pharmaceuticals of Cambridge, Massachusetts, a company specializing in cancer drug research, for $8.8 billion. The acquisition brought in Velcade, a drug indicated for hematological malignancies, as well as a portfolio of pipeline candidates in the oncology, inflammation, and cardiovascular therapeutic areas. Millennium now operates as an independent subsidiary, serving as the global center of excellence in oncology under its new name: "Millennium: The Takeda Oncology Company." 
In May 2008, the company licensed non-exclusively the RNAi technology platform developed by Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, creating a potentially long-term partnership between the companies.[ref]
</ref>
On May 19, 2011, Takeda Pharmaceutical and Nycomed announced that Takeda will acquire Nycomed for € 9.6 billion. The acquisition was completed by September 30, 2011.takeda.html
On April 11, 2012, Takeda Pharmaceutical and URL Pharma announced that Takeda will acquire URL Pharma for $800 million. The acquisition is expected to be completed within 60 days.
On 25 May 2012, Takeda announced the purchase of Brazilian pharmaceutical company Multilab by R$ 540 million.

Locations

Takeda operates two primary bases in Japan in Osaka and Tokyo. Its United States subsidiary is based in Deerfield, Illinois, and all Global Operations outside of Japan and U.S. are based in Opfikon (Zurich), Switzerland.
The company maintains research & development sites in Osaka and Tsukuba, Japan; San Diego and San Francisco, United States; Cambridge, United Kingdom; and Singapore.
The company has manufacturing facilities in Japan, China, Indonesia, Italy, and Ireland. Following the Nycomed acquisition, the Takeda manufacturing sites have been extended with facilities in Argentina, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Denmark, Estonia, Germany, Mexico, Norway and Poland.
Takeda has overseas marketing presences in the U.S., UK, France, Italy, Germany, Austria, Switzerland, Spain, China, Taiwan, Philippines, Thailand, Indonesia, and Singapore. It has recently announced its first foray into Canada, Portugal, Spain, Mexico, and Ireland.

Products

Some of the key products that Takeda produces on behalf of partners include:






