[[Scott McCloud]]

CATEGORIES: 1960 births, Living people, American webcomic creators, People from Boston, Massachusetts, Syracuse University alumni, Harvey Award winners for Best Writer

{{Infobox comics creator
| name          = Scott McCloud
| image         = Scott McCloud.RISD.gk.JPG
| imagesize     = 
| caption       = McCloud, RISD, March 2007.
| alt           =
| birth_name    = Scott McLeod
| birth_date    =  
| birth_place   = Boston, Massachusetts, United States
| death_date    = 
| death_place   = 
| nationality   = American
| area          = {{Plainlist|
| cartoonist    = y
| alias         = 
| notable works = {{plainlist|
| awards        = 

Scott McCloud (born Scott McLeod on June 10, 1960) is an American cartoonist and comics theorist.  He is best known for his non-fiction books about comics, Understanding Comics (1993), Reinventing Comics (2000), and Making Comics (2006).

Early life

McCloud was born in 1960McCloud, Scott. (2000), Reinventing Comics. Paradox Press. p. 92 in Boston, Massachusetts, and spent most of his childhood in Lexington, Massachusetts. PopImage. Retrieved November 16, 2011. He decided he wanted to be a comics artist in 1975, during his junior year in high school. When it came time to look for a college that fit his career goals, the one that offered a program closest to his career goals was Syracuse University's Illustration program. He selected that school and area of major, and graduated from Syracuse with a Bachelor of Fine Arts degree in 1982.C. (August 1979), "Scott McCloud". The Comics Journal #179. Retrieved November 16, 2011.

Career

Artist and theorist

McCloud created the light-hearted science fiction/superhero comic book series Zot! in 1984, in part as a reaction to the increasingly grim direction that superhero comics were taking in the 1980s.
His other print comics include Destroy!! (a deliberately over-the-top, over-sized single-issue comic book, intended as a parody of formulaic superhero fights), the graphic novel The New Adventures of Abraham Lincoln (done with a mixture of computer-generated and manually drawn digital images), 12 issues writing DC Comics' Superman Adventures, and the three-issue limited series Superman: Strength.
He is best known as a comics theorist or as some say, the "Aristotle of comics",Wardrip-Fruin, Noah & Montfort, Nick (2003). The New Media Reader. The MIT Press. following the publication in 1993 of Understanding Comics, a wide-ranging exploration of the definition, history, vocabulary, and methods of the medium of comics, itself in comics form.und.edu/our/uletter/print_article. Finally, in 2006, he released Making Comics. Following publication, he went on a tour with his family that included all 50 U.S. states and parts of Europe.
He was one of the earliest vocal supporters of micropayments. He was also an adviser to BitPass, a company that provided an online micropayment system, which he helped launch with the publication of The Right Number, an online graphic novella priced at US$0.25 for each chapter.  McCloud maintains an active online presence on his web site where he publishes many of his ongoing experiments with comics produced specifically for the web.  Among the techniques he explores is the "infinite canvas" permitted by a web browser, allowing panels to be spatially arranged in ways not possible in the finite, two-dimensional, paged format of a physical book.
He created a comic book that formed the press release introducing Google's web browser, Google Chrome, which was published on September 1, 2008.
In 2009, McCloud was featured in The Cartoonist, a documentary film on the life and work of Jeff Smith, creator of Bone. Retrieved November 14, 2011.

Creator's Bill of Rights

McCloud was the principal author of the Creator's Bill of Rights, a 1988 document with the stated aim of protecting the rights of comic book creators and help aid against the exploitation of comic artists and writers by corporate work-for-hire practices. "Creator's Rights". The Comics Journal p. 65-71 The group that adopted the Bill also included artists Kevin Eastman, Dave Sim, and  Stephen R. Bissette. Reinventing Comics, New York: Paradox Press. Pg. 62 The Bill included twelve rights such as "The right to full ownership of what we fully create," and "The right to prompt payment of a fair and equitable share of profits derived from all of our creative work."

24-hour comic

In 1990, McCloud coined the idea of a 24-hour comic, a complete 24-page comic created by a single cartoonist in 24 consecutive hours.  It was a mutual challenge with cartoonist Steve Bissette, intended to compel creative output with a minimum of self-restraining contemplation. and Rick Veitch who used it as a springboard for his comic Rarebit Fiends. The 24-Hour Comics Index. scottmccloud. Retrieved October, 2013.

Technique and materials

Although McCloud sketches his layouts in pencil, the remainder of his work is done digitally, explaining in his 2006 book Making Comics that he had not used traditional materials like Bristol board, pens or brushes in years. After sketching layouts, which he says are "pretty tight", and include the full script, he scans them into an 18-inch computer tablet/monitor to use them as a guide for lettering them in Adobe Illustrator. After completing the lettering, he exports the files to Photoshop, where he fully renders the art at a resolution of 1,200 dpi, creating between five and fifty layers of finished art before flattening it into a single black and white bitmap, plus a greyscale page, if needed. William Morrow Paperbacks. pp 196-197

Personal life

McCloud lives in Newbury Park, California. Retrieved November 30, 2012. He is married to Ivy Ratafia and they have two daughters, Sky and Winter.livejournal.html. What I did on my summer vacation.

Reception and legacy

McCloud has been called the "Marshall McLuhan of comics". The New York Times

Awards

Nominations

Bibliography

Notes





Interviews


