[[Sheck Exley]]

CATEGORIES: 1949 births, 1994 deaths, American cavers, American instructional writers, American schoolteachers, American underwater divers, Cave diving explorers, Pioneering technical divers, Place of birth missing, Sport deaths in Mexico, Underwater diving deaths

Sheck Exley (April 1, 1949 – April 6, 1994) was an American cave diver. He is widely regarded as one of the pioneers of cave diving, During his career, he established many of the basic safety procedures used in cave and overhead diving today. Exley was also a pioneer of extreme deep scuba diving.  
For purposes of rescue during cave diving, Exley helped standardize the usage of the "octopus," a redundant second stage diving regulator that can be used as a backup in the event that the diver's primary second stage fails, or alternatively to allow the diver and his buddy to have simultaneous access to his gas if the buddy has an out-of-gas emergency. The octopus is now considered an essential piece of equipment among virtually all scuba divers, whether caving or in open water.
To finance this passion, Exley worked as a mathematics teacher at Suwannee High School in Live Oak, Florida. 
He died at age 45 while trying to set a depth record in a fresh water cenote more than 1000 feet deep in Mexico.
In the book, Diving into Darkness (a story about Dave Shaw and Don Shirley), the author comments: "Exley's status in the sport is almost impossible to overstate."

Records

Exley began diving in 1965 at the age of 16. That same year he entered his first cave and was hooked on cave diving for the rest of his life. He was the first in the world to log over 1000 cave dives (at the age of 23); in 29 years of cave diving he made over 4000 dives.
Exley had an unusual resistance to nitrogen narcosis, and was one of the few divers to survive a 122 meter (400 ft) open-water dive on simple compressed air. In acting as a safety diver for two divers trying to set an air-only depth record in 1970, Exley reached 142 meters (465 ft) in salt water, but could go no deeper due to narcosis and the start of blackout (the two record-depth attempting unconscious divers died just out of reach beneath him, and such air-depth records are no longer sought or recorded).cisatlantic.htm Interview with Exley.] During his diving career, he set numerous depth and cave penetration records.
Sheck Exley is one of only eleven people in the history of technical SCUBA diving to dive below 800 feet.
Exley and German cave diver Jochen Hasenmayer became friends and rivals in the 1980s, each repeatedly attempting to break the depth records of the other. 320-321.

Death

Exley died, aged 45, on April 6, 1994 while attempting to descend to a depth of over 300 metres (1,000 ft) in a cenote, or sinkhole, called Zacatón in Mexico. He made the dive as part of a dual dive with Jim Bowden, but Bowden aborted his descent early when his gas supply ran low. Exley's body was recovered when his support crew hauled up his unused decompression tanks, when it was found that he had looped into the descent line, perhaps to sort out gas issues. His wrist-mounted dive computer read a maximum depth of 268 meters (879 ft). 
The cause of Exley's death could not be determined. Team members concluded the causes "... The line was also wrapped (deliberately) around Exley's tank valves. Bowden and other experts have theorized that Exley may have done this in anticipation of his own death to prevent any dangerous body recovery operations.

Books about Exley

Some of Exley's exploits are described in Daniel Lenihan's book Submerged. This book describes how Exley was a very influential dive buddy of the author, who went on to form the National Park Service's Submerged Resources Center.






