[[Logroño]]

CATEGORIES: Municipalities in La Rioja (Spain), Logroño

Logroño () is a city in northern Spain, on the Ebro River. It is the capital of the autonomous community of La Rioja, formerly known as La Rioja Province.
The population of the city in 2008 was 153,736 while the metropolitan area included nearly 197,000 inhabitants. The city is a centre of the trade in Rioja wine, for which the area is noted, and also produces wood, metal, and textile products.

Geography

Logroño is located in the northern region of La Rioja, on the river Ebro,  above sea level. The Camino de Santiago passes through the city. The geographical coordinates of the city are: 42° 27´ N, 2° 29´ W.
The city lies  from Barcelona.

Climate

The city's weather is moderated by its location in the valley of the river Ebro, and its weather conditions are typical of the continental Mediterranean climate. The average annual temperature is  The winds that affect the city are as follows: the northerly Cierzo, the southerly Ábrego, the easterly Solano, and the westerly Castellano. Intermediate winds are the northeasterly Navarrico, the northwesterly Regañón, the southwesterly Burgalés and the southeasterly Soriano.

History

Logroño was an old settlement, first of the Romans, under the name of Vareia, a commercial port, and then of the Celts.
From the 10th century, possession of Logroño was disputed between the kings of Navarre and those of Castile; the region was finally annexed to Castile. Alfonso VI of Castile granted Logroño in 1095 a charter of rights that served as a model for other Spanish cities. In 1609 and 1610 Logroño was the main seat of the Basque witch trials, part of the Spanish Inquisition.
Famous people from Logroño include Manuel Bretón de los Herreros, Fausto Elhúyar, Práxedes Mateo Sagasta, Rafael Azcona, Ramón Castroviejo, Pedro J. Ramírez, Navarrete "El Mudo".

Economy

Logroño is the shopping and financial capital of La Rioja. Its economy is heavily reliant on wine. It is twinned with Dunfermline, Fife, Darmstadt, Libourne, Dax, Hagunia, Rancagua, Ciudad de La Rioja, Brescia. The new airport Logroño-Agoncillo connects the city with Madrid and Barcelona.

Food

Logroño has one of the most distinguished culinary traditions in Spain. There are over 50 taperías (tapas restaurants) located within a 4 block area, near the town center. The traditional tapas restaurants often serve only one tapa as seta (mushroom), served as pincho - pintxo in Basque - meaning one serving, or media ración ("half portion"), a small plate of tapas, but offer different wines by the glass, usually all from the Rioja D.O..

Places of interest

Recreation (plazas and parks)

Social life

Calle del Laurel, known as "the path of the elephants" and Calle San Juan are typical streets where various restaurants and tapas bars offer some of the best pinchos and tapas in northern Spain. Calle Portales is the main street in the old town, where people like to walk and sit in the terraces to eat a meal or drink wine. Calle Marqués de San Nicolás (otherwise known as Calle Mayor) is the main area where people spend weekend nights.

Broadcasting stations

Southwest of Logroño, at 42°26'34"N   2°30'43"W, there is a mediumwave broadcasting station with a transmission power of 20 kW. There may exist a longwave transmitter with 300 metres tall masts at Logroño with 300 metres tall masts transmitting RNE Todo Noticias on 207 kHz.

Sports

Triple jumper Carlota Castrejana is from the city.
David Lopez Moreno, the Brighton & Hove Albion midfielder is from Logroño.

Festivals and traditions

The patron saint of Logroño is Santa María de la Esperanza.
The most important festivals are:
During the first week of January there is a cultural festival known as "ACTUAL" with music, theater and art.

International relations

Twin towns—sister cities

Logroño is twinned with:

Transport

The city is served by the new Logroño railway station.

In popular culture

In the 4th season of the HBO television series True Blood, the witch Antonia is from Logroño. She refers to herself as Antonia Gavilan de Logroño.

Gallery

File:Vareia-detailed-view. This old village was known as "Vareia".
File:Monumento-al-Fuero-de-Logro-o-en-el-Ayuntamiento.jpg|Monumento del Fuero de Logroño, given by Alfonso VI in 1095, near the Town Hall 
File:Arch of Revellín Wall in Logroño.jpg|Arch of Revellín Wall
File:Casa ciencias.JPG|Science "House"
File:Rectorado (University Headquarters) of Universidad de La Rioja in Logroño.jpg|Universidad de La Rioja






