[[Deepak Chopra]]

CATEGORIES: 1946 births, American male writers, American people of Indian descent, American spiritual writers, Ayurvedacharyas, Indian emigrants to the United States, Indian medical doctors, Indian motivational speakers, Indian self-help writers, Indian spiritual writers, Living people, Nautilus Book Award winners, New Age spiritual leaders, New Age writers, People from New Delhi, People in alternative medicine, Recipients of the Medal of the Presidency of the Italian Republic, St. Columba's School, Delhi alumni, The Huffington Post writers and columnists, Transcendental Meditation practitioners, Quantum mysticism

Deepak Chopra (; born October 22, 1947) is an Indian-American author and alternative medicine/New Age guru. A licensed physician, he began a medical career in hospitals and universities in the Northeastern United States, becoming Chief of Staff at the New England Memorial Hospital (NEMH). In 1985, Chopra met Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, who invited him to study Ayurveda. Chopra left his position at the NEMH and became the founding president of the American Association of Ayurvedic Medicine, and was later named medical director of the Maharishi Ayurveda Health Center. In 1996, Chopra and fellow physician-turned-alternative-medicine-advocate David Simon founded the Chopra Center for Wellbeing, advertising it as having a "holistic view of life".
Chopra has enjoyed business success from the sale of a range of books, courses and alternative and complementary health products. He has written more than 50 books which have been translated into 35 languages. Chopra is a controversial figure. According to a 2008 article in Time magazine, he is "a magnet for criticism", primarily from those involved in science and medicine. Critics have taken issue with his "nonsensical" references to quantum theory, criticized his descriptions of AIDS and cancer, and said the claims he makes for ineffective alternative medicine may bring "false hope" to people who are sick.

Early life

Chopra was born in New Delhi, India. His father, Krishan Chopra, was a prominent Indian cardiologist and head of the department of medicine and cardiology at Mool Chand Khairati Ram Hospital, New Delhi, for over 25 years,
Chopra completed his primary education at St. Columba's School in New Delhi and graduated from the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) in 1968. He spent his first months as a doctor working in rural India.
Chopra's subsequent career falls into two parts. At first, Chopra adhered to mainstream medical practice; he then became an advocate of alternative medicine and a wealthy businessman

East Coast years

After immigrating to the US in 1970, Chopra undertook a clinical internship at Muhlenberg Hospital in Plainfield, New Jersey. He then did a residency at the Lahey Clinic and the University of Virginia Hospital. He later became Chief of Staff at the New England Memorial Hospital (NEMH) in Stoneham, Massachusetts, later known as Boston Regional Medical Center.
Chopra earned his license to practice medicine in the state of Massachusetts in 1973, becoming board-certified in internal medicine and specializing in endocrinology.
Visiting New Delhi in 1981, Chopra met the Ayurvedic doctor Brihaspati Dev Triguna, whose advice prompted Chopra to begin investigating Ayurvedic medicine.
In 1985, Chopra met Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, who instructed him to establish an Ayurvedic health center. Chopra left his position at the NEMH and became the founding president of the American Association of Ayurvedic Medicine, and was later named medical director of the Maharishi Ayurveda Health Center for Stress Management and Behavioral Medicine.
By 1992, Chopra was serving on the National Institute of Health's ad hoc panel on alternative medicine. Chopra said one of the reasons for leaving mainstream medicine was his disenchantment at having to prescribe too many drugs, since in his view "80 percent of all drugs prescribed today are of optional or marginal benefit".

West Coast years

In 1993, Chopra moved to California and began working for Sharp HealthCare, heading their new Institute for Human Potential and Mind-Body Medicine. Chopra did not at first apply for a license to practice medicine in California, preferring to teach and write; in 2004 he was licensed in California.
Chopra left the Transcendental Meditation movement in January 1994. According to his own account, Chopra was accused by the Maharishi of attempting to compete with the Maharishi's position as guru. According to Robert Todd Carroll, Chopra left the TM organization when it "became too stressful" and was a "hindrance to his success".

Alternative medicine business

In 1996 Sharp HealthCare changed ownership and broke off its relationship with Chopra. With neurologist David Simon, Chopra founded the Chopra Center for Wellbeing at the Omni La Costa Resort and Spa in Carlsbad, California. The new center promoted itself as having a "holistic view of life that sees human beings as networks of energy and information, integrating body, mind and spirit".
The publication of Chopra's Ageless Body, Timeless Mind: The Quantum Alternative to Growing Old (1993) gained him an interview on The Oprah Winfrey Show and coverage in People magazine. Writing in 1997, Tony Perry of the Los Angeles Times puts the "explosion of interest" in Chopra down to his broad alignment with the desires of contemporary society.
In his 2013 book Do You Believe in Magic?, Paul Offit writes that Chopra's business grosses approximately $20 million annually, and is built on the sale of various alternative medicine products such as herbal supplements, massage oils, books, videos and courses. A year's worth of products for "anti-aging" can cost up to $10,000.
According to medical anthropologist Hans Baer, Chopra – as a wealthy individual – is an example of the American success story, but one who has failed to explore some of the potential benefits of a truly alternative, holistic approach to health. Instead he merely offers an alternative form of medical hegemony, focused on the individual – particularly well-off members of the upper and middle-classes; the "worried well".

Education, charity and advisory roles

Chopra established the Chopra Foundation in 2009 with a mission to advance the cause of mind/body spiritual healing, education, and research through fundraising for selected projects.
In 2005 Chopra was made a Senior Scientist at The Gallup Organization.
Chopra is Adjunct Professor, Columbia Business School, Columbia University
He participates annually as a lecturer at the Update in Internal Medicine event sponsored by Harvard Medical School, Department of Continuing Education and the Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center.
In 2012, Chopra joined the board of advisors for tech startup State.

Ideas and reception

Aging

Chopra has advanced the notion that human aging can be retarded or reversed, saying that "contrary to our traditional notions of aging, we can learn to direct the way our bodies metabolize time",
Conversely, Chopra also says that aging can be accelerated, for example by a person engaging in "cynical mistrust".
Robert Todd Carroll has characterized Chopra's promotion of lengthened life as a selling of "hope", but that it seems to be "a false hope based on an unscientific imagination seeped in mysticism and cheerily dispensed gibberish".

Alternative medicine

Chopra has been described as "America's most prominent spokesman for Ayurveda". He mixes ideas associated with quantum mechanics with ayurvedic medicine in what he calls "quantum healing".
Chopra has described the AIDS virus as emitting "a sound that lures the DNA to its destruction". The condition can be treated, according to Chopra, with "Ayurveda's primordial sound". Taking issue with this view, medical professor Lawrence Schneiderman has said that ethical issues are raised when alternative medicine is not based on empirical evidence and that, "to put it mildly, Dr. Chopra proposes a treatment and prevention program for AIDS that has no supporting empirical data".
A 2008 article in Time magazine by Ptolemy Tompkins commented that for most of his career Chopra had been a "magnet for criticism": Tompkins wrote that the medical and scientific communities had voiced negative opinions of Chopra, which ranged from the "dismissive" to the "outright damning", particularly because Chopra's claims for the effectiveness of alternative medicine could lure sick people away from effective treatments. Tompkins however considered Chopra a "beloved" individual whose basic messages centered on "love, health and happiness" had made him rich because of their popular appeal.

=Quantum healing=

Chopra coined the term quantum healing to invoke the idea of a process whereby a person's health "imbalance" is corrected by quantum mechanical means. Chopra claimed that quantum phenomena are responsible for health and wellbeing. He has attempted to integrate Ayurveda, a traditional Indian system of medicine, with quantum mechanics, in order to justify his teachings. According to Robert Carroll, he "charges $25,000 per lecture performance, where he spouts a few platitudes and gives spiritual advice while warning against the ill effects of materialism".
Chopra has equated spontaneous remission in cancer to a change in quantum state, corresponding to a jump to "a new level of consciousness that prohibits the existence of cancer". Physics professor Robert L. Park has written that physicists "wince" at the "New Age quackery" in Chopra's cancer theories, and characterizes them as a cruel fiction, since adopting this view in place of effective treatment risks compounding the ill effects of the disease with guilt, and might rule out the prospect of getting a genuine cure.
Chopra's claims of quantum healing have attracted controversy due to what has been described as a "systematic misinterpretation" of modern physics.

=Distance healing=

In 2001, ABC News aired a show segment on the topic of distance healing and prayer. In it Chopra said that "there is a realm of reality that goes beyond the physical where in fact we can influence each other from a distance". Chopra was shown using his claimed mental powers in an attempt to relax a person in another room, whose vital signs were recorded in charts which were said to show a correspondence between Chopra's periods of concentration and the subject's periods of relaxation. After the show, a poll of its viewers found that 90% of them believed in distance healing.
Christopher Wanjek has criticized the experiment, saying that any correspondence evident from the charts would prove nothing, but that even so freezing the frame of the video showed the correspondences were not so close as claimed. Wanjek characterized the broadcast as "an instructive example of how bad medicine is presented as exciting news" which had "a dependence on unusual or sensational science results that others in the scientific community renounce as unsound".

Spirituality and religion

Chopra acknowledges that his thought has been inspired by Jiddu Krishnamurti and others.
In 2012, reviewing War of the Worldviews – a book co-authored by Chopra and Leonard Mlodinow – physics professor Mark Alford says that the work is set out as a debate between the two authors, "covering all the big questions: cosmology, life and evolution, the mind and brain, and God". Alford considers the two sides of the debate a false opposition, and says that "the counterpoint to Chopra's speculations is not science, with its complicated structure of facts, theories, and hypotheses," but rather Occam's razor.
In August 2005, Chopra wrote a series of articles on the creation-evolution controversy and Intelligent design, which were criticized by science writer Michael Shermer, founder of The Skeptics Society. Shermer has said that Chopra is "the very definition of what we mean by pseudoscience".

Attack against skepticism

Paul Kurtz has written that the popularity of Chopra's views is associated with increasing antiscientific attitudes in society, and such popularity represents an assault on the objectivity of science itself by seeking new, alternative, forms of validation for ideas. Kurtz argues that medical claims must always be submitted to open-minded but proper scrutiny, and that skepticism "has its work cut out for it".
In 2013 Chopra published an article on what he saw as "skepticism" at work in Wikipedia, arguing that a "stubborn band of militant skeptics" were editing articles to prevent what he believes would be a fair representation of the views of such figures as Rupert Sheldrake. The result, Chopra argued, was that the encyclopedia's readers lost out through not being able to read of attempts to "expand science beyond its conventional boundaries". Biologist Jerry Coyne responded saying that it was instead Chopra himself who was losing out, as his views were being "exposed as a lot of scientifically-sounding psychobabble".
More broadly, Chopra has attacked skepticism as a whole, writing in The Huffington Post that "No skeptic, to my knowledge, ever made a major scientific discovery or advanced the welfare of others".

Use of scientific terminology

Reviewing Susan Jacoby's book, The Age of American Unreason, Wendy Kaminer sees Chopra's popular reception in America as being symptomatic of many Americans' historical inability (as Jacoby puts it) "to distinguish between real scientists and those who peddled theories in the guise of science". Chopra's "nonsensical references to quantum physics" are placed in a lineage of American religious pseudoscience, extending back through Scientology to Christian Science. Physics professor Chad Orzel has written that "to a physicist, Chopra's babble about 'energy fields' and 'congealing quantum soup' presents as utter gibberish", but that Chopra's writing gifts enable him to construct a compelling narrative that non-scientists can find convincing.
Chopra has been criticized for his frequent references to the relationship of quantum mechanics to healing processes, a connection that has drawn skepticism from physicists who say it can be considered as contributing to the general confusion in the popular press regarding quantum measurement, decoherence and the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
Others have argued that Chopra's misuse of the word "quantum" has undermined the public's confidence in genuine science and has discouraged people from engaging with conventional medicine. Brian Cox says that "for some scientists, the unfortunate distortion and misappropriation of scientific ideas that often accompanies their integration into popular culture is an unacceptable price to pay."

Yoga

In April 2010, Aseem Shukla criticized Chopra for suggesting that yoga did not have origins in Hinduism but is an older Indian spiritual tradition.

Legal actions

In 1991 the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA) published an article on Ayurvedic medicine that Chopra had co-authored.
Chopra was sued for copyright infringement by Robert Sapolsky, for using a chart displaying information on the endocrinology of stress without proper attribution, after the publication of Chopra's book Ageless Body, Timeless Mind.
In 1996, The Weekly Standard published an apology for an earlier article that had accused Chopra of "plagiarism and soliciting a prostitute".

Other areas of interest

Media and entertainment

Chopra is a weekly columnist for the San Francisco Chronicle, a regular contributor to The Washington Post "On Faith" section, a prolific contributor to The Huffington Post, and is also a contributor to the LinkedIn Influencer program. "Now You Can Follow Influential People On LinkedIn Without Them Following You Back", Business Insider, New York, October 2, 2012.
Chopra is also a monthly contributor to The Times of India Speaking Tree.
Chopra is heavily featured in UniGlobe Entertainment's cancer docudrama titled 1 a Minute talking about mind, body, spirit and the mystery of life and death. The documentary is directed by actress Namrata Singh Gujral and also features cancer survivors Olivia Newton-John, Diahann Carroll, Melissa Etheridge, Mumtaz and Jaclyn Smith.
A friend of Michael Jackson for 20 years, Chopra has criticized the "cult of drug-pushing doctors, with their co-dependent relationships with addicted celebrities", saying that he hoped Jackson's death, attributed to an overdose of a prescription drug, would be a call to action. Deepak Chopra: How Michael Jackson Could Have Been Saved, The Daily Beast, July 2, 2009, p. 4

Minor business activities

In 2006, Chopra launched Virgin Comics LLC with his son Gotham Chopra and entrepreneur Richard Branson. The company's purpose is to "spread peace and awareness through comics and trading cards that display traditional Kabalistic characters and stories".
Since 2005, Chopra has been a board member of Men's Wearhouse, Inc., a men's clothing distributor and Fortune 1000 company.

Select bibliography

Chopra has written over 50 books and they have been translated into 35 languages. They include:

Awards and memberships

Chopra is a member of the American Medical Association (AMA),
Doctor of Science, Hartwick College 
In 1997, Chopra was given the Golden Gavel Award by Toastmasters International.toastmasters.org/goldengavel
He was presented the Medal of the Presidency of the Italian Republic awarded by the Pio Manzu International Scientific Committee. In the citation, Committee Chairman Mikhail Gorbachev referred to Chopra as "one of the most lucid and inspired philosophers of our time".
As the keynote speaker, he appeared at the inauguration of the State of the World Forum, hosted by Mikhail Gorbachev and the Peace and Human Progress Foundation.
He received the 2010 Humanitarian Starlite Award "for his global force of human empowerment, well-being and for bringing light to the world".
In the Help Yourself category, Time magazine lists Deepak Chopra as one of the 100 Heroes and Icons of the Century. In March 2000, President Clinton said, "My country has been enriched by the contributions of more than a million Indian Americans ... which includes Dr. Deepak Chopra, the pioneer of alternative medicine."President William Jefferson Clinton, from a speech at a State Dinner hosted by President Kircheril Narayan of India in New Delhi, March 21, 2000. Printed in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: William J. Clinton, 2000-2001, January 1 to June 26, 2000, Government Printing Office, 2001.





Further reading




