[[Doc Holliday]]

CATEGORIES: 1851 births, 1887 deaths, People from Griffin, Georgia, American people of English descent, American dentists, American folklore, American gamblers, American poker players, Arizona folklore, History of Cochise County, Arizona, Deaths from tuberculosis, Gunmen of the American Old West, Infectious disease deaths in Colorado, People of the American Old West, Cochise County conflict, Film sidekicks

John Henry "Doc" Holliday (August 14, 1851 – November 8, 1887) was an American gambler, gunfighter, and dentist of the American Old West who is usually remembered for his friendship with Wyatt Earp and his involvement in the Gunfight at the O.K. Corral.
As a young man, Holliday earned a D.D.S. degree from the Pennsylvania College of Dental Surgery and set up a dental practice in Atlanta, Georgia. In 1873 he was diagnosed with tuberculosis, the same disease that had claimed his mother when he was 15. He moved to the American Southwest in hopes that the climate would prolong his life. Taking up gambling as a profession, he subsequently acquired a reputation as a deadly gunman. During his travels, he met and became a good friend of Wyatt Earp and his brothers. In 1880, he moved to Tombstone, Arizona, and participated alongside the Earps in the famous gunfight at the OK Corral.
The gunfight did not occur at the OK Corral, but in a vacant lot owned by CS Fly, located between the CS Fly photography Studio and the Harwood house along Fremont Street. This did not settle matters between the two sides, and Holliday was embroiled in ensuing shootouts and killings. He successfully fought being extradited for murder and died in bed at a Colorado hotel at the age of 36.
The legend and mystique of his life is so great that he has been mentioned in countless books and portrayed by various actors in numerous movies and television series. For the 125-plus years since his death, debate has continued about the exact crimes he may have committed. It is believed that Holliday had killed between three to seven men in his lifetime, and has been to nine shootouts.415Walter Noble Burns in Tombstone : An Illiad of the Southwest, placed the fatalities as three

Early life and education

Holliday was born in Griffin, Georgia, to Henry Burroughs Holliday and Alice Jane Holliday (née McKey). His father served in the Mexican–American War and the Civil War, during which his father brought with him an adopted son named Francisco and taught Holliday shooting.gov Civil War Soldiers and Sailors System of the National Park Service His family baptized him at the First Presbyterian Church in 1852.
In 1864 his family moved to Valdosta, Georgia, where Holliday's mother died of tuberculosis on September 16, 1866 when he was 15 years old. The same disease killed his stepbrother. Three months later, his father married Rachel Martin. While in Valdosta, he attended the Valdosta Institute, where he received a strong classical secondary education in rhetoric, grammar, mathematics, history, and languages—principally Latin but also French and some Ancient Greek.
In 1870 the 19-year-old Holliday left home to begin dental school in Philadelphia. On March 1, 1872, at the age of 20, he met the requirements for the degree of Doctor of Dental Surgery from the Pennsylvania College of Dental Surgery (which later merged with the University of Pennsylvania School of Dental Medicine). He graduated five months before his 21st birthday, which would have been problematic since this age was needed both to hold a D.D.S. degree and to practice dentistry as anything other than a student under a preceptor in Georgia.
Doc won awards as a dentist during the Annual Fair of the North Texas Agricultural, Mechanical, and Blood Stock Association at the Dallas County Fair together with his dental partner Doctor John A. Seegar. Holliday took all three awards - "best set of teeth in gold," "the best in Vulcanized rubber" and "the best set of artificial teeth and dental ware.
Holliday did not go home after graduation but worked as an assistant with a classmate, A. Jameson Fuches, Jr., in St. Louis, Missouri.
Holliday's cousin by marriage was Margaret Mitchell, who wrote Gone With the Wind.

Health

Author Karen Holliday Tanner reported that Holliday was born with a cleft palate and partly cleft lip that was repaired by his uncle, Dr. J.S. Holliday, and a family cousin, the famous physician Crawford Long. She wrote that Holliday needed many hours of speech therapy conducted by his mother..
Shortly after beginning his dental practice, Holliday was diagnosed with tuberculosis. He may have contracted the disease from his mother, although he may also have caught it from a coughing or sneezing patient. Little or no precaution was taken against this during dental procedures, as tuberculosis was not known to be contagious until 1885. He was given only a few months to live, but he considered that moving to the drier and warmer southwestern United States might slow the deterioration of his health.

Gambler and gunman

One of Holliday's earliest shootings happened in the Withlacoochee river in 1873. A young Holliday together with friends went to their favorite bathing place, but discovered it occupied by a group of African-American youths. Holliday and his companions told them to leave, but they were defiant. Enraged, Holliday left and returned carrying either a shotgun or a pistol and started firing. Some of the African-Americans started firing at him as well. Accounts of this event varied as violence against blacks were largely undocumented at that time. Holliday's family denied him ever killing anyone that day, but two accounts said that Holliday killed one to two of the group. 64-67 This however, forced his family to move him to Dallas.
In September 1873, Holliday moved to Dallas, Texas, where he opened a dental office with fellow dentist and Georgian John A. Seegar. Their office was located between Market and Austin Streets along Elm Street, about three blocks east of the site of today's Dealey Plaza. Wright (December 2001). "Looking For Doc in Dallas". ''True West Magazine, pp. 42–43. He soon began gambling and realized this was a more profitable source of income, since patients feared going to his office because of his ongoing cough. On May 12, 1874, Holliday and 12 others were indicted in Dallas for illegal gambling. He was arrested in Dallas in January 1875 after trading gunfire with saloon-keeper Charles Austin, but no one was injured and he was found not guilty. He moved his offices to Denison, Texas, and after being found guilty of, and fined for, "gaming" in Dallas, he decided to leave the state.
Holliday made his way to Denver, traveling the stage routes and staying at army outposts along the way, practicing his trade as a gambler. In the summer of 1875 he settled in Denver under the alias "Tom Mackey", working as a Faro dealer for John A. Babb's Theatre Comique at 357 Blake street. There, he got involved in an argument with Bud Ryan, a well-known gambling tough. Both men fought a deadly melee, and Doc ends up mutilating him with a knife.
In 1877, Holliday returned to Cheyenne and Denver, eventually making his way to Kansas to visit an aunt. He left Kansas and returned to Texas, setting up as a gambler in the town of Breckenridge, Texas. On July 4, 1877, he got involved in an altercation with another gambler named Henry Kahn, whom Holliday beat with his walking stick repeatedly. Both men were arrested and fined, but later in the day Kahn shot an unarmed Holliday, wounding him seriously.
The Dallas Weekly Herald incorrectly reported Holliday as dead in its July 7 edition. His cousin, George Henry Holliday, moved west to take care of him during his recovery. Fully recovered, Holliday relocated to Fort Griffin, Texas, where he met "Big Nose Kate" (Mary Katharine Horony) and began his longtime involvement with her. In Fort Griffin, Holliday was initially introduced to Wyatt Earp through mutual friend John Shanssey.
In the summer of 1878 Holliday assisted Earp during a barroom confrontation when Earp "was surrounded by desperadoes". Ed Morrison, whom Wyatt humiliated in Wichita, rode into Dodge together with Tobe Driskill and about 50 Texas gunmen, where they started shooting and vandalizing before entering the Long Branch Saloon. Wyatt, not realizing what was happening, ran through the front door, where Morrison and his men aimed their pistols and rifles at him, sneering, "Pray and jerk your gun! Your time has come, Earp!" Holliday, who was playing cards and saw the commotion, retaliated by drawing his pistol at Morrison's head and said, "No, friend, you draw or throw your hands up! Any of you bastards pulls a gun and your leader here loses whats left of his brains." The men were then apprehended. Earp credited Holliday with saving his life that day, and the two became friends as a result.
Bat Masterson recalled that when Holliday was in Jacksonboro, he had a gunfight with a unnamed colored soldier, who Holliday eventually shot and killed. Historian Gary L. Roberts found records of one Private Jacob Smith, who was gunned down at that time by an "unknown assailant".78-79 Holliday was still practicing dentistry on the side from his rooms in Fort Griffin and in Dodge City, as indicated in an 1878 Dodge newspaper advertisement (he promised money back for less than complete customer satisfaction), but this is the last known time he attempted to practice. Holliday was primarily a gambler, although he had a reputation as a deadly gunman. It was in this time that Holliday was now called "Doc" by many.74
One documented instance happened when Holliday was employed during a railroad dispute, and his duel with an army scout named Mike Gordon. On July 19, 1879, Holliday and noted gunman John Joshua Webb were seated in a saloon in Las Vegas, New Mexico, when a former U.S. Army scout named Mike Gordon tried to persuade one of the saloon girls, a former girlfriend, to leave town with him. When she refused, Gordon stormed outside, One report says he began firing into the building, and Doc sneaked outside, Gordon shot at him. Doc fled to Dodge City as authorities tried to capture him for questioning and for his gambling, before settling in Tombstone.
Before leaving Las Vegas however, Holliday was engaged in another gunfight with a bartender named Charles White. According to eyewitness Gillie Otero Jr., Holliday walked into the saloon with a cocked revolver in his hand and challenged White, so as to settle a score. White, who was serving his customers at that time, took cover behind a bar, and started shooting at Holliday with his own six-shooter. A duel commenced, and Holliday retaliated by shooting White in the scalp.  Holliday thought he had killed White and left for Dodge City, but White actually survived the ordeal. 120

Tombstone

Dodge City was not a frontier town for long. By 1879 it had become too respectable for the sort of people who had seen it through its early days. For many, it was time to move on to places not yet reached by the civilizing railroad—places where money was to be made. By this time Holliday was as well known for his prowess as a gunfighter as for his gambling. Through his friendship with Wyatt and the other Earp brothers, especially Morgan and Virgil, Holliday made his way to the silver-mining boom town of Tombstone, Arizona Territory, in September 1880. The Earps had been there since December 1879. Some accounts state that the Earps sent for Holliday when they realized the problems they faced in their feud with the Cowboy faction. In Tombstone, Holliday quickly became embroiled in the local politics and violence that led up to the famous Gunfight at the O.K. Corral in October 1881.
Prior to the gunfight, Holliday heard that a Tombstone bar owner, Milt Joyce, was spreading rumors about him robbing a stagecoach. Joyce had recently disarmed Holliday's revolver earlier after Holliday's alteration with a fellow gambler named Johnny Tyler. Holliday rushed drunk over to the saloon and sends abuse to Joyce, demanding his firearm back. When Joyce refused and throws him out, Holliday went back carrying a "self cocker". Joyce, upon seeing this, brandishes a pistol at him, but Holliday shot the six gun out of Joyce's hand, putting a bullet through his palm. Seconds later he shot Joyce's bartender Parker in the toe when the latter tried to grab his gun. Joyce on the other hand, quickly managed to counter by picking up his pistol and knocking Holliday out. Holliday was then detained. In October 26, 1881, Doc sought out Ike Clanton when he learned Ike was the one spreading the rumors by getting Kate drunk and making her confess that Holliday robbed the stagecoach. Doc then challenged Ike to a gunfight. Clanton pleaded to be spared and was later pistol whipped by Wyatt that day.October 12, 1880, the Nugget article
The gunfight happened in front of, and next to, Fly's boarding house and picture studio (where Holliday had a room) the day after a late night of hard drinking and poker playing by Ike Clanton. The Clantons and McLaurys collected in the space between the boarding house and the house west of it before being confronted by the Earps. Holliday may have thought they were there specifically to assassinate him. It is also highly unlikely for Morgan to have fired that fatal shot, as he was seriously wounded in the shoulder, thus rendering him the ability to shoot accurately. Holliday was grazed in the hip during the fight.Tombstone Epitaph October 27, 1881 article
It is known that Holliday carried a coach gun from the local stage office into the fight. He was given the weapon just before the fight by Virgil Earp, as Holliday was wearing a long coat that could conceal it. Virgil Earp in turn took Holliday's walking stick, and by not going conspicuously armed, Virgil was seeking to avoid alarm amongst both the citizenry of Tombstone and with the Clantons and McLaurys.
Big Nose Kate, his longtime companion, remembered Holliday's reaction after his role in the O.K. Corral gunfight. She reported that Holliday came back to his room, sat on the bed, wept, and said, "That was awful—awful". An inquest and arraignment hearing determined the gunfight was not a criminal act on the part of Holliday and the Earps.

Earp Vendetta Ride

The situation in Tombstone soon grew worse when Virgil Earp was ambushed and permanently injured in December 1881. Then Morgan Earp was ambushed and killed in March 1882. After Morgan's murder, Virgil Earp and many remaining members of the Earp families fled town. Holliday and Wyatt Earp stayed in Tombstone to exact retribution on Ike Clanton and the corrupt members known as the Cowboys. Several Cowboys were identified by witnesses as suspects in the shooting of Virgil Earp on December 27, 1881, and the assassination of Morgan Earp on March 19, 1882. Some circumstantial evidence also pointed to their involvement. Wyatt Earp had been appointed Deputy U.S. Marshall after Virgil was maimed. He deputized Holliday, Warren Earp, Sherman McMaster, and "Turkey Creek" Jack Johnson. It was in that time that Holliday said farewell to Kate for good.
The Earp party guarded Virgil Earp and his wife Allie on their way to the train for California. In Tucson, the group spotted an armed Frank Stilwell and Ike Clanton who they thought were lying in wait to kill Virgil. On Monday, March 20, 1882, Frank Stilwell's body was found at dawn alongside the railroad tracks, riddled with buckshot and gunshot wounds.
Tucson Justice of the Peace Charles Meyer issued arrest warrants for five of the Earp party, including Holliday. On March 21, they returned briefly to Tombstone, where they were joined by Texas Jack Vermillion and possibly others. Wyatt deputized the men who rode with him. After leaving Tombstone, the posse made its way to Spence's wood-cutting camp in the South Pass of the Dragoon Mountains. There they found and killed Florentino "Indian Charlie" Cruz.
Two days later, they arrived in the Iron Springs in the Whetstone Mountains. They came upon a cowboy camp, and they attempted to sneak up on them. Things went bad when eight cowboys surprised and ambushed the party. Outnumbered and outgunned, Holliday charged and gave covering fire while Wyatt kills "Curly Bill" Brocius with a shotgun, wounded Johnny Barnes in the chest and Milt Hicks in the shoulder. Holliday also helped Vermillion get cover when he got pinned down in his horse as Wyatt's posse fled. Barnes, mortally wounded, died after. 
Holliday and four other members of the posse were still faced with warrants for Stilwell's death. The group elected to leave the Arizona Territory for New Mexico and then Colorado. While in Trinidad, Colorado, Wyatt Earp and Holliday parted ways, going separately to different parts of Colorado. Holliday arrived in Colorado in mid April 1882.

Extradition fails

On May 15, 1882, Holliday was arrested in Denver on the Arizona warrant for murdering Frank Stilwell. Wyatt Earp, fearing that Holliday could not receive a fair trial in Arizona, asked his friend Bat Masterson, Chief of Police of Trinidad, Colorado, to help get Holliday released. The extradition hearing was set for May 30. Late in the evening of May 29, Masterson needed help getting an appointment with Colorado Governor Frederick Walker Pitkin. He contacted E.D. Cowen, capital reporter for the Denver Tribune, who held political sway in town. Cowen later wrote, "He submitted proof of the criminal design upon Holliday's life. Late as the hour was, I called on Pitkin." After meeting with Masterson, Pitkin was persuaded by whatever evidence he presented and refused to honor Arizona's extradition request. His legal reasoning was that the extradition papers for Holliday contained faulty legal language, and that there was already a Colorado warrant out for Holliday—one on bunco charges that Masterson had fabricated in Pueblo, Colorado.
Masterson took Holliday to Pueblo, where he was released on bond two weeks after his arrest. Holliday and Wyatt met briefly after Holliday's release during June 1882 in Gunnison.

Death of Johnny Ringo

On July 14, 1882, Johnny Ringo was found dead in the crotch of a large tree in West Turkey Creek Valley, near Chiricahua Peak, Arizona Territory, with a bullet hole in his right temple and a revolver hanging from a finger of his hand. The book, I Married Wyatt Earp, supposedly written by Josephine Marcus Earp, reported that Wyatt Earp and Holliday returned to Arizona to find and kill Ringo. Actually written by Glen Boyer, the book states that Holliday killed Ringo with a rifle shot at a distance, contradicting the coroner's ruling that Ringo's death was a suicide. However, Boyer's book has been discredited as a fraud and a hoax
Official records of the Pueblo County, Colorado, District Court indicate that both Holliday and his attorney appeared in court there on July 11, 14, and 18, 1882. Author Karen Holliday Tanner, in Doc Holliday, A Family Portrait, speculated that Holliday may not have been in Pueblo at the time of the court date, citing a writ of habeas corpus issued for him in court on July 11. She believes that only his attorney may have appeared on his behalf that day, in spite of the wording of a court record that indicated he may have appeared in person—in propria persona or "in his own person". She cites this as standard legal filler text that does not necessarily prove the person was present. There is no doubt that Holliday arrived in Salida, Colorado, on July 7 as reported in a town newspaper. This is 

Final illness, death and burial

Holliday spent the rest of his life in Colorado. After a stay in Leadville, he suffered from the high altitude. He increasingly depended on alcohol and laudanum to ease the symptoms of tuberculosis, and his health and his skills as a gambler and gunfighter began to deteriorate. One of Holliday's last gunfights happened in a saloon in Leadville, Colorado. An inexperienced and arrogant gunfighter named Billy Allen allegedly challenged Holliday to a duel. When Holliday replied that he carried no weapon, Allen sent insults to him, making him leave the saloon bitter. Allen again spoke to Doc, but was said to be armed and had a pistol in his pocket. When Doc saw Allen trying to draw his pistol, Doc let out two shots from his own, one hitting Allen in the arm and disarming him. But at that time, Holliday's disease had already taken a toll on the gunfighter. In Deadwood, South Dakota, Holliday also had one of his last gunfights in the summer of 1882. This was the second or the third time Holliday shot a man in the hand or the arm to disarm and drop their weapons, his favorite method than risking capital punishment by killing.373
In 1887, prematurely gray and badly ailing, Holliday made his way to the Hotel Glenwood, near the hot springs of Glenwood Springs, Colorado. (The Hotel Glenwood was not a sanatorium, as is popularly believed. The sanatorium in Glenwood Springs was not built until many years after Holliday's death.glenwoodhistory.
Recent Holliday biographer Gary L. Roberts, however, considers it unlikely that Holliday, who had scarcely left his bed for two months, would have been able to speak coherently, if at all, on the day he died. Although the legend persists that Wyatt Earp was present when Holliday died, Earp did not learn of Holliday's death until two months afterward. Big Nose Kate later said she attended to him in his final days, but it is also doubtful that she was present.
The Glenwood Springs Ute Chief of November 12, 1887, wrote in his obituary that Holliday had been baptized in the Catholic Church. This assertion in his obituary was based on correspondence written between Holliday and his cousin, Sister Mary Melanie, a Catholic nun. No baptismal record exists, however, in St. Stephen's Catholic Church in Glenwood Springs or at the Annunciation Catholic Church in nearby Leadville, Colorado.300 Holliday's mother had been raised a Methodist and later joined a Presbyterian church (her husband's faith) but objected to the Presbyterian doctrine of predestination and reconverted to Methodism publicly before she died, saying she wanted her son John to know what she believed.
He is buried in Linwood Cemetery overlooking Glenwood Springs. Because it was November and the ground may have been frozen, some authors like Bob Boze BellThe Illustrated Life and Times of Doc Holliday, Bob Boze Bell, Tri Star-Boze Publications, (1995) ISBN 1-887576-00-2. have speculated that Holliday could not have been buried in his marked grave in the Linwood Cemetery, which was only accessible via a difficult mountain road. Holliday biographer Gary Roberts, however, has located evidence that other bodies were transported to the Linwood Cemetery at the same time of the month that year. And the papers reported at the time explicitly that the burial was in the Linwood Cemetery; no exhumation has been attempted.

Character

Throughout his lifetime, Doc is known by many of his peers to being a tempered, but calm Southern gentleman. In an 1896 article Wyatt Earp said that "Doc was a dentist, not a lawman or an assassin, whom necessity had made a gambler; a gentleman whom disease had made a frontier vagabond; a philosopher whom life had made a caustic wit; a long lean, ash-blond fellow nearly dead with consumption, and at the same time the most skillful gambler and the nerviest, speediest, deadliest man with a six-gun that I ever knew."
In a newspaper interview Holliday was once asked if his conscience ever troubled him. He is reported to have said, "I coughed that up with my lungs, years ago."

Public reputation

Publicly, Holliday could be as fierce as was needed for a gambling man to earn respect. In Tombstone in January 1882, he told Johnny Ringo (as recorded by diarist Parsons), "All I want of you is ten paces out in the street." He and Ringo were prevented from a gunfight only by the Tombstone police (which did not include the Earps at the time), who arrested them both. During the Gunfight at the O.K. Corral, Holliday likely killed Tom McLaury and probably fired the second bullet that hit Frank McLaury. Although Frank McLaury is sometimes erroneously stated to have been hit by three bullets (based on the next-day news accounts in Tombstone papers), the coroner's inquest found Frank was hit only in the stomach and through the back of the head under his ear, which was Holliday's based on their last position during the fight. Holliday was also present at the death of Frank Stilwell in Tucson, Arizona, and the other three men killed during the Earp Vendetta Ride. Overall, Holliday has been arrested 17 times, but he was never given or serve any jail time, four attempts were made to hang him and he survived ambush five times. Historyteacher.pdf

Stabbings and shootings

Much of Holliday's violent reputation has been proven false, as much of it was through rumors and self-promotion. However, there were many instances where he did show great skill in gambling and gunfights. Even though Holliday was sick of tuberculosis, this did not hamper his ability as a gambler and a marksman. Holliday was ambidextrous, and was known to have carried two pistols into fights. There were three to four instances that Holliday used a shotgun. With the exception of Mike Gordon in 1879 and other few victims, there are no contemporaneous newspaper or legal records to match the many unnamed men whom Holliday is credited with killing in popular folklore; the same is true for the several tales of knifings credited to Holliday by early biographers. Some scholars have argued that Holliday may have allowed his reputation to remain as it was and in reality may not have killed that many. Overall, Holliday has been in at least five one-on-one gunfights in his lifetime.
In a March 1882 interview with the Arizona Daily Star, Virgil Earp told the reporter, "There was something very peculiar about Doc. He was gentlemanly, a good dentist, a friendly man, and yet outside of us boys I don't think he had a friend in the Territory. Tales were told that he had murdered men in differ­ent parts of the country; that he had robbed and committed all manner of crimes, and yet when persons were asked how they knew it, they could only admit that it was hearsay, and that nothing of the kind could really be traced up to Doc's account." Originally published in the Arizona Daily Star on May 30, 1882

Arrests and convictions

Biographer Karen Holliday Tanner found that Holliday had been arrested 17 times before his 1881 shootout in Tombstone. Only one arrest, an 1879 shootout with Mike Gordon in New Mexico, was for murder. Holliday was not successfully prosecuted. In the preliminary hearing following the Gunfight at the O.K. Corral, Judge Wells Spicer exonerated Holliday's actions as a duly appointed lawman. In Denver, the warrant for Frank Stilwell's murder went unserved when the governor was persuaded by Trinidad Chief of Police Bat Masterson to release Holliday to his custody for bunco charges.
Out of all his other arrests, Holliday pleaded guilty to two gambling charges, one charge of carrying a deadly weapon in the city (in connection with the argument with Ringo), and one misdemeanor assault and battery charge (his shooting of Joyce and Parker). The others were all dismissed or returned as "not guilty".

Alleged murder of Ed Bailey

Wyatt Earp recounted one event during which Holliday killed a fellow gambler named Ed Bailey. Wyatt and his common-law wife Mattie Blaylock were in Fort Griffin, Texas, during the winter of 1878, looking for gambling opportunities. Earp visited the saloon of his old friend from Cheyenne, John Shannsey, and met Holliday at the Cattle Exchange.
According to Earp, Holliday was playing poker with a well-liked local man named Ed Bailey. Holliday caught Bailey "monkeying with the dead wood," or the discard pile, which was against the rules. Holliday reminded Bailey to "play poker", which was a polite way to caution him to stop cheating. When Bailey made the same move again, Holliday took the pot without showing his hand, which was his right under the rules. Bailey immediately went for his pistol, but Holliday whipped out a knife from his breast pocket and "caught Bailey just below the brisket" or upper chest. Bailey died and Holliday, new to town, was detained in his room at the Planter's Hotel.
In Stuart Lake's best-selling biography, Wyatt Earp: Frontier Marshal (1931), Earp is quoted as saying that Holliday's girlfriend, Big Nose Kate, devised a diversion. She procured a second pistol from a friend in town and then, removing a horse from its shed behind the hotel, set fire to the shed. When everyone but Holliday and the lawmen guarding him ran to put out the fire, she calmly walked in and tossed Holliday the second pistol. However, no contemporary records of any either Bailey's death or of the shed fire have been found. In addition, Big Nose Kate denied before she died in 1940 that the story was true and laughed at the idea of "a 116-pound woman holding a gun on a sheriff".

Photo issues

There are three photos most often printed (but of unknown provenance) of Holliday, supposedly taken by C.S. Fly in Tombstone (but sometimes said to be taken in Dallas). Holliday lived in a rooming house in front of Fly's photography studio. Many individuals share similar facial features and faces on people who look radically different can look similar when viewed from certain angles. Because of this, most museum staff, knowledgeable researchers, and collectors require provenance or a documented history for an image to support physical similarities that might exist. Experts will rarely offer even a tentative identification of new or unique images of famous people based solely on similarities shared with other known images.

Image:DocHollidayCloseUp. Pennsylvania School of Dental Surgery graduation photo. Authenticated as Holliday.
Image:Doc Holliday in Prescott AZ (closeup).
Image:DocHolliday.
Image:HollidayLcollar.
Image:Doc Holliday.
Image:HollidayandBowler. This is not a retouch or expanded field version of any of the other photos.

Legacy

Doc Holliday is one of the most recognizable gunslingers in the Old West, but he is most remembered by his enduring friendship with Wyatt Earp. Holliday's friendship with the lawman has been a staple of popular sidekicks in culture,Top Ten Greatest Sidekicks and Holliday himself became a stereotypical image of a deputy and a loyal companion in modern times. He is typically portrayed in films as being loyal to his friend Wyatt, whom he sticks together during the duo's greatest conflicts such as the Gunfight at the OK Corral and Earp's vendetta, even with the ensuing violence and hardships they both endured.407-409 Together with Wyatt Earp, Doc Holliday has become a modern symbol of loyalty, brotherhood, and friendship.
On March 20, 2005, the 122nd anniversary of the killing of Frank Stilwell by Wyatt Earp, a life-sized statue of Holliday and Earp by the sculptor Dan Bates was dedicated by the Southern Arizona Transportation Museum at the restored Historic Railroad Depot in Tucson, Arizona, at the approximate site of the shooting on the train platform. Wyatt Earp later claimed that Doc and I were the only ones in Tucson at the time Frank Stillwell was killed The facial features on this statue are based on the set of supposed portrait photos and not on the two known authentic photos of him.
"Doc Holliday Days" are held yearly in Holliday's birthplace of Griffin, Georgia. In January 2010, to coincide with its sesquicentennial celebration, Valdosta, Georgia, held a Doc Holliday look-alike contest.
Places are also named after him, with themes about his life such as a restaurant called "J Henry's" which features pictures and memorabilia of Holliday in Holliday's home town of Griffin, on College Street. A bar called "Doc Holliday's Saloon," featuring murals and pictures of Holliday, exists on Avenue A in the East Village district of New York City. For a time in the 1970s and 1980s, in Valdosta, Georgia, where he formerly resided, the Holliday Skate Palace, a since defunct roller skating rink, was named in his honor.

Popular culture

Holliday was nationally known during his life as a gunman, and the O.K. Corral fight has become one of the most famous tales in the American west. Numerous westerns have been made of it, and the Holliday character has been prominent in all of them. However, not all films that feature Holliday or a character based on him are biographical in nature.
Actors who have played Holliday in name include:Doc Holliday characters at IMDB.
Roy Halladay, a Major League Baseball pitcher, is nicknamed "Doc" Halladay, a name coined by the late Toronto Blue Jays announcer Tom Cheek.
In Fallout 2, a doctor going by Doc Holliday lives in Broken Hills. His dialogue reveals that he was an adventurer before he settled down and became a doctor there.
In Parasite Eve II a portrait of Doc Holliday with the date 1851-1897, can be seen on room 1 in the second mission.

Fiction

Songs



Bibliography






