[[Lidocaine]]

CATEGORIES: Antiarrhythmic agents, Local anesthetics, Sodium channel blockers, World Health Organization essential medicines, Acetamides

Lidocaine (INN, BAN)  is a common local anesthetic and class 1b antiarrhythmic drug. Lidocaine is used topically to relieve itching, burning and pain from skin inflammations, injected as a dental anesthetic or as a local anesthetic for minor surgery.
It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines, a list of the most important medication needed in a basic healthcare system.

Medical uses

The efficacy profile of lidocaine as a local anesthetic is characterized by a rapid onset of action and intermediate duration of efficacy. Therefore, lidocaine is suitable for infiltration, block and surface anesthesia. Longer-acting substances such as bupivacaine are sometimes given preference for subdural and epidural anesthesias; lidocaine, on the other hand, has the advantage of a rapid onset of action. Epinephrine (aka adrenaline) vasoconstricts arteries reducing bleeding and also delays the resorption of lidocaine, almost doubling the duration of anaesthesia. For surface anesthesia several formulations are available that can be used e.g. for endoscopies, before intubations etc. Buffering the pH of lidocaine makes local freezing less painful. Lidocaine drops can be used on the eyes for short ophthalmic procedures.
Topical lidocaine has been shown in some patients to relieve the pain of postherpetic neuralgia (a complication of shingles), though there is not enough study evidence to recommend it as a first-line treatment.
Lidocaine is also the most important class 1B antiarrhythmic drug: it is used intravenously for the treatment of ventricular arrhythmias (for acute myocardial infarction, digoxin poisoning, cardioversion or cardiac catheterization) if amiodarone is not available or contraindicated. Lidocaine should be given for this indication after defibrillation, CPR, and vasopressors have been initiated.
A routine prophylactic administration is no longer recommended for acute cardiac infarction; the overall benefit of this measure is not convincing.
Inhaled lidocaine can be used as an antitussive (cough suppressor) acting peripherally to reduce the cough reflex. This application can be implemented as a safety and com for measure for patients that have to be intubated as it reduces the incidence of coughing and any tracheal damage it might cause when emerging from anesthesia.
Lidocaine along with ethanol, ammonia, and acetic acid has also been proven to be effective in treating jellyfish stings, both numbing the affected area and preventing further nematocyst discharge.

Insensitivity

Relative insensitivity to lidocaine is genetic. In hypokalemic sensory overstimulation, relative insensitivity to lidocaine has been described in people who also have attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.

Contraindications

Absolute Contraindications for the use of lidocaine include:
Exercise caution in patients with any of the following
Though dose adjustment is often needed for hepatic impairment, renal impairment requires no change in dose.* Thomson, Pate D., Malcolm Rowland, and Kenneth L. Melmon. "The influence of heart failure, liver disease, and renal failure on the disposition of lidocaine in man." American heart journal 82.3 (1971): 417-421. pmid: 4694036 doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-78-4-499

Adverse effects

Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) are rare when lidocaine is used as a local anesthetic and is administered correctly. Most ADRs associated with lidocaine for anesthesia relate to administration technique (resulting in systemic exposure) or pharmacological effects of anesthesia, and allergic reactions only rarely occur. Systemic exposure to excessive quantities of lidocaine mainly result in central nervous system (CNS) and cardiovascular effects – CNS effects usually occur at lower blood plasma concentrations and additional cardiovascular effects present at higher concentrations, though cardiovascular collapse may also occur with low concentrations. ADRS are listed below by system:
CNS excitation: nervousness, agitation, anxiety, apprehension, tingling around the mouth (circumoral paraesthesia), headache, hyperesthesia, tremor, dizziness, pupillary changes, psychosis, euphoria, hallucinations, and seizures
CNS depression with increasingly heavier exposure: drowsiness, lethargy, slurred speech, hypoesthesia, confusion, disorientation, loss of consciousness, respiratory depression and apnoea.
Cardiovascular: hypotension, bradycardia, arrhythmias, flushing, venous insufficiency, increased defibrillator threshold, edema, and/or cardiac arrest – some of which may be due to hypoxemia secondary to respiratory depression.
Respiratory: Bronchospasm, dyspnea, respiratory depression or arrest
Gastrointestinal: metallic taste, nausea, vomiting
Ears: tinitis
Eyes: local burning, Conjunctival hyperemia, corneal epithelial changes/ulceration, diplopia, visual changes (opacification)
Skin: itching, depigmentation, rash, urticaria, edema, angioedema, bruising, inflammation of the vein at the injection site, irritation of the skin when applied topically
Blood: methemoglobinemia
Allergic
ADRs associated with the use of intravenous lidocaine are similar to toxic effects from systemic exposure above. These are dose-related and more frequent at high infusion rates (≥3 mg/minute). Common ADRs include: headache, dizziness, drowsiness, confusion, visual disturbances, tinnitus, tremor, and/or paraesthesia. Infrequent ADRs associated with the use of lidocaine include: hypotension, bradycardia, arrhythmias, cardiac arrest, muscle twitching, seizures, coma, and/or respiratory depression.
Traditionally physicians have always advocated against using epinephrine with local anesthesia in end arterial structures (fingers, toes, nose, and penis) because vasospasm combined with a lack of collateral circulation in these areas may result in tissue necrosis. No clinical evidence has implicated lidocaine in particular as a cause of this adverse reaction.

Overdosage

Overdosage with lidocaine can be a result of excessive administration via topical or parenteral routes, accidental oral ingestion of topical preparations by children who are more susceptible to overdose, accidental intravenous (rather than subcutaneous, intrathecal or paracervical) injection or prolonged use of subcutaneous infiltration anesthesia during cosmetic surgical procedures. These occurrences have often led to severe toxicity or death in both children and adults. Lidocaine and its two major metabolites may be quantified in blood, plasma or serum to confirm the diagnosis in potential poisoning victims or to assist in the forensic investigation in a case of fatal overdosage. It is important in the interpretation of analytical results to recognize that lidocaine is often routinely administered intravenously as an antiarrhythmic agent in critical cardiac care situations.

Interactions

Any drugs that are also ligands of CYP3A4 and CYP1A2 can potentially increase serum levels and potential for toxicity or decrease serum levels and the efficacy depending on whether they induce or inhibit the enzymes respectively. Drugs that may increase the chance of methemoglobinemia should also be considered carefully. Dronedarone and 
liposomal morphine are both absolutely contraindicated as they may increase the serum levels but there are hundreds of other drugs that have to me monitored for interaction.

Dosage forms

Lidocaine, usually in the form of lidocaine hydrochloride, is available in various forms including:

Adulterant in cocaine

Lidocaine is often added to cocaine as a diluent.

Preparation

Lidocaine may be prepared in two steps by the reaction of 2,6-xylidine with chloroacetyl chloride, followed by the reaction with diethylamine:

Pharmacokinetics

The onset of action of lidocaine is about 45 to 90 seconds and it's duration is 10 to 20 minutes. It is approximately 95% metabolized (dealkylated) in the liver mainly by CYP3A4 to the pharmacologically-active metabolites monoethylglycinexylidide (MEGX) and then subsequently to the inactive glycine xylidide. MEGX has a longer half life than lidocaine but also is a less potent sodium channel blocker. The volume of distribution is 1.1-2.1 L/kg but congestive heart failure can decrease it. 60-80% circulates bound to the protein alpha1 acid glycoprotein. The oral bioavailability is 35% and the topical bioavailability is 3%.
The elimination half-life of lidocaine is biphasic and approximately 90–120 minutes in most patients. This may be prolonged in patients with hepatic impairment (average 343 minutes) or congestive heart failure (average 136 minutes). Lidocaine is excreted in the urine (90% as metabolites and 10% as unchanged drug)., SUMNER M. KALMAN, and DONALD C. HARRISON. "The clinical pharmacology of lidocaine as an antiarrhythymic drug." Circulation 50.6 (1974): 1217-1230. PMID:

Pharmacodynamics

Anaesthesia

Lidocaine alters signal conduction in neurons by blocking the fast voltage gated sodium (Na+) channels in the neuronal cell membrane that are responsible for signal propagation. With sufficient blockage the membrane of the postsynaptic neuron will not depolarize and will thus fail to transmit an action potential. This creates the anaesthetic effect by not merely preventing pain signals from propagating to the brain but by stopping them before they begin. Careful titration allows for a high degree of selectivity in the blockage of sensory neurons, whereas higher concentrations will also affect other modalities of neuron signaling.

Antiarrhythmic

The same principle applies for this drug's actions in the heart. Blocking sodium channels in the conduction system as well as the muscle cells of the heart raises the depolarization threshold making the heart less likely to initiate or conduct early action potentials that may cause an arrhythmia.

History

Lidocaine, the first amino amide–type local anesthetic, was first synthesized under the name xylocaine by Swedish chemist Nils Löfgren in 1943. His colleague Bengt Lundqvist performed the first injection anesthesia experiments on himself. It was first marketed in 1949.

Recreational use

Lidocaine is not currently listed by the World Anti-Doping Agency as an illegal substance.

Compendial status



Notes and references




