[[Oil sands]]

CATEGORIES: Bituminous sands, Petroleum geology, Petroleum industry, Unconventional oil

Oil sands, tar sands or, more technically, bituminous sands, are a type of unconventional petroleum deposit.
The oil sands are loose sand or partially consolidated sandstone containing naturally occurring mixtures of sand, clay, and water, saturated with a dense and extremely viscous form of petroleum technically referred to as bitumen (or colloquially tar due to its similar appearance, odour and colour). Natural bitumen deposits are reported in many countries, but in particular are found in extremely large quantities in Canada.  Other large reserves are located in Kazakhstan and Russia. The estimated worldwide deposits of oil are more than , or 70.8%, are in Canada.
Oil sands reserves have only recently been considered to be part of the world's oil reserves, as higher oil prices and new technology enable profitable extraction and processing. Oil produced from bitumen sands is often referred to as unconventional oil or crude bitumen, to distinguish it from liquid hydrocarbons produced from traditional oil wells.
The crude bitumen contained in the Canadian oil sands is described by the National Energy Board of Canada as "a highly viscous mixture of hydrocarbons heavier than pentanes which, in its natural state, is not usually recoverable at a commercial rate through a well because it is too thick to flow."  Crude bitumen is a thick, sticky form of crude oil, so heavy and viscous (thick) that it will not flow unless heated or diluted with lighter hydrocarbons such as light crude oil or natural-gas condensate. At room temperature, it is much like cold molasses.[ref]


[/ref]  The World Energy Council (WEC) defines natural bitumen as "oil having a viscosity greater than 10,000 centipoise under reservoir conditions and an API gravity of less than 10° API".  The Orinoco Belt in Venezuela is sometimes described as oil sands, but these deposits are non-bituminous, falling instead into the category of heavy or extra-heavy oil due to their lower viscosity.  Natural bitumen and extra-heavy oil differ in the degree by which they have been degraded from the original conventional oils by bacteria. According to the WEC, extra-heavy oil has "a gravity of less than 10° API and a reservoir viscosity of no more than 10,000 centipoise".
Making liquid fuels from oil sands requires energy for steam injection and refining. This process generates 12 percent more greenhouse gases per barrel of final product than extraction of conventional oil.

History

The exploitation of bituminous deposits and seeps dates back to Paleolithic times.
In ancient times, bitumen was primarily a Mesopotamian commodity used by the Sumerians and Babylonians, although it was also found in the Levant and Persia. The area along the Tigris and Euphrates rivers was littered with hundreds of pure bitumen seepages. The Mesopotamians used the bitumen for waterproofing boats and buildings. In North America, the early European fur traders found Canadian First Nations peoples using bitumen from the vast Athabasca oil sands to waterproof their birch-bark canoes.
The name tar sands was applied to bituminous sands in the late 19th and early 20th century.
Since then, coal gas has almost completely been replaced by natural gas as a fuel, and coal tar as a material for paving roads has been replaced by the petroleum product asphalt. Naturally occurring bitumen is chemically more similar to asphalt than to coal tar, and the term oil sands (or oilsands) is more commonly used by industry in the producing areas than tar sands because synthetic oil is manufactured from the bitumen, and due to the feeling that the terminology of tar sands is less politically acceptable to the public.

Major deposits

There are numerous deposits of oil sands in the world, but the biggest and most important are in Canada and Venezuela, with lesser deposits in Kazakhstan and Russia. The total volume of non-conventional oil in the oil sands of these countries exceeds the reserves of conventional oil in all other countries combined. Vast deposits of bitumen - over 350 billion cubic metres (2.2 trillion barrels) of oil in place - exist in the Canadian provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan. If only 30% of this oil could be extracted, it could supply the entire needs of North America for over 100 years. These deposits represent plentiful oil, but not cheap oil. They require advanced technology to extract the oil and transport it to oil refineries.
Most of the Canadian oil sands are in three major deposits in northern Alberta. They are the Athabasca-Wabiskaw oil sands of north northeastern Alberta, the Cold Lake deposits of east northeastern Alberta, and the Peace River deposits of northwestern Alberta. Between them, they cover over , is estimated by the government of Alberta to be recoverable at current prices, using current technology, which amounts to 97% of Canadian oil reserves and 75% of total North American petroleum reserves. Although the Athabasca deposit is the only one in the world which has areas shallow enough to mine from the surface, all three Alberta areas are suitable for production using in-situ methods, such as cyclic steam stimulation (CSS) and steam assisted gravity drainage (SAGD).

Athabasca

The Athabasca oil sands lie along the Athabasca River and are the largest natural bitumen deposit in the world, containing about 80% of the Alberta total, and the only one suitable for surface mining. With modern unconventional oil production technology, at least 10% of these deposits, or about  are considered to be economically recoverable, making Canada's total proven reserves the third largest in the world, after Saudi Arabia's conventional oil and Venezuela's Orinoco oil sands.
The Athabasca oil sands are more or less centered around the remote northern city of Fort McMurray. They are by far the largest deposit of bitumen in Canada, probably containing over 150 billion cubic metres (900 billion barrels) of oil in place. The bitumen is highly viscous and is often denser than water (10°API or 1000 kg/m3). The oil saturated sands range from  thick in places, and the oil saturation in the oil-rich zones is on the order of 90% bitumen by weight.
The Athabasca River cuts through the heart of the deposit, and traces of the heavy oil are readily observed as black stains on the river banks. Since portions of the Athabasca sands are shallow enough to be surface-mineable, they were the earliest ones to see development. Historically, the bitumen was used by the indigenous Cree and Dene Aboriginal peoples to waterproof their canoes. The Athabasca oil sands first came to the attention of European fur traders in 1719 when Wa-pa-su, a Cree trader, brought a sample of bituminous sands to the Hudson's Bay Company post at York Factory on Hudson Bay.
In 1778, Peter Pond, a fur trader for the rival North West Company, was the first European to see the Athabasca deposits. In 1788, fur trader and explorer Alexander Mackenzie from the Hudson Bay Company, who later discovered the Mackenzie River and routes to both the Arctic and Pacific Oceans, described the oil sands in great detail. He said, "At about  long may be inserted without the least resistance. The bitumen is in a fluid state and when mixed with gum, the resinous substance collected from the spruce fir, it serves to gum the Indians' canoes."
in 1883, G.C. Hoffman of the Geological Survey of Canada tried separating the bitumen from oil sand with the use of water and reported that it separated readily. In 1888, Robert Bell of the Geological Survey of Canada reported to a Senate Committee that "The evidence ... points to the existence in the Athabasca and Mackenzie valleys of the most extensive petroleum field in America, if not the world." In 1926, Karl Clark of the University of Alberta patented a hot water separation process which was the forerunner of today's thermal extraction processes. However, it was 1967 before the first large scale commercial operation began with the opening of the Great Canadian Oil Sands mine by the Sun Oil Company of Ohio.
Today its successor company, Suncor Energy (no longer affiliated with Sun Oil), is the largest oil company in Canada. In addition, other companies such as Royal Dutch Shell, ExxonMobile, and various national oil companies are developing the Athabasca oil sands. As a result, Canada is now by far the largest exporter of oil to the United States.
The smaller Wabasca (or Wabiskaw) oil sands lie above the western edge of the Athabasca oil sands and overlap them. They probably contain over 15 billion cubic metres (90 billion barrels) of oil in place. The deposit is buried from  of clay shale and silt. The bitumen in the Wabasca is as highly viscous as that in the Athabasca, but lies too deep to be surface-mined, so in-situ production methods must be used to produce the crude bitumen.

Cold Lake

The Cold Lake oil sands are northeast of Alberta's capital, Edmonton, near the border with Saskatchewan. A small portion of the Cold Lake deposit lies in Saskatchewan. Although smaller than the Athabasca oil sands, the Cold Lake oil sands are important because some of the oil is fluid enough to be extracted by conventional methods. The Cold Lake bitumen contains more alkanes and less asphaltenes than the other major Alberta oil sands and the oil is more fluid. As a result, cyclic steam stimulation (CSS) is commonly used for production.
The Cold Lake oil sands are of a roughly circular shape, centered around Bonnyville, Alberta. They probably contain over 60 billion cubic metres (370 billion barrels) of extra-heavy oil-in-place. The oil is highly viscous, but considerably less so than the Athabasca oil sands, and is somewhat less sulfurous. The depth of the deposits is  thick. They are too deep to surface mine.
Much of the oil sands are on Canadian Forces Base Cold Lake. CFB Cold Lake's CF-18 Hornet jet fighters defend the western half of Canadian air space and cover Canada's Arctic territory. Cold Lake Air Weapons Range (CLAWR) is one of the largest live-drop bombing ranges in the world, including testing of cruise missiles. As oil sands production continues to grow, various sectors vie for access to airspace, land, and resources, and this complicates oil well drilling and production significantly.

Peace River

The Peace River oil sands located in northwest-central Alberta are the smallest of the three major oil sands deposits in Alberta. The Peace River oil sands lie generally in the watershed of the Peace River, the largest river in Alberta. The Peace and Athabasca rivers, which are by far the largest rivers in Alberta, flow through their respective oil sands and merge at Lake Athabasca to form the Slave River, which flows into the MacKenzie River, one of the largest rivers in the world. All of the water from these rivers flow into the Arctic Ocean.
The Peace River oil sands probably contain over 30 billion cubic metres (200 billion barrels) of oil-in-place. The thickness of the deposit ranges from  deep.
Whereas the Athabasca oil sands lie close enough to the surface that the bitumen can be excavated in open-pit mines, the smaller Peace River deposits are too deep, and must be exploited using in situ methods such as steam-assisted gravity drainage and Cold Heavy Oil Production with Sand (CHOPS).

Orinoco

The Orinoco Belt is a territory in the southern strip of the eastern Orinoco River Basin in Venezuela which overlies one of the world's largest deposits of petroleum. The Orinoco Belt follows the line of the river. It is approximately .
The oil sands consist of large deposits of extra heavy crude. Venezuela's heavy oil deposits of about  which would make it the largest petroleum reserve in the world.
In 2009, the US Geological Survey (USGS) increased its estimates of the reserves to 

Other deposits

In addition to the three major Canadian oil sands in Alberta, there is a fourth major oil sands deposit in Canada, the Melville Island oil sands in the Canadian Arctic islands which are too remote to expect commercial production in the foreseeable future.
Outside of Canada and Venezuela, numerous other countries hold oil sands deposits which are smaller by orders of magnitude. In Kazakhstan, the bitumen deposits are located
in the North Caspian Basin. Russia holds oil sands in two main regions. Large resources are present in the Tunguska Basin, East Siberia, with the largest deposits being Olenek and Siligir. Other deposits are located in the Timan-Pechora and Volga-Urals basins (in and around Tatarstan), which is an important but very mature province in terms of conventional oil, holds large amounts of oil sands in a shallow permian formation.
In Madagascar, Tsimiroro and Bemolanga are two heavy oil sands deposits, with a pilot well already producing small amounts of oil in Tsimiroro. and larger scale exploitation in the early planning phase.  In the Republic of the Congo reserves are estimated between .
In the United States, oil sands resources are primarily concentrated in Eastern Utah, with a total of  of oil (known and potential) in eight major deposits in Carbon, Garfield, Grand, Uintah, and Wayne counties.  In addition to being much smaller than the oil sands deposits in Alberta, Canada, the U.S. oil sands are hydrocarbon-wet, whereas the Canadian oil sands are water-wet.  As a result of this difference, extraction techniques for the Utah oil sands will be different from those used for the Alberta oil sands.

Production

Bituminous sands are a major source of unconventional oil, although only Canada has a large-scale commercial oil sands industry. In 2006, bitumen production in Canada averaged  through 81 oil sands projects. 44% of Canadian oil production in 2007 was from oil sands.  This proportion is expected to increase in coming decades as bitumen production grows while conventional oil production declines, although due to the 2008 economic downturn work on new projects has been deferred.  Petroleum is not produced from oil sands on a significant level in other countries.

Canada

The Alberta oil sands have been in commercial production since the original Great Canadian Oil Sands (now Suncor Energy) mine began operation in 1967. Despite the increasing levels of production, the process of extraction and processing of oil sands can still be considered to be in its infancy; with new technologies and stakeholders oversight providing an ever lower environmental footprint. A second mine, operated by the Syncrude consortium, began operation in 1978 and is the biggest mine of any type in the world. The third mine in the Athabasca Oil Sands, the Albian Sands consortium of Shell Canada, Chevron Corporation, and Western Oil Sands Inc. by Marathon Oil Corporation in 2007 began operation in 2003. Petro-Canada was also developing a $33 billion Fort Hills Project, in partnership with UTS Energy Corporation and Teck Cominco, which lost momentum after the 2009 merger of Petro-Canada into Suncor.
By 2013 there were nine oil sands mining projects in the Athabasca oil sands deposit: Suncor Energy Inc. (Suncor), Syncrude Canada Limited (Syncrude)'s Mildred Lake and Aurora North, Shell Canada Limited (Shell)'s Muskeg River and Jackpine, Canadian Natural Resources Limited (CNRL), Horizon, Imperial Oil Resources Ventures Limited (Imperial), Kearl Oil Sands Project (KOSP), Total E&P Canada Ltd. Joslyn North Mine and Fort Hills Energy Corporation (FHEC). In 2011 alone they produced over 52 million cubic metres of bitumen.

Venezuela

No significant development of Venezuela's extra-heavy oil deposits was undertaken before 2000, except for the BITOR operation which produced somewhat less than 100,000 barrels of oil per day (16,000 m3/d) of 9°API oil by primary production. This was mostly shipped as an emulsion (Orimulsion) of 70% oil and 30% water with similar characteristics as heavy fuel oil for burning in thermal power plants.[ref]
