[[Rhode Island College]]

CATEGORIES: Rhode Island College, Public universities and colleges in Rhode Island, American Association of State Colleges and Universities, Educational institutions established in 1854, Universities and colleges in Providence, Rhode Island, New England Association of Schools and Colleges

Rhode Island College (RIC) is a nationally ranked, coeducational, state-supported comprehensive college founded in 1854, located in Providence, Rhode Island, USA. Rhode Island College is the oldest of the three public institutions of higher education that operate under the aegis of the Board of Governors for Higher Education; the two other institutions are the University of Rhode Island and the Community College of Rhode Island.

History

Rhode Island College was first established as the Rhode Island State Normal School by the Rhode Island General Assembly in 1854. Rhode Island State Normal School was one of the nation's first normal schools (teacher preparatory schools), which grew out of the humanitarian groundswell of the mid-19th century spurred by educational missionaries like Horace Mann. The school attracted hard working young people who came chiefly from ordinary backgrounds, who wanted to teach and who had no other way of preparing themselves.
Not yet thoroughly convinced of the school's value, the General Assembly curtailed its financial support in 1857 and the school was moved to Bristol where it lingered until 1865 before closing. However, in 1869, the newly appointed state commissioner of education, Thomas W. Bicknell, began a vigorous personal campaign to revive the school.
Renamed the Rhode Island Normal School, the institution settled into a period of steady growth punctuated by periodic moves to larger quarters.
At first, the Rhode Island Normal School offered admission to both high school graduates and non-graduates, with high school graduates expected to complete their studies in one year. However, by 1908 the program had been lengthened to two and a half years and restricted to high school graduates.
In 1920, the Rhode Island Normal School was renamed Rhode Island College of Education by order of the General Assembly. The college now offered a four-year program which upon a student's completion would grant a Bachelor of Education degree. At this time the observation school, which dated back to the 1890s, was renamed the Henry Barnard School. The college's graduate program also originated in the early 1920s and the first master's degrees were conferred in 1924.
For the next three decades the college remained a small teachers' college with a student body of four to six hundred men and women, most of whom went on to teach in the elementary and junior high schools of the state. Early in the 1950s that calm was shattered by intense debate that arose over the college's role in the state system of higher education and for a time serious doubt was cast on its continued existence. There were plans to merge the institution with Rhode Island's other four-year college, the University of Rhode Island. After careful consideration, the Board of Trustees of State Colleges decided to keep the college independent and strengthen it overall.
In 1958, the college was moved to its current campus in the Mount Pleasant section of Providence. In 1959, the Rhode Island Commission to Study Higher Education recommended the development of the institution into a general college which was approved by the General Assembly. Reflecting the broadening of purpose, the institution's name was changed to its current name Rhode Island College in 1959.
The East Campus includes the former grounds of the Rhode Island State Home and School, the first post-Civil War orphanage in the country. In recent years, many efforts have been undertaken by Rhode Island College and its benefactors to preserve Nina's House (formerly known as the Yellow Cottage or Cottage C), one of the original structures from the State Home.

Academics

The academics at Rhode Island College received national recognition in 2011 when Forbes Magazine ranked the college the 571st best college out of the 3,000 plus colleges and universities in the United States. Academic programs at Rhode Island College are divided into five colleges: the Faculty of Arts and Sciences, the Feinstein School of Education and Human Development, the School of Management, the School of Nursing, and the School of Social Work. These schools offer more than 90 undergraduate and 30 graduate programs for students. Rhode Island College is accredited by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges. Among the five colleges, individual departments have received additional accreditation from the following associations: Council on Social Work Education, National Association of Schools of Art and Design, National Association of Schools of Music, National Association of State Directors of Teacher Education and Certification, National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education, and the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education.
The James P. Adams Library is the main library serving the entire community in support of teaching and learning.  Students, faculty, staff and the community have access to a wide variety of knowledge resources including electronic reference resources, e-books, databases, audiovisual materials, and special collections.  The library is also the academic, social, and intellectual center of the campus, hosting a variety of lectures, exhibits and performances to the benefit of the campus community.

Students and faculty

With an enrollment predominantly from Rhode Island and nearby Massachusetts and Connecticut, the institution historically has served as a "College of Opportunity" for first-generation college students.
66% of the student body are full-time students.
67% of enrolled students are female, and 33% of enrolled students are male

President

Nancy Carriuolo is the ninth president, and 17th chief officer of Rhode Island College. The president is the chief executive officer of the College and is responsible for the success of the College's mission in providing superior academic programs and research. The previous president, John Nazarian, who was associated with the College for more than fifty years, retired from the presidency at the end of the 2007-2008 academic year.Inauguration Program, Inauguration of Nancy Carriuolo as the Ninth President of the College

Notable graduates

Justine Mainville, keyboardist, drummer, singer for Math the Band.
Roberto Gonzalez, the first Hispanic judge in the history of Rhode Island, graduated in 1975.ric.php?id=4
James Langevin, 2nd District Congressman from Rhode Island, was a graduate of Rhode Island College, majoring in public administration. Langevin also served as President of Student Community Government, Inc., during his undergraduate career at the college.
Ron McLarty, a noted television actor and novelist, is a graduate of the College; in 2007, he was the featured speaker at commencement, and was awarded an honorary degree.
Viola Davis, a Tony Award winning and Academy Award nominated actress. In 2001, she was awarded the Tony Award for Best Featured Actress in a Play for her work in King Hedley II. In 2009, she was nominated for a Best Supporting Actress Oscar for her role in the film Doubt, and in 2010 she won a Tony Award for "Fences".
Allan Fung, an American politician and the first Asian America mayor of Cranston, Rhode Island. Graduated in 1992. 
Annie Smith Peck, a pioneering woman educator and mountaineer, graduated from the college when it was still known as the Normal School.
Danny Smith, Executive Producer, writer and voice actor for television's Family Guy.
Peter Boyer is one of the most frequently performed young American orchestral composers. His work Ellis Island: The Dream of America for actors and orchestra was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Classical Contemporary Composition in 2006.
James Macomber, novelist, author of international legal thrillers "Bargained for Exchange", "Art & Part", "A Grave Breach", "Sovereign Order". As a RIC undergraduate, Macomber was president of the freshman and sophomore classes, was elected President of the Student Senate in his junior year, and as a senior was the first student to be named to the College Council.
Sharon Ellen Burtman, 1995 US Women's Chess Champion.
Hugh Leonard, Irish playwright, screenwriter, and columnist, was awarded an honorary Doctor of Humane Letters degree in 1980.ric.php?id=41
Sandeep Joshi, James Thibault, Keith Kaplan, David Ouellette, James Della-Selva, Robert Tsang, Lorraine Levin and Edward Gonsalves, members of the 1985 Pan Am Intercollegiate and National Champion chess club. RIC replaced Columbia University as the new National Champion in 1985 by defeating Rutgers, Michigan, Baruch College, Ohio State, Northwestern and Harvard. RIC also routed Canadian National Champion University of Toronto 4-0 to become the 1985 Pan American Intercollegiate Team Chess Champion.
Steven Libman, a nationally recognized performing arts leader known for producing dance, theatre and multi-disciplinary performing arts series. He was awarded Outstanding Alumnus in the Arts from the college in 2000.

Campus life

There are 19 varsity sports: six in the fall, six in the winter, and seven in the spring. RIC is primarily a commuter school; its six residence halls house 1194 students.
Student activities and clubs on campus are governed and funded by Student Community Government, Inc., a semi-autonomous organization financed by the college's student activity fee, consisting of an executive board, parliament, and several committees. Student Parliament consists of 34 student positions and a number of by-lawed positions. Those positions include seats taken by administrators, faculty, staff and alumni. All student representatives of Student Parliament represent a constituency whose concerns they are supposed to represent throughout the academic year.
Active clubs on campus include The Anchor (newspaper), 
WXIN RIC Radio, Rhode Island College Programming, Future Elementary Education Teachers, Biology Club, Harambee, Debate Council, Henry Barnard School Mentors, L.I.F.E: Live, Inspire, Fight, Educate, Feminists United, Helping Others Promote Equality, Intervarsity Christian Fellowship, Latin American Student Organization, NSSLHA, Anchor TV, Rhode Island College Ballroom Dance Club, American Marketing Association chapter, and the English Club. As of September 2009, there are 71 clubs on campus considered "active" by Student Community Government, Inc.
A new $30 million, energy efficient, LEED-certified residence hall (simply called "New Residence Hall" for now) opened for the fall semester of 2007. The  building expanded the institution's existing housing capacity by 44%.ric.php?id=news-483
RIC also has a Campus Ministry in the lower level of Donovan Dining Center, next door to the Unity Center. The ministry is non-denominational with many religions, ethnic groups, and academic concentrations represented.
The college's Music, Theatre and Dance department has a strong presence on campus. Tickets to performances are offered to students at a discounted rate.

Athletics

Rhode Island College teams participate as a member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division III. The Anchormen are a member of the Little East Conference. Men's sports include baseball, basketball, cross country, golf, soccer, swimming & diving, tennis, track & field and wrestling; while women's sports include basketball, cross country, golf, gymnastics, lacrosse, soccer, softball, swimming & diving, tennis, track & field and volleyball.

Greek Life

Rhode Island College has recently seen an increase in "Greek" life on campus. The Greek Council has been reformed, as it now consists of two fraternities and three sororities. Fraternities at Rhode Island College include national groups Kappa Delta Phi and Iota Phi Theta. Sororities at Rhode Island College include local group Zeta Xi Delta, national sorority Delta Phi Epsilon, and national sorority Alpha Sigma Tau.ric.php The Rhode Island College Greek Life logo was designed by Alexander Colburn in November, 2011.






