[[Carol Thatcher]]

CATEGORIES: Alumni of University College London, Children of Prime Ministers of the United Kingdom, British television personalities, I'm a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here! (UK) winners, People educated at Queenswood School, Participants in British reality television series, Margaret Thatcher, Twin people from the United Kingdom, 1953 births, Living people

Carol Jane Thatcher (born 15 August 1953) is a British journalist, author and media personality. She is the daughter of Margaret Thatcher, Baroness Thatcher, a former British Prime Minister, and Sir Denis Thatcher, 1st Baronet.
Thatcher has written biographies of both her parents and also produced a documentary about her father which contained his only public interview. Thatcher won the fifth series of the reality show I'm a Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here!.

Early life

Carol Thatcher and her twin brother, Sir Mark Thatcher, Bt, were born six weeks prematurely by caesarean in 1953. According to Margaret Thatcher, her husband Denis responded to seeing his children for the first time: "My God, they look like rabbits. Put them back." Margaret Thatcher was selected for Finchley in 1958 and was elected as a member of Parliament in 1959.  Thatcher graduated with a law degree from University College London before moving to Australia in 1977 to begin a journalism career.  While she was there, her mother was elected Prime Minister. Thatcher has said, "You need quite good shock absorbers and a sense of humour to be the Prime Minister's child."

Career

Thatcher began her career as a journalist in Australia, working on the Sydney Morning Herald from 1977 to 1979. She became a TV reporter at Channel Seven, also in Sydney, and later a reporter on its news morning show, 11AM. On her return to Britain, she worked as a presenter for LBC, BBC Radio 4, TV-am and wrote travel articles for The Daily Telegraph. Due to her mother's high profile political position, many newspapers refused to publish work with her byline. Retrieved on 8 February 2009.
Her first book, Diary of an Election: with Margaret Thatcher on the campaign trail, was published in 1983. Her second book, a collaboration with tennis player Chris Evert (Mrs. Lloyd) called Lloyd on Lloyd, was released three years later. It became Thatcher's first best-seller.
Later publications included a 1996 best-selling biography of her father, Below the Parapet. In 2003, Thatcher produced a Channel 4 documentary about him called Married to Maggie. Thatcher captured the only public interview Denis Thatcher gave in his lifetime; he died shortly after its release.

The One Show

From 2006 to 2009, Thatcher was a freelance contributor to the BBC One magazine programme The One Show, making filmed reports and joining the presenters and guests in the studio for discussions. On 3 February 2009, British media reported that during the 2009 Australian Open Thatcher had, in a conversation in the show's Green room, referred to a black
According to The Times, Thatcher called Tsonga "half-golliwog" and "the golliwog Frog". I wasn't going to apologise. I never meant it in a racist way. It was shorthand. I described someone's appearance colloquially—someone I happen to greatly admire."

Reality shows

I'm a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!

In November 2005 Thatcher was selected to appear with a number of fellow celebrities on the ITV television show I'm a Celebrity... The format of the show meant that she would be forced to spend at least a week in the Australian rainforest with a minimal supply of food in basic living conditions. One of her highlights in the show was urinating on the ground. She did not own up and the camp accused Sid Owen.
She had to undergo one of the more infamous "Bushtucker Trials" during her stay in the jungle — which saw her eat jungle bugs and kangaroo testicles as a challenge to earn food for her fellow celebrities. Ultimately, she emerged as the fifth series winner and second 'Queen of the Jungle'. Retrieved on 7 February 2009.

100% English

DNA tests in association with a reality TV programme 100% English screened on Channel 4 on 13 November 2006 indicated that Thatcher could be descended from a Bedouin tribe, or that her ancestors could have been desert farmers in ancient Mesopotamia or Assyria, which then covered all of Iraq and large portions of contemporary Turkey, Syria and Iran.DNAPrint Genomics EuroDNA(TM) Test Used as Basis for Reality Show on British Television

Most Haunted

Thatcher appeared on Living TV's Most Haunted on 13 February 2007 as a celebrity guest alongside presenter Yvette Fielding and medium David Wells as well as Joanne Gregory to search for paranormal activity at Tatton Hall in Cheshire.

Mummy's War

In 2007, Carol Thatcher travelled to the Falkland Islands and Argentina for the documentary Mummy's War, in order to explore the legacy of the Falklands War. Whilst receiving a highly positive reception from the pro-British islanders (who regard her mother as a heroine), her reception in Argentina provoked protests and demonstrations (including the cry "Your mother is a war criminal!"). During her stay in Argentina, she met a group of mothers who lost their sons during the conflict and stated, "We were fighting a war; we won, you lost," and reminded them that it was their country that invaded the islands, thus initiating the conflict. The interview ended with one of the women claiming that "God will punish her (Margaret Thatcher)".

Bibliography

Thatcher has written several books, including: Below the Parapet: the Biography of Denis Thatcher (1996) and Diary of an Election: with Margaret Thatcher on the Campaign Trail (1983). On 4 September 2008 Headline Publishers released A Swim-on Part in the Goldfish Bowl: A Memoir, which recounts the decline of Margaret Thatcher's health and the onset of her dementia.

Personal life

Thatcher had a relationship with Jonathan Aitken which ended in 1979,Francis Elliott "Lady Thatcher's friends hit back at 'betrayal of family secrets'", The Independent, 28 May 2006. Retrieved on 7 February 2009. just after the Conservatives won that year's general election. His severing of the liaison is alleged to have been the reason for Aitken being bypassed for a ministerial career; the Prime Minister reportedly told cabinet colleagues that she was damned if she was going to give a job to a man "who had made Carol cry". Retrieved on 8 February 2009."UK Politics: Jonathan Aitken – a 'swashbuckling' life", BBC News, 7 December 1998l. Retrieved on 8 February 2009.






