[[De La Salle University]]

CATEGORIES: De La Salle University, De La Salle Philippines, Educational institutions established in 1911, Research Universities in the Philippines, Universities and colleges in the Philippines, Universities and colleges in Metro Manila, Association of Christian Universities and Colleges in Asia, Lasallian colleges and universities, Roman Catholic universities and colleges in the Philippines

De La Salle University (Tagalog: Pamantasang De La Salle) (also referred to as DLSU or La Salle) is a Roman Catholic, Lasallian University of Higher Learning  in Taft Avenue, Malate, Manila, Philippines. It was founded in 1911 by De La Salle Brothers as the De La Salle College in Paco, Manila with Blimond Pierre serving as its first director.
The university started as a boys' elementary and high school. It started offering in 1920 a two-year Associate in Arts in Commerce program, which was later discontinued in 1931 in favor of a Bachelor of Science in Commerce program.
The university, currently under the administration of President Ricky Laguda, is a member of several international university associations (including the ASEAN University Network and International Association of Universities) as well as local organizations (such as the South Manila Inter-Institutional Consortium).
DLSU is identified by the Philippine Commission on Higher Education (CHED) as a "Center of Excellence" in six of its programs, and a "Center of Development" in 3 of its programs. in the 2013 Asian University Rankings and 2013 World University Rankings, respectively, published by Quacquarelli Symonds.
Research is mainly funded by the De La Salle University Science Foundation. Since 2000, DLSU has been the CHED Zonal Research Center for 10 cities in southern Metro Manila. As such, it evaluates research proposals for recommendation for CHED funding, and monitoring of CHED-funded researches, among others. DLSU research has focused on affective computing and renewable energy. Application of its research has resulted to electrification of remote areas in the country through the use of micro hydro generators, and the creation of both of the only two solar cars of the Philippines, SINAG and SIKAT.
DLSU has four official student publications, including the Ang Pahayagang Plaridel, The LaSallian (a student newspaper) and Green & White, the university yearbook publication. The De La Salle University Chorale has won several awards from different international choir competitions, including the Llangollen International Musical Eisteddfod and Tampere Vocal Music Festival. It is a member of the University Athletic Association of the Philippines since 1986, and has formed rivalries with other universities, including the Ateneo de Manila University and University of Santo Tomas.
People affiliated with the De La Salle University include one National Artist of the Philippines, Archbishops of Manila and prominent politicians, educators, scientists, business tycoons, singers, actors, TV personalities and the field of communication and public service.

History

DLSU traces its founding to Manila Archbishop Jeremiah James Harty. Harty believed that the establishment of a La Salle school in Manila is instrumental in preempting the spread of Protestantism in the Philippines through the arrival of the Thomasites.

Early history

De La Salle College was established as an elementary school and high school for boys on June 16, 1911 by the three Lasallian Brothers (namely Blimond Pierre Eilenbecker, Aloysius Gonzaga McGiverin and Augusto Correge) who arrived in Manila
On February 12, 1912, the college was incorporated under the sole ownership of the college director, who was then Eilenbecker. The college was permitted to confer commercial high school diplomas in the same year. Meanwhile, it received a charter from the Governor-General of the Philippines, allowing the college to confer associate's degrees in commerce.
The college already had 425 students by 1921. Due to the lack of space in the Paco campus, and the growing population of its student and faculty, the college moved to its present location in Malate, Manila on February 12.
In 1931, the College discontinued its two-year program in commerce in favor of a three-year Bachelor of Science in Commerce program, which was approved a year earlier.

Second World War

De La Salle College served as a shelter for displaced civilians and wounded soldiers during the Second World War. It was, however, occupied by the Japanese forces, and made into a defense quarters on January 2, 1942. Repeated bombings severely damaged the campus. Despite this, classes continued. De La Salle students shared classes with students from other schools that had closed because of the war, while the American Brothers had left. Meanwhile, high school classes were transferred to St. Scholastica's College in 1943.
Classes were eventually discontinued. On February 1, 1945, Japanese forces ordered the occupants of the college and surrounding vicinities to vacate the college. However, Egbert Xavier Kelly, the president of the college, refused. On February 7, Kelly was abducted by the Japanese, and was never found again; he is believed to have been tortured and killed. Around 20 Japanese soldiers came to the campus on February 12 shortly after noontime, and massacred 16 of the 17 Brothers residing in the campus, along with 25 other residents. Only one Brother (Antonius von Jesus) and 21 other civilians survived the event.

Post-war period

Classes resumed on July 1945, with a class of incoming freshmen that was composed of 60 high school graduates. One year later, the College of Commerce reopened with its 3-year BS Commerce program extended to 4-year program. Later, the High School Department of De La Salle College was dissolved in 1968. The college, together with Ateneo de Manila University and the University of the Philippines Diliman, gave birth to the Asian Institute of Management in the same year with assistance from the Ford Foundation and Harvard University. Several other units were established in the following years.
1970s marked substantial developments for De La Salle College. For instance, it started admitting female students in 1973. On February 19, 1975, De La Salle College was granted university status. Since then it became known as De La Salle University. It also used the name De La Salle University – Manila.
1980s was also as significant. In 1981, De La Salle University shifted from the traditional semestral academic calendar to a trimestral one. In 1987, the university, together with four other Lasallian institutions, became part of the De La Salle University System. The system would later be dissolved in favor of De La Salle Philippines, a network of 18 Lasallian institutions. Meanwhile, De La Salle – College of Saint Benilde became independent of the university in 1988.

Recent history

An explosion occurred at the DLSU portion of Taft Avenue on September 26, 2010 around 5:05 pm PST, the same day as the Philippine Bar exams conducted by the university.

Campus

Manila Campus (Taft)

The DLSU campus consists of 19 buildings (nine classroom buildings and 10 other buildings for administrative and auxiliary functions) located on a  lot in 2401 Taft Avenue Malate, Manila. DLSU faces to its right the Taft Campus of De La Salle – College of Saint Benilde, another DLSP institution, and the Vito Cruz Station of the Manila LRT Yellow Line. As part of the University Belt, several other colleges and universities, including St. Scholastica's College and Philippine Women's University, can be found near to the campus.
The buildings have a combined floor area of , and mostly feature neoclassical design. These include:
Construction of the Henry Sy Sr. Hall began on December 2, 2010 as part of the university's Centennial Renewal Plan, a project that aims to construct and renovate facilities inside the campus. A 15-floor building,
The campus, which is relatively small in size for its large student population, suffers limited space. According to The LaSallian each student had only  To address the problem regarding limited space, DLSU has resolved to vertical expansion. But this has resulted to overcrowded elevators.

Binan Campus (Science and Technology Complex)

The De La Salle University Science and Technology Complex (DLSU-STC) is a satellite campus of De La Salle University (DLSU) located in Biñan City, Laguna, Philippines. The 55-hectare campus was built on land donated by the family of the late National Artist for Architecture Leandro Locsin. It was originally known as De La Salle Canlubang (DLSC), a district school of De La Salle Philippines that provided science and technology-based primary, secondary, and tertiary education. In 2012, the administrations of DLSU and DLSC approved the integration of DLSC to DLSU, becoming the DLSU Science and Technology Complex.
Although smaller (5 ha; 2 acres), only  DLSU fears, however, that it might lose some of its students due to the DLSC campus's distance from Manila (around 42 km).

Makati Campus

The Makati Campus is an extension campus of DLSU located in RCBC Plaza, Ayala Avenue, Makati City, Philippines. The campus primarily serves the university's Graduate School of Business students.

Ortigas Campus

In 2011, the Ortigas Campus of DLSU Ramon V. Del Rosario College of Business moved from La Salle Green Hills in Mandaluyong City to Ortigas Business District. The university offers its graduate programs in an extension campus in Wynsum Corporate Plaza, Ortigas Center, Pasig City, Philippines.

Bonifacio Global City Campus

In September 2013, the Bases Conversion and Development Authority (BCDA) has awarded to De La Salle University the lease and development of a 1,395 square-meter institutional lot in Bonifacio Global City in Taguig City. DLSU is set to sign contract with BCDA on October 2013.

Organization and administration

As an non-stock incorporated entity, DLSU is headed by a 15-person board of trustees.
DLSU has had 21 presidents (including seven Filipinos, six Americans, six Irishmen, and two Frenchmen) and three chancellors.

Affiliations

De La Salle University is the oldest member of De La Salle Philippines, a network of 17 Lasallian institutions established in 2006. DLSP is the successor of the De La Salle University System, a similar organization.
DLSU is also a member of several international university associations, namely: the ASEAN University Network, Association of Christian Universities and Colleges in Asia, Association of Southeast and East Asian Catholic Colleges and Universities, Association of Southeast Asian Institutions of Higher Learning, International Association of Lasallian Universities, International Association of Universities, International Federation of Catholic Universities, United Board for Christian Higher Education in Asia and University Cooperation for Internationalisation. and the South Manila Inter-Institutional Consortium.

Student government

The University Student Government (USG), headed by Migi Moreno, is the highest governing student organization. Under it are College Student Governments and Batch Student Governments for each of DLSU's colleges and student batches, respectively. Meanwhile, the Legislative Assembly, is the highest policy-making body.

Academics

De La Salle University offers 74 undergraduate and over 100
DLSU received 23,495 in 2010. 3,428 of them were admitted as first year students. In the same year, it had 11,413 undergraduate and 3,366 graduate students, making a total of 14,779. 704 of these are non-Filipino. 53 percent of the undergraduate students were male while 59 of the graduate students were female.
The College of Science, established in 1920, is the oldest degree-granting unit of the university. In contrast, the College of Business, College of Law, School of Economics (all established in 2010) are the newest of the university. The College of Business and the School of Economics are the products of the reorganization of the defunct College of Business and Economics. Meanwhile, the College of Law was established with initially 90 students. It offers a Juris Doctor degree program with focus on environmental and human rights law.

Grading system

Academic performance is rated from 4.0 (excellent) to 0.0 (fail). Grades 4.0 to 1.0 are separated by increments of 0.5 while 0.0 is immediately after 1.0. candidates for graduation for its June 2010, October 2010 and February 2011 graduations, respectively.
DLSU has used the trimestral academic calendar in favor of the traditional semestral calendar since 1981. An academic trimester usually lasts 14 weeks. In contrast, the previous system employed 18-week semesters.

Tuition and financial aid

Tuition fees vary in the different colleges of the university. In 2011, tuition per trimester ranged from ₱37,000
High school valedictorians and salutatorians of DLSP schools are automatically exempt from paying fees under the Br. Andrew Gonzalez Academic Scholarship. Also, dependents of military personnel who died or became incapacitated during duty enjoy similar benefits through PD 577 of President of the Philippines Ferdinand Marcos.

Accreditation

The university is identified by the Commission on Higher Education as "Center of Excellence" in seven disciplines (namely biology, chemistry, information technology, mathematics, physics, teacher education, chemical engineeringcivil engineering, industrial engineering and electronics and communications engineering, and a "Center of Development" in the field of engineering (namely chemical engineering, computer engineering and mechanical engineering). The university is also among the 40 institutions granted autonomous status by CHED as of 2010. Autonomous institutions have the privilege to determine their own curriculum, and offer new courses without prior approval from CHED, among others.
It is the first of the only two institutions (the other being Ateneo)

Libraries and collections

The DLSU Library was established 1956 upon to merger of the high school and college libraries. It was located in the first two floors of St. Joseph Hall with a seating capacity of 100 persons and a collection of almost 10,000 books. Its collection includes 21,218 titles and 33,741 volumes on language and literature as of 2008,
The University Archives, established in 1973 as the College Archives, is located in the fourth floor of the DLSU Library. It holds materials of historical significance to the university (many of which was lost during the Second World War), and acts as its "official memory".
The Museum is the university's collection of Philippine modern art donated by the heirs of Doreen Fernandez, a food critic. The collection comprises more than 400

Research

The De La Salle University Science Foundation serves as DLSU's repository of research funding providing research grants to faculty, and scholarship grants to students.
Since 2000, DLSU has been the Commission on Higher Education Zonal Research Center for the 59 colleges and universities located in Las Piñas, Makati, Manila, Muntinlupa, Parañaque, Pasay, Pasig, Pateros, Taguig and San Juan.
The College of Computer Studies Center for Empathic Human-Computer Interactions specializes in affective computing, a study that seeks to create machines capable of reacting to human emotions. The center is funded by the Philippine Department of Science and Technology.
The Center for Micro-Hydro Technology for Rural Electrification of the College of Engineering, established in 2002 through Japan International Cooperation Agency funds,
Both of the only two solar cars, SINAG (Tagalog for light beam)
The College of Engineering is among the 18 "National Research Institutions" of the Asian Regional Research Programme on Environmental Technology,

Student life

As of 2010, the Council of Student Organizations, a union of DLSU-accredited student organizations, had 39 members.
The LaSallian (first published in 1960) and Ang Pahayagang Plaridel (Tagalog for The Plaridel Newspaper;

Performing arts

The De La Salle University Chorale is "the premiere chorale group in the university."
The La Salle Dance Company–Street is the first champion of the UAAP Street Dance Competition, an annual event organized by the University Athletic Association of the Philippines in 2011.
Established around 1966, The Harlequin Theatre Guild is the official theater organization of DLSU. and Rizal is My President: 40 Leadership Tips from Jose Rizal by Joshua So based on the book written by Napoleon G. Almonte and 
staged during the May 2009 Presidential Elections.

Athletics

The university has several varsity teams and sport clubs participating in different sports competitions, most notably basketball, volleyball and cheerleading.
The Animo Squad, known as the Pep Squad prior to its rename in 2008,
Notable rivals include the Ateneo de Manila University and the University of Santo Tomas.

People

People affiliated with the university include:

File:Lasallejf. Yuchengco Hall
File:Eglasallejf.JPG|Halls of the University
File:Alasallejf.JPG|Jean-Baptiste de La Salle, universal patron of teacher
File:Clasallejf.JPG|Psychology department
File:Alasallejfb. Shaw theatre






