[[Kongsberg Gruppen]]

CATEGORIES: Companies established in 1814, Holding companies of Norway, Manufacturing companies of Norway, Formerly government-owned companies of Norway, Companies based in Buskerud, Kongsberg, Kongsberg Gruppen, 1814 establishments in Norway

Kongsberg Gruppen () (lit.: "The Kongsberg Group") is a Norwegian defence contractorSt. nr. 13 (2006-2007) Et aktivt og langsiktig eierskap and maritime automation supplier,Jane's World Defence Industry headquartered in Kongsberg.
Its subsidiaries as of 2014 are Kongsberg Defence & Aerospace AS, Kongsberg Teknologipark AS, Kongsberg Holding AS, Kongsberg Basetec AS, Kongsberg Maritime AS, Kongsberg Forsvar AS, Norsk Forsvarsteknologi AS, Kongsberg Næringseiendom AS, Kongsberg Næringsparkutvikling AS, Kongsberg Næringsbygg 2 AS, Kongsberg Næringsbygg 3 AS, Kongsberg Næringsbygg 5 AS, Kongsberg Næringsbygg 6 AS, Kongsberg Næringsbygg 7 AS, Kongsberg Næringsbygg 8 AS, Kongsberg Næringsbygg 9 AS, Nerion AS, Kongsberg Reinsurance Ltd.
The conglomerate has four "business areas", in regards to accounting, marketing, and operating it: Kongsberg Defence Systems (KDS),  Kongsberg Protech Systems (KPS),  Kongsberg Oil & Gas Technologies (KOGT) and Kongsberg Maritime (KM). KDS is a supplier of defence and aerospace-related systems and KPS delivers weapon control systems with PROTECTOR Remote Weapon Station. KOGT provides technology, products and services for surveillance, integration, analysis, simulation, quality assurance, and governance of drilling and production operations and KM delivers products and systems for positioning, navigation and automation to merchant vessels and offshore installations, as well as products and systems for seabed surveying and monitoring, and for fishing vessels and fisheries research.

History

The company was established March 20 in 1814 as Kongsberg Vaabenfabrik (KV) (lit.: "Kongsberg Weapons Factory"), a name which remained virtually unchanged until 1987, when it took the name Norsk Forsvarsteknologi (NFT) (lit.: "Norwegian Defence Technology") after restructuring due to the sale of all civilian activity and financial troubles. The name changed again in 1995 to the present Kongsberg Gruppen following its listing on the Oslo Stock Exchange in 1993. In 1974, a Canadian subsidiary known as Kongsberg Mesotech Ltd was established for the development and manufacturing of underwater surveillance systems.
In 1987, the company was part of the Toshiba-Kongsberg scandal, which involved a subsidiary of Toshiba and the Kongsberg Vaapenfabrikk. The two provided the Soviet Union with technology (Toshiba milling machines and Kongsberg computer numerical controls) that could be used to produce quiet submarine propellers, in violation of the CoCom agreement.  The US always relied on the fact that the Soviets had noisy boats. Providing the USSR with technology that could make their subs harder to find and track was perceived as a significant threat to America's security.

Owners

In 2014 NRK said that Ministry of Trade, Industry and Fisheries has a 50,001 percentKongsberg Gruppen siktet for korrupsjon  stake in the company (while another website said that Ministry of Trade and IndustryKONGSBERG GRUPPEN ASA has a 50 percent stake).

Organization

The company fullyKongsberg Defence & Aerospace AS owns Kongsberg Defence & Aerospace. Sometimes referred to as a division,)
Kongsberg Defence Systems—a company that had no income
Eleven executive officers report directly to the CEO, including those of the four "business areas": Kongsberg Maritime, "Kongsberg Defence Systems", Kongsberg Protech Systems, Kongsberg Oil & Gas Technologies.

Shared names of "business area" and indirectly owned companies

The "business area" "Kongsberg Defence Systems" and the company Kongsberg Defence Systems AS has the same person in different positions; in the "business area" he is its executive officer
"Kongsberg Oil & Gas Technologies" is another of the conglomerate's "business areas", that shares name with an indirectly owned company, Kongsberg Oil & Gas Technologies AS (owned by Kongsberg Basetec).

Shared name of "business area" and directly owned company

"Kongsberg Maritime" is one of the conglomerate's "business areas", and it shares name with a directly owned  company, Kongsberg Maritime AS.

Corruption charges

In 2014 the company and Kongsberg Defence Systems
In spring 2012 "various signals"
indicated corrupt practices, and within a short 
time, investigators from outside the company were put to task.Alle spor stoppet i skatteparadis In autumn of 2013 the company discontinued a year-long
investigation by PricewaterhouseCoopers—without giving the investigators' report to the police.Alle spor stoppet i skatteparadis
On 25 February 2014 Økokrim searched company premises in Kongsberg and Asker. The leaders of the company were summoned for a meeting with then Minister of Trade and Industry.Møte med Kongsberg Gruppen The board meeting later that day, was joined by the minister via phone.dn.ece
On 27 February 2014 media said that then chairman had not read the report by PricewaterhouseCoopers about their investigation.
A 28 February 2014 NRK article said that the transaction with Romania was connected with export guarantees worth Norwegian kroner  669 million—from Guarantee Institute for Export Credits (GIEK).Kongsberg fikk statlige garantier (The folders contained "three of the contracts" Romania.Kongsberg fikk statlige garantier
Reactions to the investigation include professor Peter Gottschalk saying that "It is obvious that the company should have contacted the police and not discontinued the case. When økonomisk kriminalitet is suspected, the police should be notified. I think that the reason they did not do that, was that they did not want publicity".- De burde gått til politiet, ikke lagt bort saken A 28 February 2014 Dagens Næringsliv article said that "The question for the company's largest owner thru minister of trade Monica Mæland (H)—without regard to what Økokrim uncovers in its investigation—ought to be whether the government's companies are best served by having committee members that are that irresolute". - The minister of trade must evaluate if this is in line with the zero tolerance, that she is trying to 'make more clear'."Inn på teppet

Chairman

CEO

Board members








