[[Acoustical engineering]]

CATEGORIES: Acoustics, Noise reduction, Engineering disciplines

Acoustical engineering (also known as Acoustic Engineering) is the branch of engineering dealing with sound and vibration.  It is the application of acoustics, the science of sound and vibration, in technology. Acoustical engineers are typically concerned with the design, analysis and control of sound.
One goal of acoustical engineering can be the reduction of unwanted noise, which is referred to as noise control. Unwanted noise can have significant impacts on animal and human health and well being, reduce attainment by pupils in schools, and cause hearing loss. Noise control principles are implemented into technology and design in a variety of ways, including control by redesigning sound sources, the design of noise barriers, sound absorbers, silencers, and buffer zones, and the use of hearing protection (Earmuffs or Earplugs).
right|thumb|The transparent baffles inside this auditorium were installed to optimize sound projection and reproduction, key factors in Acoustical engineering. From designing a concert hall's acoustics to enhance the sound of an orchestra,

Acoustic Engineer (Professional)

Acoustic engineers usually possess a bachelor's degree or higher qualification in acoustics, physics or another engineering discipline. Practicing as an acoustic engineer usually requires a bachelor's degree with significant scientific and mathematical content. Acoustic engineers might work in acoustic consultancy, specializing in particular fields, such as architectural acoustics, environmental noise or vibration control. Acousticians are also involved in researching and understanding sound scientifically. Some positions, such as faculty (academic staff) require a Doctor of Philosophy.
In most countries, a degree in acoustics can represent the first step towards professional certification and the degree program maybe certified by a professional body. After completing a certified degree program the engineer must satisfy a range of requirements before being certified. Once certified, the engineer is designated the title of Chartered Engineer (in most Commonwealth countries).

Subdisciplines

The listed subdisciplines are loosely based on the PACS (Physics and Astronomy Classification Scheme) coding used by the Acoustical Society of America.

Aeroacoustics

Aeroacoustics is concerned with how noise is generated by the movement of air, for instance via turbulence, and how sound propagates through the fluid air. Aeroacoustics plays an important role in understanding how noise is generated by aircraft and wind turbines, as well as exploring how wind musical instruments work.

Audio signal processing

Audio signal processing is the electronic manipulation of audio signals and is a branch of Digital signal processing. Audio signal processing is done for a variety of reasons such as: (i) to enhance a sound, for instance by applying an audio effect such as reverberation; (ii) to remove unwanted noises from a signal, for instance echo cancellation on Skype; (iii) to compress an audio signal to allow efficient transmission, e.g. mp3 perceptual coding, and (iv) to understand the content of the signal, e.g. Music information retrieval to allow the identification of music tracks via Shazam (service). Audio engineers develop and use Audio signal processing algorithms.

Architectural acoustics

Architectural acoustics (also known as building acoustics) is the science and engineering of achieving a good sound within a building..

Bioacoustics

Bioacoustics usually concerns the scientific study of sound production and hearing in animals.

Electroacoustics

This branch of Acoustic Engineering deals with the design of headphones, microphones, loudspeakers, sound systems, sound reproduction and recording. There has been a rapid increase in the use of portable electronic devices which can reproduce sound and rely of electroacoustic engineering, e.g. Mobile phones, Portable media players, and Tablet computers.

Environmental noise

Environmental acoustics is concerned with the control of noise and vibrations caused by traffic, aircraft, industrial equipment, recreational activities and anything else that might be considered a nuisance.

Musical acoustics

Musical acoustics is concerned with researching and describing the physics of music and its perception – how sounds employed as music work. This includes: the function and design of musical instruments including electronic synthesizers; the human voice (the physics and neurophysiology of singing); computer analysis of music and composition; the clinical use of music in music therapy, and the perception and cognition of music.

Noise control

Noise control is a set of strategies to reduce noise pollution by reducing noise at its source, by inhibiting sound propagation using noise barriers or similar, or by the use of ear protection (Earmuffs or Earplugs). for instance manipulating the sound of door closures on Automobiles.

Psychoacoustics

Psychoacoustics tries to explain how  humans respond to what they hear, whether that is an annoying noise or beautiful music. In many branches of acoustic engineering, a human listener is the final arbitrator as to whether a design is successful, for instance whether Sound localization works in a Surround sound system. 'Psychoacoustics seeks to reconcile acoustical stimuli and all the scientific, objective, and physical properties that surround them, with the physiological and psychological responses evoked by them.'

Speech

Speech is a major area of study for acoustical engineering, including the production, processing and perception of speech. This can include physics, physiology, psychology, audio signal processing and linguistics. Speech recognition and Speech synthesis are two important aspects of the machine processing of speech. Ensuring speech is transmitted intelligibly, efficiently and with high quality; in rooms, through public address systems and through telephone systems are other important areas of study.

Ultrasonics

thumb|right|Ultrasound image of a fetus in the womb, viewed at 12 weeks of pregnancy (bidimensional-scan)Ultrasonics deals with sound waves in solids, liquids and gases at frequencies too high to be heard by the average person. Specialists areas include medical ultrasonics (including Medical ultrasonography), Sonochemistry nondestructive testing, material characterisation and underwater acoustics (Sonar).

Underwater acoustics

Underwater acoustics is the scientific study of sound in water. It is concerned with both natural and man-made sound and its generation underwater; how it propagates, and the perception of the sound by animals. Applications include sonar to locate submerged objects such as submarines, underwater communication by animals, observation of sea temperatures for climate change monitoring, and marine biology.

Vibration and dynamics

Acoustic engineers working on vibration study the motions and interactions of mechanical systems with their environments, including measurement, analysis and control. This might include: ground vibrations from railways and construction; vibration isolation to reduce noise getting into recording studios; studying the effects of vibration on humans (vibration white finger); vibration control to protect a bridge from earthquakes, or modelling the propagation of structure-borne sound through buildings.

Fundamental science

Although the way in which sound interacts with its surroundings is often extremely complex, there are a few ideal sound wave behaviors that are fundamental to understanding acoustical design.  Basic sound wave behaviors include absorption, reverberation, diffraction, and refraction. Absorption is the loss of energy that occurs when a sound wave reflects off of a surface. Just as light waves reflect off of surfaces, sound waves also reflect off of surfaces, and every reflection results in a loss of energy.  Absorption refers both to the sound that transmits through and the energy that is dissipated by a material. 7.1. Reverberation is the persistence of sound that is caused by repeated boundary reflections after the source of the sound stops. This principle is particularly important in enclosed spaces.  In addition to reflecting off of surfaces, sound waves also bend around surfaces in the path of the waves.  This bending is known as diffraction.  Refraction is another kind of sound wave bending.  This type of bending, however, is caused by changes in the medium through which the wave is passing and not the presence of obstacles in the path of a sound wave.  Temperature gradients, for example, cause bending in sound waves. 24–44. Acoustical engineers apply these fundamental concepts, along with complex mathematical analysis, to control sound for a variety of applications.

Associations



Notes




