[[Bacolod]]

CATEGORIES: Bacolod, Metro Bacolod, Provincial capitals of the Philippines, Cities in the Visayas, Port cities and towns in the Philippines, Populated places established in 1575, 1575 establishments in the Philippines, Cities in Negros Occidental

 
Bacolod 

Etymology

Bacólod (

History

Spanish colonial period

Historical church accounts provide a glimpse of the early years of Bacolod as a mere small settlement by the riverbank known as Magsung̃ay (English: Magsungay). When the neighboring settlement of Bago was elevated into the status of a small town in 1575, The early missionaries placed the village under the care and protection of San Sebastián (
Bacolod was not established as a town until 1755 or 1756, after the inhabitants of the coastal settlement of San Sebastián de Magsung̃ay, were attacked by forces under Datu Bantílan of Sulu on July 14, 1755 and the villagers transferred from the coast to a hilly area called Bacólod. Bernardino de los Santos became the first gobernadorcillo (
On 11 February 1802, Fr. Eusebio Laurencio became acting parish priest of Bacolod. In September 1806, Fr. León Pedro was appointed interim parish priest and the following year became the first regular parish priest.
In September 1817, Fray () Julián Gonzaga from Barcelona was appointed as the parish priest. He encouraged the people to settle once again near the sea. He also encouraged migration to Bacolod and the opening of lands to agriculture and industry.
In 1846, upon the request of Msgr. Romualdo Jimeno, bishop of Cebu and Negros at that time, Gobernador General (
In 1889, Bacolod became the capital of Occidental Negros when the Province of Negros was politically divided into the separate provinces of Occidental Negros (Spanish: Negros Occidental) and Oriental Negros (Spanish: Negros Oriental).

Negros Revolution

The success of the uprising in Bacolod was attributed to the low morale of the local Spanish detachment, due to its defeat in Panay and Luzon and to the psychological warfare waged by Generals Aniceto Lacson and Juan Araneta. In 1897, a battle in Bacolod was fought at Matab-ang River. A year later, on November 5, 1898, the Negrense Revolucionarios (), surrendered.

Cantonal Republic of Negros

On 7 November 1898, most of the revolutionary army gathered together to establish a provisional junta and to confirm the elections of Aniceto Lacson as president, Juan Araneta as war-delegate, as well as the other officials. For a brief moment, the provinces of Occidental Negros and Oriental Negros were reunited under the cantonal government of the Negrense Revolucionarios, from 6 November 1898 to the end of February 1899, making Bacolod the capital. On March 1899, the American forces led by Colonel James G. Smith occupied Bacolod, the revolutionary capital of República Cantonal de Negros ().

American colonial period

República de Negros became a U.S. territory on April 30, 1901. Negros was once again separated, reverting Bacolod to its status as the capital of Occidental Negros.
The public school of Instituto Rizal (
A historic event took place in 1938 when Municipality of Bacolod was elevated into a city through Commonwealth Act No. 326 passed by the 1st National Assembly of the Philippines creating the City of Bacolod.

Japanese occupation and Allied liberation

In World War II, Bacolod City was occupied by the Japanese forces on May 21, 1942. Lieutenant General Kawano "Kono" Takeshi, the Japanese commanding officer of the 77th Infantry Brigade, 102nd Division, seized the homes of Don (honorific/lang-English:Sir) Generoso Villanueva, a prominent sugar planter—whose home (Daku Balay) served as the "seat of power" (occupational headquarters for the Japanese Forces in Negros and all of the Central Visayan region of the Philippines) and being the tallest building in the city served as the watchtower of the city—and the home of his brother-in-law, Don Mariano Ramos, the first appointed Presidente Municipal () of Bacolod. The home of Don Generoso was lived in by Lt General Takeshi throughout  the duration of the war and also served as his office and the home of Don Mariano was occupied by a Japanese Colonel serving under the command of Lt General Takeshi. The city was liberated by joint Filipino and American forces on May 29, 1945. It took time to rebuild the city after liberation.  However, upon the orders of Lt General Takeshi, both the homes of Don Generoso and Don Mariano were saved from destruction by the retreating Japanese forces.
In March 1945, upon the invasion of the American forces, the withdrawal of the Japanese army into the mountains and the temporary occupation of Bacolod by the US armed forces, the house of Don Generoso was then occupied by Major General Rapp Brush, commander of the 40th Infantry Division, known as the "Sun Burst" Division, for approximately five months. The local Philippine military built and established the general headquarters and camp bases of the Philippine Commonwealth Army which was active from 1942 to 1946. The 7th Infantry Regiment of the Philippine Constabulary was also active from 1944 to 1946 and was stationed in Bacolod City after World War II.

Independent Philippines

When the country finally gained complete independence from the United States, the city's public markets and slaughterhouses were rebuilt during the administration of former mayor Vicente Remitió from 1947 to 1949. In 1948, a fire razed a portion of the records section of the old city hall that consumed the rear end of the building and with it, numerous priceless documents of the city.

Geography

Bacolod City is located on the northwestern coast of the Province of Negros Occidental. It is bounded on the north by the City of Talisay; on the east by the town of Murcia; on the south by the City of Bago; and in the west by the Guimaras Strait. The global location of Bacolod City is 10 degrees, 40 minutes 40 seconds - north and 122 degrees 54 minutes 25 seconds - east with Bacolod Public Plaza as the benchmark.
Bacolod has a total land area of 16,145 hectares, including straits and bodies of water and the 124 hectare reclamation area; and is composed of 61 barangay (villages) and 639 purok (smaller units composing a village). It is accessible by sea through the ports of Banago; the BREDCO Port in the Reclamation Area, and the port of Pulupandan. By air, it is accessible through the New Bacolod-Silay International Airport, which is approximately 13 (four is counting from the Lagoon) kilometers away from the center of the city.
Bacolod is ideally located on a level area, slightly sloping as it extends toward the sea with an average slope of 0.9 percent for the city proper and between 3 to 5 percent for the suburbs. The altitude is 32.8 feet or 10.0 meters above sea level with the Bacolod City Public Plaza as the benchmark. Bacolod has two pronounced seasons, wet and dry. The rainy season starts from May to January of the following year with heavy rains occurring during the months of August and September. Dry season starts from the month of February until the last week of April.

Climate

Barangays

Bacolod City is politically subdivided into 61 barangays.

Demographics

Economy

Business process outsourcing

Bacolod is the Philippines' third fastest growing economy in terms of information technology (IT) and business process outsourcing (BPO) activities. The city has been recommended by the Information and Communication Technology Office of the Department of Science and Technology (DOST) and Business Processing Association of the Philippines (BPAP) as the best location in the Visayas for BPO activities.
Bacolod ranked 3rd among the top ten "Next Wave Cities" of the Philippines for the best location for BPO and offshoring according to a 2010 report of the Commission on Information and Communications Technology. In 2013, the city was declared a "center of excellence" for IT-business process management operations by the DOST, joining the ranks of Metro Manila, Metro Cebu, and Metro Clark.
Among the notable BPO companies operating in the city are Convergys, Teleperformance, TeleTech, Transcom, Panasiatic, Focus Direct, Hit Rate Solutions and Telequest.

Agriculture

Along its highways, sugarcane plantations are a typical scene. As of 2003, 7,216 hectares of the city's 8,560 hectares of agricultural land were still planted with sugarcane. Meanwhile, 915 hectares were devoted to rice, 120 hectares to assorted vegetables, 100 hectares to coconut, 43 hectares to banana and 34 hectares to corn. "The Future Smiles On The City Of Smiles", Philippine Business.

Competitiveness

According to the "Philippine Cities Competitiveness Ranking Project 2005" of Asian Institute of Management (AIM), Bacolod tops the list in terms of infrastructure, ahead of such other mid-size cities like Iligan, Calamba, and General Santos. Bacolod also tops the list in terms of quality of life, ahead of such other mid-size cities like San Fernando, Baguio, Iloilo and Lipa. AIM also recognized Bacolod as one of the Top Five most competitive mid-size cities together with Batangas, Iligan, Iloilo, and San Fernando."Pinoy Cities on the Rise - The Philippine Cities Competitiveness Ranking Project 2005 National Presentation of Results", Asian Institute of Management.

Sports

Football

Bacolod City hosted the 2005 Southeast Asian Games Football tournament, the 2007 ASEAN Football Championship qualification, the 2010 AFC U-16 Championship qualification and the 2012 AFC Challenge Cup qualification play-off first leg was held at the Panaad Stadium where the Philippines won 2–0 over Mongolia. Likewise the city has the home football stadium of the Philippines national football team (Azkals).

Basketball

2008 PBA All-Star Weekend was held in the city and since then has been a regular venue of Philippine Basketball Association out-of-town games. Recently the Sandugo Unigames 2012 was hosted by the city participated by various universities around the country notably those who compete in the UAAP.

Karatedo

The 1996 Philippine Karatedo Federation (PKF) National Championships and the 20th PKF National Open 2007 were held in the city. Both events were hosted by La Salle Coliseum of the University of St. La Salle. The tournaments were participated by hundreds of karatekas all over the country.PKF and POF National Karatedo Winners,Team Jack & Jill School, Sunstar September 26, 2007Karatedo Winners, NOKAF Karatedo, Visayan Daily Star September 17, 2007 edition

Golf

There are two major golf courses in the city; the Bacolod Golf and Country Club and the Negros Occidental Golf and Country Club. The city hosted the 61st Philippine Airlines Inter-club Golf Tournament and the 2008 Philippine Amateur Golf Championship. A Golf tournament sponsored by the City Mayor is also held every Masskara.

Mixed Martial Arts

Bacolod City is home to many mixed martial arts competitions including quarterly fights hosted by the URCC.

Infrastructure

Panaad Park and Stadium

The Panaad Stadium is a multi-purpose stadium in the city. It is currently used mostly for football matches, and it serves as the home football stadium of the . It was used for the 2005 South East Asian Games. It was the venue of the pre-qualifiers of the 2007 ASEAN Football Championship or ASEAN Cup, in which the Philippines, Cambodia, East Timor, Brunei and Laos participated. The stadium has a seating capacity of 15,500, but holds around 20,000 people with standing areas. It is unofficially designated as the home stadium of the Philippines national football team. Aside from the football field, it also has a rubberized track oval, an Olympic-size swimming pool and other sports facilities.
The stadium is also the home of Panaad Festival, a week-long celebration participated in by all cities and municipalities in the province held annually every summer. The festival is highlighted by merry-making, field demonstrations, pageant and concert at the stadium. The stadium itself features replicas of the landmarks of the 13 cities and municipalities of Negros Occidental.

Bacolod Public Plaza

The Bacolod Public Plaza is one of the notable landmarks in Bacolod City, the capital of Negros Occidental, which is found right in the heart of downtown area, very near to the city hall and right across the San Sebastian Cathedral. The plaza is a trapezoidal park with a belt of trees all around the periphery and a gazebo/bandstand at the center. Scattered within the trees are four circular fountains.
The Plaza was constructed back in 1927 as a place for recreation, political, spiritual and cultural activities; it seems to be quite a popular site for outdoor picnic and concerts. The gazebo/bandstand is often where the stage is located and this is quite apt since inscribed along the sides of the roofing are the names of Western musical composers like Beethoven, Wagner, Haydn, and Mozart.
The plaza is the celebrated place of MassKara Festival. Bacolod public plaza is the final destination of MassKara street dancing competitions which is the highlights of the celebration.

Capitol Park & Lagoon

The Capitol Park and Lagoon is a provincial park located right in the heart of Bacolod City, Negros Occidental, in the Philippines.  One of the landmarks of the park is the carabao (water buffalo) being pulled by a woman. This carabao is located at the northern end of the lagoon. On the other end, there is also another carabao sculpture but the figure is being pulled by a man.

Transportation

Bacolod-Silay International Airport

The Bacolod-Silay International Airport, located in nearby Silay City, is 15 kilometers north-east from Bacolod. The P4.37-billion airport is capable of handling all-weather and night-landing operations. Its 2,000-meter (6,600 ft.) long and 45-meter (148 ft.) wide primary runway, and 678-meter by 23-meter taxiways can accommodate Airbus A320 family-size aircraft, and the Boeing 737, while the apron can hold five aircraft at any one time. The runway runs in a direction of 03°/21°. Provisions for a   expansion of the present runway in order to accommodate even larger aircraft like the Airbus A330, Airbus A340 and Boeing 747 are in place.
Bacolod is 1 hour by air from Manila, 30 minutes by air from Cebu and 1 hour by air from Cagayan de Oro. Commercial airlines operating in Bacolod are Philippine Airlines, Cebu Pacific Air, PAL Express, Zest Airways and South East Asian Airlines

Bacolod City Domestic Airport

Bacolod City Domestic Airport was the airport serving the general area of Bacolod. It was one of the busiest airports in the Western Visayas region and was one of four trunkline airports, or major commercial domestic airports, in the region, the others being Mandurriao Airport in Iloilo City, Roxas Airport in Roxas City and Puerto Princesa Airport in Puerto Princesa.  This airport was replaced by the new Bacolod-Silay International Airport, located in nearby Silay City. It was classified as such by the Air Transportation Office, a body of the Department of Transportation and Communications that is responsible for the operations of all other airports in the Philippines except the major international airports. The Bacolod City Domestic Airport ceased operations on January 17, 2008, prior to the opening of the Bacolod-Silay International Airport which began operations the day after.

Ports

Banago Wharf and BREDCO Port are the vessels entry point in Bacolod. It has daily access to Iloilo, with different shipping lines such as 2GO Travel (as relaunched in 2012), Weesam Express, Ocean Jet, Montenegro Lines, Jomalia Shipping and Tri Star megalink. There are also access routes to Puerto Princesa City via Iloilo City, Cagayan de Oro City, General Santos City, Zamboanga City, Cotabato City, Butuan City via Cagayan de Oro route, Dipolog City Iligan City, Ozamiz City, and Surigao City via Cagayan de Oro route. As of 2012 SuperFerry and Negros Navigation was relaunched into 2GO Travel routes from Bacolod going Manila, Iloilo and Cagayan de Oro. Bacolod City is 18–23 hours from the Port of Manila, 2-3hrs from Dumangas Port and 45 minutes- 1hr from the Port of Iloilo.

Land routes

Bacolod City has two main roads, Lacson Street to the north and Araneta Street to the south. The city has a good traffic plan lay-out and very seldom has traffic jams. The streets in the downtown area are one way, making Bacolod free from traffic congestion. Recently, Bacolod City is experiencing an increase in traffic congestion due to an increase in number of vehicles and a perceived lack of implementation of traffic rules by the local government.
By land-RORO-land, Bacolod City is approximately 3 hours from Iloilo City via Dumangas route. By land-ferry-land, Bacolod City is approximately 4 hours and 30 minutes from Cebu City via Toledo City-San Carlos City-Salvador Benedicto-Murcia route. By land-RORO-land, Bacolod City-Cebu City via Toledo-Escalante route is approximately 6 hours and 30 minutes or via Mabinay or Canlaon going Cebu City and from Bacolod City-Dumaguete City via Mabinay route is approximately 6 hours and while from Bacolod City-Dumaguete City via Cadiz City-San Carlos City route is approximately 8 hours both routes going Negros Oriental.

Notable people

Entertainment

Literature

Politics

Religion

Sports

Sister cities

Bacolod City has the following sister cities:

Local cities

International

Gallery

File:MassKara Festival, Bacolod City, Philippines.JPG|MassKara Festival Street Dancing
File:Fountain of Justice Bacolod City Philippines.jpg|Fountain of Justice and downtown Bacolod
File:Northdrivebacolod.jpg|North Drive
File:San Sebastian Cathedral.jpg|San Sebastian Cathedral
File:Riversidebacolod. Medical Arts Building along BS Aquino Drive
File:PNB Bacolod.JPG|Philippine National Bank building, along Lacson Street
File:SM City Bacolod PyroMagic 2007.jpg|SM City Bacolod during PyroMagic 2007
File:SM_City_Bacolod_North_Wing.jpg|SM City Bacolod North Wing
File:Robinsons_Place_Bacolod.jpg|Robinsons Place Bacolod, along Lacson Street in Barangay Mandalagan
File:La Salle Coliseum. La Salle
File:Unorfacade.jpg|UNO-Recoletos façade
File:Csab facade.JPG|Colegio San Agustin - Bacolod Administration Building Facade
File:P10004672r654r.gif|Bacolod Christian College of Negros
File:Capitol_Lagoon_Bacolod_City_Philippines.jpg|A view of the Capitol Park and Lagoon looking towards the Negros Occidental Provincial Capitol building








