[[Take the Money and Run]]

CATEGORIES: 1960s comedy films, 1969 films, American criminal comedy films, English-language films, Films directed by Woody Allen, Films set in San Quentin State Prison, Films shot in San Francisco, California, Films shot in San Quentin, California, Heist films, Independent films, Mockumentary films, Screenplays by Woody Allen

Take the Money and Run is a 1969 American comedic mockumentary directed by Woody Allen and starring Allen and Janet Margolin (with Louise Lasser in a cameo role). Written by Allen and Mickey Rose, the film chronicles the life of Virgil Starkwell (Woody Allen), an inept bank robber.

Plot

Virgil Starkwell (Woody Allen) enters a life of crime at a young age. The "plot" traces his crime spree, his first prison term and eventual escape, the birth and growth of his family, as well as his eventual capture at the hands of the FBI. His multiple crimes include stealing a pane of glass from a jewelry store, robbing a pet store and carving bars of soap into guns to escape from jail. He also robs a man who turns out to be his former friend who reveals he is now a cop, and the movie ends with Woody admitting he got 800 years in prison, but "with good behavior, can get that cut in half". Starkwell grew up in New Jersey, and played the cello (badly) in his town's marching band.

Cast

Production

This was the second film directed by Woody Allen, and the first with original footage (after What's Up, Tiger Lily, which consisted of vsiuals taken from a Japanese James Bond knockoff). He had originally wanted Jerry Lewis to direct, but when that did not work out, Allen decided to direct it himself. Allen's decision to become his own director was partially spurred on by the chaotic and uncontrolled filming of Casino Royale (1967), in which he had appeared two years previously. This film marked the first time Allen would perform the triple duties of writing, directing, and acting in a film. The manic, almost slapstick style is similar to that of Allen's next several films, including Bananas (1971) and Sleeper (1973).
Allen discussed the concept of filming a documentary in an interview with Richard Schickel:

The film was shot on location in San Francisco, including one scene set in Ernie's restaurant, whose striking red interior was immortalized in Alfred Hitchcock's Vertigo (1958). Other scenes were filmed at San Quentin State Prison, where 100 prisoners were paid a small fee to work on the film. The regular cast and crew were stamped each day with a special ink that glowed under ultra-violet light so the guards could tell who was allowed to leave the prison grounds at the end of the day. (One of the actors in the San Quentin scenes was Micil Murphy, who knew the prison well: he served five and a half years there, for armed robbery, before being paroled in 1966.)
Allen initially filmed a downbeat ending in which he was shot to death, courtesy of special effects from A.D. Flowers. Reputedly the lighter ending is due to the influence of Allen's editor, Ralph Rosenblum, in his first collaboration with Allen.

Reception

Box Office

By 1973 movie had earned rentals of $2,590,000 in North America and $450,000 in other countries. After all costs were deducted, it reported a loss of $610,000.

Critical response

The film received mostly positive reviews. Vincent Canby of The New York Times described it as "a movie that is, in effect, a feature-length, two-reel comedy—something very special and eccentric and funny", even though toward the end "a certain monotony sets in" with Allen's comedy rhythm.
On the review aggregator web site Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds a 93% positive rating from top film critics based on 14 reviews, with only one negative review from Roger Ebert. The film holds a 73% positive audience rating based on 10,893 ratings.

Awards and nominations

American Film Institute recognition






