[[Kyushu University]]

CATEGORIES: Japanese national universities, National Seven Universities, Forestry education, 1911 establishments in Japan, Educational institutions established in 1911, Universities and colleges in Fukuoka Prefecture, Kyushu University

, is a Japanese public university located in Fukuoka, Kyushu. It is one of Japan's National Seven Universities (The others are Hokkaido University, Tohoku University, The University of Tokyo, Nagoya University, Kyoto University and Osaka University). The history of Kyushu University can be traced by medical schools of the feudal domains built in 1867, and now it is the largest public university in Kyushu.
There are 1,292 foreign students (as of May 1, 2008) enrolled in the University. It is among the top 3 (after Tokyo University and Osaka University) destinations for foreign students.
The Faculty of Law, Kyushu University initiated English language course LL.M program in October 1994, which is  the earliest in Japan.

History

Kyushu University was initially founded as Fukuoka Medical College in 1903 and was associated with Kyoto Imperial University. Kyūshū Imperial University was established as a separate entity in 1911. In 1947, Kyūshū Imperial University was renamed Kyushu University.
On October, 2003, Kyushu University and Kyūshū Institute of Design officially amalgamated into a single university, with Kyushu Institute of Design becoming Kyushu University's Ohashi Campus. In 2004 Kyushu University was incorporated as a national university corporation under a new law which applies to all national universities.

War crimes

In World War II, the survivors of a B-29 bomber on the border between Kumamoto and Ōita were sent to Kyushu Imperial University where they were vivisected and killed. Reynolds, 2002, "U.S. Prisoners of War and Civilian American Citizens Captured and Interned by Japan in World War II: The Issue of Compensation by Japan" (Library of Congress) 

Symbol

Kyushu University does not have an official school song, instead it has three student songs and one cheering song. Among others, Matssubara-ni, wrote the lyrics by Yoshihumi Akiyama, is famous.
Logo is design which laid out the capital of the University on pine straw. 
The mark was established in 2004, originally it was the designing of student batch, which was designed by Sou Yoshihide, and was used from 1950. 
This mark was registered. And there were the design of KU or Q.
The school color is wine color, and there are some sub-colors.

Undergraduate schools and graduate schools/faculties

Undergraduate schools

Graduate Schools and graduate faculties

Research institutes

Topics

Taught from a Japanese perspective, the one year program offers students the opportunity to study international economic and business law, and Japanese and comparative law in a Japanese law faculty. A three-year LL.D. program and another one-year Master's course in Comparative Studies of Politics and Administration in Asia (CSPA) were launched in October 1999. As a result of the success of these programs, in 2001, Kyushu University was invited by the Ministry of Education to host the Young Leader's Program in Law, a program which, among others, seeks to foster good relations among future national leaders in Asia and other countries. In 2009, it was again selected by the Ministry of Education to host a Bilingual Program in law (LL.M). This unique master aims to overcome barriers of language and culture in the field of international law. This is achieved through law classes conducted in both Japanese and English, an internship, as well as a thesis written in both languages. Its first batch of students graduated in 2010.

Campus

Statues

File:大森治豊.jpg|Ōmori Harutoyo
File:Kyushu University1.jpg|Takeya Hiroshi 
File:久保猪之吉博士.jpg|Inokichi Kubo 

Academic rankings

General rankings

The university has been ranked 8th in 2010 and 2009 in the ranking "Truly Strong Universities" by Toyo Keizai. In another ranking, Japanese prep school Kawaijuku ranked Kyusyu as the 7th best university in Japan.
In 2011 QS World University Rankings

Research performance

Kyushu is one of the top research institutions in Japan. According to Thomson Reuters, Kyushu is the 6th best research university in Japan. Its research excellence is especially distinctive in Materials Science (6th in Japan, 49th in the world), Chemistry (6th in Japan, 41st in the world), Biology & Biochemistry (4th in Japan, 95th in the world), Immunology (4th in Japan, 68th in the world), and Pharmacology & Toxicology (4th in Japan, 76th in the world). (this raking includes non-educational institutions)
Weekly Diamond reported that Kyushu has the 16th highest research standard in Japan in terms of research funding per researchers in COE Program."週刊ダイヤモンド" ダイヤモンド社 2010/2/27  In the same article, it is also ranked fifth in terms of the quality of education by GP funds per student.
Furthermore, Nikkei Shimbun　on 2004/2/16 surveyed about the research standards in Engineering studies based on Thomson Reuters, Grants in Aid for Scientific Research and questionnaires to heads of 93 leading Japanese Research Centers, and Kyushu was placed 11th (research planning ability 10th) in this ranking.
Kyushu University is one of Japan's National Seven Universities.  Since Prof. Suzuki received the Nobel Prize in 2010, all the other Universities have alumni or professors who received a Nobel Prize, Kyushu University is only National Seven University whose alumni or staff have not won a Nobel Prize.

Graduate school rankings

Eduniversal ranked Kyushu as 9th in the rankings of "Excellent Business Schools nationally strong and/or with continental links " in Japan.
Kyushu has a good Law schools in Japan, as it was ranked 12th in the number of successful candidates of Japanese Bar Examination in 2009 and 15th in 2010.

Alumni rankings

According to the Weekly Economist's 2010 rankings, graduates from Kyushu have the 53rd best employment rate in 400 major companies in Japan.
École des Mines de Paris ranks Kyushu University as 38th in the world in 2011 in terms of the number of alumni listed among CEOs in the 500 largest worldwide companies.

Popularity and selectivity

Kyushu is one of the most selective universities in Japan. Its entrance difficulty is usually considered as one of the top in Japan.e.g. Yoyogi seminar published Hensachi (the indication showing the entrance difficulties by prep schools) rankings  journalist Kiyoshi Shimano ranks Kyushu's entrance difficulty as SA (most selective/out of 11 scales) in Japan. 

Scholarships for international students

Kyushu offers a number of selected scholarships for international students. Some of them are:Kyushu Scholarships for International Students

Notable alumni

Ph.D.

Bachelors

Former professors

Medical faculty

File:Kubo_Inokichi_1934.jpg|　








