[[Our Lady of La Salette]]

CATEGORIES: Marian apparitions, Our Lady of La Salette

 
Our Lady of La Salette (

History

On September 19, 1846, Maximin Giraud and Melanie Calvat (called Mathieu) reported seeing the Virgin Mary on Mount Sous-Les Baisses, weeping bitterly. According to their account, she continued to weep even as she spoke to them—first in French, then in their own dialectStern, Jean. 1980. La Salette, Documents authentiques. Part 1. Paris: Desclée De Brouwer, pp. 66, 71, the dialect itself 279-280. of Occitan. 2010. "Linguistic borders, language revitalisation and the imagining of new regional entities", Borders and Identities (Newcastle upon Tyne, 8-9 Jan. 2010), p. 18. After speaking, the apparition vanished. The following day the children's account of the apparition was put into writing and signed by the visionaries and those who had heard the story.
According to the children's account, the Virgin invited people to respect the repose of Sunday, and the name of God.  She threatened punishment, in particular a scarcity of potatoes, which would rot.  The context of these punishments places the warning just prior to the winter of 1846-1847, which was in Europe, and especially in Ireland and in France, a period of famine in the months which followed the apparition.  This was one of the factors of the apparition's popular appeal.
After five years of research, the bishop of Grenoble, Philibert de Bruillard recognized the authenticity of the apparition and Pope Pius IX approved the devotion to Our Lady of La Salette.

Secrets

The children also reported that the Blessed Virgin had confided a special secret to each of them. These two secrets, which neither Melanie or Maximin ever made known to each other, were sent by them in 1851 to Pope Pius IX on the advice of Mgr. de Bruillard.

Mélanie's Secret, July 6, 1851

Calvat first recorded her revealed Secret on July 3, in Corenc, at the Sisters of Providence residence and it was carried at the Bishop's House. The following day, she said she had not expressed herself well on the misfortunes which were to befall to two cities (Paris and Marseilles): they appeared simultaneous, whereas they were successive. She was asked to rewrite her Secret on July 6, then the Bishop read the document before sealing it. Calvat's statement was:
Secret which the Blessed Virgin gave me on the Mountain of La Salette on September 19, 1846

Maximin's Secret, July 3, 1851

Giraud wrote his revealed Secret at the bishop's palace, in front of Bishop de Bruillard's staff on July 3 in the evening. He was asked to rewrite it again because of spots of ink. The Secret was delivered to the bishop sent to the pope. The sealed envelope was countersigned by two witnesses. Giraud's statement was:
Here is the secret of Maximin written in 1851 that was never revealed until 1999:

Controversy

Sensation about Our Lady of La Salette arose when Melanie and Maximin made their message public, which caused the bishop of Grenoble to investigate the apparition. La Salette The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 9. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1910. 23 Nov. 2013. During the investigation, a number of accusations were made against the visionaries, including the assertion that the apparition was just a young woman named Lamerliere. In 1851 the local bishop of Grenoble declared the apparition to be worthy of belief, the first step in approval by the Catholic Church.

Two versions of the Melanie's secret

There are two versions of the secret of Melanie, one written by her in 1851, and another by the same author published in 1879 in Lecce, Italy, with the local bishop's approval. This last secret however, is not included in the approval given by the Church to the apparition since it was disclosed later.
A controversy followed as to whether the secret published in 1879 was identical with that communicated to Pius IX in 1851 or if its second form it was a work of the imagination.

Fate of the children

Maximin Giraud, after an unhappy and wandering life, returned to Corps, his native village, and died on 1 March 1875. Mélanie Calvat died at Altamura, Italy  on 15 December 1904.

Message

John Paul II stated: "As I wrote on the occasion of the 150th anniversary, 'La Salette is a message of hope, for our hope is nourished by the intercession of her who is the Mother of mankind."
The message of the visionaries of La Salette focuses on the conversion of all humanity to Christ. Though La Salette's message is embedded in the bygone environment of the nineteenth century, rural France, it has had a tremendous impact on the modern world. Saints (for example, John Vianney), pastors (such as Don Bosco), and religious writers (like Joris-Karl Huysmans) have all been influenced by La Salette. The spirit of La Salette is one of prayer, conversion, and commitment.

Documents

La Salette - Authentic Documents, Volumes I-III, compiled by Fr. Jean Stern, the archivist of the Missionaries of Our Lady of La Salette in Rome, presents "the authentic documents on La Salette in chronological order, of which only bits have been revealed to the public up to this point": the interviews with the witnesses, the reports of the investigators, reactions of pilgrims and the opponents of the Apparition, brochures that were peddled at the time, articles in newspapers, etc.

Notes




