[[Platform Sutra]]

CATEGORIES: Mahayana sutras, Zen texts

The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch ( The "platform" (施法壇) refers to the podium on which a Buddhist teacher speaks.
Its key theme are the direct perception of one's true nature, and the unity in essence of śīla (conduct), dhyāna (meditation) and prajñā (wisdom).
The text centers around teachings and stories ascribed to the sixth Chan patriarch Huineng. It contains the well-known story of the contest for the succession of Hongren (enlightenment by the non-abiding), and discourses and dialogues attributed to Huineng.
The text attributes its recollection to Fa-hai, but was probably written within the so-called Oxhead School, which existed along with the East Mountain School and Shenhui's Southern School. The text attempts to reconcile the so-called Northern School with its alleged gradual enlightenment teachings, and the so-called Southern School with its alleged sudden enlightenment teachings. In effect, the text incorporates the "rhetorical purity" which originated with Shenhui's attack on Shenxiu, while effectively "writing him out of the story".

History of the text

The Platform Sutra underwent various redactions. Though its recollection has been attributed to Fa-hai, a student of Huineng, its origins are not clear:

The Dunhuang versions are the oldest texts available, with the full title Southern School's Sudden Doctrine, Supreme Mahayana Great Perfection of Wisdom: The Platform Sutra as Delivered by the Sixth Patriarch Huineng at the Dafan Temple in Shao Prefecture , subtitled, "one roll, recorded by the spreader of the Dharma, the disciple Fahai, who at the same time received the Precepts of Formlessness" (一卷，兼受無相戒弘法弟子法海集記). 
Two copies dated to between 830 and 860 have been found in the Mogao Caves in Dunhuang. Both are thought to be based on an edition from about 780. The finds at Dunhuang have been very important for the historical understanding of Zen:

In 1056, the Chinese scholar-monk Qisong (契嵩, Wade-Giles: Ch'i-sung) produced a larger edition, entitled Liuzu fabao ji (法寶記 'Precious Record of the Dharma').
In 1291, Zongbao (宗寶, Wade-Giles: Tsung-pao) produced the edition that became part of the Ming Dynasty Chinese Buddhist canon. This canonical version, apparently based on the Qisong edition, is about a third longer than the Mogao Caves version, and structured differently.

Contents

The Platform Sutra is:


Chapter One - Personal History

Chapter One contains the well-known story of the contest for the succession of Hongren. It is an essential part of the Traditional Zen Narrative. According to the text, Huineng won this contest, but had to flee the monastery to avoid the rage of the supporters of Henxui. The story is not a factual account, but an 8th-century construction, probably by the so-called Oxhead School.
The contest centers on two verses:
Shenxiu: 
The body is the bodhi tree; 
The mind is like a bright mirror's stand. 
Be always diligent in rubbing it— 
Do not let it attract any dust.
Huineng: 
Bodhi is fundamentally without any tree; 
The bright mirror is also not a stand. 
Fundamentally there is not a single thing— 
Where could any dust be attracted?
}}
According to the traditional interpretation, which is based on Guifeng Zongmi, the fifth-generation successor of Shenhui, the two verses represent respectively the gradual and the sudden approach. According to McRae, this is an incorrect understanding: 
Huineng's verse does not stand alone, but forms a pair with Shenxiu's verse:

McRae notes a similarity in reasoning with the Oxhead School, which used a threefold structure of "absolute, relative and middle", or "thesis-antithesis-synthesis".

Chapter Two - Prajna (Lecture)

Chapter Two contains a lecture on prajna, given after a recitation of the Mahaprajnaparamita Sutra. From this chapter: 

Chapter Three - Questions

In Chapter Three Huineng answers questions from a lay audience. Huineng discusses the famous story of Bodhidharma telling Emperor Wu of Liang that his good deeds would bring him no merit. Next, he discusses the Pure Land of the West, asserting the greater importance of one's inner state compared to one's physical location. This leads to a conclusion in which Huineng asserts that lay practice outside of a monastery is preferable to following the forms of monastic renunciation without inner practice.

Chapter Four - Meditation and Wisdom (Lecture)

In Chapter Four, meditation and wisdom are said to be of the same essence:

Chapter Five - Seated Meditation (Lecture)

Chapter Five details the "pureness of our fundamental nature":


Chapter Six - Ceremony of Repentance

Chapter Six describes a repentance-ritual.

Chapter Seven - Key Events (Encounter stories and dialogues)

Chapter Seven gives various stories of encounters and dialogues.

Chapter Eight - Immediate and Gradual (Encounter stories and dialogues)

Chapter Eight also gives various stories of encounters and dialogues.

Chapter Nine - The Imperial Summons

Chapter Nine describes the request of the Imperial Court for Huineng to visit the Emperor, and Huineng's decline of this command.

Chapter Ten - Transmission

In the chapter on his final instructions, Huineng instructs his accomplished disciples, giving specific instructions how to "preach the Dharma", which show the influence of the Buddhist teachings on the five skandhas, the concept of Namarupa, and the Yogacara-teachings:

Scholarship and translations

Japanese scholarship

In the 1920s, Japanese scholar Yabuki Keiki (矢吹慶輝 1879-1939) produced an edition based on one of the Mogao Caves texts (the only one known at the time), dividing the text into fifty-seven sections.
In 1934, D. T. Suzuki published an edition based on the Mogao Cave text, but incorporating corrections from the Tsungpao (Zongbao) edition.
In 1993, the Buddhist scholar Yang Zengwen (杨曾文, b. 1939, Shandong) published an annotated edition of the second Mogao Caves text (which has fewer errors than the first Mogao Caves text). (Pine, 2006, Introduction)

Translations into English

The first published translation into English was completed in 1930 by Wong Mou-lam (黃茂林 
The Suzuki edition was translated into English by Wing-tsit Chan in 1963 and is written in his book, A source book in Chinese Philosophy.
In 1967 Philip Yampolsky published a translation based on the Mogao Cave text. This translation is a landmark in the modern Western scholarship on Zen and its history.
Shoemaker & Hoard published a translation and commentary by the American writer Red Pine, based on the second Mogao Caves text, in 2006.





Sources




