[[The Cloisters]]

CATEGORIES: Metropolitan Museum of Art, European medieval architecture in the United States, Institutions founded by the Rockefeller family, Washington Heights, Manhattan, Buildings and structures on the National Register of Historic Places in Manhattan, Relocated buildings and structures in New York, Museums in Manhattan, Art museums in New York City, Medieval art, Art museums established in 1938, 1938 establishments in New York

The Cloisters  is a museum located in Fort Tryon Park in Upper Manhattan, New York City. It is a branch of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, used to exhibit the museum's extensive collection of art, architecture and artifacts from Medieval Europe. 
The Cloisters is situated on a hill overlooking the Hudson River, and incorporates parts from five European abbeys which were disassembled and shipped to New York City, where, between 1934 and 1939, they were reconstructed and integrated together with new buildings in the medieval style designed by Charles Collens. The area around the buildings was landscaped with gardens planted according to horticultural information obtained from medieval manuscripts and artifacts, and the structure includes multiple medieval-style cloistered herb gardens.
The Cloisters was designated a New York City landmark in 1974, , p.213 and Fort Tryon Park and the Cloisters were listed together as a historic district on the National Register of Historic Places in 1978.

History

The  Fort Tryon Park was created by the philanthropist John D. Rockefeller, Jr. beginning in 1917, when he purchased the Billings Estate and other properties in the Fort Washington area and hired Frederick Law Olmsted, Jr., son of one of the designers of Central Park, and the Olmsted Brothers firm to create a park, which he then donated to New York City in 1935. As part of the overall project, Rockefeller also bought the extensive medieval art collection of George Grey Barnard, an American sculptor and collector, who had already established a medieval-art museum near his home in Fort Washington, and gave it to the Metropolitan along with a number of pieces from Rockefeller's own collection, including the Unicorn Tapestries. These became the core of the collection now housed at the Cloisters.
The museum and adjacent gardens within Fort Tryon Park, which incorporate   Rockefeller also bought and donated several hundred acres of the New Jersey Palisades to the State of New Jersey on the other side of the Hudson River to preserve the view for the museum.  This land is now part of the Palisades Interstate Park.
The museum was designed by Charles Collens who incorporated parts from five cloistered abbeys of Catalan, Occitan and French origins. Buildings from Sant Miquel de Cuixà, Sant Guilhèm dau Desèrt, Bonnefont-en-Comminges, Trie-en-Bigòrra, and Froville were disassembled stone-by-stone and shipped to New York City, where they were reconstructed and integrated by Collens into a cohesive whole by simplifying and merging the various medieval styles in his new buildings. 
In 1988, the Treasury Gallery within The Cloisters, containing objects used for liturgical celebrations, personal devotions, and secular uses, was renovated. Other galleries were refurbished in 1999.

Collection

The Cloisters collection contains approximately five thousand European medieval works of art, with a particular emphasis on pieces dating from the 12th through the 15th centuries.  Notable works of architecture include the Cuixà cloister, with an adjacent Chapter House; and the Fuentidueña Apse from a chapel in the province of Segovia (Castilla y León, Spain).
Among the works of art are seven Flemish tapestries depicting The Hunt of the Unicorn, Robert Campin's Mérode Altarpiece,for example by Campbell in: National Gallery Catalogues (new series): The Fifteenth Century Netherlandish Paintings, p. 72, Lorne Campbell, 1998, ISBN 1-85709-171-X and his 1974 Burlington article JSTOR specifically dealing with the authorship of the work and the Romanesque altar cross known as the Cloisters Cross or Bury St. Edmunds Cross, which was acquired under the curatorship of Thomas Hoving.
The Cloisters also holds many medieval manuscripts and illuminated books, including the Limbourg brothers' Les Belles Heures du Duc de Berry and Jean Pucelle's book of hours for Jeanne d'Evreux.

Library and Archives

The Cloisters Library is one of the Metropolitan Museum's thirteen libraries. It contains 15,000 volumes of books. The Library and Archives contains Museum Administration papers, the personal papers of George Grey Barnard, early glass lantern slides of museum materials, curatorial papers, museum dealer records, scholars records, recordings of musical performances at the museum, and maps."The Cloisters Library and Archives" on the Metropolitan Museum of Art website

Gallery

File:2013 The Cloisters from Linden Terrace in Fort Tryon Park.jpg|A view from the south
File:The cloisters2.jpg|The building's tower
File:Cloisters-garden.jpg|The garden
File:Tapestry by unknown weaver - The Unicorn in Captivity - WGA24176.jpg|One of the Hunt of the Unicorn tapestries
File:Campin Annunciation triptych.jpg|The center panel of the Merode Altarpiece triptych
File:Storing up Manna, Boppard Room, The Metropolitan Museum of Art, The Cloisters, Fort Tryon Park.jpg|"Storing Up Manna" (1497-99)
File:Belles heures jean duc de berry flagellants.jpg|"Procession of Flagellants" from Belles Heures of Jean of France, Duke of Berry
File:Vierge à l'enfant.jpg|French Late Gothic Virgin and Child, 14th century, from Cernay-lès-Reims





Notes
Further reading




