[[Tina Weymouth]]

CATEGORIES: 1950 births, American female singers, American people of French descent, American people of Breton descent, American New Wave musicians, American rock bass guitarists, Female bass guitarists, Female New Wave singers, Female rock singers, Living people, Musicians from California, People from San Diego County, California, Rhode Island School of Design alumni, Talking Heads members, Tom Tom Club members, People from Fairfield, Connecticut

Martina Michèle "Tina" Weymouth (born November 22, 1950) is an American musician, best known as a founding member and bassist of the new wave group Talking Heads and its side project Tom Tom Club (co-founded with husband and Talking Heads drummer Chris Frantz).

Profile

Born in Coronado, California, Weymouth is of French heritage on her mother's side (she is the great-granddaughter of Anatole Le Braz, a Breton writer). Heritage-d'Anatole Le Braz aux talking heads dated 31 August 2012 at letelegramme. As a bass guitarist, she combined the minimalist art-punk basslines of groups such as Wire and Pere Ubu with danceable, funk-inflected riffs to provide the bedrock of Talking Heads signature sound. Her sound is often very syncopated (i.e. reggae/funk) in feel, combining low fundamental notes with higher flourishes in clipped, staccato rhythms. She joined Talking Heads as bass guitarist at the request of then-boyfriend, Chris Frantz.

Life outside Talking Heads

Full members of the Compass Point All Stars, Weymouth and Frantz formed the Tom Tom Club in 1980, which kept them busy during a fairly long hiatus in Talking Heads activity. When it became obvious that Talking Heads frontman David Byrne had no interest in another Talking Heads album, Weymouth, Frantz, and Jerry Harrison reunited without him for a single album called No Talking, Just Head under the name "The Heads" in 1996, featuring a rotating cast of vocalists. Weymouth has been critical of Byrne, describing him as "a man incapable of returning friendship."
She also co-produced the Happy Mondays' 1992 album Yes Please! and has recently contributed backing vocals and percussion for the alternative rock virtual band Gorillaz; the backing vocals were provided for the character Noodle.
Weymouth was a judge for the 2nd annual Independent Music Awards to support independent artists' careers.

Personal life

Weymouth is the daughter of retired U.S. Navy Vice Admiral Ralph Weymouth and his wife, Laure. She has seven siblings, including Lani and Laura Weymouth, who are collaborators in Tom Tom Club.
Tina Weymouth and Chris Frantz have been married since 1977. They live in Fairfield, Connecticut, and have two sons, Robin and Egan. 
Her older brother, Yann Weymouth, was married to Lally Weymouth, a daughter of Katharine Graham, a publisher of the Washington Post for many decades. Her niece, Katharine Weymouth, currently serves as publisher of the Washington Post.

Equipment






