[[Paul Boateng]]

CATEGORIES: 1951 births, Alumni of the University of Bristol, Black British politicians, British people of Ghanaian descent, Ghanaian people of Scottish descent, British people of Scottish descent, Ambassadors and High Commissioners of the United Kingdom to South Africa, Labour Party (UK) MPs, Labour Party (UK) life peers, Living people, Members of the Greater London Council, Members of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom, Members of the United Kingdom Parliament for English constituencies, People from Hackney, People from Hemel Hempstead, Politics of Brent, UK MPs 1987–92, UK MPs 1992–97, UK MPs 1997–2001, UK MPs 2001–05, Alumni of Accra Academy, Politics of Dacorum, National Council for Civil Liberties people

Paul Yaw Boateng, Baron Boateng (born 14 June 1951) is a British Labour Party politician, who was the Member of Parliament (MP) for Brent South from 1987 to 2005, becoming the UK's first mixed race Cabinet Minister in May 2002, when he was appointed as Chief Secretary to the Treasury. Following his departure from the House of Commons, he served as the British High Commissioner to South Africa from March 2005 to May 2009.  He was introduced as a member of the House of Lords on 1 July 2010.

Background and early life

Boateng was born in Hackney, London of mixed Ghanaian and Scottish heritage; his family later moved to Ghana when Boateng was four years old.blackhistorymonth.uk/#/paul-boateng-the-first-black-c/4567369886  His father, Kwaku Boateng, was a lawyer and cabinet minister under Kwame Nkrumah.  There, Boateng attended Accra Academy High School.  Boateng's life in Ghana came to an abrupt end with the jailing of his father in 1966 after a coup against Nkrumah. His father was imprisoned without trial for four years. Boateng, then 15, and his sister fled to Britain with their mother.
They settled in Hemel Hempstead where he attended Apsley Grammar School. He read law at the University of Bristol and began his career in civil rights, originally as a solicitor, though he later retrained as a barrister.  He worked primarily on social and community cases, starting under renowned civil rights advocate Benedict Birnberg, involving women's rights, housing and police complaints, including a period from 1977-1981 as the legal advisor for the Scrap Sus Campaign. Boateng was also an executive member of the National Council for Civil Liberties.  He became a partner at the firm B M Birnberg & Co, and as a barrister, he practised at Eight King's Bench Walk.

Political career

Boateng was elected to the Greater London Council for Walthamstow in 1981, which was then under the leadership of Ken Livingstone. Boateng was only the second person of Afro-Caribbean descent to be elected to the GLC. As chair of the GLC's police committee and vice-chair of its ethnic minorities committee, he advocated greater accountability in the Metropolitan Police and spoke out against racism in relation to their dealings with the black and Asian communities.

Member of Parliament

He stood, and lost, as a parliamentary candidate for Hertfordshire West (which included his former home town of Hemel Hempstead) in the 1983 general election. He won in the general election of 1987, when he became the MP for Brent South in succession to Laurence Pavitt, being one of the first three black British MPs (the others being Bernie Grant and Diane Abbott). During his victory speech he said: "We can never be free in Brent until South Africa is free too." He then famously declared, "Today Brent South, tomorrow Soweto!"
Like many other members of the left in the 1980s, he became more moderate under the leadership of Neil Kinnock, who made him a junior Treasury spokesman in 1989, making him the first mixed race person to join the front bench as a party spokesperson. His portoflio included economics, industrial strategies and corporate responsibility.

Ministerial career

With Labour's victory, Boateng became the UK's first mixed race government minister as Parliamentary Under Secretary of State at the Department of Health, where he was responsible for social services and mental health. In that position, he published guidelines to end the denial of adoptions purely on the basis of race.
In 1998 Boateng became a Minister of State at the Home Office and subsequently became Number 2 Minister there. He was made a Privy Councillor in 1999. He earned a reputation for being tough on crime, particularly with regard to aggressive begging on the streets.
His portfolio was expanded in 2000, and he became the first Minister for Young People, where his priority was to listen to and be a voice for Britain's youth.

Cabinet history

In 2001, he was made Financial Secretary to the Treasury, and was promoted to the position of Chief Secretary to the Treasury in May 2002, making history as Britain's first mixed race cabinet minister.  He was quoted as saying "My colour is part of me but I do not choose to be defined by my colour."  His appointment was greeted with praise by civil rights activists who said that his appointment gave hope to young black youths and would inspire them to become involved in politics.
In his role as Chief Secretary to the Treasury, he was responsible for finalising the Spending Review of 2002 and leading the Spending Review of 2004. Boateng, coordinating with Sir Peter Gershon's report, announced in 2004 the government's efficiency programme to save over £20 billion in the public sector.
Boateng played a leading role in coordinating the Every Child Matters policy paper, which called for the reform of children's services, including greater accountability and coordination among government agencies. 
In March 2005, Boateng announced that he would not stand for re-election as an MP in the May 2005 general election. Dawn Butler was selected by the Constituency Labour Party to replace him and was elected in Brent South.

High Commissioner to South Africa

Due to Boateng's passion and enthusiasm for the government's Africa Commission Report and his associations with African leadersA diplomat with Africa in his veins - Times LIVE Tony Blair named him to be the next High Commissioner to South Africa for a term of four years. Boateng is credited with building a close relationship to South Africa's ANC government, and it was reported that he privately worked to bring together bitter rivals in the crisis in Zimbabwe,

He has also addressed the World Economic Forum on issues concerning Africa.

Appointment to the House of Lords

On 28 May 2010, it was announced in the 2010 Dissolution Honours that Boateng would become a member of the House of Lords.
In December 2011, he initiated a debate in the House of Lords to discuss cuts in funding to the Citizens Advice Bureau centres, which Lord Boateng vehemently opposed.Lords Hansard text for 8 Dec 201108 Dec 2011 (pt 0002)

Career outside of politics

Boateng is an active Methodist and Methodist lay preacher;
In 1988, the Southern Christian Leadership Conference honored Boateng as the recipient of the Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Award for his contributions to the field of civil rights.  He also serves on the executive board of the international Christian charity, Food for the Hungry.fh.org/who/leadership
In 1994, Boateng appeared in Episode 5 of spoof news programme The Day Today, where he was interviewed by Chris Morris about the influence of (fictional) rappers on Britain's youth. Boateng cracks up laughing at points of the interview.

Personal life

Boateng is married to Janet, a former councillor in Lambeth. They have two sons and three daughters.insidehousing.co.040924.020-021.pdf





|-
|-

|-

|-



