[[Looe Island]]

CATEGORIES: Islands of Cornwall, Uninhabited islands of Cornwall, Nature reserves of the Cornwall Wildlife Trust

Looe Island (, meaning island of the monk's enclosure), also known as St George's Island, and historically St Michael's Island is a small island a mile from the mainland town of Looe in Cornwall, United Kingdom.
According to local legend, Joseph of Arimathea landed here with the child Christ. 15, Lulu.
The waters around the island are a marine nature reserve and aims to protect the coastal and marine wildlife around Looe.

History

People have been living on Looe Island since the Iron Age. Evidence of early habitation includes pieces of Roman amphora as well as stone boat anchors and Roman coins.channel4.html Time Team Site report In the Dark Ages, the island was used a seat of early Christian settlement.  The child Jesus was believed to have visited the Island with his uncle, Joseph of Arimathea, who traded with the Cornish tin traders. Therefore Looe Island became a place of pilgrimage for early Christians and a small thatched roofed chapel was built there during this time.
In the later Medieval period, the island came under the control of Glastonbury Abbey. Lammana Priory was a priory on the mainland directly aligned to a small chapel on the Island consisting of two Benedictine monks until 1289 when the property was sold  to a local landowner. The priory was replaced by a chapel served by a secular priestOrme, Nicholas (2007) Cornwall and the Cross. Chichester: Phillimore; pp. 30–31, 35, 38 until the Dissolution of the Monasteries in 1536 when it became property of the Crown. From the 13th to the 16th centuries the island was known as St Michael's Island. After 1584 it became known as St Georges Island.Weatherhill, Craig, Place Names in Cornwall and Scilly, Wessex Books, 2005
Through the 17th and 18th centuries the island was a popular haunt for smugglers avoiding the British government's revenue cutters out of Plymouth and Falmouth.  The Old Guildhall Museum in Looe hold information and research about the smuggling families of Looe Island and  information is also available the more recent publications about the Island
In the 20th century, Looe island was owned (and inhabited) by two sisters, Babs and Evelyn Atkins, who wrote two books: We Bought An Island (1976, ISBN 0-245-52940-3) and its sequel Tales From Our Cornish Island (1986, ISBN 0-245-54265-5). They chronicle the purchase of the island and what it was like to live there. Evelyn died in 1997 at the age of 87; Babs continued to live on the island until her death in 2004, at the age of 86. On her death, the island was made a bequest to the Cornwall Wildlife Trust; it will be preserved as a nature reserve in perpetuity. The role of the Island today is briefly described in Looe Island Then and Now published 2014

Geography

It is about  above sea level. The island, like much of south west England, has a mild climate with frost and snow being rare.
The island is owned and managed by a charity, the Cornwall Wildlife Trust. This is a non-profit making venture, the landing fees and other income being devoted to conserving the island's natural beauty and providing facilities. The island is open during the summer to day visitors arriving by the Trust's boat. After a short welcome talk visitors are directed to the small visitor centre from where they can pick up a copy of the self-guided trail. Visitors have some two hours on the Island and all trips are subject to tides and weather/sea state.  While it is normally accessible only by the Cornwall Wildlife Trust's boat, at low spring tides it is possible for the journey to be made by foot across the rocky sea floor.

Media appearances

In 2008, Channel 4's archaeology series Time Team visited the island to carry out an investigation into its early Christian history. They excavated the sites of Christian chapels built on both the island and on the mainland opposite. During their dig they found the remains of a Benedictine chapel that was built in c.1139 by monks from Glastonbury Abbey, a reliquary, graves and the remains of much earlier Romano-British chapels built of wood with dating evidence suggesting use by Christians before the reign of Constantine the Great.
In 1994/95 Andrew Hugill composed Island Symphony, an electro-acoustic piece utilising sampled sounds sourced over the net plus recorded natural sounds from the island itself. Island musics. pp. 207–208. Berg Publishers ISBN 978-1-85973-703-3.

Further reading






