[[Hyapatia Lee]]

CATEGORIES: 1960 births, Living people, 21st-century women writers, American female pornographic film actors, American pornographic film directors, American female musicians, American people of Irish descent, American people of Cherokee descent, American stage actresses, American women writers, Women pornographic film directors, People from Indianapolis, Indiana, Pornographic film actors from Indiana, Native American pornographic film actors

Hyapatia Lee (born November 11, 1960) is the stage name of a former American exotic dancer and pornographic actress. One-quarter Cherokee, she was the only Native American in the adult business during her tenure; this contributed to her becoming one of the most prolific pornographic actresses of the Golden Age of Porn. Lee is an AVN and XRCO Hall of Fame inductee.

Career

After winning the Miss Nude Galaxy contest in Roselawn, Indiana in 1979 (and again in 1981), its owner cast Lee in The Young Like It Hot (1983). Her movie debut happened in Naughty Girls Need Love Too, also from 1983.
In 1984, she appeared in the movie Sweet Young Foxes. Also in 1984, she appeared in Penthouse magazine, in the same September 1984 record-breaking bestselling issue that exposed Miss America 1984, Vanessa Williams (although it became illegal to own since its Penthouse Pet was minor Traci Lords).
Over time, her husband Bud Lee joined the cast and crew of her films. Together they created the second-most-expensive pornographic film (at the time), The Ribald Tales of Canterbury (1985), with Bud directing and Hyapatia starring and screenwriting a version of  Geoffrey Chaucer's classic The Canterbury Tales.
Lee had difficulties coping with the fame and recognition she received, and she had increasing problems with mental illness. In 1993 she was diagnosed with dissociative identity disorder and blacked out after having left the set of Native Tongue, following a confrontation with the director.
Also in 1993, she was inducted into the AVN Hall of Fame, She was also given the Lifetime Achievement Award from the Free Speech Coalition in 1995.hightimes.com/read/5-questions-hyapatia-lee
In 1998, members of her fan club had received word of her death due to diabetes.

Appearances

Lee has appeared on a variety of television shows such as The Robin Byrd Show
In 2013 Lee appeared in an episode of the television series Gigolos under her real first name, Vicki.

Music

In 1994, Lee recorded the album Double Euphoric with her band W4IK. She toured with the same band, which was based in Los Angeles, and also with another band, based in Indiana, called Vision Quest.
In 1999, one of Lee's tracks from her 1994 release appeared on the music CD Porn to Rock. but she chose not to sue to reclaim cybersquatting entities that use her alias in their domain names.
Under her birth name, Lee has made a return to the Entertainment industry. She currently is a member of the Coachlight Musical Theater in Nashville, Indiana.
Double Euphoric was been re-released in September 2010, both as physical and digital versions, via outlets such as CD Baby, Amazon and Apple iTunes.

Awards

Personal life

Lee was born as Victoria (Vicki) Lynch in Haughville, Indianapolis to teenaged parents and is of Cherokee and Irish descent. She attended the local high school, where she performed in several musicals. In her teenage years, she developed dissociative identity disorder following reported sexual abuse from her stepfather. She views Hyapatia as a particular personality that allowed her to perform. She met and married Bud Lee, with whom she bought land in rural southern Indiana, where she has lived since. The couple had two children, who were homeschooled by their mother at their Indiana home. In 1993 she retired from the industry and separated from Bud the same year. She has since remarried and had another child.






