[[Aniline]]

CATEGORIES: Anilines, Dyes, Hazardous air pollutants, IARC Group 3 carcinogens

Aniline, phenylamine or aminobenzene is an organic compound with the formula C6H5NH2.  Consisting of a phenyl group attached to an amino group, aniline is the prototypical aromatic amine.  Being a precursor to many industrial chemicals, its main use is in the manufacture of precursors to polyurethane. Like most volatile amines, it possesses the somewhat unpleasant odor of rotten fish. It ignites readily, burning with a smoky flame characteristic of aromatic compounds.

Production

Aniline is mainly produced in industry in two steps from benzene.  First,  benzene is nitrated using a concentrated mixture of nitric acid and sulfuric acid at 50 to 60 °C, which gives nitrobenzene.  In the second step, the nitrobenzene is hydrogenated, typically at 200–300 °C in presence of various metal catalysts:
400px
Originally, the reduction was effected with a mixture of ferrous chloride and iron metal via the Bechamp reduction.
As an alternative, aniline is also prepared from phenol and ammonia, the phenol being derived from the cumene process. R. Lawrence, W. J. Marshall, Hartmut Höke, Rudolf Jäckh "Aniline" in Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry 2007; John Wiley & Sons: New York.
In commerce, three brands of aniline are distinguished: aniline oil for blue, which is pure aniline; aniline oil for red, a mixture of equimolecular quantities of aniline and ortho- and para-toluidines; and aniline oil for safranine, which contains aniline and ortho-toluidine, and is obtained from the distillate (échappés) of the fuchsine fusion.

Related aniline derivatives

Many derivatives of aniline can be prepared in similar fashion from nitrated aromatic compounds. Nitration followed by reduction of toluene affords toluidines.  Nitration of chlorobenzene and related derivatives and reduction of the nitration products gives aniline derivatives, e.g. 4-chloroaniline. R. Lawrence, W. J. Marshall, Hartmut Höke, Rudolf Jäckh "Aniline" in Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry 2007; John Wiley & Sons: New York.
In commerce, three brands of aniline are distinguished: aniline oil for blue, which is pure aniline; aniline oil for red, a mixture of equimolecular quantities of aniline and ortho- and para-toluidines; and aniline oil for safranine, which contains aniline and ortho-toluidine, and is obtained from the distillate (échappés) of the fuchsine fusion.

Reactions

The chemistry of aniline is rich because the compound has been cheaply available for many years.  Below are some classes of its reactions.

Oxidation

The oxidation of aniline has been heavily investigated, and can result in reactions localized at nitrogen or more commonly results in the formation of new C-N bonds. In alkaline solution, azobenzene results, whereas arsenic acid produces the violet-coloring matter violaniline. Chromic acid converts it into quinone, whereas chlorates, in the presence of certain metallic salts (especially of vanadium), give aniline black. Hydrochloric acid and potassium chlorate give chloranil. Potassium permanganate in neutral solution oxidizes it to nitrobenzene, in alkaline solution to azobenzene, ammonia and oxalic acid, in acid solution to aniline black. Hypochlorous acid gives 4-aminophenol and para-amino diphenylamine.  Oxidation with persulfate affords a variety of polyanilines compounds. These polymers exhibit rich redox and acid-base properties.

Electrophilic reactions at carbon

Like phenols, aniline derivatives are highly susceptible to electrophilic substitution reactions.  Its high reactivity reflects that it is an enamine, which enhances the electron-donating ability of the ring.  For example, reaction of aniline with sulfuric acid at 180 °C produces sulfanilic acid, H2NC6H4SO3H, which can be converted to sulfanilamide. Sulfanilamide is one of the sulfa drugs, which were widely used as antibacterials in the early 20th century.  The largest scale industrial reaction of aniline involves its alkylation with formaldehyde. .  An idealized equation is shown:
The resulting diamine is the precursor to 4,4'-MDI and related diisocyanates.

Reactions at nitrogen

=Basicity=

Aniline is a weak base. Aromatic amines such as aniline are, in general, much weaker bases than aliphatic amines because of the electron-withdrawing effect of the phenyl group. Aniline reacts with strong acids to form anilinium (or phenylammonium) ion (C6H5-NH3+).  Although aniline is weakly basic, it precipitates zinc, aluminium, and ferric salts, and, on warming expels ammonia from its salts. The weak basicity is due to both an inductive effect from the more electronegative sp2 carbon and to a resonance effect, as the lone pair on the nitrogen is partially delocalized into the pi system of the benzene ring.

=Acylation=

Aniline reacts with carboxylic acids or more readily with acyl chlorides such as acetyl chloride to give amides.  The amides formed from aniline are sometimes called anilides, for example CH3-CO-NH-C6H5 is acetanilide.  Antifebrin (acetanilide), an anti-pyretic and analgesic,No longer in common medicinal use. is obtained by the reaction of acetic acid and aniline.

=N-Alkylation=

N-Methylation of aniline with methanol at elevated temperatures over acid catalysts gives N-methylaniline and dimethylaniline:
N-Methylaniline and dimethylaniline are colorless liquids with boiling points of 193–195 °C and 192 °C, respectively. These derivatives are of importance in the color industry. Aniline combines directly with alkyl iodides to form secondary and tertiary amines.

=Carbon disulfide derivatives=

Boiled with carbon disulfide, it gives sulfocarbanilide (diphenylthiourea) (CS(NHC6H5)2), which may be decomposed into phenyl isothiocyanate(C6H5CNS), and triphenyl guanidine (C6H5N=C(NHC6H5)2).

=Diazotization=

Aniline and its ring-substituted derivatives react with nitrous acid to form diazonium salts. Through these intermediates, aniline can be conveniently converted to -OH, -CN, or a halide via Sandmeyer reactions. This diazonium salt can also be reacted with NaNO2 and phenol which produces a dye which is benzeneazophenol, this process is called coupling.

Other reactions

It reacts with nitrobenzene to produce phenazine in the Wohl-Aue reaction.  Hydrogenation gives cyclohexylamine.
Being a standard reagent in laboratories, aniline is used for many niche reactions.  Its acetate is used in the Aniline acetate test for carbohydrates, identifying pentoses by conversion to furfural.  It is used to stain neural RNA blue in the Nissl stain.

Uses

The largest application of aniline is for the preparation of methylene dianiline and related compounds by condensation with formaldehyde as discussed above). The diamines are condensed with phosgene to give Methylene diphenyl diisocyanate, a precursor to urethane polymers. R. Lawrence, W. J. Marshall, Hartmut Höke, Rudolf Jäckh "Aniline" in Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry 2007; John Wiley & Sons: New York.
Other uses include rubber processing chemicals (9%), herbicides (2%), and dyes and pigments (2%).  As additives to rubber, aniline derivatives such as phenylenediamines and diphenylamine, are antioxidants.  Illustrative of the drugs prepared from aniline is paracetamol (acetaminophen, Tylenol).  The principal use of aniline in the dye industry is as a precursor to indigo, the blue of blue jeans.
Aniline is also used at a smaller scale in the production of the intrinsically conducting polymer polyaniline.

History

Aniline was first isolated by destructive distillation of indigo by Otto Unverdorben,[ref]
