[[Jane Kaczmarek]]

CATEGORIES: 1955 births, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, Actresses from Milwaukee, Wisconsin, American film actresses, American people of Polish descent, American television actresses, Wisconsin Democrats, Living people, University of Wisconsin–Madison alumni, Yale School of Drama alumni

Jane Frances Kaczmarek (; born December 21, 1955) is an American actress. She is best known for playing the character of Lois on the television series Malcolm in the Middle (2000–06). Kaczmarek is a three-time Golden Globe and seven-time Emmy Award nominee. She currently plays Pam in FOX's Us & Them.

Early life

Kaczmarek was born in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, the daughter of Evelyn (née Gregorski), a teacher, and Edward Kaczmarek, a defense department worker. She majored in theater at the University of Wisconsin–Madison and later attended grad school at the Yale School of Drama, where she was a part of its theater company.

Career

In 1998, Kaczmarek was cast as David and Jennifer's mother in the movie Pleasantville. She has had several Broadway hits, including Lost in Yonkers and Raised in Captivity, where she won an LA Drama Critics' Award. Her first television role was that of Margie Spoletto on For Lovers Only (1982). One of her first notable appearances was in the famous 1984 movie "Falling in Love", starring Meryl Streep and Robert De Niro, playing the role of Ann Raftis, De Niro's character's wife. She also played a role in The Heavenly Kid in 1985 as Emily.
Kaczmarek has also appeared in over forty television roles, the most notable including:

Malcolm in the Middle

In 2000, Kaczmarek was cast to play Lois in the FOX mid-season replacement Malcolm in the Middle.Malcolm in the Middle. Fox. I played very unfunny people.""Malcolm in the Middle" on TV. She also earned three Golden Globe Award nominations, two Screen Actors Guild Award nominations, and garnered two Television Critics' Association Awards and the American Comedy Award and Family Television Award in 2001.

Post-Malcolm

Following the end of Malcolm in the Middle, Kaczmarek went on to star in the short-lived series Help Me Help You co-starring Ted Danson. She starred in the short-lived TNT series Raising the Bar as Judge Trudy Kessler. She also continues to voice Judge Constance Harm on several Simpsons episodes.
On November 19, 2009, Kaczmarek played against Julie Bowen and Robin Quivers in the Jeopardy! Million Dollar Celebrity Invitational, on which she won $50,000 for a charity.
In 2010, she starred in the Lifetime Original Movie, Reviving Ophelia, which aired October 11, 2010, she starred as the mother of a 16-year-old girl who was in an abusive relationship.
On July 22, 2011, it was confirmed that Kaczmarek will make a vocal appearance as Red Jessica in the television series Jake and the Never Land Pirates during its second season early 2012.
In 2011, guest starred in the FX comedy Wilfred, starring Elijah Wood.
Since 2011, she has appeared on Whitney as Whitney's mother.
In April 2012, she appeared in the David Lindsay-Abaire play Good People as Margie.
On November 2012, she made a guest appearance on ABC's The Middle as Frankie Heck's (Patricia Heaton) dental teacher. In 2013, Kaczmarek guest starred on NBC's long-running legal drama, Law & Order: Special Victims Unit, as Suffolk County D.A. Pamela "Pam" James.
In 2013, Jane Kaczmarek played the lead role of Ms. Liz, a third generation dairy woman in the feature film Lost on Purpose starring alongside C. Thomas Howell, James Lafferty, Aaron Hill, Dale Dickey and Academy Award winner Octavia Spencer.
Kaczmarek reprised her role as Lois in an "alternate ending" featurette on the Breaking Bad DVD/Blu-ray box set that was released on November 26, 2013. In it, Hal wakes up from the nightmare that was the plot of Breaking Bad, in a nod to the final scene from Newhart.

Personal life

Kaczmarek married fellow Wisconsin native and actor Bradley Whitford (The West Wing, Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip) on August 15, 1992. They lived in Los Angeles with their three children: Frances Genevieve (b. January 1997), George Edward (b. December 23, 1999) and Mary Louisa (b. November 25, 2002). Both were very active with charity, and were seen attending many major award shows together. She is the founder of "Clothes Off Our Back" which auctions celebrity clothing for children's charities. In June 2009, the couple filed for divorce after almost 17 years of marriage. One of the last times they were seen together publicly was in September 2008, at the opening of a Los Angeles production of The House of Blue Leaves,Search: bradley whitford. Getty Images. Retrieved on 2011-09-23. in which Kaczmarek was starring. According to a June 2009 magazine interview with More. She also added that she used to believe that she could "go it alone and as long as I had some fabulous boy on my arm, or man, and my career was sailing, that's all I needed" whereas she now had grown to appreciate the support of her girlfriends "to talk about kids, to talk about marriages, to talk about just life". More. Retrieved on 2011-09-23.
Kaczmarek underwent a hip replacement in April 2004, due to chronic arthritis."Malcolm in the Middle – Kaczmarek Has Hip Replacement Surgery". contactmusic. She recovered quickly, and used an X-ray of her new hip for her Emmy campaign the following summer, advertising herself as "the only Emmy nominee with an artificial hip (except for Anthony LaPaglia)"."Jane Kaczmarek – Kaczmarek Explains Hip Emmy Ad." contactmusic.
In 2006, Kaczmarek and Malcolm in the Middle co-star Erik Per Sullivan contributed the afterword for the children's book, Together, that shows the importance of domestic animals to impoverished people in the world, and was inspired by the mission of the nonprofit charitable organization, Heifer International.
She lives in San Marino, California.

Awards and nominations

Filmography






