[[Body integrity identity disorder]]

CATEGORIES: Abnormal psychology, Amputations, Identity disorders, Sexology

Body integrity identity disorder (BIID, also referred to as amputee identity disorder
BIID is typically accompanied by the desire to amputate one or more healthy limbs to achieve that end.  BIID can be associated with apotemnophilia, sexual arousal based on the image of one's self as an amputee. The cause of BIID is unknown.  One theory states that the cause of BIID is a neurological failing of the brain's inner body mapping function (located in the right parietal lobe).  According to this theory, the brain mapping does not incorporate the affected limb in its understanding of the body's physical form.

Description

Symptoms of BIID sufferers are often keenly felt. The sufferer feels incomplete with four limbs but is confident amputation will fix this. The sufferer knows exactly what part of which limb should be amputated to relieve the suffering. The sufferer has intense feelings of envy toward amputees. They often pretend, both in private and in public, that they are an amputee. The sufferer recognizes the above symptoms as being strange and unnatural. They feel alone in having these thoughts and don't believe anyone could ever understand their urges. They may try to injure themselves to require the amputation of that limb. They generally are ashamed of their thoughts and try to hide them from others, including therapists and health care professionals.
The majority of BIID sufferers are white middle-aged males, although this discrepancy may not be nearly as large as previously thought.
A sexual motivation for being or looking like an amputee is called apotemnophilia.

Ethical considerations

The idea of medically amputating a BIID sufferer's undesired limb is highly controversial.  Some support amputation for patients with BIID that cannot be treated through psychotherapy or medication.  Others emphasize the irreversibility of amputation and promote the study of phantom limbs to treat the patient from a psychological perspective instead.
Some act out their desires, pretending they are amputees using prostheses and other tools to ease their desire to be one. Some sufferers have reported to the media or by interview over the telephone with researchers that they have resorted to self-amputation of a "superfluous" limb, for example by allowing a train to run over it, or by damaging the limb so badly that surgeons will have to amputate it. However, the medical literature records few, if any, cases of actual self amputation. The condition is usually treated as a psychiatric disorder.

In film





Further reading




