[[Daniel Johnston]]

CATEGORIES: 1961 births, Living people, American male singers, Songwriters from California, Outsider musicians, Abilene Christian University alumni, American members of the Churches of Christ, People with bipolar disorder, People with schizophrenia, Musicians from Sacramento, California, Music of Texas, Homestead Records artists, People from Hancock County, West Virginia, Songwriters from West Virginia, Singers from West Virginia, Shimmy Disc artists

Daniel Dale Johnston (born January 22, 1961) is an American singer, songwriter, musician, and artist. Johnston was the subject of the 2005 documentary The Devil and Daniel Johnston. He currently lives in Waller, Texas.

Early life

Johnston was born in Sacramento, California, and grew up in the northern panhandle of West Virginia between Ohio and Pennsylvania near Chester and New Cumberland, West Virginia. He began recording music in the late 1970s on a $59 Sanyo monaural Boombox, singing and playing piano and chord organ. Following graduation from Oak Glen High School, Johnston spent a few weeks at Abilene Christian University in West Texas, but soon dropped out. Later he attended the East Liverpool branch of Kent State University.

Music career

Johnston's musical work gained some notoriety when he moved to Austin, Texas. Johnston began to attract the attention of the local press and gained a following augmented in numbers by his habit of handing out tapes to people he met. Live performances were well-attended and hotly anticipated.
His local standing led to him being featured in a 1985 episode of the MTV program The Cutting Edge featuring performers from Austin's "New Sincerity" music scene. 157-58 (excerpt available at Google Books).  Subsequently he performed at the 1985 Woodshock music festival in Austin, where he was featured in a short documentary of the festival, Woodshock.
In 1988, Johnston visited New York City and recorded 1990 with producer Kramer at his Noise New York studio. It was released in 1990 on Kramer's Shimmy-Disc label. This was Johnston's first experience in a professional recording environment after a decade of releasing home-made cassette recordings. His mental health further deteriorated during the making of 1990.  In 1989 Johnston released the album It's Spooky in collaboration with Half Japanese singer Jad Fair.
In 1990, Johnston played at a music festival in Austin, Texas. On the way back to West Virginia on a small, private two-seater plane piloted by his father Bill, Johnston had a manic psychotic episode believing he was Casper the Friendly Ghost and removed the key from the plane's ignition and threw it out of the plane. His father, a former Air Force pilot, managed to successfully crash-land the plane, even though "there was nothing down there but trees". Although the plane was destroyed, Johnston and his father emerged with only minor injuries. As a result of this episode, Johnston was involuntarily committed to a mental hospital.
Interest in Johnston increased when Kurt Cobain was frequently photographed wearing a t-shirt featuring the cover image of Johnston's album Hi, How Are You which music journalist Everett True gave him. Kurt Cobain listed Yip/Jump Music as one of his favorite albums in his journal in 1993.
In spite of Johnston being resident in a mental hospital at the time, a bidding war to sign him ensued. He refused to sign a multi-album deal with Elektra Records because Metallica was on the label's roster and he was convinced that they were of Satan and would hurt him. He also dropped his manager after having a psychotic episode at a Butthole Surfers concert. His manager, Kramer, called Johnston's parents after the episode and was in turn fired because he thought: "they'll put me in a looneybin". It was a commercial failure. In June 1996, Atlantic dropped Daniel from the label.
Johnston contributed two songs to the soundtrack for Larry Clark's controversial 1995 film Kids, produced by Folk Implosion and Sebadoh's frontman, Lou Barlow. Johnston later covered Schoolhouse Rock!'s  "Unpack Your Adjectives" for a compilation of the popular education songs called Schoolhouse Rock! Rocks in 1996.
In 2004, he released The Late Great Daniel Johnston: Discovered Covered, a two-disc compilation. The first disc featured many artists, such as Tom Waits, Beck, TV on the Radio, Jad Fair, Eels, Bright Eyes, Calvin Johnson, Death Cab for Cutie, Sparklehorse, Mercury Rev and  The Flaming Lips covering songs written by Johnston. The second disc featured Johnston's original recordings of the songs.
In 2005, Texas-based theater company Infernal Bridegroom Productions received a Multi-Arts Production/MAP Fund grant to work with Johnston to create a rock opera based on his music, titled Speeding Motorcycle.
A 2005, Dutch documentary about Johnston for the TV series R.A.M. was followed in 2006 by The Devil and Daniel Johnston. Jeff Feuerzeig's documentary, four years in the making, collated some of the vast amount of recorded material Johnston (and in some case, others) had produced over the years to portray his life and music. The film won high praise, receiving the Director's Award at the 2005 Sundance Film Festival. The film also inspired more interest in Johnston's work, and increased his pull as a touring artist.
In 2006, Johnston's own Eternal Yip Eye Music label released his first greatest hits compilation, Welcome to My World. He also appeared as musical guest on The Henry Rollins Show on which he performed "Mask" and "Care Less" (the latter was exclusive to the internet).
Through the next few years Johnston toured extensively across the world, and continued to attract press attention. In 2008, Dick Johnston, Daniel's brother and manager, revealed that "a movie deal based on the artist's life and music had been finalized with a tentative 2011 release."The Austin Chronicle article: "Off the Record: Music News". He also said that a deal had been struck with the Converse company for a "signature series" Daniel Johnston shoe. Later, it was revealed by Dick Johnston that Converse had dropped the plan.
On January 31, 2009, Daniel Johnston joined the band The Swell Season on a broadcast of Austin City Limits (previously recorded on September 28, 2008) to perform the song "Life in Vain".
His latest album, Is and Always Was, was released on October 6, 2009 on his Eternal Yip Eye Music record label. In 2009, it was announced that Matt Groening had chosen Johnston to perform at the edition of the All Tomorrow's Parties festival that he curated in May 2010 in Minehead, England. Later that year, he was invited by rock band Cage the Elephant to appear at Starry Nights Fest, an upstart music festival in Bowling Green, Kentucky. Johnston performed a brief solo set before being joined on stage by Cage, who backed performances of several songs, including "Speeding Motorcycle" and "True Love Will Find You in the End".
In August 2012, male cosmetics company Axe used Daniel's song "True Love Will Find You In The End" in a television advertisement marketing a men's hair care product.

Personal life

Johnston has been diagnosed with schizophrenia and manic depression.

Reviews

One critic from Pitchfork Media writes that Johnston's recordings range from "spotty to brilliant."

Art career

His artwork is shown in galleries such as in London's Aquarium Gallery and New York's Clementine Gallery. Both in 2006, and the 2008 Liverpool Biennial.  Currently his work is being exhibited as "The Museum of Love" at Verge Gallery in Sacramento, California.
In 1993, the Sound Exchange record store in Austin, Texas commissioned Johnston to paint a mural of the Hi, How Are You? frog (also known as "Jeremiah the Innocent") from his 1983 album cover. In Spring 2008, a Jeremiah the Innocent collectible figurine was released in limited runs of four different colors.Daniel Johnston's Frog Jeremiah: Now a Collector's Item
As of June 2010, a biopic about Johnston's life featuring Gabriel Sunday of My Suicide is in production.
March 1, 2012, Brooklyn-based photographer Jung Kim announced her photo book and traveling exhibition project with Johnston titled DANIEL JOHNSTON: here, a collaboration that began in 2008 when Kim first met Johnston and began photographing him on the road and at his home in Waller, TX. 
On March 13, 2013, the first-ever photography book on Johnston was published which features 5 years of documentation on the artist. Along with the book launched a traveling exhibition starting at SXSW 2013 in Austin, Texas, hosted by Johnston's long-time friend and early supporter Louis Black, Co-founder of The Austin Chronicle and SXSW Festival. The opening featured a special performance by Johnston along with tribute performances lead by Jason Sebastian Russo formerly of Mercury Rev.  
The second exhibition and book release opened in London, England, in May and June 2013 which also featured a special performance by Johnston along with tribute performances by the UK band Charlie Boyer and the Voyeurs with Steffan Halperin of the Klaxons.  
On October 10, 2013, Jason Pierce of Spiritualized hosted Jung Kim's New York City opening of DANIEL JOHNSTON: here which included special tribute performances lead by Pierce and Glen Hansard of The Swell Season and The Frames.  
On March 13, 2012, Johnston released his first comic book, Space Ducks – An Infinite Comic Book of Musical Greatness at SXSW in Austin, Texas, published by BOOM! Studios. The comic book is complemented by the Space Ducks album and an iOS app.
In 2011, the Macedonian alternative rock band Kulturno Umetnichki Rabotnici released an album called Ha Ha Jolly Jolly using Johnston's artwork of the same name as the cover.

New media

Dr. Fun Fun and Smashing Studios developed an iPhone platform game called Hi, How Are You (game). The game is similar to Frogger, but features Johnston's art and music. It is said Daniel Johnston played it during its development and liked it, although he was not familiar with the iPhone. Retrieved 2009-10-01.

Discography





Official

Other


