[[Advaita Vedanta]]

CATEGORIES: Vedanta, Advaitin philosophers, Indian philosophy, Hindu philosophical concepts, Philosophical traditions, Philosophical schools and traditions, Ancient philosophical schools and traditions, Monism, Mysticism, Transtheism

Advaita Vedanta
The key source texts for all schools of Vedānta are the Prasthanatrayi, the canonical texts consisting of the Upanishads, the Bhagavad Gita and the Brahma Sutras, of which they give a philosophical interpretation and elucidation.
Advaita (not-two in Sanskrit) refers to the identity of the true Self, Atman, which is pure consciousness

 of the identity of Atman and Brahman. Attaining this liberation takes a long preparation and training under the guidance of a guru.
Advaita developed in a multi-faceted religious and philosophical landscape. The tradition developed in interaction with the other traditions of India, Buddhism, Vaishnavism and Shaivism, as well as the other schools of Vedanta. In modern times, due to western Orientalism and Perennialism, and its influence on Indian Neo-Vedanta and Hindu nationalism,

History of Advaita Vedanta

Advaita Vedanta existed prior to Shankara, but found its most influential expounder in Shankara. By John A Grimes. Introduction, p.7. Motilal Banarsidass 1990

Pre-Shankara Advaita

Of the Vedanta-school before the composition of the Brahma Sutras (400–450 CE

=Earliest Vedanta=

According to Balasubramanian, the Vedantic philosophy is as old as the Vedas, arguing that the basic ideas of the Vedanta systems are derived from the Vedas.
Deutsch and Dalvi point out that in the Indian context texts "are only part of a tradition which is preserved in its purest form in the oral transmission as it has been going on."

=Bādarāyana's Brahma Sutras=

The Brahma Sutras of Bādarāyana, also called the Vedanta Sutra,
The Brahma Sutra is a critical study of the teachings of the Upanishads. It was and is a guide-book for the great teachers of the Vedantic systems.


=Between BrahmaSutras and Shankara=

According to Nakamura, "there must have been an enormous number of other writings turned out in this period, but unfortunately all of them have been scattered or lost and have not come down to us today".
The names of various important early Vedanta thinkers have been listed in the Siddhitraya by Yamunācārya (c.1050), the Vedārthasamgraha by Rāmānuja (c.1050–1157), and the Yatīndramatadīpikā by Śrīnivāsa-dāsa.
Although Shankara is often considered to be the founder of the Advaita Vedanta school, according to Nakamura, comparison of the known teachings of these early Vedantins and Shankara's thought shows that most of the characteristics of Shankara's thought "were advocated by someone before Śankara".

Gaudapada

Gaudapada (6th century) was the teacher of Govinda Bhagavatpada and the grandteacher of Shankara.

==

Gaudapada wrote or compiled
The 

=Buddhist influences=

According to B.N.K. Sharma, the early commentators on the Brahma Sutras were all realists,
It was Gaudapada who further bridged Buddhism and Vedanta. At the same time, Gaudapada emphatically rejected the epistemic idealism of the Buddhists, arguing that there was a difference between objects seen in dreams and real objects in the world, although both were ultimately unreal. He also rejected the pluralism and momentariness of consciousnesses, which were core doctrines of the Vijnanavada school, and their techniques for achieving liberation. Candradhara Śarmā, Motilal Banarsidass Publishers, 1996. p 152–154
Gaudapada also took over the Buddhist concept of "ajāta" from Nagarjuna's Madhyamaka philosophy,

"Ajātivāda", "the Doctrine of no-origination"
Richard King has noted that Ajativada has a radically different meaning in the context of respectively Vedanta and Buddhism. Buddhist writers take Ajativada to imply that there are no essences in factors, and therefore change is possible. Gaudapada made the opposite interpretation, advocating the absolutist position that origination and cessation were unreal, the only Ultimate reality (Brahman) being unoriginated and unchanging.
According to Gaudapada, the Absolute is not subject to birth, change and death. The Absolute is aja, the unborn eternal.

=Shri Gaudapadacharya Math=

Around 740 AD Gaudapada founded Shri Gaudapadacharya Math
Unlike other mathas, Shri Gaudapadacharya matha is not a polemical center established to influence the faith of all Hindus, its jurisdiction is limited to only Dakshinatya Saraswat Brahmins.

Adi Shankara

Adi Shankara (788–820), also known as 

=Late-Classical Hinduism=

Shankara lived in the time of the so-called "Late classical Hinduism", (606 to 647 CE).
Prior to this "Golden Age"
During the classical period, power was centralised, along with a growth of far distance trade, standardizarion of legal procedures, and general spread of literacy.
After the end of the Gupta Empire and the collapse of the Harsha Empire, power became decentralised in India. Several larger kingdoms emerged, with "countless vasal states".{{refn|group=note|These were:
The disintegration of central power also lead to regionalisation of religiosity, and religious rivalry.
Buddhism, which was supported by the ancient Indian urban civilisation lost influence to the traditional religions, which were rooted in the countryside.

=Philosophical system=

Shankara systematised the works of preceding philosophers.
Shankara's synthesis of Advaita Vedanta is summarised in this quote from the 

According to Sringeri Math, Shankara's message can be summarised even shorter:

=Writings=

Adi Shankara's main works are his commentaries on the Prasthana Trayi, which consist of the Brahma Sūtras, Bhagavad Gītā and the Upanishads. According to Nakamura, Shankara's Brahma-sūtra-bhāsya, his commentary on the Brahma Sūtra, is "the most authoritative and best known work in the Vedānta philosophy". Shankara also wrote a major independent treatise, called "Upadeśa Sāhasrī", expounding his philosophy.
The authenticity of the "Vivekachudamani", a well-known work ascribed to Shankara, is doubtful,
The authorship of Shankara of his Mandukya Upanishad Bhasya and his supplementary commentary on Gaudapada's 

=Advaita Mathas=

Advaita Vedanta is, at least in the west, primarily known as a philosophical system. But it is also a tradition of renunciation. Philosophy and renunciation are closely related:
Shankara, himself considered to be an incarnation of Shiva, established the Dashanami Sampradaya, organizing a section of the Ekadandi monks under an umbrella grouping of ten names.Karigoudar Ishwaran, Ascetic CultureWendy Sinclair-Brull, Female AsceticsH.A. Rose, Ibbetson, Denzil Ibbetson Sir, and Maclagan, Glossary of the Tribes and Castes of the Punjab and North West Frontier Province, page 857
Adi Sankara organised the Hindu monks of these ten sects or names under four ) (monasteries), with the headquarters at Dvārakā in the West, Jagannatha Puri in the East, Sringeri in the South and Badrikashrama in the North. Each math was headed by one of his four main disciples, who each continues the Vedanta Sampradaya.
According to Pandey, these Mathas were not established by Shankara himself, but were originally ashrams established by Vibhāņdaka and his son Ŗșyaśŗnga.
Monks of these ten orders differ in part in their beliefs and practices, and a section of them is not considered to be restricted to specific changes made by Shankara. While the dasanāmis associated with the Sankara maths follow the procedures enumerated by Adi Śankara, some of these orders remained partly or fully independent in their belief and practices; and outside the official control of the Sankara maths.
The advaita sampradaya is not a Saiva sect, despite the historical links with Shaivism:
Nevertheless, contemporary Sankaracaryas have more influence among Saiva communities than among Vaisnava communities. The greatest influence of the gurus of the advaita tradition has been among followers of the Smartha Tradition, who integrate the domestic Vedic ritual with devotional aspects of Hinduism.
According to Nakamura, these mathas contributed to the influence of Shankara, which was "due to institutional factors".
The table below gives an overview of the four Amnaya Mathas founded by Adi Shankara, and their details.
According to the tradition in Kerala, after Sankara's samadhi at Vadakkunnathan Temple, his disciples founded four mathas in Thrissur, namely Naduvil Madhom, Thekke Madhom, Idayil Madhom and Vadakke Madhom.

=Smarta Tradition=

Traditionally, Shankara is regarded as the greatest teacher According to Hunduism-guide.com:
According to Hiltebeitel, Shankara established the nondualist interpretation of the Upanishads as the touchstone of a revived smarta tradition:

The Sringeri monastery is still the centre of the Smarta sect. According to iskcon.org, 

Advaita Vedanta sub-schools

After Shankara's death several subschools developed. Two of them still exist today, the Bhāmatī and the Vivarana.THE BHAMATI AND VIVARANA SCHOOLS
These schools worked out the logical implications of various Advaita doctrines. Two of the problems they encountered were the further interpretations to the concepts of maya and avidhya.

=Bhamati=

The name of the Bhamati-subschool is derived from Vachaspati Misra's commentary on Adi Shankara's Brahmasutra Bhashya.
Vachaspati Misra Bhamati attempts to harmonise Sankara's thought with that of Mandana Misra. The Bhamati-school takes an ontological approach. It sees the Jiva as the source of avidya.

=Vivarana=

The name of the Vivarana-school is derived from Prakasatman's Pancapadika-Vivarana, a commentary on the Pancapadika by Padmapadacharya.
Prakasatman was the first to propound the theory of mulavidhya or maya as being of "positive beginningless nature".
The Vivarana-school takes an epistemological approach. It sees Brahman as the source of avidhya. Critics object that Brahman is pure consciousness, so it can't be the source of avidya. Another problem is that contradictory qualities, namely knowledge and ignorance, are attributed to Brahman.

Later developments

The prominent names in the later Advaita tradition are Prakāsātman (tenth century), Vimuktātman (tenth century), Sarvajñātman (tenth century), Śrī Harṣa (twelfth century), Citsukha (twelfth century), ānandagiri (thirteenth century), Amalānandā (thirteenth century), Vidyāraņya (fourteenth century), Śaṅkarānandā (fourteenth century), Sadānandā (fifteenth century), Prakāṣānanda (sixteenth century), Nṛsiṁhāśrama (sixteenth century), Madhusūdhana Sarasvati (seventeenth century), Dharmarāja Advarindra (seventeenth century), Appaya Dīkśita (seventeenth century), Sadaśiva Brahmendra (eighteenth century), Candraśekhara Bhārati (twentieth century), and Sacchidānandendra Saraswati (twentieth century).Sangeetha Menon (2007), Advaita Vedānta, Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Influence

Early influence

According to Richard E. King, 

According to King, until the 10th century Sankara was overshadowed by his older contemporary Mandana-Misra. In the centuries after Sankara it was Maṇḍana Miśra who was considered to be the most important representative of Vedanta.
Prior to Shankara, views similar to his already existed, but did not occupy a dominant position within the Vedanta.

Popularization

=Indian nationalism and Hindu Universalism=

With the onset of the British Raj, the colonialisation of India by the British, there also started a Hindu renaissance in the 19th century, which profoundly changed the understanding of Hinduism in both India and the west.
Vedanta came to be regarded as the essence of Hinduism, and Advaita Vedanta came to be regarded as "then paradigmatic example of the mystical nature of the Hindu religion".

=Vivekananda's Neo-Vedanta=

A major proponent in the popularisation of this Universalist and Perennialist interpretation of Advaita Vedanta was Vivekananda, In a talk on "The absolute and manifestation" given in at London in 1896 Swami Vivekananda said,

Vivekananda emphasised samadhi as a means to attain liberation. not the highest goal itself:

Vivekenanda's modernisation has been criticised:


Neo-Advaita

Neo-Advaita is a New Religious Movement based on a popularised, western interpretation of Advaita Vedanta and the teachings of Ramana Maharshi.

Non-dualism

Advaita Vedanta has gained attention in western spirituality and New Age, where various traditions are seen as driven by the same non-dual experience. Nonduality points to "a primordial, natural awareness without subject or object".Jerry Katz on Nonduality, What is Nonduality?
Georg Feuerstein is quoted by nonduality-adepts as summarizing the Advaita Vedanta-realization as follows:

Texts

Advaita Vedanta is based on the inquiry into the sacred texts of the Upanishads, Bhagavad Gita and Brahma Sutras. Adi Shankara gave a systematisation and philosophical underpinning of this inquiry in his commentaries. The subsequent Advaita-tradition has further elaborated on these sruti and commentaries.

Textual authority

The order of precedance regarding authority of Vedic Scriptures is as follows,
If anyone of them contradicts the preceding one, then it is disqualified as an authority to judge. There is a well known Indian saying that Smṛti follows Śruti. So it was considered that in order to establish any Theistic Philosophical theory (Astika Siddhanta) one ought not contradict Śruti (Vedas).

Prasthānatrayī – Three standards

Adi Sankara has chosen three standards, called Prasthānatrayī, literally, three points of departure (three standards). Later these were referred to as the three canonical texts of reference of Hindu philosophy by other Vedanta schools.
They are:
The Upanishads consist of twelve or thirteen major texts, with many minor texts. The .
Sankara Bhagavadpāda has written Bhāshyas (commentaries) on the Prasthānatrayī. These texts are thus considered to be the basic texts of the Advaita-parampara.

Siddhi-granthas

Additionally there are four Siddhi-granthas that are taught in the Advaita-parampara, after study of the Prasthana-trayi:

Introductory texts

Introductory texts from the Advaita Vedanta tradition include:

Modern texts

Treatises on Advaita Vedanta are still being written. The works of Swami Vivekananda, such as his writings on Jnana yoga, have been influential in the spread of Advaita Vedanta in the west.

Philosophy

The philosophy of Advaita Vedanta is based on the sacred texts of the Upanishads, Bhagavad Gita and Brahma Sutras. Adi Shankara gave a systematisation and philosophical underpinning of this inquiry in his commentaries, which have become central texts in the Advaita Vedanta tradition.

Puruṣārtha – Chief aims of human life

Indian philosophy emphasises that "every acceptable philosophy should aid man in realising the Purusarthas, the chief aims of human life:
According to Puligandla:

Advaita Vedanta gives an elaborate path to attain moksha. It entails more than self-inquiry or bare insight into one's real nature. Practice, especially Jnana Yoga, is needed to "destroy one's tendencies (vAasanA-s)" before real insight can be attained.

Soteriology – Liberation

The aim of Advaita Vedanta is liberation, by knowledge of the identity of atman and Brahman. According to Adi Śankara, knowledge of Brahman springs from inquiry into the sacred texts of the Upanishads, Bhagavad Gita and Brahma Sutras. It is obtained by following the four stages of samanyasa (self-cultivation), sravana, listening to the teachings of the sages, Manana, reflection on the teachings, and Dhyana, contemplation of the truth "that art Thou".

=Identity of Atman and Brahman=

Moksha is attained by realizing the identity of Atman and Brahman. According to Potter,

"Pure consciousness" is the translation of jnanam. is "consciousness", the term has a broader meaning of "knowing"; "becoming acquainted with", "knowledge about anything", "awareness", "higher knowledge".
"Brahman" too has a broader meaning than "pure consciousness". According to Paul Deussen, Brahman is:
According to David Loy, 

The same nuance can be found in satcitananda, the qualities of Brahman, which are usually translated as "Eternal Bliss Consciousness", Satcitananda is composed of three Sanskrit words:
This knowledge is intuitive knowledge, a spontaneous type of knowing, as rendered in the prefix pra of prajnanam Brahman'',

=Mahavakya – The Great Sentences=

Mahavakya, or "the great sentences", state the unity of Brahman and Atman, There are many such sentences in the Vedas, however only one such sentence from each of the four Vedas is usually chosen.

=Jivanmukta – Liberation=

Advaitins believe that suffering is due to Maya (also known as Mithya or Vaitathya). Only knowledge of Brahman can destroy Maya. At the relative plane Jiva and Iswara "are regarded as different from and of a lower order of reality than the original consciousness that is the absolutely real (paaramaarthika) Brahman".
Such a state of bliss when achieved while living is called Jivanmukta.

=Necessity of a Guru=

==Guidance of a Guru==

According to Śankara and others, anyone seeking to follow the philosophy of Advaita Vedānta must do so under the guidance of a Guru (teacher). Also see the first prose chapter of Śankara's Upadeśasāhasrī. It is the teacher who through exegesis of Sruti and skilful handling of words generates a hitherto unknown knowledge in the disciple. The teacher does not merely provide stimulus or suggestion.

==Qualities of the Guru==

The Guru must have the following qualities (see Mundaka Upanishad 1.2.12):
The seeker must serve the Guru, and submit questions with all humility in order to remove all doubts (see Bhagavad Gita 4.34). By doing so, Advaita says, the seeker will attain Moksha ('liberation from the cycle of births and deaths').

=Advaita practice=

Practice, especially Jnana Yoga, is needed to "destroy one's tendencies (vAasanA-s)" before real insight can be attained.

==Jnana Yoga – Four stages of practice==

Classical Advaita Vedanta emphasises the path of Jnana Yoga, a progression of study and training to attain moksha. It consists of four stages:

==Bhakti Yoga==

The paths of Bhakti Yoga and Karma Yoga are subsidiary.
In Bhakti Yoga, practice centres on the worship God in any way and in any form, like Krishna or Ayyappa. Adi Shankara himself was a proponent of devotional worship or Bhakti. But Adi Shankara taught that while Vedic sacrifices, puja and devotional worship can lead one in the direction of jnana (true knowledge), they cannot lead one directly to moksha. At best, they can serve as means to obtain moksha via shukla gati.

==Karma Yoga==

Karma yoga is the way of doing our duties, in disregard of personal gains or losses. According to Sri Swami Sivananda,

Epistemology – Ways of knowing

Epistemology () is the branch of philosophy concerned with the nature and scope (limitations) of knowledge.

= – Correct knowledge=

Pramāna, (sources of knowledge, Sanskrit प्रमाण), refers to the correct knowledge, arrived at by thorough reasoning, of any object.

==Six pramāṇas==

In Advaita Vedānta, are accepted:
Perception, inference and verbal testimony have the same meaning as in the Nyaya-school. Regarding comparison, postulation and non-cognition Advaita Vedanta views which somewhat differ from the Nyaya-school.

==Pramātṛ, Pramāṇa and Prameya==

 (trio), namely,

==Domains of knowledge==

Shankara refused, where he considered it appropriate, to take a literal approach to scriptural statements and adoption of symbolic interpretation. In a famous passage in his commentary on the Brahmasutra's of Badarayana, Shankara writes


=Sruti and anubhava - canonical texts and personal experience=

According to a common interpretation, Shankara emphasizes the role of personal experience (anubhava) in ascertaining the validity of knowledge. Anantanand Rambachan quotes several modern interpretators in defence of this interpretation, especially Radakrishnan.
According to Swami Dayananda Saraswati, anubhava has a more specific meaning than "experience", namely "direct knowledge".  Interpreting anubahva as "experience" may lead to a misunderstanding of Advaita Vedanta, and a mistaken rejection of the study of the scriptures as mere intellectual understanding. Stressing the meaning of anubhava as knowledge, Saraswati makes clear that liberation comes from knowledge, not from mere experience... can never come because consciousness is ever-present, in and through each and every experience."Swami Dayananda Saraswati, Anubhava
According to Hirst, anubhava is the "non-dual realisation gained from the scriptures", which "provides the sanction and paradigm for proper reasoning", when interpreted by a self-realized Advaitin teacher.
Davis translates anubhava as "direct intuitive understanding". And according to Comans, Shankara uses anubhava interchangeably with pratipatta, "understanding".

 – cause and effect

Cause () are an important topic in all schools of Vedanta.

=Creation of the world=

All schools of Vedanta subscribe to the theory of Satkāryavāda,Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Bhedābheda Vedānta which means that the effect is pre-existent in the cause. It is explained in a central passage at Chāndogya Upaniṣad 6.1.4-5, where the sage Aruni explains the worlings causality to his son, Śvetaketu, using the example of the relation of clay to a pot:
But there are two different views on the status of the "effect", that is, the world. Most schools of Vedanta, Adi Shankara and Advaita Vedanta adheres to the other view, Vivartavada, which says that the effect, the world, is merely an unreal (vivarta) transformation of its cause, Brahman:


=Nimitta kāraṇa and Upādāna kāraṇa=

Two sorts of causes are recognised:
Brahman is the instrumental cause of existence:


But Brahman is also the material cause:


Thus, based on these and other statements found in the Vedas, Advaita concludes that Brahman is both the instrumental cause and the material cause.

==

Advaita states that effect (), but the cause is different from the effect:
This principle is called .

==Effect is not different from cause==

When the cause is destroyed, the effect will no longer exist. For example, cotton cloth is the effect of the cotton threads, which is the material cause. Without threads there will be no cotton cloth. Without cotton there will be no thread.
In the  2.1.9 Adi Shankara describes this as follows:


==Cause is different from effect==

The cause is different from the effect. For example, the reflection of the gold ornament seen in the mirror is only the form of the ornament. It is not the ornament itself, since the reflection itself is not the gold.

==Brahman is different from the world==

This reasoning implies that the world is not different from Brahman, but Brahman is different from the world:


Ontology – The nature of being

Ontology is the philosophical study of the nature of being, existence, or reality, as well as the basic categories of being and their relations.
Advaita Vedanta is a so-called substance ontology, an ontology "which holds that underlying the seeming change, variety, and multiplicity of existence there are unchanging and permanent entities (the so-called substances)".

=Criterion of Sublation=

Sublation is replacement of a "truth" by a higher "truth", until no higher truth can be found. Shankara uses sublatibility as the criterion for the ontological status of any content of consciousness:


=Three Levels of Reality=

Advaita took over from the Madhyamika the idea of levels of reality.org, Discrimination

=Brahman=

==Absolute Truth==

Brahman is Paramarthika Satyam, "Absolute Truth". It is 

"Brahman" has a broader meaning than "pure consciousness". According to Paul Deussen, Brahman is:
Other than Brahman, everything else, including the universe, material objects and individuals, are maya. Brahman is absolute reality, unborn and unchanging. According to Advaita Vedanta, consciousness is not a property of Brahman but its very nature. In this respect Advaita Vedanta differs from other Vedanta schools. Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Brahman is the Self-existent, the Absolute and the Imperishable. Brahman is indescribable. It is at best Satchidananda, Infinite Truth, Infinite Consciousness and Infinite Bliss.
Brahman is free from any kind of differences or differentiation. It does not have any  (heterogeneous) differentiation because there is nobody in reality existing other than Brahman. It has neither svagata (internal) differences, because Brahman is itself homogeneous.
Brahman is often described as neti neti, "not this, not this" since Brahman cannot be correctly described as this or that.

==Avidyā==

Due to ignorance (), Brahman is visible as the material world and its objects (nama rupa vikara). The actual Brahman is attributeless and formless. Brahman, the highest truth and all (reality), does not really change; it is only our ignorance that gives the appearance of change.
The notion of avidyā and its relationship to Brahman creates a crucial philosophical issue within Advaita Vedanta thought: how can avidyā appear in Brahman, since Brahman is pure consciousness?
Sengaku Mayeda writes, in his commentary and translation of Adi Shankara's Upadesasahasri:


==Logical proofs==

Adi Shankara based his teachings of Brahman on various arguments:

==

==True Self==

Ātman (IAST: ātman, Sanskrit: आत्मन्) is a Sanskrit word that means 'self'. Ātman is the first principle,Deussen, Paul and Geden, A. S. The Philosophy of the Upanishads. Cosimo Classics (1 June 2010). P. 86. ISBN 1-61640-240-7. the true self of an individual beyond identification with phenomena, the essence of an individual.
When the reflection of Atman falls on avidya (ignorance), atman becomes jīva — a living being with a body and senses. Each jiva feels as if he has his own, unique and distinct Atman, called jivatman. The concept of jiva is true only in the pragmatic level. In the transcendental level, only the one Atman, equal to Brahman, is true.
Ātman is not a part of Brahman that ultimately dissolves into Brahman, but identical with Brahman. The characteristics of Atman are Consciousness, Reality and Bliss.
Atman, being the silent witness of all the modifications, is free and beyond sin and merit. It does not experience happiness or pain because it is beyond the triad of Experiencer, Experienced and Experiencing. It does not do any Karma because it is Aaptakaama. It is incorporeal and independent.

==Koshas==

According to Advaita Vedanta the Atman is covered by five koshas, usually rendered "sheath". Hinduism's Online Lexicon. (accessed: 30 March 2008) They are often visualised like the layers of an onion:
The five sheaths (pancha-kosas) are alluded to in the fourteen verse of the Atmabodha. From gross to fine they are:
According to Vedanta the wise man should discriminate between the self and the koshas, which are non-self.

==Avasthåtraya – Three states of consciousness==

Adi Shankara discerned three states of consciousness, namely waking (jågrat), dreaming (svapna), and deep
sleep (suƒupti),Arvind Sharma, Sleep as a State of Consciousness in Advaita Vedånta. State University of New York Pressadvaita.uk, '''Om' – three states and one reality (An interpretation of the Mandukya Upanishad) which correspond to the three bodies:
A fourth state is Turiya, pure consciousness. It is the background that underlies and transcends the three common states of consciousness. 


=Empirical reality=

====

According to Adi Shankara, Māyā () is the complex illusionary power of Brahman which causes the Brahman to be seen as the material world of separate forms. Its shelter is Brahman, but Brahman itself is untouched by the illusion of Māyā, just as a magician is not tricked by his own magic.
All sense data entering ones awareness via the five senses are Māyā. Māyā is neither completely real nor completely unreal, hence indescribable. Māyā is temporary and is transcended with "true knowledge", or perception of the more fundamental reality which permeates Māyā.
Maya has two main functions:
Swami Vivekananda explains the concept of Māyā as follows:

==The world is unreal and real==

The world is both unreal and real. but something can't be both true and false at the same time; hence Adi Shankara has classified the world as indescribable.
Adi Sankara says that the world is not real (true), it is an illusion. Adi Sankara gives the following reasoning:
Adi Sankara also claims that the world is not absolutely unreal (false). It appears unreal (false) only when compared to Brahman. At the empirical or pragmatic level, the world is completely real:Sinha 1993
The world being both unreal and real is explained by the following. A pen is placed in front of a mirror. One can see its reflection. To one's eyes, the image of the pen is perceived. Now, what should the image be called? It cannot be true, because it is an image. The truth is the pen. It cannot be false, because it is seen by our eyes.

= – The Supreme Lord=

, literally, the Lord) Parama Īshvara means "The Supreme Lord".
According to Advaita Vedanta, when man tries to know the attributeless Brahman with his mind, under the influence of Maya, Brahman becomes the Lord. Isvara is Brahman with Maya – the manifested form of Brahman. Adi Shankara uses a metaphor that when the "reflection" of the Cosmic Spirit falls upon the mirror of Maya, it appears as the Ishvara or Supreme Lord. The Ishvara is true only in the pragmatic level. God's actual form in the transcendental level is the Cosmic Spirit.

==Ishvara is false and true==

Ishvara is, in an ultimate sense, described as "false" because Brahman appears as Ishvara only due to the curtain of Maya. However, just as the world is true in the pragmatic level, similarly, Ishvara is also pragmatically true. Just as the world is not absolutely false, Ishvara is also not absolutely false.

==Saguna Brahman==

Ishvara can be described as Saguna Brahman or Brahman with attributes that may be regarded to have a personality with human and Godly attributes. This concept of Ishvara is also used to visualise and worship in anthropomorphic form deities such as Shiva, Vishnu or Devi by the dvaitins which leads to immense confusion in the understanding of a monistic concept of God apart from polytheistic worship of Vishnu, Shiva and Shakti in Hinduism.

==Karma==

Ishvara is the distributor of the fruits of one's Karma. Whenever referencing Brahman, is referencing God. God is the highest knowledge theoretically possible. Devotion (Bhakti) will cancel the effects of bad Karma and will bring a person closer to the true knowledge by purifying his mind. Slowly, the difference between the worshipper and the worshipped decreases and upon true knowledge, liberation occurs.

==Creation of the world==

The universe is believed to be the creation of the Supreme Lord Ishvara. Maya is the divine magic whereby Ishvara creates the world.
Adi Shankara assumes that Creation is recreation or play of Ishvara. It is His nature, just as it is man's nature to breathe. Creating the world for any incentive slanders the wholeness and perfection of Ishvara. Creating the world for gaining something is against His perfection. Creating the world out of compassion is illogical, since the emotion of compassion cannot arise in a blank and void world in the beginning, when only Ishvara existed.
A criticism against Satkāryavāda is the question how Ishvara, whose form is spiritual, can be the effect of this material world. Adi Shankara says that just as from a conscious living human, inanimate objects like hair and nails are formed, similarly, the inanimate world is formed from the spiritual Ishvara.

==Ishvara in the Vedas==

The sole proof for Ishvara that Adi Shankara gives is Shruti's mentions of Ishvara, as Ishvara is beyond logic and thinking. This is similar to Kant's philosophy about Ishvara in which he says that "faith" is the basis of theism. However, Adi Shankara has also given few other logical proofs for Ishvara, but warning us not to completely rely on them:

Status of ethics

Some claim that there is no place for ethics in Advaita, "that it turns its back on all theoretical and practical considerations of morality and, if not unethical, is at least 'a-ethical' in character".
Ethics does have a firm place in this philosophy. Ethics, which implies doing good Karma, indirectly helps in attaining true knowledge. However, to encourage students to strive towards Vidyā (spiritual knowledge) and combat Avidyā (ignorance), the idea of Karma is maintained.
Truth, non-violence, service of others, pity, are Dharma, and lies, violence, cheating, selfishness, greed,  are adharma (sin). However, no authoritative definition of Dharma was ever formulated by any of the major exponents of Advaita Vedanta. Unlike ontological and epistemological claims, there is room for significant disagreement between Advaitins on ethical issues.

Advaita and other Indian philosophies

Advaita developed in a multi-facetted religious and philosophical landscape. The tradition developed in interaction with the other traditions of India, Buddhism, Vaishnavism and Shaivism, as well as the other schools of Vedanta.

Influence of Mahayana Buddhism

Although Shankara's Advaita, like other traditions of Vedanta, claims to base itself chiefly on the Upanishads, the Bhagavad Gita and the Brahma Sutras, many authorities from India and elsewhere have noted that it shows signs of influence from Mahayana Buddhism. The Mahayana schools with whom Shankara's Advaita is said to share similarities are the Madhyamaka, founded by Nagarjuna,Campbell, W. L. Ed. and trans. 1919. The Tree of Wisdom: Being the Tibetan text with English translation of Nāgārjuna's gnomic verse treatise called the Prajñādanda. Calcutta University. Reprint: Sonam T. Kazi, Gangtok. 1975. and the Yogacara,Consciousness in Indian philosophy: the advaita doctrine of 'awareness only', by Sthaneshwar Timalsina, p. 125 founded by VasubandhuP. 34 Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland, Volume 2001 By Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland and AsangaTsoṅ-kha-pa Blo-bzaṅ-grags-pa, Robert A. F. Thurman (Page 28) in the early centuries of the Common Era.
John Grimes writes that while Mahayana Buddhism's influence on Advaita Vedanta has been ignored for most of its history, scholars now see it as undeniable. Journal of the American Academy of Religion Vol. 66, No. 3 (Autumn, 1998), pp. 684–686
Eliot Deutsch and Rohit Dalvi state:

S. Mudgal noted that among some traditionalist Indian scholars, it was the accepted view that Shankara
This influence goes back at least to Gaudapada:

Michael Comans has also demonstrated how Gaudapada, an early Vedantin, utilised some arguments and reasoning from Madhyamaka Buddhist texts by quoting them almost verbatim. 
However, Comans believes there is a fundamental difference between Buddhist thought and that of Gaudapada, in that Buddhism has as its philosophical basis the doctrine of Dependent Origination, while Gaudapada does not at all rely on this principle. Gaudapada's Ajativada is an outcome of reasoning applied to an unchanging nondual reality, the fundamental teaching of the Upanishads. 88–93"

=Upanishadic influences=

A few authors are of the opinion that the similarities in Advaita and certain aspects of Buddhism were due to the Upanishadic influence on both streams. For instance, NeoVedantin Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, an important intellectual figure of 20th century India, wrote in his book Indian Philosophy:
In the same vein, C.D Sharma, in his A Critical Survey of Indian Philosophy, states:
Mudgal states that the Advaita according to Shankara is a synthesis of two independent and opposing streams of thought, the Upanishadic and the Buddhist, representing the orthodox and the heterodox respectively.S. Mudgal, Advaita of Sankara, A Reappraisal, Delhi 1975, p.175"
According to Geoffrey Samuel, the similarities between Buddhism and the Upanishadic tradition are not due to a shared Upanishadic background, but to a shared shramanicbackground.

=Advaita-criticisms=

In India, the similarity of Shankara's Advaita to Buddhism was brought up by his rivals from other Vedanta schools, while on the other hand, Mahayanists such as Bhavyaviveka had to defend themselves from Theravada Buddhist accusations of the Mahayana doctrine being just another form of Vedantism.p200. Early Advaita Vedānta and Buddhism: the Mahāyāna context of the Gauḍapādīya-kārikā, By Richard King. 1995.V.V Gokhale, trans. and comments. "The Vedanta philosophy described by Bhavya in his Madhyamakahrdaya" Indo-Iranian journal, VOl II, No. 3, 1958, p 179–80
Shankara defended himself against these accusations:


=Modern praise of the Buddha=

In modern India, spiritual gurus following the tradition of Advaita Vedanta have generally been enthusiastic in their praise of the Buddha. Swami Vivekananda of the monastic Ramakrishna Mission, a leading figure in the late 19th century religious scene in India, spoke highly of the BuddhaThe complete works of Swami Vivekananda Volume 1 – Address at the Parliament of Religions. Vedanta Press and bookshop 1947. ISBN 81-85301-46-8. and the similarities between Advaita and Buddhist thought. Vedanta Press and bookshop 1947. ISBN 81-85301-46-8

=Common core thesis=

Western scholars like N.V. Isaeva state that the Advaita and Buddhist philosophies, after being purified of accidental or historical accretions, can be safely regarded as different expressions of the same eternal absolute truth.N.V. Isaeva, Shankara and Indian Philosophy, SUNY Press, 1993. p14 The comparison breaks down, of course, when one realizes that Gautama the Buddha denied the existence of the Atman whereas Atman is central to Advaita Vedanta.
Ninian Smart, a historian of religion, noted that the differences between Shankara and Mahayana doctrines are largely a matter of emphasis and background, rather than essence. London 1964. p.104

Relationship with other forms of Vedanta

The exposition and spread of Advaita by Sankara spurred debate with the two main theistic schools of Vedanta philosophy that were formalised later: Vishishtadvaita (qualified nondualism), and Dvaita (dualism).

=Vishishtadvaita=

Yamunacharya, a 10th-century AD proponent of the Vishishtadvaita philosophy that opposed Shankara's Advaita, compared Advaita to Buddhism and remarked in his Siddhitraya that for both the Buddhists and the Advaitins, the distinctions of knower, known and knowledge are unreal. The Advaita traces them to Maya, while Buddhist subjectivism traces them to buddhi.J.R.A.S, 1910, p132 Ramanujacharya, another prominent Vishishtadvaita philosopher, accused Shankara of being a Prachanna Bauddha, that is, a hidden BuddhistSee Sri Bhasya of Ramanuja, II.II.27

=Dvaita=

The Dvaita, founded by Madhvacharya (1238–1317 AD), was partisan to Vaishnavism, building on a cogent system of Vedantic interpretation that proceeded to take on Advaita in full measure. Madhvacharya's student Narayana, in his Madhvavijaya, a hagiography of Madhva, characterised Madhva and Shankara as born-enemies, and describes Shankara as a "demon born on earth". JIRD issue 7 svh 08 15 11 Surendranath Dasgupta noted that some Madhva mythology went so far as to characterise the followers of Shankara as "tyrannical people who burned down monasteries, destroyed cattle and killed women and children".  A History of Indian Philosophy, vol. 1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1922.I, p. 52

Advaita and Kashmir Shaivism

Over time, followers of Advaita came to consider Shankara as an incarnation or Avatar of the God Shiva.

Advaita and Sufism

Sufism is the mystical tradition of Islam. According to Sufi scholar Martin Lings,


List of teachers

Advaita Vedanta has had many teachers over the centuries in many teachers in different countries.



Notes



Sources

Published sources

Web-sources

Further reading

History

Introductions

Source books

Topical studies

Shankara

Sringeri Sharada Peetham

Neo-Advaita

Indian languages

Contemporary criticism




