[[Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs]]

CATEGORIES: Department for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (United Kingdom), Agriculture in England, Environment ministries, Environment of England, Ministries established in 2001, 2001 establishments in the United Kingdom, Forestry agencies, Forestry in the United Kingdom

The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) is the government department responsible for environmental protection, food production and standards, agriculture, fisheries and rural communities in the United Kingdom. Concordats set out agreed frameworks for co-operation between it and the Scottish Government, which have devolved responsibilities for these matters in their respective nations. Defra also leads for Britain at the EU on agricultural, fisheries and environment matters and in other international negotiations on sustainable development and climate change, although a new Department of Energy and Climate Change was created on 3 October 2008 to take over the last responsibility.
DEFRA has recently been involved in controversial trial badger culls in two areas of England in North Somerset and Gloucestershire.
As of the reshuffle of 7 October 2013, the department has not had a Minister of State  following the return of David Heath to the backbenches, his replacement Dan Rogerson only having the rank of Parliamentary Under Secretary of State.

Creation

It was formed in June 2001 under the leadership of Margaret Beckett, when the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (MAFF) was merged with part of the Department of Environment, Transport and the Regions (DETR) and with a small part of the Home Office. The department was created after the perceived failure of MAFF to deal adequately with an outbreak of Foot and Mouth disease. The Department had about 9 000 core personnel,  The Department's main building is Nobel House on Smith Square, SW1.
In October 2008, the climate team at Defra was merged with the energy team from the Department for Business Enterprise and Regulatory Reform (BERR) to create the Department of Energy and Climate Change, then headed by Ed Miliband.

Ministers

The Defra Ministers are as follows:
The Permanent Secretary is Bronwyn Hill.New Permanent Secretary for Department for Environment, Food, and Rural Affairs, Defra

Responsibilities

Defra is responsible for British Government policy in the following areas
Some policies apply to England alone due to devolution, while others are not devolved and therefore apply Britain as a whole.

Executive agencies

The department's executive agencies are:

Key delivery partners

The department's key delivery partners are:"Working with others: Defra's delivery partners", Chapter 6, Departmental Report 2006 (from the Defra website)
A full list of departmental delivery and public bodies may be found on the Defra website.

Defra in the English regions

Policies for environment, food and rural affairs are delivered in the regions by Defra's executive agencies and delivery bodies, in particular Natural England, the Rural Payments Agency, Animal Health and the Marine Management Organisation. 
Defra provides grant aid to the following flood and coastal erosion risk management operating authorities:

Aim and strategic priorities

Defra's overarching aim is sustainable development, which is defined as "development which enables all people throughout the world to satisfy their basic needs and enjoy a better quality of life without compromising the quality of life of future generations." The Secretary of State wrote in a letter to the Prime Minister that he saw Defra's mission as enabling a move toward what the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) has called "one planet living"."My priorities for Defra", David Miliband's letter to the Prime Minister, 11 July 2006
Under this overarching aim, Defra has five strategic priorities:"Delivering the Essentials of Life: Defra's Five Year Strategy", Annex B







Video clips


