[[Alpha-Amanitin]]

CATEGORIES: Cyclic peptides, Amatoxins, Hepatology, Indoles

''alpha''-Amanitin or α-amanitin is a cyclic peptide of eight amino acids. It is possibly the most deadly of all the amatoxins, toxins found in several species of the Amanita genus of mushrooms, one being the death cap (Amanita phalloides) as well as the destroying angel, a complex of similar species, principally A. virosa and A. bisporigera.  It is also found in the mushrooms Galerina marginata and Conocybe filaris. The oral  of amanitin is approximately 0.1 mg/kg.
The structure of the polypeptide is atypical of most polypeptides, due to the branching of the amino acid chain.  A cross bridge between 6-hydroxy-tryptophan and cysteine allows the formation of a second "inner loop," as seen in the diagram at right.  The "outer loop" is formed by the normal peptide bond of the carboxyl terminus to the amino terminus of the peptide chain.
Unlike other known fungal cyclic peptides, amatoxins (and phallotoxins such as phalloidin) are synthesized on ribosomes. Heather Hallen, working in the laboratory of Jonathan Walton at Michigan State University, first isolated the genes encoding the proproteins for alpha-amanitin and phallacidin

Scientific use

α-Amanitin is an inhibitor of RNA polymerase II and III. This mechanism makes it a deadly toxin.
α-Amanitin can also be used to determine which types of RNA polymerase are present. This is done by testing the sensitivity of the polymerase in the presence of α-amanitin. RNA polymerase I is insensitive, RNA polymerase II is highly sensitive (inhibited at 1μg/ml), RNA polymerase III is moderately sensitive (inhibited at 10μg/ml), and RNA polymerase IV is slightly sensitive (inhibited at 50μg/ml).

Symptoms of poisoning

α-Amanitin has an unusually strong and specific attraction to the enzyme RNA polymerase II. Upon ingestion and uptake by liver cells, it binds to the RNA polymerase II enzyme, effectively causing cytolysis of hepatocytes (liver cells).
Around 15% of those poisoned will die within 10 days, progressing through a comatose stage to renal failure, liver failure, hepatic coma, respiratory failure and death. Those who recover are at risk of permanent liver damage.

Mode of inhibitory action

From the crystal structure solved by Dr. Bushnell et al., The bridge helix has evolved to be flexible and its movement is required for translocation of the polymerase along the DNA backbone. Binding of α-amanitin puts a constraint on its mobility, hence slowing down the translocation of the polymerase and the rate of synthesis of the RNA molecule.








