[[SMS Lützow]]

CATEGORIES: Derfflinger-class battlecruisers, World War I battlecruisers of Germany, Ships sunk at the Battle of Jutland, 1913 ships, Ships built in Danzig, Ships built by Schichau

SMS ''Lützow from which she differed slightly in that she was armed with an additional pair of 15 cm (5.9 inch) secondary guns and had an additional watertight compartment in her hull. She was named in honor of the Prussian general Ludwig Adolf Wilhelm von Lützow who fought in the Napoleonic Wars.
Lützow was commissioned on 8 August 1915, but did not join the I Scouting Group until 20 March due to engine damage during trials. This was after most of the major actions conducted by the German battlecruiser force had taken place. As a result, Lützow saw very little action during the war. She took part in only one bombardment operation: the Bombardment of Yarmouth and Lowestoft on 24–25 April 1916, after which she became Admiral Franz von Hipper's flagship. One month later, the ship was heavily engaged during the Battle of Jutland, on 31 May–1 June. During the battle, Lützow sank the British battlecruiser .

Construction

Lützow was ordered as Ersatz Kaiserin Augusta, to replace the elderly protected cruiser 
On completion she displaced nearly 

Service

Bombardment of Yarmouth and Lowestoft

Lützow
By 14:00, Bödicker's ships had reached a position off Norderney, at which point he turned his ships northward to avoid the Dutch observers on the island of Terschelling. At 15:38, Seydlitz struck a mine, which tore a 
At 04:50 on 25 April, the German battlecruisers were approaching Lowestoft when the light cruisers 
At 05:20, the German raiders turned north, towards Yarmouth, which they reached by 05:42. The visibility was so poor that the German ships fired one salvo each, with the exception of Derfflinger, which fired fourteen rounds from her main battery. The German ships turned back south, and at 05:47 encountered for the second time the Harwich Force, which had by then been engaged by the six light cruisers of the German screening ships. Bödicker's ships opened fire from a range of 12,000 m (13,000 yards).

Battle of Jutland

At 02:00 CET,
An hour and a half later, the High Seas Fleet—under the command of Admiral Scheer—left the Jade with 16 dreadnoughts.

=Opening actions=

Shortly before 16:00, Hipper's force encountered Vice Admiral Beatty's 1st Battlecruiser Squadron. At 16:00, Hipper ordered the signal "Distribution of fire from left" be hoisted on Lützow.
At 17:03, the rearmost British battlecruiser, 
The leading ships of the German battle fleet had by 18:00 come within effective range of the British ships, and had begun trading shots with the British battlecruisers and Queen Elizabeth-class battleships.

=Battlefleets engage=

Shortly after 19:00, the German cruiser 
At 19:15, the German battlecruisers spotted the British armored cruiser 
By 19:24, the 3rd Battlecruiser Squadron had formed up with Beatty's remaining battlecruisers ahead of the German line. The leading British ships spotted Lützow and Derfflinger, and began firing on them. In the span of 8 minutes, the battlecruiser 
By 19:30, the High Seas Fleet, which was by that point pursuing the British battlecruisers, had not yet encountered the Grand Fleet. Scheer had been considering retiring his forces before darkness exposed his ships to torpedo boat attack.

=Lützow withdraws=

The other battlecruisers followed the move, but Lützow had lost speed and was unable to keep up. Instead, the ship tried to withdraw to the southwest to escape the punishing British gunfire.
As the German fleet began to withdraw after nightfall, Lützow, steaming at 15 knots,

=Lützow scuttled=

At midnight, there was still hope that the severely wounded Lützow could make it back to harbor.
The crew attempted to reverse direction and steam backwards, but this had to be abandoned when the bow became so submerged that the propellers were pulled partially out of the water; forward draft had increased to over 17 meters.
During the battle, Lützow had fired an estimated 380 main battery shells and 400 rounds from her secondary guns, as well as two torpedoes.



Notes

Footnotes

Citations



  | last = Bennett
  | first = Geoffrey
  | authorlink = Geoffrey Bennett
  | year = 2005
  | title = Naval Battles of the First World War
  | publisher = Pen & Sword Military Classics
