[[RSA Security]]

CATEGORIES: Cryptography organizations, Software companies based in Massachusetts, Companies established in 1986, EMC Corporation, Former certificate authorities, Companies based in Massachusetts, Bedford, Massachusetts, 1986 establishments in Massachusetts

RSA Security LLC, It also organizes the annual RSA Conference, an information security conference.
Founded as an independent company in 1982, RSA Security, Inc. was acquired by EMC Corporation in 2006 for US$2.1 billion and operates as a division within EMC.
RSA is based in Bedford, Massachusetts, maintaining offices in Australia, Ireland, Israel, the United Kingdom, Singapore, India, China, Hong Kong and Japan.

History

Ron Rivest, Adi Shamir and Leonard Adleman, who developed the RSA encryption algorithm in 1977, founded RSA Data Security in 1982.

SecurID security breach

On March 17, 2011 RSA disclosed an attack on its two-factor authentication products. The attack was similar to the Sykipot attacks, the July 2011 SK Communications hack, and the NightDragon series of attacks. RSA called it an Advanced Persistent Threat.

Relationship with NSA

RSA's relationship with the NSA changed over the years. Reuter's Joseph Menn, as well as cybersecurity analyst Jeffrey Carr,  In the company's early years, RSA and its leaders were prominent advocates of strong cryptography for public use, while NSA and the Bush and Clinton administrations sought to prevent its proliferation.

In the mid-1990s, RSA and Bidzos led a "fierce" public campaign against the Clipper Chip, an encryption chip with a backdoor to allow the U.S. government to decrypt communications. The Clinton administration pressed telecommunications companies to use the chip in their devices, and relaxed export restrictions on products that used it. (Such restrictions had prevented RSA Security from selling its software abroad.) RSA joined civil libertarians and others in opposing the Clipper Chip by, among other things, distributing posters with a foundering sailing ship and the words "Sink Clipper!"
The relationship shifted from adversarial to cooperative after Bidzos stepped down as CEO in 1999, according to Victor Chan, who led RSA's department engineering until 2005: "When I joined there were 10 people in the labs, and we were fighting the NSA. It became a very different company later on." For example, RSA was reported to have accepted $10 million from the NSA in 2004 in a deal to use the Dual_EC_DRBG random number generator in their BSAFE library, despite many indications that Dual_EC_DRBG was both of poor quality and possibly backdoored. RSA Security later released a statement about the Dual_EC_DRBG backdoor:

In March 2014, it was reported by Reuters that RSA adopted not just one but two encryption tools developed by the NSA, greatly increasing the spy agency's ability to eavesdrop on some Internet communications. According to a team of academic researchers, a Dual Elliptic Curve adopted by RSA contained a deliberate flaw - or "back door" - that allowed the NSA to crack the encryption.

Alleged NSA Dual_EC_DRBG backdoor

From 2004 to 2013, RSA shipped security software — BSAFE toolkit and Data Protection Manager — that included a default cryptographically secure pseudorandom number generator, Dual_EC_DRBG that was later suspected to contain an alleged secret National Security Agency backdoor. The alleged backdoor could have made data encrypted with these tools much easier to break for NSA, which allegedly had the secret private key to the backdoor.
RSA Security employees had long been aware, at least, that Dual_EC_DRBG might contain a backdoor. Three employees were members of the ANSI X9F1 Tool Standards and Guidelines Group, to which Dual_EC_DRBG had been submitted for consideration in the early 2000s.cryptographyengineering.html The possibility that the random number generator could contain a backdoor was "first raised in an ANSI X9 meeting", according to John Kelsey, a co-author of the NIST SP 800-90A standard that contains Dual_EC_DRBG. In January 2005, two employees of the cryptography company Certicom — they were also members of the X9F1 group — wrote a patent application that described a backdoor for Dual_EC_DRBG identical to the NSA one.google. Two of these — ensuring that two arbitrary elliptic curve points P and Q used in Dual_EC_DRBG are independently chosen, and a smaller output length — was added to the standard as an option, though NSA's backdoored version of P and Q and large output length remained as the standard's default option. Kelsey said he knew of no implementers who actually generated their own non-backdoored P and Q, and there have been no reports of implementations using the smaller outlen.
Nevertheless, NIST included Dual_EC_DRBG in its 2006 NIST SP 800-90A standard with the default settings enabling the backdoor, largely at the behest of NSA officials, who had cited RSA Security's early use of the random number generator as an argument for its inclusion. The standard did also not fix the unrelated (to the backdoor) problem that the CSPRNG was slightly predictable, which Gjøsteen had pointed out earlier in 2006, and which lead Gjøsteen to call Dual_EC_DRBG not cryptographically sound.math.no/~kristiag/drafts/dual-ec-drbg-comments.pdf
The ANSI standard group's backdoor suspicion had apparently not been widely publicized, because the potential backdoor was rediscovered in 2007 by Dan Shumow and Niels Ferguson when they implemented Dual_EC_DRBG in Windows.cr.yp.pdf  Commenting on Shumow and Ferguson's work in 2007, prominent security researcher and cryptographer Bruce Schneier called the possible NSA backdoor "rather obvious", and wondered why NSA bothered pushing to have Dual_EC_DRBG included, when the general poor quality and possible backdoor would ensure that nobody would ever use it. There does not seem to have been a general awareness that RSA Security had made it the default in some of its products in 2004, until the Snowden leak.
In September 2013, the New York Times, drawing on the Snowden leaks, revealed that the NSA worked to "Insert vulnerabilities into commercial encryption systems, IT systems, networks, and endpoint communications devices used by targets" as part of the Bullrun program. One of these vulnerabilities, the Times reported, was the Dual_EC_DRBG backdoor. With the renewed focus on Dual_EC_DRBG, it was noted that RSA Security's BSAFE used Dual_EC_DRBG by default, which there had not previously been a widespread awareness of.
After the New York Times published its article, RSA Security recommended that users switch away from Dual_EC_DRBG, but denied that they had deliberately inserted a backdoor. RSA Security officials have largely declined to explain why they did not remove the dubious random number generator once the flaws became known, or why they did not implement the simple mitigation that NIST added to the standard to neutralize the suggested and later verified backdoor.
On 
In the wake of the reports, several industry experts cancelled their planned talks at RSA's 2014 RSA Conference. Hyppönen announced his intention to give his talk, "Governments as Malware Authors," at a conference quickly set up in reaction to the reports: TrustyCon, to be held on the same day and one block away from the RSA Conference.com/information-technology/2014/01/trustycon-security-counter-convention-planned-for-rsa-refusniks/

Products

RSA enVision is a security information and event management (SIEM) platform, with centralised log-management service that claims to "enable organisations to simplify compliance process as well as optimise security-incident management as they occur."








