[[Varicella zoster virus]]

CATEGORIES: Chickenpox, Varicelloviruses, Viral diseases

Varicella zoster virus or varicella-zoster virus (VZV) is one of eight herpesviruses known to infect humans and  vertebrates. VZV only affects humans, and commonly causes chickenpox in children, teens and young adults and herpes zoster (shingles) in adults and rarely in children. VZV is known by many names, including chickenpox virus, varicella virus, zoster virus, and human herpesvirus type 3 (HHV-3).
VZV infects the nerves, and causes a wide variety of symptoms.  After the primary infection (chickenpox), the virus goes dormant in the nerves, including the cranial nerve ganglia, dorsal root ganglia, and autonomic ganglia.  Many years after the patient has recovered from chickenpox, VZV can reactivate to cause a number of neurologic conditions.

Human disease

Primary Varicella Zoster Virus infection results in chickenpox (varicella), which may result in complications including encephalitis or pneumonia (either direct viral pneumonia or secondary bacterial pneumonia). Even when clinical symptoms of chickenpox have resolved, VZV remains dormant in the nervous system of the infected person  (virus latency), in the trigeminal and dorsal root ganglia. In about 10–20% of cases, VZV reactivates later in life producing a disease known as shingles or herpes zoster. Serious complications of varicella zoster infection include postherpetic neuralgia, narrowing or blocking of arteries by thickening of the arterial linings, leading to stroke, zoster multiplex, myelitis, herpes ophthalmicus, or zoster sine herpete. In Ramsay Hunt syndrome, VZV affects the geniculate ganglion giving lesions that follow specific branches of the facial nerve. Symptoms may include painful blisters on the tongue and ear along with one sided facial weakness and hearing loss.

Recent advances in research and diagnosis

The introduction of DNA analysis techniques has shown some complications of varicella-zoster to be more common than previously thought.  For example, sporadic meningoencephalitis (ME) caused by varicella-zoster was regarded as rare disease, mostly related to primary varicella, and occurring mainly in children or immunocompromised people.  However, meningoencephalitis caused by varicella-zoster is increasingly recognized as a predominant cause of ME among immunocompetent adults in non-epidemic circumstances.
Diagnosis of complications of varicella-zoster, particularly in cases where the disease reactivates after years or decades of latency, are difficult.   A rash (shingles) can be present or absent.  Symptoms vary, and there is significant overlap in symptoms with herpes-simplex symptoms.
Although DNA analysis techniques such as Polymerase Chain Reaction can be used to look for DNA of herpesviruses in spinal fluid or blood, the results may be negative, even in cases where other definitive symptoms exist. Notwithstanding these limitations, the use of PCR has resulted in an advance in the state of the art in our understanding of herpesviruses, including VZV, during the 1990's and 2000's.  For example, in the past, clinicians believed that encephalitis was caused by herpes simplex, and that patients always died or developed serious long term function problems.  People were diagnosed at autopsy or by brain biopsy.  Brain biopsy is not undertaken lightly:  it is reserved only for serious cases that cannot be diagnosed by less invasive methods.  For this reason, knowledge of these herpes virus conditions was limited to severe cases.  DNA techniques have made it possible to diagnose "mild" cases, caused by VZV or HSV, in which the symptoms include fever, headache, and altered mental status.   Mortality rates in treated patients are decreasing.

Morphology

VZV is closely related to the herpes simplex viruses (HSV), sharing much genome homology. The known envelope glycoproteins (gB, gC, gE, gH, gI, gK, gL) correspond with those in HSV; however, there is no equivalent of HSV gD. VZV also fails to produce the LAT (latency-associated transcripts) that play an important role in establishing HSV latency (herpes simplex virus). VZV virons are spherical and 180–200 nm in diameter. Their lipid envelope encloses the 100 nm nucleocapsid of 162 hexameric and pentameric capsomeres arranged in an icosahedral form. Its DNA is a single, linear, double-stranded molecule, 125,000 nt long. The capsid is surrounded by a number of loosely associated proteins known collectively as the tegument; many of these proteins play critical roles in initiating the process of virus reproduction in the infected cell. The tegument is in turn covered by a lipid envelope studded with glycoproteins that are displayed on the exterior of the virion, each approximately 8 nm long.

Genome

The genome was first sequenced in 1986. J Gen Virol 67:1759-1816 It is a linear duplex DNA molecule, a laboratory strain has 124,884 base pairs.  The genome has 2 predominant isomers, depending on the orientation of the S segment, P (prototype) and IS (inverted S) which are present with equal frequency for a total frequency of 90-95%.  The L segment can also be inverted resulting in a total of four linear isomers (IL and ILS).  This is distinct from HSV's equiprobable distribution, and the discriminatory mechanism is not known.  A small percentage of isolated molecules are circular genomes, about which little is known.  (It is known that HSV circularizes on infection.) There are at least 70 open reading frames in the genome.
There are at least five clades of this virus. Clades 1 and 3 include European/North American strains; clade 2 are Asian strains, especially from Japan; and clade 5 appears to be based in India. Clade 4 includes some strains from Europe but its geographic origins need further clarification.

Evolution

Commonality with HSV1 and HSV2 indicates a common ancestor, five genes do not have corresponding HSV genes. Relation with other human herpes viruses is less strong, but many homologues and conserved gene blocks are still found.
There are five principle clades (1-5) and four genotypes that do not fit into these clades. The current distribution of these clades is Asia (clades 1,2,and 5) and Europe (clades 1, 3 and 4). Allocation of VZV strains to clades required sequence of whole virus genome. Practically all molecular epidemiological data on global VZV strains distribution obtained with targeted sequencing of selected regions.
Phylogenetic analysis of VZV genomic sequences resolves wild-type strains into 9 genotypes (E1, E2, J, M1, M2, M3, M4, VIII and IX).
The mutation rate for synonymous and nonsynonymous mutation rates among the herpesviruses have been estimated at 1 × 10−7 and 2.7 × 10−8 mutations/site/year, respectively, based on the highly conserved gB gene. J Mol Biol 238:9-22

Treatment

Within the human body it can be treated by a number of drugs and therapeutic agents including acyclovir for the chicken pox, famciclovir, valaciclovir for the shingles, zoster-immune globulin (ZIG), and vidarabine. VZV immune globulin is also a treatment.

Vaccination

A live attenuated VZV Oka/Merck strain vaccine is available and is marketed in the United States under the trade name Varivax. It was developed by Merck, Sharp & Dohme in the 1980s from the Oka strain virus isolated and attenuated by Michiaki Takahashi and colleagues in the 1970s. It was submitted to the US Food and Drug Administration for approval in 1990 and was approved in 1995. Since then, it has been added to the recommended vaccination schedules for children in Australia, the United States, and many other countries.  Varicella vaccination has raised concerns in some that the immunity induced by the vaccine may not be lifelong, possibly leaving adults vulnerable to more severe disease as the immunity from their childhood immunization wanes.  Vaccine coverage in the United States in the population recommended for vaccination is approaching 90%, with concomitant reductions in the incidence of varicella cases and hospitalizations and deaths due to VZV. So far, clinical data has proved that the vaccine is effective for over 10 years in preventing varicella infection in healthy individuals and when breakthrough infections do occur, illness is typically mild.
In 2006, the United States Food and Drug Administration approved Zostavax for the prevention of shingles.  Zostavax is a more concentrated formulation of the Varivax vaccine, designed to elicit an immune response in older adults whose immunity to VZV wanes with advancing age. A systematic review by the Cochrane Library shows that Zostavax reduces the incidence of shingles by almost 50%.








