[[Joe Carter]]

CATEGORIES: 1960 births, Living people, African-American baseball players, American League All-Stars, American League RBI champions, Baltimore Orioles players, Baseball players from Oklahoma, Canadian Baseball Hall of Fame inductees, Canadian television sportscasters, Chicago Cubs broadcasters, Chicago Cubs players, Cleveland Indians players, Iowa Cubs players, Major League Baseball announcers, Major League Baseball right fielders, Midland Cubs players, Sportspeople from Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, San Diego Padres players, San Francisco Giants players, Toronto Blue Jays broadcasters, Toronto Blue Jays players, Wichita State Shockers baseball players, College Baseball Hall of Fame inductees

Joseph Christopher Carter (born March 7, 1960) is a former outfielder and first baseman in Major League Baseball who played from . Carter is most famous for hitting a walk-off home run to win the 1993 World Series for the Toronto Blue Jays.

Career

College

Joe Carter attended Wichita State University,

Chicago Cubs and Cleveland Indians

Carter first reached the majors in  but was traded to the Cleveland Indians the following year, where he blossomed into a star. Carter emerged as a prolific power hitter, hitting as many as 35 home runs in a season and regularly driving in 100 or more runs. He usually hit nearly as many doubles as he did homers, and would get respectable numbers of triples in many years too. He was also a very good baserunner, stealing 20-30 bases a year with a high rate of success; in 1987, Carter became a rare member of the single-season 30–30 club for home runs/stolen bases. However, he was considered a below-average defensive outfielder. The Indians publicly criticized his defense and low batting average after he left, although Cleveland was a below average team after his departure, while Carter contributed to multiple championships elsewhere.

San Diego Padres

After a strong  season, Carter was traded by Cleveland to the San Diego Padres for prospects Sandy Alomar, Jr., Carlos Baerga, and Chris James. Although he continued to drive in runs, he also continued to have defensive problems. The Padres subsequently dealt him to the Toronto Blue Jays along with Roberto Alomar in exchange for star players Fred McGriff and Tony Fernández.

Toronto Blue Jays

Carter's overall game improved dramatically in , he helped the Jays win their first World Series championship, the first ever won by a Canadian-based team. Carter hit two home runs and recorded the final out of the Series, taking a throw to first base from reliever Mike Timlin to nab Otis Nixon of the Atlanta Braves, who bunted. This was the first time a World Series ended on a bunt.
Carter, along with Edwin Encarnación, are the only two Blue Jays to hit two home runs in one inning, with Carter's coming against the Baltimore Orioles in 1993 and Encarnacion's against the Houston Astros in 2013.

=1993 World Series=

In , the Blue Jays reached the World Series again, facing the Philadelphia Phillies. In Game 6, with the Blue Jays leading three games to two, Carter came to bat with one out in the bottom of the ninth inning with the Blue Jays trailing 6–5 and Rickey Henderson and Paul Molitor on base. On a 2–2 count, Carter hit a three-run walk-off home run off Phillies pitcher Mitch Williams (against whom he was 0–4 career) to win the World Series, only the second time a Series has ended with a home run (the other being in 1960, when Bill Mazeroski did it for the Pittsburgh Pirates against the New York Yankees), and the only time the home run has been hit by a player whose team was trailing in the bottom of the 9th inning in a potential championship clinching game. Upon hitting the home run, Carter went into a hysteria, jumping up and down many times, most notably while rounding first base, where his helmet came off.
Carter is also the only player ever to both record the final out in one World Series, and get a series-clinching walk-off hit in another.

=1994–1997=

Carter continued to play for the Blue Jays until 1997, and led the Blue Jays in home runs and RBIs in 1994 and 1995.
When he represented the Blue Jays at the 1996 All-Star Game, he received boos for his home run that won the Blue Jays the 1993 World Series, as the game took place at Veterans Stadium, then the home of the Philadelphia Phillies.

Baltimore Orioles and San Francisco Giants

He became a free agent in 

Career statistics

Carter was named to five All-Star teams. In his career he hit 396 home runs and drove in 1445 runs. He drove in 100 runs in a season ten times, including the  In 1993, while a Toronto Blue Jay, Carter set an American League record when he hit 3 home runs in a game for the fifth time in his career. (The record was tied 10 years later by another Blue Jay – Carlos Delgado.)
Carter was also involved in the final plays of four games in which the Blue Jays clinched a championship: 1) The game-winning single to clinch the 1991 American League East division championship, 2) catching the final out at first base in the 1992 World Series, 3) catching the final out on a fly ball to right field in the 1993 American League Championship Series, and 4) the walk-off home run in Game 6 of the 1993 World Series.

Post retirement

From , Carter served as the color commentator, alongside play-by-play man Chip Caray, for the Chicago Cubs on WGN-TV. Carter was replaced by the man whom Carter himself replaced, Steve Stone.
Carter became eligible for the Baseball Hall of Fame in 2003, however, he only received 19 votes, representing 3.8% of the vote and was dropped from future ballots.
Carter was inducted into the Canadian Baseball Hall of Fame in 2003.
In September 2006, Carter was awarded the Major League Baseball Hometown Heroes Award, as the former or current player who best represents the legacy of his franchise's history, as voted by fans.
In 2008, Carter appeared on an episode of Pros vs. Joes.
On August 7, 2009, Carter, along with many of his 1992 and 1993 Toronto Blue Jay World Series alumni teammates, attended a reunion/pre-game ceremony at the Rogers Centre. The event was organized by Carter himself and included three dozen players, coaches and athletic trainers from the Blue Jays' 1992 and 1993 World Series rosters.
On May 19, 2012, the Cleveland Indians honored Carter with a bobblehead giveaway bearing his likeness during their game against the Miami Marlins.  Carter attended and signed autographs, as well as throwing out the ceremonial first pitch.

Charity involvement

Carter co-chairs the annual "Joe Carter Classic", a celebrity golf tournament in the Toronto area founded in 2010 to benefit the Children's Aid Foundation. The tournament has raised over $225,000 for the foundation. Previous events have featured celebrities including  Charles Barkley, Ray Bourque, and Gordie Howe.

Awards








