[[Traian Vuia]]

CATEGORIES: Romanian engineers, Romanian aerospace engineers, Romanian inventors, Romanian Austro-Hungarians, Romanian aviators, Aviation inventors, People from Timiş County, Aviation pioneers, Honorary members of the Romanian Academy, French people of Romanian descent, Burials at Bellu, 1872 births, 1950 deaths

Traian Vuia or Trajan Vuia ( Later, Vuia also designed helicopters.
A French citizen since 1918, Vuia was also a great patriot, leading the Romanians (especially Transylvanians) of France in the resistance during World War I and World War II.

Education and early career

Vuia was born to Romanian parents Simion Popescu and Ana Vuia living in Surducul-Mic, a village in the Banat region, Austro-Hungarian Empire, today in Romania; the place is now called Traian Vuia. After graduating from high school in Lugoj, in 1892, he enrolled in the School of Mechanics at the Polytechnic University of Budapest where he received his engineering diploma. He then joined the Faculty of Law in Budapest, Hungary, where he earned a Ph.D. in law in May 1901 with the thesis "Military and Industry, State and Contract regime"..
He returned to Lugoj, where he studied the problem of human flight and designed his first flying machine, which he called the "airplane-car".  He attempted to build the machine, but due to financial constraints decided to go to Paris in July 1902, hoping to find someone interested in financing his project, possibly balloon enthusiasts. He met with considerable skepticism from people who believed that a heavier-than-air machine could not fly. He then visited Victor Tatin, a well-known theoretician and experimenter who had built an aircraft model which flew in 1879.
Tatin was interested in the project, but doubted that Vuia had a suitable engine or that his aircraft would be stable. Vuia then presented his plan to the Académie des Sciences in Paris on February 16, 1903, but was rejected with the comment: "The problem of flight with a machine which weighs more than air can not be solved and it is only a dream."
Undeterred, Vuia applied for a French patent on May 15, 1903, and obtained the patent No. 332106 for his flying machine.. He began to build his first flying machine in the winter of 1902–3.  Overcoming more financial difficulties, he also started construction of an engine of his own design for which he was granted different patents, starting with 1904.Romanian Aviation Pioneers

Flying experiments

By December 1905 Vuia had finished construction of his first airplane, the "Traian Vuia I" a high-wing monoplane powered by a carbonic acid gas engine. The British aviation historian Charles Harvard Gibbs-Smith described this aircraft as "the first man-carrying monoplane of basically modern configuration", yet "unsuccessful" because it was incapable of sustained flight.  "Hops and Flights" Flight. p. 469
The French journal L'Aérophile emphasized that Vuia's machine had the capability to take off from a flat surface only by on-board means without outside assistance, such as an incline, rails, or catapult.
The main characteristics of Vuia's first airplane:Trajan Vuia – the Romanian inventor who first flew a powered airplane in 1906 at love4aviation.com
After his March 1906 takeoff, Vuia made several more powered  short flights later that year and in 1907. In August 1906 he built a modified version of his flying machine, the "Vuia I bis." None of these were successful in achieving sustained flight, so Vuia abandoned them.
In 1907, Vuia built his "Vuia II" airplane, with an Antoinette  internal combustion engine, which was later exhibited at the first Aeronautical Salon in Paris.
Charles Dollfus, former curator of the Air Museum in Paris, wrote that aviation pioneer Alberto Santos Dumont's use of wheels on his aircraft was influenced by Dumont's having seen Vuia's flight attempts.

Documentation

Vuia made his first flight  on March 18, 1906, in the presence of his mechanic and two close friends. Accounts of this test, published at the time, and of his later airborne tests, till August 19, 1906, are based on letters he wrote to L'Aérophile, the official journal of the Aéro Club of France.

Later career

Between 1918 and 1921 Vuia built two experimental helicopters on the Juvisy and Issy-les-Moulineaux aerodromes..
He is buried at the Bellu cemetery in Bucharest, Romania.

Legacy

Another invention by Vuia was a steam generator with internal combustion that generates very high pressure – more than 100 atm (10 MPa) – that is still used today in thermal power stations. Traian Vuia and one of his partners, Emmanuel Yvonneau, patented several types of gas generators.Steam generator patent
On May 27, 1946, Vuia was named an Honorary Member of the Romanian Academy..
Timişoara International Airport Traian Vuia (TSR), Romania's third largest airport, carries his name.

Gallery

File:Vuia I - 1906 (3).png | Vuia I
File:Vuia I - 1906 (4).png | Vuia I
File:Vuia II - 1907.png | Vuia II
File:Vuia II - 1907 (2).png | Vuia II
File:Vuia 1920.png | Vuia helicopter





Notes

Bibliography




