[[Southern right whale]]

CATEGORIES: Balaenidae, Cetaceans of Australia, Megafauna, Fauna of the Atlantic Ocean, Fauna of the Pacific Ocean

The southern right whale (Eubalaena australis) is a baleen whale, one of three species classified as right whales belonging to the genus Eubalaena. Like other right whales, the southern right whale is readily distinguished from others by the callosities on its head, a broad back without a dorsal fin, and a long arching mouth that begins above the eye. Its skin is very dark grey or black, occasionally with some white patches on the belly. The right whale's callosities appear white due to large colonies of cyamids (whale lice). It is almost indistinguishable from the closely related North Atlantic and the North Pacific right whales, displaying only minor skull differences. It may have fewer callosities on its head and more on its lower lips than the two northern species. Approximately 10,000 southern right whales are spread throughout the southern part of the Southern Hemisphere.
The maximum size of an adult female is  
Right whales cannot cross the warm equatorial waters to connect with the other (sub)species and (inter)breed: their thick layers of insulating blubber make it impossible for them to dissipate their internal body heat in tropical waters.
Proportion and number of molten colored individuals are considerably notable in this species that cannot be observed in the other species in Northern Hemisphere. Some whales remain white even after growing up.victorharbortimes.au/story/1671907/white-whale-in-middleton/?cs=1285

Taxonomy

The right whales were first classified in the Balaena genus in 1758 by Carolus Linnaeus, who at the time considered all of the right whales (including the bowhead) as a single species.  Through the 1800s and 1900s, in fact, the Balaenidae family has been the subject of great taxonometric debate.  Authorities have repeatedly recategorized the three populations of right whale plus the bowhead whale, as one, two, three or four species, either in a single genus or in two separate genera. In the early whaling days, they were all thought to be a single species, Balaena mysticetus.
The southern right whale was initially described as Balaena australis by Desmoulins in 1822. Eventually, it was recognized that bowheads and right whales were in fact different, and John Edward Gray proposed the Eubalaena genus for the right whale in 1864.  Later, morphological factors such as differences in the skull shape of northern and southern right whales indicated at least two species of right whale—one in the Northern Hemisphere, the other in the Southern Ocean.
In 2000, Rosenbaum et al. disagreed, based on data from their genetic study of DNA samples from each of the whale populations.  Genetic evidence now clearly demonstrates that the northern and southern populations of right whale have not interbred for between 3 million and 12 million years, confirming the southern right whale as a distinct species. The northern Pacific and Atlantic populations are also distinct, with the North Pacific right whale being more closely related to the southern right whale than to the North Atlantic right whale.
It is believed that the right whale populations first split because of the joining of North and South America. The rising temperatures at the equator then created a second split, into the northern and southern groups, preventing them from interbreeding.Palaeobiology and Biodiversity Research Group, University of Bristol
In 2002, the Scientific Committee of the International Whaling Commission (IWC) accepted Rosenbaum's findings, and recommended that the Eubalaena nomenclature be retained for this genus.
The cladogram is a tool for visualizing and comparing the evolutionary relationships between taxa. The point where a node branches off is analogous to an evolutionary branching – the diagram can be read left-to-right, much like a timeline. The following cladogram of the Balaenidae family serves to illustrate the current scientific consensus as to the relationships between the southern right whale and the other members of its family.
 
  
 

Other junior synonyms for E. australis have included B. antarctica (Lesson, 1828), B. antipodarum (Gray, 1843), Hunterus temminckii (Gray, 1864), and E. glacialis australis (Tomilin, 1962) (see side panel for more synonyms).

Behavior

Like other right whales, they are rather active on the water surface, and being curious and playful towards human vessels. According to the quantity of observations, Southern rights seem more active and tend to interact with human more than other two species in Northern Hemisphere. One behavior unique to the southern right whale, known as sailing, is that of using their elevated flukes to catch the wind, remaining in the same position for considerable amount of time. It appears to be a form of play and is commonly seen off the coast of Argentina and South Africa. Some other species such as Humpback whales are also known to display. Right whales are often seen interacting with other cetaceans, especially Humpback whales and dolphins. There is a record of a Southern right and a Humpback thought to be involved in mating activities off Mozambique.
They have very strong maternal connections with locations and gene pools they were born in,

Population and distribution

The southern right whale spends summer in the far Southern Ocean feeding, probably close to Antarctica. It migrates north in winter for breeding and can be seen by the coasts of Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Chile, Namibia, Mozambique, Peru, Tristan de Cunha, Uruguay, Madagascar, New Zealand and South Africa. The total population is estimated to be around 10,000. Since hunting ceased, stocks are estimated to have grown by 7% a year. It appears that the South American, South African and Australasian groups intermix very little if at all, because maternal fidelity to feeding and calving habitats is very strong. The mother also passes these choices to her calves.[ref]
</ref>
The most recent population estimates, published by National Geographic in October 2008, put the southern whale population at 10,000. The estimate of 7,000 followed a March 1998 IWC workshop. Researchers used data about adult female populations from three surveys (one in each of Argentina, South Africa and Australia, collected during the 1990s) and extrapolated to include unsurveyed areas, number of males and calves using available male:female and adult:calf ratios to give an estimated 1999 figure of 7,500 animals. Retrieved 24 July 2007.
Many locations throughout Southern Hemisphere were named after presence of Southern rights where whales are either rare or missing today in these locations, such as Walvis Bay, Punta Ballena, Right Whale Bay, Whangarei Harbour, and so on.

Africa

Hermanus in South Africa has become known as a mecca for whale watching, during the southern hemisphere winter months (June - October) the Southern Right Whales migrate to the coastal waters of South Africa, with in excess of 100 whales known to be in the Hermanus area. Whilst in the area, the whales can be seen with their young as they come to Walker Bay to calve and mate. Many behaviours such as breaching, sailing, lobtailing, or spyhopping can be witnessed. In False Bay whales can be seen from the shore from July to October while both Plettenberg Bay and Algoa Bay are also home to the Southern Right Whales from July to December.  They can be viewed from land as well as by boat with licensed operators conducting ocean safaris throughout the year.
In Namibia, most of confirmed whales are strongly restricted in the south of Luderitz, southern edge of the country and only a handful animals venture further north of historical breeding grounds.
On contrast to the case in South Africa, right whales are becoming regular migrants but within very small numbers in Mozambique and on Madagascar. The first sighting in Mozambique since the end of whaling was in 1997.[ref]Report of the IWC Workshop on the Assessment of
Southern Right Whales,  SC/64/Rep5[/ref]

Latin America

In Brazil, more than 300 individuals have been cataloged through photo identification (using head callosities) by the Brazilian Right Whale Project, maintained jointly by Petrobras (the Brazilian state-owned oil company) and the International Wildlife Coalition. The State of Santa Catarina hosts a concentration of breeding and calving right whales from June to November, and females from this population also calve off Argentinian Patagonia and Uruguay. In recent years, possibly due to changing habitat environments by human activities and conflicts with local fisheries, the number of whales visiting the coasts are decreasing.researchgate.net/publication/257163054_The_conflict_between_the_southern_right_whale_and_coastal_fisheries_on_the_southern_coast_of_Brazil
During the 2012 annual meeting of the International Whaling Commission's Scientific Committee, data was presented regarding the continued phenomena of southern right whale strandings and high rate of mortality at Península Valdés, Argentina.  Between 2003 and 2011, a total of 482 dead right whales were recorded at Península Valdés. There were at least 55 whale deaths in 2010, and 61 in 2011. As in previous years, the vast majority of strandings were calves of the season.
In Uruguay, coastal areas such as Punta del Este host congregating sites for whales in breeding seasons, but not likely as calving grounds.com/blog/2012/9/whales-in-punta-2012 Their recovery helped creating a whale-sanctuary off Latin America
For critically endangered Chile/Peru population, CCC, the Cetacean Conservation Center has been working a separate program for right whales. Aside from vagrants' records, Peru's coastlines possibly host the northernmost of confirmed range of the species. Some hope arising for establishment of new tourism industry in eastern side of the Strait of Magellan as the number of sightings increases. It is unknown whether these increases are due to re-colonization by whales from Patagonian population.

Australia

Southern Right Whales can be found in many parts of southern Australia, with the largest population to be found at the Head of the Bight in South Australia. Over 100 Visitors can view the whales from cliff top boardwalks and lookouts, with whales swimming almost directly below. The Head of the Bight is located in a sparsely populated area in the middle of the Nullabor. A more accessible location for viewing whales in South Australia is Encounter Bay where the whales can be seen just off the beaches of the Fleurieu Peninsular centred around the surfing town of Middleton, South Australia. Numbers are much smaller at this location compared to the Bight, with an average of a couple of whales per day. In recent years there have been regular sightings of more than ten whales at a time off Basham Beach.sawhalecentre.html A Whale Centre for information on the history of whaling and now whale watching in the area can be found at Victor Harbor. Some whales can be seen around in subantarctic regions such as Macquarie Island.antarctica.au/living-and-working/stations/macquarie-island/this-week-at-macquarie-island/page?id=119873&st=Macquarie&dt=MjAxMy0xMS0wOA==&test=2013-11-08 It is unknown whether historical oceanic habitats such as Lord Howe Island would be re-colonized by Australian populations in the future.

New Zealand

Many features are still unknown about right whale populations in New Zealand waters. However, studies by Department of Conservation and sightings reported by locals helped to deepen understanding. Scientists used to believe there was a very small, remnant population of southern right whales inhabiting New Zealand's "main" islands (North and South Island), containing probably 11 reproductive females.[ref]
