[[Kiefer Sutherland]]

CATEGORIES: 1966 births, Canadian people of English descent, Canadian people of German descent, Canadian people of Scottish descent, 20th-century Canadian male actors, 21st-century Canadian male actors, Male actors from Toronto, Best Drama Actor Golden Globe (television) winners, Canadian expatriate actors in the United States, Canadian male film actors, Canadian male television actors, Canadian male voice actors, Outstanding Performance by a Lead Actor in a Drama Series Primetime Emmy Award winners, Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Drama Series Screen Actors Guild Award winners, Sutherland family, Twin people from Canada, Living people

Kiefer William Frederick Dempsey George Rufus Sutherland"Beckham baby: Why the middle name Seven?" 11 July 2011, BBC (born 21 December 1966) is a Canadian actor, film producer, and film director. He is best known for his portrayal of Jack Bauer on the Fox series 24, for which he won an Emmy Award, a Golden Globe Award, two Screen Actors Guild Awards, and two Satellite Awards. He also starred as Martin Bohm in the Fox drama Touch, and provided the English voice of Punished Snake (aka Big Boss) in the video games Metal Gear Solid V: Ground Zeroes, and the upcoming Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain.

Early life

Sutherland was born in London, the son of Donald Sutherland and Shirley Douglas, both of whom are successful Canadian actors. His maternal grandfather was Scottish-born Canadian politician and former Premier of Saskatchewan Tommy Douglas, who is widely credited for bringing universal health care to Canada.
Sutherland is named after American-born writer and director Warren Kiefer, who, under the assumed name of Lorenzo Sabatini,Off Screen Volume 15, Issue 12, 31 December 2011: Warren Kiefer – The Man Who Wasn't There Retrieved 16 June 2012 directed Donald Sutherland in his first feature film, the Italian low-budget horror film Il castello dei morti vivi (Castle of the Living Dead).The Observer 30 March 2008: On the money – interview with Donald Sutherland Retrieved 16 June 2012
Sutherland's family moved to Corona, California. His parents divorced in 1970. In 1975, Sutherland moved with his mother to Toronto. He attended elementary school at Crescent Town Elementary School, St. Clair Junior High East York, and John G. Althouse Middle School in Toronto. He attended five different high schools, including St. Andrew's College, Martingrove Collegiate Institute, Harbord Collegiate Institute, Silverthorn Collegiate Institute, Malvern Collegiate Institute, and Annex Village Campus. He also spent a semester at Regina Mundi Catholic College in London (Ontario) and attended weekend acting lessons at Sir Frederick Banting Secondary School. Sutherland told Jimmy Kimmel Live! (2009) that he and Robert Downey, Jr. were roommates for three years when he first moved to Hollywood to pursue his career in acting.

Career

Stand by Me was the first film Sutherland made in the United States. He played the neighbourhood bully in this  coming of age story about the search for a dead body. Sutherland has appeared in more than 70 films, most notably Young Guns, Young Guns II, Twin Peaks: Fire Walk with Me, Flashback, A Few Good Men,  The Vanishing, The Three Musketeers, The Cowboy Way, Eye for an Eye, Dark City, Taking Lives and The Sentinel.
The actor is also a frequent collaborator with director Joel Schumacher, and has appeared in The Lost Boys, Flatliners, Phone Booth and the big screen adaptation of A Time to Kill. In The Lost Boys, Sutherland was reunited with actor Cory Feldman, who he had previously worked with on Stand by Me.
In 2005, Sutherland was inducted into Canada's Walk of Fame in Toronto,
He has starred in Japanese commercials for CalorieMate, performing a parody of his Jack Bauer character.
Sutherland is a celebrity producer of The 1 Second Film. In 2011, he made his Broadway debut, opposite Brian Cox, Jim Gaffigan, Chris Noth and Jason Patric in the Broadway revival of That Championship Season, which opened in March 2011. The show has since closed. Sutherland starred in the Fox television series Touch. Sutherland played the father of an autistic boy who does not like to be touched, while the son also communicates future humanity interrelated events to his father through numbers and mathematics.

24

Since 2001, Sutherland has been associated most widely with the role of Jack Bauer, on the critically acclaimed television series 24. After being nominated four times for the "Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series" Primetime Emmy Award, Sutherland won the award in 2006 for his role in 24's fifth season. In the opening skit of the 2006 Primetime Emmy Awards, Sutherland made an appearance as his 24 character, Jack Bauer. He was also nominated for Best actor in a Drama Television Series in the 2007 Golden Globe Awards for 24. According to his 2006 contract, his salary of $40 million for three seasons of the show made him the highest-earning actor on television.com, 11 April 2006. Retrieved 4 July 2008. Sutherland constantly emphasizes that the show is merely "entertainment." The Dean of the United States Military Academy, Brigadier General Patrick Finnegan, visited the set of 24 in February 2007 to urge the show's makers to reduce the number of torture scenesBuncombe, Andrew. US military tells Jack Bauer: Cut out the torture scenes ... or else!, The Independent, 13 February 2007. Retrieved 26 May 2008. and Sutherland accepted an invitation from the U.S. military to tell West Point cadets that it is wrong to torture prisoners. U.S. Army Invites Sutherland to Give Anti-Torture Speech, Hollywood. Retrieved 26 May 2008. In an interview with OK! Magazine, Howard Gordon says that it would be an "unbearable loss" if they killed off Sutherland's character. 49 (8 December 2008), p.8
In an interview with Charlie Rose on 12 January 2007, Sutherland made clear statements of his opposition to torture, specifically that, "... Torture is not a way of procuring information. The way of procuring information is in fact quite the opposite, and unfortunately that takes a lot of time." (see minute 19:00)Chambonfan. A conversation with actor Kiefer Sutherland, 12 January 2007. In another interview on 20 November 2008, Rose asked Sutherland, "You'd shut down Guantanamo tomorrow, would you not?" Sutherland's reply, "Me personally? Absolutely.  And unless you can charge those detainees, I'd let them go too.  The Constitution makes that really clear." (see minute 18:30)Chambonfan. A conversation with actor Kiefer Sutherland, 20 November 2008.
On 14 February 2010, Fox TV announced they were temporarily suspending production of Season 8 of 24 due to a ruptured cyst near one of Sutherland's kidneys. According to the report, he waited a few days before going in to have "elective surgery" performed.
On 26 March 2010, it was announced that 24 would end at the conclusion of the 8th season, paving the way for the 24 feature film to go into production. Production was anticipated to begin at the beginning of 2011.
On 9 May 2013, Deadline.'24′ Eyes Return As Limited Series On Fox, Howard Gordon To EP, Kiefer Sutherland In Talks To Star Retrieved 10 May 2013 On 14 May 2013, it was confirmed that the show will return for a limited series.Official: '24' returns May 2014 Retrieved 14 May 2013

Personal life

Family and relationships

Sutherland has one daughter from his first marriage to Camelia Kath, the widow of Chicago guitarist/singer Terry Kath, to whom he was married from 1987 to 1990, and through his marriage to Camelia, he became stepfather to Michelle Kath, who has two sons.
Julia Roberts met Sutherland in 1990, when they co-starred in Flatliners. In August 1990, Roberts and Sutherland announced their engagement, with an elaborate studio-planned wedding scheduled for 14 June 1991. Roberts broke the engagement three days before the wedding allegedly because Sutherland had been meeting with a stripper named Amanda Rice. Sutherland denied having an affair with Rice and said that they only met because he liked to play pool. On the day of what was supposed to be their wedding, Roberts went to Ireland with Sutherland's friend Jason Patric."Miss Roberts Regrets" People, 1 July 1991
On 29 June 1996, Sutherland married Kelly Winn. The couple separated in 1999 and he filed for divorce in 2004. The divorce was finalized on 16 May 2008.

Hobbies

Sutherland has a guitar collection, the majority of which are Gibson Les Pauls. Recently, the Gibson Custom shop released a guitar (signed by Sutherland), the KS-336, as part of their 'Inspired By' series.
Sutherland is an American football fan, particularly of USC Trojans football, and recorded a birthday message for former USC head coach Pete Carroll's 56th birthday.com, 15 September 2007. Retrieved 18 August 2008. After losing a bet to friend Dave Andreychuk over the 2010 New England Patriots versus Baltimore Ravens playoff game, Sutherland was forced to appear on the Late Show with David Letterman wearing a dress. He is also a NASCAR fan. He narrated the IMAX film NASCAR: The IMAX Experience. Additionally, his character Jack Bauer in 24 has used the name of team owner Jack Roush as an alias.
Additionally, Sutherland paints. One of his paintings served as the cover art for the twelfth edition of the Live X acoustic compilation series released by the American alternative rock radio station WNNX.
In the late 1990s, Sutherland, inspired by the experience in his films Young Guns, The Cowboy Way, and Cowboy Up, retired from acting briefly to pursue the rodeo circuit.

Legal troubles

Sutherland was arrested in Los Angeles on 25 September 2007, on drunk driving charges, after performing poorly on a field sobriety test. His test exceeded the state's legal blood alcohol limit, and he was later released on a $25,000 bail. Sutherland pleaded no contest to the DUI charge and was sentenced to 48 days in jail.
Sutherland surrendered to NYPD on 7 May 2009 for head-butting fashion designer Jack McCollough, founder and co-designer of Proenza Schouler, at the Mercer Hotel in SoHo following a fundraiser for the Metropolitan Museum of Art.

Business ventures

Sutherland is the co-owner (along with Jude Cole) of the independent record label Ironworks.
Sutherland reportedly fell victim to a financial scam involving cattle in 2010.

Filmography

Film and television

Video game

As director

Awards and nominations

Ranked No. 68 on the 2006 Forbes Celebrity 100 list of the world's most powerful celebrities. His earnings were a reported $23 million.







Interviews and articles


