[[Lundy]]

CATEGORIES: Landmark Trust properties in England, National Nature Reserves in England, National Trust properties in Devon, Nature reserves in Devon, Sites of Special Scientific Interest in Devon, Sites of Special Scientific Interest notified in 1987, Special Areas of Conservation in England, Visitor attractions in Devon, Ports and harbours of the Bristol Channel, Barbary pirates, Invasions of England, Marine reserves of the United Kingdom, Philately of the United Kingdom, Lundy, Micronations in England, Natural regions of England, Shipwrecks of England, Island restoration

Lundy is the largest island in the Bristol Channel, lying  off the coast of Devon, England, approximately one third of the distance across the channel between England and Wales. Lundy gives its name to a British sea area and is one of the islands of England. Bradford on Avon: Thomas Reed ISBN 0-901281-33-6 Lundy has been designated by Natural England as National Character Area 159, one of England's natural regions.naturalengland. Accessed on 8 September 2013
As of 2007, there was a resident population of 28 people, including volunteers. These include a warden, ranger, island manager, and farmer, as well as bar and house-keeping staff. Most live in and around the village at the south of the island. Most visitors are day-trippers, although there are 23 holiday properties and a camp site for staying visitors, mostly also around the south of the island.
In a 2005 opinion poll of Radio Times readers, Lundy was named as Britain's tenth greatest natural wonder. The entire island has been designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest and it was England's first statutory Marine Nature Reserve, and the first Marine Conservation Zone,Natural England,News release, 12 January 2009 because of its unique flora and fauna. It is managed by the Landmark Trust on behalf of the National Trust.

History

The name Lundy is believed to come from the old Norse word for "puffin island" (Lundey), lundi being the Norse word for a puffin and ey, an island,
Lundy has evidence of visitation or occupation from the Neolithic period onward, with Mesolithic flintwork, Bronze Age burial mounds, four inscribed gravestones from the early medieval period,See the discussion and bibliography in Elisabeth Okasha, Corpus of early Christian inscribed stones of South-west Britain (Leicester: University Press, 1993), pp. 154-166Lundy Field Society 40th Annual Report for 1989. Pp. 34 - 47. and an early medieval monastery (possibly dedicated to St Elen or St Helen).

Beacon Hill Cemetery

Beacon Hill cemetery was excavated by Charles Thomas in 1969. The site was originally enclosed by a curvilinear bank and ditch, which is still visible in the south west corner. However, the other walls were moved when the Old Light was constructed in 1819. Early Christian enclosures of this type are known as lanns in Cornish. There are surviving examples in Luxulyan, in Cornwall; Mathry, Meidrim, and Clydau in Wales; and Stowford, Jacobstowe, Lydford, and Instow, in Devon.
Thomas proposed a five-stage sequence of site usage:
(1) An area of round huts and fields. These huts may have fallen into disuse before the construction of the cemetery.
(2) The construction of the focal grave, an 11 ft by 8 ft rectangular stone enclosure containing a single cist grave. The interior of the enclosure was filled with small granite pieces. Two more cist graves located to the west of the enclosure may also date from this time.
(3) Perhaps 100 years later, the focal grave was opened and the infill removed. The body may have been moved to a church at this time.
(4) & (5) Two further stages of cist grave construction around the focal grave.
23 cist graves were found during this excavation. Considering that the excavation only uncovered a small area of the cemetery, there may be as many as 100 graves.

=Inscribed stones=

Four Celtic inscribed stones have been found in Beacon Hill cemetery:

Knights Templar

Lundy was granted to the Knights Templar by Henry II in 1160. The Templars were a major international maritime force at this time, with interests in North Devon, and almost certainly an important port at Bideford or on the River Taw in Barnstaple. This was probably because of the increasing threat posed by the Norse sea raiders; however, it is unclear whether they ever took possession of the island. Ownership was disputed by the Marisco family who may have already been on the island during King Stephen's reign. The Mariscos were fined, and the island was cut off from necessary supplies.

Marisco family

In 1235 William de Marisco was implicated in the murder of Henry Clement, a messenger of Henry III.

Piracy

Over the next few centuries, the island was hard to govern. Trouble followed as both English and foreign pirates and privateers – including other members of the Marisco family – took control of the island for short periods. Ships were forced to navigate close to Lundy because of the dangerous shingle banks in the fast flowing River Severn and Bristol Channel, with its tidal range of ,[ref]

</ref><ref>
