[[Maple Leaf (train)]]

CATEGORIES: Amtrak routes, Named passenger trains of Canada, Passenger rail transport in Ontario, Passenger rail transportation in New York, Railway services introduced in 1981

The Maple Leaf is a passenger train operated by Amtrak and Via Rail between Pennsylvania Station in New York City and Union Station in Toronto via the Empire Corridor. Daily service is offered in both directions; the  trip takes approximately 12 hours, including two hours for customs and immigration inspection. Although Amtrak rolling stock is used exclusively, the train is staffed by Via Rail personnel while in Canada. Service began in 1981.

History

The original Maple Leaf passenger train was a Grand Trunk Western Railroad service between Chicago, Illinois and Toronto, Ontario.  The service operated between Chicago's Dearborn Station and Toronto's Union Station on a route through Stratford, Ontario, Port Huron, Flint, Lansing, and Battle Creek, Michigan and South Bend, Indiana.  The route between Battle Creek and Port Huron is still served by Amtrak trains 365 and 364 and is called the Blue Water service.
The long-standing Maple Leaf  name was later applied to a joint Lehigh Valley Railroad/Canadian National overnight service between New York City and Toronto, which followed a route through  Geneva, New York and Wilkes-Barre, Allentown, and Bethlehem in eastern Pennsylvania.1946 Lehigh Valley timetable for The Maple Leaf. 
Amtrak and Via Rail introduced the Maple Leaf along the Hudson River and Erie Canal on April 26, 1981. The new Maple Leaf was the first collaboration between the two companies and the first New York-to-Toronto passenger service in a decade. The new train employed Amtrak's Amfleet coaches with a dinette car.   A 1982 consist included a baggage car, two coaches and a dinette; time spent in customs ranged from thirty minutes to two hours.
In the US an Amtrak crew operates the train whereas in Canada a Via Rail crew is in charge.

2013 Terror Plot

In 2013, the Maple Leaf was the target of a terror plot involving an attempt by two men, both non-citizen residents of Canada, who sought to derail the train as it crossed a bridge over the Twenty Mile Creek near Jordan, Ontario.  The two men were allegedly affiliates of an Al-Qaeda group operating out of Iran.

Route details

A change of locomotive is made at Albany on select days with P42DC units utilized north of Albany and P32AC-DM units taking over the remainder of the route to Penn Station. The Maple Leaf has previously operated with P32ACDM units directly from Toronto to New York.  Rarely, the P32ACDM may stay on the train to Toronto.  East of the border crossing, the service is shared with Empire Service trains.  Prior to the completion of the Empire Connection in 1991 the Maple Leaf originated at Grand Central Terminal in New York instead of Penn Station.
The Maple Leaf operates over Canadian National Railway, CSX Transportation, Metro-North Railroad, and Amtrak trackage:

Consist and equipment

The Maple Leaf operates year-round with Amtrak P42DC & P32AC-DM units and Amfleet I & II equipment. A typical consist will include:
The Maple Leaf consist grows to six cars with the addition of an extra Amfleet II car during the winter Christmas Holiday Shopping rush to handle additional seasonal demand.








