[[Golden Gate University]]

CATEGORIES: Universities and colleges in San Francisco, California, Educational institutions established in 1901, Distance education institutions, Online schools, Council of Independent Colleges, Schools accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges, Golden Gate University, South of Market, San Francisco

Golden Gate University (informally referred to as GGU, or simply as Golden Gate) is a private, nonsectarian, coeducational university located in the South of Market district, immediately south of the Financial District of downtown San Francisco, California. Founded in 1901, GGU specializes in educating professionals through its schools of law, business, taxation, and accounting. The University offers two undergraduate degrees with eight concentrations and 15 graduate degrees with 24 concentrations.

History

The university evolved out of the literary reading groups of the San Francisco Central YMCA at a time when, according to one contemporary estimate only one of every two thousand men had a college education.
The night school was renamed the Evening College on October 1, 1896 and became a full-fledged operation in 1901 with the creation of a law school. The law school was the first of the Y's educational departments to offer a full degree-level course, and thus the University traces its founding to the law school's establishment. Courses in Accountancy and Business Administration leading to the degree of Bachelor of Commercial Science began in 1908. Later, courses in foreign trade were added. The YMCA building was destroyed in the fire that followed the 1906 Earthquake. Following the earthquake, the school was conducted out of tents, and later leased space at 1220 Geary St. (now Geary Boulevard near Franklin Street in the Western Addition). In November 1910 the school moved into the YMCA's new building (closed in 2009) at 220 Golden Gate Avenue at Leavenworth Street, also in the Tenderloin.
A student contest resulted in the adoption of the new name Golden Gate. originally suggested by law student Charles H. Pool, Jr. (1895–1977) (LLB 1925) because contest judges thought it symbolized "romantic California."
The college continued to share the YMCAs building until June 1968, when it moved into the Allyne Building, a warehouse at 536 Mission Street originally built in 1924 as the showroom and wholesale department of Sherman Clay, a large retailer of pianos, records, record players, and other musical instruments.
In 1972, the College expanded and elevated itself to university status. In 1979, a new "west wing" of the university was completed, where most of the classroom space is located today.

Presidents

(prior to 1948, the top executive was called the "Director of Education")

Schools

Golden Gate University is primarily a post-graduate institution focused on professional training in law and business, with its smaller undergraduate programs linked to its larger graduate and professional schools.
Its four schools, with the year a university degree was first offered in the area are as follows:
Founded	in 1901, Golden	Gate University	School of Law was the first Northern California law school with an evening program and is 
one of the oldest law schools in the Western United States. 
The School of Law offers the JD, LLM, and JSD (Doctor of Juridical Science) degrees, while the Ageno School of Business offers the degrees of BA, BS, MS, MBA, PMBA, and DBA (Doctor of Business Administration). The Braden School of Taxation offers an MS in Taxation and the School of Accounting offers the MAc (Master of Accountancy).
As of December 2013, the Ageno School of Business was ranked 195 on the Social Science Research Network's list of the Top 500 U.S. Business Schools.

Programs and Disciplines

Accounting 
At the graduate level, the School of Accounting offers a master of accountancy, with optional concentrations in forensic accounting or taxation, and two graduate certificates (graduate certificate in forensic accounting and graduate certificate in accounting). The Edward S. Ageno School of Business offers an MBA with a concentration in accounting. The concentration and certificate in forensic accounting offer a nationally unique course of study focused on helping accountants prepare to participate in the growing specialty area of forensic accounting. This option of a concentration or certificate is aimed at Certified Public Accountants (CPAs) planning to become Certified in Financial Forensics(CFF).
Business and Management 
Finance
Financial Planning 
In 1980, GGU created the first graduate degree in financial planning to be offered in the United States.
Human Resource Management 
Information Technology Management 
International Business
Law 
Marketing and Public Relations 
Operations and Supply Chain Management 
Project Management 
Psychology 
Public Administration
Taxation 
TaxTalent ranked the Golden Gate University as the highest-regarded MS Tax program in the United States in along with DePaul University, which tied for first place. The results were based on the responses of 127 heads of corporate tax departments across the country.

Administration

At its incorporation as a separate institution from the YMCA in 1923, the college governance was divided between a four member (increased to nine members in 1948) Board of Governors, which ran educational program of the college including the conferral of degrees, and a five-member Board of Trustees to hold the college property. The Board of Governors met monthly, while the Board of Trustees only met occasionally when it's approval was required on a matter. Day-to-day operations of the college were handled by a Director of Education. The appointment of the Director, Governors and Trustees were made by the San Francisco YMCA though appointments to the latter two bodies were made on the Director of Education's recommendation. A 1948 reorganization raised the Director of Education to President, the incumbent Director, Nagel T. Miner (since 1931) becoming President. In September 1949 the Board of Governors and Board of Trustees were merged, with all current Trustees retiring, and the members of the Board of Governors being elected onto the Board of Trustees, which had 14 members out of a possible maximum of 21 members.
Presently, the University is managed by a self-sustaining Board of Trustees of between 20 and 47 members. Trustees serve 3-year terms with one third being up for election annually. The President of the University, and the President of the Alumni Association hold voting seats on the Board. Additionally there are four non-voting ex officio members, the President of the Student Government, the President of the Student Bar Association (law school student government); the President of the University Faculty Senate, and the Chair of the Law Faculty. The Trustees are selected from the worlds of business, law, accounting, and philanthropy.
Prominent former Trustees have included Curtis D. Wilbur, U.S. Secretary of the Navy under Calvin Coolidge. John L. McNabb, a former United States Attorney for the Northern District of California; Warren H. Pillsbury, an expert in the federal law of workers compensation (Governor 1923-1949, Trustee 1949-1963); James E. Hammond, a partner with what is now PriceWaterhouse Coopers (Governor 1923-1949, Trustee 1949-1968); George Christopher, a former Mayor of San Francisco; and Caspar Weinberger, an executive with Bechtel and a future U.S. Secretary of Defense.
Day to day operation of the University is in the hands of a President, five Vice-Presidents and the Deans of the four schools (Accounting, Business, Law and Taxation.)

Accreditation

Golden Gate University has been accredited on an institution-wide basis by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges (WASC) since 1959. It had previously been accredited by what is now the Northwest Commission on Colleges and Universities since 1950. and students completing either the masters in Financial Planning or the graduate certificate in financial planning qualify to sit for the Certified Financial Planner (CFP) certification exam.

Campuses

The GGU campus is located in the Financial District of San Francisco.  It maintains satellite teaching/learning sites in the following locations:

CyberCampus

Golden Gate first offered distance education programs in 1993 via correspondence, online courses in 1997, then began offering fully accredited online degree programs in 1998. Cybercampus offerings include 13 graduate degrees, two undergraduate degrees, seven graduate certificates, and 10 undergraduate certificates, all of which can be completed entirely online. GGU currently uses the Moodle online learning platform to manage and deliver course content.

Students

Roughly 67 percent of students who attend Golden Gate University are in graduate programs, 12 
percent are in undergraduate programs and 21 percent are law 
students. In 2011 around 650 international students from 46 countries were
enrolled at GGU.

Notable people: alumni and faculty

Image:Terence_Henricks.jpg|Terence Henricks, MPA 1982, Commander of the Space Shuttle Columbia
Image:Mary_Hayashi. First Korean-American woman in California's legislative history.
Image:Philip_Burton.jpg|Philip Burton, LLB 52, former US Congressman
Image:Fiona_Ma.jpg|Fiona Ma, MS 92, former member of the California State Assembly

Business

Government

Military

Law firms

Faculty








