[[Ramana Maharshi]]

CATEGORIES: 1879 births, 1950 deaths, Advaitin philosophers, Hindu gurus, Indian spiritual teachers, Indian philosophers, Tamil people, People from Virudhunagar district, Indian yogis, Indian yoga teachers

Ramana Maharshi 
At the age of sixteen, Venkataraman lost his sense of individual selfhood,
His first years were spent in solitude, but his stillness and his appearance as a sannyasin soon attracted devotees.
Venkataraman was given the name Bhagavan Sri Ramana Maharshi by one of his earliest devotees, Ganapati Muni.
In response to questions on self-liberation and the classic texts on Yoga and Vedanta, Ramana recommended self-enquiry as the principal way to awaken to the "I-I", realising the Self He also recommended Bhakti, and gave his approval to a variety of paths and practices.David Godman, Meditation and concentration, from Be As You Are: The Teachings of Sri Ramana Maharshi

Biography

Early years (1879–1896)

=Family background=

Ramana Maharshi was born Venkataraman Iyer on 30 December 1879

=Childhood (1879–1895)=

Venkataraman was popular, good at sports, mischievous, and was very intelligent with an exceptional memory which enabled him to succeed in school without having to put in very much effort. He had a couple of unusual traits. When he slept, he went into such a deep state of unconsciousness that his friends could physically assault his body without waking him up. He also had an extraordinary amount of luck. In team games, whichever side he played for always won. This earned him the nickname 'Tanga-kai', which means 'golden hand'. David Godman talks to John David
When Venkataraman was about 11, his father sent him to live with his paternal uncle Subbaiyar in Dindigul because he wanted his sons to be educated in English so they would be eligible to enter government service, and only Tamil was taught at the village school in Tiruchuzhi. In 1891, when his uncle was transferred to Madurai, Venkataraman and his elder brother Nagaswami moved with him. In Dindigul, Venkataraman attended a British School.
In 1892, Venkataraman's father Sundaram Iyer suddenly fell seriously ill and unexpectedly died several days later at the age of 42. For some hours after his father's death he contemplated the matter of death, and how his father's body was still there, but the 'I' was gone from it.

Awakening (1895–1896)

After leaving Scott's Middle School, Venkataraman went to the American Mission High School. One November morning in 1895, he was on his way to school when he saw an elderly relative and inquired where the relative had come from. The answer was "From Arunachala." Krishna Bikshu describes Venkataraman's response: 
A month later he came across a copy of Sekkizhar's Periyapuranam, a book that describes the lives of 63 Saivite saints, and was deeply moved and inspired by it. During this period he began to visit, the nearby Meenakshi Temple in Madurai. Chapter 1: Early Years
Soon after, on 17 July 1896,
According to David Godman, a more accurate exposition of this event is given in the Sri Ramana Leela, the Telugu biography of Ramana that was written by Krishna Bhikshu, which "is surprisingly short, but it does have interesting additions and variations from the English version that was recorded by Narasimha Swami":

Ramana summarised his insight into "aham sphurana" (Self-awareness)
At first, Ramana thought that he was possessed by a spirit, "which had taken up residence in his body". This feeling remained for several weeks. Later in life, he called his death experience akrama mukti, "sudden liberation", as opposed to the krama mukti, "gradual liberation" as in the Vedanta path of jnana yoga:
After this event, he lost interest in school-studies, friends, and relations. Avoiding company, he preferred to sit alone, absorbed in concentration on the Self, and went daily to the Meenakshi Temple, ecstatically devoted to the images of the Gods, tears flowing profusely from his eyes.
Venkataraman's elder brother, Nagaswamy, was aware of a great change in him and on several occasions rebuked him for his detachment from all that was going on around him. About six weeks after Venkataraman's absorption into the Self, on 29 August 1896, he was attempting to complete a homework assignment which had been given to him by his English teacher for indifference in his studies. Suddenly Venkataraman tossed aside the book and turned inward in meditation. His elder brother rebuked him again, asking, "What use is all this to one who is like this?", referring to his behaviour as a sadhu. Venkataraman did not answer, but recognised the truth in his brother's words.

First years at Tiruvannamalai (1896–1899)

=Journey to Tiruvannamalai (1896)=

He decided to leave his home and go to Arunachala. Knowing his family would not permit this, he slipped away, telling his brother he needed to attend a special class at school. Fortuitously, his brother asked him to take five rupees and pay his college fees on his way to school. Venkataraman took out an atlas, calculated the cost of his journey, took three rupees and left the remaining two with a note which read: 

On the morning of 1 September 1896, Venkataraman boarded the train and travelled to Tiruvannamalai, where he was to stay the rest of his life. On the three occasions in later life Venkataraman referred to himself he used the name Arunachala Ramana.

=Arunachaleswara temple (1896–1897)=

In Tiruvannamalai he went straight to the temple of Arunachaleswara. There, he entered the sanctum sanctorum and embraced the linga in ecstasy. The burning sensation that had started back at Madurai, which he later described as "an inexpressible anguish which I suppressed at the time", merged in Arunachaleswara.
The first few weeks he spent in the thousand-pillared hall, but shifted to other spots in the temple and eventually to the Patala-lingam vault so that he might remain undisturbed. There, he would spend days absorbed in such deep samādhi that he was unaware of the bites of vermin and pests. Seshadri Swamigal, a local saint, discovered him in the underground vault and tried to protect him. After about six weeks in the Patala-lingam, he was carried out and cleaned up. For the next two months he stayed in the Subramanya Shrine, so unaware of his body and surroundings that food had to be placed in his mouth or he would have starved.

=Gurumurtam temple (1897–1898)=

In February 1897, six months after his arrival at Tiruvannamalai, Ramana moved to Gurumurtam, a temple about a mile out of Tiruvannamalai.
During this time, Ramana neglected his body, "completely disregarding his outward appearance".
While living at Gurumurtam temple his family discovered his whereabouts. First his uncle Nelliappa Iyer came and pled with him to return home, promising that the family would not disturb his ascetic life. Ramana sat motionless and eventually his uncle gave up.

=Pavalakkunru temple (1898–1899)=

In September 1898 Ramana moved to the Shiva-temple at Pavalakkunru, one of the eastern spurs of Arunachala. His mother and brother Nagaswami found him here in December 1898. Day after day his mother begged him to return, but no amount of weeping and pleading had any visible effect on him. She appealed to the devotees who had gathered around, trying to get them to intervene on her behalf until one requested that Ramana write out his response to his mother. He then wrote on a piece of paper,
At this point his mother returned to Madurai saddened.

Arunachala (1899–1922)

=Virupaksha Cave (1899–1916)=

Soon after this, in February 1899, Ramana left the foothills to live on Arunachala itself.
In 1902, a government official named Sivaprakasam Pillai, with writing slate in hand, visited the young Swami in the hope of obtaining answers to questions about "How to know one's true identity". The fourteen questions put to the young Swami and his answers were Ramana's first teachings on Self-enquiry, the method for which he became widely known, and were eventually published as 'Nan Yar?', or in English, 'Who am I?'.
Several visitors came to him and many became his devotees. Kavyakantha Sri Ganapati Sastri,
In 1911 the first westerner, Frank Humphreys, then a policeman stationed in India, discovered Ramana and wrote articles about him which were first published in The International Psychic Gazette in 1913.
It is reported that in 1912, while in the company of disciples, an episode occurred where Ramana's vital life signs ceased for approximately 15 minutes, after which he displayed an enhanced ability to engage in practical affairs while remaining in Sahaja Samadhi:

=Skandashram (1916–1922)=

In 1916 his mother Alagammal and younger brother Nagasundaram joined Ramana at Tiruvannamalai and followed him when he moved to the larger Skandashram Cave, where Bhagavan lived until the end of 1922. His mother took up the life of a sannyasin, and Ramana began to give her intense, personal instruction, while she took charge of the Ashram kitchen. Ramana's younger brother, Nagasundaram, then became a sannyasi, assuming the name Niranjanananda, becoming known as Chinnaswami (the younger Swami).
During this period, Ramana composed The Five Hymns to Arunachala, his magnum opus in devotional lyric poetry. Of
them the first is Akshara Mana Malai. It was composed in Tamil in response to the request of a devotee for a song to be sung while wandering in the town for alms. The Marital Garland tells in glowing symbolism of the love and union between the human soul and God, expressing the attitude of the soul that still aspires.Introduction to Sri Ramana's Hymns to Arunachala, from The Collected Works of  Sri Ramana Maharshi

=Mother's death (1922)=

Beginning in 1920, his mother's health deteriorated. On the day of her death, 19 May 1922, at about 8 a.m., Ramana sat beside her. It is reported that throughout the day, he had his right hand on her heart, on the right side of the chest, and his left hand on her head, until her death around 8:00 p.m., when Ramana pronounced her liberated, literally, 'Adangi Vittadu, Addakam' ('absorbed'). Later Ramana said of this: "You see, birth experiences are mental. Thinking is also like that, depending on sanskaras (tendencies). Mother was made to undergo all her future births in a comparatively short time."A.R. Natarajan, The Maharshi and His Mother Her body was enshrined in a samadhi, on top of which a Siva lingam was installed and given the name Matrbhuteshwara, Shiva manifesting as mother. To commemorate the anniversary of Ramana Maharshi's mother's death, a puja, known as her Aradhana or Mahapooja, is performed every year at the Matrbhuteshwara.

Ramanashram (1922–1950)

From 1922 till his death in 1950 Ramana lived in Sri Ramanashramam, the ashram that developed around the mother's tomb.

=Commencement of Ramanashram (1920s)=

Ramana often walked from Skandashram to his mother's tomb. In December 1922 he didn't return to Skandashram, and settled at the base of the Hill, and Sri Ramanasramam started to develop. At first, there was only one hut at the samadhi, but in 1924 two huts, one opposite the samadhi and the other to the north, were erected. The so-called Old Hall was built in 1928. Ramana lived here until 1949.
Sri Ramanasramam grew to include a library, hospital, post-office and many other facilities. Ramana displayed a natural talent for planning building projects. Annamalai Swami gave detailed accounts of this in his reminiscences. Until 1938, Annamalai Swami was entrusted with the task of supervising the projects and received his instructions from Ramana directly.

=Discovery by westerners (1930s)=

In 1931 the classic biography of Ramana Maharshi, Self Realisation: The Life and Teachings of Ramana Maharshi, written by Narasimha Swami, was published. and describes his affection toward Ramana:

While staying at Sri Ramanasramam, Brunton had an experience of a "sublimely all-embracing" awareness, Resulting visitors included Paramahansa Yogananda, Somerset Maugham (whose 1944 novel The Razor's Edge models its spiritual guru after Ramana),David Godman (1988), Somerset Maugham and The Razor's Edge, The Mountain Path, 1988, pp. 239–45 Mercedes de Acosta and Arthur Osborne.

=Later years (1940s)=

In 1939 started the building of a temple which was erected over the mother's samadhi, called Mathrubhuteswara, "God in the form of the mother". In the late 1940s Arthur Osborne joined the ashram. He was the first editor of Mountain Path in 1964, the magazine published by Ramanashram.

=Final years (1948–1950)=

In November 1948, a tiny cancerous lump was found on Ramana's arm and was removed in February 1949 by the ashram's doctor. Soon, another growth appeared and another operation was done by an eminent surgeon in March 1949 with radium applied. The doctor told Ramana that a complete amputation of the arm to the shoulder was required to save his life, but he refused. A third and fourth operation were performed in August and December 1949, but only weakened him. Other systems of medicine were then tried; all proved fruitless and were stopped by the end of March when devotees gave up all hope. To devotees who begged him to cure himself for the sake of his followers, Ramana is said to have replied, "Why are you so attached to this body? Let it go" and "Where can I go? I am here."
By April 1950, Ramana was too weak to go to the hall and visiting hours were limited. Visitors would file past the small room where he spent his final days to get one final glimpse. Swami Satyananda, the attendant at the time, reports,
Henri Cartier-Bresson, the French photographer, who had been staying at the ashram for a fortnight prior to Ramana's death, recounted the event:

Cartier-Bresson took some of the last photographs of Ramana on 4 April 1950, and went on to take pictures of the mahasamadhi preparations. The New York Times in its article dated 16 April 1950, concluded: 

Charisma

Devotion for Ramana Maharshi

Ramana Maharshi was a charismatic person, When one devotee asked if it would be possible to prostrate before Sri Ramana and touch his feet, he replied,

In later life, the amount of devotees and their devotion became so extensive that Ramana became restricted in his daily routine. Several times Ramana tried to escape from the ashram, to return to a life of solitude. Vasudeva reports:

Ramana did return to the ashram, but has also reported himself on attempts to leave the ashram:


How Sri Ramana Lived

Ramana was noted for his belief in the power of silence and his relatively sparse use of speech, as well as his lack of concern for fame or criticism.org, Sri Ramana Maharshi's Response to Criticism Ramana was noted for his unusual love of creatures and plants. On the morning of 18 June 1948, he realised his favourite cow Lakshmi was near death. Just as he had with his own Mother, Ramana placed his hands on her head and over her heart. The cow died peacefully at 11:30 a.m. and Ramana later declared that the cow was liberated.A. R. Natarajan, Timeless in Time
He led a modest and renunciate life. However, a popular image of him as a person who spent most of his time doing nothing except silently sitting in samadhi is highly inaccurate, according to David Godman, who has written extensively about Ramana. According to Godman, from the period when an Ashram began to rise around him after his mother arrived into his later years, Ramana was actually quite active in Ashram activities such as cooking and stitching leaf plates until his health failed. David Godman talks to John David. Page 3

Lineage

=Sri Ramana did not create any lineage=

Ramana did not publicise himself as a guru,
With regard to Sri Ramana Ashram, Sri Ramana had in 1938 executed a legal will bequething all the Ramanashram properties to his younger brother Niranjanananda and his descendants. The Ramanashram as in 2013 is run by Sri Niranjananda's grandson Sri V.S. Raman. Ramanashram is legally recognised as a public religious trust whose aim was to maintain Ramanasramam in a way that was consonant with Sri Ramana's declared wishes that is the ashram should remain open as a spiritual institution so that anyone who wished to could avail themselves of its facilities.
Judgement of the Madras High Court; Bench: Ramaswami, Anantanarayanan; AIR 1961 Mad 265, (1960) 2 MLJ 121; Ramanasramam Vs The Commissioner For Hindu; 12 December 1959
 online text


=Sri Ramana was not part of any lineage=

Although Ramana's teachings have often been labelled as Advaita Vedanta,
Ramana copied this verse on a slip of paper, and when the sannyasin returned, Ramana showed the verse, where-after the sannyasin gave up and left.

Context

C.G. Jung objected to regarding Ramana as an "isolated phenomenon"

Alan Edwards has placed Ramana Maharshi in the context of western Orientalism, arguing that


=Indian context=

According to Zimmer and Jung, Ramana's appearance as a mauni, a silent saint absorbed in samadhi, fitted into pre-existing Indian notions of holiness.
Tamil culture has a long tradition of devotional spiritual practices an aspect of Shiva as a guru.

=Western context=

In the 1930s Ramana Maharshi's teachings were brought to the west by Paul Brunton in his A Search in Secret India.
A major force in the mutual influence of eastern and western ideas and religiosity was the Theosophical Society,
Brunton also wasn't the first westerner who searched for masters in India.
Jung and Zimmer were two of the first westerners to pick up Ramana's teachings. Jung also wrote,

Stimulated by Arthur Osborne, in the 1960s Bhagawat Singh actively started to spread Ramana Maharshi's teachings in the USA.

Teachings

Ramana gave upadesa, "instruction or guidance given to a disciple by his Guru",Arthur Osborne, Ramana Maharshi and the Path of Self-Knowledge. Glossary pointing to the true Self of the devotees and showing them the truth of it.
Early on, Ramana attracted devotees who would sit in his company, and ask him questions. Several devotees recorded the answers to their own specific questions, or kept the sheets of paper on which Ramana answered, and had them later published. Other devotees recorded the talks between Ramana and devotees, a large amount of which have also been published.
Though his teaching is consistent with and generally associated with Hinduism, the Upanishads and Advaita Vedanta, there are some differences with the traditional Advaitic school. Ramana gave his approval to a variety of paths and practices from various religions.

Silence

Ramana's main means of instruction of his devotees was through silence:Sr Ramanashram, Teachings

His method of teaching has been compared to Dakshinamurti, Shiva in the ascetic appearance of the Guru, who teaches through silence:

Commenting on the Dakshinamurti Stotra, Ramana said:


Self-enquiry


Ramana urged people who came to him to practice self-enquiry. He directed people to look inward rather than seeking outside themselves for Realization: "The true Bhagavan resides in your Heart as your true Self. This is who I truly am". Ramana's teachings about self-enquiry have been classified as the Path of Knowledge (Jnana marga) among the Indian schools of thought.

=Questioning "Who am I?"=

In response to questions on self-liberation and the classic texts on Yoga and Vedanta, Ramana recommended self-enquiry as the means to awaken to the "I-I"

Basically "self-enquiry" is the constant attention to the inner awareness of "I" or "I am").

Ramana warned against considering self-enquiry as an intellectual exercise. Properly done, it involves fixing the attention firmly and intensely on the feeling of 'I', without thinking. Attention must be fixed on the 'I' until the sense of "I" disappears and the Self is realised. Ramana's written works contain terse descriptions of self-enquiry. Verse thirty of Ulladu Narpadu:
Verses nineteen and twenty of Upadesa Undiyar describe the same process in almost identical terms:

Ramana considered the Self to be permanent and enduring,

=Nan Yar?=

His earliest teachings are documented in the book Nan Yar? (Who am I?), in which he elaborates on the "I" and Self-enquiry:

Bhakti

Although he advocated self-enquiry as the fastest means to realisation, he also recommended the path of bhakti and self-surrender (to one's deity or guru) either concurrently or as an adequate alternative, which would ultimately converge with the path of self-enquiry.
Bhakti can be done in four ways:American Institute of Vedic Studies, The Teachings of Ramana Maharshi: An Integral View

Influences

Throughout his life, through contact with educated devotees like Ganapata Muni,


Study through devotees

Already in 1896, a few months after his arrival at Arunachala, Ramana attracted his first disciple, Uddandi Nayinar,
In 1897 Ramana was joined by Palaniswami, who became his attendant.
As early as 1900, when Ramana was 20 years old, he became acquainted with the teachings of the Hindu monk and Neo-Vedanta

Referred works

thumb| Adi Shankara with Disciples, by Raja Ravi Varma (1904) Ramana often mentioned and encouraged the study of the following classical works which are associated with Advaita Vedanta and Shaivism: 

Shaivism

Though Ramana's teachings are often considered to be akin to Vedanta, his spiritual life is also associated with Shaivism.
Shaiva Siddhanta, the Shaivism which is prevalent in Tamil Nadu, combines the original emphasis on ritual fused with an intense devotional tradition expressed in the bhakti poetry of the Nayanars. Osborne notes that Ramana was born at Arudra Darshan, the day of the 'Sight of Siva'
As a youth, prior to his awakening, Ramana read the Periya Puranam, the stories of the 63 Tamil saints. In later life, he told those stories to his devotees:

In later life, he came to be regarded as a Dakshinamurthy, an aspect of Shiva as a guru of all types of knowledge, and bestower of jnana. This aspect of Shiva is his personification as the supreme or the ultimate awareness, understanding and knowledge. This form represents Shiva in his aspect as a teacher of yoga, music, and wisdom, and giving exposition on the shastras.
Ramana considered the Self to be his guru, in the form of the sacred mountain Arunachala, where he spent his adult life.
One of the works that Ramana used to explain his insights was the Ribhu Gita, a song at the heart of the Shivarahasya Purana, one of the 'Shaiva Upapuranas' or ancillary Purana regarding Shiva and Shaivite worship. Another work used by him was the Dakshinamurthy Stotram, a text by Shankara. It is a hymn to Shiva, explaining Advaita Vedanta.

Vedanta

Ramana's teachings are often interpreted as Advaita Vedanta, though Ramana Maharshi never "received diksha (initiation) from any recognised authority".Sri Ramanasramam, "A lineage of Bhagavan Sri Ramana Maharshi?" Ramana himself did not call his insights advaita:

There are differences with the traditional Advaitic school. Advaita recommends a negationist neti, neti (Sanskrit, "not this", "not this") path, or mental affirmations that the Self was the only reality, such as "I am Brahman" or "I am He". Ramana advocated the enquiry "Nan Yar" (Tamil, "Who am I"). And Sri Ramana, unlike the traditional Advaitic school, strongly discouraged devotees from adopting a renunciate lifestyle and renouncing their responsibilities. To one devotee who felt he should abandon his family, whom he described as "samsara" (illusion), to intensify his spiritual practice, Sr Ramana replied,


Notable devotees

Over the course of Ramana's lifetime, people from a wide variety of backgrounds, religions, and countries were drawn to him. Some stayed for the rest of their lives (or his) and served him with great devotion, and others came for a single darshan and left, deeply affected by the peace he radiated.
Quite a number of devotees wrote books conveying Ramana's teachings: 
Several western authors have been instrumental in gaining western attention for Ramana Maharshi:
H. W. L. Poonja and his students have been instrumental in the further popularisation of Ramana through the so-called Neo-Advaita or Satsang-movement.
Attendants of Ramana included Palaniswami (from 1897), Kunju Swami (from 1920), Madhava Swami, Ramanatha Brahmachari, Krishnaswami, Rangaswamy, Sivananda, Krishna Bhikshu and Annamalai Swami (from 1928). The devoted ladies who cooked for Bhagavan and his devotees in the ashram kitchen include Shantamma, Sampurnamma, Subbalakshmi Ammal, Lokamma, and Gowri Ammal.
Swami Ramdas visited Ramana Maharshi while on pilgrimage in 1922, and after darshan, spent the next 21 days meditating in solitude in a cave on Arunachala. Thereafter, he attained the direct realisation that "All was Rama, nothing but Rama".The Mountain Path, January 1965, Swami Ramdas
William Somerset Maugham, the English author, wrote a chapter entitled "The Saint" in his last book "Points of View." This chapter is devoted to Ramana Maharshi, whom Maugham had at one time visited before Indian independence.
Indian National Congress politician and freedom-fighter, O. P. Ramaswamy Reddiyar, who served as the Premier of Madras from 1947 to 1949, was also a devoted follower of Ramana Maharshi. Ramaswami Pillai, Balarama Reddy, Ramani Ammal, Kanakammal, Meenakshi Ammal, Perumalswami and Rayar are some of the other long standing devotees who came into the Sannadhi of Bhagavan during his life at Sri Ramanasramam.
Maurice Frydman (a.k.a. Swami Bharatananda), a Polish Jew who later translated Nisargadatta Maharaj's work "I Am That" from Marathi to English, was also deeply influenced by Ramana's teachings.
Many of the questions published in Maharshi's Gospel (1939) were put by Maurice, and they elicited detailed replies from the Maharshi. About Frydman, Sri Ramana had remarked "He (Maurice Frydman) belongs only here (to India). Somehow he was born abroad, but has come again here." Mountain Path, No. 1, 1977, Maurice Frydman by Dr. M.Sadashiva Rao

Works

Writings

Ramana "never felt moved to formulate his teaching of his own accord, either verbally or in writing".
Writings by Ramana are:

Recorded talks

Several collections of recorded talks, in which Ramana used Tamil, Telugu and Malayalam, have been published. Those are based on written transcripts, which were "hurriedly written down in English by his official interpreters".

Compendia and expositions

Biographies

Reminiscences

Books on devotees

For children

Documentary

Translations of Indian texts





Notes

Citations

Sources

=Published sources=

=Web-sources=

Further reading



Ashrams and organisations
Websites on Ramana Maharshi
Background


