[[University of Ontario Institute of Technology]]

CATEGORIES: University of Ontario Institute of Technology, Educational institutions established in 2003, Technical universities and colleges, Engineering universities and colleges in Canada, Buildings and structures in Oshawa, 2003 establishments in Canada

The University of Ontario Institute of Technology (UOIT) is a public research university located in Oshawa, Ontario, Canada.  The university shares its campus with Durham College. The university was founded in 2002 and accepted its first students in 2003, making it one of Canada's newest universities. The enabling legislation is the University of Ontario Institute of Technology Act, 2002. Faculty members also encourage students to use their laptops to complete assignments, perform laboratory research and interact with faculty during lectures. UOIT offers a range of undergraduate programs, and graduate programs in Science, Engineering, Health and Information Technology. The UOIT campus is approximately  in the northern part of Oshawa.

History

UOIT was founded in 2002 by the University of Ontario Institute of Technology Act, 2002 passage by the Legislative Assembly of Ontario of Bill 109 on June 27, 2002. It is a public, career-focused university emphasizing science and technology, and a part of the Ontario government's initiative to create more spaces in postsecondary institutions for the double cohort. UOIT's new slogan, "Challenge, Innovate, Connect" was unveiled in June 2006.
UOIT offered graduate and postgraduate programs and research opportunities to the first 947 students in September 2003 and total enrolment was over 5,000 in the 2007–2008 school year, making it the fastest growing university in Ontario. The student population for 2009 was 6285 and 7018 in 2010; by 2012 there are 9203 students.Logistics Education
thumb|left|UOIT Library and Starbucks. The facilities currently include a library shared with Durham College, the Science Building, and the Business and IT Building as well as a state of the art virtual hospital for nursing students. The Ontario Power Generation Engineering Building opened in September 2006. The residences for UOIT are Simcoe Village and South Village. The Automotive Centre of Excellence (ACE) is connected to the Ontario Power Generation Engineering Building (opened in 2011). ACE is a multi-level testing and research centre that will allow for full climatic, durability and lifecycle testing. It has a full range of testing facilities including a five-story high climatic wind tunnel.
Plans have been announced for the Centre for Cybercrime Research which will be a separate, permanent location on campus and will be dedicated to leading-edge research and the training of graduate and undergraduate students in various aspects of cybercrime.Campus Athletic Centre expansion well underwayUOIT celebrates grand opening of Campus Recreation and Wellness Centre expansion | 2007
The University has established a downtown campus. It purchased and renovated the Regent Theatre to be used as a lecture theatre during the week and as a community stage on the weekends. The university also renovated the former Alger Press building which opened in January 2011 as the headquarters of the UOIT downtown campus. UOIT has also initiated plans to renovate Victoria St. (Between King St. and Bond St. and beside Bordessa Hall) into a pedestrian, social and lounge area. Currently the Faculty of Social Sciences and Humanities and the Faculty of Education are located downtown. The university just completed a comprehensive master plan for the downtown campus location entitled "Into the Future: A Framework & Action Plan for Growing UOIT & Downtown Oshawa. It will guide university growth over the next years and decades. The study anticipates the relocation of the Faculty of Business and Information Technology from the north campus location to the downtown campus location by 2015.

Programs

UOIT has seven faculties, each offering several programs.Connect@UOIT - UOIT - List by faculty

Research

Faculty members are involved in research in a variety of areas. These include:

Athletics

The University of Ontario Institute of Technology Ridgebacks Athletics department is home to a growing varsity athletics program featuring curling, dance, golf, hockey, rowing, tennis, women's lacrosse and men's soccer. The Ridgebacks are members of Ontario University Athletics (OUA) and Canadian Interuniversity Sport (CIS).

Student life

thumb|left|TKE founders The University of Ontario Institute of Technology is home to a number of fraternities and sororities, both local and international. There is no "Greek row" on campus, nor are the fraternities and sororities formally acknowledged by the university. The university has a fast-growing Greek community, considering that it was founded in 2002. There are currently two fraternities and two sororities on campus. Of the approximately 9000 undergraduate students, about 170 are currently involved in a Greek organization. The Greek system at the University of Ontario Institute of Technology has a system of self-government. The day-to-day operations of the Greek community are governed by the organizations themselves, with a representative from each organization residing on the Greek Council. Many of the fraternity and sorority houses on campus are located within walking distance of the school. Many of the Greek organizations often contribute hundreds of volunteer hours and donate thousands of dollars to local charities, causes and clubs. These organizations are listed below, along with the year they were founded.

Greek life

Fraternity:
Tau Kappa Epsilon was the first fraternity chartered at UOIT and is the only fraternity to recruit both from UOIT and Durham College. With 292 chapters and over 290,000 members worldwide, they are the largest college fraternity in the world. Their six main values are brotherhood, scholarship, leadership, service, teamwork and character. TKE has also made an impact in the community and on campus.durhamcollege.php?id=3077&issue=
Sorority:
Alpha Gamma Delta is UOIT's only international sorority with over 160,000 sisters worldwide. Their values include sisterhood, academic excellence, personal development, leadership and philanthropy.
Alpha Sigma Chi is a sorority that recruits from both UOIT and Durham College. It is a local sorority.
All of the sororities accept students from both Durham College and UOIT.
In addition to fraternities and sororities, UOIT also has a number of societies and clubs.your-sa.ca/20102011-clubs-list/

Student societies

Buildings

ACE
The Automotive Centre of Excellence (ACE) is the first testing and research centre of its kind in Canada, and in many respects the world. It is owned by the University of Ontario Institute of Technology (UOIT) and is located on the university's north campus location in Oshawa, Ontario.
ACE is a multi-purpose centre with an area of approximately 16,300 square metres. It is divided into two distinct sections: a core research facility (CRF) and an integrated research and training facility (IRTF).
The CRF offers full-size chambers that allow for full climatic, structural durability and lifecycle testing including one of the largest and most sophisticated climatic wind tunnels on the planet. In this test chamber, wind speeds can exceed 240 kilometres per hour, temperatures range from -40 to +60°C and relative humidity ranges from 5 to 95 per cent. The climatic wind tunnel has a unique variable nozzle that can optimize the airflow from 7 to 13 square metres (and larger) allowing for an unprecedented range of vehicle and test property sizes. Coupled with this feature is a large flexible chassis dynamometer that is integrated into an 11.5-metre turntable. Now, for the first time anywhere, vehicles and test properties can be turned into the airstream under full operating conditions to facilitate crosswind development. The large open chamber has a readily reconfigurable solar array that will replicate the effects of the sun and is hydrogen-capable, allowing for alternative fuels and fuel cell development.
The IRTF spans five floors with space dedicated for research, education and training. It has offices, laboratories, conference rooms and common work areas that are available to rent. This facility will foster an environment for collaboration and interaction between industry, researchers and students.
ACE is a truly independent test facility that is commercially available to customers who are seeking to bring their ideas into a proof of concept and ready for market. In addition to conventional automotive applications, ACE is suitable for testing alternative fuel, hybrid and electric vehicles. It is large enough to accommodate trucks, tandem drive systems, full coach buses, light rail transit, aerospace, military and agricultural applications, wind turbines and solar panels. Furthermore, ACE could be used to train military personnel, rescue crews or competitive athletes, to carry out performance testing of outdoor survival gear. ACE also has the potential to assist the movie industry or test products that are subject to severe wind, humidity, snow, icing or desert heat.
ACE is available to rent by those with a need for its unique capabilities, including: manufacturers of all descriptions, start-up companies and researchers in Canada and from around the world. Clients can rent the entire facility or specific chambers at an hourly rate that is globally competitive.
ACE was developed in partnership with UOIT, General Motors of Canada, the Government of Ontario, the Government of Canada and the Partners for the Advancement of Collaborative Engineering Education (PACE). The total cost of the facility is approximately $100 million CDN.
ERC
The Energy Systems and Nuclear Science Research Centre (ERC) is a 9,290-square-metre facility that houses UOIT's unique-in-Canada education programs and research in geothermal, hydraulic, hydrogen, natural gas, nuclear solar and wind energy technologies. The ERC enables leading-edge research in clean and green energies and technologies, and promotes Canada's entrepreneurial advantage through public-private research and commercialization partnerships. 
Through its offering of programs in Nuclear Engineering and Energy Systems Engineering, UOIT is well-positioned as the premier training ground for the country's future energy scientists and nuclear engineers. Undergraduate, graduate and second-career training enrolment is projected to climb from 364 students in 2009-2010 to approximately 650 in 2012. This increase will help address the significant demand for next-generation profes­sionals who are prepared to meet the needs of a rapidly growing industry and aging infrastructure and ensure Canada has the highly qualified workforce that it requires to remain globally competitive. These programs are complemented by Energy and Environmental options in UOIT's Mechanical Engineering, Electrical Engineering and Science programs. 
ERC facts

Campus Facilities

Board Members

Presidents/Vice-Chancellor








