[[Lorentz transformation]]

CATEGORIES: Equations, Minkowski spacetime, Special relativity, Concepts in physics, Functions and mappings, Time

In physics, the Lorentz transformation (or transformations) is named after the Dutch physicist Hendrik Lorentz. It was the result of attempts by Lorentz and others to explain how the speed of light was observed to be independent of the reference frame, and to understand the symmetries of the laws of electromagnetism. The Lorentz transformation is in accordance with special relativity, but was derived before special relativity.
The transformations describe how measurements of space and time by two observers are related. They reflect the fact that observers moving at different velocities may measure different distances, elapsed times, and even different orderings of events. They supersede the Galilean transformation of Newtonian physics, which assumes an absolute space and time (see Galilean relativity). The Galilean transformation is a good approximation only at relative speeds much smaller than the speed of light.
The Lorentz transformation is a linear transformation. It may include a rotation of space; a rotation-free Lorentz transformation is called a Lorentz boost.
In Minkowski space, the Lorentz transformations preserve the spacetime interval between any two events. They describe only the transformations in which the spacetime event at the origin is left fixed, so they can be considered as a hyperbolic rotation of Minkowski space. The more general set of transformations that also includes translations is known as the Poincaré group.

History

Many physicists, including Woldemar Voigt, George FitzGerald, Joseph Larmor, and Hendrik Lorentz himself had been discussing the physics implied by these equations since 1887.
Early in 1889, Oliver Heaviside had shown from Maxwell's equations that the electric field surrounding a spherical distribution of charge should cease to have spherical symmetry once the charge is in motion relative to the ether. FitzGerald then conjectured that Heaviside's distortion result might be applied to a theory of intermolecular forces. Some months later, FitzGerald published the conjecture that bodies in motion are being contracted, in order to explain the baffling outcome of the 1887 ether-wind experiment of Michelson and Morley. In 1892, Lorentz independently presented the same idea in a more detailed manner, which was subsequently called FitzGerald–Lorentz contraction hypothesis.
Their explanation was widely known before 1905.
Lorentz (1892–1904) and Larmor (1897–1900), who believed the luminiferous ether hypothesis, were also seeking the transformation under which Maxwell's equations are invariant when transformed from the ether to a moving frame. They extended the FitzGerald–Lorentz contraction hypothesis and found out that the time coordinate has to be modified as well ("local time"). Henri Poincaré gave a physical interpretation to local time (to first order in v/c) as the consequence of clock synchronization, under the assumption that the speed of light is constant in moving frames. Larmor is credited to have been the first to understand the crucial time dilation property inherent in his equations.
In 1905, Poincaré was the first to recognize that the transformation has the properties of a mathematical group,
and named it after Lorentz.[ref]
The reference is within the following paper:

[/ref]
Later in the same year Albert Einstein published what is now called special relativity, by deriving the Lorentz transformation under the assumptions of the principle of relativity and the constancy of the speed of light in any inertial reference frame, and by abandoning the mechanical aether.[ref]
. See also: English translation.[/ref]

Lorentz transformation for frames in standard configuration

Consider two observers O and O′, each using their own Cartesian coordinate system to measure space and time intervals. O uses (t, x, y, z) and O′ uses (t′, x′, y′, z′).  Assume further that the coordinate systems are oriented so that, in 3 dimensions, the x-axis and the x′-axis are collinear, the y-axis is parallel to the y′-axis, and the z-axis parallel to the z′-axis. The relative velocity between the two observers is v along the common x-axis; O measures O′ to move at velocity v along the coincident xx′ axes, while O′ measures O to move at velocity −v along the coincident xx′ axes. Also assume that the origins of both coordinate systems are the same, that is, coincident times and positions. If all these hold, then the coordinate systems are said to be in standard configuration.
The inverse of a Lorentz transformation relates the coordinates the other way round; from the coordinates O′ measures (t′, x′, y′, z′) to the coordinates O measures (t, x, y, z), so t, x, y, z are in terms of t′, x′, y′, z′. The mathematical form is nearly identical to the original transformation; the only difference is the negation of the uniform relative velocity (from v to −v), and exchange of primed and unprimed quantities, because O′ moves at velocity v relative to O, and equivalently, O moves at velocity −v relative to O′. This symmetry makes it effortless to find the inverse transformation (carrying out the exchange and negation saves a lot of rote algebra), although more fundamentally; it highlights that all physical laws should remain unchanged under a Lorentz transformation.
Below, the Lorentz transformations are called "boosts" in the stated directions.

Boost in the x-direction

These are the simplest forms. The Lorentz transformation for frames in standard configuration can be shown to be (see for example Dynamics and Relativity, J.R. Forshaw, A.G. Smith, Manchester Physics Series, John Wiley & Sons Ltd, ISBN 978-0-470-01460-8 and  Hyperphysics, web-based physics material hosted by Georgia State University, USA.):
where:
The use of β and γ is standard throughout the literature. McMahon, Mc Graw Hill (USA), 2006, ISBN 0-07-145545-0 For the remainder of the article – they will be also used throughout unless otherwise stated. Since the above is a linear system of equations (more technically a linear transformation), they can be written in matrix form:
According to the principle of relativity, there is no privileged frame of reference, so the inverse transformations frame F′ to frame F must be given by simply negating v:
where the value of γ remains unchanged.

Boost in the y or z directions

The above collection of equations apply only for a boost in the x-direction. The standard configuration works equally well in the y or z directions instead of x, and so the results are similar.
For the y-direction:
summarized by
where v and so β are now in the y-direction.
For the z-direction:
summarized by
where v and so β are now in the z-direction.
The Lorentz or boost matrix is usually denoted by Λ (Greek capital lambda). Above the transformations have been applied to the four-position X,
The Lorentz transform for a boost in one of the above directions can be compactly written as a single matrix equation:

Boost in any direction

=Vector form=

For a boost in an arbitrary direction with velocity v, that is, O observes O′ to move in direction v in the F coordinate frame, while O′ observes O to move in direction −v in the F′ coordinate frame, it is convenient to decompose the spatial vector r into components perpendicular and parallel to v: 
so that
where • denotes the dot product (see also orthogonality for more information). Then, only time and the component r‖ in the direction of v;
are "warped" by the Lorentz factor:
Since r‖ and v are parallel we have
where geometrically and algebraically:
substituting for r‖ and factoring v gives
This method, of eliminating parallel and perpendicular components, can be applied to any Lorentz transformation written in parallel-perpendicular form.

=Matrix forms=

These equations can be expressed in block matrix form as
where I is the 3×3 identity matrix and β = v/c is the relative velocity vector (in units of c) as a column vector – in cartesian and tensor index notation it is:
βT = vT/c is the transpose – a row vector:
and β is the magnitude of β:
More explicitly stated:
The transformation Λ can be written in the same form as before,
which has the structure:
and the components deduced from above are:
where δij is the Kronecker delta, and by convention: Latin letters for indices take the values 1, 2, 3, for spatial components of a 4-vector (Greek indices take values 0, 1, 2, 3 for time and space components).
Note that this transformation is only the "boost," i.e., a transformation between two frames whose x, y, and z axis are parallel and whose spacetime origins coincide. The most general proper Lorentz transformation also contains a rotation of the three axes, because the composition of two boosts is not a pure boost but is a boost followed by a rotation. The rotation gives rise to Thomas precession. The boost is given by a symmetric matrix, but the general Lorentz transformation matrix need not be symmetric.

Composition of two boosts

The composition of two Lorentz boosts B(u) and B(v) of velocities u and v is given by:
where 
The composition of two Lorentz transformations L(u, U) and L(v, V) which include rotations U and V is given by:eq. (55), Thomas rotation and the parameterization of the Lorentz transformation group, AA Ungar – Foundations of Physics Letters, 1988

Visualizing the transformations in Minkowski space

Lorentz transformations can be depicted on the Minkowski light cone spacetime diagram.
