[[Sarah Lawrence College]]

CATEGORIES: Sarah Lawrence College, Former women's universities and colleges in the United States, Educational institutions established in 1926, Liberal arts colleges, National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities members, Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools, Education in Yonkers, New York, Universities and colleges in Westchester County, New York, Members of the Annapolis Group, Progressive colleges, Skyline Conference, 1926 establishments in New York

 

Sarah Lawrence College is a private and independent liberal arts college in the United States. It is located in southern Westchester County, New York, in the city of Yonkers,  north of Manhattan. ("Although nearby Sarah Lawrence College, founded in 1926 by William Lawrence to honor his wife, has a Bronxville postal address, it is actually located in Yonkers.") Retrieved March 29, 2014. 
The college is known for its rigorous academic standards, The school models its approach to education after the Oxford/Cambridge system of one-on-one student-faculty tutorials, which are a key component in all areas of study. Sarah Lawrence emphasizes scholarship, particularly in the humanities, performing arts, and writing, and places a high value on independent study.

History

Sarah Lawrence College was established by real-estate mogul William Van Duzer Lawrence, 1842-1927, on the grounds of his estate in Westchester County and was named in honor of his wife, Sarah Bates Lawrence, 1846-1926. The College was originally intended to provide instruction in the arts and humanities for women. A major component of the College's early curriculum was "productive leisure," wherein students were required to work for eight hours weekly in such fields as modeling, shorthand, typewriting, applying makeup, and gardening. Its pedagogy, modeled on the tutorial system of Oxford University, combined independent research projects, individually supervised by the teaching faculty, and seminars with low student-to-faculty ratio—a credo it retains to the present, despite its cost.  Sarah Lawrence was the first liberal arts college in the United States to incorporate a rigorous approach to the arts with the principles of progressive education, focusing on the primacy of teaching and the concentration of curricular efforts on individual needs.
In addition to founding Sarah Lawrence College, William Lawrence played a critical role in the development of the neighboring community of Bronxville, New York. His name can be found on the affluent Lawrence Park and Lawrence Park West neighborhoods, the Houlihan Lawrence Real Estate Corporation, and on Lawrence Hospital in downtown Bronxville, an institution that was created when Lawrence's son, Dudley, nearly died en route to a hospital in neighboring New York City. Lawrence embodied ideas from the Progressivist movement of the 1890s, especially his view that the arts were a crucial element in the social evolution of individuals and families, in developing both private and public sensibilities, and in creating equal relations between men and women.
Harold Taylor, President of Sarah Lawrence College from 1945 to 1959, greatly influenced the college. Taylor, elected president at age 30, maintained a friendship with educational philosopher John Dewey, and worked to employ the Dewey method at Sarah Lawrence.  Taylor spent much of his career calling for educational reform in the United States, using the success of his own College as an example of the possibilities of a personalized, modern, and rigorous approach to higher education.
Sarah Lawrence became a coeducational institution in 1968. Prior to this transition, there were discussions about relocating the school and merging with Princeton University, but the administration opted to remain independent.

Academics

At the undergraduate level, Sarah Lawrence offers a Bachelor of Arts degree in liberal arts where, instead of traditional majors, students pursue a wide variety of courses in four different curricular distributions: the Creative Arts (writing, music, dance, theatre, film, and the plastic arts, such as painting, printmaking, drawing and sculpture); history and the social sciences (e.g., anthropology, economics, political science, and sociology); the humanities (e.g., Asian studies, art history, film studies, languages, literature, philosophy, and religion); and natural science and mathematics (biology, chemistry, physics, computer science, and mathematics). Classes are structured around a seminar-conference system through which students learn in small, highly interactive classes and in private tutorials with professors. Each student is assigned to a faculty advisor, known as a "don," to plan a course of study and provide ongoing academic guidance.  Most courses, apart from those in the performing arts, consist of two parts: the seminar, limited to 15 students, and the conference, a private, fortnightly meeting with a seminar professor.  In these conferences, students develop individual projects that extend the course material and link it to their personal interests.  Sarah Lawrence has no required courses and traditional examinations have largely been replaced with writing final research papers and essays.  Additionally, grades are recorded only for transcript purposes—academic evaluations are given in lieu of grades. The College sponsors international programs in Florence, at Wadham College, Oxford, at Reid Hall in Paris, and at the British American Drama Academy in London.  Sarah Lawrence is one of the only American colleges operating an international program in Cuba.
Sarah Lawrence also offers Master's-level programs in Writing, the Art of Teaching, Child Development, Theatre, and Dance, and is home to the nation's oldest graduate program in Women's History and the nation's first master's degree programs in Human Genetics and Health Advocacy.
Sarah Lawrence offers a program for adults wishing to seek a B.A. or a Master's and have been out of school for any period of time.

Exchange programs

International programs

The College has a number of international programs in four countries.  Sarah Lawrence makes all practical efforts to preserve its most characteristic elements, such as one-on-one interaction with professors, small classes, and an emphasis on qualitative comprehension, in its programs overseas.

Graduate programs

Sarah Lawrence offers eight graduate programs, each of which confers the Master of Arts or Master of Science degree upon its graduates.  In contrast to highly specialized, research-oriented doctoral study, these programs reflect the emphasis on interdisciplinary studies and the close student-teacher relationship that have come to be characteristic of the College's undergraduate program.  Intensive work with faculty members, small seminars, and one-on-one conferences form the foundation of the curricular model.  According to their own literature, the programs make an effort to balance the "theoretical (usually discussed in seminars and conferences) with the practical (in the form of fieldwork, practicums, research or creative work). This experiential work is most often conducted not in isolation, but in the midst of a community. Interdisciplinary work and ideas are encouraged, as is an ethic of social responsibility."  There are approximately 340 graduate students currently enrolled in the following programs:

=Art of Teaching=

The Sarah Lawrence College Art of Teaching Program offers training in education in both degree-track and continuing education formats. One component of the program is the Empowering Teachers Program, which was established in 1989 as a forum for the support of teachers and educational administrators, and has since expanded into a resource and network for more than 250 beginning and experienced professionals from 25 school districts in Westchester County and adjacent areas of New York, Connecticut and New Jersey.

SAT and academic ranking

In 2007, some educators in the United States began to question the impact of rankings on the college admissions process, due in part to the 11 March 2007 The Washington Post article "The Cost of Bucking College Rankings" by Dr. Michele Tolela Myers, the former president of Sarah Lawrence College. As Sarah Lawrence College dropped its SAT test score submission requirement for its undergraduate applicants in 2003, U.S. News & World Report issued a response to this article on 12 March 2007 which stated that the evaluation of Sarah Lawrence is currently under review. The 2008 issue of the U.S. News & World Report rankings put Sarah Lawrence among the "unranked" institutions, colleges and universities that for a variety of reasons do not adhere to the magazine's guidelines.
On Tuesday, June 19, 2007, following a meeting of the Annapolis Group, which represents over 100 liberal arts colleges, Sarah Lawrence announced that it would join others who had previously signed the letter to college presidents asking them not to participate in the "reputation survey" section of the U.S. News and World Report survey (this section comprises 25% of the ranking).  Myers commented on this in a 20 June 2007 article for The New York Times by stating, "they will do what they will do, … we will do what we will do. And we want to do it in a principled way."
In The Best College for You, a 2000 co-publication of Time magazine and The Princeton Review, Sarah Lawrence was named the liberal arts "College of the Year", citing the school's strong emphasis on writing across the curriculum.SLC honored for writing program that encourages students to write, think, communicate clearly 
In 2013, Forbes rated it 131st of America's Best Colleges.
In 2011, The Princeton Review ranked Sarah Lawrence first in its top ten list of colleges with the best class discussions.The 10 Colleges With the Best Discussions
In 2012, The Princeton Review ranked Sarah Lawrence first in its top ten list of colleges with the best professors.

Political involvement and activism

Political activism has played a crucial role in forming the spirit of the Sarah Lawrence community since the early years of the College.  As early as 1938, students were volunteering in working-class sections of Yonkers, New York to help bring equality and educational opportunities to poor and minority citizens, and the Sarah Lawrence College War Board, organized by students in the fall of 1942, sought to aid troops fighting in World War II.  During a time when the College's enrollment consisted of only 293 students, 204 signed up as volunteers during the first week of the War Board. Since that time, activism has played a central role in student life, with movements for civil rights and against the Vietnam War in the 1960s and for student and faculty diversity in the 1980s. Also in the 1960s, students established an Upward Bound program for students from lower-income and poverty areas to prepare for college. United States Congress.  Joint Committee.  A Directory of Urban Research Study Centers.  Washington: United States Congress, 1977.  Theatre Outreach, the Child Development Institute, the Empowering Teachers Program, the Community Writers program, the Office of Community Partnership, and the Fulbright High School Writers Program are among the many programs founded since the 1970s to provide services to the larger community. In the late 1980s, students occupied Westlands, the main administrative building for the campus, in a sit-in for wider diversity. Students have remained active in recent years, with numerous organizations and movements sprouting in response to the Iraq War. For many years, the College has been considered as being at the vanguard of the sexual rights movement.

Campus

The site of  Sarah Lawrence campus is located atop a promontory above the banks of the Bronx River. Much of the campus was originally a part of the estate of the College's founder, William Van Duzer Lawrence, though the College has more than doubled its geographical size since Lawrence bequeathed his estate to the College in 1926. The terrain of the campus is characterized by dramatic outcroppings of exposed bedrock shaded by large oak and elm trees. Much of the older architecture on the campus follows the Tudor style that was popular in the area during the early 20th century, and many of the College's newer buildings attempt to achieve an updated interpretation of the same architectural style.  The campus is divided into two distinctive sections: the "Old Campus" and the "New Campus," wherein the former is roughly contained within the boundaries of the erstwhile Lawrence estate, and the latter is that which was obtained some time after the College's earliest years.
The area outside the original Lawrence estate is home to the College's more cutting-edge facilities. A number of stately, century-old Tudor-style mansions will be found among these newer additions, including Andrews, Tweed, Lynd, Marshall Field, and Slonim House. Each was once a private estate, purchased by the college during periods of growth and expansion. The more modest Tudor houses along Mead Way, which were also once private residences, now serve as dorms for Sarah Lawrence students. "Slonim Woods" is a group of newer, townhouse-style dorms, built on the grounds of Slonim House.
The Campbell Sports Center was constructed in 1998 in response to an increased focus on physical fitness and sports. This state-of-the-art facility includes an indoor pool, gymnasium, track, squash courts, and weightrooms.
In 2004, the College completed construction of a state-of-the-art visual arts facility, the Monika A. and Charles A. Heimbold Visual Arts Center, the sleek architecture and environmentally friendly aspects of which earned the College national press attention. Just down the road is Hill House, a seven-story apartment building purchased by the College in the late 1990s that now houses student residences. Across the street from Hill House is the large Wrexham house, also in the Tudor style, that was purchased by Sarah Lawrence in 2004 from the government of Rwanda. This building, which once housed the Rwandan consul, has been renovated and is used by the College for various graduate studies programs. On the opposite end of the campus stands the Science and Mathematics Center, completed in 1994.

Buildings

=Academic facilities=

=Administration buildings=

=Housing=

=="Old Dorms"==

The "Old Dorms" refer to four original purpose-built student housing structures to the immediate north of Westlands in what is frequently referred to as the "central campus". Dudley Lawrence, one of the sons of William and Sarah Lawrence, achieved the remarkable feat of constructing three of these buildings in one year (1926–1927). The halls were designed by William Augustus Bates, who repeated the Neo-Tudor style of Westlands through the use of stone and timber materials, and mansard roofs.  The interiors are also in keeping with the English Tudor architectural style found on most of the older buildings in the area, with thick plaster walls, hardwood floors, and leaded windows (since replaced with more energy-efficient double-pane windows). MacCracken, built a few years later than the other three, is situated to the south of Dudley Lawrence. The original elegant living rooms that were found in each building, excepting MacCracken, are now used as classrooms.Central Campus - "old dorms" - Historic Campus Architecture Project

=="New Dorms"==

Designed by the renowned architect Philip Johnson in the sparse modernist style of the time, the "New Dorms" were completed in 1960. The architectural style of the buildings is meant to be a modernist reflection of the three older dorms (Gilbert, Titsworth, and Dudley Lawrence) that stand on the opposite side of the North Lawn. The three buildings that comprise the New Dorms are connected by two glass atria in which the buildings' primary stairwells are found. With the exception of the large apartments in Rothschild, these dorms typically house first-year students.

==The Mead Way Houses==

The Mead Way Houses are the eight former private homes that stand along the steep hill of Mead Way on the College's eastern end. The two southernmost houses, Robinson and Swinford, are occupied by administrative offices and the office of the campus internet radio station, and the northernmost six houses, listed below, are reserved for student living spaces.  The northern houses include:

Presidents

The first president was Marion Coats from 1924 to 1929.  She was a friend of Vassar College President Henry McCracken and of Sarah Lawrence founder William Van Duzer Lawrence.  Coats had traditional views of women's role in society that were at odds with her progressive approach to women's education.
The current president is Karen R. Lawrence, who was installed in 2007. She is a noted scholar of James Joyce, holding a B.A. from Yale University, a Master of Arts in English Literature from Tufts University, and a Ph.D. in literature from Columbia University.  Before her tenure at Sarah Lawrence, Dr. Lawrence served as the dean of the School of Humanities at the University of California, Irvine from 1998 to 2007, and as a member and subsequent chair of the English faculty at the University of Utah from 1978 to 1997.

Notable people

Athletics

The College sponsors intercollegiate teams in crew (aka rowing), men's and women's cross country, equestrian, men's basketball, men's and women's tennis, men's and women's volleyball, women's softball, and men's and women's swimming.  In March 2011 the College announced that it would seek membership as a Division III member of the NCAA. However the college will apply for a one year waive which will make the transition by 2015-16 season. 
In May 2013, Sarah Lawrence announced that it would join Skyline Conference beginning 2014-15 season. The college will quit the current Hudson Valley conference after the 2013-14 season. The Skyline Conference contains several schools including SUNY Purchase and Yeshiva University which plays Sarah Lawrence regularly for the past years.
The College's official mascot is a Gryphon by the name of Godric. It was chosen in the 1990s to represent the College's athletics teams after a long period of fielding sports teams without an official mascot. Unofficially the student body had long adopted the large resident population of 'Black Squirrels' as a de facto mascot to the college. The position of silent mascot that the 'Black Squirrel' occupied was financially endorsed by the college itself with the production of various Black Squirrel merchandise (including Sarah Lawrence clothing branded with the Black Squirrel image) and plush toys. It is only recently (post 2003) that efforts on the behalf of the college to establish the Gryphon as the icon of Sarah Lawrence have begun to take root.
In 2008/09, the school re-established the men's soccer team that plays in the Hudson Valley Men's Athletic Conference. In 2013, women's soccer was announced as the newest varsity program.

Notes



Category:1926 establishments in New York 
