[[Ipoh]]

CATEGORIES: Ipoh, Populated places in Perak

Ipoh  is the capital city of Perak state, Malaysia. It is approximately 200 km (125 miles) north of Kuala Lumpur and 130 km (81 miles) south of Penang on the North-South Expressway.
Ipoh developed into one of Malaysia's main cities around the turn of the 19th century due to the booming tin mining industry. During the British colonial era, Ipoh was Malaysia's second city for administrative purposes. Architecturally, the city centre is characterised by Straits eclectic shop houses. There are several impressive historical buildings from the British Colonial era such as the Railway Station, the Town Hall and the Court House.

History

Ipoh came into existence in the 1820s as a village at the highest navigable point of the Kinta River. the town was rebuilt. 
From the turn of the early 20th century, when more British tin-mining companies were set up in the city, Ipoh gained greater prominence. thumb|right|Town Hall
Its geographic location in the rich tin-bearing valley of the Kinta River made it a natural centre of growth. It grew rapidly as a mining town, especially in the 1920s and 1930s. A local Hakka miner, millionaire Yau Tet-Shin started developing a large tract of the city in the early 1930s, today known as the 'New Town' section from the eastern bank of the Kinta River to Greentown. Ipohworld. Retrieved on 2013-09-27. In 1937, Ipoh was made the capital of Perak, replacing Taiping.
Ipoh was invaded by the Japanese on 15 December 1941. In March 1942, the Japanese Civil Administration or Perak Shu Seicho had been set up at the St. Michael's Institution. After the liberation of Malaya by British forces, Ipoh remained the capital of Perak, till this day. pp. 273–292
Two of the largest entertainment groups then, the Cathay Organisation and Shaw Brothers Company, set up cinema chains in Ipoh.

Geography

Topography

Ipoh is in the state of Perak, which is in the northern part of Peninsular Malaysia. The city is in the middle of the Kinta Valley, on the bank of the Kinta River and the confluence of smaller rivers, Sungai Pinji and Sungai Pari. The city is surrounded by limestone hills, which can be found around suburban areas to the northeast, east and southeast.
The Kledang mountain range stretches from the north to the west of the city. This range runs parallel to the Bintang mountain range with the Perak River flowing on its left bank and the Kinta River to its right. This range is interrupted to the north of Ipoh by a tributary of the Perak River called the Pelus River, which is sourced from the Titiwangsa mountain range, which runs to the east of Ipoh.

Climate

Ipoh features a tropical rainforest climate. Temperatures show little variation throughout the year. The city's average temperature is 27 degrees Celsius. Ipoh sees high precipitation throughout the year with more 200mm of rain each month and averaging 2800 mm of rain per year. The wettest month is November where on average 360 mm of rain is seen. Ipoh's driest month is June which has 128 mm of rain fall on average.
Ipoh annual mean rainfall can be compared to other places in Malaysia in Annual Mean Rainfall Location in Malaysia 2013

Principle Meteorological Station - Ipoh

Limestone caves, mountains and lakes

Ipoh is surrounded by limestone caves and there are several cave temples. The Sam Po Tong (Chinese: 三寶洞; Cavern of Three Precious) is a Chinese temple built within a limestone cave. Another temple is Perak Tong (Chinese: 霹靂洞; Perak Cave); it has a steep staircase inside leading up to the top of its hill where there is a panoramic view of Ipoh and its surroundings. The statue of Buddha in Perak Tong was the tallest and largest of its kind in Malaysia when first commissioned.
Kek Lok Tong (Chinese: 極樂洞; Cavern of Utmost Happiness) is a cave temple that lies on the other side of the same hill as Sam Poh Tong. It is accessible through the Gunung Rapat housing area. It has a clean, quiet and cool environment and has the best scenic cave view.
Limestone hills extend 20 km north of Ipoh and 20 km to the south. There are many caves in these hills; cave temples are built in some. Gua Tempurung, near Gopeng south of Ipoh, is a show cave open to the public. It is popular among spelunkers. More than 3 km long, it is one of the longest caves in Peninsula Malaysia. Part of it has been developed as a show cave with electric lighting and walkways, and there are tours of different lengths and difficulty. A fine river cave, the river passage runs about 1.6 km through the hill. There are five very large chambers and some stalactites and stalagmites.
Lakes in Ipoh include the one at Gunung Lang.

Cuisine

Ipoh has a vibrant food scene with a vast proliferation of hawker centres and restaurants. It is well known for dishes such as "Sar Hor Fun" (), literally translated to "fragrant biscuit". The city is well known in Malaysia for its "Ipoh white coffee" where the coffee beans are roasted with palm-oil margarine and the resulting coffee is served with condensed milk.

Cityscape

Today, "Ipoh" usually refers to the territory under administration of Ipoh City Council or Majlis Bandaraya Ipoh, which includes the smaller towns adjacent to the city such as Pengkalan, Silibin, Chemor, Jelapang, Menglembu and Tanjung Rambutan.

The Old Town

The Old Town is west of the Kinta River. There is a vibrant commercial district with many historical 'shop-houses' centred around Leech Street (; now Jalan Bandar Timah). Other notable features include:

The New Town

The so-called New Town, to the east of the Kinta River, was developed by Yau Tet Shin around 1908. The New Town houses the Perak Medical University and Ipoh City Hall building, among others. There are numerous shops, shopping malls, and hotels.
D. R. Seenivasagam Park (Coronation Park), located in the heart of Ipoh (New Town), is known for its scenic beauty and recreational facilities. It comprises recreational fields, an artificial lake filled with fish, a nursery for potted plants and a children's traffic playground.  The latest addition is the newly landscaped Japanese garden featuring a Japanese carp pond.
From the late 1980s Greentown, beside the New Town, was transformed from old government quarters to an administrative and commercial centre of Ipoh, often overshadowing Old Town and New Town.

Sports

There are a few sporting venues in Ipoh. A portion of land in the Kampong Simee area has been selected by the City Council for the Sport Center. The main sports stadium for football (soccer) and other track and field events is the Perak Stadium. There is an indoor sports stadium beside it, the Indera Mulia Stadium, playing host to events such as badminton. Ipoh is also home for the Perak Football Association.
Ipoh has Malaysia's first velodrome, Velodrom Rakyat (The People's Velodrome), costing RM 3.25 million; funds were raised in a country-wide donation drive (led by Tan Sri Darshan Singh Gill). In addition, Ipoh has an Astroturf stadium for hockey, the Azlan Shah Stadium.
For golf, the courses are the Royal Perak Golf Club off Jalan Sultan Azlan Shah (Tiger Lane), the Meru Golf Club in Jelapang, and Clearwater Sanctuary Golf Club en route to Batu Gajah.
Other sports venues include the Kilat Club in Pasir Pinji, Ipoh Field (Padang Ipoh) in the Old Town, the Polo Grounds, and the Iskandar Polo Club, in Ampang Baru.
The Sultan Azlan Shah Cup is an annual international men's field hockey tournament held in Ipoh.

Governance

The Ipoh City Council governs the city. Roshidi Hashim, appointed in 2008, is the mayor of Ipoh. Thestar.my (2008-07-05). Retrieved on 2013-09-27.
Ipoh is divided into two parliamentary constituencies: Ipoh Barat (Ipoh West) and Ipoh Timur (Ipoh East). The parliamentary seat for Ipoh Timur is held by DAP Representative, Lim Kit Siang while the seat for Ipoh Barat is held by fellow DAP leader, M. Kulasegaran.

Demographics

Ipoh remains one of Malaysia's largest cities. It is the fourth largest city in Malaysia. As of 2009, it has a population of 702,464, with a total urban area population of 1,143,778.

Census statistics

The following is based on Ipoh City Hall statistics, 2004.mbi.my/gis_baru/penduduk.html 

Toponymy

The name Ipoh is derived from a local tree, Pohon Epu or now more commonly known as Pokok Ipoh. The sap of this plant is poisonous and was used by Orang Asli (indigenous peoples in Malay) to coat the tips of the darts of their blowpipes for hunting.

Transportation

Notable people

Angie Cheung,
Mimi Chu,
Iqram Dinzly,
Mamat Khalid,
Peter Pek,
Afdlin Shauki,
Patrick Teoh,
Dato' Michelle Yeoh,
Jamal Abdillah,
Shila,
Ning Baizura,
Choong Tan Fook,
Lee Wan Wah,
Cheah Soon Kit,
Wong Pei Tty,
Wong Mew Choo.
David Ho Sue San of Hovid Berhad & Carotech Berhad
Lee Loy Seng (founder of Kuala Lumpur Kepong Berhad)
Lee Oi Hian (current CEO of Kuala Lumpur Kepong Bhd, eldest son of Lee Loy Seng),
Lim A. Heng of Yee Lee Edible Oil (Red Eagle Oil),
Ngan Yin (Ngan Yin Hand Brand Groundnut),
Dr. Wong Jeh Shyan prominent venture capitalist and CEO of CommerceNet Singapore Limited

Film and television

Movies filmed in Ipoh include:

Sister cities

Sister cities of Ipoh include:

Gallery

File:Ipoh City 2.jpg|Ipoh skyline from Impiana Hotel Ipoh
File:Ipoh 26.jpg|Street view of "Greentown Walk" in New Town, overlooking Syuen Hotel near Greentown
File:Ipoh 66.jpg|View overlooking Convent School from Ipoh Parade shopping mall in New Town
File:Gunung Lang.jpg|The Lang Mountains in Ipoh
File:IpohBP.JPG|Ipoh Shops
File:Kellie's Castle.jpg|Kellie's Castle
File:HSBC Building, Ipoh.jpg|HSBC Ipoh branch, the oldest operating bank in Ipoh
File:Ipoh 62.jpg|Ipoh Old Town, partially overlooking Ipoh Padang








