[[Qiu Jin]]

CATEGORIES: 1875 births, 1907 deaths, 20th-century executions by China, Chinese feminists, Chinese revolutionaries, Chinese women poets, Chinese women writers, Martyrs, People executed by the Qing dynasty by decapitation, People from Fujian executed by decapitation, People from Xiamen, People from Shaoxing, People listed in Hummel's Eminent Chinese of the Ch'ing Period, People of the Xinhai Revolution, Qing dynasty people executed by decapitation, Qing dynasty poets, Tongmenghui members, Writers from Fujian

Qiu Jin (), was a Chinese revolutionary, feminist and writer. She was executed after a failed uprising against the Qing Dynasty. She is considered a national heroine in China.

Biography

Born in Xiamen, Fujian, Qiu grew up in her ancestral home, Shanyin Village, Shaoxing, Zhejiang. During an unhappy marriage, Qiu came into contact with new ideas. She became a member of the Triads, who at the time advocated the overthrow of the Qing Dynasty and restoration of Han Chinese governance.  In 1903 she decided to travel overseas and study in Japan, leaving her two children behind. Arriving in Japan in 1904, she first entered a Japanese language school in Surugadai, then later transferred to the Girls' Practical School in Kōjimachi, run by Shimoda Utako.
Whilst still based in Tokyo, Qiu edited a journal by herself entitled Vernacular Journal (Baihua Bao). The journal published a number of issues using vernacular Chinese as a medium of revolutionary propaganda. In one issue, Qiu wrote a manifesto entitled "A Respectful Proclamation to China's 200 Million Women Comrades", in which she lamented the problems caused by bound feet and oppressive marriages, Qiu herself having suffered from both. She explained this in her article and received an overwhelmingly sympathetic response from her readers.
Qiu felt that a better future for women lay under a Western-type government instead of the Qing government that was in power at the time. She joined forces with her cousin Xu Xilin and together they worked to unite many secret revolutionary societies to work together for the overthrow of the Qing Dynasty.
She was an eloquent orator who spoke out for women's rights, such as the freedom to marry, freedom of education, and abolishment of the practice of foot binding. In 1906 she founded a radical women's journal with another female poet, Xu Zihua, called China Women's News (Zhongguo nü bao), though it published only two issues before it was closed by the authorities.  In 1907 she became head of the Datong school in Shaoxing, ostensibly a school for sport teachers, but really intended for the military training of revolutionaries.
On July 6, 1907 Xu Xilin was caught by the authorities before a scheduled uprising in Anqing. He confessed his involvement under interrogation and was executed. Immediately after, on July 12, the authorities arrested Qiu at the school for girls where she was a principal. She was tortured but refused to admit her involvement in the plot, but they found incriminating documents and a few days later she was publicly beheaded in her home village, Shanyin, at the age of 31. Qiu was acknowledged immediately by the revolutionaries as a heroine and martyr, and she became a symbol of women's independence in China.
Qiu was immortalised in the Republic of China's popular consciousness and literature after her death. She is now buried beside West Lake in Hangzhou. The People's Republic of China established a museum for her in Shaoxing, named Qiu Jin's Former Residence (绍兴秋瑾故居).
Her life has been portrayed in two films, one simply entitled Qiu Jin released in 1983 and a second in 2011 named Jing Xiong Nüxia Qiu Jin (竞雄女侠秋瑾).

Literary works

While Qiu is mainly remembered in the West as revolutionary and feminist, one aspect of her life that gets overlooked is her poetry and essays, though owing to her early death, they are not great in number. Having received an exceptional education in classical literature, reflected in her writing of more traditional poetry (shi and ci) Qiu composed verse with a wide range of metaphors and allusions; mixing classical mythology along with revolutionary rhetoric. 
For example, in a poem Ayscough translates as, Capping Rhymes with Sir Shih Ching From Sun's Root Land (147) we read the following:
Editors Sun Chang and Saussy (642) explain the metaphors as follows:

On leaving Beijing for Japan, she wrote a poem summarizing her life until that point:

Gallery

Image:Qiujin.jpg|Statue of Qiu Jin beside West Lake in Hangzhou
Image:QiuJin feminist revolutionary.jpg|Statue of Qiu Jin








