[[Tony Fernández]]

CATEGORIES: 1962 births, Living people, American League All-Stars, National League All-Stars, Cincinnati Reds players, Cleveland Indians players, Seibu Lions players, Milwaukee Brewers players, New York Mets players, New York Yankees players, San Diego Padres players, Toronto Blue Jays players, Major League Baseball shortstops, Gold Glove Award winners, Dominican Republic expatriate baseball players in Japan, People from San Pedro de Macorís, Major League Baseball players from the Dominican Republic, Kinston Eagles players, Syracuse Chiefs players

Octavio Antonio Fernández Castro (born June 30, 1962), better known as Tony Fernández, is a former Major League Baseball player most noted for his defensive skills, setting a nine-year record for shortstops with a .992 fielding percentage in 1989.

Career

Fernández was first scouted by the Toronto Blue Jays' famed Latin America scout Epy Guerrero, and contributed significantly to the team winning its first division title that year. Fernández continued to star for the Jays for several years afterwards. His 213 hits in 1986 were, at the time, a major league single-season record for a shortstop (the record has since been surpassed).
Before the 1991 season, Fernández was traded to the San Diego Padres in a major deal that also sent Jays star Fred McGriff to San Diego in exchange for Roberto Alomar and Joe Carter. Fernández played well for San Diego for two years and then began the 
Fernández played for the New York Yankees in 1995. It was because of an injury early in the season that Derek Jeter was called up to the major leagues for the first time.

In  He hit a two-run single in the top of the third inning for the Indians' only runs of the game, and would have been credited with the Series-winning hit for Cleveland had they won the game.
In 
A very thin man, Fernández had a tilted, wavering batting stance that made it appear as if he might not be strong enough to hold his bat. From early in his career he carried a scar on his right cheek from a pitched ball. Fernández was a noted fitness fanatic; he liked buying unusual home exercise machines and trying them out in the clubhouse.
Early in his career, Fernández was well known for his exceptional defensive skills at shortstop, and was described by Ivan Maisel in a Sports Illustrated article as having "the range of a Texas cattleman".
Fernández was awarded four consecutive Gold Glove Awards for his defense, from 1986 to 1989.








