[[Lung volumes]]

CATEGORIES: Respiratory physiology, Respiratory therapy, Pulmonary function testing

Lung volumes and lung capacities refer to the volume of air associated with different phases of the respiratory cycle. Lung volumes are directly measured; Lung capacities are inferred from lung volumes.
The average total lung capacity of an adult human male is about 6 litres of air, but only a small amount of this capacity is used during normal breathing. The lung capacity of freediver and world record holder Herbert Nitsch is measured to be 10 Liters, which he can expand to 15 Liters with a special technique called "packing" or "buccal pumping".
Tidal breathing is normal, resting breathing; the tidal volume is the volume of air that is inhaled or exhaled in only a single such breath.
The average human respiratory rate is 30-60 breaths per minute at birth,

Factors affecting volumes

Several factors affect lung volumes; some can be controlled and some cannot. Lung volumes vary with different people as follows:
A person who is born and lives at sea level will develop a slightly smaller lung capacity than a person who spends their life at a high altitude. This is because the partial pressure of oxygen is lower at higher altitude which, as a result means that oxygen less readily diffuses into the bloodstream. In response to higher altitude, the body's diffusing capacity increases in order to process more air.
When someone living at or near sea level travels to locations at high altitudes (e.g., the Andes; Denver, Colorado; Tibet; the Himalayas) that person can develop a condition called altitude sickness because their lungs remove adequate amounts of carbon dioxide but they do not take in enough oxygen. (In normal individuals, carbon dioxide is the primary determinant of respiratory drive.)
Specific changes in lung volumes also occur during pregnancy. Functional residual capacity drops 18–20%, typically falling from 1.7 to 1.35 litres,

Values

The tidal volume, vital capacity, inspiratory capacity and expiratory reserve volume can be measured directly with a spirometer. These are the basic elements of a ventilatory pulmonary function test.
Determination of the residual volume is more difficult as it is impossible to "completely" breathe out. Therefore measurement of the residual volume has to be done via indirect methods such as radiographic planimetry, body plethysmography, closed circuit dilution (including the helium dilution technique) and nitrogen washout.
In absence of such, estimates of residual volume have been prepared as a proportion of body mass for infants (18.1 mL/kg),

Restrictive and obstructive

The results (in particular FEV1/FVC and FRC) can be used to distinguish between restrictive and obstructive pulmonary diseases:








