[[Sexy Beast]]

CATEGORIES: 2000 films, 2000s crime films, Bisexuality-related films, British films, British crime thriller films, British LGBT-related films, Directorial debut films, English-language films, Film4 Productions films, Films directed by Jonathan Glazer, Films shot in England, Films shot in Spain, Fox Searchlight Pictures films, Gangster films, Heist films, Independent films

Sexy Beast is a 2000 British crime film and the directorial debut of Jonathan Glazer. Glazer had previously directed music videos and commercials for companies such as Guinness and Levi's. The film stars Ray Winstone, Ben Kingsley and Ian McShane.
Kingsley's performance earned him an Oscar nomination for Best Supporting Actor. In 2004 the magazine Total Film named Sexy Beast the 15th greatest British film of all time.

Plot

Ex-con and expert safe-cracker Gary "Gal" Dove (Ray Winstone) has served his time behind bars and blissfully retired to a Spanish villa with his beloved ex–porn star wife DeeDee (Amanda Redman). He also has the company of longtime friend Aitch and his wife Jackie. Their idyllic life is shattered by the arrival of an old criminal associate, sociopath Don Logan (Ben Kingsley), who is intent on enlisting Gal in a bank heist back in London. Organising the heist is Teddy Bass (Ian McShane), a powerful crime lord, who has learned about the bank's vault from Harry (James Fox), the bank's chairman whom he met at an orgy.
Gal politely but firmly declines Logan's many demands to join the heist, but Logan will not back down. After revealing a lingering infatuation with Jackie, Logan also makes several unwelcome attempts at reconnecting with her. Logan eventually grows angry, hurling torrents of abuse at the group while at the same time spitefully painting himself as a victim of their betrayal. After storming away in a rage, Logan boards a plane back to London, only to be kicked off for refusing to put out his cigarette. Seething with hatred, Logan returns to Gal's home with ominous intentions, smashing a glass beer bottle into his former friend's ear. DeeDee shoots Don with a shotgun, immobilising him. The four friends join in their efforts to kill him, first beating him, stomping him, shooting him again, and finally crushing his skull. 
Hoping to cover up Logan's murder, Gal returns to London to perform the job. When asked by Bass about Logan's whereabouts, Gal feigns ignorance and claims Logan had called him "from Heathrow". However, Bass is visibly suspicious, and Gal's anxieties mount.
During the heist, Bass' crew use surface-supplied diving gear to drill into Harry's bank vault from a pool in a neighbouring bath house. The water from the pool floods the vault and shorts its security system. While helping to empty the vault's safe deposit boxes, Gal secretly pockets a pair of large ruby earrings encrusted with diamonds. After the job is successfully completed, Gal's lack of joviality further raises Bass's suspicions. Bass offers Gal a ride to the airport, but along the way, stops by Harry's home. Inside, Bass kills Harry in cold blood and immediately and pointedly questions Gal again about Logan. Gal merely responds, "I'm not into this any more." Back in the car, Bass suggests he knows what happened to Logan, saying, "Spain, eh? I must drop in sometime. Pay my respects." He offers Gal £10 in payment for his services, tells him to get out of the car and drives away, leaving Gal to his own devices.
In the final scene, back in Spain, Gal is again home surrounded by his friends and by DeeDee, who is seen wearing the ruby-diamond earrings that he stole. It is also revealed that Logan lies buried under the double-heart insignia at the bottom of their pool.

Cast

Production

Producer Jeremy Thomas later remembered his experience making the film:

Reception

The film has received very positive reviews, currently holding an aggregate rating of 85 percent on Rotten Tomatoes, based on 117 reviews.

Awards and honours

Ben Kingsley's performance received a majority of the accolades given to Sexy Beast, winning Best Supporting Actor awards from the Broadcast Film Critics Association, Boston Society of Film Critics, Dallas-Fort Worth Film Critics Association, Florida Film Critics Circle, San Diego Film Critics Society, Southeastern Film Critics Association and the Toronto Film Critics Association. He also was nominated for a Screen Actors Guild Award (losing to Ian McKellen for his performance in The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring), a Golden Globe and an Academy Award (losing both to Jim Broadbent for his performance in Iris).
In addition, the film also won Best Director and Best Screenplay from the British Independent Film Awards and Special Recognition ("For excellence in filmmaking") from the National Board of Review.

Music

Dean Martin's version of Sway accompanies the film's end credits. The soundtrack also includes "Peaches" by The Stranglers, "Cuba" by The Gibson Brothers, "G-Spot" by Wayne Marshall, "Lujon" by Henry Mancini and "Daddy Rollin' Stone" by Otis Blackwell.






