[[Lexus]]

CATEGORIES: Lexus, Automotive companies of Japan, Car manufacturers of Japan, Companies based in Aichi Prefecture, Companies established in 1989, Japanese luxury motor vehicle marques, Luxury motor vehicle manufacturers, Toyota, 1989 establishments in Japan, 1989 establishments in the United States, Luxury brands

 Lexus is headquartered in Nagoya, Japan. Operational centers are located in Brussels, Belgium, and Torrance, California, USA.
Lexus originated from a clandestine flagship sedan project, code-named F1, which began in 1983 and culminated in the launch of the original Lexus LS in 1989. Subsequently, the division added sedan, coupé, convertible, and SUV models. In 2005, a hybrid version of the RX crossover debuted, and additional hybrid models later joined the division's lineup. In 2007, Lexus launched its own F marque performance division with the debut of the IS F sport sedan, followed by the LFA supercar in 2009.
From the start of production, Lexus vehicles have been produced in Japan, with manufacturing centered in the Chūbu and Kyūshū regions, and in particular at Toyota's Tahara, Aichi, Chūbu and Miyata, Fukuoka, Kyūshū plants. Assembly of the first Lexus built outside the country, the Ontario, Canada-produced RX 330, began in 2003. Following a corporate reorganization from 2001 to 2005, Lexus also operates its own design, engineering, and manufacturing centers, solely responsible for the division's vehicles.
Since the 2000s, Lexus has increased sales outside its largest market, the USA, through an ongoing global expansion. The division inaugurated dealerships in Japan's domestic market in 2005, becoming the first Japanese premium car marque to launch in its country of origin. Further debuts in Southeast Asia, Latin America, Europe, and other  export regions have since followed. The division's lineup has also been expanded to reflect regional specifications in model and powertrain configurations.

History

1980s: The F1 project

In 1983, Toyota chairman Eiji Toyoda summoned a secret meeting of company executives, to whom he posed the question, "Can we create a luxury vehicle to challenge the world's best?" The Century was conservatively styled for the Japanese market, and along with the Crown not slated for export, despite having undergone a complete restyle in 1982. F1 designers targeted their new sedan at international markets and began development on a new V8 engine.
The opportunity for Japanese manufacturers to export more expensive models had grown in the 1980s due to voluntary export restraints, negotiated by the Japanese government and U.S. trade representatives, restricting mainstream car sales. In 1988, Mazda began selling the Luce as the Mazda 929 in North America, and later began plans to develop an upscale marque, to be called Amati, but its plans did not come to fruition.
Toyota researchers visited the USA in May 1985 to conduct focus groups and market research on luxury consumers.

=Brand development=

In 1986, Toyota's longtime advertising agency Saatchi & Saatchi formed a specialized unit, Team One, to handle marketing for the new premium brand. Image consulting firm Lippincott & Margulies was hired to develop a list of 219 prospective names; Vectre, Verone, Chaparel, Calibre and Alexis were chosen as top candidates.
The etymology of the Lexus name has been attributed to the combination of the words "luxury" and "elegance," The injunction threatened to delay the division's launch and marketing efforts. Upon reflection, a U.S. appeals court lifted the injunction, deciding that there was little likelihood of confusion between the two products.
The original Lexus slogan, developed after Team One representatives visited Lexus designers in Japan and noted an obsessive attention to detail, became "The Relentless Pursuit of Perfection."

=Launch=

In 1989, after an extended development process involving 60 designers, 24 engineering teams, 1,400 engineers, 2,300 technicians, 220 support workers, approximately 450 prototypes, and over 
At its debut, the LS 400 was widely praised for its quietness, well-appointed and ergonomic interior, engine performance, build quality, aerodynamics, fuel economy, and value, Despite being an upstart, Lexus established instant customer loyalty and its debut was generally regarded as a major shock to the pedigree luxury marques. BMW's and Mercedes-Benz's U.S. sales figures dropped 29% and 19%, respectively, with BMW executives accusing Lexus of dumping in that market, while 35% of Lexus buyers traded in a Lincoln or Cadillac to make their purchase.
In December 1989, Lexus initiated a voluntary recall of all 8,000 LS 400s sold to date, based upon two customer complaints over defective wiring and an overheated brake light. In a sweeping 20-day operation which replaced the parts on all affected vehicles, Lexus sent technicians to pick up, repair, and return cars to customers free of charge, and also flew in personnel and rented garage space for owners in remote locations. This response was lauded in media publications and helped establish the marque's early reputation for customer service.
By 1989's end, 16,392 LS 400 and ES 250 sedans had been sold in the four months following the U.S. launch. Following initial models, plans called for the addition of a sports coupe along with a redesigned ES sedan.

1990s: Growth and expansion

In 1990, during its first full year of sales, Lexus sold 63,594 LS 400 and ES 250 sedans in the U.S.,
In 1993, Lexus launched the mid-size GS 300 sports sedan, based on the Toyota Aristo using the Toyota "S" platform from the Toyota Crown, which had sold for two years prior in Japan. The GS 300 was priced below the LS 400 in the marque's lineup. Normal sales operations resumed by late 1995 when the Japanese auto manufacturers collectively agreed to greater American investments, and the tariffs were not enacted.
In 1996, Lexus debuted its first sport utility vehicle, the LX 450, In 1999, Lexus recorded its one-millionth vehicle sold in the U.S. market, and was ranked as the top-selling premium car maker in the U.S. overall.

2000s: Global reorganization

In 2000, Lexus introduced the IS line, a new series of entry-level sport sedans.  In 2001, the marque debuted its first convertible, the SC 430, a redesigned ES 300, and the third generation LS 430. 27, 196. The GX 470 mid-size SUV debuted in 2002, followed by the second generation RX 330 in 2003.
In 2005, Lexus completed an organizational separation from parent company Toyota,
Lexus' arrival in the Japanese market in July 2005 marked the first introduction of a Japanese premium car marque in the domestic market."Toyota Opens Lexus Dealerships in Japan". CBS News. 2005-08-30. Retrieved on 2008-06-21. New generation LS, IS, ES, GS and RX models subsequently became available in Japan along with the SC 430, ending domestic sales of Toyota-branded models under the Celsior, Altezza, Windom, Aristo, Harrier and Soarer nameplates, respectively. The Altezza and Aristo were previously exclusive to Japanese Toyota retail sales channels called Toyota Vista Store, the Windom was exclusive to Toyota Corolla Store, the Celsior and Harrier were exclusive to Toyopet Store, and the Soarer was previously available at both Toyota Store and Toyopet Store locations.
affected by the contraction of the domestic auto market and price increases, but improved in subsequent months with an expanded lineup.
Through the mid-2000s, Lexus experienced sales successes in South Korea and Taiwan, becoming the top-selling import make in both markets in 2005;"Toyota's Lexus Remains Best-Selling Foreign Car in Korea". The Korea Times. 2007-01-05. Retrieved on 2007-01-07.
[/ref]"Australia Vehicle Sales - 2006 YTD". Driving Australia. 2006-12. Retrieved on 2007-05-06. Division executives in 2006 announced an expansion goal from 68 countries to 76 worldwide by 2010. and the Philippines in 2009. "Lexus unleashed in historic glory". Business Mirror. Retrieved on 2009-02-02.

=Hybrids and F models=

In 2006, Lexus began sales of the GS 450h, a V6 hybrid performance sedan, and launched the fourth generation flagship LS line, comprising both standard- and long-wheelbase V8 (LS 460 and LS 460 L) and hybrid (LS 600h and LS 600h L) versions. The fifth generation ES 350 also debuted in the same year. The LS 600h L subsequently went on sale as the most expensive sedan ever produced in Japan, with a sticker price of approximately  accompanied by a supercar concept, the LF-A.
In October 2007, Lexus entered the Specialty Equipment Market Association show in the U.S. for the first time with the IS F, and announced its F-Sport performance trim level and factory-sanctioned accessory line. Automotive columnists noted Lexus' increased emphasis on sporty models as an effort to bolster the marque's performance credentials and target rivals from Mercedes-Benz's AMG and BMW's M divisions.
In 2008, amidst the late-2000s recession and a weakened world car market, global sales fell 16% to 435,000,"2009 Lexus sales" (in Japanese). Gazoo/レクサス. 2009. Retrieved 2009-04-22.

2010s: Recent developments

In 2010, Lexus underwent a gradual sales recovery in North America and Asia as the marque focused on adding hybrids and new model derivatives. "Lexus 'resets its compass' to cope with new global economic realities". The National (Abu Dhabi).  Retrieved 2010-07-08. Sales in the U.S. held steady despite the 2009–2010 Toyota vehicle recalls, several of which included Lexus models. The ES 350 and certain IS models were affected by a recall for potentially jamming floor mats, Although the publication knew of no reported incidents, the GX 460 received updated stability control software.
In late 2010 and early 2011, Lexus began sales of the CT 200h, a compact four-door hybrid hatchback designed for Europe, in multiple markets.  Subsequently, Toyota chairman Akio Toyoda vowed to restore passion to the marque and further increase its organizational independence, admitting that "... As a result of Toyoda's organizational changes, Lexus senior managers report directly to the chairman for the first time in the marque's history.
In January 2012, the marque began sales of the fourth generation GS line, including GS 350 and GS 450h variants, as well as a lower-displacement GS 250 model for select markets.

Corporate affairs

Management

The Lexus Group, headed by managing officer Kiyotaka Ise, coordinates the worldwide operations of Toyota's luxury division.
In the U.S., Lexus operations are headed by Jeffrey Bracken, group vice president and general manager of the U.S. Lexus division, located in Southern California.

Regional operations

Lexus sales operations vary in structure by region. In many markets, such as the U.S., the dealership network is a distinct organization from corporate headquarters, with separately owned and operated Lexus showrooms. Other officially sanctioned regional distributors have sold Lexus models prior to the launch of, or in absence of, a dedicated dealership network.

Financial performance

Financial data of Lexus operations are not disclosed publicly. In 2009, Interbrand ranked Lexus as Japan's seventh largest brand, between Panasonic and Nissan, based on revenue, earnings, and market value.

Automobiles

Vehicle lineup

The global Lexus lineup features sedans of different size classes, including the compact IS and HS models,  mid-size ES and GS models, and the full-size LS flagship. Convertibles include the IS C models. Sport-utility vehicles range in size from the crossover RX, the mid-size GX, to the full-size LX. Hybrid models include the CT hatchback, HS sedan, and variants of the GS, LS, and RX. The F marque line produces a variant of the IS sedan and the LFA coupe.

F marque

Lexus produces its highest-performance models under its F marque division.  The name refers to Flagship and Fuji Speedway in Japan, whose first corner, 27R, inspired the shape of the "F" emblem.

Model nomenclature

Lexus production models are named alphanumerically using two-letter designations followed by three digits. The first letter indicates relative status in the Lexus model range (ranking), On hybrids, the three digits refer to the combined gasoline-electric output. For certain models, a lower case letter placed after the alphanumeric designation indicates powerplant type ('h' for hybrid, 'd' for diesel), while capital letter(s) placed at the end indicates a class subtype (e.g. 'L' for long-wheelbase, 'C' for coupe, 'AWD' for all-wheel drive). On F marque models, the two-letter designation and the letter 'F' are used with no numbers or hyphens (e.g. IS F).

Design and technology

Lexus design has traditionally placed an emphasis on targeting specific vehicle development standards. Autoweek (2005-03-07)
Vehicle cabins have incorporated electroluminescent Optitron gauges,
In 2006, Lexus incorporated the first production eight-speed automatic transmission in an automobile with the LS 460, and the gearbox was later adapted for the GS 460 and IS F models. Continuously variable transmissions, regenerative brakes, and electric motors have been used on all Lexus hybrid models. In 2007, Lexus executives signaled intentions to equip further models with hybrid powertrains,
Safety features on Lexus models range from stability and handling programs (Vehicle Stability Control and Vehicle Dynamics Integrated Management)
Production models in development have included convertibles, crossovers, and dedicated hybrids. The Nürburgring test track in Germany has also seen Lexus prototype testing.

L-finesse

Lexus introduced a new design language known as "L-finesse" in the mid-2000s with its LF series concepts and the 2006 Lexus GS.

Production

Assembly plants

thumb|Lexus models produced by the Tahara plant in Aichi, Japan|alt=Car showroom displaying three sedans, the nearest on a glass turntable, in front of a reception counter and windows.Tierney, Christine (2004-02-22). "Robot-filled Tahara sets standard for Toyota, World". Retrieved on 2007-05-06. Lexus production techniques include methods and standards of quality control that differ from Toyota models. The highest level takumi (Japanese for "artisan") engineers are responsible for maintaining production standards at key points in the assembly process, such as testing engine performance. Production vehicles are given visual inspections for flaws, individually test-driven at high speeds, and subjected to vibration tests.
Through the 2000s, most Lexus sedan and SUV production has occurred in Japan at the Tahara plant in Aichi and Miyata plant in Fukuoka. In addition to the Tahara factory, Lexus vehicles have been produced at the Miyata plant (Toyota Motor Kyushu, Inc.) in Miyawaka, Fukuoka, Higashi Fuji plant (Kanto Auto Works, Ltd.) in Susono, Shizuoka, and Sanage plant (Toyota Boshoku Corp.; Araco) in Toyota City, Aichi. and in 2009 the Higashi Fuji plant, site of SC production, received the same recognition.

Quality rankings

In industry ratings of build quality, owner satisfaction, and reliability, Lexus vehicles have outperformed other manufacturers in successive years. J.D. Power and Associates has named Lexus the most reliable brand in the U.S. over fourteen times since 1995,

Service

thumb|Showroom of a Lexus dealership in Sapporo, Hokkaido, Japan|alt=Car showroom with a coupe, two sedans, glass windows, plus large sign reading "Lexus". The waiting areas in service departments are replete with amenities, ranging from refreshment bars to indoor putting greens.
Since 2002, Lexus has scored consecutive top ratings in the Auto Express

Motorsport

Lexus first entered the motorsport arena in 1999 when its racing unit, Team Lexus,[ref]
[/ref] fielded two GS 400 race vehicles in the Motorola Cup North American Street Stock Championship touring car series. In its 1999 inaugural season, Team Lexus achieved its first victory with its sixth race at Road Atlanta.
After the release of the Lexus brand in the Japanese domestic market in 2005, Lexus sanctioned the entry of four SC 430 coupes in the Super GT series of the All Japan Grand Touring Car Championship in the GT500 class. In the first race of the 2006 series, an SC 430 took the chequered flag,
Lexus' participation in endurance racing further includes the Rolex 24 Hours of Daytona, sanctioned by the Grand American Road Racing Association. After entering the Rolex Sports Car Series in 2004, Lexus has won over 15 Rolex Series event races.
On May 14, 2011, a CT 200h tuned up by Gazoo Racing competed in the Adenauer ADAC Rundstrecken-Trophy, a six-hour endurance race.

Marketing

From its inception, Lexus has been advertised to luxury consumers using specific marketing strategies, with a consistent motif used for the marque's advertisements. Beginning in 1989, television ads were narrated by actor James Sloyan (the voice of "Mr. Lexus" until 2009),
Industry observers have attributed Lexus' early marketing successes to higher levels of perceived quality and lower prices than competitors, which have enabled the marque to attract customers upgrading from mass-market cars. A reputation for dependability, bolstered by reliability surveys, also became a primary factor in attracting new customers from rival premium makes.
Automotive analysts have also noted Lexus' relative newcomer status as a marketing challenge for the brand, although some have debated the requirement of a long history. whereas Lexus' reputation rests primarily upon its perceived quality and shared history with parent company Toyota.  Several analysts have stated that Lexus will have to develop its own heritage over time by highlighting technological innovations and producing substantial products.
Lexus' marketing efforts have extended to sporting and charity event sponsorships, including the U.S. Open tennis Grand Slam event from 2005 to 2009, and the  United States Golf Association's U.S. Open, U.S. Women's Open, U.S. Senior Open, and U.S. Amateur tournaments since 2007. Lexus has organized an annual Champions for Charity golf series in the U.S. since 1989. The Oregonian, 1997-06-14. Endorsement contracts have also been signed with professional athletes Andy Roddick, Annika Sörenstam, and Peter Jacobsen.





Notes

Bibliography




