[[HMS Queen Mary]]

CATEGORIES: 1912 ships, Lion-class battlecruisers, Royal Navy ship names, Ships sunk at the Battle of Jutland, World War I battlecruisers of the United Kingdom

HMS ''Queen Mary was the last battlecruiser built by the Royal Navy before World War I. The sole member of her class, Queen Mary'' shared many features with the  during the early part of the battle and her magazines exploded shortly afterwards, sinking the ship.
Her wreck was discovered in 1991 and rests in pieces, some of which are upside down, on the floor of the North Sea. Queen Mary is designated as a protected place under the Protection of Military Remains Act 1986 as it is the grave of 1,266 officers and men.

Design

Queen Mary was ordered, together with the four battleships of the  in 1905 had placed the officers' quarters closer to their action stations amidships; after complaints from the Fleet, Queen Mary was the first battlecruiser to restore the quarters to their traditional place in the stern. 163 In addition, she was the first battlecruiser to mount a sternwalk. 531–536
Queen Mary, the only ship of her name ever to serve in the Royal Navy,Colledge, p. 283 was named for Mary of Teck, the wife of King George V. 259 The Queen's representative at the ship's christening on 20 March 1912 was the wife of Viscount Allendale.

General characteristics

Slightly larger than the preceding Lion-class ships, Queen Mary had an overall length of  at deep load. 43, 45 In peacetime the crew numbered 997 officers and enlisted men, but this increased to 1,275 during wartime.

Propulsion

The ship had two paired sets of Parsons direct-drive steam turbines housed in separate engine rooms. Each set consisted of a high-pressure turbine driving an outboard propeller shaft and a low-pressure turbine driving an inner shaft. A cruising stage was built into the casing of each high-pressure turbine for economical steaming at low speeds. The turbines had a designed output of . 31

Armament

Queen Mary mounted eight BL 13.5-inch Mk V guns in four twin hydraulically powered turrets, designated 'A', 'B', 'Q' and 'X' from bow to stern. The guns could be depressed to −3° and elevated to 20°, although the director controlling the turrets was limited to 15° 21' until prisms were installed before the Battle of Jutland in May 1916 to allow full elevation. 33H.M.S.O. (1916). The Sight Manual. Pub. No. OU 6026 ADM 186/216, p. 4 They fired  with armour-piercing (AP) shells. The rate of fire of these guns was 1.5–2 rounds per minute. 49–52 Queen Mary carried a total of 880 rounds during wartime for 110 shells per gun. 83
Her secondary armament consisted of sixteen BL 4-inch Mk VII guns, most of which were mounted in casemates on the forecastle deck, unlike the arrangement in the Lion class. The guns could depress to −7° and had a maximum elevation of 15°. They fired ;Friedman, pp. 97–98 the ship carried 150 rounds per gun.
The ship was built without any anti-aircraft guns, but two guns were fitted in October 1914. One was a QF 6-pounder Hotchkiss gun and the other was a QF 3-inch 20 cwt,"cwt" is the abbreviation for hundredweight, 20 cwt referring to the weight of the gun. both on high-angle mountings. The Hotchkiss fired a . 108–09
Two . 331

Fire-control

In February 1913, the Admiralty bought five sets of fire-control equipment from Arthur Pollen for comparative trials with the equipment designed by Commander Frederic Dreyer. One set was mounted in Queen Mary and consisted of a  Argo rangefinder located on top of the conning tower that fed range data into an Argo Clock Mk IV (a mechanical fire-control computer)Brooks, p. 169 located in the transmitting station below the conning tower. The clock converted the information into range and deflection data for use by the guns. The target's data was also graphically recorded on a plotting table to assist the gunnery officer in predicting the movement of the target. The aft torpedo director tower was the backup gunnery control position. All four turrets were provided with 9-foot rangefinders and 'B' and 'X' turrets were further outfitted to serve as auxiliary control positions. 91–92
Fire-control technology advanced quickly during the years immediately preceding World War I, and the development of the director firing system was a major advance. This consisted of a fire-control director mounted high in the ship which electrically provided elevation and training angles to the turrets via pointers, which the turret crewmen only had to follow. The guns were fired simultaneously, which aided in spotting the shell splashes and minimized the effects of the roll on the dispersion of the shells. 92–93 Queen Mary received her director before the Battle of Jutland. 100

Armour

The armour protection given to Queen Mary was similar to that of the Lions; her waterline belt of Krupp cemented armour was also . 102–03
The gun turrets had nine-inch fronts and sides, while their roofs were  thick on the sides and one inch thick on the ends between the upper and forecastle decks. 109, 112

Service

Pre-war career

Queen Mary was laid down at Palmers Shipbuilding and Iron Company, Jarrow, on 6 March 1911. She was launched on 20 March 1912 and was completed in August 1913Roberts, pp. 41, 123 at a total cost of £2,078,491 (including guns). 531Burt, p. 167 The ship came under the command of Captain Reginald Hall on 1 July and was the last battlecruiser commissioned before the start of World War I, being commissioned on 4 September 1913. 123 Assigned to the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron (BCS) under the command of Rear Admiral David Beatty, Queen Mary and the rest of the 1st BCS made a port visit to Brest in February 1914 and the squadron visited Russia in June. 161

World War I

=Battle of Heligoland Bight=

Queen Mary. 109–13

=Raid on Scarborough=

The German Navy had decided on a strategy of bombarding British towns on the North Sea coast in an attempt to draw out the Royal Navy and destroy elements of it in detail. An earlier Raid on Yarmouth on 3 November had been partially successful, but a larger-scale operation was devised by Admiral Franz von Hipper afterwards. The fast battlecruisers were to conduct the bombardment, while the entire High Seas Fleet was to station itself east of Dogger Bank to provide cover for their return and to destroy any elements of the Royal Navy that responded to the raid. But what the Germans did not know was that the British were reading the German naval codes and were planning to catch the raiding force on its return journey, although they were not aware that the High Seas Fleet would be at sea as well. Beatty's 1st BCS, now reduced to four ships, including Lion, together with the 2nd Battle Squadron with six dreadnoughts, was detached from the Grand Fleet in an attempt to intercept the Germans near Dogger Bank. 333–34 By this time, Queen Mary was commanded by Captain C. I. Prowse.
Hipper set sail on 15 December 1914 for another such raid and successfully bombarded several English towns, but British destroyers escorting the 1st BCS had already encountered German destroyers of the High Seas Fleet at 05:15 and fought an inconclusive action with them. Vice Admiral Sir George Warrender, commanding the 2nd Battle Squadron, had received a signal at 5:40 that the destroyer s message to Beatty at 7:36, but did not manage to make contact until 07:55. Beatty reversed course when he got the message and dispatched New Zealand to search for Roon. She was being overhauled by New Zealand when Beatty received messages that Scarborough was being shelled at 09:00. Beatty ordered New Zealand to rejoin the squadron and turned west for Scarborough. 342–43
The British forces split going around the shallow Southwest Patch of the Dogger Bank; Beatty's ships passed to the north, while Warrender passed to the south as they headed west to block the main route through the minefields defending the English coast. This left a  This confusion allowed the German light cruisers to escape, and alerted Hipper to the location of the British battlecruisers. The German battlecruisers wheeled to the northeast of the British forces and made good their escape. 34
Queen Mary was refitting in January and February 1915 and did not participate in the Battle of Dogger Bank; she received her main battery director in December 1915

=Battle of Jutland=

On 31 May 1916 Queen Mary put to sea with the rest of the Battlecruiser Fleet to intercept a sortie by the High Seas Fleet into the North Sea. The British were able to decode the German radio messages and left their bases before the Germans put to sea. Hipper's battlecruisers spotted the Battlecruiser Fleet to their west at 15:20, but Beatty's ships did not spot the Germans to their east until 15:30. Two minutes later, he ordered a course change to east south-east to position himself astride the German's line of retreat and called his ships' crews to action stations. Hipper ordered his ships to turn to starboard, away from the British, almost 180 degrees, to assume a south-easterly course, and reduced speed to  behind him. Around this time Beatty altered course to the east, as it was quickly apparent that he was still too far north to cut off Hipper. 69, 71, 75
This began what was to be called the "Run to the South" as Beatty changed course to steer east-southeast at 15:45, paralleling Hipper's course, now that the range closed to under , and Beatty ordered a course change two points to starboard to open up the range at 15:57. 83 During this period, Queen Mary made two hits on Seydlitz, at 15:55 and 15:57, one of which caused a propellant fire that burnt out her aft superfiring turret. 241
The range had grown too far for accurate shooting, so Beatty altered course four points to port to close the range again between 16:12 and 16:15. This manoeuvre exposed Lion to the fire of the German battlecruisers, and she was hit several times. The smoke and fumes from these hits caused 

Aftermath

Queen Mary, along with the other Jutland wrecks, has been declared a protected place under the Protection of Military Remains Act 1986 to discourage further damage to the resting place of 1,266 officers and men. Surveys of this site conducted by nautical archaeologist Innes McCartney in 2001–03 have shown the wreck is in three sections, with the two forward sections being heavily damaged and in pieces. 43 Her aft end is upside down and relatively complete except for her propellers, which have been salvaged. Examination of the damage to the ship has suggested that the initial explosion was not in the magazine of 'A' or 'B' forward main turrets, but instead in the magazine of the forward 4-inch battery. An explosion of the quantity of cordite in the main magazine would have been sufficient to also ignite 'Q' magazine, destroying much more of the ship. The explosion in the smaller magazine would have been sufficient to break the ship in two, the blast then spreading to the forward magazine and ripping apart the forward section. 47

Notes

Footnotes

Bibliography




