[[Mike Huckabee]]

CATEGORIES: Mike Huckabee, 1955 births, Living people, American Christians, American evangelicals, American anti-communists, American Christian Zionists, ABC Radio Networks, American bass guitarists, American health and wellness writers, American memoirists, American political pundits, American political writers, American radio personalities, American television talk show hosts, Arkansas Republicans, Christian creationists, Commentators, Fox News Channel people, Governors of Arkansas, Lieutenant Governors of Arkansas, Musicians from Arkansas, Ouachita Baptist University alumni, People from Hope, Arkansas, Republican Party state governors of the United States, Southern Baptist ministers, Southwestern Baptist Theological Seminary alumni, Baptist ministers from the United States, Baptist writers, Baptists from the United States, United States presidential candidates, 2008, Writers from Arkansas, Victory University, Critics of Islam, Southern Baptists, American pro-life activists, Intelligent design advocates, Conservatism in the United States, Christian writers, Christian religious leaders, Conservative talk radio, American talk radio hosts

Michael Dale "Mike" Huckabee (born August 24, 1955) is an American politician who served as the 44th Governor of Arkansas (1996–2007).
Huckabee currently hosts the eponymous Fox News Channel talk show Huckabee. From April 2012 through December 2013, he hosted a daily radio program, The Mike Huckabee Show, on weekday afternoons for Cumulus Media Networks.Brian Stelter, New Huckabee Radio Show Could Vie With Limbaugh, The New York Times, February 8, 2012
Huckabee is the author of several best selling books, an ordained Southern Baptist minister,

Early life

Huckabee was born on August 24, 1955 in Hope, Arkansas,
His first job, at 14, was working at a radio station where he read the news and weather.
Huckabee married his wife, Janet, on May 25, 1974. He graduated magna cum laude from Ouachita Baptist University, completing his bachelor's degree in Religion in 2½ years before attending Southwestern Baptist Theological Seminary in Fort Worth, Texas. He dropped out of the seminary after one year in order to take a job in Christian broadcasting.

Pastoral career

At 21, Huckabee was a staffer for James Robison, a television evangelist. Robison commented, "His convictions shape his character and his character will shape his policies. His whole life has been shaped by moral absolutes."
Prior to his political career, Huckabee served as pastor at Immanuel Baptist Church in Pine Bluff, Arkansas from 1980 to 1986 and the Beech Street Baptist Church in Texarkana from 1986 to 1992. In both Texarkana and Pine Bluff Huckabee started 24-hour television stations "where he produced documentaries and hosted a program called Positive Alternatives. He encouraged the all-white Immanuel Baptist Church to accept black members in the mid-1980s. He served as president of a religion-oriented television station.
In 1989 Huckabee ran against the Rev. Dr. Ronnie Floyd of Springdale for the presidency of the Arkansas Baptist State Convention.[ref]
[/ref] Huckabee won and served as president from 1989 to 1991.

Early political career

In 1992, in Huckabee's first political race, he lost to incumbent Senator and conservative Democrat Dale Bumpers, receiving 40 percent of the vote in the general election. 51–49 percent. Huckabee became only the second Republican since Reconstruction to serve as Arkansas lieutenant governor, the first having been Maurice Britt from 1967 to 1971.
In his autobiography From Hope to Higher Ground, Huckabee recalled the chilly reception that he received from the Arkansas Democratic establishment on his election as lieutenant governor:
 "The doors to my office were spitefully nailed shut from the inside, office furniture and equipment were removed, and the budget spent down to almost nothing prior to our arriving. After fifty-nine days of public outcry, the doors were finally opened for me to occupy the actual office I had been elected to hold two months earlier."Huckabee, From Hope to Higher Ground, pp. 6–7 
Dick Morris, who had previously worked for Bill Clinton, advised Huckabee on his races in 1993, 1994 and 1998. Huckabee commented that Morris was a "personal friend". A newspaper article reported on Huckabee's 1993 win: "Morris said the mistake Republicans always make is that they are too much of a country club set. What we wanted to do was run a progressive campaign that would appeal to all Arkansans.'"
Morris elaborated, "So we opened the campaign with ads that characterized Mike as more of a moderate whose values were the same as those of other Arkansans." Consequently, he abandoned his earlier support for the CofCC when in April 1994 following an adverse media campaign against the CofCC, Huckabee withdrew from a speaking engagement before their national convention. He repeated the accusations made by various media and left-wing organizations such as the Southern Poverty Law Center recalling his past association with the CofCC saying, "I will not participate in any program that has racist overtones. I've spent a lifetime fighting against racism and anti-Semitism."
In 1994, Huckabee was re-elected to a full term as lieutenant governor, beating Democratic candidate Charlie Cole Chaffin with nearly 59 percent of the vote.
In October 1995, David Pryor announced that he was retiring from the United States Senate. Huckabee then announced he was running for the open seat and moved well ahead in the polls. He won the Republican nomination unopposed.
During his campaign, Huckabee opposed in December then-Governor Tucker's plan for a constitutional convention. Huckabee also opposed Tucker's plan for school consolidation.
In May 1996, Tucker, involved in the Whitewater scandal, was convicted "on one count of arranging nearly $3 million in fraudulent loans" and he promised to resign by July 15. Huckabee then announced he would quit the Senate race and instead fill the unexpired term of Tucker.

Governor of Arkansas

In 1996, incumbent Democratic governor Jim Guy Tucker was convicted of fraud. The Arkansas Constitution, like nearly all state constitutions in the United States, does not allow convicted felons to hold office, so Tucker was forced to resign. However, Tucker, insisting he had a strong case for appeal, rescinded his resignation as Huckabee was preparing to be sworn in on July 15. Within a few hours, Tucker reinstated his resignation after Huckabee threatened to initiate impeachment proceedings against Tucker. Huckabee was sworn in as Governor of Arkansas on July 15, 1996. In November 1998, Huckabee was elected to a full four-year term by defeating retired Colonel Gene McVay in the primary and Jonesboro attorney Bill Bristow in the general election, becoming the state's third elected Republican Governor since Reconstruction. In November 2002, Huckabee was reelected to his second four-year term by defeating State Treasurer Jimmie Lou Fisher, garnering 53 percent of the vote. His reelection came despite the defeat in the general election of fellow Republican U.S. Senator Tim Hutchinson. By the end of his term, Huckabee owned the third-longest tenure of any Arkansas Governor. Only Democrats Orval Faubus, who served six consecutive two-year terms (1955–1967), and Bill Clinton, who served 11 years, 11 months (1979–1981; 1983–1992), had longer tenures.
Huckabee said that his experience as a minister afforded him special insight in being governor:  My experience dealing every day with real people who were genuinely affected by policies created by government gave me a deep understanding of the fragility of the human spirit and vulnerability of so many families who struggled from week to week. I was in the ICU at 2 a.m. with families faced with the decision to disconnect a respirator on their loved one; I counseled fifteen-year-old pregnant girls who were afraid to tell their parents about their condition; I spent hours hearing the grief of women who had been physically and emotionally clobbered by an abusive husband; I saw the anguish in the faces of an elderly couple when their declining health forced them to sell their home, give up their independence, and move into a long-term-care facility; I listened to countless young couples pour out their souls as they struggled to get their marriages into survival mode when confronted with overextended debt... 7 

Post-governorship

2008 presidential election campaign

Huckabee announced his run for the White House on Meet the Press on January 28, 2007.[ref]
Former Gov. Huckabee to jump into 2008 race. Associated Press, January 27, 2007|thumb|Mike at a campaign event in Londonderry, New Hampshire in 2008.
[/ref]
At the August 11 Iowa Straw Poll, Huckabee took second place with 2,587 votes, roughly 18 percent, splitting the conservative Republican party votes amongst other candidates."What Iowa's Straw Poll Tells the GOP" Time Online, August 11, 2007 Huckabee spent $57.98 per vote in the Straw Poll, which is the lowest among the top three finishers."Straw poll: Huckabee spent just $58 per vote for 2nd place and revived prospects. Associated Press, December 31, 2007. Huckabee has credited God with some of his political success.Matter of Faith: Vote God 2008 December 5, 2007
On January 3, 2008, Huckabee won the Iowa Republican caucuses, receiving 34% of the electorate and 17 delegates, compared to the 25% of Mitt Romney who finished second, receiving 12 delegates, Fred Thompson who came in third place and received three delegates, John McCain who came in fourth place and received three delegates and Ron Paul who came in fifth place and received two delegates.
On January 8, 2008, Huckabee finished in third place in the New Hampshire primary, behind John McCain in first place, and Mitt Romney who finished second, with Huckabee receiving one more delegate for a total of 18 delegates, gained via elections, and 21 total delegates, versus 30 total (24 via elections) for Romney, and 10 for McCain (all via elections).
On January 15, 2008, Huckabee finished in third place in the Michigan Republican primary, 2008, behind John McCain in second place, Mitt Romney who finished first and ahead of Ron Paul who finished in fourth place.
On January 19, 2008, Huckabee finished in second place in the South Carolina Republican primary, 2008, behind John McCain who finished first and ahead of Fred Thompson who finished third.
On January 29, 2008, Huckabee finished in fourth place in the Florida primary, behind Rudy Giuliani in third, Mitt Romney in second, and John McCain in first place.
On February 5, 2008, Huckabee won the first contest of "Super Tuesday", the West Virginia GOP state convention, but only after the McCain campaign provided their delegates thereby giving Huckabee 52% of the electorate to Mitt Romney's 47%.
On February 9, 2008, Huckabee won the first election following Super Tuesday, by winning 60% of the vote in the Kansas Republican Caucuses.
This was also the first contest to be held without Mitt Romney, who was said to be splitting the conservative vote with Huckabee and some pundits suggested it was the reason for Huckabee's landslide victory.
On March 4, 2008, Huckabee withdrew from seeking the candidacy as it became apparent he would lose in Texas, where he had hoped to win and that John McCain would get the 1191 delegates required to win the Republican nomination.

After the presidential campaign

Even though Huckabee had signed a television contract and a book deal with a pressing deadline, he was mentioned by most to be on then-presumptive Republican presidential nominee John McCain's short list for his Vice Presidential running mate. Huckabee was eventually passed over for Sarah Palin. The late pundit Tim Russert even referred to Huckabee as "Vice President Huckabee" several times when he appeared on Meet The Press on May 18, 2008.
Former President Bill Clinton has praised Huckabee and stated that he is a rising star in the Republican Party. Clinton and Huckabee have collaborated on initiatives such as the fight against childhood obesity. Former Tennessee Republican Party Chairman and Huckabee's former campaign manager Chip Saltsman has called governor Huckabee, "The most successful failed presidential candidate in the history of our country."
In December 2008, Huckabee became an Honorary Member of Tau Kappa Epsilon fraternity. (December 13, 2008). In Fox News,Arkansas Gov. Huckabee Joins a Fraternity Retrieved September 14, 2010 from 

=Books=

Since the campaign Huckabee has published, Do The Right Thing: Inside the Movement That's Bringing Common Sense Back to America (released on November 18, 2008) which became a New York Times Best Seller

=Media career=

On June 12, 2008, Fox News announced it was hiring Huckabee as a political commentator and regular contributor to their 2008 American presidential election coverage, in their New York election headquarters.
Huckabee filled in for Paul Harvey in July 2008. Huckabee in talks for own Fox show. The Politico. July 14, 2008. A few months later, he signed a deal with ABC Radio Networks (now Cumulus Media Networks) to carry a daily commentary, The Huckabee Report, beginning in January 2009. ABC Radio information page. December 2008. After Harvey's death his show replaced Harvey's broadcasts.
Huckabee hosts a weekend show, Huckabee, on Fox News Channel, which premiered Saturday September 27, 2008, at 8 PM EST.
On April 2, 2012, Huckabee launched a long-form daily talk show on Cumulus Media Networks, who provide the call-in guests. The show, which is targeted at second-tier broadcast stations, features long-form interviews and discussions and  airs in the noon to 3 p.m. time slot, directly opposite the market leader in talk radio, The Rush Limbaugh Show. New Huckabee Radio Show Could Vie With Limbaugh. The New York Times. Retrieved February 10, 2012. On November 27, 2013, Huckabee announced that the show will have its final broadcast on December 12, 2013, stating that he and Cumulus Media mutually decided not to renew the contract.
In a December 2013 interview, Huckabee stated that he would be launching a news organization in partnership with Christian Media Corp. International.

=Clemency controversies=

As governor, Huckabee commuted and accepted recommendations for pardon for twice as many sentences as his three predecessors combined; in total: 1,033 prisoners.
In 2003, Eugene Fields received a six-year prison sentence after his fourth conviction of driving while intoxicated in five years. Gov. Huckabee granted clemency over the objections of the local prosecutor and sheriff, the Arkansas Prosecuting Attorneys Association and Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD). A spokeswoman for Mr. Huckabee, Charmaine Yoest, said that Mr. Fields' political donations the Arkansas Republican Party and connections played no role in his clemency. About two years after Mr. Fields' sentence was cut to 11 months, he was arrested again for driving while intoxicated as his truck crossed the center line directly into the path of an oncoming police car.

=Recent controversies=

In February 2011, Huckabee appeared on Fox and Friends criticizing Christian churches for allowing Muslim groups to use their buildings. Huckabee was criticized by the Council on American-Islamic Relations (CAIR). CAIR noted that Huckabee falsely claimed that Jesus is regarded in Islam as an "infidel", when Jesus is instead considered a prophet in Islam.
In comments made March 1, 2011, on The Steve Malzberg Show, Huckabee said of President Barack Obama, "I would love to know more. What I know is troubling enough. And one thing that I do know is his having grown up in Kenya, his view of the Brits, for example, is very different than the average American."
In comments made March 4, 2011, on the Michael Medved Show, Huckabee spoke about pregnant, unwed actress Natalie Portman, saying "it's unfortunate we glorify and glamorize the idea of out of wedlock children."  Huckabee denies he defamed Portman.
In April, he was criticized for a remark he made, "I almost wish that there would be a simultaneous telecast and all Americans would be forced, at gunpoint, to listen to every David Barton message," in praise of David Barton.
Within hours of the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting, Huckabee made headlines in the U.S. and abroad for stating on Fox News: "we ask why there is violence in our schools, but we have systematically removed God from our schools," and further asked "Should we be so surprised that schools would become a place of carnage?""Looking for America," The New York Times, 14 December 2012
In January 2014, in a luncheon speech at the Republican National Committee's winter meeting, in response to a federal mandate on contraception that was less broad than one he himself had signed into law in 2005, Huckabee stated that Democrats want women to think "they cannot control their libido or their reproductive system without the help of the government.""Huckabee: Dems Tell Women They Can't Control Libido Without Government," The Daily Beast, 23 January 2014

=Speculated 2012 presidential campaign=

In a November 19, 2008, article by the Associated Press, Huckabee addressed the possibility of running for President in 2012. He said, "I'm not ruling anything out for the future, but I'm not making any specific plans".
Amid speculation about a future run for the Presidency, a CNN poll in December 2008 found Huckabee at the top of the list of 2012 GOP contenders, along with former Alaskan Governor Sarah Palin, fellow 2008 Presidential candidate Mitt Romney, and former Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich.
On December 3, 2008, local NBC news station WLWT asked Huckabee about the prospect of running, to which he said, "I'm pretty sure I'll be out there. Whether it's for myself or somebody else I may decide will be a better standard bearer, that remains to be seen."WLWT website  (retrieved on 2/4/2009)
A June 2009 CNN/Opinion Research Corporation national poll showed Huckabee as the 2012 presidential co-favorite of the Republican electorate along with Palin and Romney.
On May 14, 2011, Huckabee announced on his Fox News television show that he would not be a candidate for the GOP presidential nomination in 2012. Despite his high national poll numbers and being seen by many as the front runner, Huckabee declined to run, saying, "All the factors say 'go', but my heart says 'no'."

=Speculated 2016 presidential campaign=

It has been speculated that Huckabee might be ready for another presidential run in 2016.  He was limited by a lack of money in 2008 but with changes to federal election law allowing SuperPACs to pour large sums of money into a race he might be better positioned to stay in the race.csmonitor.

Political positions

Electoral history

Public image

Personal life

Weight loss and health advocacy

When elected governor of Arkansas, Huckabee was obese. In 2003, physicians diagnosed him with type 2 diabetes, and informed him that he would not live more than 10 years if he did not lose weight. Huckabee acknowledges that he has weighed as much as 300 pounds (135 kg). Coupled with  the death of former Governor Frank D. White (whose obesity contributed to a fatal heart attack) his diagnosis prompted Huckabee to begin eating a healthier diet and exercising. He subsequently lost over 110 pounds (50 kg).[ref]
 The New York Times called the weight loss so rapid that "it was as if he simply unzipped a fat suit and stepped out."[ref]
[/ref]
Although Huckabee has stated that he never smoked nor drank, he declared himself a "recovering foodaholic". Huckabee has publicly recounted his previous burdens as an obese man: the steps of the Arkansas capitol from the entrance of the building up to the Governor's office were so long and steep that he would be out of breath and exhausted by the time he reached the top of the stairs. He once joked that he would be interviewed by media at the top of the steps, and that he would be too out of breath to respond.[ref]

[/ref]
Huckabee has discussed his weight loss and used health care reform as a major focus of his governorship.
At an August 2007 forum on cancer hosted by Lance Armstrong, Huckabee said he would support a federal smoking ban, but has stated that he believes the issue is best addressed by state and local governments.
Huckabee has completed several marathons: the 2005 Marine Corps Marathon, the 2005 and 2006 Little Rock Marathon and the 2006 New York City Marathon. The 2005 Little Rock Marathon featured an impromptu challenge between Huckabee and Iowa Governor Tom Vilsack. Huckabee completed the marathon in 4:38:31, defeating Vilsack by 50 minutes. He wrote a book chronicling his weight-loss experience, Quit Digging Your Grave with a Knife and Fork. Huckabee was one of 10 recipients of a 2006 AARP Impact Award acknowledging his work as a "health crusader."
In 2009 Huckabee acknowledged that he had gained back a fourth of his weight due to a foot condition that prevented him from running.

Capitol Offense (rock band)

Huckabee plays bass guitar in his classic-rock cover band, Capitol Offense.

Organizations

Huckabee was made the chair of the Southern Governors' Association in 1999 and served in capacity through 2000. He has chaired the Southern Growth Policies Board, the Southern Region Education Board, the Southern Technology Council, the Interstate Oil and Gas Compact Commission, and the Education Commission of the States. He is also a member of the Republican Governors Association and former chairman of the National Governors Association. Huckabee is presently the chairman of conservative PACs called the Vertical Politics Institute and Huck PAC.
Huckabee co-hosted Troopathon 2013.

Honors

Huckabee received two honorary doctoral degrees: a Doctor of Humane Letters, received from John Brown University in 1991, and a Doctor of Laws from Ouachita Baptist University in 1992.nytimes.com/top/reference/timestopics/people/h/mike_huckabee/
In July 2010, Huckabee became a fundraiser on behalf of for-profit Victory College in Memphis Tennessee and was designated Chancellor of the Victory University Foundation, although he did not take up residence in Memphis. Memphis Commercial Appeal. July 12, 2010

Family

He and his wife, Janet, have been married for over 37 years and have three grown children: John Mark, David, and Sarah. Janet Huckabee was an unsuccessful candidate for Arkansas Secretary of State in 2002.  The couple currently resides in Florida.

Books

Huckabee has written or co-authored several books:



 
 




