[[Lake Tai]]

CATEGORIES: Lakes of China, National parks of China, Geography of Jiangsu, Geography of Zhejiang, Visitor attractions in Zhejiang, Visitor attractions in Jiangsu, Geography of Suzhou

Lake Tai or Lake TaihuAlso translated as Tai or T'ai Lake and as Taihu or T'ai-hu Lake. (Chinese:  it is the third-largest freshwater lake in China, after Poyang and Dongting. The lake houses about 90 islands, ranging in size from a few square meters to several square kilometers.
Lake Tai is linked to the renowned Grand Canal and is the origin of a number of rivers, including Suzhou Creek. In recent years, Lake Tai has been plagued by pollution as a result of rapid economic growth in the surrounding region.

Formation

Scientific studies suggest that Lake Tai's circular structure is the result of a meteor impact based on the discovery of shatter cones, shock-metamorphosed quartz, microtektites, and shock-metamorphic unloading fractures. Fossils indicate that Lake Tai was dry land until the ingression of the East China Sea during the Holocene epoch.  The growing deltas of the Yangtze and Qiantang rivers eventually sealed off Lake Tai from the sea, and the influx of fresh water from rivers and rains turned it into a freshwater lake.

Scenic locations

The lake is renowned for its unique limestone formations. These "scholar's rocks" or "Taihu stones" are often prized as a decorating material for traditional Chinese gardens, as exemplified by those preserved as museums in nearby Suzhou.
Lake Tai is best seen.
Three of the lake's islands are preserved as a national geological park under the name Sanshan. They are famed as a former haunt of local bandits. Mei Yuan is also located in Lake Tai, along with Yuantouzhu. Yuantouzhu received its name ("Turtle Head Isle") from the shape of its outline.

Business and industry

The lake is also known for its productive fishing industry and is often occupied by fleets of small private fishing boats. Since the late 1970s, harvesting seafood products such as fish and crabs has been invaluable to people living along the lake and has contributed significantly to the economy of the surrounding area.
The Lake is home a ceramic production industry that is very extensive. Also the lake is home to the Ishing pottery factory which makes tea pots of world renown.

Ferris wheel

The Star of Lake Tai is a 

Pollution

Pollution of the lake has been ongoing for decades despite efforts to reduce pollution that were not sustained and thus proved ineffective. In the 1980s and 1990s the number of industries in the lake region has tripled, while the population also increased significantly. One billion tons of wastewater, 450,000 tons of garbage and 880,000 tons of animal waste were dumped in the shallow lake in 1993 alone. The central government intervened and initiated a campaign to clean up the lake, setting a deadline to comply with pollution standards. When the deadline was not met, 128 factories were closed on New Year's Eve in 1999. Compliance improved somewhat afterwards, but the pollution problem remained severe. However, in 2010 The Economist reported that a fresh pollution outbreak had occurred, and that Wu, released from prison in April, was claiming that the government was trying to suppress news of it, all the while switching to other supplies in place of lake water.




