[[Hakata-ku, Fukuoka]]

CATEGORIES: Wards of Fukuoka

 is a Japanese ward of the city of Fukuoka in Fukuoka Prefecture. It is best known as the location of Fukuoka's main train station, Hakata Station.

Geography

Hakata-ku is a ward of Fukuoka City located on its eastern edge. It is 31.47 km2 with a population of 206,629 (current January 1, 2009). Most of the ward is plains where the . Hakata-ku also houses the Fukuoka Prefectural office.

Economy

Many Japanese companies have established branch offices in Fukuoka City, particularly in Hakata-ku cause of its easy access to Hakata Station and Fukuoka Airport. Therefore, people on business trips often visit and stay in Hakata-ku. and many other companies are in the ward.企業検索－福岡商工会議所
Air Next, a subsidiary of All Nippon Airways, is headquartered on the grounds of Fukuoka Airport in Hakata-ku.会社概要. Air Next. Link Airs has its headquarters in the Fukuoka Gion Daiichi Seimei Building (福岡祇園第一生命ビル Fukuoka Gion Daiichi Seimei Biru) in Hakata-ku."会社概要." Link Airs. Retrieved on 5 November 2013. "福岡県福岡市博多区冷泉町5番35 福岡祇園第一生命ビル5F" ("Fukuoka Gion Daiichi Seimei Building 5F, 5-35 Reisenmachi, Hakata-ku, Fukuoka City, Fukuoka 812-0039 Japan") Cisco has an Asia-Pacific sales office on the 12th floor of the Fukuoka Gion Daiichi Seimei Building."Asia/Pacific Sales Offices." Cisco. "Cisco Systems G.K Fukuoka Fukuoka Gion Daiichi Seimei Building 12th floor, 5-35 Reisencho Hakata-ku, Fukuoka-shi Fukuoka 812-0039 Japan"
Prior to its dissolution, Harlequin Air was headquartered on the grounds of the airport in Hakata-ku.会社概要. Harlequin Air."ハーレクィンエア会社概要." Harlequin Air. December 7, 1998.

History

Hakata is one of the oldest cities in Japan. In the Middle Ages Hakata, which faces onto the Genkai-Nada Channel (玄界灘) dividing Japan from Korea, was a base for merchants who traded with China and Korea, and the city housed Japan's first Chinatown. Taira no Kiyomori is said to have built the artificial harbor Sode-no-minato (袖の湊) to increase commerce. Hakata was burned down by many wars, including the Mongol invasions.
In the early Edo period, Kuroda Nagamasa, appointed the lord of Chikuzen Province, and most of his samurai vassals lived in Fukusaki, on the opposite shore of the Naka River from Hakata. Kuroda Nagamasa changed the name of the area to Fukuoka after his home town; Fukuoka in Okayama Prefecture. He ordered Tachibana Castle and Najima Castle dismantled, and had Fukuoka Castle built using the stones from those older castles. At that time Hakata was no larger than one square kilometer, demarcated by defensive lines along the Naka River, the Boshu-bori (or Boshu Canal), and the Ishido or Mikasa River.  
In 1876, Hakata, then also known as Dai-Ni-Dai-ku, and Fukuoka, or Dai-Ichi-Dai-ku, were merged. and in 1878 the settlement was renamed Fukuoka-ku (福岡区) by the Fukuoka prefectural government, though the population of Hakata was 25,677 and that of Fukuoka was 20,410. At that time, the name Hakata vanished from the administration. In 1889, after a local referendum in which half the voters chose the name Fukuoka and half chose Hakata, the city was officially renamed Fukuoka-shi, but at the same time a new train station then being built was named Hakata Station. 
An imperial decree issued in July 1899 established Hakata as an open port for trade with the United States and the United Kingdom. (1906). A digest of international law as embodied in diplomatic discussions, treaties and other international agreements (John Bassett Moore, ed.), Vol. 5, p. 759.
In 1972, when Fukuoka City was granted designated status by government ordinance, a ward including the old Hakata area was given the name Hakata-ku.

Culture

Hakata was the traditional center for the manufacture of Hakata ningyō, which are traditional Japanese dolls that are famous throughout Japan. Today, almost all Hakata ningyō makers (Hakata ningyō shi) have their factories out of the Old Hakata Area, a part of modern Hakata-ku.
Hakata ori is a textile used for obis of kimonos.Hakata Ori website (English)
It is also the home of Mentai Rock, named after the popular mentaiko dish served in the region, that spawned numerous J-pop idols during the early 1980s. Neo Mentai Rock is the name given to a recent renewal in activity from local musicians.
Hakata-ben is the local Japanese dialect spoken in the Old Hakata Area.
Hakata is also the location of the pop group HKT48.

Famous foods

Festivals

Transportation

Rail

Bus

Airport

Harbor

Facilities

Commerce

Culture

Religion






