[[Canary Wharf tube station]]

CATEGORIES: Canary Wharf, Jubilee Line stations, Transport architecture in London, Tube stations in Tower Hamlets, Norman Foster buildings, Transport infrastructure completed in 1999, Railway stations opened in 1999

Canary Wharf tube station is a London Underground station on the Jubilee line, between . It is in Travelcard Zone 2 and was opened by Ken Livingstone setting an escalator in motion on 17 September 1999Horne, M: The Jubilee Line, page 80. Capital Transport Publishing, 2000. as part of the Jubilee Line Extension. It is maintained by Tube Lines. Over 40 million people pass through the station each year, making it not only the busiest station on the London Underground outside Central London but also the busiest that serves only a single line. (The DLR station is completely separate.)

History

Before the arrival of the Jubilee Line, London's Docklands had suffered from relatively poor public transport. Although the Docklands Light Railway station at Canary Wharf had been operating since 1987, by 1990 it was obvious that the DLR's capacity would soon be reached. The Jubilee Line's routing through Canary Wharf was intended to relieve some of this pressure.
The tube station was intended from the start to be the showpiece of the Jubilee Line Extension, and the contract for its design was awarded in 1990 to the renowned architect Sir Norman Foster. It was constructed, by a Tarmac Construction / Bachy UK Joint Venture,Schmidlin website in a drained arm of the former dock, using a simple "cut and cover" method to excavate an enormous pit 24 metres (78 ft) deep and 265 metres (869 ft) long. The size of the interior has led to it being compared to a cathedral, and it has even been used to celebrate a wedding. However, the main reason for the station's enormous dimensions was the great number of passengers predicted; as many as 50,000 daily. These predictions have been outgrown, with as many as 69,759 on weekdays recorded in 2006.TfL statistics
In a 2013 poll conducted by YouGov, it was voted as the "Most Loved" tube station in London.Londoners say Bank Tube station is capital's worst BBC, 23 April 2013

The station today

Above ground there is little sign of the vast interior: two curved glass canopies at the east and west ends of the station cover the entrances and allow daylight into the ticket hall below. The Jubilee Park, a public park is situated between the two canopies, above the station concourse. It had originally been intended that the infilled section of the dock would be reinstated above the station, but this proved impractical because of technical difficulties and the park was created instead.
As with the other below-ground stations on the Jubilee Line extension, both station platforms are equipped with platform edge doors.
Canary Wharf station has become one of the busiest stations on the network, serving the ever-expanding Canary Wharf business district. Although it shares its name with the Docklands Light Railway station at Canary Wharf, the two are not directly integrated (in fact, Heron Quays DLR station is nearer at street level). All three stations are connected underground via shopping malls. Out-of-station interchange within twenty minutes between any two of the stations entails no additional charge.
Canary Wharf can be used to reverse trains from both the east and the west. A scissors crossover west of the station allows trains from Stanmore to enter either the east- or west-bound platform at the station, and trains from Stratford enter the normal westbound platform and can use this scissors crossover to reverse back towards Stratford.
The station was used as a location for some scenes of Danny Boyle's 2002 film 28 Days Later.
On 9 January 2013, the station appeared on a £1.28 British postage stamp as part of a set commemorating the 150th anniversary of the first London underground train journey.  The stamp's captions read "Jubilee Line at Canary Wharf" and "1999". The Canary Wharf stamp represented the most modern phase of the Underground in the set of six stamps.

Future proposals

Canary Wharf station and the Jubilee Line Extension itself were partly funded by the owners of the Canary Wharf complex, with the intention of making it more accessible to commuters. Only five years after the construction of the extension, capacity issues started becoming apparent and upgrades were required. The first step was the lengthening of the trains from 6 to 7 cars. This was done at the end of 2005.  The second step was to replace the conventional Jubilee Line signalling with the Thales S40 moving-block system.  This was eventually introduced into service during 2011 after many delays and teething problems and allows a more intensive timetable to operate with 30 trains per hour running in the peaks.

Image gallery

File:CanaryWharfTubeStation.JPG|Exterior of Canary Wharf tube station
File:London Underground Canary Wharf Station.jpg|Concourse of Canary Wharf station
File:Canary Wharf concourse and concourse roof.jpg|Concourse and concourse roof of Canary Wharf station
File:Jubilee Line train at Canary Wharf station.jpg|A Jubilee line train stopped at Canary Wharf underground station
File:Canary wharf tube canopy.jpg|Interior view under station canopy
File:Canary wharf tube station on marathon day.jpg|View from the down escalator at the west end of the station on the day of the London Marathon 2009
File:Canary.jubilee.arp.750pix.jpg|Ticket hall on the concourse of Canary Wharf station
File:CanaryWharfTubeA.JPG|Interior of Canary Wharf
File:Canary wharf station outside 2006.jpg|Canary Wharf tube station on busy day
File:Canary Wharf Roundel.jpg|Canary Wharf station roundel on the platforms
File:Canary Wharf platforms.JPG|Canary Wharf platforms

Additional images are available from the Commission for Architecture and the Built Environment (CABE) case study. 

Video Gallery

File:Jubilee line - Canary Wharf 01.ogg|Canary Wharf Tube station Jubilee line Train leaving the station
File:Jubilee line - Canary Wharf 02.ogg|Canary Wharf Tube station Jubilee line Train Coming in to the station

Local notable places



Transport links

Canary Wharf is served by the following London Bus Routes:
Canary Wharf is also served by the following Night London Bus Routes:
Canary Wharf is served by the following Coaches:







