[[Lactantius]]

CATEGORIES: 240 births, 320 deaths, Berber people, Converts to Christianity, Roman-era poets, Post–Silver Age Latin writers, Christian pacifists, 3rd-century Romans, 4th-century Romans, Christian writers, Christian apologists, 3rd-century theologians, 3rd-century poets, 4th-century poets, Berber Christians, Christianity in Morocco, Christianity in Algeria, Christianity in Libya, Caecilii, World Digital Library related

Lucius Caecilius Firmianus Lactantius was an early Christian author (c. 240 – c. 320) who became an advisor to the first Christian Roman emperor, Constantine I, guiding his religious policy as it developed,Lactantius' role is examined in detail in Elizabeth DePalma Digeser, The Making of a Christian Empire: Lactantius and Rome, 2000. and tutor to his son.

Biography

Lactantius, a Latin-speaking native of North Africa, was a pupil of Arnobius and taught rhetoric in various cities of the Eastern Roman Empire, ending in Constantinople.  He wrote apologetic works explaining Christianity in terms that would be palatable to educated people who still practiced the traditional religions of the Empire, while defending Christian beliefs against the criticisms of Hellenistic philosophers. His Divinae Institutiones ("Divine Institutes") is an early example of a systematic presentation of Christian thought. He was considered somewhat heretical after his death, but Renaissance humanists took a renewed interest in him, more for his elaborately rhetorical Latin style than for his theology.
A translator of the Divine Institutes starts his introduction as follows:

Lactantius was not born into a Christian family. In his early life, he taught rhetoric in his native town, which may have been Cirta in Numidia, where an inscription mentions a certain 'L. Caecilius Firmianus'.
Lactantius had a successful public career at first. At the request of the Roman Emperor Diocletian, he became an official professor of rhetoric in Nicomedia; the voyage from Africa is described in his poem Hodoeporicum. There he associated in the imperial circle with the administrator and polemicist Sossianus Hierocles and the pagan philosopher Porphyry; here he will first have met Constantine, and Galerius, whom he cast as villain in the persecutions. Having converted to Christianity, he resigned his post before Diocletian's purging of Christians from his immediate staff and before the publication of Diocletian's first "Edict against the Christians" (February 24, 303). As a Latin rhetor he subsequently lived in poverty according to Jerome and eked out a living by writing, until Constantine I became his patron. The new emperor appointed the aged scholar in 311 or 313. The friendship of the Emperor Constantine raised him from penury and he became tutor in Latin to his son Crispus, whom Lactantius may have followed to Trier in 317, when Crispus was made Caesar (lesser co-emperor) and sent to the city. Crispus was put to death in 326, but when Lactantius died and in what circumstances is not known.
Like so many of the early Christian authors, Lactantius depended on classical models. The early Humanists called him the "Christian Cicero" (Cicero Christianus). His works were copied in manuscript several times in the 15th century and first printed in 1465 by the Germans Arnold Pannartz and Konrad Sweynheim at the Abbey of Subiaco. This edition was the first book printed in Italy to have a date of printing, as well as the first use of a Greek alphabet font anywhere, which was apparently produced in the course of printing, as the early pages leave Greek text blank. It was probably the fourth book ever printed in Italy. A copy of this edition was sold at auction in 2000 for more than $1m.

Prophetic Exegesis

In The Divine Institutes,Lactantius expected an earthly reign of the resurrected saints with Jesus after His second advent for the thousand years before the universal judgment. He presented, in sharp chronological summary, the premillennial advent, the two resurrections, the millennial period, and the reign of the saints with Christ, with surprising astuteness, reflecting the unsettled doctrine of the time.
With the conversion of Constantine, the Christians were no longer persecuted, their adversaries were destroyed, and tranquility reigned. The world's favor, rather than its hatred, became the church's peril. Multitudes flocked into the church because it was now fashionable and the church, long comfortable to persecution and expected martyrdom, became worldly.  New errors commingled with older ones, and with truth.
In the outline of Bible history Lactantius dealt with the plan of salvation, the origin of sin, creation, probation in Eden, the fall, and the incarnation of Christ.  He said that "as the end of this world approaches, the condition of human affairs must undergo a change, and through the prevalence of wickedness become worse."
Lactantius confidently stated that the beginning of the end would be the fall, or breakup, of the Roman Empire. He asserted that the Roman world would be divided into ten contemporaneous kingdoms, which would mark the beginning of disastrous times.  After Rome's breakup the  Antichrist would appear and after that the saints would take the kingdom.  Three of the ten kingdoms would be destroyed by a powerful northern enemy that would harass the world, changing laws, assuming the government, and ruling with intolerance, oppressing mankind.
Lactantius linked the False Prophet, the Beast of Revelation 13, and the Antichrist as the same destructive power whose tyrannical rule will prevail for "forty-two months." None of the fathers thus far had been more verbose on the subject of the millennial kingdom than Lactantius, or more particular in describing the times and events preceding and following. He held to the fundamental apostolic belief that the millennium originates with the second advent of Christ and marks the destruction of the wicked, the binding of the devil, and the raising of the righteous dead.
He depicted Jesus reigning with the resurrected righteous on this earth during the seventh thousand years, prior to the general judgment.  The resurrected saints rule over the not yet glorified righteous who remain alive at the end.  And they subject the survivors of the unregenerate nations to slavery.  In the end the devil, having been bound during the thousand years, is loosed; the enslaved nations rebel against the righteous, who hide underground until the host attacking the Holy City are overwhelmed by fire and brimstone and mutual slaughter, and buried altogether by an earthquake - rather unnecessarily, it would seem, since the wicked are thereupon raised again to be sent into eternal punishment.  Next, God renews the earth, after the punishment of the wicked, and the Lord alone is thenceforth worshiped in the renovated earth.

Works

| title = The Rubrics of the First Book of Lactantius Firmianus's On the Divine Institutes Against the Pagans Begin
| work = World Digital Library
| accessdate = 2014-03-01
| date = 2011-10-17
| url = 
}}[/ref] As an apologetic treatise it was intended to point out the futility of pagan beliefs and to establish the reasonableness and truth of Christianity as a response to pagan critics. It was also the first attempt at a systematic exposition of Christian theology in Latin, planned on a scale sufficiently broad to silence all opponents. The beauty of the style, the choice and aptness of the terminology, cannot hide the author's lack of grasp on Christian principles and his almost utter ignorance of Scripture."  Included in this treatise is a quote from the nineteenth of the Odes of Solomon, one of only two known texts of the Odes until the early twentieth century.  The Odes of Solomon.  Oxford: Oxford UP, 1973, pp. 1, 82 However, his mockery of the idea of a round earth was criticised by Copernicus as "childish".






