[[Prescot]]

CATEGORIES: Towns and villages in Knowsley, Towns in Merseyside, Liverpool Urban Area, Post towns in the L postcode area, Civil parishes in Merseyside

Prescot is a town and civil parish, within the Metropolitan Borough of Knowsley in Merseyside, England. Historically part of Lancashire, it lies approximately eight miles to the east of Liverpool city centre. At the 2001 Census, the population was 11,184 (5,265 males, 5,919 females).
Prescot marks the beginning of the A58 road which runs through to Wetherby, West Yorkshire. The town is served by Prescot railway station and Eccleston Park railway station.

History

Prescot's name is believed to be derived from the Anglo-Saxon prēost "priest" + cot "cot", meaning a cottage or small house owned or inhabited by a priest, a "priest-cottage". (ME prest, preste, priest, OE prēost, LL presbyter, Gk πρεσβύτερος presbýteros "elder, priest").
In the 14th century, William Dacre, 2nd Baron Dacre, obtained a charter for the holding of a three-day market and moveable fair at Prescot, to begin on the Wednesday following Corpus Christi. 5 (J. Heywood, 1893), p. 2
From about 1593 and into the early years of the 17th century, Prescot was home to the Prescot Playhouse, a purpose-built Shakespearean theatre.
During the 18th and 19th centuries it was at the centre of the watch and clock making industry. This ended with the failure of the Lancashire Watch Company in 1910. In later years the BICC company was the primary industrial employer in the town. BICC ceased operations in Prescot in the early 1990s before the site was demolished and later cleared. The land remained desolate until the year 2000 when it was then regenerated into what is now known as Cable's Retail Park, the name of which is a reference to the BICC and the history of the site on which it was built.

Governance

Prescot has historically lain within the historic county of Lancashire. The town was contained in the Prescot Urban District in the administrative county Lancashire from 1894. When the administrative counties were abolished in 1974 the district became part of the Metropolitan Borough of Knowsley in the metropolitan county of Merseyside.

Churches

The centre of Prescot has seven churches. Dominating the skyline is the 17th century Prescot Parish Church of St Mary's. Tucked away behind St Mary's is the Roman Catholic Church of Our Lady and St Joseph. Prescot Methodist Church celebrated its 100th anniversary in 2009, but the building has since been shut down indefinitely. The congregation continues to exist, however, meeting in the adjacent church hall, known as Prescot Methodist Centre. Also in the town are a Salvation Army church, an Elim Pentecostal church (Prescot Community Church), a Plymouth Brethren Gospel Hall and the Zion Independent Methodist Church. Outside the centre, in the Portico area of the town is the Catholic Our Lady Help of Christians Church.
Places of worship shut down or moved over the past 20 years include the United Reformed church, the Kingdom Hall (Jehovah's Witnesses) and an independent charismatic church called simply Prescot Christian Fellowship.

Tourism, leisure and places of interest

Prescot Museum houses a permanent exhibition about the history of clock- and watch-making in the town, and several temporary exhibitions per year. The Georgian building is now also home to Knowsley Council's Arts and Events Service.
On the edge of the town is the famous estate of Lord Derby, which includes Knowsley Safari Park.
In recent years, a number of cultural and arts events have been established in the town, including the annual 10-day Prescot Festival of Music and the Arts and an annual Elizabethan Fayre.
The Shakespeare North Trust was founded in 2007 to promote William Shakespeare's historic connection with the town, a subject currently being researched at Liverpool's John Moores University. Attempts to raise funds to rebuild the town's Elizabethan theatre have so far been unsuccessful.

Sport

The area's local football team Prescot Cables currently play in the EvoStik League.  Prescot & Odyssey Cricket Club (est. 1854; 2010 & 2012 Southport & District Premier League Champions) is located near Knowsley Safari Park.

Notable residents






