[[Ravi Shankar (spiritual leader)]]

CATEGORIES: 1956 births, Living people, Hindu gurus, Indian religious leaders, New Age spiritual leaders, People from Thanjavur district, St. Joseph's College, Bangalore alumni

Ravi Shankar, commonly known as Sri Sri Ravi Shankar, was born on 13 May, 1956. He is also frequently referred to simply as "Sri Sri" (honorific) or as Guruji or Gurudev.A. Salkin, Emperor of Air, Yoga Journal, 2002. He is a spiritual leader and founder of the Art of Living Foundation, which aims to relieve individual stress, societal problems, and violence. In 1997, he established a Geneva-based charity, the International Association for Human Values, an NGO that engages in relief work and rural development and aims to foster shared global values. In 2009, Shankar was named by Forbes Magazine as the fifth most powerful leader in India. 5: Sri Sri Ravi Shankar. Forbes. Retrieved on 2013-03-21. He was involved in the movement demanding a strong lokpal bill.

Life

Ravi Shankar was born in Papanasam, Tamil Nadu to Visalakshi Ratnam and R. S. Venkat Ratnam, who was then active in the automobile business.org He was named "Ravi" (a common Indian name meaning "sun") because his birth was on a Sunday, and "Shankar" after the eighth-century Hindu saint, Adi Shankara. He holds a Bachelor of Science degree from Bangalore University (St. Joseph's CollegeDistinguished Alumni of St.
After graduation, Shankar traveled with his Guru Maharishi Mahesh Yogi 
In the 1980s, Shankar initiated a series of practical and experiential courses in spirituality around the globe. He says that his rhythmic breathing exercise, Sudarshan Kriya, came to him in 1982 "like a poem, an inspiration" after a ten-day period of silence on the banks of the Bhadra River in Shimoga, state of Karnataka, adding, "I learned it and started teaching it".
Shankar says that every emotion has a corresponding rhythm in the breath and regulating breath could help relieve personal suffering. After realizing Sudarshan Kriya, Shankar started sharing it with others through the Art of Living course, first held in Shimoga, Karnataka.
Shankar inspired his father and several other prominent citizens of Bangalore to found Ved Vignan Maha Vidya Peeth, an education and charitable trust, in 1981. Under the auspices of this trust, he opened a school south of Bangalore for local rural children. The school now provides free education for 2,000 such children. Expressbuzz. Retrieved on 2013-05-27.
In 1983, Shankar held the first Art of Living course in Europe in Switzerland. In 1986, he travelled to Apple Valley, California in the USA to conduct the first course to be held in North America. artofliving.eu. Retrieved on 2011-09-07.

Philosophy and teachings

Spirituality

Shankar teaches that spirituality is that which enhances human values such as love, compassion and enthusiasm. It is not limited to any one religion or culture. Hence it is open to all people. He feels the spiritual bond we share as part of the human family is more prominent than nationality, gender, religion, profession, or other identities that separate us. Bang on the Door. Santa Barbara, CA: Art of Living Foundation. 1995. ISBN 1-885289-31-6
In Shankar's view, "Violence-free society, disease-free body, quiver-free breath, confusion-free mind, inhibition-free intellect, trauma-free memory, and sorrow-free soul is the birthright of every human being."
According to him, science and spirituality are linked and compatible, both springing from the urge to know. The question, "Who am I?" leads to spirituality; the question, "What is this?" leads to science. Emphasizing that joy is only available in the present moment, his stated vision is to create a world free of stress and violence. His programs are said to offer practical tools to help accomplish this. He sees breath as the link between body and mind, and a tool to relax the mind, emphasizing the importance of both meditation/spiritual practice and service to others. In his view, "Truth is spherical rather than linear; so it has to be contradictory."Washington Post interview. Washingtonpost. Retrieved on 2011-09-07.

Sudarshan Kriya

Sudarshan Kriya ( sudarśana-kriyā) is a "breathing-based technique"Sudarshan Kriya page on Art of Living Foundation's website. Srisri. Retrieved on 2011-09-07. that is a core component of the Art of Living courses and "the cornerstone of . . . Art of Living Foundation's trauma relief programs". 
It involves "Ujjayi breathing" and "Bhastrika" in "Vajrasana" followed by rhythmic breathing in "Sukhasana".
A number of medical studies on its preparatory practices have been published in international peer-reviewed journals.org. A range of mental and physical benefits are reported in these studies, including reduced levels of stress (reduced cortisol—the "stress" hormone), improved immune system, relief from anxiety and depression (mild, moderate, and severe),
According to Bharti Verma, M.D., in The Way of Grace, by David Lucas Burge and Gary Boucherle, "Sudarshan Kriya is not hyperventilation. The process is unlike hyperventilation and seems much more complex in its nature. A person hyperventilating will often experience lightheadedness, blurred vision, muscle spasms of hands and feet, a general feeling of being unwell, fainting and loss of consciousness. In contrast, course participants learning Sudarshan Kriya report a state of deep relaxation while feeling rejuvenated and re-energized. Clearly the experiences of persons practicing Sudarshan Kriya are exactly the opposite of what a hyperventilating exercise would be expected to produce."

Peace and humanitarian work

In the 1990s, Shankar initiated a number of humanitarian projects, which continue to this date under the auspices of the Art of Living Foundation and its numerous national organizations.
In 1992, he started a prison program
In 1997, he began the International Association for Human Values, a humanitarian organization, and its 5H program, which aims to bring sustainable development to rural areas and revive human values."Sri Sri Ravi Shankar", The Huffington Post, 12 August 2010. Retrieved on 2010-08-12.
He visited Pakistan in 2004'There's dignity of religion in Pakistan', The Times of India and Iraq (at the invitation of Prime Minister Nouri al Maliki) in 2007Art of Living guru in Iraq to talk peace. Ibnlive. Retrieved on 2011-09-07. and met with political and religious leaders to promote global peace.
He is involved in interfaith dialogue and currently sits on the Board of World Religious Leaders for the Elijah Interfaith Institute.
His volunteers assisted the 2004 tsunami victims, Hurricane Katrina victims, in Haiti, and many other regions of conflict and natural disaster.Nouvelle Vie Haiti Youth Corps Haiti Program
Through interfaith summits in 2008 and 2010, he has been engaging faith-based leaders for collective action against HIV.

Social initiatives

Volunteer For a Better India

Inspired by its founder, the Art of Living along with UN Agencies, NGOs and civil society, launched Volunteer For a Better India (VFABI) on December 5, 2012. "Give one hour to the nation. The country has problems because good people are apathetic. Youth must take charge and Volunteer for a Better India", Shankar appealed.ibtl.in/video/6641/corruption-begins-where-sense-of-belongingness-ends-volunteer-for-a-better-india-vfabi/ VFABI is involved in many activities, including protest against the 2012 Delhi gang rape case,

"NONVIO" Movement

NONVIO was launched as a nation-wide movement by Shankar's foundation in March 2013 with the aim of eliminating violence. It encourages individuals to pledge one act of non-violence through different social and online media

Awards and Recognition

Criticism

In 2012, Ravi Shankar, while attending a function in Jaipur, claimed that Indian government schools are breeding grounds for Naxalism, a movement of militant communist groups in India declared to be terrorist organisations. His comments were condemned by educators and ministers as "unfortunate and illogical." Later, Shankar issued a clarification that he didn't mean that all government schools breed Naxalism.

Books

Ravi Shankar has authored the following books:

Notes






