[[Dichloromethane]]

CATEGORIES: Organochlorides, Halomethanes, Aerosol propellants, Hazardous air pollutants, Refrigerants, Halogenated solvents, IARC Group 2B carcinogens, Fetotoxicants, Testicular toxicants, Halogen-containing natural products

Dichloromethane (DCM)—or methylene chloride—is an organic compound with the formula CH2Cl2. This colorless, volatile liquid with a moderately sweet aroma is widely used as a solvent. Although it is not miscible with water, it is miscible with many organic solvents.M. Rossberg et al. "Chlorinated Hydrocarbons" in Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry 2006, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim.  One of the most well-known applications of dichloromethane is in the drinking bird heat engine.

Occurrence

Natural sources of dichloromethane include oceanic sources, macroalgae, wetlands, and volcanoes.  However, the majority of dichloromethane in the environment is the result of industrial emissions..

Production

DCM is produced by treating either methyl chloride or methane with chlorine gas at 400–500 °C. At these temperatures, both methane and methyl chloride undergo a series of reactions producing progressively more chlorinated products.
The output of these processes is a mixture of methyl chloride, dichloromethane, chloroform, and carbon tetrachloride. These compounds are separated by distillation.
DCM was first prepared in 1839 by the French chemist Henri Victor Regnault (1810–1878), who isolated it from a mixture of chloromethane and chlorine that had been exposed to sunlight. Regnault (1839) "De l'action du chlore sur les éthers hydrochloriques de l'alcool et de l'esprit de bois, et de plusieurs points de la théorie des éthers" (On the action of chlorine on the hydrochloric ethers of ethanol and methanol, and on several points of the theory of ethers), Annales de chimie et physique, series 2, 71 :  353-431; see especially: "Seconde partie.  De l'action du chlore sur l'éther hydrochlorique de l'esprit de bois" (Second part.  On the action of chlorine on the hydrochloric ether of methanol chloromethane), pages 377-380.  Regnault gives dichloromethane the name éther hydrochlorique monochloruré (monochlorinated hydrochloric ether).  Note:  Regnault gives the empirical formula for dichloromethane as C2H4Cl4 because during that era, chemists used incorrect atomic masses. 
Reprinted in German in: 

Uses

DCM's volatility and ability to dissolve a wide range of organic compounds makes it a useful solvent for many chemical processes.
It is widely used as a paint stripper and a degreaser. In the food industry, it has been used to decaffeinate coffee and tea as well as to prepare extracts of hops and other flavorings. Its volatility has led to its use as an aerosol spray propellant and as a blowing agent for polyurethane foams.

Specialized uses

The chemical compound's low boiling point allows the chemical to function in a heat engine that can extract mechanical energy from small temperature differences. An example of a DCM heat engine is the drinking bird. The toy works at room temperature.
DCM chemically welds certain plastics. For example, it is used to seal the casing of electric meters. Often sold as a main component of plastic welding adhesives, it is also used extensively by model building hobbyists for joining plastic components together. It is commonly referred to as "Di-clo."
It is used in the garment printing industry for removal of heat-sealed garment transfers, and its volatility is exploited in novelty items: bubble lights and jukebox displays.
DCM is used in the material testing field of civil engineering; specifically it is used during the testing of bituminous materials as a solvent to separate the binder from the aggregate of an asphalt or macadam to allow the testing of the materials.

Toxicity

DCM is the least toxic of the simple chlorohydrocarbons, but it is not without health risks, as its high volatility makes it an acute inhalation hazard.
DCM is also metabolized by the body to carbon monoxide potentially leading to carbon monoxide poisoning.
It may be carcinogenic, as it has been linked to cancer of the lungs, liver, and pancreas in laboratory animals. In animal experiments, it was fetotoxic at doses that were maternally toxic but no teratogenic effects were seen.

Regulation

In many countries, products containing DCM must carry labels warning of its health risks.
In February 2013, the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health warned that at least 14 bathtub refinishers have died since 2000 from DCM exposure. These workers had been working alone, in poorly ventilated bathrooms, with inadequate or no respiratory protection, and no training about the hazards of DCM. Hall February 4, 2013 OSHA has since then issued a DCM standard.Bathtub Refinisher Dies From Exposure to Methylene Chloride, FACE Facts Safety Alert, Occupational Health Surveillance Program, Massachusetts Department of Public Health, April 2012
In the European Union, the European Parliament voted in 2009 to ban the use of DCM in paint-strippers for consumers and many professionals."EU Banning Most DCM Paint Strippers," PaintSquare News, retrieved 1/5/14. The ban took effect in December 2010.
In Europe, the Scientific Committee on Occupational Exposure Limit Values (SCOEL) recommends for DCM an occupational exposure limit (8 h time-weighted average) of 100 ppm and a short-term exposure limit (15 min) of 200 ppm.
Concerns about its health effects have led to a search for alternatives in many of these applications.








