[[Jerry Dammers]]

CATEGORIES: 1955 births, Living people, Alumni of Coventry University, English DJs, English keyboardists, English songwriters, People educated at King Henry VIII School, Coventry, People from Coventry, Musicians from London, People from Tamil Nadu, The Specials members

Jeremy David Hounsell "Jerry" Dammers, (born 22 May 1955) is a British musician who is a founder, keyboard player and primary songwriter of the Coventry, England based ska revival band The Specials, The Special A.K.A. and The Spatial AKA Orchestra.

Biography

Dammers was born in Ootacamund, Tamil Nadu, South India, the son of Horace Dammers, Dean of Bristol Cathedral (1973-1987). Jerry Dammers attended King Henry VIII School, Coventry.
Dammers was a Mod in the 1960s, then became a hippie, before becoming a skinhead.
He founded 2 Tone Records, which helped develop the 1970s/1980s ska revival. He became an anti-Apartheid campaigner, helping to create Artists Against Apartheid in the U.S., and writing the song "Free Nelson Mandela" about the jailed African National Congress leader in South Africa. In 1985, in the wake of the Band Aid single, he organized the recording and release of the "Starvation" single, a version of The Pioneers' 1969 song, in aid of famine relief in Africa, featuring members of The Special AKA, UB40, Madness, The Pioneers, and The Beat. 22-23, 32 In early 1986, he took part in the Red Wedge tour that also featured The Style Council, The Communards, Junior Giscombe, Lorna Gee and other special guests. He also introduced Simple Minds to producer Tony Hollingsworth and they became the first major act to agree to perform at Hollingsworth's Nelson Mandela 70th Birthday Tribute concert, which was broadcast worldwide from London's Wembley Stadium, on 11 June 1988. That same year, he briefly played with the re-formed Madness on their single "I Pronounce You" and its attendant album, The Madness.
In October 2000 Dammers received Q Magazine's Q Merit Award at London's Park Lane Hotel.Q awards
Quoted in Dammers has fallen out of the spotlight in recent years, but he still regularly DJs in English nightclubs, as well as performing with his band, The Spatial AKA Orchestra, playing his own compositions and tributes to Sun Ra and other experimental jazz artists. The band features established jazz musicians Zoe Rahman, Larry Stabbins and Denys Baptiste. They perform in elaborate Ancient Egyptian and outer space-themed costumes, and share the stage with bizarre props such as model alien heads and mummy Sarcophagi. Rico Rodriguez has also featured in a number of shows.
In November 2006, he celebrated being awarded an honorary degree from Coventry University by DJing at the launch party of the Coventry  branch of the Love Music Hate Racism organisation. In the same month, he attended a private viewing of a Harry Pye curated art exhibition in east London that featured paintings of bands and singers that had once been championed by the late BBC Radio 1 DJ John Peel. Dammers read out a four page poem, in which he thanked Peel for helping his own band, and for supporting black musicians.
Carl Barât of The Libertines included a Dammers composition, "Too Much Too Young", on his personal compilation album Under The Influence. Pete Doherty, former member of The Libertines, namechecked "What I Like Most About You is Your Girlfriend" on Down in Albion, the first Babyshambles album. The song "Merry Go Round" contains the lyrics "He says, 'What I like most about you, Pete/Is your girlfriend and your shoes.'" Those who have recorded a song written by Dammers include Tricky ("Ghost Town"), The Prodigy ("Ghost Town") and Elvis Costello ("What I Like Most About You Is Your Girlfriend").
Dammers has produced singles for Robert Wyatt, The Untouchables, UB40 and Junior Delgado. He contributed "Riot City" to the soundtrack of the Julien Temple film, Absolute Beginners, and "Brightlights" to the compilation album Jamming: A New Optimism.
In April 2014, Dammers received the South African Companions of OR Tambo order in silver award (a national honour) for his role in the anti-apartheid movement. "It feels fantastic. It is a real honour to be considered for this, especially when I compare what little I did to the work of those who sacrificed their lives, I am humbled," he said.  Retrieved 28 April 2014
Dammers lives in London with his family.

Quotation






