[[Yuengling]]

CATEGORIES: American beer brands, Beer brewing companies based in Pennsylvania, Brewery buildings in the United States, Companies established in 1829, Cuisine of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Industrial buildings and structures on the National Register of Historic Places in Pennsylvania, Industrial buildings completed in 1873, Industrial buildings completed in 1913, Pottsville, Pennsylvania, Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania

D. G. Yuengling & Son is the oldest operating brewing company in the United States, established in 1829. It is one of the largest breweries by volume in the country. Based on sales in 2011, Yuengling was tied with the Boston Beer Company, maker of Samuel Adams brands, as the largest American-owned brewery."Boston Beer Company ties Yuengling for Largest" Accessed April 26, 2012. Its headquarters are in Pottsville, Pennsylvania."Contact Us." D. G. Yuengling & Son.  Yuengling produces about 2.5 million barrels annually, operating two Pennsylvania facilities and a brewery in Tampa, Florida.
Yuengling is pronounced , and is an Anglicized version of Jüngling, its founder's surname and the German term for "young man".
The family-owned brewery has traditionally changed ownership through the purchase of the company by the offspring of the previous owner. Pennsylvania Breweries. 3rd Edition. Stackpoles Books. Mechanicsburg, 2005. ISBN 0-8117-3222-3 Due to the popularity of Yuengling Traditional Lager in Pennsylvania and the Delaware Valley, it can be ordered by simply asking for a lager.

History

The German brewer David Gottlob Jüngling immigrated to the United States in 1823 from Aldingen, a suburb of Stuttgart, in the Kingdom of Württemberg. He anglicized his surname from Jüngling to Yuengling and began the "Eagle Brewery" on Center Street in Pottsville in 1829. His eldest son, David, Jr., left the Eagle Brewery to establish the James River Steam Brewery along the James River in Richmond, Virginia.com. "Yuengling of Pottsville: America's Oldest Brewery". Retrieved December 8, 2006. The first brewery burned down in an 1831 fire and the company relocated to W. Mahantongo Street at 5th Street, its current location.com. "History". Retrieved December 8, 2006. The Eagle Brewery changed its name to "D. G. Yuengling and Son" in 1873 after Frederick Yuengling joined his father David in running the company. Although the company's name changed, the bald eagle remained the company's emblem. During the late 19th century, breweries were also opened in Saratoga Springs, New York City, and Trail, British Columbia, although they were eventually merged with the Pottsville plant.
Frank Yuengling began heading the company in 1899 after his father Frederick died. During the Prohibition era, Yuengling survived by producing "near beers" (beverages with a 0.5% alcohol content) called "Yuengling Special", "Yuengling Por-Tor", and "Yuengling Juvo". The company also ran a dairy which produced ice cream and opened dance halls in Philadelphia and New York City. After the 18th Amendment was repealed in 1933, Yuengling sent a truckload of "Winner Beer" to President Franklin D. Roosevelt in appreciation, which arrived the day the amendment was repealed — particularly notable since Yuengling beer takes almost three weeks to brew and age. Richard L. Yuengling and F. Dohrman Yuengling succeeded Frank Yuengling after their father's death in 1963.com. "History". Retrieved December 8, 2006.
Yuengling experienced an increase of sales after a renewed interest in history owing to the United States Bicentennial in 1976. Yuengling bought the rights to use the Mount Carbon (Bavarian Premium Beer) name and label when Mount Carbon Brewery went out of business in 1977. Yuengling initially brewed beer at Mount Carbon but eventually abandoned it. The dairy remained in business until 1985, but its vacant building sits across Mahantongo Street from Yuengling's 1831 brewery and still carries Yuengling signage to this day.
Richard L. ("Dick") Yuengling, Jr. took over as the 5th-generation company president in 1985, the same year its Pennsylvanian brewery was listed on the National Register of Historic Places as the oldest in the United States. (The company's website mentions only a vague national and state registration in 1976). Yuengling has been a registered trademark since 1995. "74453768". Retrieved December 8, 2006. The Pottsville brewery was featured on an episode of The History Channel's American Eats.
In 1987, the brewery reintroduced a lager they had not made in decades to take advantage of a spike in heavier-style beers. Since this time, Yuengling Lager has become its flagship brand, accounting for 80% of production and much of its rapid growth.  At the time Yuengling was the largest brewers of porter in the United States.
In the early 1990s, demand throughout Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Delaware outstripped the existing brewery's abilities. In 1999, they increased their manufacturing capacity by purchasing a Stroh Brewery Company plant in Tampa, Florida, hiring the former Stroh employees, and began working with a trade union for the first time. In 2000, the company built a third brewery in Pennsylvania, in Port Carbon in Schuylkill County near Pottsville. With production at the Port Carbon, Tampa, and original Pottsville plants, the company has been able to expand throughout the East Coast. Yuengling was just named the oldest and largest brewing company in America.
Yuengling employees filed for union decertification in 2006. As a result, Yuengling did not renew a contract with Teamsters Local 830 of Philadelphia in March 2006. "Pittsburgh Post-Gazette"."Teamsters foaming over ejection at Yuengling "Kimm R. Montone. The REPUBLICAN & Herald. Yuengling declares it will honor petition by workers to can union". Retrieved December 8, 2006.
As of 2012, Yuengling is a moderately priced beer popular northward through New York, westward until Indiana and Kentucky, and southward through Georgia, where it has a large following. The Tampa brewery supplies the Florida Gulf Coast, the Florida Keys, Central Florida, North Florida, the Florida Panhandle as well as Alabama and Tennessee.  The brewery uses corn from Minnesota and hops from Washington as ingredients in its products. Plans are set to return the beer to Massachusetts in March of 2014, with some restaurants offering it in February.
  In Massachusetts, 2014 Will Be The Year of Yuengling 
Yuengling began distribution in the state of Georgia on October 27, 2008. Yuengling also expanded distribution into West Virginia in May 2009, and  Ohio in October 2011.
Richard Yuengling is grooming his daughters, three of the four being Jennifer Yuengling-Franquet,  Wendy Yuengling Baker and Deborah Yuengling Ferhat, to continue the Yuengling tradition as the 6th generation of the brewing family.  According to a guide of the free tour that the brewery offers at their flagship location, each succeeding owner has bought the company from his father at full market price, and that tradition will carry on with the 6th generation.
President Barack Obama has stated that Yuengling is his favorite beer. On Friday, March 19, 2010, President Obama sent a case of Yuengling to Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper along with a case of Molson Canadian to cover a friendly wager on the outcome of the 2010 Winter Olympics ice hockey final.msnbc.
Owner Dick Yuengling recently spoke in Harrisburg, PA on August 26, 2013 and made his anti-union beliefs quite clear, and calling for Pennsylvania to be a "right to work" state, and praising Republican governor Tom Corbett.
A fire broke out at Yuengling's Tampa brewery on October 26, 2013. The extent of the damage is currently unknown.com/news/crime/fire-reported-at-tampas-yuengling-brewery-20131026/ Fire reported at Tampa's Yuengling Brewery - TBO. Retrieved October 26, 2013
In February 2014, Yuengling Ice Cream returned to the market after a near 30-year absence. Although operated by the Yuengling family, it is operated by David Yuengling, a cousin of Dick Yuengling and a direct descendant of David Gottlob Jüngling. It is legally a separate company from the brewery, as was the case since 1935.cnn.com/2014/02/12/smallbusiness/yuengling-ice-cream/

Products

|title=Yuengling plans Oktoberfest at Bethlehem SteelStacks
|date=May 27, 2010
|author= Douglas B. Brill
|work= Lehigh Valley Express-Times
|url=
|title=Yuengling ready for summer with seasonal wheat brew
|date=March 29, 2014
|author= Thomas Leskin
|work= Pottsville Republican Herald
|url=

No longer produced






