[[Slint]]

CATEGORIES: Articles with inconsistent citation formats, American post-hardcore musical groups, American indie rock groups, American post-rock groups, Math rock groups, Musical groups from Louisville, Kentucky, Musical groups established in 1986, Musical groups reestablished in 2007, Touch and Go Records artists, 1986 establishments in Kentucky, Musical groups reestablished in 2005

Slint is an American rock band consisting of Brian McMahan (guitar and vocals), David Pajo (guitar), Britt Walford (drums and vocals), Todd Brashear (bass on Spiderland) and Ethan Buckler (bass on Tweez). They formed in Louisville, Kentucky, United States, in 1986 and disbanded following the recording of their second album, Spiderland, in 1990.
Since their break-up in 1992, they have reunited sporadically since 2005, with their most recent reunion in 2013.

History

Walford and McMahan began performing music together at an early age, forming Languid and Flaccid with Ned Oldham (later of The Anomoanoan) while still in middle school.
Slint's first album Tweez was recorded by Steve Albini in 1987 and released in obscurity on the Jennifer Hartman Records label in 1989.  It was followed two years later by the critically acclaimed Spiderland,, helping to usher in a new wave of bands seeking a move away from the unfettered aggression of hardcore punk but not its underlying ethic. The cover of Spiderland is from a series of photos of the band taken by the Louisville actor/musician Will Oldham. Spiderland culminates in the baleful "Good Morning, Captain", perhaps their most recognized track (it would later feature on the soundtrack to the Larry Clark film Kids).  Touch and Go Records reissued Tweez in 1993. Finally, in 1994 a brief untitled EP was released after the band broke up. This two-song record was actually recorded in 1989 and was originally intended to be released as a 12" single on Jennifer Hartman Records. Original copies of the Tweez LP included a flyer advertisement for the 12" as an insert. However, Slint signed to Touch & Go Records before it was sent to press and the master tapes were shelved.  It contained a previously unreleased track ("Glenn") and a reinterpretation of "Rhoda" from Tweez.
Members of Slint have since appeared in a number of bands.  In 2009, former guitarist David Pajo performed with Yeah Yeah Yeahs as a live back-up musician.  He briefly played bass in Interpol, and performs under the moniker PAJO and occasionally with his band Papa M.  Pajo has also been a member of Dead Child, Tortoise, Palace, The For Carnation, and the short-lived Billy Corgan-fronted rock band Zwan. Guitarist Brian McMahan formed The For Carnation in 1994 and also played with Will Oldham in Palace. Britt Walford played drums in Evergreen, and for The Breeders under the pseudonym Shannon Doughton on the album Pod and as Mike Hunt on the Safari EP.  Ethan Buckler plays in King Kong (the original line up of Slint makes up King Kong on the 1989 7" "Movie Star").
Nearly fifteen years after disbanding, three members of Slint — Brian McMahan, David Pajo, and Britt Walford — reunited to curate the 2005 All Tomorrow's Parties (ATP) music festival in Camber Sands, England. Also in 2005, Slint played a number of shows in the U.S. and in Europe. which remains unrecorded.
In a September 2012 interview conducted with Northern Irish music publication AU Magazine, David Pajo hinted at more activity from the band in the coming months: "We still communicate regularly and we've got some surprises for next year that fans will be excited about. I know I am."
The band reunited in December 2013 to play as one of the headliners of the final All Tomorrow's Parties holiday camp festival in Camber Sands, England.
In an August 2013 interview with Vish Khanna, former producer Steve Albini revealed that the band was working on remastering their second album Spiderland with producer Bob Weston.
The band was also scheduled to perform at the 2014 Primavera Sound music festival.

Members

Live members 2005, 2007

Former

Discography

Albums

Extended Plays






