[[Chiyoda, Tokyo]]

CATEGORIES: Wards of Tokyo, Diplomatic districts, Environmental model cities, Chiyoda, Tokyo

 is a special ward located in central Tokyo Metropolis, Japan. In English, it is called Chiyoda City."Profile." City of Chiyoda.
As of October 2007, the ward has an estimated population of 45,543 and a population density of 3,912 people per km², making it by far the least populated of the special wards. The total area is 11.64 km², of which the Imperial Palace, Hibiya Park, National Museum of Modern Art, and Yasukuni Shrine take up approximately 2.6 km², or 22% of the total area.
Chiyoda consists of the Palace and a surrounding radius of about 1 kilometer. It inherited the name, literally meaning "field of a thousand generations," from Chiyoda Castle (the other name of Edo Castle). Many government institutions, such as the Diet, Prime Minister's residence, and Supreme Court, are located in Chiyoda, as are Tokyo landmarks such as Yasukuni Shrine, Tokyo Station, and the Budokan. Fifteen embassies are located in Chiyoda.

History

The Chiyoda ward was created on March 15, 1947 by the unification of Kanda Ward (the northeast corner of present-day Chiyoda, west of Akihabara) and Kōjimachi Ward (comprising the rest of Chiyoda). It has been a site of a number of historical events.

Geography

Chiyoda is located at the very heart of former Tokyo City in eastern mainland Tokyo. The central area of the ward is furthermore occupied by the Imperial Palace. The east side of the ward, bordering Chūō, is the location of Tokyo Station. The south side, bordering Minato, encompasses Hibiya Park and the National Diet Building. It is almost exclusively occupied by administrations and agencies. The west and northwest are primarily upper class residential; the Yasukuni Shrine is also there. To the north and northeast are several residential neighborhoods and  the Akihabara commercial district.

Politics and government

Local government

Chiyoda is run by a directly elected mayor and a city assembly of 25 elected members. The current mayor is Masami Ishikawa, an independent.

Metropolitan representation

For the Metropolitan Assembly, Chiyoda forms a single-member electoral district. It had been represented by Liberal Democrats for 50 years until the landslide 2009 election when then 26 year old Democratic newcomer Zenkō Kurishita unseated 70 year old former Metropolitan Assembly president and six term assemblyman, Liberal Democrat Shigeru Uchida.47 News/Kyōdō Tsūshin, July 12, 2009: 自民都連幹事長が落選　要職歴任の内田茂氏 In the 2013 election, no Democrat contested the seat and Uchida won back the district against a Communist and two independents.
The Tokyo Fire Department has its headquarters in Ōtemachi in Chiyoda."Website Policy." Tokyo Fire Department.

National representation

For the national House of Representatives, Chiyoda, together with Minato and Shinjuku, forms the prefecture's 1st electoral district since the electoral reform of the 1990s. The district is currently represented by Liberal Democrat Miki Yamada.
The ward is also home to the Diet of Japan, the Supreme Court of Japan and the residence of the Prime Minister of Japan and is the political nerve center of Japan.

International representation

Cityscape

On December 31, 2001, Chiyoda had 6,572 buildings which were four stories or taller.
Some of the districts in Chiyoda are actually not inhabited, either because they are parks (Hibiya Koen), because they consist only of office buildings (Otemachi or Marunouchi), and/or because they are extremely small. The area on the eastern side of Akihabara Station is the location of several districts that cover at most a few buildings. Kanda-Hanaokachō is, for example, limited to the Yodobashi Camera department store. Understanding the address system in the Kanda area can be particularly troublesome for non-locals.

Kōjimachi Area

Kanda Area

The list below consists of the many smaller neighborhoods of the Kanda area, for which a modernization of the addressing system has not been enforced yet. All officially start with the prefix "Kanda-", but it is sometimes omitted in daily life. Note that Iwamotochō and Kanda-Iwamotochō are different districts (as is the case for Kajichō and Kanda-Kajichō)

Economy

On October 1, 2001, Chiyoda had 36,233 business establishments with 888,149 employees.
Asahi Glass,"Corporate Profile." Asahi Glass. Bungeishunjū,"会社概要." Bungeishunjū. Calbee,"Corporate Information." Calbee. Creatures Inc.,"Company." Creatures Inc. Datam Polystar,"About Us." Datam Polystar. DIC Corporation,"Corporate Data." DIC Corporation. Furukawa Electric,"Company Profile." Furukawa Electric. HAL Laboratory, Seibu Kaihatsu,セイブ開発 office Seven & i Holdings,"Office Map." Seven & i Holdings. Shogakukan,"所在地." Shogakukan. Shueisha,"会社案内." Shueisha. Sony Music Entertainment Japan,Sony Music Entertainment Japan Profile. Sony Music Entertainment Japan. Toho,"会社の沿革." Toho. "2005年4月 東宝本社を東宝日比谷ビル（東京都千代田区有楽町一丁目2－2）に移転。" Tokio Marine Nichido,"Corporate Profile." Tokio Marine Nichido. "Address of Head Office 2-1 Marunouchi 1-chome, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo" Tokyo FM, Toppan Printing,"Corporate Information." Toppan Printing. Retrieved on April 8, 2014 Yamazaki Baking Company (incl. Vie de France),"Company Profile." Yamazaki Baking Company Limited."会社概要." Vie de France. and Yomiuri Shimbun are headquartered in Chiyoda."組織体制." Yomiuri Shimbun. Mazda has an office in Chiyoda."Offices." Mazda.

Foreign operations

Foreign companies with Japanese divisions in Chiyoda include Aeroméxico,"com03." Aeroméxico. AMI Japan (subsidiary of American Megatrends),"International Offices." American Megatrends. Chloé Japan,"Chloé Offices." Chloé. Retrieved on 23 August 2009. Hewlett-Packard Japan,"Headquarters." Hewlett Packard. LVMH,"LVMH Dans le Monde."LVMH. Ropes & Gray,"Tokyo."Retrieved on March 15, 2011. Sidley Austin,"Tokyo."Retrieved on December 17, 2009. Sunoco,"Company Details." Sunoco Japan. and Swiss International Airlines."SWISS worldwide offices." Swiss International Air Lines.

Former operations

Japanese companies which formerly had their headquarters in Chiyoda include All Nippon Airways,"World Airline Directory." Flight International. March 30, 1985. 50." Bandai Visual,"History." Bandai Visual. Galaxy Airlines,"会社概要." Galaxy Airlines. May 1, 2006. Japan Airlines,"World Airline Directory." Flight International. March 30, 1985. 88." Japan Asia Airways, Mitsui Chemicals,"What's New." Mitsui Chemicals. June 5, 2001. Nippon Cargo Airlines,"Chapter 3. On the path to becoming a member of the incumbent carrier group." Nippon Cargo Airlines. 59. Taito Corporation,"Company Outline." Taito Corporation. January 11, 1998. Retrieved on January 30, 2011 "Head Office 2-5-3 Hirakawa-cho,Chiyoda-ku,Tokyo 102,JAPAN." Address in Japanese: "東京都千代田区平河町二丁目５番３号" and Yamato Life."会社概要." Yamato Life. February 5, 2005. In 1998 Fujitsu operated a branch office in Chiyoda."Company Profile." Fujitsu. January 19, 1998. Prior to its disestablishment,  At one point Cantor Fitzgerald had an office in Chiyoda."office locations." Cantor Fitzgerald. March 4, 2000.

Attractions

Transportation

Home to the massive Tokyo station with a multitude of subways, railways and long-distance services.

Points of historical interest

Image:Hanawa_Hokinoichi.JPG|Site of Haniwa Hokinoichi Wagaku kōdansho, Sanbanchō
Image:Sano_Zenzaemon.JPG|Site of home of Sano Zenzaemon, Sanbanchō
Image:九段下灯台Kudanshita.jpg|Kudan lighthouse
Image:Kanda Matsuri 2009-1 in Akihabara.jpg|Kanda Festival

Education

Primary and secondary schools

As of May 1, 2003, Chiyoda has eight elementary schools, with 2,647 students, and five junior high schools with 1,123 students. Public elementary and junior high schools in Chiyoda are operated by the Chiyoda Board of Education. Public high schools are operated by the Tokyo Metropolitan Government Board of Education.

Colleges and universities

Hitotsubashi University's Graduate School of International Corporate Strategy is located in the National Center of Sciences in Hitotsubashi.
Both of the Sophia University Campuses are in western Chiyoda. The main Yotsuya campus lies adjacent to Yotsuya Station and the Ichigaya Campus just south of Ichigaya Station. Globis University Graduate School of Management which is the largest business school in Japan is also located in Chiyoda.

Libraries

Chiyoda operates four public libraries; they are the Chiyoda Library, Yobancho Library, Shohei Library, and Kanda Library. Tokyo operates the Tokyo Metropolitan Library Hibiya Library. The Japanese government operates the National Diet Library and the National Archives. Ishikawa Enterprise Foundation Ochanomizu Library is a nearby private library.city.tokyo.html

Parks and recreation

East Imperial Garden, located on the eastern portion of the Tokyo Imperial Palace grounds and housing the castle tower and the outer defense positions of the former Edo Castle, opened to the public in 1968. Kitanomaru Kōen, located on Edo Castle's former northern section, has the Tokyo National Museum of Modern Art and the Nippon Budokan, a venue for performances. Chidorigafuchi Boat Arena and Chidorigafuchi Moat Path includes a waterway for boats. National Diet Building Park, located adjacent to the Diet Building and divided in two by a street, includes American dogwoods planted to symbolize the relations between the United States and Japan. Hibiya Park, Japan's first western-style park, includes restaurants, open-air concert halls, and tennis courts. Imperial Palace Outer Garden, in the front of Nijubashi Bridge, serves as a jogging trail and a tourist site."Parks in Chiyoda." City of Chiyoda.






