[[Houbara Bustard]]

CATEGORIES: Otididae, Birds of Azerbaijan, Birds of Pakistan, Birds of Iran, Birds of Europe, Birds of Turkey, Animals described in 1784, Birds of Western Sahara, Birds of Ukraine

The Houbara Bustard or North African Houbara (Chlamydotis undulata) is a large bird in the bustard family. This bustard is found in arid habitats spread across northern Africa with a population on the Canary Islands. They are dull brown with black markings on the wings with a greyish neck and a black ruff along the side of the neck. Males and females appear very similar but males are larger and heavier. This species formerly included MacQueen's Bustard, sometimes known as the Asian Houbara as a subspecies. 

Description

The Houbara Bustard is a small to mid-sized bustard. It measures  

Taxonomy

The former Asian subspecies, C. u. macqueenii, has now been split as a full species, MacQueen's Bustard, Chlamydotis macqueenii. These two species are the only members of the Chlamydotis genus.  The Canarian Houbara is the subspecies Chlamydotis undulata fuertaventurae. The dividing line between the two Chlamydotis species is the Sinai peninsula. Based on the rates of divergence of mitochondrial DNA sequences, the two subspecies are thought to have separated from a common ancestor around 20 to 25 thousand years ago. The separation from MacQueen's Bustard is older at 430 thousand years ago.
The British Ornithologists' Union's Taxonomic Records Committee's decision to accept this split has been questioned on the grounds that the differences in the male courtship displays may be functionally trivial, and would not prevent interbreeding, whereas a difference in a pre-copulation display would indicate that the two are separate species. J. (2004) Are there really two species of houbara? British Birds 97(7): 346-7 The committee responded to this scepticism, by explaining that there are differences in both courtship and pre-copulation displays.Collinson, Martin (2004) Are there really two species of houbara? - a response from the TSC British Birds 97(7): 348

Distribution and habitat

The Houbara Bustard is found in North Africa west of the Nile mainly in the western part of the Sahara desert region in Mauritania, Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Libya and Egypt. Some old records exist from Sudan. A small population is found in the Canary Islands. The Asian Houbara or MacQueen's Bustard which was earlier included in this species occurs east of the Sinai Peninsula. The north African species is sedentary unlike the northern populations of MacQueen's Bustards.

Behaviour

Breeding

Like other bustards, this species has a flamboyant display raising the white feathers of the head and throat and withdrawing the head. Two to four eggs are laid on the ground. It hardly ever uses its voice.

Feeding

This species is omnivorous, taking seeds, insects and other small creatures.

Status

Subspecies fuertaventurae of the Canary Islands is highly restricted and endangered. A 1997 survey found a total population of about 500 birds.

Status and conservation

The North African Houbara Bustard declined in populations in the two decades before 2004, but unlike its near relative the Asian Houbara or MacQueen's Bustard, has been on the increase since. Although hunted both by falconers and by hunters with guns, the extent is much less than that faced by MacQueen's Bustard in the middle east and west Asia.IUCN
The International Foundation for Conservation and Development of Wildlife (IFCDW) is a major conservation and breeding project established with funds from Prince Sultan Bin Abdul Aziz Al Saud and based near Agadir, Morocco. The centre releases captive bred populations to boost wild populations.  Similar projects breed MacQueen's Bustards using artificial insemination are also carried out in the United Arab Emirates.

Notes

Further reading






