[[Dude]]

CATEGORIES: 19th-century fashion, 20th-century fashion, Slang terms for men

Dude is an American English slang term for an individual. It typically applies to males, although the word can encompass all genders.
Dude is an old term, recognized by multiple generations although potentially with slightly different meanings. From the 1870s to the 1960s, dude primarily meant a person who dressed in an extremely fashion-forward manner (a dandy) or a citified person who was visiting a rural location but stuck out (a city slicker). In the 1960s, dude evolved to mean any male person, a meaning that slipped into mainstream American slang in the 1970s. Current slang retains at least some use of all three of these common meanings.

History

The word may have derived from the Scottish term for clothes, duddies.  The term "dude" was first used in print in 1876, in Putnam's Magazine, to mock how a woman was dressed (as a "dud"/dude).  The use of the word "dudde" for clothing in English goes as far back 1567.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/dud

In the popular press of the 1880s and 1890s, "dude" was a new word for "dandy" – an extremely well-dressed male, a man who paid particular importance to how he appeared. The café society and Bright Young Things of the late 1800s and early 1900s were populated with dudes. Young men of leisure vied to show off their wardrobes. The best known of this type is probably Evander Berry Wall, who was dubbed "King of the Dudes" in 1880s New York and maintained a reputation for sartorial splendor all his life. This version of the word is still in occasional use in American slang, as in the phrase "all duded up" for getting dressed in fancy clothes.
A variation of this was a well-dressed man who is unfamiliar with life outside a large city. In The Home and Farm Manual (1883), author Jonathan Periam used the term "dude" several times to denote an ill-bred and ignorant, but ostentatious, man from the city.  
The implication of an individual who is unfamiliar with the demands of life outside of urban settings gave rise to the definition of dude as a city slicker, or "an Easterner in the States West". An inverse of these uses of "dude" would be the term "redneck," a contemporary American colloquialism referring to poor farmers and uneducated persons, which itself became pejorative, and is also still in use. 424."Redneck". Dictionary.Barbara Ann Kipfer and Robert L. Chapman, American Slang (2008) p. 404 
The term was also used as a job description, such as "bush hook dude" as a position on a railroad in the 1880s. For an example, see the Stampede Tunnel.
In the early 1960s, dude became prominent in surfer culture as a synonym of guy or fella.  The female equivalent, which is used less often, is "dudette" or "dudess," although "dude" is also used as a unisex term. This more general meaning of "dude" started creeping into the mainstream in the mid-1970s. "Dude" is generally used informally to address someone ("Dude, I'm glad you finally called") or refer to another person ("That dude is stealing my car").

In popular culture

  | last = Swansburg
  | first = John                           
  | title = Dude! How great are those new Bud Light ads?
  | work = Slate.com
  | date = 2008-01-28
  | url = 
