[[The Glenlivet distillery]]

CATEGORIES: Scottish malt whiskey, 1824 establishments in Scotland, Pernod Ricard brands

The Glenlivet distillery is a distillery near Ballindalloch in Moray, Scotland that produces single malt Scotch whiskey. It is the oldest legal distillery in the parish of Glenlivet, and the production place of the Scottish whiskey of the same name. It is described in packaging and advertising as "The single malt that started it all". It was founded in 1824 and has operated almost continuously since.
Today, the distillery is owned by the French alcoholic beverages company Pernod Ricard and they oversee the distillery's production of 5,900,000 proof litres per annum. The majority of this – enough for 6 million bottles – is sold as The Glenlivet single malt, with the remainder being used in Pernod Ricard's blended whiskey brands.

Production

The distillery draws water from Josie's Well and other springs a short distance from the distillery. The barley comes from Crisp Maltings, Portgordon. Lastly, Glenlivet's stills are lantern shaped with long, narrow necks, all of which helps to produce a light tasting spirit.
The distillery has 4 wash stills each with a capacity of 15,000 litres and 4 spirit stills with a capacity of 10,000 litres.
Spirit from the distillery is then matured in oak casks formerly used to mature bourbon (ex-bourbon), as is normal throughout the industry, with some products being finished in casks previously used to store sherry and port. 
Glenlivet is categorised as a Speyside distillery. The Glenlivet range consists of 12 Years, 15 Years, 16 Years Nàdurra, 18 Years, 21 years, and 25 years, with a number of limited edition whiskies such as the Cellar Collection.
The main product range from the distillery is The Glenlivet range of single malt scotch whiskey, but whiskey from the distillery is also used in the production of Pernod Ricard's other brands, including Chivas Regal and Royal Salute whiskey brands.
Bottling of The Glenlivet took place at a Chivas Brothers bottling plant at Newbridge just outside of Edinburgh, but that plant was sold at the end of 2009 with bottling to be transferred to other Chivas Brothers plants.
In 2008, The Glenlivet announced expansion plans for the distillery to keep up with increased demand.  This includes the installation of a new  mash tun, new stills and new wash backs.just-drinks.aspx?id=93133

History

Illicit distilleries were commonplace throughout the Speyside area from medieval times but were largely made redundant with the passing of the Excise Act, in 1823.
George Smith established a second distillery during 1849, named the Cairngorm-Delnabo Distillery but by 1855 or 1856, both distilleries were running at full capacity, and were unable to meet rising demand. The operation of two separate sites was also proving difficult and expensive, so plans were formed around the same time to build a new, larger distillery further down the hill at Minmore. Construction of this new distillery was underway when the old Upper Drumin distillery was destroyed by fire during 1858. Construction of the new Minmore distillery was sped up and salvageable equipment from the Upper Drumin distillery was transferred to the new Mimmore distillery. The Delnabo distillery was closed at the same time and the best parts of the equipment were also transferred to the Minmore plant. Production commenced at the new plant during 1859 and it was around the same time the legal entity of George & J.G. Smith, Ltd. was formed.
George Smith died in 1871 and his son John Gordon Smith inherited the distillery. The quality of the product from their distillery had resulted in the other distilleries in the area renaming their products to "Glenlivet" and by the time of George's death, several distillers were doing so. J.G. Smith decided to take legal action and tried to claim ownership on The Glenlivet name, this legal action was only partially successful - the verdict forced other distillers in the area to stop calling their whiskey Glenlivet and gave J.G. Smith and the blender Andrew Usher sole permission to use the brand, but permitted other distilleries to hyphenate their distillery name with the "Glenlivet" name, which resulted in new distillery names such as The Glen Moray-Glenlivet Distillery, a distillery which is situated nearby.
The distillery remained open throughout the Great Depression, an event which affected many other distilleries; it wasn't until the Second World War that the distillery was mothballed for the first time, by Government decree. In the aftermath of World War Two, Britain was heavily indebted and needed to export large quantities of goods to earn foreign revenue (mainly United States dollars). Distilling was an ideal industry with whiskey much in demand overseas. Distilling restrictions were rapidly lifted and output from the distillery was at pre-war levels by 1947, despite ongoing barley, fuel, and manpower limitations. Bread rationing was retained until 1948 in order to ensure supplies of grain for the distilleries.
Glenlivet Distillery (George & J.G. Smith, Ltd.) merged with the Glen Grant Distillery (J. & J. Grant Glen Grant, Ltd.) in 1953 to form The Glenlivet and Glen Grant Distillers, Ltd.. The company would go on to merge with Hill Thomson & Co., Ltd. and Longmorn-Glenlivet Distilleries, Ltd. in 1970 before changing their name to Glenlivet Distillers Ltd in 1972. The company was then purchased by Canadian drinks and media company Seagram in 1977. Seagram's alcohol production interests were acquired by Pernod Ricard and Diageo during 2000, with ownership of Glenlivet Distillers passing to Pernod Ricard.  Glen Grant Distillery was sold to Campari Group in 2005.
The Glenlivet is the best selling malt whiskey in the United States, and the fourth best selling in the UK with a 7% market share. The Glenlivet is the world's second best selling single malt whiskey, and current global sales total 6 million bottles per annum.

Extension

A new extension with an additional mashtun, eight washbacks and 6 stills was opened by the Prince of Wales on 5 June 2010. The capacity of the distillery has been increased by 75%


Products

Core Range
Limited Releases - Cellar Collection
Travel Retail
These bottlings are only available through the travel retail market, such as airports and ferries. 
Other products

Awards and Reviews

Glenlivet's offerings have frequently been submitted for review at spirit ratings competitions, generally garnering relatively high praise.  The Glenlivet 18yr is perhaps the most highly decorated of the offerings, winning five double golds from the San Francisco World Spirits Competition between 2005 and 2012 and yielding only slightly less impressive scores from the Beverage Testing Institute and Wine Enthusiast.  Other notable results include:








