[[Laches (equity)]]

CATEGORIES: Equity (law), Equitable defenses, Legal doctrines and principles

Laches ( The person invoking laches is asserting that an opposing party has "slept on its rights," and that, as a result of this delay, circumstances have changed such that it is no longer just to grant the plaintiff's  original claim. Put another way, failure to assert one's rights in a timely manner can result in a claim being barred by laches.  Laches is associated with one of the maxims of equity:



The essential element of laches is that there has been an unreasonable delay by the plaintiff in bringing the claim. Because laches is an equitable defense, it is ordinarily applied only to claims for equitable relief (such as injunctions), and not to claims for legal relief (such as damages). Sometimes courts will also require that the party invoking the doctrine has changed its position as a result of the delay, but that requirement is more typical of the related (but more stringent) defense of estoppel.
A defense lawyer raising the defense of laches against a motion for injunctive relief (a form of equitable relief) might argue that the plaintiff comes "waltzing in at the eleventh hour" when it is now too late to grant the relief sought, at least not without causing great harm that the plaintiff could have avoided.  In certain types of cases (for example, cases involving time-sensitive matters, such as elections), a delay of even a few days is likely to be met with a defense of laches, even where the applicable statute of limitations might allow the type of action to be commenced within a much longer time period. Courts in the United States, laches has often been applied even where a statute of limitations exists, although there is a division of authority on this point.
If a court does accept the laches defense, it can decide either to deny the request for equitable relief or to narrow the requitable relief that it would otherwise give. Even if the court denies equitable relief to a plaintiff because of laches, the plaintiff may still have a claim for legal relief if the statute of limitations has not run out.
Under the United States Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, laches is an affirmative defense, which means that the burden of asserting laches is on the party responding to the claim to which it applies.  "When the defense of laches is clear on the face of the complaint, and where it is clear that the plaintiff can prove no set of facts to avoid the insuperable bar, a court may consider the defense on a motion to dismiss."  Solow v. Nine West Group, 2001 WL 736794, *3 (S.D.N.Y. June 29, 2001); Simons v. United States, 452 F.2d 1110, 1116 (2d Cir. 1971) (affirming Rule 12(b)(6) dismissal based, in part, on laches where papers "reveal no reason for the inordinate and prejudicial delay"). The United State Supreme Court case Costello v. United States (1961) is often cited for a definition of laches. Fort, "The New Laches: Creating Title Where None Existed," 16 Geo. Mason L. Rev. 357 (2009).

Compared to statute of limitations

The defense of laches resembles a statute of limitations, since both are concerned with ensuring that plaintiffs bring their claims in a timely fashion. But laches and a statute of limitations are not identical. A statute of limitations is concerned only with the time that has passed. Laches is concerned with the reasonableness of the delay in a particular situation. It is therefore more case-specific and more focused on the equitable conduct of the plaintiff. Those considerations are hardly unique to the laches defense, because they are characteristic of equitable reasoning and equitable remedies.

Example

In the Virginia Republican primary for the 2012 US presidential election, several candidates did not appear on the ballot, because they failed to obtain sufficient signatures in time.  Four of the unsuccessful candidates --  Rick Perry, Jon Huntsman, Newt Gingrich, and Rick Santorum -- sued, claiming that restrictions on the persons allowed to gather signatures were unconstitutional.  Their claim was dismissed by the district court on the grounds of laches, because, in the words of the appeals court:  
The appeals court upheld the dismissal on grounds of laches, even though, it added, the challenge would likely have succeeded had it been brought in a timely fashion.



Notes




