[[Carl Levin]]

CATEGORIES: 1934 births, Harvard Law School alumni, Jewish United States Senators, Levin family, Living people, Michigan lawyers, Swarthmore College alumni, United States Senators from Michigan, Detroit City Council members, Michigan Democrats, American gun control advocates, Democratic Party United States Senators, American Jews

Carl Milton Levin (born June 28, 1934) is an American politician who serves as the senior United States Senator from Michigan, serving since 1979. He is the Chairman of the Senate Committee on Armed Services, and is a member of the Democratic Party.
Born in Detroit, Michigan, Levin is the graduate of Swarthmore College and Harvard Law School. He worked as the General Counsel of the Michigan Civil Rights Commission from 1964 to 1967, and as a special assistant attorney general for the Michigan Attorney General's Office. Levin was elected to the Detroit City Council in 1968, serving from 1969 to 1977, and was president of the City Council from 1973 to 1977.
In 1978, Levin ran for the United States Senate, defeating incumbent Republican Senator Robert P. Griffin. Levin was re-elected in 1984, 1990, 1996, 2002 and 2008. On March 7, 2013, Levin announced that he would not seek a seventh term to the Senate, and will retire in 2015.

Early life, education and career

Levin was born in Detroit, and is the son of Jewish parents, Bess (née Levinson) and Saul R. Levin. Saul served on the Michigan Corrections Commission.
Soon after earning his law degree, he was admitted to the Michigan bar association, entered private practice as a lawyer for Grossman, Hyman and Grossman, and taught law at Wayne State University and the University of Detroit Mercy. He served as a special assistant attorney general for the state of Michigan and chief appellate defender for the city of Detroit from 1968 to 1969.

Detroit City Council

Levin was elected to the Detroit City Council (known then as the Detroit Common Council) in 1968, serving two four-year terms from 1969 to 1977.
Levin was elected to the United States Senate in 1978, defeating incumbent Republican Senator Robert P. Griffin.

United States Senate

Committee assignments

Legislation sponsored

On January 22, 2013, Levin introduced the Sleeping Bear Dunes National Lakeshore Conservation and Recreation Act (S. 23; 113th Congress) into the Senate.

Political positions

Armed Services

Levin is currently the chairman of the Armed Services Committee.
Levin joined the Armed Services Committee upon joining the Senate.  Recalling when he was assigned the committee seat, he said that he wanted to learn more about the armed services. "I had never served, and I thought there was a big gap in terms of my background and, frankly, felt it was a way of providing service."
He is a strong advocate for cost controls regarding military procurements.  He has also pushed for less secrecy in government, working to declassify many documents, particularly where claims of ties between Iraq and al-Qaeda are concerned.
Levin believes that in order to improve the military the United States needs to shut down more installations and get rid of excess infrastructure. Under his leadership, the Committee of Armed Forces passed the Defense Base Realignment and Closure Act, which closed some military bases.
Levin supported the Nunn–Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction Program, ensuring that all nuclear, chemical and biological weapons from post-Soviet states, are secured and dismantled. Levin argued that Nunn-Lugar presented "a chance to bury the new Hitlers and Stalins of that region before they have a chance to take root."
In 1992, he voted to ratify the START I treaty,
During the 2009 MDA/AIAA Annual Missile Defense Conference, Levin spoke in favor of the U.S.-Russian cooperation on missile defense:Remarks of Senator Carl Levin at the MDA/AIAA Annual Missile Defense Conference, March 23, 2009 "Leaders in both the U.S. and Russia have recently expressed interest in exploring missile defense cooperation. Did you ever believe that some of our missile defense engineers and experts might be working together with their Russian counterparts? It could happen and if it does, it could help address a major threat. The bottom line is simple: We have a new opportunity to seek a cooperative approach with Russia on missile defense, and we should seize it. The upside potential of such an effort is huge — a geopolitical game changer. The downside is minimal."

=Afghanistan war=

After the 9/11 terrorist attacks, Levin voted in favor of Senate Joint Resolution 23, authorizing President George W. Bush the use of "necessary and appropriate force" against those who "planned, authorized, committed or aided" al-Qaeda and it affiliates.
Levin grew critical of the Bush administration's handling of the Afghanistan War, saying in 2005 that they "took their eye off the ball when we decided to go after Iraq instead of al-Qaeda, the people who had attacked us on 9/11, and their leader.
Levin was opposed to the 2009 Afghanistan troop surge (adding an additional 30,000 U.S. combat troops), stressing the advancement of training and expanding the Afghan National Army;

=Iraq war=

Levin was an early opponent of using U.S. military force in Iraq, saying  in August 2002 that "if Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction, he wouldn't use them," and that "he's a survivalist, not a suicide bomber".
Iraqi Prime Minister, Nouri al-Maliki, has hit back at senior U.S. politicians who have called for al-Maliki to be removed from office.
After the 2006 midterm elections, with the Democratic Party taking control of the Senate and Levin being reappointed as Chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, he was seen to have gained an influential position to oppose the Bush administration's Iraq policy,

=National Defense Authorization Act 2012=

As part of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2012 (the main annual bill used to fund the US military) Levin and Senator John McCain (ranking Republican on Armed Services Committee-AZ) initially proposed to permit the indefinite detention of American citizens by the US military, without charges or trial, solely on grounds of suspected terrorist activity.

Education

Levin was a strong supporter of the creation of The Department of Education. Over the years, Levin has introduced legislation and amendments to improve education, including an amendment that greatly reduced class sizes to help teachers better focus on the needs of each specific child.

Energy

Senator Levin has directed the Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations to investigate whether Department of Energy policies have caused a rise in the price in crude oil.
Levin has opposed raising mandatory automobile fuel efficiency standards.
Levin voted for the Energy Policy Act in 2005, a comprehensive energy bill that advanced vehicle technologies, banned drilling in the Great Lakes, improved the electrical grid of the US, and made energy efficiency a component of the United States' energy policy.
Levin led opposition in the Senate to the Rahall Energy Policy Bill (H.R. 6), but lost 65–27.

Environment

Levin is working to prevent garbage from Canada (typically about 160 trucks per day) from being disposed of in Michigan.
Levin wrote legislation in the 2003 National Defense Authorization Act, creating a program for the research and construction of fuel-cell vehicles.
In 1999, Levin obtained $56 million for the Detroit Riverfront Project. The funds will be used in part to acquire land for a major five-mile walkway and greenway along the Detroit River. The Detroit Riverfront has been contaminated for decades by pollutants from factories that once operated there.

Ethics

Senator Levin authored the Competition in Contracting Act, which has led to significant reductions in federal procurement costs. He also authored the Whistleblower Protection Act, which protected federal employees who expose wasteful and unnecessary practices.

Health care

Senator Levin supported a Patients' Bill of Rights to reduce the ability of Managed care organizations to affect medical decisions.
Levin is an advocate for embryonic stem-cell research because of its potential to cure diseases like Alzheimer's, diabetes, and Parkinson's.

Stop Tax Haven Abuse Act

Carl Levin initiated the Stop Tax Haven Abuse Act
For the state of the initiative against tax avoidance and tax evasion registered as S.506, and the complementary initiative H.R.1265, see: Thomas (Library of Congress).

Miscellaneous

Levin is a critic of the New Hampshire presidential primary's first-in-the-nation status, saying a more diverse state (such as his own Michigan) should hold its contest first.
In April 2006, Levin was selected by Time as one of "America's 10 Best Senators."
The American Civil Liberties Union has given Levin an 84% lifetime rating on civil liberties issues.ACLU Congressional Scorecard
A strong gun control advocate, Levin has been graded F by Gun Owners of America. He was one of the 16 senators who voted against the Vitter Amendment.
He is almost always seen wearing his glasses at the end of his nose, which has drawn much humorous attention. In response, he lightheartedly joked that the late Senator Strom Thurmond (while he was in office) would have never worn his glasses because they "make him look old." Daily Show host Jon Stewart refers to him both as the "kindly old shoemaker", and "Grandpa Munster".
An avid supporter of the non-profit civil rights organization Focus: HOPE, Levin was instrumental in the procurement of equipment and funding for their Machinist Training Institute (MTI).

Political campaigns

Levin was first elected to the U.S. Senate in 1978, defeating Senate Minority Whip Robert P. Griffin.
Levin faced a tough reelection bid in 1984 against former astronaut Jack R. Lousma, winning by only four percent. However, he routed Congressman Bill Schuette in 1990, and was reelected in 1996 and 2002 against only nominal Republican opposition. In 2002, Levin garnered 61% of the vote against Republican Andrew "Rocky" Raczkowski despite the then-high popularity of President George W. Bush and the GOP and a close gubernatorial race that year.  In the 2008 election Levin won by a comfortable margin against state representative Jack Hoogendyk.

Electoral history




 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 

Personal life

Carl Levin married Barbara Halpern in 1961 and they have three daughters: Kate, Laura, and Erica.
Levin's family has long been active in Michigan politics. His older brother, Sander M. Levin, has represented Michigan's 12th congressional district in the House of Representatives since 1983. Sandy's son (Carl's nephew) Andy Levin was a policy analyst for the AFL-CIO and later ran unsuccessfully for the Michigan Senate. Carl's uncle Theodore Levin, was a chief judge on the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan. Carl's first cousin Charles Levin was a Michigan Supreme Court judge; another first cousin, Joseph Levin, was a candidate for the House.

Footnotes

Further reading




