[[Vikram Seth]]

CATEGORIES: 1952 births, People from Kolkata, People from West Bengal, Living people, Alumni of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, Bisexual writers, The Doon School alumni, Fellows of the Royal Society of Literature, English-language poets from India, English-language writers from India, Indian emigrants to the United Kingdom, Indian novelists, Indian poets, Indian travel writers, LGBT people from India, People educated at Tonbridge School, Recipients of the Padma Shri, The Doon School faculty, Bisexual men, Recipients of the Sahitya Akademi Award in English, St. Xavier's Patna alumni, Guggenheim Fellows, People_from_Patna

Vikram Seth (born on 20 June 1952) is an Indian novelist and poet. He has written several novel and poetry books. He has received several awards including Padma Shri, Pravasi Bharatiya Samman, WH Smith Literary Award and Crossword Book Award.

Background

Seth was born on 20 June 1952 to Leila and Prem Seth in Calcutta (now Kolkata). He spent part of his childhood in Patna since his parents were posted there for a while. He attended St. Xavier's High School, Patna. 
Seth spent part of his youth in London and returned to India in 1957. He received primary education at Welham Boys' School and then moved to The Doon School. While at Doon, Seth was the editor-in-chief of The Doon School Weekly.34 "... After leaving Oxford, Seth moved to California to work on a graduate degree in economics at Stanford University. He then went on to study creative writing at Stanford and classical Chinese poetry at Nanjing University in China.
Having lived in London for many years, Seth now maintains residences near Salisbury, England, where he is a participant in local literary and cultural events, having bought and renovated the house of the Anglican poet George Herbert in 1996, and in Delhi.
Seth self-identifies as bisexual. In 2006, he became a leader of the campaign against Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code, a law against homosexuality.

Career

Work themes

A polyglot, Seth detailed in an interview (in the year 2005) in the Australian magazine Good Weekend that he has studied several languages, including Welsh, German and, later, French in addition to Mandarin, English (which he describes as "my instrument" in answer to Indians who query his not writing in his native Hindi, which he reads and writes in the Dēvanāgarī script) and Urdu, which he reads and writes in Nasta'liq script. He plays the Indian flute and the cello and sings German lieder, especially Schubert.

Business acumen

Seth's former literary agent Giles Gordon recalled being interviewed by Seth for the position:
Vikram sat at one end of a long table and he began to grill us. It was absolutely incredible. He wanted to know our literary tastes, our views on poetry, our views on plays, which novelists we liked..
Seth later explained to Gordon that he had passed the interview not because of commercial considerations, but because unlike the others he was the only agent who seemed as interested in his poetry as in his other writing. Seth followed what he has described as "the ludicrous advance for that book" (£250,000 for A Suitable BoyVikram Seth writes Suitable Boy sequel in The Guardian 3  July 2009) with £500,000 for An Equal Music and £1.4 million for Two Lives.

Bibliography

Novels

Poetry

Children's book

His Expressions

Awards

Also See






