[[Phrygian cap]]

CATEGORIES: Caps, Costume in the French Revolution, National symbols of Argentina, National symbols of Colombia, National symbols of Cuba, National symbols of El Salvador, National symbols of Haiti, National symbols of Nicaragua, Culture of Phrygia, American Revolution, Hats, Middle Ages, National symbols of the United States, History of clothing (Europe), Medieval costume, American Revolutionary War, History of Asian clothing, History of clothing (Western fashion), Clothes in politics

The Phrygian cap is a soft conical cap with the top pulled forward, associated in antiquity with the inhabitants of Phrygia, a region of central Anatolia. In early modern Europe it came to signify freedom and the pursuit of liberty, through a confusion with the pileus, the felt cap of manumitted (emancipated) slaves of ancient Rome. Accordingly, the Phrygian cap is sometimes called a liberty cap; in artistic representations it signifies freedom and the pursuit of liberty.

History

Antiquity

For the ancient Greeks, the Phrygian cap indicates non-Greek "barbarism" (in the classical sense).  The Phrygian cap identifies Trojans such as Paris in vase-paintings and sculpture, and it is worn by the syncretic Persian saviour god Mithras and by the Anatolian god Attis who were later adopted by Romans and Hellenic cultures. The twins Castor and Pollux wear a superficially similar round cap called the pileus.
The Phrygian cap is sometimes associated with the headdress that was worn by King Midas to hide the donkey ears given to him as a curse by Apollo, although according to Ovid, Midas hid his ears beneath a purple turban. Phrygians, however, were shown wearing the distinctive peaked cap in illustrations on Greek vases,Lynn E. Roller, "The Legend of Midas", Classical Antiquity, 2.2 (October 1983:299–313) p. 305. and such images predate the earliest surviving literary sources: a mid-6th-century Laconian cup depicts the capture of Silenus at a fountain house, by armed men in Eastern costume and pointed caps.
In vase-paintings and other Greek art, the Phrygian cap serves to identify the Trojan hero Paris as non-Greek; Roman poets habitually use the epithet "Phrygian" to mean Trojan. The Phrygian cap can also be seen on the Trajan's Column carvings, worn by the Dacians, and on the Arch of Septimius Severus worn by the Parthians. 
In the later parts of Roman history, the god Mithras — whose worship was widespread until suppressed by Christianity — was regularly portrayed as wearing a Phrygian cap,  fitting with his being perceived as a Persian god who had "come out of the East".    
The Macedonian, Thracian, Dacian and 12th-century Norman military helmets had a forward peaked top resembling the Phrygian cap called Phrygian type helmets. 
In late Republican Rome, pileus, the cap of freedmen served as a symbol of freedom from tyranny. A coin issued by Marcus Junius Brutus the Younger in Asia Minor 44–42 BC, showed one posed between two daggersAn example from the De Salis collection, in the British Museum, is noted by Jennifer Harris, "The Red Cap of Liberty: A Study of Dress Worn by French Revolutionary Partisans 1789-94" Eighteenth-Century Studies 14.3 (Spring 1981:283–312) p. 290, note 9.uned.jpg During the Roman Empire, the pileus was worn on festive occasions such as the Saturnalia, and by emancipated slaves, whose descendants were consequently considered citizens of the Empire. In early modern Europe, pileus was confused with the Phrygian cap. This is often considered the root of its meaning as a symbol of liberty. 

Revolutionary icon

In revolutionary France, the cap or bonnet rouge was first seen publicly in May 1790, at a festival in Troyes adorning a statue representing the nation, and at Lyon, on a lance carried by the goddess Libertas. To this day the national emblem of France, Marianne, is shown wearing a Phrygian cap. The caps were often knitted by women known as Tricoteuse who sat beside the guillotine during public executions in Paris in the French Revolution, supposedly continuing to knit in between executions. Cooper, and John McCardell. "Liberty caps and liberty trees." Past and Present 146.1 (1995): 66-102.
In 1792, when Louis XVI was induced to sign a constitution, popular prints of the king were doctored to show him wearing the bonnet rouge. 1. Most of the details that follow are drawn from Ms Harris. The bust of Voltaire was crowned with the red bonnet of liberty after a performance of his Brutus at the Comédie-Française in March 1792. The spire of the cathedral in Strasbourg was crowned with a bonnet rouge in order to prevent it from being torn down in 1794. 
By wearing the red Phrygian cap the Paris sans-culottes made their Revolutionary ardour and plebeian solidarity immediately recognizable. During the period of the Reign of Terror, the cap was adopted defensively even by those who might be denounced as moderates or aristocrats and were especially keen to advertise their adherence to the new regime.
The coat of arms of Haiti, a country established by rebellious slaves, has a Phrygian cap on top of a palm tree.
The cap was also incorporated into the symbol of the late 18th-century Irish revolutionary organisation the Society of the United Irishmen. The English Radicals of 1819 and 1820 often wore a white "cap of liberty" on public occasions.

Banning

During political tumult in France, chief executive Adolphe Thiers "had made any display of the Phrygian cap a punishable offense" (along with singing La Marseillaise and celebrating Bastille Day)."Nord">[/ref] The ban was ended in 1870,"Nord"/> and by 1880 (as historian Philip Nord tells us), the political climate had changed, previous disapproval ended, and "revolutionary symbols—the cap, the holiday, the anthem--had become constituent parts of a national heritage consecrated by the state and embraced by the public."

Use in American iconography

United States of America

The Phrygian cap has been used to symbolize liberty in numerous countries of the Americas. For example, starting in 1793, U.S. coinage frequently showed liberty wearing the cap or, on many 19th-century pieces, holding it on a Liberty Pole. The cap's last appearance on circulating coinage was the Walking Liberty Half Dollar, which was minted through 1947 (and reused on the current bullion American Silver Eagle).  The U.S. Army has, since 1778, utilized a "War Office Seal" in which the motto "This We'll Defend" is displayed directly over a Phrygian cap on an upturned sword. It also appears on the state flags of West Virginia (as part of its official seal), New Jersey, and New York, as well as the official seal of the United States Senate, the state of Iowa, the state of North Carolina (as well as the arms of its Senate,) and on the reverse side of the Seal of Virginia.
In 1854, when sculptor Thomas Crawford was preparing models for sculpture for the United States Capitol, Secretary of War Jefferson Davis (later to be the President of the Confederate States of America) insisted that a Phrygian cap not be included on a statue of Freedom, on the grounds that "American liberty is original and not the liberty of the freed slave". The cap was not included in the final bronze version that is now in the building. (1964), Thomas Crawford: American Sculptor, University of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh, p. 124.

Latin America

Many of the anti-colonial revolutions in Latin America were heavily inspired by the imagery and slogans of the American and French Revolutions. As a result, the cap has appeared on the coats of arms of many Latin American nations.
The cap had also been displayed on certain Mexican coins (most notably the old 8-reales coin) through the late 19th century into the mid-20th century. Today, it is featured on the coats of arms or national flags of Argentina, Bolivia, Colombia, Cuba, El Salvador, Haiti, Nicaragua and Paraguay.
The Phrygian cap in Latin American coats of arms

Literary and popular culture references

Gallery

Image:ColumbiaStahrArtwork.
Image:Magi (1).
Image:Mithras petra genetrix Terme. From the area of S. Stefano Rotondo, Rome).
Image:Louis le dernier3.
Image:Marianne Symbol of french republic 3.
Image:GillrayBritannia.
File:EndOfSlaveTrade.
Image:Rodrigues-republica-mab.
File:Iowa-StateSeal. The 1847 written description did not specify that the soldier has to wear the cap; thus he is commonly depicted with a Civil War-era Cavalry hat. 
File:YOUNG AMERICA.jpg|Columbia holding up a Phrygian cap on an advertisement for the clipper ship Young America
File:1868 dollar obv.
Image:Coat of Arms of Cuba.
File:Coat of arms of Argentina.svg|Coat of arms of Argentina
File:Coat of arms of Nicaragua.svg|Coat of arms of Nicaragua
File:Bandeira de Santa Catarina.svg|Flag of Santa Catarina State, Brazil





Further reading

 
 




