[[Human Rights Campaign]]

CATEGORIES: 1980 establishments in Washington, D.C., History of LGBT civil rights in the United States, LGBT culture in Washington, D.C., LGBT political advocacy groups in the United States, Organizations based in Washington, D.C., Organizations established in 1980

The Human Rights Campaign (HRC) is the largest LGBT civil rights advocacy group and political lobbying organization in the United States.

Structure

HRC is an umbrella group of two separate non-profit organizations and a political action committee: the HRC Foundation, a 501(c)(3)
Local activities are carried out by local steering committees, of which there are over 30 located throughout the United States.

Leadership

The Human Rights Campaign's leadership includes President Chad Griffin.

Programs

The Human Rights Campaign's priorities include: prevention of hate crimes and HIV/AIDS; advocacy for healthcare benefits, marriage, and adoption rights for same-sex couples; lobbying for a federal Employment Non-Discrimination Act (ENDA) and gender identity anti-discrimination laws; combating gay bashing in schools; and building relationships with straight allies, ethnic groups, religious leaders, and youth.
The HRC Foundation provides educational resources and publications on coming out, transgender issues, LGBT-related healthcare topics and information about workplace issues faced by LGBT people, notably the Corporate Equality Index. It also maintains resources on LGBT parenting, religion and faith issues, immigration, and outreach for youth.Resources
The HRC Foundation's Coming Out Project provides information to people who are in the process of coming out.Resources: Coming Out
HRC lobbies for anti-discrimination, hate crimes laws, and worked on the passage of the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd, Jr. Hate Crimes Prevention Act, which expanded federal hate-crime law to allow the Justice Department to investigate and prosecute crimes motivated by a victim's actual or perceived gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, or disability."President Barack Obama Signs Hate Crimes Legislation Into Law
The organization's work on health issues traditionally focused on responding to the HIV/AIDS epidemic. In recent years, HRC has addressed discrimination in health care settings for LGBT employees, patients and their families. Since 2007, the Human Rights Campaign Foundation has published the "Healthcare Equality Index", which rates hospitals on issues such as patient and employee non-discrimination policies, employee cultural competency training, and hospital visitation rights for LGBT patients' families.
HRC lobbied extensively for the repeal of the Don't Ask Don't Tell (DADT) law, which barred gay and lesbian people from serving openly in the United States military. Eric Alva, a gay Marine who was the first American wounded in combat in Iraq, has since been a spokesman on behalf of the Human Rights Campaign's efforts to repeal the law, and was invited to stand behind President Obama at the signing ceremony.

Annual indexes

History

Steve Endean, who had worked with a previously established Gay Rights National Lobby from 1978, established the Human Rights Campaign Fund political action committee in 1980 to raise money for gay-supportive congressional candidates. In 1983, Vic Basile, at the time one of the leading LGBT rights activists in Washington, D.C., was elected as the first executive director. In October 1986, the HRC Foundation (HRCF) was formed as a non-profit organization.
In January 1989, Basile announced his departure, and HRC reorganized from serving mainly as a political action committee (PAC) to broadening its function to encompass lobbying, research, education, and media outreach. HRC decided on a new Statement of Purpose:
Tim McFeeley, a Harvard Law School graduate, founder of the Boston Lesbian and Gay Political Alliance, and a co-chair of the New England HRC Committee, was elected the new executive director. Total membership was then approximately 25,000 members.
In 1992, HRC endorsed a presidential candidate for the first time, Bill Clinton. In March 1993, HRC began a new project, National Coming Out Day. From January 1995 until January 2004, Elizabeth Birch served as the executive director of the HRC. Under her leadership, the institution more than quadrupled its membership to 500,000 members.
In 1995, the organization dropped the word "Fund" from its name, becoming the Human Rights Campaign. That same year, it underwent a complete reorganization. The HRC Foundation added new programs such as the Workplace Project and the Family Project, while HRC itself broadly expanded its research, communications, and marketing/public relations functions. The organization also unveiled a new logo, a yellow equal sign inside of a blue square, which has become one of the most recognizable symbols in the LGBT community.
In 2002, HRC purchased a headquarters building in Washington, D.C. The building, located at 1640 Rhode Island Avenue, was previously the headquarters for B'nai B'rith International. The organization renovated the building and moved in 2003.
As part of the activities surrounding the Millennium March on Washington, the HRC Foundation sponsored a fundraising concert at Washington, D.C.'s RFK Stadium on April 29, 2000. Billed as a concert to end hate crimes, "Equality Rocks" honored hate crime victims and their families, such as featured speakers Dennis and Judy Shepard, the parents of Matthew Shepard. More than 45,000 people
Elizabeth Birch's successor, Cheryl Jacques, resigned in November 2004 after only 11 months as executive director. In a statement released by HRC, Jacques said she had resigned over "a difference in management philosophy".
In March 2005, HRC announced the appointment of Joe Solmonese as the president, describing him as having an "unrivaled track record at the nation's foremost progressive electoral powerhouse" and appealing to "Americans across the political and ideological spectrum".
HRC launched its Religion and Faith Program in 2005 to mobilize clergy to advocate for LGBT people, and helped form DC Clergy United for Marriage Equality, which was involved in the legalization of same-sex marriage in the District of Columbia.
On August 9, 2007, HRC and Logo TV co-hosted a forum for 2008 Democratic presidential candidates dedicated specifically to LGBT issues.Dems Court the Gay Vote
HRC spent over $7 million in its "Year to Win" campaign during the 2008 elections, the largest electoral campaign in its history to date.Our victo: Year to Win
In 2010, HRC lobbied for the repeal of the United States' ban on HIV-positive people's entry into the country for travel or immigration, stating the need to "combat the stigma and ignorance that still too often guides public policy debates around HIV/AIDS".Miami Herald: After 22 years, HIV travel and immigration ban lifted
In September 2011, it was announced that Solmonese would step down from the presidency following the end of his contract in 2012.
In 2012, HRC executed its largest mobilization effort ever, raising and contributing $20 million to re-elect President Obama and to advance marriage equality and other electoral priorities.

Annual fundraisers

Each year since 1997, HRC has hosted a national dinner that features high-profile speakers and serves as the organization's single largest annual fundraiser. In 2009, President Barack Obama addressed a crowd of approximately 3,000 guests

HRC historical records

The historical records of the Human Rights Campaign are maintained in a collection at the Cornell University Library. Arriving at Cornell in 2004, the records include strategic planning documents, faxes, minutes, e-mails, press releases, posters, and campaign buttons. Taking up , the archive is the second largest in the library's Division of Rare and Manuscript Collections, Human Sexuality Collection. In February 2007, the archive was opened to scholars at the library, and selected records were organized into an online exhibit called "25 Years of Political Influence: The Records of the Human Rights Campaign". (January 30, 2007) 25 years of gay-rights struggles traced in online exhibit The Cornell Chronicle of Cornell University. Retrieved July 29, 2007. 25 Years of Political Influence:The Records of the Human Rights Campaign Cornell University. Retrieved July 29, 2007.

Awards

The Human Rights Campaign maintains a number of awards for individuals distinguished for their LGBT-related work. In addition to awards from the national organization, local chapters also award their own versions of the awards. These awards are typically presented at national and local chapters' annual dinner galas.

Visibility Award winners

Ally for Equality Award winners

Equality Award

HRC Legacy Award

HRC Award for Workplace Equality Innovation

Logo

The official logo of the HRC, adopted in 1995, consists of a yellow equals sign imposed onto a blue background. The logo was created in 1995 by design firm Stone Yamashita, who attracted then-Executive Director Elizabeth Birch to its bold design. HRC uses the term Equality Flag for flags bearing their logo.HRC Store page selling Equality Flag

Marriage equality logo

thumb|right|The HRC equal sign logo reworked in red to show particular support for same-sex marriage. HRC shared a red version of its logo – selected because the color is synonymous with love – on social network services on March 25, 2013, and asked its supporters to do the same to show support for marriage equality in light of two marriage equality cases that were before the U.S. Supreme Court (United States v. Windsor and Hollingsworth v. Perry). The logo went viral, and Facebook saw a 120% increase in the number of profile photo changes on March 26. Celebrities such as George Takei, Beyonce, Sophia Bush, Padma Lakshmi, Martha Stewart and Ellen DeGeneres shared the logo with their millions of followers on social network services and U.S. senators, state governors and other elected officials did the same.
As the logo's popularity took off, countless memes were created. Highly recognized brands and corporations showed their support for marriage equality with creative recreations of the red HRC logo. Supporters included Bud Light, Bonobos, Fab.
Major print and online news sources reported on the success of the viral campaign, including MSNBC,

Criticism

Critics of the HRC have accused the organization of favoring the Democratic Party. Andrew Sullivan, a conservative gay political columnist and blogger, has been critical of the HRC, calling it "a patronage wing of the Democratic party". (February 19, 2007) The Human Rights Campaign (Blech) The Atlantic Monthly. Retrieved July 29, 2007. "My Alliance with the Christianists" Theatlantic.HRC hits back at blogger criticisms – Washington Blade originally here
HRC's endorsement of New York Republican Al D'Amato in his 1998 campaign for re-election to the U.S. Senate brought more criticism. HRC defended the endorsement because of D'Amato's support for Employment Non-Discrimination Act (ENDA) and repeal of "Don't Ask, Don't Tell". However, many liberal LGBT leaders did not welcome D'Amato's many conservative stances, including his opposition to affirmative action and abortion. (July 18, 2000) The D'Amato Factor The Advocate. Retrieved February 22, 2012.
HRC has also been accused of overstating the number of its actual members in order to appear more influential in politics... it's about sending e-mails to elected officials, volunteering time or lobbying members of Congress" and more than half of its members made contributions during the previous two years.
Some transgender people have criticized the HRC for its stance on the 2007 version of ENDA, which enumerated sexual orientation as a protected category but not gender identity and expression. (October 4, 2007) HRC Alone in Eschewing No-Compromise Stand Gay City News. Retrieved October 8, 2007. Once the legislation was submitted by Rep. Barney Frank, HRC officially neither opposed nor supported it... we appreciate the steadfast efforts of our ... allies ... even when they are forced ... to make progress that is measured by inches rather than yards.""Letter to U.S. Representatives"








