[[Audacity (audio editor)]]

CATEGORIES: 2000 software, Free audio editors, Cross-platform free software, Free music software, Free software programmed in C, Free software programmed in C++, OS X multimedia software, Podcasting software, Software that uses wxWidgets, Software using the GPL license, Audio editing software for Linux

Audacity is a free open source digital audio editor and recording computer software application, available for Windows, Mac OS X, Linux and other operating systems.

Features and usage

In addition to recording audio from multiple sources, Audacity can be used for post-processing of all types of audio, including podcasts by adding effects such as normalization, trimming, and fading in and out. It is also currently used in the UK OCR National Level 2 ICT course for the sound creation unit.
Audacity's features include the following:
Audacity supports the LV2 open standard for plugins and can therefore load software like e.g. Calf Studio Gear.

Limitations

Audacity supports only 32-bit VST audio effect plug-ins. It does not support 64-bit or instrument VST plugins.
Audacity does not directly support WMA, AAC, or most other proprietary or restricted file formats. To import or export AC3, AMR(NB), WMA and other proprietary formats, requires the optional FFmpeg library.
Also, while Audacity does feature a vocal remover for the easy creation of karaoke tracks, a more desirable result requires several steps and use of the noise removal feature.

Language support

In addition to English language help, the ZIP file of the downloadable Audacity software program includes help files for Afrikaans, Arabic, Basque, Bulgarian, Catalan, Chinese (simplified), Chinese (traditional), Czech, Danish, Dutch, Finnish, French, Galician, German, Greek, Hungarian, Irish, Italian, Japanese, Lithuanian, Macedonian, Norwegian (Bokmål), Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Slovak, Slovenian, Spanish, Swedish, Turkish, Ukrainian, and Welsh in its user interface. A partial Bengali help file is also included.
The Audacity website also provides tutorials in several languages.

Reception

The free and open nature of Audacity has allowed it to become very popular in education, encouraging its developers to make the user interface easier for students and teachers.
CNET rated Audacity 5/5 stars and called it "feature rich and flexible".
In The Art of Unix Programming, Eric S. Raymond says of Audacity "The central virtue of this program is that it has a superbly transparent and natural user interface, one that erects as few barriers between the user and the sound file as possible."








