[[Barbara Walters]]

CATEGORIES: 1929 births, 20th-century American writers, 20th-century women writers, 21st-century American writers, 21st-century women writers, ABC News personalities, Alumni of women's universities and colleges, American memoirists, American people of Polish-Jewish descent, American television news anchors, American television personalities, American television reporters and correspondents, American television talk show hosts, Women television journalists, American women journalists, Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Talk Show Host winners, Ethical Culture Fieldston School alumni, Jewish American writers, Jewish women writers, Journalists from New York City, Living people, Miami Beach Senior High School alumni, NBC News, People from Brookline, Massachusetts, People from Miami, Florida, People with a speech impediment, Sarah Lawrence College alumni, Television Hall of Fame inductees, Women television writers, American women writers, Writers from Florida, Writers from New York City, Writers from Boston, Massachusetts

Barbara Gill Walters is an American broadcast journalist, author, and television personality. She has hosted morning television shows Today and The View, the television news magazine 20/20, co-anchored the ABC Evening News, and is a contributor to ABC News.
Walters first became known as a television personality when she was a writer and segment producer of "women's interest stories" on the morning NBC News program The Today Show, where she began work with host Hugh Downs in 1962, once even modeling a swimsuit when an expected model did not show up. Because of her excellent interviewing ability and her popularity with the viewers, and when other women left the program, she was eventually allowed more air time. Even though her production duties made her a significant contributor to the show, she had no input in choosing a successor for Hugh Downs when he left the show in 1971. Frank McGee was hired. Although his salary was twice hers, Jim Hartz became her co-host. Two years later, continuing as a pioneer for women, she became the first female co-anchor of any network evening news, working with Harry Reasoner on the ABC News flagship program ABC Evening News (List of ABC Evening News anchors).
From 1979 to 2004, Walters worked as co-host and producer for the ABC newsmagazine 20/20, again appearing with Hugh Downs. From 1976 to 2010, she contributed as an anchor, reporter, and correspondent for ABC News, along with producing and hosting her own special interview programs several times yearly. Beginning in 1997, she has created, and appears as co-host on, The View.  Walters has announced that she will retire from ABC News and as co-host of The View in May 2014.
In 1996, Walters was ranked #34 on the TV Guide "50 Greatest TV Stars of All Time."

Early life

Walters was born in 1929 in Boston to Dena (née Seletsky) and Louis "Lou" Walters (born Louis Abrahams).Tropicana – Las Vegas Strip. A2zlasvegas. Retrieved on 2011-10-27. Walters' brother, Burton, died in 1944 of pneumonia.
According to Walters, her father made and lost several fortunes throughout his life in show business. He was a booking agent, and unlike her uncles who were in the shoe and dress business, his job was not very safe. During the good times, Walters recalls her father taking her to the rehearsals of the night club shows he directed and produced. The actresses and dancers would make a huge fuss over her and twirl her around until she was dizzy. Then she said her father would take her for hot dogs on buns, their favorites. (2008) Audition :a memoir New York : A.A. Knopf,
According to Walters, being surrounded by celebrities when she was young kept her from being "in awe" of them. When she was a young woman, Walters' father lost his night clubs and the family's penthouse on Central Park West. As Walters recalled, "He had a breakdown. He went down to live in our house in Florida, and then the Government took the house, and they took the car, and they took the furniture." Of her mother, she said, "My mother should have married the way her friends did, to a man who was a doctor or who was in the dress business."Elisabeth Bumiller, "So Famous, Such Clout, She Could Interview Herself", The New York Times, April 21, 1996, page H1
Walters attended Lawrence School, a public school in Brookline, Massachusetts, to the middle of fifth grade, when her father moved the family to Miami Beach in 1939, where she also attended public school. After her father moved the family to New York City, she went to eighth grade at Ethical Culture Fieldston School, after which the family moved back to Miami Beach. Then, back to New York City, and for high school, Birch Wathen SchoolCan Barbara Walters's Career Survive Rosie and Donald's War?- New York Magazine. Nymag. Retrieved on 2011-10-27. and immediately looked for work in New York City. After about a year at a small advertising agency, she began working at the NBC network affiliate in New York City, WNBT-TV (now  WNBC), doing publicity and writing press releases. She began producing a 15-minute children's program, "Ask the Camera," directed by Roone Arledge in 
1953.  She then produced for TV host, Igor Cassini/Cholly Knickerbocker, but left the network due to pressure from her boss to marry him, and his fist-fight with a man she preferred to date.  Then she went to WPIX to produce the "Eloise McElhone Show."; it was cancelled in 1954.  She became a writer on "The Morning Show" at CBS in 1955.

Career

The Today Show

After a few years as a publicist with Tex McCrary Inc. and a job as a writer at Redbook magazine, Walters joined NBC's The Today Show as a writer and researcher in 1961. She moved up to become that show's regular "Today Girl", handling lighter assignments and the weather. In her autobiography, she describes this era before the Women's Movement as a time when it was believed that nobody would take a woman seriously reporting "hard news". Previous "Today Girls" (whom Walters called "tea pourers") included Florence Henderson, Helen O'Connell, Estelle Parsons and Lee Meriwether. 107–114 Within a year she had become a reporter-at-large developing, writing, and editing her own reports and interviews. She had a great relationship with host Hugh Downs for years. When Frank McGee was named host, he refused to do joint interviews with Walters unless he was given the first four questions. She was not named co-host of the show until McGee's death in 1974, when NBC officially designated Walters as the program's first female co-host.

ABC Evening News and 20/20

Walters has seldom minced words when describing the visible, on-the-air disdain her co-anchor, Harry Reasoner displayed for her when she was teamed up with him on the ABC Evening News in 1976–78.  Reasoner had a difficult relationship with Walters because he disliked having a co-anchor, even though he worked with former CBS colleague Howard K. Smith nightly on ABC for several years. In 1981, five years after the start of their short-lived ABC partnership and well after Reasoner returned to CBS News, Walters and her former co-anchor had a memorable (and cordial) 20/20 interview on the occasion of Reasoner's new book release.
Walters is also known for her years on the ABC newsmagazine 20/20 where she reunited with former Today Show host Hugh Downs in 1979.  Throughout her career at ABC, Walters has appeared on ABC news specials as a commentator, including presidential inaugurations and the coverage of 9/11. She was also chosen to be the moderator for the third and final debate between candidates Jimmy Carter and Gerald Ford, held on the campus of the College of William and Mary at Phi Beta Kappa Memorial Hall in Williamsburg, Virginia, during the 1976 Presidential Election. In 1984, she moderated a Presidential debate held at the Dana Center for the Humanities at Saint Anselm College in Goffstown, New Hampshire.

=Interviews=

Walters is known for "personality journalism" and her "scoop" interviews. In November 1977, she achieved a joint interview with Egypt's President, Anwar Al Sadat, and Israel's Prime Minister, Menachem Begin. According to the New York Times, when she went mano a mano with Walter Cronkite to interview both world leaders, at the end of Cronkite's interview he is clearly heard saying: "Did Barbara get anything I didn't get?" Maselin, J. (2008, May 05). Hard sell, soft touch, and the right question. The New York Times. Retrieved from  They include the Shah of Iran, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, and his wife, the Empress Farah Pahlavi; Russia's Boris Yeltsin and Vladimir Putin; China's Jiang Zemin; the UK's Margaret Thatcher; Cuba's Fidel Castro, as well as India's Indira Gandhi, Czechoslovakia's Václav Havel, Libya's Muammar al-Gaddafi, King Hussein of Jordan, King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia, Venezuelan President, Hugo Chavez, and Syrian President, Bashar al-Assad, among many others. Other interviews with influential people include pop icon Michael Jackson, actress Katharine Hepburn, Vogue editor Anna Wintour, and in 1980 Sir Laurence Olivier. Walters considered Robert Smithdas, a deaf-blind man who spent his life improving the life of other individuals who are deaf-blind, as her most inspirational interview.
Walters was widely lampooned for asking actress Katharine Hepburn, "If you were a tree, what kind would you be?"  On her last 20/20 television episode, Walters showed video of the Hepburn interview, showing the actress saying that she would like to be a tree. Walters merely followed up with the question, "What kind of a tree?",Kate the Great, The Katharine Hepburn Forum – The Barbara Walters Interview  Retrieved 2008-05-10 and Hepburn responded "an oak" because they are strong and pretty. According to Walters, for years Hepburn refused her requests for an interview. And when she finally agreed to one, she said she wanted to meet her first. Walters walked in all smiles and ready to please, while Hepburn was at the top of the stairs and barked, "You're late. Have you brought me chocolates?" Walters hadn't, but said she never showed up without them from then on. They had several other meetings since that first time, mostly in Hepburn's living room where she would give Walters her opinions. Careers and marriage did not mix. Children and careers were out of the question. Walters said Hepburn's opinions stuck with her so much, she could repeat them almost verbatim to this day.
During her television special about Cuban leader, Fidel Castro, that aired on ABC-TV on June 9, 1977, Walters claimed that "for Castro, freedom begins with education  At the time, Walters kept quiet about seeing New York Yankees owner George Steinbrenner, pitcher Whitey Ford, and several coaches in Cuba, there to assist Cuban ballplayers.
On March 3, 1999, her interview of Monica Lewinsky was seen by a record 74 million viewers, the highest rating ever for a news program.

The View

Walters is a part-time host of the daytime talk show The View, of which she also is co-creator and co-executive producer with her business partner, Bill Geddie. Walters described the show in its original opening credits as a forum for women of "different generations, backgrounds, and views." She added, "Be careful what you wish for..." The show's current co-hosts are Whoopi Goldberg, Jenny McCarthy, and Sherri Shepherd. Previous co-hosts include Joy Behar (1997–2013), Elisabeth Hasselbeck (2003–2013), Meredith Vieira (1997–2006), Star Jones (1997–2006), Lisa Ling (1999–2002), Rosie O'Donnell (2006–2007), and Debbie Matenopoulos (1997–1999).

Retirement

As of 2004, Walters was in semi-retirement as a broadcast journalist, but remained a correspondent for ABC News as well as a host of ABC's special programs, while continuing to co-host The View. On March 7, 2010, Barbara Walters announced she would no longer hold Oscar interviews, but will still be working with ABC and on The View.
In a November 2010 episode of The View, while interviewing Larry King on his retirement from CNN, Walters alluded to her impending retirement, stating, "I know when my time's coming."
On March 28, 2013, numerous media outlets reported that Barbara Walters would retire in May 2014 and that she would make the announcement on the show four days later.

Personal life

Walters has been married four times to three different men. Her first husband was Robert Henry Katz, a business executive and former Navy lieutenant. They married on June 20, 1955, at The Plaza Hotel in New York City."Katz—Walters", The New York Times, June 21, 1955, page 36 The marriage was reportedly annulled after 11 months,[ref]
</ref> or in 1957.<ref>
</ref>
Her second husband was Lee Guber, theatrical producer and theater owner. They married on December 8, 1963, and divorced in 1976. They have one daughter, Jacqueline Dena Guber (born 1968, adopted the same year).
Her third husband was Merv Adelson, the CEO of Lorimar Television. They married in 1981, divorced in 1984, remarried on May 10, 1986, and divorced again in 1992.
She dated gay lawyer
Walters dated future U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman, Alan Greenspan, in the 1970s and was linked romantically to United States Senator, John Warner, in the 
1990s.
In Walters' autobiography, Audition, she claimed that she had an affair in the 1970s with Edward Brooke, then a married United States Senator from Massachusetts. It is not clear whether Walters also was married at the time. Walters said they ended the affair to protect their careers from scandal., Associated Press, May 1, 2008 In 2007 she dated Pulitzer Prize-winning gerontologist Robert Neil Butler.com
Walters has been close friends with Fox News head, Roger Ailes, since the late 
1960s.com

Health

She announced on the May 10, 2010, episode of The View that she would be undergoing open heart surgery to replace a faulty aortic valve. Walters added that she knew for quite a while that she was suffering from aortic valve stenosis, even though she was symptom-free. The procedure to fix the faulty heart valve "went well, and the doctors are very pleased with the outcome," Walters' spokeswoman, Cindi Berger, said in a statement on May 14, 2010.
On July 9, 2010, it was announced that Walters would return to The View and her Sirius XM satellite show, Here's Barbara, in September 2010.

Legacy

Barbara Walters was inducted into the Television Hall of Fame in 1989. On June 15, 2007, Walters received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. She has won Daytime and Prime Time Emmy Awards, a Women in Film Lucy Award, and a GLAAD Excellence in Media award. Her impact on the popular culture is illustrated by Gilda Radner's "Baba Wawa" impersonation of her on Saturday Night Live, featuring her idiosyncratic speech with its rounded "R". In 2008, she was honored with the Disney Legends award, an award given to those who made an outstanding contribution to The Walt Disney Company, which owns the network ABC. That same year, she received the Lifetime Achievement Award from the New York Women's Agenda. On September 21, 2009, Walters was honored with a Lifetime Achievement Award at the 30th Annual News and Documentary Emmy Awards at New York City's Lincoln Center.

Awards and nominations

Public perception

When Walters announced her retirement, Alex Pareene welcomed the news in Salon. Pareene wrote that like Walter Winchell, Walters was "an amoral power-obsessed monster" and suffered from a "total lack of journalistic ethics" as well as a "tendency to interview her close, personal friends."
S.J. Perelman once called Walters "an absolute fiend" and "the most insincere, brassy nitwit in the business."

Books

In the late 1960s Walters wrote a magazine article, "How to Talk to Practically Anyone About Practically Anything", which drew upon the kinds of things people said to her, which were often mistakes. 186–9 Shortly after the article appeared, she received a letter from Doubleday expressing interest in expanding it into a book. Walters felt that it would help "tongue-tied, socially awkward people — the many people who worry that they can't think of the right thing to say to start a conversation." She published the book How to Talk with Practically Anybody about Practically Anything in 1970, with the assistance of ghostwriter June Callwood. To Walters' great surprise, the book was a phenomenon. As of 2008, it had gone through eight printings, sold hundreds of thousands of copies worldwide, and had been translated into at least six different languages.
She published her autobiography, Audition: A Memoir, in 2008.
Books about Barbara Walters
Seen and Heard:  The Women of Television News, Nichola D. Gutgold. (Lexington Books, 2008)












