[[Shinagawa, Tokyo]]

CATEGORIES: Shinagawa, Tokyo, Wards of Tokyo

 is a special ward located in Tokyo Metropolis, Japan. While somewhat misleadingly referred to as Shinagawa City in bureaucratic English translations (it is not a city in its own right, but a subsection of the city of Tokyo), in natural English it is more commonly known simply as Shinagawa, as Shinagawa Ward or (particularly in street addresses) as Shinagawa-ku. The ward is home to nine embassies.
As of 2008, the ward has an estimated population of 344,461 and a population density of 15,740 persons per km². The total area is 22.72 km².

Geography

Shinagawa includes natural uplands and lowlands, as well as reclaimed land. The uplands are the eastern end of the Musashino hills. They include Shiba Shiroganedai north of the Meguro River, Megurodai between the Meguro and Tachiai Rivers, and Ebaradai south of the Tachiai River.
The ward lies on Tokyo Bay. Its neighbors on land are all special wards of Tokyo: Kōtō to the east, Minato to the north, Meguro to the west, and Ōta to the south.
The ward consists of five districts:

History

Most of Tokyo east of the Imperial Palace is reclaimed land. A large portion of reclamation happened during the Edo period. Following the Meiji restoration and the Abolition of the han system, Shinagawa prefecture was instituted in 1869. The prefectural administration was planned to be set up in present-day Shinagawa in the Ebara district. In 1871, Shinagawa prefecture was integrated into Tokyo Prefecture.
The ward was founded on March 15, 1947 through the administrative amalgamation of the former Ebara Ward with the former Shinagawa Ward. Both Ebara Ward and Shinagawa Ward had been created in 1932, with the outward expansion of the municipal boundaries of the Tokyo City following the 1923 Great Kantō Earthquake.
In the Edo period, Shinagawa was the first post town a traveler would reach after setting out from Nihonbashi on the Tōkaidō highway from Edo to Kyoto. The post-town function is retained today with several large hotels near the train station offering 6,000 hotel rooms, the largest concentration in the city. The Tokugawa shogunate maintained the Suzugamori execution grounds in Shinagawa.
The Tōkaidō Shinkansen began serving Shinagawa Station from 2003.

Politics and government

Shinagawa is run by a city assembly of 40 elected members. The mayor as of 2007 is Takeshi Hamano, an independent. Liberal Democratic Party together with New Komeito currently forms government.
The Embassy of Myanmar in Japan is located in Kita Shinagawa."Welcome to the Myanmar Embassy, Tokyo." Embassy of Myanmar in Japan. "Shinagawa-ku, 4-8-26 Kita-Shinagawa, 140-0001 Tokyo"

Economy

Corporate headquarters

Many companies are headquartered in Shinagawa. Isuzu, an auto manufacturer;"Corporate Profile." Isuzu. JTB Corporation, a major travel agency;"Company Profile." JTB Corporation. Nippon Light Metal, an aluminum and chemical products  company;"Corporate Profile." Nippon Light Metal. MOS Burger (in the ThinkPark Tower, Ōsaki);"Corporate Profile." MOS Burger. "Address of Headquarters 4F ThinkPark Tower, 2-1-1 Osaki, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo 141-6004 JAPAN" - Address in Japanese: "〒141-6004　東京都品川区大崎2-1-1 ThinkPark Tower 4階 " Lawson (East Tower of Gate City Ohsaki in Ōsaki),[ref]"Corporate Profile." Lawson. "East Tower, Gate City Ohsaki
11-2, Osaki 1-chome, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo 141-8643 Japan"[/ref] Namco Bandai Holdings;"Corporate Data." Namco Bandai Holdings. "Head Office NamcoBandai Miraikenkyusho 4-5-15, Higashi-Shinagawa, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo 140-8590, Japan" Namco Bandai Games;"Corporate Overview." Namco Bandai Games. Banpresto;"Company Outline." Banpresto. February 18, 2008. Rakuten,"Company Overview." Rakuten. ""Rakuten Tower" (Headquarters) Shinagawa Seaside Rakuten Tower, 4-12-3 Higashishinagawa, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo, 140-0002 (MAP).""Rakuten Tower." (Direct map image link) Rakuten. Honda brand Acura; Marza Animation Planet also has its headquarters in Shinagawa."Company Profile." Marza Animation Planet. "NYK Tennoz Bldg., 18F, 2-2-20, Higashi-Shinagawa, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo, 140-0002 JAPAN""会社概要." Marza Animation Planet. "所在地	〒140-0002　東京都品川区東品川2-2-20　天王洲郵船ビル18階"
Japan Airlines (JAL), the head office of its subsidiary JAL Hotels, and registered offices of JAL Express and JALways are located in the Tennōzu Isle area."Information & Reservations." Japan Airlines."Company Profile." Japan Airlines."Company Profile." JALways."会社案内." JAL Express."Company Profile." Japan Airlines."会社概要." JAL Hotels. "本社 ： 〒140-0002 東京都品川区東品川２-４-11 JALビル１３F." In addition, Jalux, a subsidiary, has its head office in the I·S Building."Corporate Profile." Jalux. "Head Office I·S Building, 3-32-42 Higashi Shinagawa, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo" One group of employees moved into the building on July 26, 2010, and one on August 2, 2010."Notice of Office Relocation." Jalux.

Other offices

Other companies maintain branch offices or research facilities in Shinagawa. Sony operates the Gotenyama Technology Center and the Osaki East Technology Center in Shinagawa."Access & Map." Sony. Sony used to have its headquarters in Shinagawa."Corporate Data." Sony. September 9, 2008. Sony moved to Minato, Tokyo around the end of 2006 and closed the Osaki West Technology Center in Shinagawa around 2007. "Sony Considers Sale of Properties Including Former Headquarters." Bloomberg. August 3, 2006."Sony to close symbol of TV business.." Kyodo News International. February 1, 2007. Adobe Systems maintains its Japan headquarters on the 19th Floor of Gate City Ohsaki near Ōsaki Station,"Locations." Adobe Systems. while Siemens AG has its Japan offices in Takanawa Park Tower."About us > Locations." Siemens K.K.. Phoenix Technologies operates its Japan office on the 8th floor of the Gotanda NN Building in Gotanda."Worldwide Corporate Offices." Phoenix Technologies. Siemens Japan and Philips also have offices in Shinagawa.
Microsoft and ExxonMobil have their Japanese headquarters in the in Konan, Minato, near Shinagawa."Our Office Locations."Retrieved on March 6th, 2011.

Former economic operations

Prior to its dissolution, JAL subsidiary Japan Asia Airways was also headquartered in the JAL Building."会社概要." Japan Asia Airways. October 25, 2005.
GEOS, an English language school company, once had its headquarters in Shinagawa."会社概要." GEOS. February 23, 2009. "〒141-0032 東京都品川区大崎1丁目6番4号 新大崎勧業ビルディング4F" At one time Air Nippon had its headquarters in Shinagawa."World Airline Directory." Flight International. April 1–7, 1998. Nippon Airways" 45.

Places

Education

Universities

Special colleges

Tokyo Metropolitan Government Board of Education operates two special colleges in Shinagawa:

Primary and secondary

Public elementary and junior high schools are operated by the Shinagawa Ward Board of Education. Public high schools are operated by the Tokyo Metropolitan Government Board of Education.
Public high schools in Shinagawa include:

Transport

Important railway stations

Shinagawa Station in neighboring Minato also serves Shinagawa, and is a stop on the high-speed Tōkaidō Shinkansen line.

Rail

Road

Shinagawa is also home to the main motor vehicle registration facility for central Tokyo (located east of Samezu Station). As a result, many license plates in Tokyo are labeled with the name "Shinagawa."

Events

The abduction of Kiyoshi Kariya by the Aum Shinrikyo cult occurred in Shinagawa. On February 28, 1995, cult members abducted Kariya, a public employee, and took him to their facility in Kamikuishiki, Yamanashi. Cult members, including Ikuo Hayashi, injected Kariya with sodium thiopental in order to discover the location of the man's sister (a former Aum member), but Kariya unexpectedly died.The Aum Supreme Truth Terrorist Organization - The Crime library

Sister cities

Shinagawa has sister-city relationships with Auckland in New Zealand, Geneva in Switzerland, and Portland, Maine in the United States.国際交流事業の紹介 | 品川区 ("Introduction to International Relations | Shinagawa") Retrieved on March 10, 2009






