[[Larry King]]

CATEGORIES: 1933 births, Living people, 20th-century American writers, 21st-century American writers, Male actors from Miami, Florida, Male actors from New York City, American agnostics, American columnists, American people of Austrian-Jewish descent, American people of Belarusian-Jewish descent, American people of Russian-Jewish descent, American talk radio hosts, American television talk show hosts, CNN people, Jewish American writers, Jewish agnostics, Miami Dolphins broadcasters, National Football League announcers, National Radio Hall of Fame inductees, American newspaper writers, People from Brooklyn, People from Hollywood, Florida, People from Miami Beach, Florida, Radio personalities from Miami, Florida, World Football League announcers, Writers from Florida, Writers from New York City

{{Infobox person
| name          = Larry King
| image         = LarryKingSept10 (cropped).jpg
| caption       = King attending a ceremony for Bill Maher to receive a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame on September 14, 2010
| birth_name    = Lawrence Leibel Harvey Zeiger
| birth_date    = 
| birth_place   = Brooklyn, New York, U.S.
| other_names   =
| religion      =
| occupation    = Radio and television personality
| years_active  = 1957–present
| spouse        = 

Larry King (born November 19, 1933) is an American television and radio host, actor, voice artist, and comedian whose work has been recognized with awards including two Peabodys and 10 Cable ACE Awards.
He began as a local Florida journalist and radio interviewer in the 1950s and 1960s and became prominent as an all-night national radio broadcaster starting in 1978. From 1985 to 2010, he hosted the nightly interview television program Larry King Live on CNN. He currently hosts Larry King Now on Hulu and RT America  Monday,  Tuesday, Wednesday, and Friday evenings. He also hosts "Politicking with Larry King," a weekly political talk show Thursday evenings on RT America. Accessed September 15. 2013.

Early life

King was born Lawrence Leibel Harvey Zeiger in Brooklyn, New York City, New York on November 19, 1933 to an Austrian immigrant Edward Jonaton Zeiger, a restaurant owner and defense-plant worker, and his wife Jennie (Gitlitz), a garment worker, who emigrated from Belarus.
King's father died at 46 of a heart attack

Career

Miami radio and television

A CBS staff announcer, whom King met by chance, told him to go to Florida, a growing media market where openings still existed for inexperienced broadcasters. King rode a train to Miami.
After initial setbacks, King persisted and got his first job in radio. The manager of a small station, WAHR (now WMBM) in Miami Beach, hired him to clean up and perform miscellaneous tasks. He also did two afternoon newscasts and a sportscast. He was paid $55 a week.
He acquired the name Larry King when the general manager Marshall Simmonds said that Zeiger was too ethnic and difficult to remember, so Larry chose the surname King, which he got from an ad in The Miami Herald for King's Wholesale Liquor, minutes before air.
He started doing interviews on a mid-morning show for WIOD, at Pumpernik's Restaurant in Miami Beach.
His Miami radio show launched him to local stardom. A few years later, in May 1960, he hosted Miami Undercover, airing Sunday nights at 11:30 p.m. on WPST-TV Channel 10 (now WPLG). On the show, he moderated debates on important issues of the time.
King credits his success on local television to the assistance of comedian Jackie Gleason, whose national television variety show was being filmed in Miami Beach during this period. "That show really took off because Gleason came to Miami," King said in a 1996 interview he gave when inducted into the Broadcasters' Hall of Fame. "He did that show and stayed all night with me. We stayed till five in the morning. He didn't like the set, so we broke into the general manager's office and changed the set. Gleason changed the set, he changed the lighting, and he became like a mentor of mine."
During this period, WIOD gave King further exposure as a color commentator for the Miami Dolphins of the National Football League, during their 1970 season and most of their 1971 season. Other staffers covered the Dolphins' games into their 24–3 loss to Dallas in Super Bowl VI. King also lost his weekly column at the Miami Beach Sun newspaper. The charges were dropped on March 10, 1972, and King spent the next several years in reviving his career, including a stint as the color announcer in Louisiana for the Shreveport Steamer of the World Football League in 1974–75 on KWKH. Eventually, King was rehired by WIOD in Miami. For several years during the 1970s in South Florida, he hosted a sports talk-show called "Sports-a-la-King" that featured guests and callers.

National radio

In 1978, King went national, inheriting the nightly talk show slot on the Mutual Broadcasting System, broadcast coast-to-coast, that had been "Long John" Nebel's until his death, and had been pioneered by Herb Jepko.
It was broadcast live Monday through Friday from midnight to 5:30 a.m. Eastern Time. King would interview a guest for the first 90 minutes, with callers asking questions that continued the interview for another 90 minutes. At 3 a.m., he would allow callers to discuss any topic they pleased with him, until the end of the program, when he expressed his own political opinions. That segment was called "Open Phone America." Some of the regular callers used the pseudonyms "The Portland Laugher," "The Miami Derelict," "The Todd Cruz Caller," "The Scandal Scooper," "Mr. Radio" and "The Water Is Warm Caller." "Mr. Radio" made over 200 calls to King during Open Phone America. The show was successful, starting with relatively few affiliates and eventually growing to more than 500. It ran until 1994.
For its final year, the show was moved to afternoons, but, because most talk radio stations at the time had an established policy of local origination in the time-slot (3 to 6 p.m. Eastern Time) that Mutual offered the show, a very low percentage of King's overnight affiliates agreed to carry his daytime show and it was unable to generate the same audience size. The afternoon show was eventually given to David Brenner and radio affiliates were given the option of carrying the audio of King's new CNN evening television program. The Westwood One radio simulcast of the CNN show continued until December 31, 2009.

CNN

He started his Larry King Live CNN show in June 1985,  hosting a broad range of guests from controversial figures of UFO conspiracy theories and alleged psychics,One notable guest is Sylvia Browne, who in 2005 told the Newsweek magazine that King, a believer in the paranormal, asks her to do private psychic readings.  to prominent politicians and leading figures in the entertainment industry, often doing their first or only interview on breaking news stories on his show.
Unlike many interviewers, King has a direct, non-confrontational approach. His reputation for asking easy, open-ended questions has made him attractive to important figures who want to state their position while avoiding being challenged on contentious topics.
In a show dedicated to the surviving Beatles, King asked George Harrison's widow about the song "Something," which was written about Harrison's first wife. He seemed surprised when she did not know very much about the song.
Throughout his career King has interviewed many of the leading figures of his time. 
King also wrote a regular newspaper column in USA Today for almost 20 years, from shortly after that newspaper's origin in 1982 until September 2001.

=Departure=

On June 29, 2010, King announced that after 25 years, he would be stepping down from his nightly job hosting Larry King Live. However, he stated that he would remain with CNN to host occasional specials.
The final edition of Larry King Live aired on December 16, 2010.
On February 17, 2012, CNN announced that he would no longer host specials.

Ora TV

In March 2012, King co-founded Ora TV, a production company, with Mexican business magnate Carlos Slim; the company signed a multi-year exclusive deal with Hulu to exclusively carry King's new talk-oriented web series, Larry King Now, beginning July 17.
On October 23, 2012, King hosted the third-party presidential debate on Ora TV, featuring Jill Stein, Rocky Anderson, Virgil Goode and Gary Johnson."Third-party candidates face off in US debate".  Al Jazeera English.  October 23, 2012.
On January 16, 2013, Ora TV celebrated their 100th episode of Larry King Now.

=Russia Today=

In May 2013 RT America announced that King would be anchoring a new talk show on its network. King said in an advertisement on RT: "I would rather ask questions to people in positions of power, instead of speaking on their behalf."  Dylan Byers, Larry King joins Russian channel RT, Politico, May 29, 2013. He also is bringing his Hulu show Larry King Now to RT. On June 13, 2013 RT previewed Larry King's new Thursday evening political talk show Politicking with Larry King with a discussion of Edward Snowden's leaking of the PRISM surveillance program.com, June 13, 2013.  King stated in early March 2014, during the 2014 Crimean crisis, "I don't work for RT. My podcasts, Larry King Now and Politicking, are licensed for a fee to RT America by New York-based Ora TV.

Other ventures

Larry King remains active as a writer and television journalist. King was the moderator of the sixth Kazenergy Eurasian Forum in Astana, Kazakhstan, an annual forum for Kazakhstan's energy sector occurring in October 2011."KAZENERGY Eurasian Forum." Expo-kz.kz. Retrieved September 2011."The main topic of the VI KAZENERGY Eurasian Forum is: 'Kazakhstan: 20 Years of Sustainable Growth, New Horizons For Investments and Cooperation'." Corporate Social Responsibility in Kazakhstan. Retrieved September 2011."The main topic of the VI KAZENERGY Eurasian Forum is: 'Kazakhstan: 20 Years of Sustainable Growth, New Horizons For Investments and Cooperation'." Rogtecmagazine. Retrieved September 2011.
King also guest starred in episodes of 30 Rock and Gravity Falls. He also had cameos in Ghostbusters  and Bee Movie. King also voiced Doris the Ugly Stepsister in Shrek 2 and its sequels.
King made an appearance alongside his wife, Shawn King, on October 8 edition of WWE Monday Night Raw and participated in a segment with The Miz and Kofi Kingston.  He had served as Raw's Social Media Ambassador the previous week.
King has become a very active user on the social-networking site Twitter, where he posts thoughts and comments on a wide variety of subjects. King states, "I love tweeting, I think it's a different world we've entered. When people were calling in, they were calling in to the show and now on Twitter I'm giving out thoughts, opinions. The whole concept has changed."Larry King on his dream guest, Twitter, and the 100th episode of 'Larry King Now' -- EXCLUSIVE
In December 2012, King endorsed the American-made suspender brand Holdup Suspenders.suspenders.htm.

Charitable works

As a result of heart attacks, he established the Larry King Cardiac Foundation, an organization to which David Letterman, through The Letterman Foundation for Courtesy and Grooming, has also contributed. King gave $1 million to George Washington University's School of Media and Public Affairs for scholarships to students from disadvantaged backgrounds.
On September 3, 2005, following Hurricane Katrina, King aired "How You Can Help", a three-hour special designed to provide a forum and information clearinghouse for viewers to understand and join nationwide and global relief efforts. On January 18, 2010, in the wake the 2010 Haiti earthquake, King aired "Haiti: How You Can Help", a special two-hour edition designed to show viewers how to take action and be a part of the global outreach.  Following the Deepwater Horizon explosion, King aired "Disaster in the Gulf: How You Can Help", a special two-hour edition designed to show viewers how to take action in the clean-up efforts on the Gulf Coast.
On August 30, 2010, King served as the host of Chabad's 30th annual "To Life" telethon, in Los Angeles.
On October 24, 2012, King was a guest speaker at Alberta's first We Day event, a youth empowerment conference, held for young adults as part of the Free the Children movement.

Controversial positions

On September 10, 1990, while on The Joan Rivers Show, Rivers asked King which contestant in the Miss America pageant was "the ugliest." King responded, "Miss Pennsylvania. She was one of the 10 finalists and she did a great ventriloquist bit ... The dummy was prettier."NEWSMAKERS:`Ugliest' beauty offered equal time, The Atlanta Journal and The Atlanta Constitution, September 12, 1990  King was a judge for the September 8, 1990 pageant. King later sent Miss Pennsylvania, Marla Wynne, a dozen long-stemmed roses and a telegram apologizing for saying she was the ugliest contestant in the pageant that year.The People Column, Roanoke Times, September 15, 1990
In 1997, King was one of 34 celebrities to sign an open letter to then-German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, published as a newspaper advertisement in the International Herald Tribune, which protested the treatment of Scientologists in Germany, comparing it to the Nazis' oppression of Jews in the 1930s. "U.S. Celebrities Defend Scientology in Germany". The Washington Post. p. A11. Other signatories included Dustin Hoffman and Goldie Hawn.

Personal life

King has been married eight times, to seven women. Larry Jr. and his wife, Shannon, have three children.
In 1961, King married his third wife, Alene Akins, a Playboy Bunny at one of the magazine's eponymous nightclubs. Larry adopted Alene's son Andy in 1962, and divorced the following year. In 1963, King married his fourth wife, Mary Francis "Mickey" Stuphin, who divorced King. He remarried Akins, with whom he had a second child, Chaia, in 1969. The couple divorced a second time in 1972.  In 1997, Dove Books published a book written by King and Chaia, Daddy Day, Daughter Day. Aimed at young children, it tells each of their accounts of his divorce from Akins.
On September 25, 1976, King married his fifth wife, math teacher and production assistant Sharon Lepore. The couple divorced in 1983.  Daily News.  pp. 5–6.
King met businesswoman Julie Alexander in summer 1989, and proposed to her on the couple's first date, on August 1, 1989. Alexander became King's sixth wife on October 7, 1989, when the two were married in Washington, D.C. Daily News. pp. 7–8. The couple lived in different cities, however, with Alexander in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and King in Washington, D.C., where he worked. They separated in 1990 and divorced in 1992. He became engaged to actress Deanna Lund in 1995, after five weeks of dating, but they remained unmarried.  Daily News  . p. 10.
In 1997, he married his seventh wife, Shawn Southwick, born in 1959 as Shawn Ora Engemann,Daily News, slide show, ibid., p. 11 of 25 a singer, actress, and TV host, but have since stopped the proceedings.
In July 2009, King appeared on The Tonight Show with Conan O'Brien, where he told host O'Brien about his wishes to be cryonically preserved upon death,

Heart disease

On February 24, 1987, King suffered a major heart attack and then had quintuple-bypass surgery. Since then, King has written two books about living with heart disease. Mr. King, You're Having a Heart Attack: How a Heart Attack and Bypass Surgery Changed My Life (1989, ISBN 0-440-50039-7) was written with New York's Newsday science editor B. D. Colen. Taking On Heart Disease: Famous Personalities Recall How They Triumphed over the Nation's #1 Killer and How You Can, Too (2004, ISBN 1-57954-820-2) features the experience of various celebrities with cardiovascular disease including Peggy Fleming and Regis Philbin.
On February 12, 2010, King revealed that he had undergone surgery five weeks earlier to place stents in his coronary artery to remove plaque from his heart. During the segment on Larry King Live which discussed Bill Clinton's similar procedure, King said he was "feeling great" and had been in the hospital for just one day.

Religious views

On Norm Macdonald's video podcast Norm Macdonald Live in April 2013, King stated that he did not believe in a higher power nor did he believe he would be going anywhere after he died.

Awards and nominations

King has received many broadcasting awards. He won the Peabody Award for Excellence in broadcasting for both his radio (1982) and television (1992) shows. He has also won 10 CableACE awards for Best Interviewer and for Best Talk Show Series.
In 1989, King was inducted into the National Radio Hall of Fame,
In 1994, King received the Scopus Award from the American Friends of Hebrew University. In June 1998, he received an Honorary Degree from Brooklyn College, City University of New York, for his life achievements.
He was given the Golden Mike Award for Lifetime Achievement in January 2009, by the Radio & Television News Association of Southern California.
King is an honorary member of the Rotary Club of Beverly Hills. He is also a recipient of the President's Award honoring his impact on media from the Los Angeles Press Club in 2006.
King is the first recipient of the Arizona State University Hugh Downs Award for Communication Excellence,






