[[Leominster]]

CATEGORIES: Leominster, Market towns in Herefordshire, Towns of the Welsh Marches, Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English), Towns in Herefordshire, Post towns in the HR postcode area

Leominster ( south of Ludlow. With a population of approximately 11,700 people, it is the largest of the five towns in the county that surround the City of Hereford.
From 1974 to 1996, Leominster served as the administrative centre for the former local government district of Leominster District.

Toponymy

The town takes its name from a minster, that is a community of clergy in the district of Lene or Leon, probably in turn from an Old Welsh root lei to flow.J. & C. Hillaby, Leominster Minster, Priory, and Borough c.660-1539 (Logaston Press, Almeley, Herefs. 2006), 4-5.  Contrary to certain reports, the name has nothing to do with Leofric, an 11th-century Earl of Mercia (most famous for being the miserly husband of Lady Godiva). The Welsh name for Leominster, still used today on the Welsh side of the nearby border, is Llanllieni.

History

During the Early Middle Ages, Leominster was home to Æthelmod of Leominster, a  Catholic Saxon saint  known to history mainly through the hagiography of the Secgan Manuscript.
According to the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, a raid by Gruffudd ap Llywelyn on Leominster in 1052 resulted in the Battle of Llanllieni, between the Welsh and a combined force of Normans and English Saxons.
Henry II bestowed the minster and its estates on Reading Abbey, which founded a priory at Leominster in 1121, although there was one here from Saxon times. Peter and St. Paul, which now serves as the parish church, is the remaining part of this 12th-century Benedictine monastery. Quatrefoil piers were inserted between 1872–79 by Sir George Gilbert Scott.The Buildings of England: Herefordshire, Nikolaus Pevsner, (1963) p226 ISBN 0-14-071025-6
The priory was ransacked by the Welsh forces of Owain Glyndŵr after their victory at the Battle of Bryn Glas near Pilleth in 1402, along with several local manor houses.
Investigations to the north of the priory in 2005 located the position of the cloister, although most of the stone had been stolen following the Dissolution. Discarded animal bones found on the site when submitted to carbon dating showed that the area was occupied in the 7th century. This agrees with the date of 660 CE associated with the founding myth, which suggests a Christian community was established here by a monk, St. Edfrid, from Northumberland.
Leominster is also the historical home of Ryeland sheep, a breed once famed for its "Lemster" 
From approximately 1748 to 1754, Pinsley Mill in Leominster was home to one of the Paul-Wyatt cotton mills, the first four cotton mills in the world, employing the spinning machines of Lewis Paul and John Wyatt. The mill was financed by Lancashire native Daniel Bourn, and was partly owned by other men from Lancashire.  Bourn introduced his own version of the carding engine to work at this mill, and of the four Paul-Wyatt mills, it may have been the most successful, as shortly after the fire that destroyed the mill, it was reported that the cotton works "had been viewed with great pleasure and admiration by travellers and all who had seen them."Manchester Mercury, reported on 5 November 1754
One of the last ordeals by ducking stool took place in Leominster in 1809, with Jenny Pipes as the final incumbent.

Climate

As with all towns in the United Kingdom, Leominster has a maritime climate, with mild winters and summers. The data below is from a weather station in Preston Wynne, a village about 10 miles South East of Leominster.

Transport

The  A49 £9 million bypass opened in November 1988. The town also has a bus station linking it to Hereford and a number of nearby towns and villages.
Leominster railway station has services to Manchester via Ludlow and to Cardiff via Hereford; links to London are achieved by changing at Hereford, for services via Worcester and Oxford, or at Newport, South Wales.

Schools

Earl Mortimer college, is a state   comprehensive school providing  secondary  education for about 650 pupils. It is located near the centre of the town, next  to the public leisure centre and swimming pool. The town has three primary schools; Leominster Infants School, Leominster Junior School and Westfields Special School. Primary schools in the villages around the town include Ivington,  Kimbolton, Kingsland, Luston and Stoke Prior

Notable people

Twin towns

Leominster is twinned with Saverne in France, and Tengeru in Tanzania.

Local attractions








