[[Venlo Incident]]

CATEGORIES: 1939 in Germany, World War II espionage, 1939 in international relations, Espionage scandals and incidents, Venlo, 1939 in the Netherlands

The Venlo Incident was a covert German Sicherheitsdienst (SD-Security Service) operation where two British SIS (Secret Intelligence Service) agents were abducted on the outskirts of the town of Venlo, the Netherlands, on 9 November 1939."The Scotsman", November 25, 1939, p13Captain S. Payne Best, "The Venlo Incident", first published by Hutchinson & Co,1950. p14-17 The incident was later used by the German Nazi government to link Britain to Georg Elser's failed assassination attempt on German Chancellor Adolf Hitler at the Bürgerbräukeller in Munich, Germany, on 8 November 1939 and to justify Germany's invasion of the Netherlands, while a neutral country, on 10 May 1940. See Documents on German Foreign Policy, Series D, Vol. VIII, 445.

Background

Even after the British declaration of war on Nazi Germany on September 3, 1939, Prime Minister, Neville Chamberlain, was still interested in seeking a comprise peace with Germany before too much blood had been spilt. Allen, Himmler's Secret War: The Covert Peace Negotiations of Heinrich Himmler, Robson Books, London (2005) p 54. 
The British government were well aware of the existence of widespread opposition among the top of the Germany army. During the autumn of 1939 the German opposition was throwing out feelers to the British government all over Europe. In October the Munich lawyer  Josef Müller got in touch with the British through the Vatican with the connivance of Colonel Hans Oster. Theodor Kordt, the younger brother of Erich, pursued similar objectives in Berne. The Swedish industrialist Birger Dahlerus tried to establish peace through an early form of shuttle diplomacy, partly performed on Dutch soil. And in early October the Dutch minister in Ankara, Dr Ph. C. Visser, was communicating peace proposals on the line of the Dahlerus proposals, made by Hitler's former Deputy Chancellor and then ambassador to Turkey, Franz von Papen, to the British ambassador Sir Hugh KnatchbuIl-Hugessen. 2-13  
All diplomatic efforts to avoid the Second World War during the days preceding the German invasion of Poland in 1939 had come to nothing. So when a German refugee named Fischer succeeded in winning the confidence of the exiled Catholic leader, Dr Klaus Speickler, a British intelligence informant in the Netherlands, the British Secret Intelligence Service (SIS) became interested in the information Fischer was offering.

Covert meetings

In early September 1939 a meeting was arranged between Fischer and the British SIS agent Captain Sigismund Payne Best. Aged 54, Best was an experienced British Army intelligence officer who worked under the cover of a businessman residing in The Hague with his Dutch wife. 
Subsequent meetings included Major Richard Henry Stevens, a less-experienced intelligence operative working covertly for the British SIS as the Passport Control Officer in The Hague, Netherlands. To assist Best and Stevens in passing through Dutch mobilised zones near the border with Germany, a young Dutch officer, Lieutenant Dirk Klop, was recruited by Chief of the Dutch Military Intelligence, Major General van Oorschot. Klop was permitted by van Oorschot to sit in on covert meetings but not take part due to the neutrality of the Netherlands. Payne Best, "The Venlo Incident", first published by Hutchinson & Co,1950. p9
Fischer brought to the early meetings participants posing as German officers who supported a plot against Hitler and were interested in establishing Allied peace terms should Hitler be deposed. Payne Best, "The Venlo Incident", first published by Hutchinson & Co,1950. p11.
When Fischer's success in setting up the meetings with the British agents became known, Sturmbannführer (Major) Walter Schellenberg of the Foreign Intelligence (Counter-Espionage) section of the Sicherheitsdienst (SD) began coming to the meetings. Masquerading as a "Hauptmann (Captain) Schämmel", Schellenberg was at the time a trusted operative of Heinrich Himmler and was in close contact with Reinhard Heydrich during the Venlo operation. Allen, Himmler's Secret War: The Covert Peace Negotiations of Heinrich Himmler, Robson Books, London (2005) 
At the last meeting between the British SIS agents and the German SD officers on Wednesday November 8, Schellenberg promised to bring a general to the meeting on the following day. Instead the Germans brought the talks to an abrupt end with the kidnapping of Best and Stevens. Payne Best, "The Venlo Incident", first published by Hutchinson & Co,1950. p14.

German motives

For different Germans the covert meetings might have meant different things. Dutch historian, Bob de Graaf as written; 'Hitler, who was kept informed, might have hoped that sooner or later Dutch neutrality would be compromised. Himmler, continually on the outlook for a peace settlement with Britain, might have had hopes that the contacts with MI6 would lead to a compromise, whereafter the Soviet Union, in Himmler's mind Germany's real enemy, could be faced with confidence. To Schellenberg the game meant gathering information about British intelligence activities in Germany. By studying the files he had become especially interested in a so-called 'observer corps' the British were running against the German Luftwaffe. What Schellenberg expected from the meetings were names, as many names as possible of agents working for MI6. To Heydrich, who liked intelligence games for the sake of it, the Spiel with Best and Stevens might have meant anything. But in the light of his continuous efforts to get at Canaris' throat, he might have hoped for revelations about a connection between British officials and a German opposition, which was rooted in Wehrmacht circles'. 2-13 
Press reports== 
The Venlo Incident was first reported in the British Press on November 10, 1939, as follows:

 
While the British press were unaware two British SIS agents were involved in the border incident, Sir Alexander Cadogan, Permanent Under-Secretary for Foreign Affairs, was not, for he recorded in his diary:

Sequence of covert meetings

The covert meetings leading up to the kidnapping as remembered by Captain S. Payne Best in his book "The Venlo Incident" are summarised below. Payne Best, "The Venlo Incident", first published by Hutchinson & Co,1950. p7-14
NOTES: 

Kidnapping of the British agents

Early on 9 November 1939, Schellenberg received orders from Heinrich Himmler to abduct the British SIS agents, Best and Stevens. German SS-Sonderkommandos (SS Special Units) under the operations command of SD man Alfred Naujocks, carried out the orders. 2-13  
Best was at the wheel of his car when he drove into the car park at the Cafe Backus for the meeting planned for 4 pm with Schellenberg. Stevens was sitting beside him while Leiutenant Klop and Jan Lemmens (Best's Dutch driver) were sitting in the back seat. Before Best had time to get out Naujock's SD men arrived in an open car. In a brief shootout, Klop was mortally wounded. After being handcuffed and stood against a wall, Best and Stevens, together with Jan Lemmens were bundled into the SD car. Klop was put into Best's car and both cars were driven off over the border into Germany. Payne Best, The Venlo Incident, first published by Hutchinson & Co,1950. p16-19
Best recalls a full body search was performed on him when they reached Dusseldorf en route to Berlin. At Dusseldorf one of the men who had taken part in the kidnapping told Best the reason for the action was to catch some German's plotting against the Führer who were responsible for the attempt on his life the night before. Payne Best, The Venlo Incident, first published by Hutchinson & Co,1950. p20-22
Lieutenant Dirk Klop was admitted to the Protestant Hospital in Dusseldorf. A doctor on duty recalled years later Klop was unconscious when admitted and died the same day from a gun wound to the head.mythoselser.htm

German account of the kidnapping

A different account (with conflicting details) of the Venlo Incident is told by Günter Peis in "The Man Who Started The War",Günter Peis, The Man Who Started The War, London, 1960 and by Walter Schellenberg in his memoirs. For instance, Best did not know that Schellenburg, still posing as Major Schämmel, was waiting at Cafe Backus at the time of the kidnapping by Naujocks and twelve SD men. When one SD man mistook him as Best, Schellenberg narrowly escaped being shot.

Relationship with failed assassination attempt

Prior to the assassination attempt at the Bürgerbräukeller in Munich on 8 November, Naujocks and his squad had been sent to Dusseldorf to support Schellenberg. Even before his private train had returned from Munich to Berlin, Hitler ordered the British SIS officers in the Netherlands be brought to Berlin for questioning. Himmler issued the order to Schellenberg early in the morning on 9 November.Günter Peis, The Man Who Started The War, London, 1960
Though Georg Elser, a suspect being interrogated in Munich by the Gestapo, insisted he had acted alone, Hitler recognized the propaganda value of the assassination attempt as a means to incite German public resentment against Great Britain. On 21 November Hitler declared he had incontrovertible proof that the British Secret Service was behind the Munich bombing and that two British agents had been arrested near the Dutch border.greyfalcon. On the front page of Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung there were pictures of the conspirators named as, Georg Elser, 'Kaptain Stevens' and 'Mr Best'.
Years later Walter Schellenberg recalled in his memoirs:
"He (Hitler) began to issue detailed directives on the handling of the case to Himmler, Heydrich, and me and gave releases to the press. To my dismay, he became increasingly convinced that the attempt on his life had been the work of the British Intelligence, and that Best and Stevens, working together with Otto Strasser, were the real organizers of this crime. . . Meanwhile a carpenter by the name of Elser had been arrested while trying to escape over the Swiss border. The circumstantial evidence against him was very strong, and finally he confessed. He had built an explosive mechanism into one of the wooden pillars of the Beer Cellar. It consisted of an ingeniously worked alarm clock which could run for three days and set off the explosive charge at any given time during that period. Elser stated that he had first undertaken the scheme entirely on his own initiative, but that later on two other persons had helped him and had promised to provide him with a refuge abroad afterward. He insisted, however, that the identity of neither of them was known to him. . . I thought it possible that the "Black Front" organization of Otto Strasser might have something to do with the matter and that the British Secret Service might also be involved. But to connect Best and Stevens with the Beer Cellar attempt on Hitler's life seemed to me quite ridiculous. Nevertheless that was exactly what was in Hitler's mind. He announced to the press that Elser and the officers of the British Secret Service would be tried together. In high places there was talk of a great public trial, to be staged with the full orchestra of the propaganda machine, for the benefit of the German people. I tried to think of the best way to prevent this lunacy."The Labyrinth: Memoirs Of Walter Schellenberg, Hitler's Chief Of Counterintelligence, 1956, Harper & Brothers.

Fallout

The Nazi press reported that the Gestapo had tricked the British Secret Service into carrying on radio contact for 21 days after Best and Stevens were abducted using the radio transmitter given to them. Himmler is accredited to quipping, 'After a while it became boring to converse with such arrogant and foolish people'. 
The British Foreign Office believed Himmler was involved in the secret Anglo-German contact of autumn 1939, and that the discussions, involving Prime Minister, Neville Chamberlain, and the Foreign Secretary, Lord Halifax, were bona fide peace negotiations. Allen, Himmler's Secret War: The Covert Peace Negotiations of Heinrich Himmler, Robson Books, London (2005) p 65. Historian, Callum MacDonald, shared this view. 8 (1978) No. 4, London 1978 
The damage inflicted on Britain's espionage network in Europe caused new Prime Minister, Winston Churchill to start his own spy and sabotage agency, the Special Operations Executive (SOE) in 1940. 
The Venlo Incident exposed the fact that the Chamberlain government was still seeking to do a deal with Germany while exhorting the nation to a supreme war effort. This outraged Winston Churchill to the extent he was against providing support to German opposition to Hitler for the rest of the war. Payne Best, published by Pen & Sword Books, 2009
Hitler used the Venlo Incident to claim The Netherlands had violated its own neutrality. The presence of the Dutch agent Klop, whose signature on his personal papers was gratefully misused by the Germans, provided sufficient 'proof of cooperation between British and Dutch secret services, and justify an invasion of The Netherlands by Germany in May, 1940.go2war2.htm
Alfred Naujocks was awarded the Iron Cross by Hitler the day after the kidnapping.Günter Peis, The Man Who Started The War, London, 1960
Walter Schellenberg gave evidence against other Nazis at the Nuremberg Trials.  He died in 1952 aged 42.

Imprisonment of the British Agents

After interrogation at the Gestapo Prinz-Albrecht-Strasse headquarters in Berlin, Best and Stevens were sent to the Sachsenhausen concentration camp. Both were held in isolation in the T shaped building reserved for protected prisoners of the Gestapo. Payne Best, The Venlo Incident, first published by Hutchinson & Co,1950.
While at Sachsenhausen Best claimed he corresponded via secret letters with another protected prisoner Georg Elser. Payne Best, The Venlo Incident, first published by Hutchinson & Co,1950, p 94
In January 1941 Stevens was moved from Sashsenhausen to the bunker at Dachau concentration camp where he remained until evacuated with Best and other protected prisoners in April, 1945. Payne Best, The Venlo Incident, first published by Hutchinson & Co,1950.
In February, 1945, Best was transferred briefly to Buchenwald concentration camp and then to the 'bunker' at Dachau concentration camp on April 9, 1945. Coincidently this was the same day Georg Elser was killed at Dachau. Payne Best, The Venlo Incident, first published by Hutchinson & Co,1950.
On April 24, 1945, Best and Stevens left Dachau with 140 other protected 'high-profile' prisoners in a convoy bound for South Tyrol. At the lakeside Prags Wildbad Hotel near Niederdorf, South Tyrol, they were liberated by the advancing US Army on May 4, 1945Captain S. Payne Best, The Venlo Incident, first published by Hutchinson & Co,1950.

Radio and TV

The Venlo Incident was described in episode 1 of BBC Radio 4's "MI6: A Century in the Shadows", broadcast on Monday, 27 July 2009.

Fictional portrayals

The Venlo Incident is the inspiration for the ending of the first episode in the BBC comedy-drama Private Schulz. It was also used by William Boyd in his 2006 book, Restless. Venlo and Klop are renamed, respectively, Prenslo and Lt. Joos. The two SIS officers are not named. Café Backus is named.

Bibliography




