[[Axion]]

CATEGORIES: Bosons, Dark matter, Astroparticle physics, Hypothetical elementary particles

The axion is a hypothetical elementary particle postulated by the Peccei–Quinn theory in 1977 to resolve the strong CP problem in quantum chromodynamics (QCD). If axions exist and have low mass within a specific range, they are of interest as a possible component of cold dark matter.

History

Reasons for prediction

As shown by Gerardus 't Hooft, strong interactions of the standard model, QCD, possess a non-trivial vacuum structure that in principle permits the violation of the combined symmetries of charge conjugation and parity, collectively known as CP. Together with effects generated by the weak interactions, the effective periodic strong CP violating term,  could have any value between 0 and 2π, this presents a naturalness problem for the standard model. Why should this parameter find itself so close to 0? (Or, why should QCD find itself CP-preserving?) This question constitutes what is known as the strong CP problem.
One simple solution exists: if at least one of the quarks of the standard model is massless,   becomes unobservable; i.e. it vanishes from the theory. However, empirical evidence strongly suggests that none of the quarks are massless and so the strong CP problem persists.
In 1977, Roberto Peccei and Helen Quinn postulated a more elegant solution to the strong CP problem, the Peccei–Quinn mechanism. The idea is to effectively promote 

Experimental searches

A number of experiments have attempted to detect axions, including at least one that has claimed positive results.
In the Italian PVLAS experiment polarized light propagates through the magnetic field of a 5 T dipole magnet, searching for a small anomalous rotation of the direction of polarization. The concept of the experiment was first put forward in 1986 by Luciano Maiani, Roberto Petronzio and Emilio Zavattini,.  However, there are other possible sources for such an effect besides axions. Axion signature may be QED CERN Courier, 2006-10-05
Several experiments search for axions of astrophysical origin using the Primakoff effect. This effect causes conversions of axions to photons and vice versa in strong electromagnetic fields. Axions can be produced in the Sun's core when x-rays scatter off electrons and protons in the presence of strong electric fields and are converted to axions. The CAST experiment is currently underway to detect these axions by converting them back to x-rays in a strong magnetic field.
The Axion Dark Matter Experiment (ADMX) searches for light, weakly interacting axions saturating the dark matter halo of our galaxy.   The microwave cavity experiment known as ADMX in 1996–2010 failed to detect axions having a mass range of 1.98–2.17 µeV and a frequency between 450 and 850 MHz.
Another means of searching for axions is by conducting so called "light shining through walls" experiments,
On 9 July 2007, a paper submitted to arXiv by Carlo Rizzo and other researchers from the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique indicated with a confidence level of 94% or higher, that they believed the results published by the PVLAS experiment, in Italy, were incorrect and did not prove the existence of the axion.  Initially, the team researched the matter after their claim that the axion coupling inferred from the PVLAS experiment did not match with experiments conducted in 2007 and earlier in 2006,Andriamonje,S., et al. (CAST Collaboration), Journal of Cosmological Astroparticle Physics 4, 10 (2007); Duffy, L. D, et al., Physical Review D, vol 74, 110406 (2006) and thus required review.
The experiment conducted by Rizzo's team differed from the approach of the Italian researchers in the fact that at the end of a vacuum chamber, an aluminium plate was placed to prevent photons from an adjacent laser from passing through the plate, where axions would simply pass through the plate and be converted back into photons, and were able to observe a small-portion of the supposed-converting particles—to the number of  photons.
In the use of optical measurement and pulsating beams of light, the team showed through illustration of exclusion curves compared to the PVLAS experiment and another conducted by the BFRT,  that the axion had been ruled out but still remained a valid hypothesis;  the experiment counting as an important step in the understanding of the particle, with the possibility of a very weak coupled axion.
A few days earlier, on the 23 June, the PVLAS had submitted a paper to arXiv, passes.
Resonance effects of axions may be evident in Josephson junction devices.
Axions and other light bosons are also expected to have an observable signature in various astrophysical settings. In particular, several recent works have proposed the existence of axion-like particles as a possible solution to the apparent transparency of the Universe to TeV gamma-ray radiation.
[/ref] It has also been demonstrated in a few recent works that, on account of the large magnetic fields threading the atmospheres of compact astrophysical objects (e.g., magnetars), such environments will convert photons to axions much more efficiently than most laboratory experiments, over a broad axion mass range. This, in turn, would give rise to distinct absorption-like features in the spectra of such objects which can be observed by current telescopes and, therefore, significantly increase our sensitivity to axion detection.

Axions in condensed-matter physics

A term analogous to the one that must be added to Maxwell's equations also appears in recent theoretical models for topological insulators.  This term leads to several interesting predicted properties at the interface between topological and normal insulators.    In this situation the field θ describes something very different from its use in high-energy physics.

Properties

Predictions

One theory of axions relevant to cosmology had predicted that they would have no electric charge, a very small mass in the range from 10−6 to , and very low interaction cross-sections for strong and weak forces. Because of their properties, axions interact only minimally with ordinary matter. Axions are predicted to change to and from photons in the presence of strong magnetic fields, and this property is used for creating experiments to detect axions.

=Supersymmetry=

In supersymmetric theories the axion has both a scalar and a fermionic superpartner. The fermionic superpartner of the axion is called the axino, the scalar superpartner is called the saxion. In some models, the saxion is the dilaton.
They are all bundled up in a chiral superfield.
The axion has been predicted to be the lightest supersymmetric particle in such a model.[ref]

