[[London Post Office Railway]]

CATEGORIES: London Post Office Railway, Electric railways in the United Kingdom, Electric locomotives of Great Britain, Industrial railways in England, Underground railways in the United Kingdom, 2 ft gauge railways in England, Subterranean London, History of rail transport in London, Postal history of the United Kingdom, Postal infrastructure in London

The Post Office Railway, also known as Mail Rail, was a 

Geography

It ran east–west from Paddington Head District Sorting Office in the west to the Eastern Head District Sorting Office at Whitechapel in the east, a distance of . It had eight stations, the largest of which was underneath Mount Pleasant, but by 2003 only three stations remained in use because the sorting offices above the other stations had been relocated.

History

In 1911 a plan evolved to build an underground railway  longRomance of London's Underground, Ayer Publishing from Paddington to Whitechapel serving the main sorting offices along the route; road traffic congestion was causing unacceptable delays. The contract to build the tunnels was won by John Mowlem and Co. Most of the line was constructed using the Greathead shield system, with limited amounts of hand-mining for connecting tunnels at stations.
The main line has a single  Stations are at a much shallower depth, with a 1-in-20 gradient into the stations. The gradients assist in slowing the trains when approaching stations, and accelerating them away. There is also less distance to lift mail from the stations to the surface. At Oxford Circus the tunnel runs close to the Bakerloo line tunnel of the London Underground.
During 1917 work was suspended due to the shortage of labour and materials. By June 1924 track laying had started. In February 1927 the first section, between Paddington and the West Central District Office, was made available for training. The line became available for the Christmas parcel post in 1927 and letters were carried from February 1928.
In 1954 plans were developed for a new Western District Office at Rathbone Place, which required a diversion, opening in 1958.  It was not until 3 August 1965 that the new station and office were opened by the Postmaster General, Anthony Wedgwood-Benn. The disused section was used as a store tunnel; some parts of it still have the track in place.

Closure

A Royal Mail press release in April 2003 said that the railway would be closed and mothballed at the end of May that year. Royal Mail had earlier stated that using the railway was five times more expensive than using road transport for the same task. The Communication Workers Union claimed the actual figure was closer to three times more expensive but argued that this was the result of a deliberate policy of running the railway down and using it at only one-third of its capacity. Despite a report by the Greater London Authority in support of continued use, the railway was closed in the early hours of 31 May 2003.
In April 2011 an urban exploration group called the "Consolidation Crew" published accounts of illicit access to the tunnels. Detailed photography and text revealed that the railway is still largely in good condition, despite some natural decay.

Future development

In October 2013 the British Postal Museum & Archive announced that it is planning to open part of the network to the public.

Rolling stock

The first stock was delivered in 1926 with the opening of the system. All stock used was electrically powered.

Electric locomotives

Electric units

Some trains have been preserved at the Launceston Steam Railway.Launceston Steam Railway

In fiction

Similar railways

A pneumatic underground railway was used by the Post Office in London between 1863 and 1874 using individual wheeled capsules, operated by the London Pneumatic Despatch Company.
In 1910 a 
The Chicago Tunnel Company delivered freight, parcels, and coal, and disposed of ash and excavation debris. It operated an elaborate network of  tunnels running under the streets throughout the central business district including and surrounding the "Loop".





Literature




