[[1991 FIFA Women's World Cup]]

CATEGORIES: 1991 FIFA Women's World Cup, FIFA Women's World Cup tournaments, International football (soccer) competitions hosted by China, Sport in Guangdong, United States women's national soccer team, Women's football in China, 1991 in women's football, 1991 in Chinese football

The 1991 FIFA Women's World Cup was the inaugural FIFA Women's World Cup, the world championship for women's national association football teams.
It was won by the United States, Total attendance was 510,000, an average per match of 19,615. In the opening match at the same stadium, Norway had been defeated 4–0 by hosts China. Goalkeeper Zhong Honglian, of China, posted the first official "clean sheet" in the tournament.
The 12 qualified teams were divided into three groups of four (A to C). The top two teams and the two best third place finishers from the three groups advanced to the knockout round of eight teams.

Venues

Teams

Twelve teams qualified for the 1991 FIFA Women's World Cup final tournament. Each of the six FIFA confederations had at least one representative.

Squads

For a list of the squads that disputed the final tournament, see 1991 FIFA Women's World Cup squads.

Match officials

For the first time in FIFA competition, six female officials were included. All functioned as assistant referees, except for Cláudia Vasconcelos who took charge of the third place play–off; becoming the first woman to referee a match sanctioned by FIFA.
|}

Tournament review

FIFA's technical report demonstrates that, after the tournament, players and officials were undecided whether to persist with 80 minute matches, or to change to 90 minutes in line with men's football. Opinion was also divided about the suitability of using a size five football. Some teams reported difficulty in sourcing good quality equipment in the correct size.
The tournament was considered a major success in the quality of play and attendances at the games. FIFA president João Havelange wrote that:
The perceived success of the tournament was a significant factor in the subsequent inclusion of women's football in the 1996 Summer Olympics.

Group Stage

Group A

Group B

Group C

Knockout stage

Quarterfinals

Semifinals

Third Place

Final

For three days prior to the final both teams stayed at the White Swan Hotel, a cost saving measure which upset the players. Many felt that male teams would not be asked to share a hotel before a game of comparable importance.
Norway's Birthe Hegstad had played for American coach Anson Dorrance at North Carolina Tar Heels women's soccer from 1985 to 1988.

Awards

Goalscorers



Bibliography




