[[L'Hôpital's rule]]

CATEGORIES: Articles containing proofs, Theorems in calculus, Theorems in real analysis, Limits (mathematics)

In calculus, l'Hôpital's rule (
The Stolz–Cesàro theorem is a similar result involving limits of sequences, but it uses finite difference operators rather than derivatives.
In its simplest form, l'Hôpital's rule states that for functions :
If
then
The differentiation of the numerator and denominator often simplifies the quotient and/or converts it to a determinate form, allowing the limit to be evaluated more easily.

General form

If either
or
then

Requirement that the limit exists

The requirement that the limit

Examples

Complications

Sometimes l'Hôpital's rule does not lead to an answer in a finite number of steps unless a transformation of variables is applied. Examples include the following:
A common pitfall is using l'Hôpital's rule with some circular reasoning to compute a derivative via a difference quotient. For example, consider the task of proving the derivative formula for powers of x:
Applying l'Hôpital's rule and finding the derivatives with respect to h of the numerator and the denominator yields  as expected. However, differentiating the numerator required the use of the very fact that is being proven.  This is an example of begging the question, since one may not assume the fact to be proven during the course of the proof.

Other indeterminate forms

Other indeterminate forms, such as , convert the difference of two functions to a quotient:
where l'Hôpital's rule was applied in going from (1) to (2) and then again in going from (3) to (4).
l'Hôpital's rule can be used on indeterminate forms involving exponents by using logarithms to "move the exponent down". Here is an example involving the indeterminate form :
Thus

Other methods of evaluating limits

Although l'Hôpital's rule is a powerful way of evaluating otherwise hard-to-evaluate limits, it is not always the easiest way. Consider
This limit may be evaluated using l'Hôpital's rule:
It is valid to move the limit inside the cosine function because the cosine function is continuous.
But a simpler way to evaluate this limit is to use a substitution.  approaches zero. So,
The final limit may be evaluated using l'Hôpital's rule or by noting that it is the definition of the derivative of the sine function at zero.
Still another way to evaluate this limit is to use a Taylor series expansion:
For , the expression in parentheses is bounded, so the limit in the last line is zero.

Geometric interpretation

Consider the curve in the plane whose , i.e.
Suppose  is the limit of the slopes of tangents at the points approaching zero.

Proof of l'Hôpital's rule

Special case

The proof of l'Hôpital's rule is simple in the case where  and where a finite limit is found after the first round of differentiation. It is not a proof of the general l'Hôpital's rule because it is stricter in its definition, requiring both differentiability and that c be a real number. Since many common functions have continuous derivatives (e.g. polynomials, sine and cosine, exponential functions), it is a special case worthy of attention.
The proof of a more general version of L'Hôpital's rule is given below.

General proof

The following proof is due to .
The definition of m(x) and M(x) will result in an extended real number, and so it is possible for them to take on the values ±∞.  In the following two cases, m(x) and M(x) will establish bounds on the ratio f/g.
The limit superior and limit inferior are necessary since the existence of the limit of f/g has not yet been established.
We need the facts that

and
Note: In case 2 we did not use the assumption that f(x) diverges to infinity within the proof. This means that if |g(x)| diverges to infinity as x approaches c and both f and g satisfy the hypotheses of l'Hôpital's rule, then no additional assumption is needed about the limit of f(x): It could even be the case that the limit of f(x) does not exist. In this case, L'Hopital's theorem is actually a consequence of Cesàro–Stolz (see proof at 
In the case when |g(x)| diverges to infinity as x approaches c and f(x) converges to a finite limit at c, then l'Hôpital's rule would be applicable, but not absolutely necessary, since basic limit calculus will show that the limit of f(x)/g(x) as x approaches c must be zero.

Corollary

A simple but very useful consequence of l'Hopital's rule is a well-known criterion for differentiability. It states the following:

Proof



Notes






