[[Meagan Good]]

CATEGORIES: 1981 births, Living people, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, Actors from Santa Clarita, California, Actresses from Los Angeles, California, African-American actresses, African-American Christians, African-American film producers, American actresses of Puerto Rican descent, American child actresses, American film actresses, American people of Barbadian descent, American people of Cherokee descent, American people of Jewish descent, American people of Native American descent, American television actresses, Christians of Jewish descent, Hispanic and Latino American actresses, People from the San Fernando Valley

Meagan Monique Good (born August 8, 1981) is an American film and television actress and occasional film producer. Beginning her career at the age of four, Good has appeared in numerous commercials, television shows, feature films, and music videos.
In 2011, Good featured in an ensemble cast of the highly successful film version of Think Like a Man. She played Joanna Locasto, the lead character on the NBC drama series Deception.

Early life and education

Good was born in Panorama City, Los Angeles, California. Her mother, Tyra Wardlow-Doyle, worked as Good's manager into her teens, and her father, Leondis "Leon" Good, is an LAPD police officer. When she was thirteen, Good was cast in her first film, the 1995 hit Friday. Good first began to gain recognition for her performance as troubled teen Cisely Batiste in Kasi Lemmons' critically acclaimed 1997 film Eve's Bayou, which earned Good two award nominations, including her first NAACP Image Award nomination.

Career as an adult

After taking on small film and television roles for the next few years, Good would begin to transition into more mature roles in the early 2000s. From 1999 to 2003, she appeared as Nina on Nickelodeon's hit show Cousin Skeeter. Good later took on small roles in the films 3 Strikes and House Party 4: Down to the Last Minute. 2003 proved to be a major year for Good, as she landed roles in the action-drama Biker Boyz and the romantic-comedy Deliver Us from Eva, which helped her transition from child to adult actress. Good also appeared as the character Vanessa for five episodes during the third season of My Wife and Kids, before being replaced by Brooklyn Sudano for unknown reasons. In 2004, Good starred alongside Jordana Brewster, Sara Foster, and Jill Ritchie in the action film D.E.B.S., and for her performance received a Best Actress nomination at the 2005 Black Movie Awards. She also had small roles in The Cookout, Lance "Un" Rivera's directorial debut, and the teen dance film You Got Served.
In 2005, Good co-starred in the horror film Venom as well as the well-received indie noir Brick. She then played opposite rapper/actor Bow Wow in Malcolm D. Lee's Roll Bounce. In 2006, Good took on the role of Coco, which she felt was her first true lead actress role, in the urban action-drama Waist Deep. Good also voiced a character for the video game Scarface: The World Is Yours that same year. The following year, Good landed a role in the dance movie Stomp the Yard, starring alongside Ne-Yo and childhood friend Columbus Short. In 2008, Good appeared in the horror film One Missed Call and the Mike Myers comedy The Love Guru, and in the latter half of the year could be seen in Saw V. Good also starred in 2009's The Unborn with Gary Oldman and Odette Yustman. Good's most recent role was in 2012's Think Like a Man, a movie based on Steve Harvey's 2009 book Act like a Lady, Think like a Man.
Good has also made appearances in many music videos, by artists such as 50 Cent, Imajin, Isyss (of which Good's sister La'Myia Good is a member), Lil' Johnny, Memphis Bleek, Tyrese, and Will Smith.
She has also started her own production company, Freedom Bridge Entertainment, with Marlon Olivera, and fellow actors Tamara Bass and Ty Hodges.

Blue dress controversy

Good wore a plunging royal blue dress designed by Michael Costello to the June 30, 2013 BET Awards ceremony. The dress caused a controversy on both traditional and social media because Good had recently married Sony Pictures Executive and Seventh-day Adventist pastor Devon Franklin and she was presenting the BET Award for Best Gospel Artist.

Background

According to Christine Thomasos of The Christian Post, Good has a history of defending her stylistic choices of presenting herself as a "sexy Christian". She had stated that "there is a classy way to do everything and there is nothing wrong with being sexy or having sex appeal and I think that I am definitely going to be someone who is boldly going to go out to the masses and be someone who say, ' Look! Women its okay'..." during a speaking engagement earlier in the year. Good and Franklin had wed on June 16, 2012 at Triunfo Creek Winery in Malibu, California.

Design

The royal blue dress was designed by Michael Costello. It had a  neckline that plunged to her midriff and a front slit that rose to her mid thigh. According to Fashion & Style journalist Jessica Durham, "the hemline extended behind her into a sweeping train".

Reception

Los Angeles Times journalist Greg Braxton sarcastically queried whether a new social rule should be put in place: "Should there be another commandment: 'Thou shall not wear skin-bearing dresses when presenting religious awards?'" His column was one of many that questioned the propriety of a cleavage bearing dress given her role as a presenter of a gospel award.
Julee Wilson of The Huffington Post noted that Good "stole the show" at the BET Awards but described the controversy as follows: "the night's holiest honor came with a side of cleavage, which definitely got people talking". Wilson also noted that the wide-ranging public response included a sizeable proportion that wondered how a fashion mishap was avoided, specifically wondering about her use of fashion tape.
Amethyst Tate of International Business Times said that Good "pulled out all the stops", comparing the dress to the Green Versace dress of Jennifer Lopez and describing Good's voluptuous figure.
Levy described the out fit as "raunchy". Fashion & Style editors selected her as "worst dressed" at the ceremony.
Good responded to the controversy via Instagram:

Personal life

Good currently lives in Studio City, California.
Although she was not raised in the church, Good is a Christian, considers herself a very spiritual person and has stated in numerous interviews that she would not do roles that she feels might "disappoint God". She explained in an interview that Jesus tops her hero list and the last book she read was the Bible. DallasBlack. Retrieved on 2012-07-03.
In early April 2012, Good became engaged to boyfriend DeVon Franklin, an executive for Columbia Pictures and a Seventh-day Adventist preacher. The two began dating in 2011 and were married on June 16, 2012, in Malibu, California. (2012-06-17) "Meagan Good Weds in Malibu". People. Retrieved 2012-07-03.

Filmography

Film

Television

Award nominations








