[[Jesus Jones]]

CATEGORIES: British techno music groups, English alternative rock groups, English electronic music groups, Musical groups established in 1986, Musical groups from London, British industrial music groups, Industrial rock musical groups, Alternative dance musical groups, 1986 establishments in the United Kingdom

Jesus Jones are a British alternative dance band. The Wiltshire-based group, formed in late 1988, recorded and performed in the late 1980s, throughout the 1990s, and into the 2000s. They are best remembered for their track, "Right Here, Right Now", an international hit which was subsequently globally licensed for promotional and advertising campaigns. They are also well-remembered for the songs "Real Real Real," "International Bright Young Thing" and "Info Freako".

Career

Formation and Liquidizer (1986-1989)

Incorporating elements of electronic music styles such as house and techno to an indie rock format, along with fellow British groups such as The Shamen, Pop Will Eat Itself and EMF, Jesus Jones were one of the leading purveyors of the early 1990s indie dance scene.  The band is led by Mike Edwards. In late 1988, while on holiday in Spain, Mike Edwards, Iain Baker, and Jerry DeBorg decided to leave the band they were currently in, and form their own band. The name of the band came about when they realised that they were three "Joneses" sitting on a beach in Spain surrounded by people called Jesus.
They achieved initial critical acclaim with their 1989 album Liquidizer, and in particular, the single "Info Freako", which featured buzzing rock guitars with samples and a hip-hop sensibility, relatively new at the time. The track was particularly championed by Bruno Brookes on his BBC Radio 1 programme.

Doubt and Perverse (1990-1995)

In the spring of 1990, Jesus Jones recorded their second album, Doubt, but their record label was forced to delay its release until the beginning of 1991. The album sold well, due to the success of their best-known hit "Right Here, Right Now". The song is about the swift end of the Cold War, and was a No. 2 hit in the US but reached only No. 31 in the UK.  It was resurrected in 2006 as an advertising jingle for the American retailer Kmart, an image campaign for CBS News, and was used in promotional advertisements for the now defunct television channel, TechTV. Ford Motors was using "Right Here, Right Now" in their 2010 televisual advertising campaign. The song was also remixed by The Feelers to be used in advertising for the 2011 Rugby World Cup. In June 1990, Jesus Jones appeared at the Glastonbury Festival.
Other singles from Doubt included "Real, Real, Real" and "International Bright Young Thing", which became two of their biggest hit singles in the UK, reaching No. 19 and No. 7 respectively in the UK Singles Chart. In 1991, Jesus Jones were the only UK winners when they won the 'Best Newcomer' award at the MTV Awards. In April 1991, the British music magazine NME reported that their US tour had sold out before Jesus Jones arrived in the country.
The follow-up to Doubt was Perverse (1993) which, although a big seller, did not reach the worldwide hit status of Doubt. Perverse was one of the first rock albums recorded entirely digitally.com

Already and London (1996-2003)

After the release of the Perverse album, Jesus Jones took an extended hiatus and did not return to the recording studio until December 1996. After the recording of their fourth album, drummer Gen left the band before the album was released. They released their fourth album, titled Already, in 1997 after which Jesus Jones and their record label EMI parted company. The final months of the band are chronicled in the PDF book written by Mike Edwards "Death Threats From An 8 Year Old In The Seychelles" which was available for a time from the band's website. The band remained in contact and came back with a new drummer Tony Arthy with the low-selling London in 2001 on the indie record label Mi5 Recordings. EMI issued Never Enough: the Best of Jesus Jones, a greatest hits compilation album whilst, in the meantime, the band moved from the North American-only Mi5 to the newly established Mi5 Recordings UK.

Recent activities (2004-present)

In 2004 they released the EP "Culture Vulture".
Since the mid-2000s, Jesus Jones have continued performing live off and on. To date, no new material from the band has been announced.
"Right Here, Right Now" being used as the backing track for the 2011 Rugby World Cup ticket TV commercial in New Zealand. The cover version by
kiwi band "The Feelers" is being used.
In 2010, a series of download albums were released to Amazon.co.uk. They were six different albums by Jesus Jones containing 'in concert' performances at the BBC. Most of them were EPs but some were live albums.
They are due to be releasing a new compilation album in 2011 which will contain many of their B-side tracks and some unreleased rarities.
In August 2011 the band went on a short tour (dubbed on one poster "The World's Smallest World Tour"), playing 3 shows in various Australian cities before closing with a show in Japan.  There has also been a suggestion of the possibility of new material in the near future, but that is speculation on the part of the band member maintaining the band's Facebook page (likely Iain Baker).
In November 2011 the band were due to perform in Birmingham, UK (1 November) and London, UK (2 November) but these dates were postponed due to Al taking ill. They were rescheduled for January 2012 (27 January - Birmingham and 28 January in London. Also in November, the band announced the news of their first album in 9 years, The Collection, containing entirely band chosen tracks. CD1 contains previously released but less-known B-sides and album tracks and the like. CD2 is made up of new previously unreleased demos and full recordings. This was released in late December 2011.
The band also toured the UK in December 2013 as part of The Wonder Stuff's 'Sleigh The UK' tour.
It was announced at 3pm on Wednesday 1 January 2014 that original drummer Simon 'Gen' Matthews was to return after drummer Tony Arthy decided to retire from drumming to allow him to focus on other business ventures.

Band members

Discography

Studio Albums

Compilation Albums

Singles

Other






