[[Maple Town]]

CATEGORIES: 1986 anime films, 1986 anime television series, 1987 anime films, 1987 anime television series, 1980s Nickelodeon shows, 1980s toys, Television programs featuring anthropomorphic characters, TV Asahi shows

Maple Town, known as  It focuses on the adventures of Patty Rabbit, Bobby Bear, and their families, in a small utopian anthropomorphic city named Maple Town. The series gave way to a 50-episode sequel, New Maple Town Stories: Palm Town Chapter, which made Patty Rabbit (and her voice actor, Maya Okamoto) the only ongoing member from both series, although Maple Town's citizens made cameos from time to time. To date, this has not seen an official English release.
The program spawned collectible figurines with changeable clothing as well as houses, furniture, and vehicles; Tonka was the licensee and manufacturer in the US market.
VHS compilations of Maple Town appeared in North America, Europe and Japan during the late 1980s and early 1990s. As of 2009, official DVDs of the show have only surfaced in Spain with no release plans announced for other territories (including Japan and the United States of America).

Plot

Set in Canada  However due to a train heist by the sly—if usually "endearingly" unsuccessful—thief, Wild Wolf, he stole the mailbag from her father and made his eacape in the forest. Soon she follows after him alone to retrieve the mailbag. In the midst of getting the bag back from the thief, she befriends a boy of her age named Bobby Bear who has the bag. As they both escaped from Wild Wolf and outwitted him, they deliver the mailbag back safely to her father. Soon, the Rabbit Family made their stay at Maple Town as mail carriers and the bitter, yet sweet friendship of Patty and Bobby begins to blossom. At the same time trying to foil Wild Wolf's plans.

Characters

Credits

Japanese version:
US version:

Voice cast

English

Japanese

Episodes

Production

Produced of Toei Animation, Asatsu and Asahi Broadcasting, Maple Town was created by Chifude Asakura and directed by Sailor Moon's Junichi Sato. It served as one of the first projects for Kunihiko Ikuhara, who would later go on to join the crew of Sailor Moon and Revolutionary Girl Utena. for some of the show's later episodes.

In the United States

In October 1986, toy manufacturer Tonka acquired the property for US$2.5–3 million and became its US licensee, launching a toy line and ad campaign early the following year. An English-dubbed version, airing in tandem with the toys' promotion, starred actress Janice Adams as Mrs. Maple in its book-ending live-action segments. Mrs. Maple was the only human inhabitant of the title town in this version, and she offered every episode's moral lesson to audiences. The voice cast included Reba West as Patty Rabbit and Steve Kramer as Wilde Wolf.
The English version of Maple Town was produced by Saban Entertainment and The Maltese Companies, the latter of which also produced Spiral Zone, another syndicated series in which and in whose licensing Tonka was involved, and the 1988 animated feature Pound Puppies and the Legend of Big Paw.

Broadcast history

The original Maple Town series aired on Sunday mornings in Japan on TV Asahi, from 19 January 1986 until 11 January 1987. Following its last of 52 episodes, its follow-up, , aired in the same 8:30 a.m. slot.
In late 1986, Saban Entertainment and toy maker Tonka picked it up for the North American market; the latter invested US$7 million on television ads for the toy line.
Around the late 1980s and early 1990s, a number of European stations also aired Maple Town in their various native languages. In Spain, TVE aired the program under the title La aldea del arce, starting in 1987. It also aired on RTL Veronique in the Netherlands (as Avonturen in Maple Town); in Finland under the title Seikkailumetsä; in Sweden as Äventyrsskogen; and on Hungary's RTL Klub channel as Juharfalvi történetek.
As with Japan, several other countries aired both series of the Maple Town franchise. In Italy, Mediaset's Italia 1 broadcast both iterations of Maple Town during the late 1980s (under the titles Maple Town: Un nido di simpatia and Evviva Palm Town).

Home video

During the 1990s, Toei Video released a ten-tape collection of Maple Town, each consisting of three episodes in their original airing order.
Select episodes of Saban's US dub were released from late 1987 until 1990 by Family Home Entertainment and Tonka Home Video. Each tape consisted of two stories each, except for the first release, "Welcome to Maple Town". No less than eight English episodes were distributed in the UK by the now-defunct M.S.D. (Multiple Sound Distributors) label.
In the Netherlands, CNR Video released a Dutch dub of the first two episodes in 1992. The stories were entitled "De Overval op de Trein" and "Voor het eerst naar de nieuwe school" in the Dutch language.
The entire original series has been released on DVD in Spain by Divisa Home Video, and Hungary's Fümoto has released some episodes onto that format. As of 2009, no other plans for a DVD premiere have been announced elsewhere.








