[[Lester Bangs]]

CATEGORIES: 1948 births, 1982 deaths, American music journalists, Writers from California, Drug-related deaths in New York, People from El Cajon, California, People from Escondido, California, 20th-century American writers

Leslie Conway "Lester" Bangs (December 14, 1948 – April 30, 1982) was an American music journalist, author, and musician. He wrote for Creem and Rolling Stone magazines and was known for his leading influence in rock music criticism. Random House. Ed. Ulf Lindberg. Publisher Peter Lang, 2005. ISBN 0-8204-7490-8, ISBN 978-0-8204-7490-8 p. 176.

Early life

Bangs was born in Escondido, California, the son of Norma Belle (née Clifton) and Conway Leslie Bangs, a truck driver.

Career

In 1969 Bangs became a freelance writer after reading an ad in Rolling Stone soliciting readers' reviews. His first piece was a negative review of the MC5 album Kick Out The Jams, which he sent to Rolling Stone with a note requesting that if the magazine were to pass on publishing the review, that he receive a reason for their decision; however, no reply was forthcoming as the magazine did indeed publish the review.
Bangs wrote about Janis Joplin's death by drug overdose, "It's not just that this kind of early death has become a fact of life that has become disturbing, but that it's been accepted as a given so quickly." In 1973, Jann Wenner fired Bangs from Rolling Stone, a negative review of Canned Heat being the final event. Let it blurt, p. 95 at Google Books  He moved to Detroit to edit and write for Creem. After leaving Creem, he wrote for  The Village Voice, Penthouse, Playboy, New Musical Express, and many other publications.
Bangs was enamored of the noise music of Lou Reed. Art, Time and Technology: Histories of the Disappearing Body (2005) Berg, p. 110 Bangs wrote the essay/interview "Let Us Now Praise Famous Death Dwarves" about Reed in 1975. Milk it!: collected musings on the alternative music explosion of the 90s,  p. 188 at Google Books
At one point he climbed onto the stage while the J. Geils Band were playing in concert, and typed a supposed review of the event, in full view of the audience.
His review of Black Sabbath's first album in Rolling Stone was scathing, rating them as Cream wannabes: 

Style

Bangs adopted a radical and critical style of working, apparent in this quote:


Music

Bangs was also a musician in his own right. In 1976, he and Peter Laughner recorded an acoustic improvisation in the Creem office. 
In 1979, he released, as a solo artist, a 7" vinyl single named "Let It Blurt/Live", mixed by John Cale. The following year, he traveled to Austin, Texas, and met a punk rock group named the Delinquents. During his stay in Austin, he recorded an album as Lester Bangs and the Delinquents, entitled Jook Savages on the Brazos.
In 1981, he teamed up with Joey Ramone's brother Mickey Leigh, to put together a New York City group named Birdland. Their only album, mixed by Ed Stasium, was released in 1986.
In 1990 The Mekons released the EP F.U.N. 90 with Bangs on vocals in the song "One Horse Town".

In popular culture

Excerpts from an interview with Lester Bangs appeared in the last two episodes of Tony Palmer's seventeen-episode television documentary entitled All You Need Is Love: The Story of Popular Music.
He was portrayed in the 2000 movie Almost Famous by Philip Seymour Hoffman.
Lester's formative years are the subject of a documentary, A Box Full of Rocks: The El Cajon Years of Lester Bangs (director: Raul Sandelin) released in 2013.
Bangs is mentioned in the lyrics to the R.E.M. hit "It's the End of the World as We Know It (And I Feel Fine)".

Death

Bangs died in New York City on April 30, 1982, of an accidental overdose of Darvon, Valium, and NyQuil. Hal Leonard Corporation. p. 56.

Selected works

By Lester Bangs

About Lester Bangs

Works citing Lester Bangs






