[[Al Goldstein]]

CATEGORIES: 1936 births, 2013 deaths, Adult magazine publishers (people), American pornographers, American magazine founders, Businesspeople from New York City, People from Pompano Beach, Florida, Jewish American writers, American public access television personalities, Disease-related deaths in New York, American autobiographers, Free speech activists, Obscenity controversies

Alvin "Al" Goldstein (January 10, 1936 – December 19, 2013) was an American publisher, pornographer, and outspoken champion of free speech and sexual liberation.

Screw

In 1968 in New York he founded Screw, a weekly tabloid "Consumer Reports for sex" featuring reviews of stag films, peep shows, massage parlors, and other offerings of the adult entertainment industry, interspersed with hardcore pictorials, personal ads, the occasional interview, and scathing editorials lambasting The Establishment. "Screw grew from a combination of many factors, chief of which was my own dissatisfaction with the sex literature of 1968 and my yearning for a publication that reflected my sexual appetites," he wrote. "I may be making a lot of money, but I really believe I'm doing some good by demythologizing a lot about sexuality," he said in a Playboy Interview. Arrested 19 times on obscenity charges, he spent millions on First Amendment lawsuits, ultimately scoring a major victory when a federal judge threw out an obscenity case in 1974. In that year he launched Screw Magazine of the Air, soon renamed Midnight Blue, a thrice weekly hour-long adult oriented public access program that ran for nearly 30 years on Manhattan Cable.
In his 2011 book Dirty! Dirty! Dirty! - of Playboys, Pigs, and Penthouse Paupers, an American Tale of Sex and Wonder, former Screw writer and editor Mike Edison documents Goldstein's rise and fall against the successes of his peers Larry Flynt of Hustler, Bob Guccione of Penthouse, and Hugh Hefner of Playboy. Edison also lauds Goldstein as a staunch fighter for the First Amendment, quoting author Gay Talese who wrote about Goldstein in his book Thy Neighbor's Wife as saying, "We need a free society, and freedom is not won by literary tea parties and well-meaning, virtuous publishers, it is won by disreputable people like Al Goldstein." Edison also quotes the New York reporter Jimmy Breslin as saying, "Al Goldstein is one of four people in the last 35 years who has effectively protected the First Amendment rights of reporters who bring the news to you. The others are Ralph Ginzburg, Larry Flynt, and Lenny Bruce. I know you don't want to meet them, but you owe them."

Views on pornography and religion

In his book XXX-Communicated: A Rebel Without a Shul, Luke Ford wrote about a conversation with Goldstein, in which Ford asked Goldstein why the porn industry contained so many Jews. Goldstein answered, "The only reason that Jews are in pornography is that we think that Christ sucks. Catholicism sucks. We don't believe in authoritarianism." Ford then asked, "What does it mean to you to be a Jew?" To which Goldstein responded, "It doesn't mean shit. It means that I'm called a kike."  Ford also asked, "Do you believe in God?" Goldstein said, "I believe in me. I'm God. Fuck God. God is your need to believe in some super being. I am the super being. I am your God, admit it. We're random. We're the flea on the ass of the dog."XXX-Communicated: A Rebel Without a Shul
In 1989, Goldstein ran a full page ad in Screw offering $1 million for the assassination of the Ayatollah Khomeini, in response to Khomeini's fatwa against novelist Salman Rushdie for blaspheming Islam.

Family

Goldstein had a son, Jordan Ari Goldstein, who graduated from Harvard, and made his father angry by not inviting him to the graduation ceremony.Screw Harvard Law: Father of Porn Renounces Son, Blames Harvard, Harvard Crimson, February 27, 2003

Last years

In 2002, Goldstein was found guilty of harassing a former employee, having published her telephone number in Screw and encouraging readers to call her. Goldstein was sentenced to 60 days in jail. Goldstein served six days in prison before the charges were overturned on appeal. Goldstein apologised as part of a plea bargain. "Pornographer In Plea Deal". The New York Times. (February 28, 2002). "Pornographer Guilty in Harassment Case". The New York Times. "6 Days in Jail Broke Him, Freed Pornographer Says". The New York Times. Goldstein's company, Milky Way Productions, which published Screw and Midnight Blue, went into bankruptcy in 2004.

Death

Goldstein died on December 19, 2013, aged 77, from renal failure at a nursing home in Cobble Hill, Brooklyn.



Further reading

Bibliography




