[[Fireside chats]]

CATEGORIES: 1933 introductions, 1944 disestablishments in the United States, American radio programs, Presidency of Franklin D. Roosevelt, Speeches by Franklin D. Roosevelt, United States National Recording Registry recordings

The fireside chats were a series of thirty evening radio addresses given by United States President Franklin D. Roosevelt between 1933 and 1944. Although the World War I Committee on Public Information had seen presidential policy propagated to the public en masse, "fireside chats" were the first media development that facilitated intimate and direct communication between the president and the citizens of the United States. Roosevelt's cheery voice and demeanor played him into the favor of citizens and he soon became one of the most popular presidents ever, often affectionately compared to Abraham Lincoln. On radio, he was able to quell rumors and explain his reasons for social change slowly and comprehensibly. The Great Communicator: How Roosevelt's Radio Speeches Shaped American History, pp. 89-106.  Radio was especially convenient for Roosevelt because it enabled him to hide his polio symptoms from the public eye.

Origin of radio address

According to Pulitzer Prize Viewed 2 January 2013.

Chronological list of Presidential fireside chats

Rhetorical manner

Sometimes beginning his talks with "Good evening, friends," Roosevelt urged listeners to have faith in the banks and to support his New Deal measures. The "fireside chats" were considered enormously successful and attracted more listeners than the most popular radio shows during the "Golden Age of Radio." Roosevelt continued his broadcasts into the 1940s, as Americans turned their attention to World War II. 
Roosevelt's first fireside chat was March 12, 1933, which marked the beginning of a series of 30 radio broadcasts to the American people, in which he reassured them that the nation was going to recover and shared his hopes and plans for the country. The chats ranged from fifteen to forty-five minutes long, and eighty percent of the words used were in the one thousand most commonly used words in the English dictionary. 
No longer was the message of the administration to be tinkered with by the interpretations of the press; Roosevelt was simply going to tell the people what he was doing and why. This level of intimacy with politics made people feel as if they too were part of the administration's decision-making process and many soon felt that they knew Roosevelt personally. Most importantly, they grew to trust him, and thus he was able to implement the most radical social overhaul in U.S history without much internal dissent. Reedy. Review: The First Great Communicator, pp. 152-155

Weekly address and effect on the press

Every U.S. president since Roosevelt has delivered periodic addresses to the American people, first on radio, and later adding television and the Internet. The practice of regularly scheduled addresses began in 1982 when President Ronald Reagan started delivering a radio broadcast every Saturday. or 631 weeks, an average of one address every twenty weeks.
Reagan's successors have continued his practice of making weekly addresses, though such addresses have rarely attracted large numbers of listeners (perhaps because of the much more fragmented mass audience than that of the 
Roosevelt era). When President Barack Obama took office, he began providing his address in both audio and video forms, both of which are available online via whitehouse.President Obama's Weekly Video Address from the White House website  It has long become customary for the President's Weekly Radio Address to be followed an hour later (on the radio) by a 'response' (not always a topical response) by a member of the opposing political party. The respondent from the opposing party changes weekly, while the President is the same for the entirety of their term. Occasionally the Vice President may deliver the address in the absence of the President.Weekly Address: Tax Cuts & Unemployment Insurance - YouTube
The conventional press grew to love Roosevelt because they too had gained unprecedented access to the goings-on of government like never before. Roosevelt's opponents had control of most newspapers during his first bid for the presidency but he cleverly circumnavigated their influence by penetrating directly into the living rooms of citizens with radio addresses. It became increasingly difficult to voice opposition to government policy because the president carried more clout than any reporter or other politician. He was able to personally address the nation if any issue was controversial, like he did on October 16, 1940, when he spoke on the radio about the first ever peacetime draft he had ordered a month earlier. He did this less than a month before presidential elections were to take place, which for any other president would probably have been political suicide, but Roosevelt was able to use his new media techniques to garner domestic support for this international policy. Roosevelt Selected Speeches, Messages, Press Conferences, and Letters, p. 258 The effectiveness was again proven when he was re-elected with 10% more of the popular vote than his opponent.U.S election Atlas. "1940 Presidential General Election Results". Popular Vote Percentage.

Legacy

Radio technology, along with Roosevelt's charm in his approach to the media, had once again revolutionized the relationship between the public and the administration. Simultaneously, the role of the president had begun to change; it was now imperative that he be a charismatic impromptu speaker as well as classically stoic in formal situations. The president's personality was becoming an increasingly important factor in elections. Such a huge development would not be seen again until the next great technological communication tool reached maturity, and that was to be television.






