[[Distributed.net]]

CATEGORIES: Cryptographic attacks, Distributed computing projects, 501(c)(3) nonprofit organizations, Organizations established in 1997, Articles which contain graphical timelines

distributed. or DCTI) is a worldwide distributed computing effort that is attempting to solve large scale problems using otherwise idle CPU or GPU time. It is recognized as a non-profit organization under U.S. tax code 501(c)(3).
Distributed.net is working on RC5-72 (breaking RC5 with a 72-bit key),
In 2001, distributed.

History

A coordinated effort was started in February 1997 by Earle Ady and Christopher G. Stach II of Hotjobs.  Unfortunately, this initial effort had to be suspended as the result of SYN flood attacks by participants upon the server.
A new independent effort, named distributed. Lawson, Adam L. Beberg, and David C. McNett along with several others who would serve on the board and operate infrastructure. By late March 1997 new proxies were released to resume RC5-56 and work began on enhanced clients. A cow head was selected as the icon of the application and the project's mascot.
The next project was the RC5-64 challenge which took nearly five years to complete before the correct key (0x63DE7DC154F4D039) was found on July 14, 2002 decrypting the message to the plaintext "some things are better left unread".

Client

"dnetc" is the file name of the software application which users run to participate in any active distributed. It is a command line program with an interface to configure it, available for a wide variety of platforms. distributed. 
Portions of the source code for the client are publicly available, although users are not permitted to distribute modified versions themselves.

Development of GPU-enabled clients

In recent years, most of the work on the RC5-72 project has been submitted by clients that run on the GPU of modern graphics cards. Although the project had already been underway for almost 6 years when the first GPUs began submitting results, as of January 2014, GPUs represent almost 70% of all completed work units, and complete almost 90% of all work units each day.

Timeline of distributed.net projects








