[[Cult film]]

CATEGORIES: Film and video fandom, Film and video terminology, Popular culture

A cult film, also commonly referred to as a cult classic, is a film that has acquired a cult following. Cult films are known for their dedicated, passionate fanbase, an elaborate subculture that engage in repeated viewings, quoting dialogue, and audience participation.  Inclusive definitions allow for major Hollywood productions, especially box office bombs, while exclusive definitions focus more on obscure, transgressive films, shunned by the mainstream.  The difficulty in defining the term and subjectivity of what qualifies as a cult film mirror classificatory disputes about art. The term cult movie as well as midnight movie was first used by critics and viewers in 1970, for the New York premiere of El Topo by Alejandro Jodorowsky. 
Cult films trace their origin back to controversial and suppressed films kept alive by dedicated fans.  In some cases, reclaimed or rediscovered films have acquired cult followings decades after their original release, occasionally for their camp value.  Other cult films have since become well-respected or reassessed as classics; there is debate as to whether these popular and accepted films are still cult films.  After failing in the cinema, some cult films have become regular fixtures on cable television or profitable sellers on home video.  Others have inspired their own film festivals.
Since the late 1970s, cult films have become increasingly more popular and mainstream, which has drawn accusations that Hollywood studios have begun trying to artificially create cult films.  Films are frequently stated to be an "instant cult classic" now, occasionally before they are released.  Fickle fans on the Internet have latched on to unreleased films only to abandon them later on release.  At the same time, other films have acquired massive, quick cult followings, thanks to spreading virally through social media.  Easy access to cult films, via video on demand and peer-to-peer file sharing have led some critics to pronounce the death of cult films.  Overbroad usage has resulted in controversy, as purists state it has become a meaningless term.

Definition

A cult film is any film that has a cult following, although the term is not easily defined and can be applied to a wide variety of films. and Shiel criticizes this recontextualization as cultural commodification.
In 2008, Cineaste asked a range of academics for their definition of a cult film.  Several people defined cult films primarily in terms of their opposition to mainstream films and conformism, explicitly requiring a transgressive element, though others disputed the transgressive potential, given the demographic appeal to white males and mainstreaming of cult films.  Jeffrey Andrew Weinstock instead called them mainstream films with transgressive elements.  Most definitions also required a strong community aspect, such as obsessed fans or ritualistic behavior.  Citing misuse of the term, Mikel J. Koven took a self-described hard-line stance that rejected definitions that use any other criteria.  Matt Hills instead stressed the need for an open-ended definition rooted in structuration, where the film and the audience reaction are interrelated and neither is prioritized.  Ernest Mathijs focused on the accidental nature of cult followings, arguing that cult film fans consider themselves too savvy to be marketed to, while Jonathan Rosenbaum rejected the continued existence of cult films and called the term a marketing buzzword.
Quoting Jeffrey Sconce, Jancovich et al. define cult films in terms of paracinema, marginal films that exist outside critical and cultural acceptance: everything from exploitation to beach party musicals to softcore pornography.  However, they reject cult films as having a single unifying feature; instead, they state that cult films are united in their "subcultural ideology" and opposition to mainstream tastes, itself a vague and undefinable term.  Cult followings themselves can range from adoration to contempt, and they have little in common except for their celebration of nonconformity – even the bad films ridiculed by fans are artistically nonconformist, albeit unintentionally.  At the same time, they state that bourgeois, masculine tastes are frequently reinforced, which makes cult films more of an internal conflict within the bourgeoisie, rather than a rebellion against it.  This results in an anti-academic bias despite the use of formal methodologies, such as defamiliarization.

General overview

Cult films have existed since the early days of cinema. Nosferatu (1922), for example, was an unauthorized adaptation of Bram Stoker's Dracula.  Stoker's widow sued the production company and drove it to bankruptcy.  All known copies of the film were destroyed, and Nosferatu become an early cult film, kept alive by a cult following that circulated illegal bootlegs.  Much like later cult films, these early exploitation films encouraged audience participation, influenced by live theater and vaudeville.
Modern cult films grew from 1960s counterculture and underground films, popular among those who rejected mainstream Hollywood films.  These underground film festivals led to the creation of midnight movies, which attracted cult followings.
Releases from major studios – such as The Big Lebowski (1998), which was distributed by Universal Studios – can become cult films when they fail at the box office and develop a cult following through reissues, such as midnight movies, festivals, and home video.  Hollywood films, due to their nature, are more likely to attract this kind of attention, which leads to a mainstreaming effect of cult culture.  With major studios behind them, even financially unsuccessful films can be re-released multiple times, which plays into a trend to capture audiences through repetitious reissues.  The constant use of profanity and drugs in otherwise mainstream, Hollywood films, such as The Big Lebowski, can alienate critics and audiences yet lead to a large cult following among more open-minded demographics not often associated with cult films, such as Wall Street bankers and professional soldiers.  Thus, even comparatively mainstream films can satisfy the traditional demands of a cult film, perceived by fans as transgressive, niche, and uncommercial.
In a global context, popularity can vary widely by territory, especially with regard to limited releases.  Mad Max (1979) was an international hit – except in America
Ernest Mathijs states that cult films and fandom frequently involve nontraditional elements of time and time management.  Fans will often watch films obsessively, an activity that is viewed by the mainstream as wasting time yet can be seen as resisting the commodification of leisure time.  They may also watch films idiosyncratically: sped up, slowed down, frequently paused, or at odd hours.  Cult films themselves subvert traditional views of time – time travel, non-linear narratives, and ambiguous establishments of time are all popular.  Mathijs also identifies specific cult film viewing habits, such as viewing horror films on Halloween, sentimental melodrama on Christmas, and romantic films on Valentine's Day.  These films are often viewed as marathons where fans can gorge themselves on their favorites.
Despite their oppositional nature, cult films can produce celebrities.  Like cult films themselves, authenticity is an important aspect of their popularity.

Transgression and censorship

Transgressive films as a distinct artistic movement began in the 1970s.  Unconcerned with genre distinctions, they drew inspiration equally from the nonconformity of European art cinema and experimental film, the gritty subject matter of Italian neorealism, and the shocking images of 1960s exploitation.  Some used hardcore pornography and horror, occasionally at the same time.  In the 1980s, Nick Zedd identified this movement as the Cinema of Transgression and later wrote a manifesto.  Popular in midnight showings, they were mainly limited to large urban areas, which led Joan Hawkins to label them as "downtown culture".  These films acquired a legendary reputation, as they were discussed and debated in alternative weeklies, such as The Village Voice.  Home video would finally allow general audiences to see them, which gave many people their first taste of underground film.
According to Ernest Mathijs, critical reception is important to a film's perception as cult, through topicality and controversy.  Topicality, which can be regional (such as objection to government funding of the film) or critical (such as philosophical objections to the themes), enables attention and a contextual response.  Cultural topics make the film relevant and can lead to controversy, such as a moral panic, which provides opposition.  Cultural values transgressed in the film, such as sexual promiscuity, can be attacked by proxy, through attacks on the film.  These concerns can vary from culture to culture, and they need not be at all similar.  However, Mathijs says the film must invoke metacommentary for it to be more than simply culturally important.  While referencing previous arguments, critics may attack its choice of genre or its very right to exist.  Taking stances on these varied issues, critics assure their own relevance while helping to elevate the film to cult status.
Peter Hutchings, noting the many definitions of a cult film that require transgressive elements, states that cult films are known in part for their excesses.  Both subject matter and its depiction are portrayed in extreme ways that break taboos of good taste and aesthetic norms.  Violence, gore, sexual perversity, and even the music can be pushed to stylistic excess far beyond that allowed by mainstream cinema.  Film censorship can make these films obscure and difficult to find, common criteria used to define cult films.  Despite this, these films remain well-known and prized among collectors.  Fans will sometimes express frustration with dismissive critics and conventional analysis, which they believe marginalizes and misinterprets paracinema.
Films that are influenced by unpopular styles or genres can become cult films.  Jean Rollin worked within cinéma fantastique, an unpopular genre in modern France.  Influenced by American films and early French fantasists, he drifted between art, exploitation, and pornography.  His films were reviled by critics, but he retained a cult following drawn by the nudity and eroticism.  Transgressive elements that limit a director's appeal in one country can be celebrated or highlighted in another.  Takashi Miike has been marketed in the West as a shocking and avant-garde filmmaker despite his many family-friendly comedies, which have not been imported.
The transgressive nature of cult films can lead to their censorship.  During the 1970s and early 1980s, a wave of explicit, graphic exploitation films caused controversy.  Called "video nasties" within the UK, they ignited calls for censorship and stricter laws on home video releases, which were largely unregulated.
Academics David Church and Chuck Kleinhans describe an uncritical celebration of transgressive themes in cult films, including misogyny and racism.  David Church has also criticized gendered descriptions of transgressive content that celebrate masculinity.  Joanne Hollows further identifies a gendered component to the celebration of transgressive themes in cult films, where male terms are used to describe films outside the mainstream while female terms are used to describe mainstream, conformist cinema.

Subcultural appeal and fandom

Cult films can be used to help define or create groups as a form of subcultural capital; knowledge of cult films proves that one is "authentic" or "non-mainstream".  They can be used to provoke an outraged response from the mainstream, which further defines the subculture, as only members could possibly tolerate such deviant entertainment.
A film can become the object of a cult following within a particular region or culture if it has unusual significance. For example, Norman Wisdom's films, friendly to Marxist interpretation, amassed a cult following in Albania, as they were among the few Western films allowed by the country's Communist rulers.  Films which appeal to stereotypical male activities, such as sports, can easily gain strong male cult followings.  Sports metaphors are often used in the marketing of cult films to males, such as emphasizing the "extreme" nature of the film, which increases the appeal to youth subcultures fond of extreme sports.
Matt Hills' concept of the "cult blockbuster" involves cult followings inside larger, mainstream films.  Although these are big budget, mainstream films, they still attract cult followings.  The cult fans differentiate themselves from ordinary fans in several ways: longstanding devotion to the film, distinctive interpretations, and fan works.  Hills identifies three different cult followings for The Lord of the Rings, each with their own fandom separate from the mainstream.  Also, instead of valuing textual rarity, fans of cult blockbusters will value repeat viewings.  They may also engage in behaviors more traditional for fans of cult television and other serial media, as cult blockbusters are often franchised, preconceived as a film series, or both.  To reduce mainstream accessibility, a film series can be self-reflexive and full of in-jokes that only longtime fans can understand.
Cult films can create their own subculture.  The Rocky Horror Picture Show
Like cult films themselves, magazines and websites dedicated to cult films revel in their self-conscious offensiveness.  They maintain a sense of exclusivity by offending mainstream audiences with misogyny, gore, and racism.  Obsessive trivia can be used to bore mainstream audiences while building up subcultural capital.  Specialist stores on the fringes of society (or websites which prominently partner with hardcore pornographic sites) can be used to reinforce the outsider nature of cult film fandom, especially when they use erotic or gory imagery.  In online communities, different subcultures attracted to transgressive films can clash over values and criteria for subcultural capital.  Even within subcultures, fans who break subcultural scripts, such as denying the affectivity of a "sick film", will be ridiculed for their lack of authenticity.

Types

"So bad it's good"

The critic Michael Medved characterized examples of the "so bad it's good" class of low-budget cult film through books such as The Golden Turkey Awards. These films include financially fruitless and critically scorned films that have become inadvertent comedies to film buffs, such as Plan 9 from Outer Space (1958)

Camp and guilty pleasures

Chuck Kleinhans states that the difference between a guilty pleasure and a cult film can be as simple as the number of fans; David Church raises the question of how many people it takes to form a cult following, especially now that home video makes fans difficult to count.  As these cult films become more popular, they can bring varied responses from fans that depend on different interpretations, such as camp, irony, genuine affection, or combinations thereof.  Earnest fans, who recognize and accept the film's faults, can make minor celebrities of the film's cast,

Midnight movies

Tomas Crowder-Taraborrelli describes midnight movies as a reaction against the political and cultural conservatism in America,

Art, exploitation, and genre films

Although seemingly at odds with each other, art and exploitation films are frequently treated as equal and interchangeable in cult fandom, listed alongside each other and described in similar terms: their ability to provoke a response.  The most exploitative aspects of art films are thus played up and their academic recognition ignored.

Animation

Animation can provide wide open vistas for stories; the French film Fantastic Planet (1972) explored ideas beyond the limits of traditional, live-action science fiction films.

Nostalgia

According to Brigid Cherry, nostalgia "is a strong element of certain kinds of cult appeal." When Veoh added many cult films to their site, they cited nostalgia as a factor for their popularity.

Mainstream popularity

Mark Shiel explains the rising popularity of cult films as an attempt by cinephiles and scholars to escape the oppressive conformity and mainstream appeal of even independent film, as well as a lack of condescension in both critics and the films; Donna de Ville says it is a chance to subvert the dominance of academics and cinephiles.  According to Xavier Mendik, "academics have been really interested in cult movies for quite a while now."  Mendik has sought to bring together academic interest and fandom through Cine-Excess, a film festival.  Academic I. Q. Hunter states that "it's much easier to be a cultist now, but it is also rather more inconsequential."  Citing the mainstream availability of Cannibal Holocaust, Jeffrey Sconce rejects definitions of cult films based on controversy and excess, as they've now become meaningless. "Cult Cinema: A Critical Symposium". Cineaste, Winter 2008, 34 (1), cited on Ludic Despair, Jeffrey Sconce's blog. Retrieved 2013-06-22.  Cult films have influenced such diverse industries as cosmetics,
As far back as the 1970s, Attack of the Killer Tomatoes (1978) was designed specifically to be a cult film,
As major Hollywood studios and audiences both become savvy to cult films, productions once limited to cult appeal have instead become popular hits, and cult directors have become hot properties known for more mainstream and accessible films.  Remarking on the popular trend of remaking cult films, Claude Brodesser-Akner of New York magazine states that Hollywood studios have been superstitiously hoping to recreate past successes rather than trading on nostalgia.  Despite this, the Alamo Drafthouse has capitalized on cult films and the surrounding culture through inspiration drawn from Rocky Horror and retro promotional gimmickry.  They sell out their shows regularly and have acquired a cult following of their own.
Bob Batchelor states that the Internet has democratized cult culture and destroyed the line between cult and mainstream.  Fans of even the most obscure films can communicate online with each other in vibrant communities.
I. Q. Hunter identifies a prefabricated cult film style which includes "deliberately, insulting bad films", "slick exercises in dysfunction and alienation", and mainstream films "that sell themselves as worth obsessing over".  Scott Tobias states that Don Coscarelli, whose previous films effortlessly attracted cult followings, has drifted into this realm.  Tobias criticizes Coscarelli as trying too hard to appeal to cult audiences and sacrificing internal consistency for calculated quirkiness.  This trend of "instant cult classics" which are hailed yet fail to attain a lasting following is described by Matt Singer, who states that the phrase is an oxymoron.
Cult films are often approached in terms of auteur theory, which states that the director's creative vision drives a film.  This has fallen out of favor in academia, creating a disconnect between cult film fans and critics.






