[[Yeovil Town F.C.]]

CATEGORIES: Yeovil Town F.C., Association football clubs established in 1895, Football League clubs, Football clubs in Somerset, Southern Football League clubs, Yeovil, 1895 establishments in England, Isthmian League

Yeovil Town Football Club is an English football club based in the town of Yeovil, Somerset. It is the only Somerset-based club in the Football League, competing in the Championship, the second tier of English football. This was achieved after winning the play-off final on 19 May 2013 against Brentford having previously won the League Two championship in 2004–05.  Founded in 1895, Yeovil took 108 years to enter the Football League when they were promoted from the Football Conference as champions in 2003.
Yeovil have been one of the most successful non-league teams in the FA Cup – having defeated major Football League teams, most famously Sunderland in the 4th Round in 1949, going on to play in front of more than 81,000 against Manchester United at Maine Road. Since entering the Football League FA Cup results have deteriorated having only reached the 3rd Round twice including, in 2004, against Liverpool for which the club released a record prior to the tie sold only in shops in the town, "Yeovil True" reached #36 in the UK Singles Chart. The only other successful performance since then was in 2005 when they reached the 4th Round, drawn away against then Premier League side Charlton Athletic where they narrowly lost 3–2.
Their home ground is Huish Park, built in 1990 on the site of an old army camp and named after their former home, Huish, itself known for its pitch, which had an  sideline to sideline slope.

History

Non-League football

Yeovil Football Club was founded in 1890, and shared their ground with the local rugby club for many years. Five years later they were renamed Yeovil Casuals and started playing home games at the Pen Mill Athletic Ground. In 1907 the name Yeovil Town was adopted, which on amalgamation with Petters United became Yeovil and Petters United.  The name reverted to Yeovil Town prior to the 1946–47 season.
The club came to national attention as 'giant-killers' during the 1948–49 FA Cup,
Between 1955 and 1973 they were champions of the Southern Football League three times, and runners-up twice. During this period, Yeovil Town applied for election to the Football League on a number of occasions, coming within a few votes of being elected in 1976. In 1985, they were relegated to the Isthmian League. Yeovil won that championship in 1988 and returned to the Conference.
There was success in the Bob Lord Challenge Trophy in 1990 and three years later Yeovil finished fourth in the Conference, their best finish ever. In January 1995, former Weymouth and Spurs player Graham Roberts was appointed manager, but demotion back to the Isthmian League soon followed. Yeovil secured promotion back into the Conference in 1997 after winning the Isthmian League with a record number of points – 101.
Colin Lippiatt became manager 1998 – 1999 and brought Terry Skiverton to the club as a player. Gary Johnson took over as manager in June 2001 and Yeovil won the FA Trophy in his first season in charge with a 2–0 victory over Stevenage Borough in the final at Villa Park – the club's first major trophy. Yeovil Town earned promotion to the Football League in the following season, by winning the Football Conference by a record 17 points margin, accumulating 95 points and scoring 100 goals, remaining unbeaten at Huish Park. Their team included many top players, some of which went on to play Premier League football. Notable players include Gavin Williams who moved to West Ham United, Lee Johnson, Chris Weale, Darren Way and Adam Lockwood.

Reaching the Football League

Yeovil's first game in the Football League was a 3–1 away win over Rochdale. The Glovers finished their first season in eighth position, and reached the third round of the FA Cup before losing 2–0 at home to Liverpool. The following season Yeovil finished as champions of League Two with 83 points, earning promotion to League One. Part way through the season the club was sold by Jon Goddard-Watts to David Webb, taking over the role of Chief Executive from Chairman John Fry.
At the beginning of the 2005–06 season manager Gary Johnson left Yeovil for Bristol City. He was replaced by his assistant Steve Thompson, and Kevin Hodges was appointed as his number two. At the season's end Thompson was demoted to first team coach and he was replaced by Russell Slade. Around this time John Fry had bought all Dave Webb's share of the club, becoming Yeovil Town's new owner.
Yeovil finished the 2006–07 season in fifth position, qualifying for the League One play-offs. In the semi-final Yeovil beat Nottingham Forest in the two-legged match 5–4 on aggregate, after losing the first home leg 2–0.
The 2007–08 was less successful, as Yeovil finished 18th in League One with 52 points. Russell Slade continued as Yeovil manager into the 2008–09 season, but he left the position in February 2009. After one game with Assistant Manager Steve Thompson acting as caretaker manager, club captain Terry Skiverton was announced as manager until the end of the 2009–10 season, with Nathan Jones as his assistant. The duo had to wait seven games before their first victory, which came against Swindon Town. The one-nil victory was vital considering Swindon were also flirting with relegation and it started a good run of form with two more wins and a draw against difficult opposition. Yeovil secured their League One status with a 1–1 draw against Tranmere Rovers on Saturday 25 April, an achievement which may not have been possible without the loan of Jonathon Obika from Tottenham Hotspur. It was Obika's four goals that kept Yeovil up. At the end of the season, Terry Skiverton had to discuss contracts with players such as Terrell Forbes and Lee Peltier.
Yeovil made a good start to the 2009–10 season with a 2–0 win over Tranmere but then went seven league games without a win. After this they went six games unbeaten including victories over Brentford, Carlisle United and Bristol Rovers before this was ended by a 4–0 drubbing away at leaders Leeds United, on 31 October 2009. The return of Gavin Williams, on a loan spell from Bristol City, helped Yeovil to end the season strongly.
Yeovil's first half of the 2010–11 season was poor and saw them bottom of the table at Christmas. However, new signings including Max Ehmer and Paul Wotton helped turn the season around starting with an unbeaten run in January which saw Terry Skiverton nominated for Manager of the Month and Paul Huntington, who had scored three goals during the month, win Player of the Month.
The 2011–12 season again started poorly, and Yeovil found themselves in the relegation zone at Christmas for the second consecutive season, and this prompted a change of manager. On 9 January 2012, the club announced the re-appointment of Gary Johnson, with former manager Terry Skiverton becoming assistant. Yeovil made their best ever start in the 2012–13 season, picking up 10 points from their first 4 games. However the unbeaten run came to an end on 8 September as they suffered a 1–0 home defeat at the hands of local rivals A.F.C. Bournemouth. Yeovil hosted Premier League side West Bromwich Albion F.C. in the second round of the Football League Cup and although they took the lead early on, they ended up losing 4–2 after conceding 2 late goals courtesy of Shane Long and Yassine El Ghanassy. Yeovil finished the 2012–13 season in 4th place, reaching the league one play-offs, they reached the final on 6 May 2013 after a 2–0 home victory against Sheffield United, after a 1–0 loss at Bramall Lane in the first leg. On 19 May 2013, Yeovil defeated Brentford 2–1 in the League One play-off final, reaching the second tier for the first time in their history.

International representatives

Rivals

Due to the lack of other large football clubs in Somerset, Yeovil have few strong rivals. Yeovil have their strongest traditional rivalry with Weymouth, dating back to their non-league days.
In August 2009 they played Exeter City for the first time in the league. The game ended 1–1. AFC Bournemouth could also be seen as current rivals due to their relatively close geographical proximity compared to other Championship clubs.
Swindon Town are also strong rivals as they are geographically close as well.

Recent seasons

Players

Current squad



























|}

Out on loan


|}

Backroom staff



Directors

Management









|}

Managers

|width="10"| 
|valign="top"|
|width="10"| 
|valign="top"|
|}

Chairmen

The following men have been chairman of the club's Board of Directors:
| valign="top"|
|}

Honours

Football League One
'''Football League Two
Football Conference
FA Trophy
Isthmian League
Southern League
Southern League Western Division
'''Western League
Somerset Professional Cup
Forse Somerset Charity CupFebruary 2010 County Magazine Somerset FA

Club records






