[[Madeleine Stowe]]

CATEGORIES: 1958 births, Living people, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, Actresses from California, Actresses from Los Angeles, California, American film actresses, American people of Costa Rican descent, American people of German descent, American television actresses, Glendale High School (Glendale, California) alumni, Hispanic and Latino American actresses

Madeleine Stowe (born Madeline M. Stowe;According to the State of California. California Birth Index, 1905-1995. Center for Health Statistics, California Department of Health Services, Sacramento, California. At Ancestry.familytreelegends. She is best known for her performances in the films Revenge, Stakeout, Unlawful Entry, The Last of the Mohicans, Blink, China Moon, 12 Monkeys, The General's Daughter, and We Were Soldiers. She currently stars as Victoria Grayson in the ABC drama series Revenge,  for which she was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Television Series Drama in 2012.

Early life

Stowe, the first of three children, was born at the Queen of Angels Hospital,Madeleine Stowe in Hollywood, Los Angeles, California and raised in Eagle Rock, a suburb of Los Angeles. Her mother, Mireya (née Mora Steinvorth), had come from a prominent family in Costa Rica. Her father, Robert Stowe, was a civil engineer from a "poor Oregon family".com Results One of Stowe's maternal great-great-grandfathers, politician José Joaquín Mora Porras, was a younger brother of President Juan Rafael Mora Porras, who governed Costa Rica between 1849-1859. Another one of Stowe's maternal great-great-grandfathers was Bruno Carranza, President of Costa Rica in 1870, albeit briefly, as he resigned three months after taking power. His wife, Stowe's great-great-grandmother, Gerónima Montealegre, was the sister of President José María Montealegre Fernández, who governed Costa Rica from 1859-1863.tribalpages.
Stowe's father suffered from multiple sclerosis, and she accompanied him to medical treatments."The Trip to Bankable", Los Angeles Times, January 30, 1994
She originally aspired to become a concert pianist, taking piano lessons between the ages of 10 and 18. Stowe would later explain that playing the piano was a means of escape from having to socialize with other children her age. Her Russian-born music teacher, Sergei Tarnowsky, had faith in Stowe, even teaching her from his deathbed. Following his death at the age of 92, she quit, later commenting: "I just felt it was time to not be by myself anymore." Stowe went on her first date at the age of 18.What drives Madeleine Stow sic up the Wall?

Career

Early years

Stowe studied cinema and journalism at the University of Southern California. Not being especially interested in her classes, she volunteered to do performances at the Solaris, a Beverly Hills theater, where a movie agent saw her in a play and got her several offers of appearances in TV and films. In 1978, she made her debut in an episode in the police drama series Baretta, followed by a string of TV work with guest appearances on The Amazing Spider-Man, Barnaby Jones and Little House on the Prairie. In 1978, she played a leading role as Mary in the television movie, The Nativity (1978). She starred in the NBC miniseries The Gangster Chronicles, which starred Brian Benben, her future husband. She also starred in several television films, such as Amazons (1984) and Blood & Orchids (1986)..

Breakthrough and film career

In 1987, Stowe appeared in her first breakthrough role in the feature film, Stakeout opposite Richard Dreyfuss and Emilio Estevez. The film debuted at No.1 at the box office. After Stakeout, she co-starred with Mark Harmon in the comedy Worth Winning, with Kevin Costner in the 1989 thriller Revenge, and opposite Jack Nicholson in 1990 in The Two Jakes. She played a leading role in the 1991 independent film Closet Land.Closet Land (1990), AllRovi
In 1992, she appeared opposite Kurt Russell in the financially successful gritty crime drama Unlawful Entry.  Her critically acclaimed performance in the film, which grossed more than $75 million worldwide, elevated Stowe from supporting player to an A-list movie star. The next year, director Robert Altman cast Stowe in the award-winning ensemble cast movie Short Cuts, where she gave one of her most acclaimed screen performances as the wife of a compulsively lying and adulterous police officer played by Tim Robbins. She won the National Society of Film Critics Awards for Best Supporting Actress, a Golden Globe Award and a Volpi Cup for Best Ensemble Cast for her performance in the movie. She also made a cameo appearance in Stakeout's sequel Another Stakeout. The following year, Stowe played a leading role as a blind musician in the thriller Blink, in the neo-noir thriller China Moon, and in the Western Bad Girls. The year after that, she was a sympathetic psychiatrist in the financially successful and critically lauded science-fiction movie Twelve Monkeys. Stowe received a Saturn Awards nomination for this performance.
In 1994 Stowe was named one of People magazine's "50 Most Beautiful People in the World". In 1995, Stowe was chosen by Empire as one of the "100 Sexiest Stars in Film History".Biography for Madeleine Stowe
Stowe postponed her acting career in 1996 to concentrate on motherhood. In 1998, she came back with The Proposition and Playing by Heart, and then The General's Daughter, opposite John Travolta in 1999.  In 2001, she starred in the science-fiction box office bomb Impostor. In 2003, she starred in the thriller Octane about single mother Senga Wilson (Stowe), a recently divorced woman, trying to save her 15-year-old daughter Natasha (Mischa Barton) from a bizarre cult obsessed with blood and cars.

Recent years and Revenge

Stowe had left the screen in 2003 and settled on a Texas ranch outside Fredericksburg, with her daughter May and husband Brian Benben. Stowe returned to television in 2005 with a role in the television film Saving Milly, an adaptation of Morton Kondracke's  book of the same name, of a woman diagnosed with Parkinson's disease.IN OTHER FALL PILOT NEWS..., Feb 27, 2006, TV Guide In 2007, she appeared in the recurring role of Dr. Samantha Kohl in Jeff Goldblum's supernatural detective drama Raines on NBC, a mid-season replacement. The series was canceled after two months. In 2009 she starred in the Lifetime movie, The Christmas Hope.
In 2011, Stowe played Victoria Grayson, the glamorous and powerful matriarch of the Grayson family, on ABC's television drama series Revenge.  and she was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Television Series Drama for this role.Golden Globes nominations: 'The Artist' leads pack of nominees
In April 2012, she came in fifth in People magazine's annual Most Beautiful Woman list.PEOPLE's 2012 World's Most Beautiful Woman, People, Retrieved April 28, 2012Madeleine Stowe Shares Mom's Best Beauty Advice, People, April 17, 2012, Retrieved April 25, 2012

Personal life

In 1982, Stowe married Brian Benben, whom she met on the set of the NBC miniseries The Gangster Chronicles the previous year. They live near Johnson City, Texas, and have a daughter named May Theodora (born 1996). September 28, 1998, p. 29.
In 2008, Stowe travelled to Haiti and helped found Artists for Peace and Justice. She is on the Board of Directors of the foundation.The Team - Artists For Peace And Justice web site

Filmography

Film

Television

Awards and nominations







