[[Sensory memory]]

CATEGORIES: Memory processes

During every moment of an organism's life, sensory information is being taken in by sensory receptors and processed by the nervous system.

Characteristics

SM is considered to be outside of cognitive control and is instead an automatic response. The information represented in SM is the "raw data" which provides a snapshot of a person's overall sensory experience. Common features between each sensory modality have been identified; however, as experimental techniques advance, exceptions and additions to these general characteristics will surely evolve.  The auditory store, echoic memory, for example, has been shown to have a temporal characteristic in which the timing and tempo of a presented stimulus affects transfer into more stable forms of memory. 
Four common features have been identified for all forms of SM:
It is widely accepted that all forms of SM are very brief in duration; however, the approximated duration of each memory store is not static.  Iconic memory for example has an average duration of 500 ms which tends to decrease with age.

Types

Iconic Memory

Iconic memory. The mental representation of the visual stimuli are referred to as icons (fleeting images.) Iconic memory was the first sensory store to be investigated with experiments dating back as far as 1740. One of the earliest investigations into this phenomenon was by Ján Andrej Segner, a German physicist and mathematician. In his experiment, Segner attached a glowing coal to a cart wheel and rotated the wheel at increasing speed until an unbroken circle of light was perceived by the observer. He calculated that the glowing coal needed to make a complete circle in under 100ms to achieve this effect, which he determined was the duration of this visual memory store.

Echoic Memory

Echoic memory represents SM for the auditory sense of hearing.  Auditory information travels as sound waves which are sensed by hair cells in the ears.  Information is sent to and processed in the temporal lobe.  The first studies of echoic memory came shortly after Sperling investigated iconic memory using an adapted partial report paradigm.

Haptic Memory

Haptic memory represents SM for the tactile sense of touch.  Sensory receptors all over the body detect sensations such as pressure, itching, and pain.  Information from receptors travel through afferent neurons in the spinal cord to the postcentral gyrus of the parietal lobe in the brain.  This pathway comprises the somatosensory system.  Evidence for haptic memory has only recently been identified resulting in a small body of research regarding its role, capacity, and duration.

Relationship with other memory systems

SM is not involved in higher cognitive functions such as consolidation of memory traces or comparison of information.  STM is capable of storing information for 10–15 seconds without rehearsal while working memory actively processes, manipulates, and controls the information. Information from STM can then be consolidated into long-term memory where memories can last a lifetime.  The transfer of SM to STM is the first step in the Atkinson–Shiffrin memory model which proposes a structure of memory.= See also =




