[[List of tallest buildings in the world]]

CATEGORIES: Lists of buildings and structures, Lists of tallest buildings, Construction records, Skyscrapers

This article lists the world's tallest buildings, ranked by
The lists only include buildings that
For lists that include non-building structures, see

Ranking criteria and alternatives

The non-profit international organization Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat (CTBUH) was formed in 1969 and announces the title of "The World's Tallest Building" and sets the standards by which buildings are measured. It maintains a list of the 100 tallest completed buildings in the world.. The CTBUH only recognizes buildings that are complete, however, and some buildings listed within these list articles are not considered complete by the CTBUH.
In 1996, as a response to the dispute as to whether the Petronas Towers or the Sears Tower was taller, the council listed and ranked buildings in four categories:
Spires are considered integral parts of the architectural design of buildings, to which changes would substantially change the appearance and design of the building, whereas antennas may be added or removed without such consequences. This naturally hurts the rankings of buildings without spires, or with antennas instead of spires, or with shorter spires. The most famous such discrepancy is that the Petronas Towers, with their spires, are ranked higher than the Willis Tower (formerly called the Sears Tower) with its antennas, despite the Petronas Towers' lower roofs and lower highest points (of spire/antenna).
However, this type of discrepancy has happened before, without resulting in a change of the criteria used to determine the world's tallest building, which until 1996 was the height to the top of the tallest architectural element (spires, but not antennae). A famous historical case of this discrepancy was the rivalry between The Trump Building (then known as the Bank of Manhattan Building) and the Chrysler Building. The Bank of Manhattan Building employed only a short spire and was 927 ft (283 m) tall and had a much higher top occupied floor (the second category in the 1996 criteria for tallest building). In contrast, the Chrysler Building employed a very large 125 ft (38 m) spire secretly assembled inside the building to claim the title of world's tallest building with a total height of 1,048 ft (319 m), despite having a lower top occupied floor and a shorter height when both buildings' spires are not counted in their heights. Upset by Chrysler's victory, Shreve & Lamb, the consulting architects of the Bank of Manhattan Building, wrote a newspaper article claiming that their building was actually the tallest, since it contained the world's highest usable floor. They pointed out that the observation deck in the Bank of Manhattan Building was nearly 100 ft (30 m) above the top floor in the Chrysler Building, whose surpassing spire was strictly ornamental and essentially inaccessible. 101 of the World's Tallest Buildings. p. 102. At present the issue of identifying the tallest building is not contested, as Burj Khalifa tops the list by some margin, regardless of which criterion is applied.

Tallest skyscrapers in the world

The list includes the tallest 300 (completed and topped out) buildings in the world. As of 2014, eight of the last ten buildings to have held the record as 'tallest building in the world' are still found in the tallest 300, with the twin towers of the World Trade Center (tallest in 1972 and 1973) no longer standing, and the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company Tower not being high enough to make the list.
The term "country" as used in this list encompasses the broader definition of the word, and is inclusive of states and special territories (e.g. Hong Kong).

Photo gallery

File:Abraj-al-Bait-Towers.
File:OneWorldTradeCenter.
File:Taipei101.altonthompson.
File:Petronas Panorama II.
File:KM 6167 sears tower august 2007 D.
File:SWFC Jul08.
File:International Commerce Centre 200911. The top 15 floors are occupied by the Ritz-Carlton Hotel Company; this hotel will be the world's tallest 6-star grand hotel, replacing the Park Hyatt Shanghai Hotel.
File:Empire state bulding.
File:Shaghai Jin Mao.
File:Trump Tower Chicago.
File:Ryugyong Hotel - August 27, 2011 (Cropped).
File:Q1 Tower.
File:Usbnktwr.S. Bank Tower|The US Bank Tower in Los Angeles is the tallest building in the United States west of the Mississippi River.
File:Sondo.
File:Gran Torre Santiago y complejo Costanera Center.
File:HK Bank of China Tower View.
File:Abeno Harukas construction site 20130503-001.
File:KingdomCentre.
File:Construction in April 2012.
File:MIBC 20th October 2012.
File:The Imperial Towers SP.jpg|The Imperial in Mumbai, tallest buildings in South Asia
File:Toronto - ON - First Canadian Place.jpg|First Canadian Place in Toronto, the tallest building in Canada
File:CarltonCentreExterior.jpg|Carlton Centre is the tallest building in Africa

Alternative measurements

Height to roof

Some prefer height to roof to determine tallest building in the world, as "architectural feature" is regarded as a subjective and less-fair measure. In November 2009, the CTBUH stopped using the roof height as a method of measurement for tall buildings.

Height to pinnacle (highest point)

This measurement disregards distinctions between architectural and non-architectural extensions, and simply measures to the highest point. This measurement is useful for air traffic obstacle determinations, and is also a wholly objective measure. However, this measurement includes extensions that are easily added, removed, and modified from a building and are independent of the overall structure.
This measurement only recently came to use, when the Petronas Towers passed the Sears Tower (now called Willis Tower) in height. The former was considered taller because its spires were considered architectural, while the latter's antennae were not. This led to the split of definitions, with the Sears Tower claiming the lead in this and the height-to-roof (now highest occupied floor) categories, and with the Petronas claiming the lead in the architectural height category.

Skyscrapers under construction

This section contains a list of skyscrapers taller than 300 metres or 65 floors.

Skyscrapers on-hold

This list ranks skyscrapers whose construction is on-hold that are planned to rise over 300 metres (984.3 ft).

List by continent

The following table is a list of the tallest completed buildings by each continent (listed by building height):

List of buildings with 100+ floors



Notes






