[[Stations of the Cross]]

CATEGORIES: Stations of the Cross, Christian iconography, Christian terms, Cross symbols, Crucifixion of Jesus in art, Franciscan spirituality, Roman Catholic Church art by subject, Roman Catholic devotions, Sorrowful Mysteries

Stations of the Cross (or Way of the Cross; in Latin, Via Crucis; also called the Via Dolorosa or Way of Sorrows, or simply, The Way) refers to a series of artistic representations, often sculptural, depicting Christ Carrying the Cross to his crucifixion. Most Roman Catholic churches contain Stations of the Cross, typically placed at intervals along the side walls of the nave; in most churches, they are small plaques with reliefs or paintings.  The tradition of moving around the Stations to commemorate the Passion of Christ began with St. Francis of Assisi and extended throughout the Roman Catholic Church in the medieval period. It is also observed in Lutheranism and Anglo-Catholicism. It is most commonly done during Lent, especially on Good Friday.

History

The Stations of the Cross originated in pilgrimages  to Jerusalem.  A desire to reproduce the holy places in other lands seems to have manifested itself at quite an early date. At the monastery of Santo Stefano at Bologna a group of connected chapels was constructed as early as the 5th century, by St. Petronius, Bishop of Bologna, which was intended to represent the more important shrines of Jerusalem, and in consequence, this monastery became familiarly known as "Santa Gerusalemme". These may perhaps be regarded as the germ from which the Stations afterwards developed, though it is tolerably certain that nothing that we have before about the 15th century can strictly be called a Way of the Cross in the modern sense.  Although several travelers who visited the Holy Land during the twelfth, thirteenth, and 14th centuries (e.g. Riccoldo da Monte di Croce, Burchard of Mount Sion, James of Verona),THURSTON, Herbert: The Stations of the Cross mention a "Via Sacra", i.e., a settled route along which pilgrims were conducted, there is nothing in their accounts to identify this with the Way of the Cross, as we understand it.  The devotion of the Via Dolorosa, for which there have been a number of variant routes in Jerusalem, was probably developed by the Franciscans after they were granted administration of the Christian holy places in Jerusalem in 1342. Today, nine of the Stations of the Cross that were established by the Franciscans are located along the Via Dolorosa as it wends its way from the northwest corner of the Temple Mount to the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, within which the remaining five stations are located.
The earliest use of the word "stations", as applied to the accustomed halting-places in the Via Sacra at Jerusalem, occurs in the narrative of an English pilgrim, William Wey, who visited the Holy Land in the mid-15th century, and described pilgrims following the footsteps of Christ to the cross. In 1521 a book called Geystlich Strass was printed with illustrations of the stations in the Holy Land.
During the 15th and 16th centuries the Franciscans began to build a series of outdoor shrines in Europe to duplicate their counterparts in the Holy Land.  The number of stations varied between seven and thirty; seven was common. These were usually placed, often in small buildings, along the approach to a church, as in a set of 1490 by Adam Kraft, leading to the Johanneskirche in Nuremberg. II, p. 82, 1972 (English trans from German), Lund Humphries, London, ISBN 0-85331-324-5  A number of rural examples were established as attractions in their own right, usually on attractive wooded hills.  These include the Sacro Monte di Domodossola (1657) and Sacro Monte di Belmonte (1712), and form part of the Sacri Monti of Piedmont and Lombardy World Heritage Site, together with other examples on different devotional themes.  In these the sculptures are often approaching life-size and very elaborate.  In 1686, in answer to their petition, Pope Innocent XI granted to the Franciscans the right to erect stations within their churches.  In 1731, Pope Clement XII extended to all churches the right to have the stations, provided that a Franciscan father erected them, with the consent of the local bishop.  At the same time the number was  fixed at fourteen.  In 1857, the bishops of England were allowed to erect the stations by themselves, without the intervention of a Franciscan priest, and in 1862 this right was extended to bishops throughout the church. s.v. "The Way of the Cross".

Spiritual significance

The object of the Stations is to help the faithful to make a spiritual pilgrimage of prayer, through meditating upon the chief scenes of Christ's sufferings and death.  It has become one of the most popular devotions for Roman Catholics, and is often performed in a spirit of reparation for the sufferings and insults that Jesus endured during His Passion.Ann Ball, 2003 Encyclopedia of Catholic Devotions and Practices ISBN 087973910X
In his encyclical letter, Miserentissimus Redemptor, on reparations, Pope Pius XI called Acts of Reparation to Jesus Christ a duty for Catholics and referred to them as "some sort of compensation to be rendered for the injury" with respect to the sufferings of Jesus.Pope John Paul II, Letter to Cardinal Fiorenzo Angelini, for the 50th anniversary of the Benedictine Sisters of Reparation of the Holy Face, 27 September 2000 (Vatican archives)

Stations

Traditional form

The early set of seven scenes was usually numbers 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 11, and 14 from the list below.Schiller, 82  The standard set from the 17th to 20th centuries has consisted of 14 pictures or sculptures depicting the following scenes:
Although not traditionally part of the Stations, the Resurrection of Jesus is sometimes included as a fifteenth station.

Scriptural Way of the Cross

Out of the fourteen traditional Stations of the Cross, only eight have clear scriptural foundation. Stations 3, 4, 6, 7, and 9 are not specifically attested to in the gospels (in particular, no evidence exists of station 6 ever being known before medieval times) and Station 13 (representing Jesus's body being taken down off the cross and laid in the arms of His mother Mary) seems to embellish the gospels' record, which states that Joseph of Arimathea took Jesus down from the cross and buried him. To provide a version of this devotion more closely aligned with the biblical accounts, Pope John Paul II introduced a new form of devotion, called the Scriptural Way of the Cross on Good Friday 1991. He celebrated that form many times but not exclusively at the Colosseum in Rome.Joseph M Champlin, The Stations of the Cross With Pope John Paul II Liguori Publications, 1994, ISBN 0-89243-679-4Pope John Paul II,  Meditation and Prayers for the Stations of the Cross at the Colosseum, Good Friday, 2000 In 2007, Pope Benedict XVI approved this set of stations for meditation and public celebration: They follow this sequence:

Modern usage

The devotion may be conducted personally by the faithful, making their way from one station to another and saying the prayers, or by having an officiating celebrant move from cross to cross while the faithful make the responses. The stations themselves must consist of, at the very least, fourteen wooden crosses, pictures alone do not suffice, and they must be blessed by someone with the authority to erect stations.newadvent.htm
In the Roman Catholic Church, Pope John Paul II led an annual public prayer of the Stations of the Cross at the Roman Colosseum on Good Friday. Originally, the Pope himself carried the cross from station to station, but in his last years when age and infirmity limited his strength, John Paul presided over the celebration from a stage on the Palatine Hill, while others carried the cross. Just days prior to his death in 2005, Pope John Paul II observed the Stations of the Cross from his private chapel. Each year a different person is invited to write the meditation texts for the Stations. Past composers of the Papal Stations include several non-Catholics. The Pope himself wrote the texts for the Great Jubilee in 2000 and used the traditional Stations.
The celebration of the Stations of the Cross is especially common on the Fridays of Lent, especially Good Friday. Community celebrations are usually accompanied by various songs and prayers. Particularly common as musical accompaniment is the  Stabat Mater.  At the end of each station the Adoramus Te is sometimes sung. The Alleluia is also sung, except during Lent.
Structurally, Mel Gibson's 2004 film, The Passion of the Christ, follows the Stations of the Cross.

Debates

Place of Christ's resurrection

Some modern liturgists say the traditional Stations of the Cross are incomplete without a final scene depicting the empty tomb and/or the resurrection of Jesus, because Jesus' rising from the dead was an integral part of his salvific work on Earth.  Advocates of the traditional form of the Stations ending with the body of Jesus being placed in the tomb say the Stations are intended as a meditation on the atoning death of Jesus, and not as a complete picture of his life, death, and resurrection. 
The Stations of the Resurrection (also known by the Latin name of Via Lucis) are used in some churches at Eastertide to meditate on the Resurrection and Ascension of Jesus Christ.

Ukrainian Byzantine Catholic Church

As part of a process of de-Latinization, the Ukrainian Byzantine Catholic Church eliminated the devotion of the Stations of the Cross

Music

Franz Liszt wrote a Via Crucis for choir, soloists and piano or organ or harmonium in 1879.  In 1931, French organist Marcel Dupré improvised and transcribed musical meditations based on fourteen poems by Paul Claudel, one for each station.  David Bowie regarded his 1976 song, "Station to Station" as "very much concerned with the stations of the cross".  Michael Valenti (known predominantly as a Broadway composer) wrote, with librettist Diane Seymour, an oratorio depicting the fourteen Stations of the Cross entitled "The Way". It was premiered in 1991.  Stefano Vagnini's 2002 modular oratorio, Via Crucis,Falcon Valley Music Ed., Stefano Vagnini, Via Crucis, Rome, Italy, 2002 composition for organ, computer, choir, string orchestra and brass quartet, depicts the fourteen Stations of the Cross.
As the Stations of the Cross are prayed during the season of Lent in Catholic churches, each station is traditionally followed by a verse of the Stabat Mater, composed in the 13th century by Franciscan Jacopane da Todi.

Gallery

File:Chapel in 3rd Station (Via Dolorosa).JPG|Chapel in 3rd Station of Via Dolorosa
File:Chapel in 4th Station (Via Dolorosa).JPG|Chapel in 4th Station of Via Dolorosa
File:Chapel in 5th Station (Via Dolorosa).JPG|Chapel in 5th Station of Via Dolorosa
File:Chapel in 6th Station (Via Dolorosa).JPG|Chapel in 6th Station of Via Dolorosa
File:Chapel in 7th Station (Via Dolorosa).JPG|Chapel in 7th Station of Via Dolorosa
File:Stations of the Cross Church of St Casimir 01 AB. Casimir the Prince
Image:Crucifixion from the Stations of the Cross.
Image:14. Station03114.JPG|Station in Upper Swabia, Germany
Image:Fuensantawaycross.JPG|Station in Fuensanta Sanctuary, Murcia, Spain
Image:Sacre Coeur - Stations du Chemin de Croix.jpg|Elaborate 19th century stations I and II, Sacré-Coeur Paris
Image:5267-20080122-jerusalem-tomb-of-jesus.jpg|Tomb of Jesus
Image:Stations at SHAS.jpg|The students at Sacred Heart Apostolic School praying the Stations of the Cross on Good Friday, 2009
Image:Droga krzyżowa we Woźnikach.jpg|14th Station at the Franciscan Monastery in Woźniki, Poland








