[[Earl Grey tea]]

CATEGORIES: Blended tea, English beverages

Earl Grey tea is a tea blend with a distinctive citrus flavour and aroma derived from the addition of oil extracted from the rind of the bergamot orange, a fragrant citrus fruit.
Traditionally, the term "Earl Grey" has applied only to black teas that contain oil of bergamot as a flavouring.

History

Tea flavoured with bergamot to imitate the more expensive types of Chinese tea has been known in England at least since the 1820s. In 1837 there is a record of court proceedings against Brocksop & Co. who were found to have supplied tea "artificially scented, and, drugged with bergamot in this country", but there is no known published reference to an 'Earl Grey' tea before advertisements by Charlton & Co. of Jermyn Street in London in the 1880s, though 'Grey's Tea' is known from the 1850s 
The Earl Grey blend, or "Earl Grey's Mixture", is assumed to be named after Charles Grey, the second Earl Grey, British Prime Minister in the 1830s and author of the Reform Bill of 1832. He reputedly received a gift, probably a diplomatic perquisite, of tea flavoured with bergamot oil. All the Tea in China. China Books, 1990. ISBN 0-8351-2194-1. Pages 180-181. Bergamot orange (Citrus bergamia) is a small citrus tree which blossoms during the winter and is grown commercially in Calabria, Italy.
According to one legend, a grateful Chinese mandarin whose son was rescued from drowning by one of Lord Grey's men first presented the blend to the Earl in 1803. The tale appears to be apocryphal, as Lord Grey never set foot in China
Jacksons of Piccadilly claim they originated Earl Grey's Tea, Lord Grey having given the recipe to Robert Jackson & Co. partner George Charlton in 1830. According to Jacksons, the original recipe has been in constant production and has never left their hands. Theirs has been based on China tea since the beginning.
According to the Grey family, the tea was specially blended by a Chinese mandarin for Lord Grey, to suit the water at Howick Hall, the family seat in Northumberland, using bergamot in particular to offset the preponderance of lime in the local water. Lady Grey used it to entertain in London as a political hostess, and it proved so popular that she was asked if it could be sold to others, which is how Twinings came to market it as a brand.

Variations

Twinings reformulation

Twinings reformulated their Earl Grey tea in April 2011, claiming to have added "an extra hint of bergamot and citrus".

Use as a flavouring

Earl Grey tea is used as a flavouring for many types of cakes and confectionery, such as chocolates, as well as savoury sauces.
There is a considerable history of Earl Grey tea being used as a drink mixer, in particular for gin, within the British Isles, somewhat similar in principle to the 'Irish Coffee', though this is seldom practiced today. During the later 19th century, poorer working class households began to combine the drinks as a minimum proof alcohol volume began to be meaningfully applied, following a 1855 revision to the Weights and Measures Act, to the relatively inexpensive spirit, making it unpalatable when taken neat. (1763). Statutes at Large 1. p. 388. Retrieved 22 March 2014. Being somewhat similarly flavoured, the two made for an affordable and pleasant pairing, in addition to which the necessary boiling during preparation helped disarm water-borne contaminants. The drink became associated briefly in the inter-war period with middle-class - particularly, female - alcoholism during the interwar years of the 20th century; it would occasionally be referred to during this time as a 'Moseley Tea Service', after the bourgeois area of Birmingham. Fogelson (1763). Bourgeois Nightmares: Suburbia, 1870-1930. p. 135. Retrieved 22 March 2014. 

Toxicology

In several studies, application of high concentrations of some brands of bergamot oil directly to the skin was shown to increase redness after exposure to ultraviolet light;
In one case study, a patient who consumed four litres of Earl Grey tea per day reported muscle cramps, which were attributed to the function of the bergapten in bergamot oil as a potassium channel blocker.  The symptoms subsided upon reducing his consumption of Earl Grey tea to one litre per day.

Popular culture

The character Jean-Luc Picard of Star Trek: The Next Generation was known to request "Tea: Earl Grey, hot." aboard the ship on many occasions.

Footnotes




