[[Mary Carey (pornographic actress)]]

CATEGORIES: 1980 births, American female pornographic film actors, Florida Atlantic University alumni, California Independents, Living people, Participants in American reality television series, Actresses from Cleveland, Ohio, People from Fort Lauderdale, Florida, Pornographic film actors from Florida, Pornographic film actors from Ohio

Mary Carey (born June 15, 1980) is an American pornographic actress and film director known for her involvement in the 2003 California gubernatorial recall election and her appearance on the VH1 reality TV series Celebrity Rehab.

Early life

Carey was born Mary Ellen Cook After her parents divorced, her mother moved in with Carey and her grandparents. When she was seven years old, she moved with her family from Cleveland to Florida, and the next year Carey was legally adopted by her grandparents.com
Carey studied ballet from the age of seven until she was 19 years old.com She graduated in 1998 from the Pine Crest School, a Fort Lauderdale private preparatory school. At 19, she joined the dance team at Florida Atlantic University, where she was a student in the theater department.

Career

After her grandfather's death, her grandmother's health worsened and Carey took a job as an exotic dancer to help support the family financially. Upon noticing that the "feature dancers" made much more money, she asked an agent how she could become one too. The agent recommended that she become a porn star (the large fan base that successful porn stars have gives them superior drawing power when they dance in-person at strip clubs). Carey travelled to Los Angeles and made the rounds of producers and studios in the adult film industry, eventually landing a job with Playboy TV.
In 2009, she made film titled Celebrity Pornhab with Dr. Screw. The film is a pornographic parody of the VH1 show, and includes a sex scene between Mary Carey and a female costar. Drew Pinsky commented in a January 2010 TV Guide story, "She puts together, like, six weeks at a time of sobriety, then drifts away. We're trying to get her to stay with it once and for all."

Appearances

She was featured on VH1's reality series Celebrity Rehab, and has appeared in more than 100 adult films.com She has a product line with Doc Johnson adult toy company, she has authored a book, and she is currently developing a TV series with GoGo Luckey. She appeared in VH1's series Sober House, which premiered in January 2009.

Politics

During the 2003 California recall election, Carey signed a contract with Kick Ass Pictures and, as a publicity stunt, they came up with the idea that Carey should run for governor. She was an independent candidate, placing tenth in a field of 135 candidates. She ran on an eleven-point platform that included somewhat tongue-in-cheek promises of taxing breast implants, making lap dances tax-deductible, and creating a "Porn for Pistols" exchange program.
In June 2005, Carey announced her bid for Lieutenant Governor of California as an independent in 2006. She has also said that she hopes to run for a major party nomination to be President of the United States upon her reaching the age of 35, per the minimum age requirement for United States presidents.
During and immediately following her gubernatorial bid in 2003, Carey was occasionally featured as a guest on various political talk shows. Carey maintained on the Fox News channel on March 16, 2006 that her pornographic films are not a negative to her political career, citing the political successes of Arnold Schwarzenegger and Ronald Reagan. She also maintained that, unlike the films in which Schwarzenegger and Reagan starred, her films are about "love".

Personal life

In April 2005, Carey was arrested in connection with a Lakewood, Washington, cabaret sting operation, for violating a city strip club ordinance that forbids dancers from sexually touching themselves.cuttingedge.htm She subsequently made a plea agreement and received a 19-month sentence, which was suspended on the condition that she was not charged with any other offense within one year.

VH1 appearance

thumb|right|upright|Carey at an industry party in 2005In January/February 2008, Carey was featured on the VH1 reality TV series Celebrity Rehab,
In the reunion episode of the show taped approximately six months after leaving rehab, she claimed she had not made an adult movie since becoming sober and intends to never make another one. However, she continues to "feature dance" in clubs, saying that she needs the money to care for her mother, but also hopes to stop doing this. In an interview with AVN magazine, Carey stated that she had entered rehab to tackle an addiction to Xanax (which she had developed around the time she dropped out of her second run for governor
During an interview with The Howard Stern Show on November 29, 2010; Pinsky commented that Carey was doing "a lot better".marksfriggin.htm#mon In 2011, Carey was interviewed for Celebrity Rehab Revisited stating that, following the end of Celebrity Rehab, she had quit Xanax and binge drinking, apart from occasional champagne. She had been married to an electrician for two years and stopped making adult films, but continued making a living with personal appearances in night clubs and strip clubs. Counselor Bob Forrest, while critical of her continuing to drink "occasional champagne," noted her improvement, saying "it's progress, not perfection and Mary's progressing and she's a million miles away from where she was when we met her five years ago."

Awards








