[[Molly house]]

CATEGORIES: Cross-dressing, LGBT history in the United Kingdom, LGBT history prior to the 19th century, LGBT culture in the United Kingdom

A molly house in 18th-century England was a tavern or private room where gay and cross-dressing men could meet each other either for socializing or as possible sexual partners. Molly houses were one precursor to some types of gay bars.

History

In 18th century England, a "molly" referred to an effeminate, usually homosexual, male. Mollies, and other third sex identities, were one precursor to the broader 'homosexual' identity of the 20th and 21st centuries. For the first time in European history, there emerged three genders: men, women, and a third gender of adult effeminate sodomites, or homosexuals. This third gender had radical consequences for the sexual lives of most men and women since it promoted an opposing ideal of exclusive heterosexuality.
In Sex and the Gender Revolution, Randolph Trumbach reconstructs the worlds of eighteenth-century prostitution, illegitimacy, sexual violence, and adultery. In those worlds the majority of men became heterosexuals by avoiding sodomy and sodomite behavior.
[/ref]
The most famous molly house was Mother Clap's, which was open for two years from 1724 to 1726 in the Holborn area of London.
Patrons of Molly houses formed a distinct subculture in Georgian England. They would take on a female persona, have a female name, and affect feminine mannerisms and speech. Marriage ceremonies between a Mollie and his male lover were enacted to symbolise their partnership and commitment.
The impersonation could at times include a ritual called "mock birth" (or "lying-in"), where a Molly would be dressed in a nightgown, laid on a chair, and assisted by fellow Mollies as "midwives" during a highly ritualized enactment of a woman's labour until finally a wooden doll representing the baby was born.  This ritual almost certainly originated as a couvade, designed to collectively relieve the extreme stress this particular social group was forced to live under.co.htm
Indeed, buggery was a capital offence at the time in England, under the Buggery Act 1533, and court records of buggery trials of the period provide much of the evidence about molly houses.oldbaileyonline.jsp?id=t17260420-67&div=t17260420-67&terms=buggery#highlight
While molly-houses continued to exist throughout the 18th and early 19th century, some of them even operating semi-publicly, patrons were often prosecuted.  Homosexuals condemned to stand in the pillory appear in court records as often as once a week for years in the mid-18th century.  Convictions for sodomy in London resulted in frequent hangings at Tyburn.co.htm
For instance, on 9 May 1726, three men (Gabriel Lawrence, William Griffin, and Thomas Wright) were hanged at Tyburn for buggery following a raid of Margaret Clap's molly house. Charles Hitchen, the Under City Marshal (and crime lord), was also convicted (in 1727) of attempted buggery at a Molly house.

In popular culture

In episode 2 of the NBC horror drama Dracula (TV series), a Molly house appears towards the end of the episode.
In an episode of the Channel 4 series City of Vice Molly Houses and Mollies play a predominant role.
A Molly House features in Episode 3 of the first series of the BBC's 2013 Ripper Street, set in London's Whitechapel area in 1889.
A Molly House and the legal issues surrounding gay life in the 18th century are the subject of Episode 2 of the second series of Garrow's Law. Garrow's Law is a BBC series set in and around London's Old Bailey courthouse. This episode originally aired in 2010.
English playwright Mark Ravenhill wrote the play Mother Capp's Molly House in 2001, based on Rictor Norton's book, Mother Clapp's Molly House: The Gay Subculture of England, 1700–1830. London: Gay Men's Press, 1992. (Second edition, revised and enlarged, Chalfont Press, an imprint of Tempus Publishing, United Kingdom, 2006.)



Footnotes



|authorlink=Rictor Norton
|title=Homosexuality in Eighteenth-Century England: A Sourcebook
|url=
|accessdate=2006-12-27}}
|last=Kaplan
|first=Morris B.
|title=Sodom on the Thames: Sex, Love, and Scandal in Wilde Times
|publisher=Cornell University Press
|year=2005
|pages=314 pages
|url=
|isbn=0-8014-3678-8
|accessdate=2009-08-04}}




