[[J. J. Abrams]]

CATEGORIES: 1966 births, J. J. Abrams, American film directors, American film producers, American Jews, American screenwriters, American television composers, American television directors, American television producers, American television writers, Film directors from New York City, Jewish American writers, Living people, Primetime Emmy Award winners, Sarah Lawrence College alumni, Science fiction film directors, Showrunners, Writers from New York City, Writers Guild of America Award winners

Jeffrey Jacob "J. J." Abrams (born June 27, 1966) is an American film and television producer, screenwriter, director, actor and composer, best known for his work in the genres of action, drama, and science fiction.
Abrams wrote and produced feature films before co-creating the television series Felicity (1998–2002). He also created Alias (2001–2006) and co-created Lost (2004–2010), Fringe (2008–2013), Undercovers (2010) and produced the television series Person of Interest (2011–present) and Revolution (2012–present), among others.
His directorial film work includes two Star Trek films; Star Trek (2009) and Star Trek Into Darkness (2013), along with Mission: Impossible III (2006) and Super 8 (2011). He will also direct Star Wars Episode VII (2015), the first film in the Star Wars sequel trilogy. Abrams produced the films Cloverfield (2008), Morning Glory (2010), and Mission: Impossible – Ghost Protocol (2011). He also played a role in the film Six Degrees of Separation.
Many of the films he has directed or produced are distributed by Paramount Pictures, while his television series were co-produced by either Warner Bros. Television or Touchstone Television. Abrams' frequent creative collaborators include writers Alex Kurtzman and Roberto Orci, composer Michael Giacchino, cinematographers Daniel Mindel and Larry Fong, and editors Maryann Brandon and Mary Jo Markey.

Early life

Abrams was born in New York City and raised in Los Angeles, the son of television producer Gerald W. Abrams and executive producer Carol Ann Abrams (née Kelvin).

Career

Abrams' first job in the movie business started when he was 16 when he wrote the music for Don Dohler's film Nightbeast. During his senior year at college, he teamed with Jill Mazursky to write a feature film treatment. Purchased by Touchstone Pictures, the treatment was the basis for Taking Care of Business, Abrams' first produced film, which starred Charles Grodin and James Belushi. He followed that up with Regarding Henry, starring Harrison Ford, and Forever Young, starring Mel Gibson. He also co-wrote with Mazursky the script for the comedy Gone Fishin' starring Joe Pesci and Danny Glover.
Abrams collaborated with producer Jerry Bruckheimer and director Michael Bay on the 1998 film Armageddon. That same year, he made his first foray into television with Felicity, which ran for four seasons on The WB Network, serving as the series' co-creator (with Matt Reeves) and executive producer. He also composed its opening theme music. 
Under his production company Bad Robot, which he founded with Bryan Burk in 2001,
In 2006, he served as executive producer of What About Brian and Six Degrees, also on ABC. Abrams directed and wrote the two-part pilot for Lost and remained active producer for the first half of the season. That same year, he made his feature directorial debut in 2006 with Mission: Impossible III, starring Tom Cruise.
Abrams spoke at the TED conference in 2007.
In 2008, Abrams produced the monster movie Cloverfield.J.J. Abrams Talks Cloverfield Sequel 
In 2008, Abrams co-created, executive produced, and co-wrote (along with Roberto Orci and Alex Kurtzman) the FOX science fiction series Fringe, for which he also composed the theme music. He was featured in the 2009 MTV Movie Awards 1980s-style digital short "Cool Guys Don't Look at Explosions", with Andy Samberg and Will Ferrell, in which he plays a keyboard solo. NBC picked up Abrams' Undercovers as its first new drama series for the 2010–11 season. However, it was subsequently cancelled by the network in November 2010.
He wrote and directed the Paramount supernatural movie Super 8, while co-producing with Steven Spielberg and Bryan Burk; it was released on June 10, 2011.
Under development (due in 2013 and enlisted comedy writers Maya Forbes and Wally Wolodarsky to write the adaptation. 
According to the article, a wealthy couple Steven B. Klinsky and Maureen Sherry purchased the apartment in 2003 and live there with their four children. Soon after purchasing the apartment, they hired young architectural designer Eric Clough, who devised an elaborately clever "scavenger hunt" built into the apartment that involved dozens of historical figures, a fictional book and a soundtrack, woven throughout the apartment in puzzles, riddles, secret panels, compartments, and hidden codes, without the couple's knowledge. The family didn't discover the embedded mystery until months after moving into the apartment.
Abrams will produce, under Bad Robot and with Bryan Burk, Earthquake for Universal Pictures. The film is being scripted by Academy Award winner Dustin Lance Black, and while it shares a title and event with Universal's 1974 feature starring Charlton Heston and Ava Gardner, it will not be a remake.
On January 25, 2013, The Walt Disney Studios and Lucasfilm officially announced Abrams as director and producer of Star Wars Episode VII, the latest entry in the Star Wars film saga. Disney/Lucasfilm also announced that Bryan Burk and Bad Robot Productions would be producing the feature.
Following the news that he would indeed direct Star Wars Episode VII, speculation arose as to Abrams' future with Paramount Pictures, with whom he has released all of his previously directed feature work and which has a first-look deal with his Bad Robot Productions. Paramount vice-chairman Rob Moore stated that Abrams will continue to have a hand in the highly successful Star Trek and Mission: Impossible franchises going forward.
Abrams announced at the 2013 D.I.C.E. Conference that Bad Robot has made a deal with Valve Corporation to produce films based on the video game titles Portal and Half-Life.
On September 9, 2013, it was announced that Abrams will be releasing a novel, S., written by Doug Dorst.entertainment.com/movies/blogs/post--second-trailer-reveals-more-of-jj-abrams-mystery-project The book was released on October 29, 2013.
In October 2013, it was announced that Abrams had taken over screenwriting duties for Star Wars Episode VII, working alongside Lawrence Kasdan following the departure of Michael Arndt.

Personal life

Abrams is married to public relations executive Katie McGrath and has three children."EW Gets the Stories Behind Those Goofy TV Production-Company Logos", Entertainment Weekly, December 7, 2001: "The title came to creator J.J. Abrams during a writers' meeting, and he recorded his children, Henry and Gracie (ages 2 and 3), saying the words into his Powerbook's microphone. 'That day in the office while editing,' says Abrams, 'I put together sound effects on my computer, burned a QuickTime movie on a CD, gave it to postproduction, and three days later it was on national television.'" He resides in Pacific Palisades, Los Angeles, California.J. Abrams and wife, actress Katie – Media (3 of 46) Movie Premieres: 'Star Trek,' 'Angels, "Director J.J. Abrams and wife, actress Katie McGrath, parade on the red carpet as they arrives at Grauman's Chinese Theatre in Hollywood for the premiere of the movie 'Star Trek' in Los Angeles on April 30, 2009.

Filmography

Feature credits

Television credits

Awards and nominations








