[[Ganglion cyst]]

CATEGORIES: Dermal and subcutaneous growths

A ganglion cyst or synovial cyst  It is caused by leakage of fluid from the joint into the surrounding tissue.

Signs and symptoms

The average size of these cysts is 2.0 cm, but cysts of more than 5 cm have to be excised. The size of the cyst may vary over time, and can increase after activity.

Sites

It is most frequently located around the dorsum of the wrist and on the fingers. A common site of occurrence is along the extensor carpi radialis brevis as it passes over the dorsum of the wrist joint. Although most commonly found in the wrist, ganglion cysts may also occur in the foot.
Ganglion cysts are "commonly observed in association with the joints and tendons of the appendicular skeleton, with 88% "in communication with the multiple small joints of the hand and wrist" and 11% with those of the foot and ankle."   They are most often found around the wrist joint, especially at the scapho-lunate area, which accounts for 80% of all ganglion cysts.
In a 2007 study of patients whose foot lumps were being surgically removed in Glasgow, 39 of 101 cases were ganglion cysts.  The study replicated an earlier result that no ganglion cysts were found on the sole or heel of the foot; the authors wrote that "Although lumps in these areas may be ganglia, the surgeon should probably consider other diagnoses in the first instance."  They also noted a marked female preponderance (85%) and that 11 of the other cases had been misdiagnosed as ganglion cysts before surgery.
Ganglion cysts can also occur about the knee, commonly near the cruciate ligaments, also at the origins of the gastrocnemius tendon and anteriorly on Hoffa's infrapatellar fat pad. At the shoulder, they typically occur at the acromioclavicular joint or along the biceps tendon. Ultrasound of the Shoulder. Master Medical Books, 2013. Sample chapter available on acromioclavicular joint ganglion.
From their common origin at the joint or tendon, ganglion cysts can form in a wide range of locations. Rarely, intraosseous ganglion cysts occur, sometimes in combination with a cyst in the overlying soft tissue.  The cysts can even intrude into the spine, which can cause pain and dysesthesia in distant extremities.
It has recently been proposed that cystic adventitial disease, in which a cyst occurs within the popliteal artery near the knee, may occur by an articular mechanism, with a conduit leading from the joint, similar to the development of ganglion cysts that spread within the peroneal nerve.
Cysts have also been reported to occur nearby to shoulder joint, compressing one or more nerves and causing bone erosions.

Cause

The most commonly accepted cause of ganglion cysts is the "herniation hypothesis", in which they occur as "an out-pouching or distention of a weakened portion of a joint capsule or tendon sheath."  This is based on the observations that the cysts occur close to tendons and joints, the microscopic anatomy of the cyst resembles that of the tenosynovial tissue, the fluid is similar in composition to synovial fluid, and dye injected into the joint capsule frequently ends up in the cyst, which can become enlarged after activity.  However, dye injected into the cyst rarely enters the joint, which has been attributed to the formation of an effective "check valve" allowing fluid out of the joint, but not back in. Synovial cysts, posttraumatic degeneration of connective tissue and inflammation have been considered as the causes. Other possible mechanisms for the development of ganglion cysts include repeated mechanical stress, facet arthrosis, myxoid degeneration of periarticular fibrous tissues and liquefaction with chronic damage, increased production of hyaluronic acid by fibroblasts, and a proliferation of mesenchymal cells. Ganglion cyst can develop independently from a joint.

Diagnosis

Ganglion cysts are easily diagnosed, as they are visible and pliable to touch.
Radiographs in AP and lateral views are obtained to exclude any more serious underlying pathology. US may be done to increase diagnostic confidence in clinically suspected lesions or depict occult cysts. Intratendinous ganglia are readily distinguished from extratendinous ganglia during dynamic US. Microscopically, ganglionic cysts are thin-walled cysts containing clear, mucinous fluid.

Treatment

Surgical treatments remain the primary option, other than doing nothing at all, for the treatment of ganglion cysts. The progression of ganglion surgery worldwide is to arthroscopic or mini-open wide awake excision of ganglion cysts. The wide awake approach to hand and wrist ganglia: Ten-year experience, technical tips and review of macroscopic pathology and outcomes of 300 cases. OA Case Reports 2013 Nov 15;2(13):129. Alternatively, a hypodermic needle may be used to drain the fluid from the cyst (aspiration) and a corticosteroid is injected after cyst is empty.
Warning: The following method is an antiquated folk remedy and is not recommended. It should not be considered a proper method of treatment in all or any cases. Do not perform the below method without consulting your doctor or physician.
A folkloric remedy for a ganglion cyst is to strike the lump with a large heavy book, causing the cyst to rupture and drain into the surrounding tissues. Historically, a Bible was the largest and/or only book in any given household and was commonly used; this led to the nickname of "Bible bumps" or "Gideon's disease."

Complications

Complications of treatment include stiffness in hand and scar formation.

Prognosis

Recurrence rate is higher in aspirated cysts than in excised ones. Ganglion cysts have been found to recur following surgery in 12% of patients.
A six-year outcome study of treatment of ganglia on the back (dorsum) of the wrist compared excision, aspiration and no treatment. Neither excision nor aspiration provided long-term benefit better than no treatment. Of the untreated ganglia, 58% resolved spontaneously; the post-surgery recurrence rate in this study was 39%. J Hand Surg Eur Vol. 2007 Oct;32(5) 502-8. A similar study in 2003 of palmar wrist ganglion states: "At 2 and 5 year follow-up, regardless of treatment, no difference in symptoms was found, regardless of whether the palmar wrist ganglion was excised, aspirated or left alone."Dias J, Buch K. Palmar wrist ganglion: does intervention improve outcome? A prospective study of the natural history and patient-reported treatment outcomes. J Hand Surg Br. 2003 Apr;28(2) 172-6.

Additional images

Cyst_Profile2.JPG|Cyst on wrist of right hand
Ganglion-cyst-2008.png|Cyst located on right wrist
Ganglion Cyst on Foot.jpg|Cyst on dorsum of right foot
Ueberbein2.jpg|Cyst on dorsum of left hand
Ueberbein.jpg|Cyst on dorsum of left hand
Kyste420.jpg|kyste biblique
Ganglion Cyst On Right Index Finger.jpg|Small cyst on right index finger
Ganglion_cyst_lanced.JPG|small cyst on thumb lanced with red-hot needle
 </gallery>

Etymology

An apparent misnomer, which extends to the neural masses by analogy.  Hippocrates is generally credited with their description.See Hippocrates' "On the Articulations" (part 40) at Wikisource
The term "Bible cyst" (or "Bible bump") is derived from a common treatment in the past that consisted of hitting the cyst with a Bible or similarly large book.eatonhand.htm Striking the ganglion cyst with a large tome is usually sufficient to rupture the cyst, and re-accumulation is uncommon.








