[[The Shield]]

CATEGORIES: 2002 American television series debuts, 2008 American television series endings, 2000s American television series, American drama television series, Best Drama Series Golden Globe winners, American crime television series, English-language television programming, FX network shows, Peabody Award winning television programs, Serial drama television series, Suspense television series, Television series by Sony Pictures Television, Television series by Fox Television Studios, Television shows set in Los Angeles, California, The Shield, Fictional portrayals of the Los Angeles Police Department, Police procedural television series

The Shield is an American drama television series starring Michael Chiklis that premiered on March 12, 2002, on FX in the United States and concluded on November 25, 2008, after seven seasons. Known for its portrayal of corrupt police officers, it was originally advertised as Rampart in reference to the true life Rampart Division police scandal, on which the show's Strike Team was loosely based. The series was created by Shawn Ryan and The Barn Productions for Fox Television Studios and Sony Pictures Television.
Several notable film actors  took extended roles on the show, including Glenn Close, who was the female lead during the fourth season, Forest Whitaker who guest starred in seasons 5 and 6, Laura Harring in season 5, Franka Potente in season 6 and Laurie Holden in season 7.
The series has received high critical acclaim as well as several awards and nominations. It won the Golden Globe Award for Best Television Series – Drama in 2002; Michael Chiklis won both the Primetime Emmy Award and Golden Globe Award for Best Lead Actor in a Drama in 2002, and the final season won a 2008 AFI Award for best television series.

Premise

The Shield is about an experimental division of the Los Angeles Police Department set up in the fictional Farmington district ("the Farm") of Los Angeles, using a converted church ("the Barn") as their police station, and featuring a group of detectives called the Strike Team, a four-man anti-gang unit based on the LAPD's real-life Rampart Division CRASH unit. Rampart was seriously considered as the series name and was even used in some early promotional ads for the series. The show has an ensemble cast, and as a result, usually runs a number of separate story lines through each episode.
Detective Vic Mackey is the leader of the Strike Team, which also consists of Mackey's close friends Shane Vendrell, Curtis Lemansky and Ronnie Gardocki. The Strike Team uses a variety of illegal and unethical methods to prosecute criminals and maintain peace on the streets, while making a profit through illegal drug protection schemes and robbery. The Strike Team isn't above planting drugs on and coercing confessions out of gang members or framing them. Attempts to give the team a fifth member have frequently led to near-catastrophe for the group. As the series progresses, the Strike Team struggle to cover up their crimes in the face of increasing pressure and scrutiny from their superiors.
Other prominent figures at the barn include Captain David Aceveda, detectives Holland "Dutch" Wagenbach, Steve Billings and Claudette Wyms, and uniformed officers Sgt. Danielle "Danny" Sofer, Julien Lowe and Tina Hanlon. The Shield has a variety of subplots, notably Aceveda's political aspirations and his suffering of a sexual assault; Mackey's struggle to cope with a failing marriage, two autistic children and his rebellious eldest daughter; Danny becoming a mother; Vendrell's rocky, new marriage; Lemansky's growing fear for the safety of the Strike Team; Claudette's battle with illness; and Lowe's internal conflicts between his belief in the teachings of the Bible and his homosexuality.
Common themes are the citizens' distrust of police, the social impact of drugs and gang warfare, and the conflict between ethics and political expediency. The majority of conversations between characters on The Shield involve one person using leverage over the other, as well as each person looking out for their own agendas.  Most characters are portrayed as having both vice and virtue. For example, Vic's loving relationship with his children sharply contrasts with his thuggish approach to police work, although his brutality is generally directed at those who seem well-deserving of such treatment. For example, in Season 2, the Strike Team prepares to rob the "Armenian Money Train," a money laundering operation of the Armenian Mafia. Another episode had Mackey cornering a serial rapist, then letting him be mauled by a police dog before calling the dog off.

Series overview

Season 1

Season 1 consisted of 13 episodes. It premiered on March 12, 2002, and concluded on June 4, 2002. David Aceveda is assigned as the new Captain of the Barn in the district of Farmington. One of his top priorities is to get Detective Vic Mackey, leader of the experimental anti-gang unit called the Strike Team, off the streets. Aceveda suspects Mackey is involved in corrupt illegal activities favoring drug dealer Rondell Robinson to control local drug trade. To capture him, Aceveda asks a newly appointed member of the team, Terry Crowley, to gather evidence for his prosecution. Although reluctant, Crowley agrees, unaware that Mackey already knows about his assignment.
Aceveda's long-term ambition is to become Mayor of Los Angeles. To do this, he must first be elected to the City Council. The district "The Farm" is in has been held by African American politicians, but given the increase in the Latino population, Aceveda thinks he can pull off an upset and be elected as the district's first Latino Councilmember. But the Latino community is distrustful of law enforcement and would only support a police officer if he was one who has exposed corruption in the police force. Aceveda's motives are therefore not completely altruistic.
During a raid on the house of Two-Time (a drug dealer rival of Rondell), Mackey uses the dealer's gun to murder Crowley with Shane Vendrell as his only witness. Aceveda is convinced that Mackey was responsible for Crowleys' death, so he starts an internal investigation of Mackey and the Strike Team. Shane is guilt-ridden and struggles to come to terms with it. Meanwhile Assistant Chief of Police Ben Gilroy tries to cover Mackey's tracks.
Another subplot involves Julien Lowe, a rookie officer who is training under the experienced Danny Sofer, as he tries to settle into the job. Due to his lack of experience, Lowe often makes mistakes, which causes tension with Danny. Lowe is a devout Christian and a closeted homosexual, and struggles to reconcile the two. He also witnesses a crime committed by Vic and the Strike Team, which Aceveda tries to use to capture Mackey.
Finally, detectives Dutch Wagenbach and Claudette Wyms try to track down an elusive serial killer who Dutch thinks to be responsible for at least four murders. While Dutch becomes obsessed with the case, Claudette frequently tries to divert his attention to their other cases.

Season 2

Season 2 premiered on January 7, 2003, and concluded April 1, 2003, consisting of 13 episodes. The season mostly revolves around a brutal new drug lord, Armadillo — a sadistic child rapist who likes to set his rivals on fire using a tire necklace and gasoline — who begins to take over the drug trade in Farmington. Meanwhile, Officer Sofer is involved in the shooting of a Muslim man and has to deal with the fallout. This season is also heavily concerned with the Strike Team's plan to rip off the money train of the Armenian Mob, which ends up going down in the season finale.

Season 3

Season 3 premiered on March 9, 2004, and concluded on June 15, 2004, consisting of 15 episodes.

Season 4

Season 4 premiered on March 15, 2005, and concluded on June 14, 2005, consisting of 13 episodes. Glenn Close joined the main cast taking over the role as Farmington's new captain, Monica Rawling. The season dealt with the fallout from the Strike Team disbandment. Shane Vendrell, with new partner Armando "Army" Renta, enters into a dangerous situation with major drug lord Antwon Mitchell (Anthony Anderson), and seemingly accepts an order to kill Vic Mackey. The police were outraged after two officers were kidnapped and subsequently found murdered. In the end, the Strike Team is re-formed and manages to successfully put Antwon in prison. The season also deals with the controversial asset-forfeiture policies of the new captain; Julien's opposition to these policies; and David Aceveda (now a City Councilman) dealing with the psychological aftermath of his sexual assault incident from the previous season. The season concludes with Capt. Rawling losing her job over a dispute with the DEA. This plot twist reflected a real-life need for Close to return to New York.
One of the season's secondary plots involves Claudette's and Dutch's marginalization as detectives because of Claudette's refusal to apologize to the DA for reopening the cases of a public defender who was discovered to be a functioning drug addict. Claudette's moral stand resulted in many of the prosecutor's cases being overturned. This cost Claudette her shot at becoming Farmington Captain. Dutch eventually resolved the situation by making a back-room deal with the DA to "keep Claudette in line" and do favors for the office in return for breaking back into action.

Season 5

Season 5 premiered on January 10, 2006, and concluded on March 21, 2006, consisting of 11 episodes. The season revolves around Internal Affairs Department Lt. Jon Kavanaugh's (played by Forest Whitaker) investigation into the Strike Team, representing one of the greatest threats the team has ever faced. As a result of Kavanaugh turning one of Vic's informants, IAD became aware of Lem stealing heroin which he never turned in. Having found the heroin, IAD is capable of arresting Lem, but Kavanaugh wants him to incriminate the whole team and has him wear a wire. Lem warns the team he is wired and they use it to embarrass IAD. Kavanaugh, applying pressure to the team in any way he can, finds out about Mackey's share of the Money Train, and ultimately arrests Lem having made a deal with Antwon Mitchell, a gang leader the team had put in prison. Mackey supports Lem and gets bail, while Shane is worried he will give evidence against the team. Claudette finally gets her opportunity for promotion as the captain of the Barn, which she reluctantly accepts. The season concluded with Shane Vendrell, fooled by Aceveda into believing that Lem was going to turn on the Strike Team, murdering his friend and fellow team member Lem with a hand grenade.

="Wins and Losses"=

The producers of The Shield produced a 15-minute "promosode", which premiered on Google on February 15, 2007, to bridge the gap between Seasons 5 and 6. The episode focuses on the aftermath of Lem's death, including his funeral and flashbacks as co-workers reflect upon Det. Lemansky's life. The "promosode" is also one of the special features included on the Season 5 DVD set.

Season 6

Season 6 premiered on April 3, 2007, and concluded on June 5, 2007, consisting of 10 episodes. Continuing directly after season 5, Vic and the Strike Team are distraught over Lem's death. Shane has been overcome by guilt and becomes reckless and suicidal. Kavanaugh refuses to let the case die and resorts to planting evidence and coercing witnesses to lie about the Strike Team and specifically, Vic. Dutch and Claudette begin to suspect his integrity and Kavanaugh finally confesses to his actions and finds himself under arrest. Vic learns from Claudette that the Chief plans to force him into early retirement — and vows to wreak bloody vengeance on Lem's killer before losing his badge. Claudette learns that the Barn could be shut down if no improvements are made by the time quarterly crime statistics are released. The season concludes with the breakdown of Vic and Shane's friendship as Shane admits killing Lem. Shane threatens Vic with revealing their illegal exploits should Vic attempt to arrest him for Lem's killing, while Shane gets in over his head with the Armenians.
Season 6 was originally intended to be aired as the second half of Season 5 (in the same way that HBO split up the last season of The Sopranos); FX decided to refer to these ten episodes as "Season 6" instead.

Season 7

Season 7 premiered on September 2, 2008, and concluded on November 25, 2008, consisting of 13 episodes. Vic's ex-wife Corrine has learned of his many crimes and agrees to work with Dutch and Claudette to try to send him to prison. Ronnie is also implicated in the process. After a botched attempt by Vic and Ronnie to have Shane killed in a shootout between Mexican and Armenian gangs, Shane recruits a local criminal to make a hit on Ronnie while he prepares to ambush and kill Vic. The plot is exposed, and Shane goes on the run, along with Mara, and Jackson. Dutch has problems of his own while dealing with a teenage serial killer. Vic tries to circumvent his forced retirement by joining with the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement in bringing down a major operator. As part of an immunity deal engineered by ICE, Vic admits to every crime the Strike Team has committed and implicates Shane and Ronnie enough to send them to jail for life. After learning that there is no way to escape prison, Shane poisons his pregnant wife and two-year old son and then commits suicide just as the police arrive. With Shane's death there is no longer any risk of Vic being sent to jail, but since Vic already spilled everything to ICE it is now too late for Ronnie. Just when Ronnie thinks he is going to go free he is arrested in front of Vic at the barn.  Claudette reveals the terminal status of her illness to Dutch, who promises to stand by her as a friend. Desperate to escape Vic, Corrine and the children disappear into the witness protection program. Aceveda stands on the verge of being elected mayor. Meanwhile, Vic is reassigned to a desk job at ICE, presumably loathed by his co-workers, including Agent Olivia Murray (played by Laurie Holden), and ostracized by his fellow cops, who want nothing to do with him now that his many crimes have been exposed. The show's final moment depicts Vic picking up his gun and leaving the ICE building, following police sirens in the distance.

Characters

Main

Strike Team

Administration and police

Crew

The series was created by Shawn Ryan. Ryan served as an executive producer for all seven seasons and was the series head writer and showrunner throughout its run. Prior to creating the series Ryan had been working as a producer and writer for the supernatural detective series Angel. He began his television career as a writer for the crime drama Nash Bridges. Scott Brazil was a co-executive producer for the first season. He became an executive producer for the second season. He was a regular director for the series until his death during production of the sixth season. Brazil and Ryan had worked together on Nash Bridges.
Several of the series more junior writers became executive producers during its run. Glen Mazzara was an executive story editor for the first season and became an executive producer from the fifth season onwards. Mazzara had also worked with Ryan on Nash Bridges. Kurt Sutter and Scott Rosenbaum were staff writers for the first season and became executive producers for the sixth season onwards. Adam E. Fierro joined the crew as a co-producer and writer for the third season and was promoted to executive producer for the seventh season. Veteran television writer Charles H. Eglee joined the crew as a consulting producer for the third season and was promoted to executive producer from the fifth season onwards.
Emmy Award winning The Sopranos veteran James Manos, Jr. served as a consulting producer and writer for the first two seasons. He left the show to develop the Showtime serial killer drama Dexter. NYPD Blue veteran writer Kevin Arkadie was a co-executive producer for the first season only. Nash Bridges writer and producer Reed Steiner replaced Arkadie as co-executive producer for the second season only. Kevin G. Cremin was the series unit production manager throughout its run and became a co-executive producer from the sixth season onwards.
Angel writing team Elizabeth Craft and Sarah Fain joined the crew as co-producers for the third season and became supervising producers before leaving at the close of the sixth season. Dean White was a producer and regular director throughout the series run. Star Michael Chiklis became a producer from the second season onwards and also regularly directed episodes. Post-production supervisor Craig Yahata joined the crew in the third season and eventually became a producer for the seventh season.
The series pilot and finale were directed by Clark Johnson; Johnson had previously starred in Homicide: Life on the Street and made his directing debut on that series. Guy Ferland directed episodes for all seven seasons of The Shield. 
Rohn Schmidt was a cinematographer for all seven seasons and made his television directing debut on the show. Stephen Kay was a frequent director for the series. Gwyneth Horder-Payton was an assistant director for the show's early seasons and made her television directing debut in the fourth season, she continued regularly direct episodes thereafter.
Film director Frank Darabont directed an episode for the series. Darabont went on to hire many The Shield crew members for his television adaptation of The Walking Dead comics, including writers Charles H. Eglee, Glen Mazzara and Adam Fierro. Acclaimed playwright and film writer and director David Mamet directed an episode of the series. Mamet and Ryan collaborated as executive producers on military thriller The Unit. Screenwriter Ted Griffin (Oceans Eleven) wrote a single episode of the show. Griffin later created Terriers and was reunited with Shawn Ryan as a fellow executive producer.  The series started with real Los Angeles Police Officers as Technical Advisors; Officer's Pablo Vitar and Rafael Dagnesses.

Reception

Time magazine's James Poniewozik ranked it #8 in his list of the Top 10 Returning Series of 2007

Awards and nominations

The series received six Primetime Emmy Award nominations during its series run. For the first season, Michael Chiklis won for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series, and the pilot episode received nominations for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series and Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series, for Shawn Ryan and Clark Johnson respectively. Chiklis received a consecutive nomination Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series for the second season. For the fourth season, Glenn Close was nominated for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series and CCH Pounder was nominated for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series.
For the Golden Globe Awards, the series received five nominations, with Michael Chiklis receiving three consecutive nominations for Best Performance by an Actor in a Television Series – Drama, and winning the award for the first season. The first season also earned the series the award for Best Drama Series. Glenn Close was also nominated for Best Performance by an Actress in a Television Series – Drama.
For the Satellite Awards, the series received seven nominations. CCH Pounder won two consecutive times for Best Performance by an Actress in a Television Series – Drama, Michael Chiklis received two nominations with one win for Best Performance by an Actor in a Television Series – Drama, and Forest Whitaker was nominated for Best Supporting Actor in a Series, Miniseries or Motion Picture Made for Television. The series won the award for Best Television Drama Series and received a nomination for the that category the following year.
For the Television Critics Association Awards, the first season received nominations for Outstanding New Program of the Year, Outstanding Achievement in Drama, and Program of the Year. That year Michael Chiklis won for Individual Achievement in Drama. The series received nominations again for Outstanding Achievement in Drama
for the next two seasons. For the final season, it was nominated for Outstanding Achievement in Drama and Program of the Year, as well as receiving the Heritage Award. Also, Walton Goggins was nominated for Individual Achievement in Drama.
Other awards and nominations include a 2005 Peabody Award and Michael Chiklis being nominated for a Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Drama Series for the first season.

Other media

Soundtrack

On September 5, 2005, The Shield: Music from the Streets was released by Lakeshore Entertainment. The soundtrack features 19 tracks, including two versions of the theme song and tracks ranging from artists such as Black Label Society to Kelis.

Video game

After a rocky development cycle, The Shield, the video game, was released for the PlayStation 2 on January 9, 2007, and for the PC on January 22, 2007. It is a third person shooter that bridges the gap between the third and fourth seasons by exploring the gang war between the Byz-Lats and the One-Niners. It received generally negative reviews.

Comic

In 2004, IDW Publishing released a five-issue comic book limited series written by Jeff Mariotte and illustrated by Jean Diaz titled The Shield: Spotlight. A controversial journalist is murdered and the barn is under intense media scrutiny. Vic and the Strike Team find the murderer but uncover a bigger conspiracy which has Dutch enthralled. All the while, Shane is trying to keep his face out of the media when he accidentally sets up a chance to make the team a whole lot of money recovering stolen art and Julien and Danny struggle to realize when is the right time to go 'by the book' and when isn't. When uniformed officers spot the Strike Team with the stolen art, they have no choice but to do things the right way. Aceveda is warned to drop the journalists investigation or risk losing political backing. He drops the case which leaves Dutch feeling disheartened.

DVD releases

The first five seasons were originally distributed by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment for region 1. However, in 2008, Sony Pictures Home Entertainment became the rights holders for the DVDs.

Digital release

In November 2012, all seven seasons were made available for purchase on iTunes.






