[[Grey Wagtail]]

CATEGORIES: Motacilla, Birds of Europe, Birds of Africa, Birds of Kenya, Birds of Asia, Birds of Pakistan, Birds of India, Birds of Turkey, Birds of Ukraine

The Grey Wagtail (Motacilla cinerea) is a small member of the wagtail family,  Motacillidae. The species looks similar to the Yellow Wagtail but has the yellow on its underside restricted to the throat and vent. Breeding males have a black throat. The species is widely distributed, with several populations breeding in Europe and Asia and migrating to tropical regions in Asia and Africa. They are usually seen on open marshy ground or meadows where they walk solitarily or in pairs along the ground, capturing insects that are disturbed. Like other wagtails, they frequently wag their tail and fly low with undulations and they have a sharp call that is often given in flight.

Taxonomy and systematics

This species was first described by Marmaduke Tunstall in his 1771 Ornithologia Britannica.
The relationships of this species are not well resolved; it belongs to the non-African clade of wagtails, these are confusing in their external morphology, and mtDNA cytochrome b and NADH dehydrogenase subunit 2 sequence data are not able to robustly resolve their relationships. While the present species is probably most closely related to Citrine Wagtails and some Blue-headed Wagtails, the exact nature of this relationship is unclear.

Description

This slim wagtail has a narrow white supercilium and a broken eye ring. The upperparts are grey and the yellow vent contrasting with whitish underparts makes it distinctive. The breeding male has a black throat that is edged by whitish moustachial stripes. They forage singly or in pairs on meadows or on shallow water marshes. They also use rocks in water and will often perch on trees. They have a clear sharp call note and the song consists of trills.

Distribution and habitat

The bird is widely distributed across the Palearctic region with several well marked populations. The nominate form (includes caspica of Iran, Turkey and the Caucasus) is from western Europe including the British Isles, Scandinavia and Mediterranean region. Race melanope, which is not well separated from the nominate subspecies, is described as the population breeding in eastern Europe and central Asia mainly along the mountain chains of the Urals, Tien Shan and along the Himalayas. They winter in Africa and Asia. Race robusta breeds along the northeastern parts of Asia in Siberia extending to Korea and Japan. These winter in Southeast Asia. Island forms include patriciae of the Azores, schmitzi of Madeira and canariensis of the Canary Islands.
They sometimes occur on the islands to the West of Alaska but have been known to occur further south in California as a vagrant.

Behaviour and ecology

The breeding season is April to July and the nest is placed near fast running streams or rivers on an embankment between stones and roots.
In some parts of the its range the White-throated Dipper nests in the same habitats as the Grey Wagtail and there are some records of interspecific feeding of dipper chicks by nesting wagtails.
These birds feed on a variety of aquatic invertebrates including adult flies, mayflies, beetles, crustacea and molluscs. They often forage along roadsides in winter, flushing with a sharp chi-cheep call and flying up further along the road but after some distance turning back to return to the original location.
In winter, they roost in small groups.
Adults often have parasitic ticks, Ixodes ricinus, which can harbour Borrelia and thus can potentially disperse Lyme disease over a wide region.






