[[Marvin Gay, Sr.]]

CATEGORIES: 1914 births, 1998 deaths, African-American Christians, American Pentecostal pastors, American people convicted of manslaughter, Deaths from pneumonia, Filicides, Infectious disease deaths in California, Marvin Gaye, People from Jessamine County, Kentucky, People from Los Angeles, California, Musicians from Washington, D.C.

The Reverend Marvin Pentz Gay Sr. (October 1, 1914 – October 10, 1998) was an American minister of the House of God. He was the father of American recording artist Marvin Gaye and gained notoriety after shooting and killing him on April 1, 1984 following an argument at their Los Angeles home.

Early life

Marvin Gay was born as one of fifteen children to George and Mamie Gay on October 1, 1914 on a farm along Catnip Hill Pike in Jessamine County, Kentucky and was raised in Lexington.
It was while in Washington that Gay met his future wife, Alberta Cooper, whom he would marry on July 2, 1935.

Ministry work

On one of his first missions as preacher at a church in Norristown, Pennsylvania, Gay impressed the congregation and his church later made him Bishop.
However, by the late 1940s, Gay had left the House of God to join another sect called the House of the Living God, but soon returned to the House of God to head its Board of Apostles in the early fifties.

Personal life

In most accounts, Gay was described as a strict and sometimes overbearing father to his four children. According to his children, Gay would make them observe an extended Sabbath, which was every Saturday. Gay was against the Christian tradition of attending church Sunday, accusing them of going against observing God on "Lord's Day", which he contended was Saturdays.
Gay administered most of his harshest punishments on Marvin, Jr. According to Marvin's sister, Jeanne, between the age of seven well into his teenage years, Marvin's life consisted of "brutal whippings". Alberta Gay later stated that her husband hated Marvin, as she told David Ritz in 1979:

According to Jeanne Gay, her father never held a job for longer than three years. 
By 1968, however, after Gaye had found musical stardom in Motown, Gaye extended an olive branch, giving his father a Cadillac as a present, but Gaye said his father's response was not affecting. In 1974, dressed in a female wig and clothing, Gay appeared on his son's Midnight Special episode. In 1975, Marvin gave up a residence at the West Adams district of Los Angeles to his parents after moving them to California. By the early 1980s, Gay's marriage to Alberta had deteriorated. According to his wife in 1984, the couple hadn't shared the same bed in nearly ten years, with Gay and Alberta sleeping in separate bedrooms.

The murder of Marvin Gaye

In October 1983, after months in D.C., Gay returned to the West Adams home located at Gramercy Place.
Around 11:00 am on April 1, 1984, Gay began arguing with Alberta over a missing insurance policy document; the argument had started the previous night.
At approximately 11:38, minutes after returning to the room, Gay Sr. came back to the bedroom with the .38 pistol and shot his son in the heart. The bullet penetrated Marvin's vital organs, including his heart. Gay then walked forward and shot him a second time in the shoulder at point-blank range. According to his daughter-in-law, Irene, Gay hid the gun in his bedroom pillow and later retrieved it for police. 
During his first police interview, Gay would tell cops that he didn't mean to shoot him, but that he had been scared that he would be hurt and only shot him in self-defense.

Aftermath and death

After being taken to the Los Angeles County Jail, Gay was held on a $100,000 bond.
During the sentencing hearing two months later on November 20, Gay was allowed to talk. In tears and struggling to come up with words, Gay, 70, told the court:

Following this, Gay was given a six-year suspended sentence and five years probation for the murder. During this time, Alberta Gay had filed for divorce after forty-nine years of marriage.



Sources




