[[Veronica Lake]]

CATEGORIES: 1922 births, 1973 deaths, 20th-century American actresses, Actresses from New York City, Alcohol-related deaths in Vermont, American aviators, American film actresses, American memoirists, American people of Danish descent, American people of German descent, American people of Irish descent, American stage actresses, American television actresses, Deaths from hepatitis, Deaths from renal failure, Female aviators, Paramount Pictures contract players, People with schizophrenia, People from Brooklyn

Veronica Lake (November 14, 1922U.S. Census, April 1, 1930, State of Washington, County of Kings, enumeration district 1657, page 8-B, family 151, Constance Ockelman (sic), age 7 years, born in Seattle. Her father, Harry Ockelman, Jr., is listed as unmarried in the 1920 U.S. Census of Pennsylvania. – July 7, 1973) was an American film, stage and television actress.
Lake won both popular and critical acclaim, most notably for her role in Sullivan's Travels and for her femme fatale roles in film noirs with Alan Ladd, during the 1940s. She was also well known for her peek-a-boo hairstyle. By the late 1940s however, Lake's career had begun to decline in part due to her struggles with mental illness and alcoholism. She made only one film in the 1950s but appeared in several guest-starring roles on   television. She returned to the screen in 1966 with a role in the film Footsteps In the Snow, but the role failed to revitalize her career.
Lake released her memoirs, Veronica: The Autobiography of Veronica Lake, in 1970. She used the money she made from the book to finance a low-budget horror film Flesh Feast. It was her final onscreen role. Lake died in July 1973 from hepatitis and acute kidney injury at the age of 50.

Early life

Lake was born Constance Frances Marie Ockelman in Brooklyn, New York. Her father, Harry E. Ockelman, was of German-Danish descent,

Career

In 1938, the Keanes moved to Beverly Hills where Constance Keane enrolled Lake in the Bliss-Hayden School of Acting (now the Beverly Hills Playhouse). She first began working in films as an extra. Her first appearance on screen was for RKO, playing a small role among several coeds in the 1939 film, Sorority House. Similar roles followed, including All Women Have Secrets and Dancing Co-Ed. During the making of Sorority House, director John Farrow first noticed how her hair always covered her right eye, creating an air of mystery about her and enhancing her natural beauty. While still a teenager, Lake was introduced to the Paramount producer Arthur Hornblow, Jr. He changed her name to Veronica Lake because the surname suited her blue eyes.
RKO subsequently dropped her contract. A small role in the comedy Forty Little Mothers brought unexpected attention. In 1941 she was signed to a long-term contract with Paramount Pictures.

Success

Lake's breakthrough role was in the 1941 war drama I Wanted Wings. The film was a major hit in which Lake played the second female lead. It was during the filming of I Wanted Wings that Lake developed her signature look. Lake's long blonde hair accidentally fell over her right eye during a take and created a "peek-a-boo" effect. The hairstyle became Lake's trademark and was widely copied by women.
For a short time during the early 1940s, Lake was considered one of the most reliable box office draws in Hollywood. At the peak of her popularity, she earned $4,500 a week.
She became known for onscreen pairings with actor Alan Ladd which began with the 1942 hit This Gun for Hire.. They became a popular onscreen duo and would make four more films together including the film noirs The Glass Key (1942), The Blue Dahlia (1946) and ''Saigon. 
During World War II, Lake changed her trademark peek-a-boo hairstyle at the insistence of the government to encourage women working in war industry factories to adopt more practical, safer hairstyles. She also became a popular pin-up girl for soldiers during World War II and traveled throughout the United States to raise money for war bonds. 

Decline

Although popular with the public, Lake had a complex personality and acquired a reputation for being difficult to work with. Eddie Bracken, her co-star in Star Spangled Rhythm (in which Lake appeared in a musical number) was quoted as saying, "She was known as 'The Bitch' and she deserved the title."
Lake's career faltered with her unsympathetic role as Nazi spy Dora Bruckman in 1944's The Hour Before the Dawn. Scathing reviews of The Hour Before the Dawn included criticism of her unconvincing German accent. She had begun drinking more heavily during this period, and a growing number of people refused to work with her. To boost her career, Paramount tried Lake in a series of comedies. Few were successful but she was in the popular thriller The Blue Dahlia (1946), in which she again co-starred with Alan Ladd.  Paramount decided not to renew her contract in 1948. 
After a single film for 20th Century Fox, Slattery's Hurricane in 1949, her career collapsed. By the end of 1951 she had appeared in one last film Stronghold (which she later described as "a dog"). Lake and her second husband, André de Toth, filed for bankruptcy that same year.
Lake then turned to television and stage work. She performed in summer stock and in stage roles in England.

Later years

After her third divorce, Lake drifted between cheap hotels in New York City, and was arrested several times for public drunkenness and disorderly conduct. In 1962, a New York Post reporter found her working as a barmaid at the all-women's Martha Washington Hotel in Manhattan. The story did revive some interest in Lake and led to some television and stage appearances, most notably in the off-Broadway revival of the musical Best Foot Forward.
In 1966, she had a brief stint as a TV hostess in Baltimore, Maryland, along with a largely ignored film role in Footsteps In the Snow. She also continued appearing in stage roles. By the late 1960s, Lake had moved to England. Her memoirs, Veronica: The Autobiography of Veronica Lake, were released in the United Kingdom in 1969, and in the United States the following year. In the book, Lake discusses her career, her failed marriages, her romances with Howard Hughes, Tommy Manville and Aristotle Onassis (whom she claimed proposed to her), her alcoholism, and her guilt over not spending enough time with her children. In the book, Lake stated that her mother pushed her into a career as an actress. Looking back at her career, Lake wrote, "I never did cheesecake like Ann Sheridan or Betty Grable. I just used my hair." She also laughed off the term "sex symbol" and instead referred to herself as a "sex zombie". Also in 1969, Lake portrayed the role as Blanche DuBois in A Streetcar Named Desire on the English stage. She won rave reviews for her performance. With the proceeds from her autobiography, she co-produced and starred in her final film, Flesh Feast (1970), a low-budget horror movie with a Nazi-myth storyline.
Lake then moved to Ipswich, England, where she met and married Royal Navy captain Robert Carleton-Munro, in June 1972. The marriage lasted just one year and Lake returned to the United States in June 1973. She went to the Virgin Islands to await her divorce decree when she fell ill.

Personal life

Lake earned her pilot's license in 1946 and later flew solo between Los Angeles and New York.

Marriages and children

Lake's first marriage was to art director John S. Detlie, in 1940. They had a daughter, Elaine (born in 1941),
In September 1955, she married songwriter Joseph Allan McCarthy.

Death

In June 1973, traveled back to the United States. On June 26, she checked into the Medical Center of Vermont in Burlington. She died there on July 7, 1973, of acute hepatitis and acute kidney injury. Published by Vermont State Archives and Records Administration, Montpelier, Vermont. Her son Michael claimed her body.
For her contribution to the motion picture industry, Veronica Lake has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6918 Hollywood Boulevard.

Filmography

Selected stage credits

In popular culture

Clips from her role in The Glass Key were integrated into the 1982 film Dead Men Don't Wear Plaid, as character Monica Stillpond.
Lake was one of the models for the animated character of Jessica Rabbit in the 1988 film Who Framed Roger Rabbit, especially for her hairstyle.[ref]

In the 1997 film L.A. Confidential (based on James Ellroy's 1990 novel), Kim Basinger won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her portrayal of a prostitute who is a Veronica Lake look-alike, and who is complimented by a police officer who tells her, "You look better than Veronica Lake".[ref]


Footnotes

Sources

Further reading




