[[TaleSpin]]

CATEGORIES: TaleSpin, The Disney Afternoon, YTV shows, 1990s American animated television series, 1990 American television series debuts, 1991 American television series endings, Aviation television series, Disney Channel shows, Disney Comics titles, English-language television programming, Playmates Toys, First-run syndicated television programs in the United States, Television programs featuring anthropomorphic characters, Disney animated television series, Television series by Disney

TaleSpin is a half-hour animated adventure series based in the fictional city of Cape Suzette, that first aired in 1990 as a preview on The Disney Channel and later that year as part of The Disney Afternoon, with characters adapted from Disney's 1967 animated feature The Jungle Book, which was theatrically rereleased in the summer before this show premiered in the fall. The show is one of the nine Disney Afternoon shows to use established Disney characters as the main characters, with the others being Darkwing Duck, DuckTales, Chip 'n Dale Rescue Rangers, Goof Troop, Bonkers, Quack Pack, Aladdin and The Lion King's Timon and Pumbaa.

Background

After a preview of TaleSpin aired on The Disney Channel from May 5 to July 15, 1990,The Disney Channel Magazine, Vol. 8, no. 2 (typo in magazine: should be "no. 3"), May/June 1990: pp. 22, 34, 37, 46, 49–53, 57–59. 8, no. 3 (typo in magazine: should be "no. 4"), July/August 1990: pp. 45–47. the series began its syndicated run in September of the same year. The original concept was embodied in the pilot episode and introductory television movie Plunder & Lightning which was the sole nominee for an Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program (For Programming More Than One Hour) in 1991., and later from January 2007 until May 2008.
Several of the characters are loosely based on characters from Disney's animated film version of The Jungle Book: in particular Baloo, the hot-shot pilot hero of the series; Louie, the owner of Baloo's favorite bar; and Shere Khan, a business tycoon who appears in many episodes. Despite its strong likeness to and re-use of several characters from the film, TaleSpin has never been intended to be a "spin-off" or a parody of The Jungle Book. While the film was released in 1992 (two years after TaleSpin had already aired) Porco Rosso is based on Miyazaki's manga, Hikōtei Jidai, which was first published in 1989.
The series was largely developed by writers Jymn Magon and Mark Zaslove, who were also the supervising producers on the series as well as story editors. There were four production teams, each one headed by a producer/director: Robert Taylor, Larry Latham, Jamie Mitchell, and Ed Ghertner.

Synopsis

TaleSpin is set in the fictional city of Cape Suzette (a pun on the dish Crêpe Suzette), in a fictional country called Usland. The city lies in a harbor protected by giant cliffs through which only a small opening exists. The opening in the cliffs is guarded by anti-aircraft artillery, preventing flying rabble-rousers or air pirates from entering the city. The characters in the world of TaleSpin are anthropomorphic animals. The time frame of the series is never specifically addressed, but appears to be in the mid-to-late 1930s. The helicopter, television and jet engine are experimental devices, and most architecture is reminiscent of the Art Deco style of that period. In one episode, Baloo comments that "The Great War ended 20 years ago,""Bygones". Original airdate 3 May 1991. suggesting that the series specifically takes place in 1938. Radio is the primary mass medium, and one episode even briefly alludes to the characters having never heard of television."The Incredible Shrinking Molly". Original airdate 8 April 1991.
The series centers on the adventures of bush pilot Baloo the bear, whose air cargo freight business, "Baloo's Air Service," is purchased by Rebecca Cunningham upon his default on delinquent bills with the bank and renamed "Higher for Hire." An orphan boy and former air pirate, the ambitious Kit Cloudkicker, attaches to Baloo and becomes his navigator. He sometimes calls him "Papa Bear." Together, they are the crew of Higher for Hire's only aircraft, a 20-year old modified Conwing L-16 (a fictitious combination of a Fairchild C-82 transport and a Grumman HU-16 amphibian) with the livery of the Canadair CL-215 waterbomber, named the Sea Duck. From there, the series follows the ups and downs of Higher for Hire and its staff, sometimes in the vein of old action-adventure film serials of the 1930s and 1940s and contemporary variations, such as Raiders of the Lost Ark.
Their adventures often involve encounters with a gang of air pirates led by Don Karnage, as well as with representatives of Thembria (a parody of the Stalinist Soviet Union inhabited by anthropomorphic boars), or other, often even stranger obstacles.  In deference to contemporary sensitivities, there is no equivalent of the Nazis in the series, although one story in Disney Adventures Magazine, "The Dogs of War!," had the heroes encounter "the Hausers" (members of the "Houn" nationality), a menacing militaristic nationality of dogs from "Hounsland" who wear uniforms that are clearly based on German ones and the senior commander of the Houn airship (Major Heartworm) speaks in a mock-German accent. "The Dogs of War!" Disney Adventures v2 #1 (November 1991), The Walt Disney Company, Story code: KZ 4590
The relationship between Baloo and Rebecca owes something to the screwball comedy films of the 1930s. More precisely, according to Jymn Magon (co-creator of the series), the two characters were fashioned after Sam Malone and Rebecca Howe from the then-popular sitcom Cheers. Famed Uncle Scrooge comic writer and artist Don Rosa wrote episode 6, "It Came from Beneath the Sea Duck," episode 9, "I Only Have Ice for You," and episode 24, "A Touch of Glass."

Characters and cast

Episodes

VHS releases

Eight VHS cassettes containing 15 episodes of the series were released in the United States.

UK, Australia & New Zealand releases

Eleven VHS cassettes containing 21 episodes of the series were released in the United Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand.

DVD releases

Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment has released some of the series on DVD; two volumes have been released in Region 1 thus far featuring the first 54 episodes of the series. The first was released on August 29, 2006 (containing episodes 1–27) and the second on November 13, 2007 (containing episodes 28–54). Volume 3 includes the controversial episode "Flying Dupes," which has never been re-aired in syndication.

International Releases

The series has been released into several volumes in different countries, each containing only 4 episodes each. As to the US release, all 65 episodes have been released in the US.

=Germany=

In Germany, A series of 3-disc sets started with Collection 1 released on December 5th 2012, in Region 2, PAL format. The sets contain the episodes in the same order as the US releases, as well as a Fastplay feature and 6 language tracks: English, Danish, German, Italian, Norwegian and Swedish, but no subtitles have been added. the first collection has only 17 episodes.
A Second Collection, containing 16 episodes, was released on March 7th.
A Third Collection, containing 17 episodes, was released on May 29th.
However, a few episodes have been removed from the original list. The 1st collection does not included "From Here To Machinery" and "Vowel Play". The 2nd set excludes "A Touch of Glass", while the 3rd set misses out "Jumping the Guns".
There is no confirmation on whether or not these episodes will be released, along with the final 11 episodes of the series.

=United Kingdom=

The sets from Germany have also been released in the United Kingdom. The First Collection came out on February 11th 2013. The Second Collection was released on May 20th 2013.

=Australia=

The sets from Germany and the United Kingdom have also been released in Australia. The First Collection came out on August 17th 2012. The Second Collection was released on March 15th 2013. The Third Collection was released on October 11th 2013.

Reception

IGN listed TaleSpin as the 81st best cartoon in the Top 100 Animated TV Shows.

Outsourced Production Work

Comics

A monthly comic book based on the show was published by the Disney subsidiary W. D. Publications, Inc. as part of their Disney Comics line in 1991, running for eleven issues, including a four-issue limited series called "Take Off" based on the series premiere episode Plunder & Lightning, which was published between January and April,Weiss, Bobbi J.G. (adaptation from a script by Mark Zaslove) (w), Quartieri, Cosme (p), Valenti, Carlos, Robert Bat (i). "Take Off: Part One – Plane for Keeps" Disney's TaleSpin Limited Series #1 (January 1991), W. D. Publications, Inc., ISBN 1-56115-115-7, Cover code: KB 0390, Story code: KB 0190Weiss, Bobbi J.G. (adaptation from a teleplay by Alan Burnett) (w), Quartieri, Cosme (p), Valenti, Carlos, Raul Barbéro, Robert Bat (i). "Take Off: Part Two – Missed Deeds and Derring-Don'ts" Disney's TaleSpin Limited Series #2 (February 1991), W. D. Publications, Inc., ISBN 1-56115-116-5, Cover code: KB 0590, Story code: KB 0290Weiss, Bobbi J.G. (adaptation from a teleplay by Len Uhley) (w), Quartieri, Cosme (p), Valenti, Carlos, Robert Bat (i). "Take Off: Part Three – Khan Job" Disney's TaleSpin Limited Series #3 (March 1991), W. D. Publications, Inc., ISBN 1-56115-117-3, Cover code: KB 0690, Story code: KB 0490Weiss, Bobbi J.G. (adaptation from a teleplay by Mark Zaslove) (w), Saavedra, Oscar F. (p), Valenti, Carlos, Raul Barbéro, Robert Bat (i). "Take Off: Part Four – Plunder and Lightning" Disney's TaleSpin Limited Series #4 (April 1991), W. D. Publications, Inc., ISBN 1-56115-118-1, Cover code: KB 0790, Story code: KB 0890 followed by a series of seven regular issues published between June and December. Bobbi J.G. Weiss was the writer for regular issues 1–4 and 6–7, while "Take Off" was adapted from Plunder & Lightning and regular issue 5 was adapted from episode 35, "The Old Man and the Sea Duck," for both of which Weiss is credited for adaptation.
The comic's cancellation at the end of 1991 terminated several planned stories that would have revealed pieces of background for the main characters.  Issue 7, "The Long Flight Home," explored Kit's past, and how he joined up with the pirates. According to the letter page in #3, a planned story for the comic's annual would have explored the origin of the Iron Vulture. In addition, #4–7 would have letters 'answered' by the characters. A collected edition called Disney's Cartoon Tales featuring TaleSpin came out in 1991 (ISBN 1-56115-269-2). It reprints #4 and 6 from the regular comic book series. Subsequent comic stories were also printed in Disney Adventures from 1990 to 1995, and then re-appeared in the Summer 2006 issue of Disney Adventures Comic Zone Magazine, as well as in The Disney Afternoon comic book published by Marvel Comics.
Although issue #8 of the monthly comic series never made it to print, the end of issue #7 included a preview for it: "Spies in Cape Suzette?! There are some mighty mysterious folk sniffing around Shere Khan Industries. When Special Agent Booker shows up to handle the problem he finds that battling foreign agents is easier than dealing with Baloo as an assistant in... THE SPY WHO BUGGED ME!"

Video games

Three different TaleSpin video games were produced. One was a scrolling shooting game developed by Capcom for the NES and Game Boy. The other two were platform games, one developed by Sega for the Sega Genesis and Game Gear, and the other developed by NEC for the TurboGrafx-16.

Cameos

Award






