[[Aflac]]

CATEGORIES: Insurance companies of the United States, Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange, Companies established in 1955, Companies based in Columbus, Georgia, Life insurance companies

Aflac Incorporated  is the largest provider of supplemental insurance in the United States,"Aflac Profit Rises 20% on Japanese Currency Strength" Bloomberg, 29 April 2009 founded in 1955 and based in Columbus, Georgia. In the United States, Aflac underwrites a wide range of insurance policies, but is perhaps more known for its payroll deduction insurance coverage, which pays cash benefits when a policyholder has a covered accident or illness. The company states it insures "one of four Japanese households" and is "the largest life insurer in Japan in terms of individual insurance policies in force".
Aflac currently is the number one supplemental health provider in the U.S., followed closely by Allstate Workplace Division. However, its market share is higher than its next four competitors combined.
In 2009, Aflac acquired Continental American Insurance Company for $100 million this enabled Aflac to sell supplemental insurance on both the individual and group platform .aflac.aspx?rid=1313847 from Aflac.com
As of June 30, 2012, Aflac was represented by approximately 19,300 sales agencies in Japan, and 76,900 licensed sales associates in the U.S.

History

The company was founded by three brothers named John, Paul, and William Amos in Columbus, Georgia, in 1955, as American Family Life Insurance Company of Columbus. In 1964, the company name was changed to American Family Life Assurance Company of Columbus.
The company, in 1990, adopted the Aflac initials, although the official name of the underwriting subsidiary remains American Family Life Assurance Company of Columbus.
The company signed 6,426 policyholders in its first year.com Aflac pioneered cancer insurance in 1958. Beginning in 1964, the company decided to focus sales on worksite settings, eventually through policies sponsored by employers and funded through payroll deductions. By 2003, more than 98% of Aflac policies in the United States were issued on a payroll deduction basis, making the company a leader in that approach to policy distribution. In 1973, Aflac established a holding company, the American Family Corporation.

Business

Aflac operates in the United States and Japan, and has its worldwide headquarters and corporate offices in an eighteen story tower just east of Downtown Columbus, Georgia in an area known as MidTown. The Aflac tower is the tallest building in the city. As of September 30, 2012, the corporation's total assets were more than $124 billion, and the company insured more than 50 million people worldwide.
Aflac is the largest provider of guaranteed-renewable insurance in the United States and the largest insurance company overall in Japan, when measured by individual insurance policies in force.com Aflac launched a campaign in 2001 to promote their first accident policy in Japan, which The Wall Street Journal rated as one of the "ten most effective campaigns of 2000."
The company now offers several types of insurance policies in the United States, including the following:
Aflac also offers un-reimbursed medical, dependent day-care, and transportation flexible spending accounts. The company also offers human resources services for HIPAA and COBRA administration.
From 1979 to 1997, the company owned several television stations, most of them in small and medium markets. It sold the broadcasting division to what became Raycom Media in 1997.

Critics of cancer policies

Consumer groups and some government officials say that cancer insurance returns fewer premium dollars to policyholders than standard insurance. A U.S. General Accounting Office study found that the policies paid back as little as 35% of premiums (Aflac said its cancer insurance paid back 62.4%). In comparison, New York State requires most major-medical policies to pay back 82% and group policies to pay back 75%. New York State does not allow stand-alone cancer policies. In 1997, AFLAC spent $175,000 on lobbyists and campaign contributions to change the law. Consumer Reports recommended that policyholders use the money instead to buy lower-deductible insurance.com  The cancer plan pays some of the highest commissions to agents in comparison to the other products.

The Aflac Duck

Since December 1999, the company's identity and brand has become more widely recognized in the United States as the result of TV commercials featuring the Aflac Duck, who frustratedly quacks the company's name to unsuspecting prospective policyholders. The duck concept and all of the commercials to date have been created by Kaplan Thaler Group, an advertising agency based in New York City. Metzer Farms, a Gonzales, California goose, duck, and gamebird hatchery, supplied them with the initial ducklings that each grew into the famous duck. Struggling to come up with a concept to make the big but relatively obscure insurance company's name memorable, one of the agency's art directors stumbled upon the duck idea while walking around Central Park at lunchtime uttering, "Aflac, Aflac." He soon realized how much the company's name sounded like a duck's quack. The Aflac Duck character has now starred in more than 30 commercials. In many of these commercials, character actor Ed Billings also appears. The Aflac Duck is enshrined on Madison Avenue's Walk of Fame as one of America's Favorite Advertising Icons.com
In April 2009, Aflac introduced a new marketing campaign called "Get the Aflacts," designed to educate consumers about the specific benefits of the insurance products the company sells. The Aflacts campaign gave the Aflac Duck "a more prominent role," designed to "help potential customers learn the Aflacts, er, facts about policies and other products," according to The New York Times."Not Daffy or Donald, but Still Aflac's Rising Star" The New York Times, 21 April 2009
Celebrities have starred in the Aflac ads, including Chevy Chase (2003); Yogi Berra; Yao Ming; Donald Trump's wife, Melania Trump; NASCAR Sprint Cup Series driver Carl Edwards (2008–); the United States Olympic synchronized swimming team (2004); and Wayne Newton playing at Stardust Hotel and Casino for the 2003 commercial. The duck even appeared with Bugs Bunny, Daffy Duck, Wile E. Coyote, the Road Runner, and Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer.Looney Tunes Aflac Commercial
In 2005, the company logo was changed to incorporate the duck. The first commercial using the new logo featured Gilbert Gottfried at a pet store because the duck kept saying, "Aflac!" and he had to trade in the duck for a parrot, saying, "If you're hurt and can't work."
The duck was voiced by comedian Gilbert Gottfried."The AFLAC Duck Selected as One of America's Favorite Icons from Aflac. The company's chief marketing officer stated that "Gilbert's recent comments about the crisis in Japan were lacking in humor, and certainly do not represent the thoughts and feelings of anyone at Aflac.""Gilbert Gottfried fired by Aflac over Japan tsunami jokes" Los Angeles Times, 14 March 2011 On March 23, 2011, Aflac announced that the company was taking applications for the new voice of the Aflac Duck through QuackAflac. Commercials requesting the submissions, first aired in 2006 but updated, resemble a silent movie. The first Aflac commercial featuring the duck's new voice aired on May 1, 2011.

Corporate philanthropy and social responsibility

The company states that through a partnership with Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Aflac has contributed more than $79 million to childhood cancer research and treatment.aflac.aspx from Aflac.com
Aflac employees are formally involved in an array of charitable organizations such as Habitat for Humanity International, the Easter Seals, and the United Way.
Aflac's stated objectives include the decrease of its environmental impact, for which the company  is into a partnership with the Clean Air Campaign to encourage  employees to engage with greater frequency in alternate commuting methods.

Award programs

Aflac National High School Baseball Player of the Year (first presented in 2004).

Awards and honors

Aflac has been the recipient of several awards:








