[[Sadie Frost]]

CATEGORIES: 1965 births, Living people, Actresses from London, Alumni of the Italia Conti Academy of Theatre Arts, English film actresses, English television actresses, English stage actresses, English film producers, English theatre managers and producers

Sadie Liza Frost (born 19 June 1965)Survivor: Sadie Frost Sunday Times - 19 August 2007 is an English actress, who currently runs fashion label Frost French and has designed the kitchens for a new development in the East End of London.

Early life

Frost was born in Islington, London to psychedelic artist David Vaughan, who worked for the Beatles, and his then-16-year-old muse, actress Mary Davidson.
She has described her childhood as a "chaotic but positive experience," as she was born in Islington but spent much of her youth in Ashton-under-Lyne, Lancashire after her parents separated. Her parents had six relationships between them, which gave her 4 sisters and 5 brothers, including fellow actresses Holly Davidson and Jade Davidson; primary school teacher Jessi Frost, brothers called Gabriel Jupiter and Tobias Vaughan; and a sister named Sunshine Purple Tara Velvet.   One of Frost's stepfathers - the rock photographer Robert Davidson - was a follower of the Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh cult, who forbade the children to say the words "No" or "Sorry"; during her father's colour-therapy phase, he insisted that everybody in the house wear orange and he wouldn't let them eat anything that was red. They also had to take showers wearing tracksuits, and they were forced to refer to objects as the most opposite they could think of as a test of character, for example calling apples elephants.

Career

Frost appeared in a Jelly Tots advertisement at age 3 and appeared with Morecambe and Wise at age 5. She attained a scholarship to the Italia Conti Academy, but after an early eating disorder,Sadie Frost Admits To Eating Disorder Tatler/Femaleifrst.co.The questionnaire: Sadie Frost The Guardian - 20 February 1999 On graduation she left home to escape her parents, and at 19 she appeared in the play Mumbo Jumbo at the Royal Exchange Theatre, Manchester, directed by Nicholas Hytner.
As an actress, Frost has performed in: Press Gang and Casualty. She earned her living mainly through appearing in music videos, including for Pulp's song "Common People", Planet Perfecto featuring Grace "Not Over Yet '99"; and various productions for Spandau Ballet where she met first husband Gary Kemp. Frost and Kemp appeared together in  the 1990s film The Krays. They appeared in 2 more films together, one of which was filmed while they were separated: 1994's film Magic Hunter, which even required them to participate in a love scene.
Frost took a role opposite Jude Law in Paul W.S. Anderson's directorial debut Shopping. After marrying Law and having three children with him, she cut down on her acting commitments in the late 1990s, and moved into producing and co-founding the production company Natural Nylon.
In 1999, she co-founded the fashion label FrostFrench with her friend, Jemima French. The label started in lingerie and expanded into clothing collections. FrostFrench won Elle Magazine's Designers of the Year Award 2004. In 2004, she wrote, presented and produced a short lived series What Sadie did next... for E4, and in 2005 appeared in Eating with... In March 2006, Frost flew to South Africa to part-fund an orphanage for the Homes of Hope project. In September 2006, aged 40, she posed nude for Canadian photographer Bryan Adams for a PETA anti-fur advert to coincide with London Fashion Week.org... For the Very First Time, a new one-woman show by Zoë Lewis, directed by Douglas Rintoul and produced by Imogen Lloyd Webber.
In January 2010 she starred in the play Fool For Love alongside Carl Barat, formerly of the Libertines. The play showed at the Riverside Studios theatre.

Personal life

When 16 and dancing in a music video, she met Spandau Ballet's Gary Kemp. They married on 7 May 1988 and their son, Finlay, was born in 1990. Frost and Kemp were married for 5 years and separated; they divorced on 19 August 1995.Jonathan Bernstein, Frost's bite, BNET, Arts Publications, interview, May, 1995
She met Jude Law during the work on the film Shopping. They married on 2 September 1997 and had three children: son Rafferty (born 1996), daughter Iris (born 2000) and son Rudy (born 2002). Frost and Law divorced on 29 October 2003. Jude Law, Sadie Frost Divorce Official People magazine - OCTOBER 29, 2003 Frost named model Kate Moss as Iris' godmother and BBC Radio 1 deejay Nick Grimshaw as Rudy's godfather.

Filmography






