[[Raoul Bott]]

CATEGORIES: 1923 births, 2005 deaths, 20th-century mathematicians, American mathematicians, Hungarian Jews, Hungarian mathematicians, Topologists, Geometers, Differential geometers, Algebraic geometers, Harvard University faculty, University of Michigan faculty, McGill University alumni, Carnegie Mellon University alumni, Foreign Members of the Royal Society, National Medal of Science laureates, Wolf Prize in Mathematics laureates, Members of the French Academy of Sciences, Cancer deaths in California, Guggenheim Fellows

Raoul Bott, ForMemRS (September 24, 1923 – December 20, 2005) was a Hungarian mathematician known for numerous basic contributions to geometry in its broad sense. He is best known for his Bott periodicity theorem, the Morse–Bott functions which he used in this context, and the Borel–Bott–Weil theorem.

Early life

Bott was born in Budapest, Hungary, the son of Margit Kovács and Rudolph Bott.google. His family emigrated to Canada in 1938, and subsequently he served in the Canadian Army in Europe during World War II.

Career

Bott later went to college at McGill University in Montreal, where he studied electrical engineering. He then earned a Ph.D. in mathematics from Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh in 1949. His thesis, titled Electrical Network Theory, was written under the direction of Richard Duffin. Afterward, he began teaching at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor. Bott continued his study at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton. In 2005, Dr. Bott died in San Diego after a battle with cancer.
With  Richard Duffin at Carnegie Mellon, Bott studied existence of electronic filters corresponding to given  positive rational functions .  In 1949 they provedJohn H. Hubbard (2010) "The Bott-Duffin Synthesis of Electrical Circuits", pp 33 to 40 in A Celebration of the Mathematical Legacy of Raoul Bott, P. Robert Kotiuga editor, CRM Proceedings and Lecture Notes #50, American Mathematical Society  a fundamental theorem of filter synthesis. Duffin and Bott extended earlier work by Otto Brune that requisite functions of complex frequency s could be realized by a passive network of inductors and capacitors. The proof, relying on induction on the sum of the degrees of the polynomials in the numerator and denominator of the rational function, was published in Journal of Applied Physics, volume 20, page 816.
In his 2000 interviewNotices of the AMS 48(4):374 with Allyn Jackson of the American Mathematical Society, he explained that he sees "networks as discrete versions of harmonic theory", so his experience with network synthesis and electronic filter topology introduced him to algebraic topology.
Bott met Arnold S. Shapiro at the IAS and they worked together.
He studied the homotopy theory of Lie groups, using methods from Morse theory, leading to the Bott periodicity theorem (1956). In the course of this work, he introduced Morse–Bott functions, an important generalization of Morse functions.
This led to his role as collaborator over many years with Michael Atiyah, initially via the part played by periodicity in K-theory. Bott made important contributions towards the index theorem, especially in formulating related fixed-point theorems, in particular the so-called 'Woods Hole fixed-point theorem', a combination of the Riemann–Roch theorem and Lefschetz fixed-point theorem (it is named after Woods Hole, Massachusetts, the site of a conference at which collective discussion formulated it).whoi.html  The major Atiyah–Bott papers on what is now the Atiyah–Bott fixed-point theorem were written in the years up to 1968; they collaborated further in recovering in contemporary language Ivan Petrovsky on Petrovsky lacunas of hyperbolic partial differential equations, prompted by Lars Gårding. In the 1980s, Atiyah and Bott investigated gauge theory, using the Yang–Mills equations on a Riemann surface to obtain topological information about the moduli spaces of stable bundles on Riemann surfaces.
He is also well known in connection with the Borel–Bott–Weil theorem on representation theory of Lie groups via holomorphic sheaves and their cohomology groups; and for work on foliations.
He introduced Bott–Samelson varieties and the Bott residue formula for complex manifolds and the Bott cannibalistic class.

Awards

In 1964, he was awarded the Oswald Veblen Prize in Geometry by the American Mathematical Society. In 1983, he was awarded the Jeffery–Williams Prize by the Canadian Mathematical Society. In 1987, he was awarded the National Medal of Science.National Science Foundation
In 2000, he received the Wolf Prize. In 2005, he was elected an Overseas Fellow of the Royal Society of London.

Students

Bott had 20 Ph.D. students, including Stephen Smale, Lawrence Conlon, Daniel Quillen, Peter Landweber, Robert MacPherson, Robert W. Brooks, Robin Forman and Kevin Corlette.

Publications






