[[A5 road (Great Britain)]]

CATEGORIES: Roads in England, Roads in Wales, Transport in Anglesey, Streets in Barnet, Transport in Bedfordshire, Streets in Brent, Transport in Buckinghamshire, Streets in Camden, Transport in Denbighshire, Streets in Harrow, Transport in Leicestershire, Transport in Shropshire, Transport in Staffordshire, Transport in Warwickshire, Streets in the City of Westminster, Roads in Milton Keynes, Transport in Walsall, Works of Thomas Telford, Roads in Gwynedd

The A5 is a major road in England and Wales. It runs for about  (including sections concurrent with other designations) from London, England to Holyhead, Wales, following in part a section of the  Roman Iter II route which later took the Anglo-Saxon name Watling Street.

History

Roman Road

The section of the A5 between London and Shrewsbury is roughly contiguous with one of the principal Roman roads in Britain; that between Londinium and Deva, which diverges from the present-day A5 corridor at Wroxeter (Viroconium Cornoviorum) near Shrewbsury.

Telford's Holyhead Road

The Act of Union 1800, which unified Great Britain and Ireland, gave rise to a need to improve communication links between London and Dublin. A Parliamentary committee led to an Act of Parliament of 1815 that authorised the purchase of existing turnpike road interests and, where necessary, the construction of new road, to complete the route between the two capitals. This made it the first major civilian state-funded road building project in Britain since Roman times.  Responsibility for establishing the new route was awarded to the famous engineer, Thomas Telford.
Through England, the road largely took over existing turnpike roads and mainly following the route of the Anglo-Saxon Wæcelinga Stræt (Watling Street), much of which had been historically the Roman road Iter II. However between Weedon, Northamptonshire and Oakengates, Telford's Holyhead Road eschews the Watling Street corridor, picking up instead the major cities of Coventry, Birmingham, and Wolverhampton this routeing being far more useful for communications.
From Shrewsbury and through Wales, Telford's work was more extensive. In places he followed existing roads, but he also built new links, including the Menai Suspension Bridge to connect the mainland with Anglesey and the Stanley Embankment to Holy Island.
Telford's road was complete with the opening of the Menai Suspension Bridge in 1826.

=Notable features of Telford's road=

The road was designed to allow stagecoaches and the Mail coach to carry post between London and Holyhead, and thence by mailboat to Ireland. Therefore throughout its length the gradient never exceeds 1:20 (5%).
The route through Wales retains many of the original features of Telford's road and has, since 1995, been recognised as a historic route worthy of preservation. These features include the following:

Route

Image:marble.london.jpg|Marble Arch, London  – start of the A5
Image:M54Motorway.jpg|The A5 as it traverses rural Shropshire near Wellington on a new alignment to that of the original Thomas Telford route
Image:A5-llwybrhanesyddol.JPG|Sign of Thomas Telford's Historic Route
Image:Admirality arch Holyhead.jpg|Admiralty Arch, Holyhead – end of the A5

London - Milton Keynes

Starting at Marble Arch in London, the A5 runs northwest up the Edgware Road through Kilburn and Cricklewood. The A5 number disappears near Edgware, but the Roman Road continues as the A5183 through Elstree, Radlett, St Albans and Redbourn, to junction 9 of the M1, where it becomes the A5 again. From there, it passes through Dunstable, where it crosses and briefly multiplexes with the A505. North of Dunstable, the A5 passes through the village of Hockliffe before becoming a dual carriageway and bypassing Little Brickhill. 

Milton Keynes - Hinckley

On entering the Milton Keynes urban area, the road becomes a fully grade-separated dual carriageway and passes through Milton Keynes. This stretch was opened in 1980, and enabled the older route to be incorporated into the Milton Keynes grid road system.  From just north of Milton Keynes, the road resumes as a single carriageway that continues through Towcester where it crosses the A43 dual carriageway just north of the town. The road accompanies the Grand Union Canal and the M1 motorway through the Watford Gap. As it passes close to Rugby, the road is diverted slightly around the Daventry International Rail Freight Terminal. After this it passes the remains of the Rugby radio station and bridges the M45 motorway.
The next phase to the Wales-England border takes it through Kilsby before going under the M6 motorway and passing close to Lutterworth. Along this stretch, the road frequently alternates between being a single and a dual carriageway. After meeting the M69 motorway at a roundabout, with the motorway passing above, the A5 runs through Hinckley.

Hinckley - Shrewsbury

After Hinckley, the road runs through the northern fringes of Nuneaton and then Tamworth. At Tamworth, the road follows a more recent dual carriageway bypass, permitting the original alignment to become a local road in the town. From this point the road is a grade separated dual carriageway up until its junction with the A38 and M6 toll. After this junction it passes just to the south of Cannock and then enters Telford, where it loses its identity and route-shares with the M54 motorway from junction 5. At junction 7 the motorway ends and the A5 continues to Shrewsbury as dual carriageway, on its new alignment. (The original route through Telford, and then via Atcham to Shrewsbury, is  unclassified through Oakengates and as the B5061 through Wellington and the B4380 through Atcham). Continuing from the end of the M54, the route runs around Shrewsbury as the town's southern bypass (still as dual carriageway), combining for a stretch with the A49. (The route once ran through the town, but was first bypassed in the 1930s, then by-passed again in the early 1990s).

Shrewsbury - Bangor

After Shrewsbury the A5 continues as single-carriageway except for the Nesscliffe bypass. It then forms part of the Oswestry bypass, running to the east of that town. Shortly after, it crosses the River Dee and enters Wales. From the Wales-England border, it continues from Chirk through Snowdonia via Llangollen, Corwen, Capel Curig, and through the centre of Bangor.

Bangor - Holyhead

From Bangor the road crosses the Menai Suspension Bridge between mainland Wales and Anglesey, through Llanfair PG then runs roughly parallel to the A55 expressway until the two roads merge in the centre of Holyhead.

=Tŷ Nant cutting=

In 1997, a section of bends on Telford's road between Tŷ Nant and Dinmael was by-passed by a modern cutting. However, investigation in 2006 revealed that the rock face in the cutting had become unstable, and the A5 was closed from the end of May 2006. This involved the removal of 230,000 tonnes of rock and alluvial deposits. In July 2007, the A5 through the reconstructed cutting was reopened.A5 at Ty Nant reopens ahead of schedule

Alternative routes

Parts of the A5 have been replaced by sections of the M1 north of London, the M54 through Telford, the M6, and the M6 Toll. The A55 route in North Wales is now the usual way to get from Chirk to Holyhead, avoiding the mountainous A5 route through Snowdonia and instead going via the much gentler Cheshire Plain and along the coast.

Road Safety

In June 2008, a  stretch of the A5 between Daventry and Rugby was named as the most dangerous road in the East Midlands.








