[[M2 motorway (Great Britain)]]

CATEGORIES: Motorways in England, Roads in Kent

The M2 is a motorway in Kent, England.  It is 25.7 miles (41.4 km) long and acts as a bypass of the section of the A2 road which runs through the Medway Towns, Sittingbourne and Faversham. It is the only motorway in England that does not meet any other motorway at a junction.

Route

The M2 starts to the west of Strood at Three Crutches, diverging southeastwards from the A2 road that heads eastwards from London. It begins at Junction 1 with four lanes and descends towards the Medway Valley to the south of Rochester. Running parallel to High Speed 1, it crosses the River Medway on the Medway Viaduct. On the west bank, Junction 2, the A228, is a complex junction where the exit roundabouts had to be built round the railink track and still maintain, by footbridge and tunnel, a public footpath. On the east bank is the village of Borstal.
The M2 then diverges from the High Speed 1 route and climbs up the north side of Nashenden Valley to Blue Bell Hill and on to the North Downs on a split-level carriageway and meets Junction 3 at Walderslade, south of Chatham.  Here the road narrows to three lanes, and runs northeast across Cossington Fields, Westfield Sole, Lidsing, and Bredhurst towards Junction 4, where it becomes two lanes.  
Continuing east, passing Medway Service Station, it crosses the A249 over the Stockbury Viaduct at Junction 5.  It then continues along the rural North Downs, with a connection to the old A2 at Faversham. Shortly after this, it terminates at Junction 7, allowing traffic to continue on either the A299 towards Thanet which joins a  dual carriage way or the A2 towards Canterbury and Dover which has been improved due to bypasses and other improvements as far as Lydden.

History

Original construction

The initial section of the motorway (junctions 2 to 5) was opened by the then Transport Minister Ernest Marples on 29 May 1963, with the remainder being constructed in 1965. It was opened in three stages:
It was planned to extend the M2 to London and Dover, making it the main route between London and the channel ports, but this extension never materialised due to a lack of traffic demand.
The M2 was originally to be designated as the A2(M), but as a result of the Daily Telegraph reporting it as the M2, the Ministry of Transport adopted this, and later decided upon the M20 designation for the main London-Channel Ports link.

Junction amendments

Aside from retrofitting central crash barriers, like all early motorways, the alignment of the M2 did not significantly change until the late 1990s. Traffic using it decreased when the M20 was completed from London to Folkestone in May 1991,

Widening

The M2 was still busy between Junctions 1 and 4, and suffered from HGVs blocking the outside lane. In 2000 work began on widening the M2 from two lanes to four lanes. A joint venture between Costain, Skanska and Mowlem (CSM) created the company that would undertake the project. The project required the redesign of Junction 2 and Junction 3, and a second Medway Bridge. The existing bridge was converted to a four lane eastbound carriageway (including a hard shoulder). The new bridge formed the westbound carriageway. The entire stretch was lit with streetlights (the old section was not lit). The old Medway Bridge was physically narrowed by removing part of the footpath. High-pressure water cutting equipment was used to cut the concrete into manageable sections for disposal. There is only one path open to the public now.
Spoil from the North Downs Tunnel was used to form the new embankment for the London bound traffic between Junction 2 and the Nashenden Valley.
The widening was completed in July 2003.

Service area

The M2 opened with a single service area between Junctions 4 and 5, named Farthing Corner Services and operated by Top Rank.
The services have an access road to the local network for service and delivery vehicles that is not, like some motorway service areas, restricted with a gate or barrier.

Junctions

Data from driver location signs are used to provide distance (in kilometres) and carriageway identifier information. Where junctions extend over several hundred metres and the data are available, values are given for the start and end points of the junction.

