[[Jenny Shipley]]

CATEGORIES: 1952 births, Female heads of government, Living people, New Zealand National Party MPs, New Zealand National Party leaders, New Zealand women in politics, People from Gore, New Zealand, Prime Ministers of New Zealand, Leaders of the Opposition (New Zealand), New Zealand MPs for South Island electorates, Dames Companion of the New Zealand Order of Merit, Members of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom, People from Ashburton, New Zealand

Dame Jennifer Mary "Jenny" Shipley  (née Robson, born 4 February 1952) served as the 36th Prime Minister of New Zealand from December 1997 to December 1999, the first woman to hold this office and the first, and to date only, woman to serve as parliamentary leader of the National Party of New Zealand.

Early life

Born in Gore, New Zealand, Shipley was one of four sisters. After attending Marlborough Girls' College, she qualified in 1971 as a teacher and taught in New Zealand primary schools until 1976. In 1973 she married Burton Shipley and settled in Ashburton. She assisted in a number of educational and child-care organisations, such as the Plunket Society.

Member of Parliament

Having joined the National Party in 1975, Shipley successfully stood for the party in the Ashburton electorate in the 1987 election, entering parliament at age 35 - at the time one of parliament's youngest members.  She would represent this electorate until her retirement from politics in 2002, though it was renamed Rakaia in 1990.

Cabinet Minister

When National (with Jim Bolger as its parliamentary leader) won the general election of 1990, Shipley became Minister of Social Welfare, having been National's shadow minister in that portfolio while in Opposition. She also served as Minister of Women's Affairs (1990–1996).[ref]
[/ref]
In her role as Minister of Social Welfare, Shipley sparked controversy with her cutbacks to state benefits. Later, when she became Minister of Health in 1993, she caused further controversy by attempting to reform the public health service, introducing an internal market. When National gained re-election in 1996, Shipley dropped the Women's Affairs portfolio and gained a number of others, including responsibility for state-owned companies and Transport.

Prime Minister

Shipley grew increasingly frustrated and disillusioned with the cautious pace of National's parliamentary leader, Jim Bolger, as well as with what she saw as the disproportionate influence of coalition-partner New Zealand First. She began gathering support to replace Bolger in mid-1997. Later that year, while Bolger attended the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, Shipley convinced a majority of her National Party colleagues to back her bid for the leadership. Bolger, seeing that he no longer had the support of his party, resigned, and Shipley replaced him. As leader of the governing party, she became Prime Minister on 8 December 1997.
Despite continued economic growth, the Shipley government became increasingly politically unstable. In particular, the relationship between National and New Zealand First deteriorated. While Bolger had been able to maintain good relations with New Zealand First and with its leader, Deputy Prime Minister Winston Peters, the alliance became strained after Shipley rose to power. Finally, on 14 August 1998, Shipley sacked Peters from Cabinet.
Peters immediately withdrew support for Shipley's government.  However, several New Zealand First MPs wanted to continue the coalition. Led by NZF deputy-leader Tau Henare, they tried to oust Peters as party leader. When they failed, they left their party, either becoming independents or trying to form their own parties. Shipley gained sufficient support from these MPs to keep National in power.
On the same day Shipley unexpectedly backed Cultural Affairs Minister Marie Hasler's call for a change in the New Zealand flag. Shipley, along with the New Zealand Tourism Board, backed the quasi-national emblem of the silver fern on a black background as a possible alternative flag, along the lines of the Canadian flag, but she took pains to publicly disassociate herself from Bolger's support for republicanism. As the debate continued in 1999, the Princess Royal visited New Zealand, and Shipley stated, "I am an unashamed royal supporter, along with many New Zealanders." However, the debate was muted by the controversy surrounding Tourism Board contracts going to the public-relations firm Saatchi and Saatchi, whose World CEO Kevin Roberts, also an advocate of the silver fern flag, was a good friend of Shipley.
Shipley was the first New Zealand Prime Minister to attend the gay and lesbian New Zealand Hero Parade. She became the first National Party leader to seek to make electoral overtures to the gay and lesbian voting public. Under her administration, Shipley personally advocated lowering the alcohol purchase age from 20 to 18 and achieved this in 1999. This was part of Shipley's expressed desire to expand the traditional National Party voting-base.
Shipley became a member of the Council of Women World Leaders, an international network of current and former women presidents and prime ministers with the mission of mobilising the highest-level women leaders globally for collective action on issues of critical importance to women and equitable development. She is also a member of the Club of Madrid.[ref]
Bio of Shipley from the Club of Madrid[/ref]
On 21 May 1998 Shipley was appointed to the Privy Council and became The Right Honourable Jenny Shipley."Appointments to the Privy Council" (28 May 1998) 74 New Zealand 1613 at 1644.

Defeat and resignation

In the 1999 election, the Labour Party, led by Helen Clark defeated the National Party.
Shipley suffered a heart attack in 2000.
Shipley continued to lead the National Party until October 2001, when Bill English took over the leadership and the role of Leader of the Opposition, and she subsequently retired from Parliament in 2002.

Life after politics

She appeared on an episode of the television reality/travel show Intrepid Journeys where she visited Namibia.
In 2007, Shipley joined the financial services firm Source Sentinel.
Shipley also has business interests in China and is currently on the board of the China Construction Bank.
According to Companies Office records, Jack Chen, Jenny Shipley and another investor founded a business together in 2004 called New Zealand Pure & Natural. Mr Chen quit as a director a year later but only quit his shareholding in 2010. and set up a new political party in NZ, before being forced to resign due to fraud and corruption charges being laid in Hong Kong.





In 2010 the China Construction Bank agreed to help finance a proposal by May Wang known as Hao May and Jack Chen known as Chen Keen to invest in the New Zealand dairy industry by taking over the Crafar Farms.
Shipley accepted a damehood on 14 August 2009 after the Fifth National Government reinstated Knighthoods. She is also a member of the Club de Madrid, a group of more than 80 former Presidents and Prime Ministers of democratic states, which works to strengthen democratic leadership and governance worldwide.clubmadrid.org/es/miembro/jennifer_mary_shipley
In December 2012 Shipley resigned from the board of directors of Mainzeal Property & Construction which later went into receivership on 6 February 2013. At mid-day on 5 February 2013 she was one of four independent directors who resigned from the board of Mainzeal Group Limited.scoop.co. 

 
 






 |first       = Karyn
 |last        = Scherer
 |title       = The prime of Mrs Jenny Shipley 
 |url         = 
