[[Oundle]]

CATEGORIES: Oundle, Market towns in Northamptonshire, Towns in Northamptonshire

Oundle  west of Oundle.

History

Inhabited since the Iron Age, Oundle was originally a trading place and market for local farmers and craftsmen.
The Saxon invasion saw the arrival of a tribe called Undalas which possibly meant undivided. It is the death place of St Wilfrid in 709AD where he had consecrated a church as well as being the location of one of his monasteries. The current St Peter's Church occupies the same site as St Wilfrid's original Church.
Saint Cetta or  CettCett at PASE.ac.[ref]Carwyn Hywel Morris, The concept of territory in
The late Anglo-Saxon and early Medieval cult of saints in England, page 5 .[/ref] Very Little is known of him, but according to the Anglo-Saxon Hagiography of the Secgan Manuscript,Stowe MS 944 II.14, British Library he was from around 1000AD,  buried in the monastery at Oundle near the river Nene,Cett in The Oxford Dictionary of Saints and a chapel to St Cett was built in the eleventh century, on the small knoll beyond the end of St Sythes Lane. The presence of this shrine and the market charter, explain much of the growth of Oundle in the twelth century.
The Domesday book records a population of 36 households, a mill and a value in 1066 of £0.3, which had risen to £11 by 1086.
As the area became prosperous, wealthy traders set up shops and houses, and guilds were formed. Unlike other settlements in the vicinity, Oundle was unaffected by the Black Death in the mid-14th century.
Oundle had a grammar school since at least 1465, at which Sir William Laxton (Lord Mayor of London) was educated. He founded Laxton Grammar School in 1556, administered by the Worshipful Company of Grocers, from which Oundle School evolved.
In 1743 a group of mutineers from the Black Watch were captured at Ladywood, near Oundle. They had deserted in protest at being sent abroad, instead of patrolling the Highlands, for which the regiment had been raised.The Black Watch - The MutinyLegends of The Black Watch or Forty-Second Highlanders - The Story of Farquhar Shaw

Landmarks

Among the oldest buildings is the Talbot Hotel. This was constructed of timber; it was rebuilt with stone from the ruins of nearby Fotheringhay Castle. Other public houses include the Rose & Crown (a 17th Century Inn Haunted by the White Cavalier), the Ship Inn (a 14th-century coaching inn), the Angel, the George and the Riverside, which is currently derelict.
There are a number of churches. By far the most prominent, with the largest steeple in the area, is St Peter's Church which occupies the main churchyard. There are also Methodist, Baptist and Roman Catholic churches. However, the Baptist church does not have its own building and holds services on Sunday mornings at Prince William School.

Education

Local schools include a comprehensive school, Prince William School, a middle school, Oundle and Kings Cliff Middle School, The town is also the location of Oundle School, a co-educational boarding independent school with around a thousand pupils, most of whom are boarders.

Culture and community

Oundle hosts a number of annual events, notably:
A farmers' market is held in the Market Place on the second Saturday of every month as well as a local market every Thursday. There is also a park with swings and climbing frames, as well as a skatepark which was built in 2005 and regenerated in 2012. An annual fair and circus is located in the park.
Oundle has many shops, pubs, cafe's and restaurants all of which are located in the town centre. It also has two supermarkets, a Co-op and a recently built Waitrose.

Town partnerships

Oundle maintains partnerships with the following places:

Economy

Oundle is home to two of the three factories producing Fairline Boats. The third site is located Weldon, near Corby. The original factory is at Barnwell Road Marina in Oundle and the newer at the Nene Valley site. The Barnwell Road Marina site is currently being mothballed as the company restructures.

Notable people






