[[John Keegan]]

CATEGORIES: 1934 births, 2012 deaths, People from Clapham, People educated at Wimbledon College, Alumni of Balliol College, Oxford, British people of Irish descent, British Roman Catholics, British historians, British military writers, British journalists, Knights Bachelor, Officers of the Order of the British Empire, British military historians, Fellows of the Royal Society of Literature, People educated at King's College, Taunton, World War I historians, World War II historians, 20th-century British writers, 21st-century British writers, 20th-century historians, 21st-century historians

Sir John Desmond Patrick Keegan OBE FRSL (15 May 1934 – 2 August 2012) was a British military historian, lecturer, writer and journalist. He was the author of many published works on the nature of combat between the 14th and 21st centuries concerning land, air, maritime, and intelligence warfare, as well as the psychology of battle.

Life and career

Keegan was born in Clapham, London, on 15 May 1934, to a family of Irish Catholic extraction. His father saw active service in the First World War.
At the age of 13 Keegan contracted orthopaedic tuberculosis, which subsequently affected his gait. The long-term effects of his tuberculosis rendered him unfit for military service, and the timing of his birth made him too young for service in the Second World War, as mentioned in his works as an ironic observation on his profession and interest. Following graduation he worked at the American Embassy in London for three years.2000
In 1960 he was appointed to a lectureship in Military History at the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst, the training establishment for officers of the British Army.  Holding the post for 26 years, he became senior lecturer in military history during his tenure.  During this period he also held a visiting professorship at Princeton University and was Delmas Distinguished Professor of History at Vassar College. Keegan, John, ISBN 0-375-40052-4
Leaving the academy in 1986 In 1998 he wrote and presented the BBC's Reith Lectures, entitled War in our World.

Death

Keegan died on 2 August 2012 of natural causes at his home in Kilmington, western England.  He is survived by his wife, their two daughters and two sons.

Opinions on contemporary conflicts

Vietnam

When asked about the Vietnam War, Keegan repled: "I will never oppose the Vietnam War. Americans were right to do it. I think they fought it in the wrong way. I don't think it's a war like fighting Hitler, but I think it was a right war, a correct war."

Kosovo

Keegan believed that NATO's bombing of Serbia and Serbian targets in Kosovo in 1999 showed that air power alone could win wars.

Iraq War

An article in the  Christian Science Monitor called  Keegan a "staunch supporter" of the Iraq War. The article quotes Keegan:  "Uncomfortable as the 'spectacle of raw military force' is, he concludes, that the Iraq war represents 'a better guide to what needs to be done to secure the safety of our world than any amount of law-making or treaty-writing can offer.

Criticism

Keegan was also criticized by peers, including Sir Michael HowardMichael Howard, "To the Ruthless Belong the Spoils," The New York Times Book Review, 14 November 1993. and Christopher Bassford War in History, November 1994, pp.319-336, Christopher Bassford available at "Clausewitz. Keegan was described as "profoundly mistaken" and Bassford stated that "Nothing anywhere in Keegan's work – despite his many diatribes about Clausewitz and 'the Clausewitzians' – reflects any reading whatsoever of Clausewitz's own writings."  The political scientist Richard Betts also criticized Keegan's understanding of the political dimensions of war, writing that Keegan was "a naïf about politics."

Honours

On 29 June 1991, as a war correspondent for The Daily Telegraph, Keegan was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) "in recognition of service within the operations in the Gulf".
He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature (FRSL) in 1986.
In 1996 the Society for Military History awarded him the Samuel Eliot Morison Prize. It recognizes not any one specific achievement, but a body of contributions in the field of military history, stretching over time and showing a range of scholarly work contributing significantly to the field. 
He was awarded an Honorary Doctor of Letters (DLitt) by the University of Bath in 2002.

Published work

Keegan's books include a traditional battle-by-battle coverage of conflict, experience of the individual, historical causes of military events, technological change in warfare, military strategy, and challenges of leadership. He wrote mainly for the educated non-specialist reader.
In A History of Warfare, Keegan outlined the development and limitations of warfare from prehistory to the modern era. It looked at various topics, including the use of horses, logistics, and "fire". One key concept put forward was that war is inherently cultural.
He also contributed to work on historiography in modern conflict. With Richard Holmes he wrote the BBC documentary Soldiers, a history of men in battle. Frank C. Mahncke wrote that Keegan is seen as being "among the most prominent and widely read military historians of the late twentieth century". Mahncke, Naval War College In a book-cover blurb extracted from a more complex article, Sir Michael Howard wrote, "at once the most readable and the most original of living historians".The New York Times Book Review - Sir Michael Howard
Keegan's Fields of Battle: The Wars for North America, which gave accounts of many of the wars fought on the soil of North America, also contained opening and closing essays on his own personal relationship to America. He continued his interest in American military history with the publication of his book The American Civil War (2009, Hutchinson).

Works

Notes






