[[Psychological horror]]

CATEGORIES: Film genres, Horror fiction, Horror genres, Psychological horror

Psychological horror is a subgenre of horror fiction, film, and video games (as a narrative) which relies on the characters' fears and emotional instability to build tension.

Characteristics

Psychological horror aims to create discomfort by exposing common or universal psychological and emotional vulnerabilities and fears, such as the shadowy parts of the human psyche that most people repress or deny referred to in Jungian psychology as the archetypal shadow characteristics:  suspicion, distrust, self-doubt and paranoia of others, themselves and the world. Thus, elements of psychological horror focus on mental conflict. These become important as the characters face perverse situations, often involving the supernatural, immorality and conspiracies. While other horror media emphasize fantastical situations such as attacks by monsters, psychological horror tends to keep the monsters hidden and to involve situations more grounded in artistic realism.
Plot twists are an often used device. Characters commonly face internal battles with subconscious desires such as romantic lust and the desire for petty revenge. In contrast, splatter fiction focuses on bizarre, alien evil to which the average viewer cannot easily relate.

Books

The novels Silence of the Lambs written by Thomas Harris, The Shining by Stephen King, and The Girl Who Loved Tom Gordon by Stephen King are some examples of books categorized under the genre of  Psychological Horror.

Films

Psychological horror films differ from the traditional horror film, where the source of the fear is typically something material, such as creatures, monsters or aliens, in that tension is built through atmosphere, eerie sounds and exploitation of the viewer's and the character's psychological fears.
The Black Cat (1934) and Cat People (1942) have been cited as early psychological horror films.
Roman Polanski directed two films which are considered quintessential psychological horror: Repulsion (1965) and Rosemary's Baby. The Changeling (1980) directed by Peter Medak is another good example of a psychological haunting story.
Japanese horror films, commonly referred to as "J-horror", have been noted to be generally of a psychological horror nature.
Another influential category is the Korean horror films, commonly referred to as "K-horror".

Video games

While video game genres are based upon their gameplay content, psychological horror as narrative is used in some video games. A few successful video game franchises have spawned from using psychological horror as a main form of creating fear, the most well known being Silent Hill. Other psychological horror games include Manhunt, Condemned: Criminal Origins, LSD, Alan Wake, Eternal Darkness: Sanity's Requiem, Amnesia: The Dark Descent, The Suffering, Anna, Lone Survivor, One Late Night, and to some extent, BioShock and The Swapper.






