[[Loya jirga]]

CATEGORIES: Afghan culture, Pashtun culture, Government of Afghanistan, Government of Pakistan, Politics of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Politics of the Federally Administered Tribal Areas, Politics of Balochistan, Pakistan, Pashtun politics

A loya jirga (

History

The ancient Aryan tribes, who are hypothesized to have spoken Proto-Indo-Iranian, came down in intermittent waves from Central Asia and Afghanistan and then moved to ancient India (in the early 2nd millennium BC). They practiced a sort of jirga-system with two types of councils – simite and sabhā. The simite (the summit) comprised elders and tribal chiefs. The king also joined sessions of the simite. Sabhā was a sort of rural council.com/nandara/index2.php?option=com_content&do_pdf=1&id=382
It was used over time for the selection of rulers and headmen and the airing of matters of principle. From the time of the great Kushan ruler Kanishka to the 1970s, there were sixteen national loya jirgas and hundreds of smaller ones. The institution, which is centuries old, is a similar idea to the Islamic "shura", or consultative assembly.
In the Afghan society, the loya jirga is still maintained and very strongly practiced, mostly in front of tribal chiefs or with them to solve internal and external tribal problems or disputes with other tribes.
When the Afghans took power they tried to legitimize their hold with such a Jirga. While in the beginning only Pashtuns were allowed to participate in the Jirgas, later other ethnic groups like Tajiks and Hazaras were allowed to participate as well, however they were little more than observers. The member of the Jirgas were mostly members of the Royal Family, religious leaders and tribal chiefs of the Afghans. King Amanullah Khan institutionalized the Jirga. From Amanullah until the reign of Mohammed Zahir Shah (1933–1973) and Mohammed Daoud Khan (1973–1978) the Jirga was recognized as a common meeting of regional Pashtun leaders.
The meetings do not have scheduled occurrences, but rather are called for when issues or disputes arise.
There is no time limit for a Loya Jirga to conclude, and the meetings often take a long time because decisions can only be made as a group and arguments can drag out for days. Many different problems are addressed, like foreign policy, declarations of war, the legitimacy of leaders, and the introduction of new ideas and laws.

Afghanistan

Some of the historical loya jirgas in the history of Afghanistan are:

Pakistan

On April 29, 2006, former Balochistan Chief Minister Taj Muhammad Jamali offered to arranged a meeting between President of Pakistan Pervez Musharraf and a loya jirga (grand jirga) for peace in Balochistan.








