[[Metallica (album)]]

CATEGORIES: 1991 albums, Metallica albums, Albums produced by Bob Rock, Elektra Records albums, Vertigo Records albums, English-language albums, Recording Industry Association of America Diamond Award albums, Grammy Award for Best Metal Performance, Heavy metal albums

Metallica (also known as The Black Album) is the eponymously titled fifth studio album by the American heavy metal band Metallica. It was released on August 12, 1991, through Elektra Records and received critical acclaim. Metallica produced five hit singles that are considered today among the band's best-known songs: "Enter Sandman", "The Unforgiven", "Nothing Else Matters", "Wherever I May Roam", and "Sad but True". The band promoted the album with a series of tours. In 2003, the album was ranked number 255 on Rolling Stone's list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time. The album marked a change in the band's sound to one less harsh than the thrash metal style of their previous four albums.
The recording of Metallica was troubled, with the band frequently entering conflicts with Bob Rock, the band's new producer, during production. The album debuted at number one in ten countries, and spent four consecutive weeks at the top spot of the Billboard 200, making it Metallica's first album to top album charts. As of April 2014, the album has stayed over 300 weeks on the Billboard charts, making it the album with most weeks on the chart of all time

Recording and production

Metallica's songwriting at that time was done mainly by singer-guitarist James Hetfield and drummer Lars Ulrich, with Hetfield being the lyricist. The duo frequently joined forces at Ulrich's house in Berkeley, California to compose. Several song ideas and concepts were conceived by other members of the band, lead guitarist Kirk Hammett and bassist Jason Newsted. For instance, Newsted wrote the main riff of "My Friend of Misery", which was originally intended to be the instrumental that had occurred at every previous Metallica album. The songs were written in two months in the summer of 1990, with the ideas for a few dating back to the Damaged Justice Tour.
The band decided to hire Bob Rock for producing after they were impressed with his work producing Mötley Crüe's Dr. Feelgood. The Billboard Book of Number One Albums. Billboard Books, 1996 ISBN 0-8230-7586-9 Initially, the band was not interested in having Rock producing the album as well, but changed their minds as Ulrich stated, "We felt that we still had our best record in us and Bob Rock could help us make it."
Four demos of the album were recorded on August 13, 1990 ("Enter Sandman", "The Unforgiven", "Nothing Else Matters" and "Wherever I May Roam"), with its lead single "Enter Sandman" being the first song written – and the last to receive lyrics. On October 4, 1990, a demo of "Sad But True" was recorded. In October 1990, Metallica entered One on One Recording Studios in North Hollywood, Los Angeles, California to record the then-forthcoming album. The band also recorded the album at Little Mountain Sound Studios in Vancouver, British Columbia, but only for about one week.
 On June 2, 1991, a demo of "Holier Than Thou" was recorded.
Since it was his first stint at producing a Metallica album, Rock had the band make the album in different ways, where they would record songs collaboratively rather than let the band members do so in separate locations. The album was remixed three times, and cost US$1 million. The troubled production led to Ulrich, Hammett and Newsted entering divorces, something Hammett said influenced their playing as they were "trying to take those feeling of guilt and failure and channel them into the music, to get something positive out of it."
Rock altered the band's working schedule and routine so much that they swore never to work with him againHodgson, Peter. Metallica Producer: Black Album 'wasn't fun'. Gibson Guitar Company. August 2, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011. The animosity and tension between Metallica and Rock was documented in the documentaries A Year and a Half in the Life of Metallica and Classic Albums: Metallica – Metallica. Both explore and document the intense recording process that resulted in Metallica. Years following the production, a petition signed by 1,500 fans was posted online, and was an attempt to encourage the band to prohibit Rock from producing Metallica albums, claiming he had too much influence on the band's sound and musical direction.  Rock indicated that the petition hurt his kids' feelings, saying, "sometimes, even with a great coach, a team keeps losing. You have to get new blood in there." Despite the controversies between the band and Rock, he continued to work with the band through the 2003 album St. Anger''.

Composition

"Tempos were often slowed down in exchange for slower BPMs, while they expand its music and expressive range", said Robert Palmer of Rolling Stone. The album was a change in direction from the thrash metal style of Metallica's previous four studio albums and saw the band moving towards a more commercial heavy metal sound. Many fans consider the album to be a transition from the often ostentatious compositions of their previous releases, to the slower, divested style of the group's later albums, where "old" and "new" Metallica are distinguished from one another. Instruments unusual for a heavy metal band, such as the cellos in "The Unforgiven" and the orchestra in "Nothing Else Matters" were added at Rock's insistence. Rock also decided to raise the volume of the bass guitar, which had been nearly inaudible in the predecessor ... Ulrich said that in his drumming he tried to avoid the "progressive Peartian paradiddles which became boring to play live" and employ a basic sound similar to The Rolling Stones' Charlie Watts and AC/DC's Phil Rudd.
The simpler approach was partially because the band felt that the songs on ... Hetfield said that radio airplay was not their intention, but because they felt "we had pretty much done the longer song format to death," and considered a good change doing songs with just two riffs and "only taking two minutes to get the point across".
The lyrics of Metallica (written by James Hetfield) were more personal and introspective in nature than previous Metallica albums, often compared by Rock to Bob Dylan, Bob Marley and John Lennon. "Enter Sandman" is about "nightmares and all that come with them", according to Chris True of Allmusic.

Packaging

Metallica had much discussion on the album title, considering the titles "Five" or naming after one of the songs, but eventually opted for a self-titled work because they "wanted to keep it simple." The album cover features the band's logo, angled against the upper left corner, and a coiled snake (derived from the Gadsden flag) on the bottom right corner, both in a dark shade of gray in order to be made out against the black background, giving Metallica the nickname "The Black Album" (these aspects are also seen in the back cover of the album). The motto of the Gadsden flag, "Don't Tread on Me", is also the title of a song on the album. A folded, page-less booklet contains the faces of all Metallica band members exposed at a black background, as well as the lyrics and liner notes printed against a grey background. The cover is reminiscent of Spinal Tap's album Smell the Glove, something the band jokingly acknowledged themselves in their A Year and a Half in the Life of Metallica documentary. Members of Spinal Tap appeared on the film and asked them about it.

Promotion

Singles

Metallica spawned six singles. "Enter Sandman" was chosen and released as the lead single on July 29, 1991, reached number 16 on the Billboard Hot 100 singles chart and was certified "Platinum" by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA).

Tours

Metallica went on the Monsters of Rock festival tour a fourth time. The last concert of the tour, held on September 28, 1991, at Tushino Airfield in Moscow, was described as "the first free outdoor Western rock concert in Soviet history" and had a crowd estimated between 150,000 and 500,000 people,
The first tour directly intended to support the album, the Wherever We May Roam Tour, included a performance at the Freddie Mercury Tribute Concert, with the band performing a short set list and Hetfield performing with Queen and Tony Iommi. One of the first gigs of the tour had the floor of the stage collapsed, however. The stage was repaired afterwards. The January 13 and 14, 1992 shows in San Diego were later released in the box set Live Shit: Binge & Purge, while the tour and the album were later documented in A Year and a Half in the Life of Metallica.
Metallica's Wherever We May Roam Tour also overlapped with Guns N' Roses' Use Your Illusion Tour. On August 8, 1992, during a Montreal show in the co-headlining Guns N' Roses/Metallica Stadium Tour, Hetfield suffered second and third degree burns to his arms, face, hands, and legs. The tour included the pyrotechnics being installed to the stage. As a result, Hetfield accidentally walked into an enormous  The gig was cut short shortly after this accident, so that Guns N' Roses began their concert, to malicious reactions from fans. Newsted recalls that Hetfield's skin was "bubbling like on The Toxic Avenger". Although Hetfield was able to sing, he was unable to play guitar for the remainder of the tour. Guitar technician John Marshall (who had previously filled in on rhythm guitar and was then playing in Metal Church) filled in on guitar for the recovering Hetfield.
The shows in Mexico City across February and March 1993 during the Nowhere Else to Roam tour were recorded, filmed and later also released as part of the band's first box set,
The final tour supporting the album, Shit Hits the Sheds, included a performance at Woodstock '94 that followed Nine Inch Nails and came before Aerosmith on August 13 in front of a crowd of 350,000.
Some songs, such as "Enter Sandman", "Nothing Else Matters" and "Sad but True" would become permanent staples of the band's concert setlists during these and subsequent tours. Other songs though, such as "Holier Than Thou", "The God That Failed", "Through the Never", and "The Unforgiven" by 1995, were no longer a part of any performances and would not be played again until more recent years when Metallica, with Robert Trujillo on bass, began performing a more extensive back catalog of songs, after he joined the band upon completion of the St. Anger album.
After touring duties for the album were finished, Metallica filed a lawsuit against Elektra Records, which attempted to force the record label to terminate their contract, while the band would gain ownership of their master recordings. The band based its claim on a section of the California Labor Code that allows employees to be released from a personal services contract after seven years. Metallica sold 40 million copies worldwide upon the filing of the suit. They were signed to the label for over a decade, but were still operating under the terms of their original 1984 contract, which provided a relatively low 14% royalty rate."Heavy Metal Band Sues Record Label". The New York Times (September 28, 1994). Retrieved June 8, 2011. The band also claimed that they were taking the action, since they were ambivalent about Robert Morgado's refusal to give them another record deal, along with Bob Krasnow (who retired from his job at the label shortly afterwards). Elektra responded by counter-suing the group, but in December 1994, then-Warner Music Group United States chairman Doug Morris had offered the group a lucrative new deal in exchange for dropping the suitPat Wechsler & Roger D. Friedman, "Heavy Metal Gets the Heavy Bucks", Intelligencer section, New York magazine, December 19–26, 1994, p.26 (which was reported to be even more generous than the earlier Krasnow deal). In January 1995, both parties settled out of court with a non-disclosure agreement. "Metallica Settles Lawsuit with its Record Label". San Francisco Chronicle (January 6, 1995). Retrieved June 8, 2011.

Critical reception

Metallica received critical acclaim upon its release from both heavy metal journalists and broader publications such as the Los Angeles Times, NME, The New York Times, and The Village Voice. Robert Palmer, writing in Rolling Stone magazine, said that several songs sound like "hard-rock classics" and that, apart from "Don't Tread on Me", Metallica is an "exemplary album of mature but still kickass rock & roll". In his guide to Metallica's albums up to that point, Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune recommended the album as "a great place for Metallica neophytes to start, with its more concise songs and explosive production."
In a retrospective article, Kerrang! hailed Metallica as the album that "propelled band out of the metal ghetto to true mainstream global rock superstardom". Robert Christgau was less enthusiastic and graded the album a "dud", indicating "a bad record whose details rarely merit further thought". 

Accolades

Metallica was voted the eighth best album of the year in The Village Voice 
In 2003, Rolling Stone ranked Metallica number 252 on their list of the 500 greatest albums of all time. Spin ranked it number 52 in a 1999 list of the "90 Greatest Albums of the '90s" and stated, "this record's diamond-tipped tuneage stripped the band's melancholy guitar excess down to melodic, radio-ready bullets and ballads." It was included in Q magazine's August 2000 list of the "Best Metal Albums of All Time", and made comments that the album "transformed them from cult metal heroes into global superstars, bringing a little refinement to their undoubted power."

Commercial performance

Metallica was the band's first album to debut at number one in the United States.
Metallica sold over 650,000 copies upon its opening week of release domestically, overshadowing all albums released in that week. It was certified platinum by the RIAA after a couple of weeks.
Metallica has sold 30 million copies worldwide,
Metallica debuted at number one in the United Kingdom.

Track listing

Personnel

Credits are adapted from the album's liner notes.

Charts

Weekly charts

Year-end charts

Decade-end charts

Certifications













