[[Metroid Fusion]]

CATEGORIES: 2002 video games, Game Boy Advance games, Metroid games, Nintendo Research & Development 1 games, Interactive Achievement Award winners, Single-player-only video games, Video games developed in Japan, Virtual Console games, Virtual Console games for Wii U

 is an action-adventure video game published by Nintendo for the Game Boy Advance. It was released in North America, Europe, and Australia in November 2002, and in Japan in February 2003. The game is considered to be the fourth main installment in the Metroid series; the intro alternatively refers to the game as Metroid 4. Metroid Fusion was developed by Nintendo Research & Development 1, the same development team that created the previous Super Metroid, to which Metroid Fusion bears heavy resemblance.
Chronologically, Metroid Fusion is the latest in the Metroid series. The story centers on bounty hunter Samus Aran, who is sent by the Galactic Federation to the Biologic Space Laboratories space station to investigate an explosion. There, she learns that the station is swarming with organisms infected with X Parasites, virions that can replicate their hosts' physical appearances and memories, killing them afterward. Learning that the Galactic Federation plans to capture the X Parasites for further study, Samus must destroy the space station to protect the Federation from the underestimated destructive power of the X Parasites.
The game was given near-universal acclaim, receiving an aggregated score of 92 out of 100 from Metacritic. Praise focused on the action-oriented gameplay, while criticism targeted towards the focus on objective based gameplay, thus making the game more linear compared to Super Metroid. Metroid Fusion received several awards, including Handheld Game of the Year at the 2002 Interactive Achievement Awards, Best Game Boy Advance Adventure Game from IGN, and Best Action Game on Game Boy Advance from GameSpot. In the United States, the game sold 199,723 copies in its first month with revenues of $5,590,768, making it the month's tenth bestselling game. By August 2006, 940,000 copies of the game were sold in North America, while by November 2004, 155,000 units were sold in Japan.
During the Nintendo Direct on February 13, 2014, Nintendo announced Metroid Fusion would be among the first three Game Boy Advance games to be released on the Wii U's Virtual Console; the game was released for the service on April 3, 2014. 

Gameplay

Metroid Fusion is an action-adventure platform shooter in which the player controls Samus Aran. Like previous games in the series, Metroid Fusion is set in a large open-ended world with elevators that connect regions, which each in turn contains rooms separated by doors. Samus opens most doors by shooting at them, while some only open after she reaches a certain point. Metroid Fusion unfolds in a more linear manner than previous Metroid games due to its focus on storyline; for example, Navigation Rooms are introduced in Metroid Fusion, which tell the player where to go. The gameplay revolves around solving puzzles to uncover secrets, platform jumping, and shooting enemies while searching for power-ups that allow Samus to reach new areas. Injected with a Metroid vaccine in Metroid Fusion, Samus can absorb X Parasites that restore health, missiles, and bombs. Power-ups can be obtained either by downloading them in Data Rooms, or absorbing a Core-X, which appears after defeating each boss. Metroid Fusion includes gameplay mechanics new to the series such as the ability to grab ledges and climb ladders.
Owners of both Metroid Prime and Metroid Fusion can unlock new features in Metroid Prime using the Nintendo GameCube – Game Boy Advance link cable.

Plot

Bounty hunter Samus Aran, the protagonist, explores the surface of the planet SR388 with a survey crew from Biologic Space Laboratories (BSL). She encounters an X Parasite, virions that can replicate their hosts' physical appearances and memories, killing them afterward. Samus is unknowingly infected by the virus, and proceeds to return to the BSL station, when she suddenly loses consciousness and is ejected from her ship before it crashes into a nearby asteroid belt. The Galactic Federation recovers her body and discovers that the X Parasite infected Samus's central nervous system. They counteract the parasite's damage by creating a vaccine made from a remaining cell culture of the infant Metroid that Samus had previously contacted. The vaccine cures Samus and not only gives her the ability to absorb and use the nuclei of X Parasites for nourishment (the Metroids were the main predators of the X prior to their extermination by Samus on SR388), but also the Metroid's vulnerability to extremely cold temperatures. Her infected Power Suit is sent to the BSL station for examination, although parts of the suit were too integrated with her body to safely remove during surgery, forming a partially armored suit known as the Fusion Suit.
The Federation sends Samus to investigate an explosion aboard the BSL station. While there, she learns that the space station is swarming with organisms that are infected with X Parasites. A group of X Parasites manage to recover and use components of Samus's infected Power Suit to transform into the SA-X, a form of the parasite that partially mimics Samus at full power and possesses the Ice Beam that can exploit Samus's weakness to cold temperatures. Samus escapes from the SA-X before it attacks her on several occasions, and continues exploring the space station. She discovers a restricted lab, which the Galactic Federation is secretly using to breed Metroids. Suddenly, the SA-X appears once again, and attempts to destroy the lab, with itself in it. Samus narrowly escapes the lab before it is destroyed, and later learns that the SA-X managed to asexually reproduce before perishing, subsequently cloning itself. In addition, Samus learns that the Galactic Federation plans to capture the X and the SA-X for further study. She is certain that the Federation underestimates the destructive power of the X Parasites, and takes it upon herself to destroy the BSL station. Samus then encounters one of the many SA-X now aboard the ship, defeating it and setting the BSL station on a collision course with SR388. As she prepares to exit the station, she encounters an Omega Metroid, which injures Samus towards an inch of her life, only to be saved by the recently defeated SA-X. Samus absorbs the nucleus of the SA-X and uses her newly restored Ice Beam to destroy the Omega Metroid, before escaping to her ship that is piloted back to the station by sentient organisms she had saved earlier, which extracts her from the space station before it collides with SR388.

Development

Metroid Fusion was developed by Nintendo Research & Development 1, the same development team that created the 1994 video game Super Metroid for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System,
Nintendo first confirmed an unnamed Metroid title would be released for the Game Boy Advance handheld game console on March 23, 2001. Despite speculation that the game would be based on Super Metroid, Ken Lobb, Nintendo of America's Director of Game Development, quelled rumors by stating, "One of the things I wanted to get across in today's meeting is that Metroid is not Super Metroid. It's something new. ... And that's something that will hopefully be seen at E3 for our sweet little Game Boy Advance."

Release

Versions and sales

Metroid Fusion was released by Nintendo for the Game Boy Advance in North America on November 17, 2002, in Europe on November 22, 2002, The game was one of ten Game Boy Advance games that can only be downloaded with 3DSs bought before a price-cut on August 11, 2011.
In its debut month of November 2002 in the United States, 199,723 copies of Metroid Fusion were sold, with total revenues of $5,590,768, making it the third bestselling Game Boy Advance game in that month,

Reception

The critical reception for Metroid Fusion was very positive; it received an aggregated score of 92 out of 100 from Metacritic, which is considered "universal acclaim". The game was considered fun and satisfying by several reviewers. X-Play claimed that it was a "pleasure to play", and praised its "beautiful" graphics and audio. The game satisfied IGN, which appreciated the lengthy minimum of 10 to 12 hours of playtime required to complete the game, further hailing it as an "outstanding achievement on the Game Boy Advance". GamesRadar and GamePro, however, felt that the game was "a little short", but still "loved every minute of it", finding the hidden secrets and new power-ups "sublimely ingenious". The sentiment was shared with GameSpot, which was disappointed that the game ended so soon, but still stated, "Metroid fans should absolutely get it, as should anyone willing to trade off some quantity for some serious quality in their gaming time." Metroid Fusion received several accolades. It was named Handheld Game of the Year at the 2002 Interactive Achievement Awards.
Nintendo World Report and Eurogamer were excited about the game, both calling it the best 2D Metroid game and the best Game Boy Advance game so far. Video game magazine Game Informer agreed, describing the game as "everything you could want from a Game Boy Advance game" from beginning to end, giving it a perfect review score. Play also enjoyed the game, describing it as a "magnified, modified, and improved" version of everything great from Metroid and Super Metroid.
Comparing the game to Super Metroid, GameSpot thought that Metroid Fusion offered that game's best qualities packaged in a new adventure. Nintendo Power heralded it as a return to the classic Metroid action gameplay style. The "perfect" controls were praised by Electronic Gaming Monthly, concluding its review by claiming "all games should feel this good." The game did not feel new to GameSpy, which complained that even the final enemy encounter draws heavy inspiration from Super Metroid. GameZone found that the small screen was a poor environment in which to play Metroid Fusion, but they ultimately still found it an exciting game.






