[[Life expectancy]]

CATEGORIES: Actuarial science, Ageing, Demography, Population, Gerontology, Demographic economics, Senescence

Life expectancy is the expected (in the statistical sense) number of years of life remaining at a given age.[ref]{{cite book
 | last = Sullivan
 | first = Arthur
 | authorlink = Arthur O'Sullivan (economist)
 | coauthors = Steven M. Sheffrin
 | title = Economics: Principles in action
 | publisher = Pearson Prentice Hall
 | year = 2012
 | location = Upper Saddle River, New Jersey 07458
 | page = 473
 | url = 
The term that is known as life expectancy is most often used in the context of human populations, but is also used in plant or animal ecology; it is calculated by the analysis of life tables (also known as actuarial tables). The term life expectancy may also be used in the context of manufactured objects, although the related term shelf life is used for consumer products and the terms "mean time to breakdown" (MTTB) and "mean time between failures" (MTBF) are used in engineering.

Interpretation of life expectancy

It is important to note that life expectancy is an average value. In many cultures, particularly before modern medicine was widely available, the combination of high infant mortality and deaths in young adulthood from accidents, epidemics, plagues, wars, and childbirth, significantly lowers the overall life expectancy. But for someone who survived past these early hazards, living into their sixties or seventies would not be uncommon. For example, a society with a life expectancy of 40 may have very few people dying at age 40: most will die before 30 years of age or after 55.
In countries with high infant mortality rates, life expectancy at birth is highly sensitive to the rate of death in the first few years of life. Because of this sensitivity to infant mortality, simple life expectancy at age zero can be subjected to gross misinterpretation, leading one to believe that a population with a low overall life expectancy will necessarily have a small proportion of older people.com/gregladen/2011/05/01/falsehood-if-this-was-the-ston/ For example, in a hypothetical stationary population in which half the population dies before the age of five, but everybody else dies at exactly 70 years old, the life expectancy at age zero will be about 37 years, while about 25% of the population will be between the ages of 50 and 70. Another measure, such as life expectancy at age 5 (e5), can be used to exclude the effect of infant mortality to provide a simple measure of overall mortality rates other than in early childhood—in the hypothetical population above, life expectancy at age 5 would be another 64 years. Aggregate population measures, such as the proportion of the population in various age classes, should also be used alongside individual-based measures like formal life expectancy when analyzing population structure and dynamics.

Human life expectancy patterns

Human beings are expected to live on average 49.42 years in Swazilandurl= years in Japan, although Japan's recorded life expectancy may have been very slightly increased by counting many infant deaths as stillborn.
The oldest confirmed recorded age for any human is 122 years (see Jeanne Calment). This is referred to as the "maximum life span", which is the upper boundary of life, the maximum number of years any human is known to have lived. Life Expectancy. A Topical Approach to: Life-Span Development(pp. 128-132). New York, New York: The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.

Life expectancy variation over time

The following information is derived from Encyclopædia Britannica, 1961. and other sources, some with a questionable accuracy. Unless otherwise stated, it represents estimates of the life expectancies of the population as a whole. In many instances, life expectancy varied considerably according to class and gender.
Life expectancy at birth takes account of infant mortality, but not pre-natal mortality.
Life expectancy increases with age as the individual survives the higher mortality rates associated with childhood. For instance, the table above listed the life expectancy at birth in Medieval Britain at 30. Having survived until the age of 21, a male member of the English aristocracy in this period could expect to live:
In general, the available data indicate that longer lifespans became more common recently in human evolution. although some research indicates that during the Neolithic Revolution natural selection favored increased longevity. Nevertheless, all researchers acknowledge the effect of cultural adaptations upon life expectancy.
During the early 1600s in England, life expectancy was only about 35 years, largely because two-thirds of all children died before the age of four.W. J. Rorabaugh, Donald T. Critchlow, Paula C. Baker (2004). "America's promise: a concise history of the United States". Rowman & Littlefield. p.47. ISBN 0-7425-1189-8 The life expectancy was under 25 years in the Colony of Virginia,"Medicine & Health", Stratfordhall. and in seventeenth-century New England, about 40 per cent died before reaching adulthood."Death in Early America". Digital History. During the Industrial Revolution, the life expectancy of children increased dramatically."Modernization - Population Change". Encyclopædia Britannica. The percentage of children born in London who died before the age of five decreased from 74.5% in 1730–1749 to 31.8% in 1810–1829. Buer, Health, Wealth and Population in the Early Days of the Industrial Revolution, London: George Routledge & Sons, 1926, page 30 ISBN 0-415-38218-1BBC—History—The Foundling Hospital. Published: 2001-05-01.
Public health measures are credited with much of the recent increase in life expectancy. During the 20th century, the average lifespan in the United States increased by more than 30 years, of which 25 years can be attributed to advances in public health.
In order to assess the quality of these additional years of life, 'healthy life expectancies' have been calculated for the last 30 years. Since 2001, the World Health Organization has published statistics called Healthy life expectancy (HALE), defined as the average number of years that a person can expect to live in "full health", excluding the years lived in less than full health due to disease and/or injury. Since 2004, Eurostat publishes annual statistics called Healthy Life Years (HLY) based on reported activity limitations. The United States of America uses similar indicators in the framework of their nationwide health promotion and disease prevention plan "Healthy People 2010". An increasing number of countries are using health expectancy indicators to monitor the health of their population.

Regional variations

