[[Tom Robbins]]

CATEGORIES: 20th-century American novelists, 21st-century American novelists, American male novelists, American satirists, Writers from North Carolina, Writers from Virginia, Writers from Washington (state), People from Richmond, Virginia, People from Seattle, Washington, Living people, Virginia Commonwealth University alumni, Postmodern writers, 1936 births

Thomas Eugene "Tom" Robbins (born July 22, 1936)See Encyclopedia Britannica (2012) and Oxford companion to American literature (1995). The discrepancy between Robbins' year of birth appearing in the Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data results from previous inaccurate reporting and the LoC rule prohibiting correction of CIP data. Robbins claims he was born in 1932 (see Conversations With Tom Robbins, 2011). is an American author. His best-selling novels are "seriocomedies" (also known as "comedy-drama"),

Early life

Robbins was born in Blowing Rock, North Carolina, United States (U.S.) to George Thomas Robbins and Katherine Belle Robinson, and both of his grandfathers were Baptist preachers. The Robbins family resided in Blowing Rock before moving to Richmond, Virginia when the author was still a young boy.
Robbins attended Hargrave Military Academy in Chatham, Virginia, where he won the Senior Essay Medal. The following year he enrolled at Washington and Lee University to major in journalism, leaving at the end of his sophomore year after being disciplined by his fraternity for bad behavior and failing to earn a letter in basketball.
In 1953, he enlisted in the Air Force after receiving his draft notice, spending a year as a meteorologist in Korea, followed by two years in the Special Weather Intelligence unit of the Strategic Air Command in Nebraska. He was discharged in 1957 and returned to Richmond, Virginia, where his poetry readings at the Rhinoceros Coffee House led to a reputation among the local bohemian scene.

Early media work

In late 1957, Robbins enrolled at Richmond Professional Institute, a school of art, drama, and music, which later became Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU). He served as an editor and columnist for the college newspaper, Proscript, from 1958-1959. He also worked nights on the sports desk of the daily Richmond Times-Dispatch.  After graduating with honors from VCU in 1959 and indulging in some hitchhiking, Robbins joined the staff of the Times-Dispatch as a copy editor.
In 1962, Robbins moved to Seattle to seek an M.A. at the Far East Institute of the University of Washington.  During the next five years in Seattle (minus a year spent in New York city researching a book on the painter, Jackson Pollock) he worked for the Seattle Times as an art critic. In 1965, he wrote a column on the arts for Seattle Magazine.  Also during this time, he hosted a weekly "underground" radio show at non-commercial KRAB-FM.  It was in 1967, while writing a review of the rock band The Doors, that Robbins says he found his literary voice. Robbins would remain in Seattle, on and off, for the following forty years.

Writing career

In 1967, Robbins moved to South Bend, Washington, where he wrote his first novel. In 1970, Robbins moved to La Conner, Washington, and it was at his home on Second Street that he subsequently authored nine books (although, in the late 1990s, he spent two years living on the Swinomish Indian reservation).
In the 1980s and early 1990s, Robbins regularly published articles and essays in Esquire magazine,
Michael Dare described Robbins' writing style in the following manner: "When he starts a novel, it works like this. First he writes a sentence. Then he rewrites it again and again, examining each word, making sure of its perfection, finely honing each phrase until it reverberates with the subtle texture of the infinite. Sometimes it takes hours. Sometimes an entire day is devoted to one sentence, which gets marked on and expanded upon in every possible direction until he is satisfied. Then, and only then, does he add a period." When Robbins was asked to explain his "gift" for storytelling in 2002, he replied:
 
 I'm descended from a long line of preachers and policemen. Now, it's common knowledge that cops are congenital liars, and evangelists spend their lives telling fantastic tales in such a way as to convince otherwise rational people that they're factual. So, I guess I come by my narrative inclinations naturally.
Over the course of his writing career, Robbins has given readings on four continents, in addition to the performances that he has delivered at festivals in Australia and Mexico, and nightclubs in England and Germany.

Awards and praise

In 1997, Robbins won the Bumbershoot Golden Umbrella Award for Lifetime Achievement in the arts that is presented annually by the Bumbershoot arts festival in Seattle.
In 2000, Robbins was named one of the 100 Best Writers of the 20th Century by Writer's Digest magazine, while the legendary Italian critic Fernanda Pivano called Robbins "the most dangerous writer in the world".
In October 2012, Robbins received the 2012 Literary Lifetime Achievement Award from the Library of Virginia."Tom Robbins: Author reflects on writing, Richmond and the many decades since he left" by Bill Lohmann.

Other activities

Robbins has defended, in print, Indian mystic Osho, although he was never a follower.
Robbins spent three weeks at ceremonial sites in Mexico and Central America with mythologist Joseph Campbell, and studied mythology in Greece and Sicily with the poet Robert Bly. Robbins also embarked on a solo pilgrimage to Timbuktu.
As of 2013, Robbins is a member of the Marijuana Policy Project's Advisory Board, alongside numerous other notable figures such as Jack Black, Ani DiFranco, Tommy Chong, and Jello Biafra;
For eight years, Robbins was an enthusiastic participant in Seattle's SPAM carving competition, serving as judge. He has also hosted an annual mayonnaise tasting, often with more than 20 international varieties, at his home in La Conner.

Personal life

Robbins was a friend of Terence McKenna,
He is friends with Gus Van Sant, and performed the voice-over narration in Van Sant's film adaptation of Even Cowgirls Get the Blues.  He has been friends with directors Robert Altman and Alan Rudolph, as well, and has had small speaking parts in five feature films.

Family life

Robbins has been married to Alexa D'Avalon since 1987 and continues to live in La Conner with Alexa and their dog, Blini Tomato Titanium. He has three sons, Rip, Kirk, and Fleetwood, all from previous marriages.

Partial bibliography

Robbins has written eight novels since 1971. He has also written numerous short stories and essays, mostly collected in the volume Wild Ducks Flying Backward, and one novella, B Is for Beer.

Non-Fiction

Novels

Collection

Novella

Notes



Further reading




