[[Dominic Keating]]

CATEGORIES: 1962 births, Living people, English male film actors, English male stage actors, English male television actors, English people of Irish descent, People from Leicester, Alumni of University College London, Male actors from Leicestershire

Dominic Keating (born 1 July 1962) is an English television, film and theatre actor, known for his portrayal as Lt. Malcolm Reed on Star Trek: Enterprise.

Early life and education

Keating was born in Leicester to an Irish father; his grandfather, a brigadier, was awarded an OBE. His first stage performance was in primary school, playing a character in The Ragged School. He then attended Uppingham School.
After graduating from the University College London with First Class Honours in History,

Personal life

As of 2005, Keating maintains homes in both London and Los Angeles. He enjoys golf, swimming, music, boogie boarding, tennis, reading and travelling.

Career

Theatre

Keating had success on the UK stage before working as a television and film actor. He originated the role of "Cosmo" in Philip Ridley's The Pitchfork Disney, as well as that of "Bryan" in Michael Wall's Amongst Barbarians, for which he won a Mobil Award. He has also done additional stage work in both the UK and in Los Angeles, including the one man play The Christian Brothers at King's Cross, in The Best Years of Your Life at the Man in the Moon Theatre, Screamers at the Edinburgh Playhouse Festival, and Alfie at the Tiffany Theater.

Television

Keating first came to major public attention in the UK when he had a semi-regular role as Tony in the Channel 4 sitcom Desmond's (1989–95). He went on from this to a role in Inspector Morse, as well as other guest-starring roles.
Having moved to the United States, he gained the role of the demonic warrior Mallos on the short-lived 2000 series The Immortal. He starred in the Zalman King series chromiumblue. He also made guest appearances on Buffy The Vampire Slayer, G vs E and Special Unit 2 as well as on several other series prior to a major role on the series Star Trek: Enterprise, where he played Lieutenant Malcolm Reed. Since then he has had a guest roles on the series Las Vegas, Holby City and the CSI: NY episode Uncertainty Rules.
Keating joined the cast of hit show Heroes for its second season and played an Irish mobster in a four episode arc. He also held a guest-starring role for three episodes on the Fox TV series Prison Break. In 2010 Keating guest starred in the FX original series Sons of Anarchy.

Film

He has appeared in films, including The Hollywood Sign, Jungle 2 Jungle, The Auteur Theory and the upcoming films Certifiably Jonathan, Hollywood Kills and Robert Zemeckis' animated version of Beowulf. At a Star Trek convention in Sacramento, California on 9 September 2006, he announced that he had been cast as an Australian scientist in the Species sequel Species IV. He has also recently done work in several short films, including the latest by Tim Russ, called Plugged, a satire on modern advertising.
Dominic Keating also appears as Sherlock Holmes's brother in the 2010 film Sherlock Holmes by the Asylum.
Dominic Keating was also responsible for the voice-over in the Ricky Gervais film "The Invention of Lying" – 2009 release by WB.

Other work

Keating also does commercial and voiceover work, perhaps most famously on an early 1990s Vidal Sassoon commercial, where his British pronunciation of "salon" brought him some notice as well as a spoof on Saturday Night Live. He has also done voice work for various audio books, and also voiced (uncredited) the minor character 'Mouse' in Bioware's Dragon Age: Origins.imdb.
Keating has been confirmed as the voice of "Kormac the Templar" in the PC game Diablo 3 by Blizzard Entertainment. He was also the voice of Gremlin Prescott in Epic Mickey 2: The Power of Two (having provided Prescott's vocal effects in the previous game).

Filmography






