[[Tomiichi Murayama]]

CATEGORIES: 1924 births, Living people, People from Ōita, Ōita, Meiji University alumni, Members of the House of Representatives of Japan, Prime Ministers of Japan, Social Democratic Party (Japan) politicians

 is a retired Japanese politician who served as the 81st Prime Minister of Japan from 30 June 1994 to 11 January 1996. He was the head of the Social Democratic Party of Japan (until 1996, the Japan Socialist Party) and the first socialist prime minister in nearly fifty years. He is most remembered today for his speech "On the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the war's end," in which he publicly apologized for Japanese atrocities during World War II.

Early life and education

With translated information from the Japanese Wikipedia
Murayama was born in Ōita Prefecture on 3 March 1924; his father was a fisherman. He entered Meiji University in 1943 as a philosophy student, but was mobilised in 1944 and assigned to work in the Ishikawajima shipyards. Later that year, he was drafted into the Imperial Army and assigned to the 72nd Infantry of the 23rd Brigade of the 23rd Division as a private second class. He was demobilisd following Japan's surrender with the rank of officer candidate.

Career

Murayama was appointed secretary of the labor union in his company and entered the Japan Socialist Party, which his union supported. He began his political career as a member of the Ōita city council in 1955 and went on to serve three terms. In 1963 his supporters urged him to be a candidate for the Ōita prefectural assembly. He was elected three times successively. In 1972 he was elected to the House of Representatives of Japan.
Murayama was known as a tough negotiator with a calm personality. In 1991 he was appointed chairman of the Diet Affairs Committee of his party, one of the eminent posts in any Japanese political party. In August 1993 after the general election, the Japan Socialist Party joined the cabinet until 1994. In October of the same year he was elected the head of the party.

Prime minister

Murayama became prime minister on 30 June 1994. The cabinet was based on a coalition consisting of the Japan Socialist Party, the Liberal Democratic Party, and the New Party Sakigake. 
Because of the unwieldy coalition and his character, his leadership was not strong. His party had been opposed to the Security Pact between Japan and the United States, but he stated that this pact was in accordance with the Constitution of Japan and disappointed many of his Socialist supporters. His government was criticised for not dealing quickly with the Kobe earthquake that hit Japan on 17 January 1995. Just two months later, on 20 March, the Aum Shinrikyo cult carried out the Sarin gas attack on the Tokyo subway.
As the prime minister, he apologised for the atrocities committed during World War II. 
In the 1995 General Election, his party lost many seats in the House of Representatives. He expressed his wish to resign from the office of prime minister, but his supporters opposed. A few months later he resigned and was replaced by Ryutaro Hashimoto, the head of the Liberal Democratic Party.

After politics

In 2000, he retired from politics. Murayama and Mutsuko Miki traveled to North Korea in 2000 to promote better bilateral relations between the two countries.
He became the president of the Asian Women's Fund, a quasi-government body that was set up to provide compensation for former comfort women. 8.5 million yen given to sex slave fund 2 Feb 2001 The Japan Times Retrieved 17 August 2012 After providing compensation and working on various projects the fund was dissolved on 31 March 2007. Closing of the Asian Women's Fund Asian Women's Fund Online Museum Retrieved 17 August 2012 

Honours

From the corresponding article in the Japanese Wikipedia








