[[Boris Berezovsky (businessman)]]

CATEGORIES: 1946 births, 2013 deaths, Aeroflot, Christians of Jewish descent, Corresponding Members of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Fugitive financiers, Fugitives wanted by Russia, Writers from Moscow, People from Sunninghill, Russian billionaires, Russian businesspeople in the oil industry, Russian emigrants to the United Kingdom, Russian mass media owners, Russian mathematicians, Russian newspaper publishers (people), Russian Orthodox Christians, Russian people of Jewish descent, Russian political activists, Russian white-collar criminals, Russian non-fiction writers, Suicides by hanging in England, Businesspeople who committed suicide, Converts to Christianity from Judaism, Russian dissidents

Boris Abramovich Berezovsky (
Berezovsky made his fortune in Russia in the 1990s when the country went through privatization of state propertyI am plotting a new Russian revolution" The Guardian. 13 April 2007 He profited from gaining control over various assets, including the country's main television channel, Channel One. In 1997 Forbes magazine estimated Berezovsky's wealth at US$3 billion."Boris Abramovich Berezovsky" Profile on Globalsecurity. Berezovsky helped fund Unity – the political party, which formed Vladimir Putin's parliamentary base,What a carve-up!, The Guardian, 3 December 2005 and was elected to the Duma on Putin's slate. After he moved to Britain, the government took over his television assets, and he divested from other Russian holdings.
In an article in The Washington Post in 2000, Berezovsky argued that in the absence of a strong civil society and middle class it may sometimes be necessary for capitalists "to interfere directly in the political process" of Russia as a counterweight to ex-Communists "who hate democracy and dream of regaining lost positions.""Oligarchs as Nation's Saviors? Berezovsky Justifies Himself" St. Petersburg Times 20 October 2000 Berezovsky took legal action against the journalist Paul Klebnikov, who accused him of various crimes.
From his new home in the UK, where he and associates including Akhmed Zakayev, Alexander Litvinenko and Alex Goldfarb became known as "the London Circle" of Russian exiles, Berezovsky publicly stated that he was on a mission to bring down Putin "by force" or by bloodless revolution."Oligarch hits out at his Kremlin monster" The Guardian 21 December 2000
In 2012, Berezovsky lost a London High Court case he brought over the ownership of Sibneft against Roman Abramovich, in which he sought over £3 billion in damages. The court judged Berezovsky as an "inherently unreliable" witness, who "regarded truth as a transitory, flexible concept, which could be moulded to suit his current purposes" and that "At times the evidence which he gave was deliberately dishonest; sometimes he was clearly making his evidence up as he went along in response to the perceived difficulty in answering the questions." The court concluded that Berezovsky had never been a co-owner of Sibneft.
Berezovsky was found dead at his home, Titness Park, at Sunninghill, near Ascot in Berkshire, on 23 March 2013. According to British police, a post-mortem exam found that his death was consistent with hanging and that there were no signs of a violent struggle. On 26 March 2014 BBC News announced that the Coroner had recorded an open verdict.

Early life and scientific research

Boris Abramovich Berezovsky was born in 1946, in Moscow, to Abram Markovich Berezovsky (1911–1979), Berezovsky conducted research on optimization and control theory, publishing 16 books and articles between 1975 and 1989.

Political and business career in Russia

Accumulation of wealth

In 1989 Berezovsky took advantage of the opportunities presented by perestroika to found LogoVAZ with Badri Patarkatsishvili and senior managers from AvtoVAZ. LogoVAZ developed software for AvtoVAZ, sold Soviet-made cars and serviced foreign cars. The dealership profited from hyperinflation by taking cars on consignment and paying the producer at a later date when the money lost much of its value.
One of Berezovsky's early endeavours was AVVA (All-Russia Automobile Alliance), a venture fund he formed in 1993 with Alexander Voloshin (Boris Yeltsin's future Chief of Staff) and AvtoVAZ Chairman Vladimir Kadannikov. Berezovsky controlled about 30% of the company, which raised nearly US$50 million from small investors through a bonded loan to build a plant producing a "people's car". The project did not collect sufficient funds for the plant and the funds were instead invested into AvtoVAZ production, while the debt to investors was swapped for equity.
In 1994 Berezovsky was the target of the car bombing incident, but survived the assassination attempt, in which his driver was killed and he was injured.
Berezovsky's involvement in the Russian media began in December 1994, when he gained control over ORT Television (see Channel One (Russia)) to replace the failing Soviet Channel 1. He appointed the popular anchorman and producer Vladislav Listyev as CEO of ORT. Three months later Listyev was assassinated amid a fierce struggle for control of advertising sales."Celebrity's Killing Stirs Talk of Intrigue in Russia" The New York Times, 3 March 1995 Berezovsky was questioned in the police investigation, among many others, but the killers were never found."Investigation into Vlad Listyev's murder suspended 3 years ago – source" Russia Today, 12 April 2009 Under Berezovsky's stewardship, ORT became a major asset of the reformist camp as they prepared to face Communists and nationalists in the upcoming presidential elections."Russian State TV Channel Says Let's Make a Deal" The New York Times, 26 July 1995
From 1995 to 1997 through the controversial loans-for-shares privatisation auctions In an article in The Washington Post in 2000, Berezovsky revealed that the American financier George Soros declined an invitation to participate in the acquisition."Our Reverse Revolution; Under Yeltsin, we 'oligarchs' helped stop Russia from reverting to its old, repressive ways" The Washington Post, 16 October 2000
In 1995, he played a key role in a management reshuffle at Aeroflot and participated in its corporatization, with his close associate Nikolai Glushkov becoming Aeroflot's CFO. In January 1998 it was announced that Sibneft would merge with Mikhail Khodorkovsky's Yukos to create the third-largest oil company in the world."Oil Merger Creates New Russian Giant, Fuels A Trend" Chicago Tribune 20 January 1998 The merger was abandoned five months later amid falling oil prices."Yuksi Oil Merger Dropped" The Moscow Times 26 May 1998

Role in Yeltsin's reelection in 1996

Berezovsky entered the Kremlin's inner circle in 1993 through arranging for the publication of Yeltsin's memoirs and befriended Valentin Yumashev, the President's ghost-writer. "What stands in the way of Russia is Russia. Putin and Other Parasites" The New Republic 5 June 2000"A Russian's Rise From Car Dealer to Tycoon" The New York Times 14 June 1997
In January 1996, at the World Economic Forum at Davos, Berezovsky liaised with fellow oligarchs to form an alliance – which later became known as "Davos Pact""Russians work on their image at Davos" The New York Times 28 January 2007 – to bankroll Boris Yeltsin's campaign in the upcoming presidential elections."The means to an end". by George Soros The Guardian 17 April 2000 On his return to Moscow Berezovsky met and befriended Tatyana Dyachenko, Yeltsin's daughter, According to a later profile by The Guardian, "Berezovsky masterminded the 1996 re-election of Boris Yeltsin... He and his billionaire friends coughed up £140 million for Yeltsin's campaign"."The richer they come ...Can Russia's oligarchs keep their billions – and their freedom?" The Guardian 2 July 2007
In the summer of 1996, Berezovsky had emerged as a key advisor to Yeltsin, allied with Anatoly Chubais, opposing a group of hardliners led by General Alexander Korzhakov."In the Kremlin, Chickens Still Come Home to Roost" The New York Times 28 June 1996 One night in June, in the drawing room of Club Logovaz, Berezovsky, Chubais and others plotted the ouster of Korzhakov and other hardliners. On 20 June 1996, Yeltsin fired Korzhakov and two other hawks, leaving the reformers' team in full control of the Kremlin."Yeltsin fires 3 hard-line officials Internal struggle leaves security chief as 2nd most powerful" Baltimore Sun 21 June 1996 Firing them was controversial though, as Korzhakov a few days before caught two of Yeltsin's campaign organizers carrying USD500,000 cash without invoices out of presidential administration building.
On 16 June 1996, Yeltsin came first in the first round of elections after forging a tactical alliance with Gen. Alexander Lebed, who finished third. On 3 July, in the runoff vote, he beat the Communist Gennady Zyuganov. His victory was due largely to the support of the TV networks controlled by Gusinsky and Berezovsky (NTV and ORT) and the money from the business elite. The New York Times called Berezovsky the "public spokesman and chief lobbyist for this new elite, which moved from the shadows to respectability in a few short years".

Role in Chechen conflict

On 17 October 1996, Yeltsin dismissed General Alexander Lebed from the position of National Security Advisor amid allegations that he was plotting a coup and secretly mustering a private army."Chernomyrdin Intervenes in Kulikov-Lebed Feud, Lebed Appeals to Yeltsin" The Jamestown Foundation Monitor. Vol. 2, Issue 194, 17 October 1996 Lebed promptly accused Berezovsky and Gusinsky of engineering his ouster, and formed a coalition with the disgraced General Alexander Korzhakov."A General on His Own" The New York Times 18 October 1996 The dismissal of Lebed, the architect of the Khasavyurt peace accord, left Yeltsin's Chechen policy in limbo. On 30 October 1996, in a political bombshell, Yeltsin named Ivan Rybkin as his new National Security Advisor and appointed Berezovsky Deputy Secretary in charge of Chechnya"Big Business And Kremlin: Togetherness Has Its Pitfalls" The New York Times 31 October 1996 with a mandate to oversee the implementation of the Khasavyurt Accord: that is, the withdrawal of Russian forces, the negotiation of a peace treaty, and the preparation of a general election. On 19 December 1996, Berezovsky made headlines by negotiating the release of 21 Russian policeman held hostage by the warlord Salman Raduev amid efforts by radicals from both sides to torpedo peace negotiations."Raduev Releases Hostages" The Jamestown Foundation Monitor. Vol. 2, Issue 237, 19 December 1996
On 12 May 1997, Yeltsin and Maskhadov signed the Russian–Chechen Peace Treaty in the Kremlin. Speaking at a press conference in Moscow, Berezovsky outlined his priorities for the economic reconstruction of Chechnya, particularly the construction of a pipeline for transporting Azerbaijani oil. He called upon the Russian business community to contribute to the rebuilding of the republic, revealing his own donation of US$1 million (some sources mention US$2 million) for a cement factory in Grozny."Berezovsky Announces Steps Toward Economic Reconstruction of Chechnya" The Jamestown Foundation Monitor. Vol. 3, Issue 95, 14 May 1997 This payment would come to haunt him years later, when he was accused of funding Chechen terrorists."FSB threatens Berezovsky with international arrest warrant" The Russia Journal 31 January 2002
After his dismissal from the Security Council, Berezovsky vowed to continue his activities in Chechnya as a private individual"Yeltsin Sacks Berezovsky" The Jamestown Foundation Monitor. Vol. 3, Issue 208, 6 November 1997 and maintained contact with Chechen warlords. He was instrumental in the release of 69 hostages, including two Britons, Jon James and Camilla Carr, whom he flew in his private jet to RAF Brize Norton in September 1998."Hostages taste freedom" BBC News 21 September 1998."On a knife edge" The Times 21 April 2008 In an interview with Thomas de Waal in 2005, he revealed the involvement of the British Ambassador to Russia, Sir Andrew Wood, and explained that his former negotiations counterpart, the Islamic militant leader Movladi Udugov, helped arrange the Britons' release."Berezovsky Blames Putin For Chechen War" IWPR Report, 25 February 2005
Berezovsky had a phone conversation with Movladi Udugov in the spring of 1999, six months before the beginning of fighting in Dagestan. A transcript of that conversation was leaked to a Moscow tabloid on 10 September 1999 and appeared to mention the would-be militants' invasion. It has been the subject of much speculation ever since. As Berezovsky explained later in interviews to de Waal and Goldfarb, Udugov proposed to coordinate the Islamists' incursion into Dagestan, so that a limited Russian response would topple the Chechen president Aslan Maskhadov and establish a new Islamic republic, which would be anti-American but friendly to Russia. Berezovsky said that he disliked the idea but reported Udugov's ouverture to prime-minister Stepashin. "Udugov and Basayev," he asserted, "conspired with Stepashin and Putin to provoke a war to topple Maskhadov ... but the agreement was for the Russian army to stop at the Terek River. However, Putin double-crossed the Chechens and started an all-out war."

Battle with "Young Reformers"

In March 1997, Berezovsky and Tatyana Dyachenko flew to Nizhniy Novgorod to persuade the city's governor, Boris Nemtsov, to join Chubais' economic team, which became known as the government of Young Reformers. This was the last concerted political action of the "Davos Pact" (see above). Four months later the group split into two cliques fiercely competing for Yeltsin's favour. The clash was precipitated by the privatization auction of the communication utility Svyazinvest, in which Onexim bank of Chubais' loyalist Vladimir Potanin, backed by George Soros, competed with Gusinsky, allied with Spanish Telefónica. An initially commercial dispute swiftly developed into a contest of political wills between Chubais and Berezovsky. Potanin's victory unleashed a bitter media war, in which ORT and NTV accused the Chubais group of fixing the auction in favor of Potanin, whereas Chubais charged Berezovsky with abusing his government position to advance his business interests."Berezovsky. Putin. West. By George Soros" Moskovskie Novosti February 2000 Both sides appealed to Yeltsin, who had proclaimed a new era of "fair" privatization "based on strict legislative rules and allowing no deviations"."Russia: Yeltsin Pledges Fair Privatization – An Analysis" Radio Free Europe 9 August 1997 In the end, both sides lost. Berezovsky's media revealed a corrupt scheme whereby a publishing house owned by Onexim Bank paid Chubais and his group hefty advances for a book that was never written. The scandal led to a purge of Chubais' loyalists from the government."Russian Reformer's Credibility Undercut by Scandal" The New York Times 17 November 1997 Chubais retaliated by persuading Yeltsin to dismiss Boris Berezovsky from the national security council. Berezovsky's service on the Security Council ended on 5 November 1997."Russia: Berezovsky's Sacking May Be A Temporary Victory For Adversaries" Radio Free Europe 9 November 1997 Soros called the Berezovsky-Chubais clash a "historical event, in the reality of which I would have never believed, if I had not watched it myself. I saw a fight of the people in the boat floating towards the edge of a waterfall". He argued that the reformist camp never recovered from the wounds sustained in this struggle, setting the political stage for conservative nationalists, and eventually Vladimir Putin.

Philanthropy

Berezovsky was reportedly the only person who, after the Karmadon Gorge tragedy when an avalanche buried the film crew of the Russian director Sergei Bodrov, immediately allocated a large sum of money for the search for survivors.
In 1991, Berezovsky founded the "Triumph" award, bestowed upon genuinely outstanding Russian poets, musicians, artists, directors and ballet dancers.ru/politics/2013/04/12/boris_berezovsky_back_to_black_24971.html

The Kremlin Family and Putin's rise to power

In the Spring of 1998, Berezovsky emerged in the centre of a new informal power group – the "Family", a close-knit circle of advisers around Yeltsin, which included Yeltsin's daughter Tatyana and his chief of staff, Yumashev. It was rumoured that no important government appointment could happen without the Family's support."Yeltsin daughter helped plot cabinet sacking" The Independent 25 March 1998 By 1999, the Family also included two of Berezovsky's associates, his former AVVA partner Alexander Voloshin, who replaced Yumashev as Yeltsin's chief of staff, and Roman Abramovich."The Pocket Prime Minister" The Jamestown Foundation Monitor. Vol. 5, Issue 12, 18 June 1998
The principal concern of the Family was finding an "electable" successor to Yeltsin to counter the presidential aspirations of the then prime minister, Yevgeny Primakov, who was leaning to more statist positions. Political battles between the Family and Primakov's camp dominated the two last years of Yeltsin's presidency."Putin's Path to Power" Post-Soviet Affairs( Bellwether Publishing, Ltd.) vol. 16, no. 4, Dec 2000
In November 1998, in a televised press conference, five officers of the FSB, led by Lieutenant Colonel Alexander Litvinenko, revealed an alleged plot by their superiors to assassinate Berezovsky."FSB Officers Claim They Were Ordered to Kill Berezovsky" The Jamestown Foundation Monitor. Vol. 4, Issue 214, 18 November 1998
In April 1999 Russia's Prosecutor General, Yury Skuratov, opened an investigation into embezzlement at Aeroflot and issued an arrest warrant for Berezovsky, who called the investigation politically motivated and orchestrated by Primakov."Russian tycoon: 'No fear of arrest' " BBC News, 8 April 1999 Nikolai Glushkov, Aeroflot's former General Director, later revealed that conflict with Primakov arose from the irritation that Berezovsky's management team caused in the Russian Foreign Intelligence Service, which Primakov headed before becoming prime minister, over firing of thousands of spies, who used Aeroflot as a front organization in Soviet times."Nickolai Glushkov: Media Should Know Facts Before Investigators Do" (in Russian) Kommersant 23, November 2000"W. No charges were brought."Berezovsky back to face the music" BBC News 18 April 1999 Yeltsin sacked Primakov's government shortly thereafter and replaced him with Sergey Stepashin as new prime-minister."Citing Economy, Yeltsin Fires Premier" The Washington Post 13 May 1999
Vladimir Putin's meteoric rise from relative obscurity to the Russian presidency in the course of a few short months of 1999 has been attributed to his intimacy with the "Family" as a protege of Berezovsky and Yumashev. By the end of 1999 the Family had persuaded Yeltsin to name Putin his political successor and candidate for the presidency."Putin Says He Tried to Dissuade Yeltsin" Los Angeles Times 5 January 2000"Behind the Scenes of Yeltsin's Resignation" The Washington Post 5 January 2000"Coronation of the Yeltsin 'Family' Heir" newsmax 1 May 2000
Berezovsky's acquaintance with Putin dated back to the early 1990s, when the latter, as Deputy Mayor of St. Petersburg, helped Logovaz establish a car dealership. They enjoyed friendly relations; on occasion, Berezovsky took Putin skiing with him in Switzerland.
In February 1999, when Berezovsky's political standing looked uncertain because of his clash with Primakov over Aeroflot, Putin, then Director of the FSB, made a bold gesture of friendship by showing up at a birthday party for Berezovsky's wife. "I absolutely do not care what Primakov thinks of me", Putin told Berezovsky on that night. That was the beginning of their political alliance. According to the Times, Spanish police discovered that on up to five different occasions in 1999 Putin had secretly visited a villa in Spain belonging to Berezovsky."Leader's secret holidays to Spain " The Times 15 June 2000
In mid-July 1999 the Family dispatched Berezovsky to Biarritz, where Putin was holidaying, to persuade him to accept the position of prime minister and the role of heir apparent."Red Or Dead" New Statesman 27 March 2006 On 9 August Yeltsin sacked the government of Sergei Stepashin and appointed Putin prime minister, amid reports that Berezovsky had masterminded the reshuffle."Russian media 'not surprised'" BBC News 9 August 1999
Putin's principal opponents were the former Prime Minister Evgeny Primakov and the Mayor of Moscow Yuri Luzhkov, backed by the Fatherland-All Russia alliance. To counter this group in the Duma elections of 1999, Berezovsky was instrumental in the creation, within the space of a few months, of the Unity party, with no ideology other than its support for Putin."Exiled oligarch plans coalition against Kremlin." Financial Times 21 January 2003"Russia Vote Returns Tycoon to Spotlight" The Washington Post 23 December 1999 Later he disclosed that the source of Unity's funding, with Putin's knowledge and consent, was Aeroflot."Putin gained from Aeroflot scam, says media mogul" The Guardian 16 November 2000 In the 1999 election Berezovsky campaigned as a Putin loyalist and won a seat in the Duma, representing the North Caucasian republic of Karachaevo-Cherkessia.
During the Duma election campaign Berezovsky's ORT TV served as an extremely effective propaganda machine for the Putin camp, using aggressive attack reporting and programming to denigrate and ridicule Putin's rivals, Primakov and Luzhkov, tactics strongly criticized as undue interference with the media."Moscow's Mayor Fights On Against Foes in High Places" The New York Times 15 December 1999 But Unity got a surprisingly high score in the elections, paving the way for Putin's election victory in spring 2000.

Conflict with Putin and emigration

Berezovsky's disagreements with Putin became public three weeks into Putin's presidency. On 8 May 2000 Berezovsky and Abramovich were spotted together at Putin's invitation-only inauguration ball in Moscow."Russia's New Prime Minister: A Tested Economic Liberal" The New York Times 11 May 2000 But on 31 May Berezovsky sharply attacked the constitutional reform proposed by the president, which would give the Kremlin the right to dismiss elected governors. In an open letter to Putin published in Kommersant Berezovsky, then a Duma deputy, said that he would be obliged to vote against the president's legislative project, which was "directed toward changing the state's structure" and represented a "threat to Russia's territorial integrity and democracy.""Berezovsky's Letter Dominates News" Moscow Times 1 June 2000 On 17 July, Berezovsky resigned from the Duma, saying he "did not want to be involved in the country's ruin and the restoration of an authoritarian regime"."Berezovsky quits Duma at 'ruining of Russia'" The Independent 18 July 2000 In August Berezovsky's media attacked Putin for the way he handled the sinking of the Kursk submarine, blaming the death of 118 sailors on the Kremlin's reluctance to accept foreign help."Russian President Putin tries to break Berezovsky's grip" World Socialist Web Site 28 September 2000 In September, Berezovsky alleged that the Kremlin had attempted to expropriate his shares in ORT and announced that he would put his stake into a trust to be controlled by prominent intellectuals."Kremlin sinks in media morass" The Russia Journal, 23 September 1999
In October, in an interview in Le Figaro, Putin announced that he would no longer tolerate criticism of the government by media controlled by the oligarchs. "If necessary we will destroy those instruments that allow this blackmail", he declared. (originally published in Le Figaro 26 October 2000) Responding to a question about Berezovsky, he warned that he had a "cudgel" in store for him. "The state has a cudgel in its hands that you use to hit just once, but on the head. We haven't used this cudgel yet. We've just brandished it... But the day we get really angry, we won't hesitate to use it."
In the same month, Russian prosecutors revived the Aeroflot fraud investigation and Berezovsky was questioned as a witness. On 7 November 2000 Berezovsky, who was travelling abroad, failed to appear for further questioning and announced that he would not return to Russia because of what he described as "constantly intensifying pressure on me by the authorities and President Putin personally. Essentially," he said, "I'm being forced to choose whether to become a political prisoner or a political emigrant." Berezovsky claimed that Putin had made him a suspect in the Aeroflot case simply because ORT had "spoken the truth" about the sinking of the submarine Kursk."Berezovsky No-shows for His Meeting with Prosecutors" The Jamestown Foundation Monitor, v. 6, No. 214, 15 November 2000 In early December his associate Nikolai Glushkov was arrested in Moscow and Berezovsky dropped the proposal to put ORT stake in trust.[ref]

</ref>

Divestment from Russian holdings

2001 was the year of systematic takeover by the government of privately owned television networks, in the course of which Berezovsky, Gusinski and Patarkatsishvili lost most of their media holdings,"Silencing Critics of the Kremlin" Editorial, The New York Times 23 January 2002 prompting one of them to warn of Russia "turning into a banana republic" in a letter to The New York Times."Off the Air in Russia" The New York Times 30 January 2002 In February, Berezovsky and Patarkatsishvili sold their stake in ORT to Roman Abramovich, who promptly ceded editorial control to the Kremlin."Abramovich Buys 49% of ORT" The Moscow Times 6 February 2001 Berezovsky later claimed that there was a secret understanding that Nikolai Glushkov would be released from prison as part of that deal, a promise that was never fulfilled."Abramovich sued for billions in 'fraud and blackmail' battle with ex-business partner" Daily Mail 18 April 2008"Chelsea FC owner Roman Abramovich 'was President Putin's enforcer'" The Times 29 April 2008 In April, the government took control of Vladimir Gusinsky's NTV."Government Takes Russia's NTV" ABC News 14 April 2001 Berezovsky then moved to acquire a controlling stake in a smaller network, TV-6, made Patarkatsishvili its Chairman, and offered employment to hundreds of locked out NTV journalists."TV-6 Staff Decries 'Freedom Fighters'" The St. Petersburg Times 20 April 2001 Almost immediately, Patarkatshishvili became a target of police investigation and fled the country."Arrest Warrant Out For Director of TV6" The St. Petersburg Times 3 July 2001 In January 2002 a Russian arbitration court forced TV-6 (Russia) into liquidation. The liquidation of TV-6 was precipitated by LUKoil, a partly state-owned minority shareholder, using a piece of legislation that was almost immediately repealed."Independent Russian TV shut down" BBC News 11 January 2002"Russians Find Suspicions Fly As Network Goes Off Air" The New York Times 23 January 2002
In 2001 Berezovsky and Patarkatsishvili ended their involvement in Sibneft for a US$1.3 billion fee from Roman Abramovich. This transaction was the subject of a later dispute in the UK commercial courts, with Berezovsky alleging that he had been put under pressure to sell his stake to Abramovich at a fraction of the true value,"Boris Berezovsky sues Roman Abramovich for £2bn at London court" Daily Telegraph 18 April 2008 an allegation that the court rejected.
In 2006 Berezovsky sold the Kommersant ("The Businessman") newspaper and his remaining Russian assets."Berezovsky Sells Remaining Russian Assets" The St. Petersburg Times 26 February 2006

=High Court case against Abramovich=

In 2011 Berezovsky brought a civil case against Roman Abramovich in the High Court of Justice in London, accusing Abramovich of blackmail, breach of trust and breach of contract, and seeking over £3 billion in damages. This became the largest civil court case in British legal history.
Berezovsky's claimed past ownership of Sibneft – which constituted the bulk of his fortune – was put into question by Abramovich, who in a statement to the High Court in London asserted that Berezovsky had never owned shares in Sibneft, and that US$1.3 billion paid in 2001 ostensibly for his stake in the company was actually in recognition of Berezovsky's "political assistance and protection" during the creation of Sibneft in 1995."Chelsea FC owner Roman Abramovich set for court showdown with Boris Berezovksy over Sibneft" Daily Telegraph 23 February 2011 The hearings, which started on 3 October 2011, examined Berezovsky's US$5.5 billion claim against Abramovich for damages arising from the sale of his assets under alleged "threats and intimidation"."Battle of the Oligarchs: Russian Exile Seeks Billions from Former Business Partner" Time 3 October 2011 The Daily Mail reported that Berezovsky only succeeded in serving a writ on Abramovich when both men happened to be shopping on Sloane Street, with Berezovsky dashing from Dolce and Gabbana to confront Abramovich in Hermes."Battle of the oligarchs... the amazing showdown between Roman Abramovich and his arch rival" Daily Mail 6 October 2007
On 31 August 2012, the High Court found for Abramovich. The High Court judge stated that because of the nature of the evidence, the case hinged on whether to believe Berezovsky or Abramovich's evidence. In her ruling, the judge observed: "On my analysis of the entirety of the evidence, I found Mr. Berezovsky an unimpressive, and inherently unreliable, witness, who regarded truth as a transitory, flexible concept, which could be moulded to suit his current purposes... I regret to say that the bottom line of my analysis of Mr. Berezovsky's credibility is that he would
have said almost anything to support his case."

Exile in Britain

Once in Britain, Berezovsky launched a concerted campaign to expose alleged misdeeds of Vladimir Putin, from suppressing freedom of speech"Russian critics blast Putin's record" BBC News 23 September 2003 to committing war crimes in Chechnya. He also accused Russia's FSB security service of staging the Moscow apartment bombings of 1999 in order to help Putin win the presidency."Russian tycoon blames Moscow for blasts" BBC News 6 March 2002 Many of these activities were funded through the New York based International Foundation for Civil Liberties directed by Berezovsky's friend Alex Goldfarb.
Berezovsky bought a Belgravia flat, a house on Surrey's Wentworth Estate, and for a while owned the 172-acre Hascombe Court estate in Godalming. In 2012, he sold his Wentworth Estate house.

Convictions in absentia and investigations abroad

After Berezovsky gained political asylum in Britain, the Russian authorities vigorously pursued various criminal charges against him. This culminated in two trials in absentia. A Moscow trial in November 2007 found him guilty of embezzling nearly 215m roubles (£4.3m) from Aeroflot. The court said that in the 1990s Berezovsky was a member of an "organised criminal group" that stole the airline's foreign currency earnings. From London, Berezovsky called the trial, which sentenced him to six years in prison, 'a farce'."Berezovsky jailed in absentia" The Guardian 30 November 2007 In June 2009, the Krasnogorsk City Court near Moscow sentenced Berezovsky to thirteen years imprisonment for defrauding AvtoVAZ for 58 million rubles (US$1.9 million) in the 1990s. Berezovsky was represented by a court-appointed lawyer."Berezovsky Sentenced to 13 Years for Defrauding AvtoVAZ" The St. Petersburg Times 30 June 2009
In spite of Berezovsky's successes in Britain in fighting off extradition requests and exposing Russian court convictions as politically motivated (see below), some other jurisdictions cooperated with Russian authorities in seizing his property and targeting his financial transactions as money laundering. Berezovsky succeeded in overturning some of these actions. In July 2007, Brazilian prosecutors issued an arrest warrant for Berezovsky in connection with his investment in the Brazilian football club Corinthians."Berezovsky wanted in Brazil for alleged money laundering" The Guardian 14 July 2007 However, a year later the Brazilian Supreme Court cancelled the order and stopped the investigation."Brazilian Court Stops Berezovsky Case" The Moscow Times 18 September 2008 On Russian requests, French authorities raided his villa in Nice in search of documents,"Russian tycoon's villa raided" The Guardian 12 May 2005 and seized his two yachts parked on the French Riviera."Criminal probe targets Russian's yachts" The Telegraph 19 February 2011 However, some months later, the boats were released by a French court."French court cancels seizure of yachts attributed to Russian tycoon Berezovsky" RIA Novosti 14 June 2011 Swiss prosecutors have been assisting their Russian colleagues for over a decade in investigating Berezovsky's finances."Swiss ready to help Russia over legal case" Swissinfo 29 September 2009

Accusations and libel suits in the UK

Berezovsky's meteoric enrichment and involvement in power struggles have been accompanied by allegations of various crimes from his opponents. After his falling out with Putin and exile to London, these allegations became the recurrent theme of official state-controlled media, earning him comparisons with Leon Trotsky
In 1996 Forbes, an American business magazine, published an article by Paul Klebnikov entitled 'Godfather of the Kremlin?' with the kicker 'Power. Politics. Murder. Boris Berezovsky could teach the guys in Sicily a thing or two.'"Godfather of the Kremlin?" Forbes 30 December 1996 The article linked Berezovsky to corruption in the car industry, to the Chechen mafia and to the murder of Vladislav Listyev. In 2000, the House of Lords gave Berezovsky and Nikolai Glushkov permission to sue for libel in the UK courts. Given that only 2,000 of the 785,000 copies sold worldwide were sold in the United Kingdom, this led numerous scholars to cite the case as an example of libel tourism.
In 2006, a UK court awarded Berezovsky £50,000 in libel damages against the Russian private bank Alfa-Bank and its Chairman, Mikhail Fridman. Fridman had claimed on a Russian television programme that could be watched in the UK that Berezovsky had threatened him when the two men were competitors for control of the Kommersant publishing house, and that making threats was Berezovsky's usual way of conducting business. The jury rejected the defendants' claim that Fridman's allegations were true."Tycoon Berezovsky wins slander suit vs. Alfa head in London" RIA Novosti26 May 2006
In June 2006, The Guardian apologised to Berezovsky over an article published in 2005 about the Russia's attempt to have him extradited to face fraud charges in Russia. The article described Berezovsky as a "wanted defrauder of the Russian region of Samara". In a statement read out in open court, The Guardian accepted that granting him political asylum in 2003 meant that the British government had concluded that there were no "serious reasons for considering that he has committed a serious non-political crime" in Russia. The Guardian accepted that its description of Berezovsky was unjustified and apologised for its error. Berezovsky accepted the apology and withdrew his libel suit."Berezovsky apology" The Guardian 22 December 2005
In March 2010, Berezovsky, represented by Desmond Browne QC, won a libel case and was awarded £150,000 damages by the UK High Court over allegations that he had been behind the murder of Alexander Litvinenko."Boris Berezovsky wins Litvinenko poison spy libel case" BBC News 10 March 2010 The allegations had been broadcast by the Russian state channel RTR Planeta in April 2007 on its programme Vesti Nedeli, which could be viewed from the UK. In his judgement judge David Eady stated: "I can say unequivocally that there is no evidence before me that Mr Berezovsky had any part in the murder of Mr Litvinenko. Nor, for that matter, do I see any basis for reasonable grounds to suspect him of it." Berezovsky had sued both the channel and a man called Vladimir Terluk, whom Mr Justice Eady agreed was the man who had been interviewed in silhouette by the programme under the pseudonym 'Pyotr'. Terluk had claimed that to further his UK asylum application Berezovsky had approached him to fabricate a murder plot against himself, and that Litvinenko knew of this. Mr Justice Eady accepted that Terluk had not himself alleged Berezovsky's involvement in the murder of Litvinenko, but considered that his own allegations were themselves serious and that that there was no truth in any of them. As RTR did not participate in the proceedings, Terluk was left to defend the case himself, receiving significant assistance (as the judge noted) from the Russian prosecutor's office. The Guardian described the case as 'almost anarchic at times as officials from the Russian prosecutors' office repeatedly intervened despite not being party to proceedings. So obvious was their intention that when one of their mobile phones went off in court one day, Browne quipped: "That must be Mr Putin on the line.""Boris Berezovsky wins libel case over Litvinenko murder" The Guardian 10 March 2010 The defendants appealed to the Court of Appeal but the appeal was dismissed, Lord Justice Laws giving a judgment with which the Chancellor of the High Court and Lady Justice Rafferty agreed. The Lord Justice described a witness statement of Andrei Lugovoi, newly adduced by the defendants, as 'not sensibly capable of belief'.carter-ruck.pdf

Business and personal activities in exile

In recent years, Berezovsky conducted business with Neil Bush, the younger brother of the US President George W. Bush. Berezovsky was an investor in Bush's Ignite! Learning, an educational software corporation, since at least 2003. In 2005, Neil Bush met with Berezovsky in Latvia, causing tension with Russia due to Berezovsky's fugitive status.C., for a game.Berezovsky Teams Up With Bush's Brother, The Moscow Times, 6 October 2005
Berezovsky gave money to a company run by Prince Michael of Kent's private secretary between 2002 and 2008, amounting to £320,000. The prince's spokesman said the money funded 'cultural and charitable activities'.
It had been speculated that Berezovsky's wealth may have been depleted with the onset of the late 2000s recession. According to the Sunday Times Rich List, in 2011 his net worth was about US$900 million.

Appeals for regime change

In September 2005, Berezovsky said in an interview with the BBC: "I'm sure that Putin doesn't have the chance to survive, even to the next election in 2008. I am doing everything in my power to limit his time frame, and I am really thinking of returning to Russia after Putin collapses, which he will."Losing power: Boris Berezovsky BBC News. Retrieved 5 April 2008 In January 2006, Berezovsky stated in an interview to a Moscow-based radio station that he was working on overthrowing the administration of Vladimir Putin by force. Борис Березовский в течение последних 1,5 лет готовит силовой захват власти в России. Опальный олигарх считает, что все перемены будет осуществлять активное меньшинство, Ekho Moskvy, 25 January 2006 Berezovsky also publicly accused Putin of being "a gangster"Russia's Oligarchs May Face a Georgian Chill, The New York Times, 4 September 2008 and the "terrorist number one"."Putin Is Terrorist Number One. Russian Troops Should Withdraw from Chechnya, and Putin Should Negotiate with Aslan Maskhadov" European Viewpoint, 14 September 2004
On 13 April 2007, in an interview with The Guardian, Berezovsky declared that he was plotting the violent overthrow of President Putin by financing and encouraging coup plotters in Moscow: "We need to use force to change this regime. It isn't possible to change this regime through democratic means. There can be no change without force, pressure."'I am plotting a new Russian revolution', The Guardian, 13 April 2007 He also admitted that during the last six years he had struggled hard to "destroy the positive image of Putin" and said that "Putin has created an authoritarian regime against the Russian constitution.... I don't know how it will happen, but authoritarian regimes only collapse by force."Kremlin foe calls for Putin's Ouster, Associated Press, 13 April 2007 Berezovsky said he had dedicated much of the last six years to "trying to destroy the positive image of Putin" held by many in the West by portraying him whenever possible as a dangerously anti-democratic figure.
Soon after Berezovsky's 2007 statement, Garry Kasparov, a significant figure in the opposition movement The Other Russia and leader of the United Civil Front, wrote the following on his website: "Berezovsky has lived in emigration for many years and no longer has significant influence upon the political processes which take place in Russian society. His extravagant proclamations are simply a method of attracting attention. Furthermore, for the overwhelming majority of Russian people he was a political symbol of the 90s, one of the "bad blokes" enriching themselves behind the back of president Yeltsin. The informational noise around Berezovsky was specifically beneficial for the Kremlin, which was trying to compromise Russia's real opposition. Berezovsky has not had and does not have any relation to Other Russia or the United Civil Front." Неудобные вопросы, Kasparov. The managing director of the United Civil Front, in turn, said that the organization would consider suing Berezovsky over these allegations,Russia's United Civic Front may sue Berezovsky over funding claims, RIA Novosti, 28/ 06/ 2007 but the lawsuit has never been brought before the court.
The Russian Prosecutor General's Office had launched a criminal investigation against Berezovsky to determine whether his comments could be considered a "seizure of power by force", as outlined in the Russian Criminal Code. If convicted, an offender faces up to twenty years imprisonment, however Berezovsky is now deceased. The British Foreign Office denounced Berezovsky's statements, warning him that his status of a political refugee might be reconsidered, should he continue to make similar remarks. Furthermore, Scotland Yard had announced that it would investigate whether Berezovsky's statements violated the law. Kremlin officials called it a "disturbing moment" in Anglo-Russian relations.Anglo-Russian relations, The Guardian, 20 March 2008

Involvement in the 2004 Ukraine presidential election

In September 2005 the former president of Ukraine Leonid Kravchuk accused Berezovsky of having financed Viktor Yushchenko's 2004 Ukrainian presidential election campaign, and provided copies of documents showing money transfers from companies he claimed were controlled by Berezovsky to companies controlled by Yuschenko's official backers. Berezovsky confirmed that he met Yushchenko's representatives in London before the election, and that the money was transferred from his companies, but he refused to confirm or deny that the companies that received the money were used in Yushchenko's campaign. Financing of election campaigns by foreign citizens is illegal in Ukraine. 25 January 2006 Пан Березовский вершит историю Украины, Lenta.Berezovsky 'funded revolution', The Independent (12 November 2005) In September 2007, Berezovsky launched lawsuits against two Ukrainian politicians, Oleksandr Tretyakov, a former presidential aid, and David Zhvaniya, a former emergencies minister. Yushchenko has denied Berezovsky financed his election campaign.DID BEREZOVSKY FINANCE UKRAINE'S ORANGE REVOLUTION?, The Jamestown Foundation (19 September 2005)
Berezovsky called on Ukrainian business to support Yushchenko in the 2010 presidential election of January 2010 as a guarantor of debarment of property redistribution after the election.

Alleged assassination attempts in London

=Alleged 2003 plot=

According to Alexander Litvinenko, a Russian Foreign Intelligence Service (SVR) agent in London was preparing to assassinate Berezovsky with a binary weapon in September 2003. This alleged plot was reported to British police. Death of a dissident: The Poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko and the Return of the KGB, The Free Press (2007) ISBN 1-4165-5165-4 Hazel Blears, then a Home Office Minister, said that inquiries made these claims were "unable to either substantiate this information or find evidence of any criminal offences having been committed".House of Commons Hansard Written Answers for 13 January 2004 (pt 8), House of Commons of the United Kingdom, 13 January 2004

=Alleged 2007 plot=

In June 2007 Berezovsky said he fled Britain on the advice of Scotland Yard, amid reports that he was the target of an assassination attempt by a suspected Russian hitman. On 18 July 2007, the British tabloid The Sun reported that the alleged would-be assassin was captured by the police at the Hilton Hotel in Park Lane.The plot to kill Boris Berezovsky, The Independent, 29 November 2007 In addition, they said British police placed a squad of uniformed officers around Akhmed Zakayev's house in north London, and also phoned Litvinenko's widow, Marina, to urge her to take greater security precautions.
Berezovsky said he was told the assassin would be someone he knew, who would shoot him in the head and then surrender to the police. He again accused Vladimir Putin of being behind a plot to assassinate him.Police Back Berezovsky Murder Story, The Moscow Times, 19 July 2007 According to The Guardian, there is speculation that Berezovsky leaked details of the alleged attempt to kill him to the media to antagonise Moscow, once the British authorities had returned the suspected hitman to Moscow. The timing of the story has also been seen as suspicious, coming in the middle of a row over Britain's attempts to charge a Russian businessman and former security agent, Andrei Lugovoi, with Litvinenko's murder.
According to the interview given by a high-ranking British security official to the BBC2 in July 2008, the alleged Russian agent, known as "A", was of Chechen nationality. Rosjanie: To nie my zabiliśmy Litwinienkę, Polska Agencja Prasowa, 8 July 2008 He was identified by Kommersant as the Chechen mobster Movladi Atlangeriyev; after returning to Russia, Atlangeriyev was forcibly disappeared in January 2008 by unknown men in Moscow.Kremlin Fingered in Litvinenko's Murder, The Moscow Times, 9 July 2008

Death of Alexander Litvinenko

Alexander Litvinenko, one of Berezovsky's closest associates, was murdered in London in November 2006 with a rare radioactive poison, Polonium 210. The British authorities charged a former FSB officer and head of security at ORT, Andrey Lugovoy, with the murder and requested his extradition, which Russia refused."Russia rejects UK's Litvinenko extradition request" Reuters 5 July 2007 Several Russian diplomats were expelled from UK over the case."Russia vows to retaliate as diplomats are expelled over Litvinenko murder" The Times 17 July 2007
The UK government has not publicly expressed a view on the matter, but allegations that the murder was sponsored by the Russian state have been expressed by "sources in the UK government", according to the BBC,"Litvinenko killing 'had state involvement'" BBC News 7 July 2008 and by officials of the US Department of State, as revealed by Wikileaks;"WikiLeaks cables: Alexander Litvinenko murder 'probably had Putin's OK'" The Guardian 1 December 2010 they were reflected in a 2008 resolution by the US Congress."Expressing the Sense of Congress Regarding Alexander Litvinenko" Congressional Record 1 April 2008, Page H1839–H1841. The intricate details of the murder, the relationship between Litvinenko and Berezosvsky, and the implications of the case have been described in the 2007 book, "Death of a Dissident — The Poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko and the Return of the KGB" by Alex Goldfarb with Marina Litvinenko.
An alternative theory – that the murder was orchestrated by Berezovsky with the aim of "framing" the Russian government and discrediting it on the global stage – has been aired in the Russian state-funded media,"Moscow points the finger of blame at billionaire exile Boris Berezovsky" The Times 29 November 2006 by Lugovoy,"Lugovoy says he`s been framed for Litvinenko murder" Russia Today 30 August 2007 by Litvinenko's Italy-based father and by Russian officials."Russian Billionaire's Bitter Feud With Putin A Plot Line in Poisoning" The Washington Post 10 December 2006 Berezovsky won a UK libel suit against Russian State Television over these allegations in 2010 (see above), following which he commented, "I trust the conclusions of the British investigators that the trail leads to Russia and I hope that one day justice will prevail." Russian State-funded media continue to report the claims e.g. "'Berezovsky killed my son', Litvinenko's dad tells Scotland Yard" as of May 2012.

Apology to Putin

After Berezovsky's death, a spokesman for President Putin reported that he had sent a letter to the Russian president, asking for permission to return to Russia and asking "forgiveness for his mistakes."Berezovsky 'was down but would not bow to Putin' AFP Retrieved on April 7, 2013Boris Berezovsky found dead at his Berkshire home The Guardian Retrieved on April 7, 2013 Some of Berezovsky's associates doubted the letter's existence, claiming that it was out of character. However his girlfriend at the time, Katerina Sabirova, later confirmed in an interview that he did in fact send the letter:Boris Berezovsky 'sought Putin's permission' to return to Moscow The Telegraph Retrieved on April 7, 2013
It was claimed by anonymous sources that rival Roman Abramovich delivered the letter to Putin personally, having received an apology from Berezovsky himself. Both Putin's chief of staff, Sergei Ivanov, and Abramovich's spokesman alluded to the letter being passed by a "certain person", but did not go into details due to the personal nature of the issue.Roman Abramovich 'passed Boris Berezovsky apology to Vladimir Putin' The Telegraph Retrieved on April 7, 2013

Suicide

On 23 March 2013, Berezovsky was found dead at his home, Titness Park, at Sunninghill, near Ascot in Berkshire.
When Berezovsky's death became known, there was speculation by mainstream British news media that Moscow might be somehow involved.
Police said on 25 March 2013, that a post mortem exam found the cause of death was consistent with hanging and there was nothing pointing to a violent struggle.

Publications by Berezovsky

Berezovsky was a doctor of technical sciences, and author of more than 100 academic papers and studies such as "Binary relations in multi-criteria optimizations" and "Multi-criteria optimization: mathematical aspects".
Aside from his academic publications, Berezovsky frequently authored articles and gave interviews; these are collected in The Art of the Impossible (3 vols.). He continued to contribute articles while in exile, taking a highly critical view of Russia's political leaders.

Works about Berezovsky

In 1996 the Russian-American journalist Paul Klebnikov wrote a highly critical article on Berezovsky and the state of Russia more generally, in response to which Berezovsky sued Forbes in the UK (see above); in 2001 he expanded his article into a book entitled Godfather of the Kremlin, alternatively subtitled The Decline of Russia in the Age of Gangster Capitalism and Boris Berezovsky and the looting of Russia.
Alex Goldfarb, a microbiologist and activist who became acquainted with Berezovsky in the 1990s and later worked for him, provides snapshots of Berezovsky at crucial moments as background to his 2007 account of the Litvinenko murder case, co-written with Marina Litvinenko, Death of a Dissident: The Poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko and the Return of the KGB. Another book is The Oligarchs: Wealth and Power in the New Russia by David E. Hoffman of The Washington Post, which provides a comparative treatment of Berezovsky and several of his fellow so-called business oligarchs.
A documentary about Berezovsky's efforts to undermine Putin from his exile in UK was shown on the BBC in December 2005.
Berezovsky features in a painting by the popular Russian artist Ilya Glazunov, displayed in Moscow's Ilya Glazunov Gallery. According to the Rough Guide, 'The Market of Our Democracy ...'






