[[Salafi movement]]

CATEGORIES: Salafi movement

The Salafi movement, also known as the Salafi methodology and the Salafist movement, is a movement or sectHave Salafis Taken Over the Muslim World and Muslim Communities, Answered by Shaykh Muhammad ibn Adam al-Kawthari, ... and only recently (in the last 30 years) has the so called Salafi sect come into existence. within Sunni Islam that takes its name from the term salaf ("predecessors", "ancestors") used to identify the earliest Muslims, who, its adherents believe, provide the epitome of Islamic practice.
The movement is often described as related to, including, or synonymous with Wahhabism, but Salafists consider the term "Wahhabi" derogatory... though designated as Wahhabis by their adversaries, ... prefer to call themselves 'Salafis.'" (from The Failure of Political Islam, by Olivier Roy, translated by Carol Volk, Harvard University Press, 1994, pp. 118–9) At other times, Salafism has been deemed a hybrid of Wahhabism and other post-1960s movements. Leiden University's ISIM Review, Spring 2008, #21. Salafism has become associated with literalist, strict and puritanical approaches to Islam and leading Salafi scholars condemn such attacks.
Academics and historians have used the term "Salafism" to denote "a school of thought which surfaced in the second half of the 19th century as a reaction to the spread of European ideas" and "sought to expose the roots of modernity within Muslim civilization."
Observers differ over whether Salafi are Sunni Muslims and whether they are Wahhabis. Self-described Salafis believe they are Sunni Muslims, while traditionalist Sunni critics claim that Salafis are the same as Wahhabis, a sect unto their own and different from orthodox (i.e. traditional) Sunni Muslims.org Ahlul Bayt Digital Islamic Library Project. Section entitled Wahabis Contradict the Sunnah!  The basis of this claim is that Salafis do not acknowledge or follow any of the four schools of thought (Madhhab) to which other Sunni Muslims adhere. They have their own beliefs and laws, their own leaders and systems, a religion with strict and so-called extremist ways.org Wahhabi.co.uk, Al-Albani Unveiled, Some Observations about the Salafi/Wahhabi sect
In the Arab world
A German intelligence service report compiled in 2010 described Salafism as the fastest-growing domestic Islamic movement.Christian Caryl, The Salafi Moment at foreignpolicy.

Etymology

The popular hadith that quotes Muhammad as saying 'The people of my own generation are the best, then those who come after them, and then those of the next generation,' is seen as a call to Muslims to follow the example of those first three generations, known collectively as the salaf or "pious Predecessors" (as-Salaf as-Saleh).
These have been revered in Islamic orthodoxy and by Sunni theologians since the fifth Muslim generation or earlier used their example to understand the texts and tenets of Islam, sometimes to differentiate the creed of the first Muslims from subsequent variations in creed and methodology (see Madhab), to oppose religious innovation (bid'ah) and, conversely, to defend particular views and practices."The way of the Sufis is the way of the Salaf, the Scholars among the Sahaba, Tabi'in, and Tabi' at-Tabi'in. Its origin is to worship Allah and to leave the ornaments of this world and its pleasures." (Ibn Khaldun (733–808 H/1332-1406 CE) Muqaddimat ibn Khaldan, p. 328, quoted in; PAHARY SHEIK MOHAMMAD YASSER, SUFISM: ORIGIN, DEVELOPMENT AND EMERGENCE OF SUFI ORDERS, retrieved March 2012.

Tenets

According to at least one scholar,  "temporal proximity to the Prophet Muhammad is associated with the truest form of Islam" among many Sunni MuslimsBernard Haykel, a professor of Near Eastern Studies, states that "a strongly held view" among Sunnis
The terms Salafi, Ahl-as-Sunnah ("People of the Sunnah") and Ahl al-Hadith ("People of the Tradition") are all considered
Salafis view the Salaf as an eternal model for all succeeding Muslim generations in their beliefs, exegesis, method of worship, mannerisms, morality, piety and conduct: the Islam they practiced is seen as pure, unadulterated and, therefore, the ultimate authority for the interpretation of the Sunnah.1348) said:
Salafis believe that the Qur'an, the Hadith and the consensus (ijma) of approved scholarship (ulama) along with the understanding of the Salaf us-salih as being sufficient guidance for the Muslim. As the Salafi da'wa is a methodology and not a madh'hab in fiqh (jurisprudence) as commonly misunderstood, Salafis can come from the Maliki, Shafi'i, Hanbali or the Hanafi schools of Sunni fiqhGlobalSecurity. In the face of clear evidence, be it from Qur'an or Hadeeth, they support scholars' engagement in ijtihad
Salafis condemn certain common practices as polytheism (shirk) and tawassul of religious figures, such as venerating the graves of Islamic prophets and saints or using amulets to seek protection.tv/index.
Salafis place great emphasis on following acts in accordance with the known sunnah, not only in prayer but in every activity in daily life. For instance, many are careful always to use three fingers when eating, drink water in three pauses with the right hand while sitting,Six Points of Tabligh, the chapter on "Desired Manners of Eating and Drinking" includes 26 norms on the etiquette of eating and drinking. From: Globalized Islam : the Search for a New Ummah, by Olivier Roy, Columbia University Press, 2004. and make sure their jellabiya or other garment does not extend below the ankle, thereby following the example recorded by Muhammad and his companions.

Views on Taqlid (scholarly authority)

In legal matters, Salafis are divided between those who, in the name of independent legal judgement (ijtihad), reject strict adherence (taqlid) to the four schools of law (madhahib) and others who remain faithful to these.Stephane Lacroix, George Holoch, Awakening Islam, p 84 These include Bin Baz, Salih al-Uthaymeen, Salih al-Fawzaan, Saud bin Shuraim and al-Sudais . Other Salafi scholars however hold that taqlid is unlawful since from their perspective, following a madhab without searching for direct evidence leads Muslims astray. Lawrence, Muslim Networks from Hajj to Hip Hop, p 213 These scholars include Rashid Rida,Thus he Rida opposed Taqlid and called for and practiced absolute ijtihad. Clinton Bennett, The Bloomsbury Companion to Islamic Studies, p.174. See also, Richard Gauvain, Salafi Ritual Purity: In the Presence of God, Introduction, p9 al-Khajnadee, Muhammad Abduh,Abduh's statement of purpose was: To liberate thought from the shackles of Taqlid and understand religion as it was understood by the Salaf. Clinton Bennett, The Bloomsbury Companion to Islamic Studies, p.168. Saleem al-Hilali and Nasir al-Din al-Albani. Clinton Bennett, The Bloomsbury Companion to Islamic Studies, p.174. Al-Albani had denounced Wahhabi attachment to the Hanbali school. Stephane Lacroix, George Holoch, Awakening Islam, p 85
At the very end of the spectrum, some Salafis hold taqlid to be an act of polytheism. Clinton Bennett, The Bloomsbury Companion to Islamic Studies, p.165

Opposition to the use of kalam

Salafi scholars are in staunch opposition to the use of kalam, dialectics or speculative philosophy in theology. This is because it is seen as a heretical innovation in Islam which opposes the primordial aspiration to follow the original methodology of the Salaf us-salih with regards to Aqidah. Statements of the early Imams of the early Muslims are in corroboration with this such as Abu Hanifa who prohibited his students from engaging in kalam, stating that those who practice it are of the "regressing ones". 183–184 Malik ibn Anas referred to kalam in the Islamic religion as being "detested",Dhammul-Kalaam (B/194) and that whoever "seeks the religion through kalam will deviate"."Ibn Abi Hatim, Manaaqibush-Shaafi'ee, pg. 182 Ahmad ibn Hanbal also spoke strongly against kalam, stating his view that no-one looks into kalam unless there is "corruption in his heart"Jaami' Bayaanul-'Ilm wa Fadlihi (2/95) and even went so far as to prohibit sitting with people practicing kalam even if they were defending the Sunnah,Manaqib al-Imam Ahmad (or Manaaqibul-Imaam Ahmad), by Abu'l-Faraj ibn al-Jawzi, p205. and instructing his students to warn against any person they saw practicing kalam.Ibn Battah, al-Ibaanah (2/540)

History

Landmarks claimed in the history of Salafi da'wah are Ahmad ibn Hanbal (died 240 AH ("Understanding Salafiyyah"), Shaikh Muhammad Naasir ad-Deen al-Albaani, Parts 1–2, 6.

Early examples of usage

Muhammad ibn Abd-al-Wahhab

Many today consider Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab as the first figure in the modern era to push for a return to the religious practices of the salaf as-salih.
The vast majority of Salafis reject the label "Wahhabi" because they consider it unfounded and an object of controversy,The Wahhabi Myth, H.J.
Trevor Stanley states that while the origins of the terms Wahhabism and Salafism "were quite distinct"they both shared a rejection of "traditional" teachings on Islam in favor of a direct, more puritan interpretation. Stéphane Lacroix, a fellow and lecturer at Sciences Po in Paris, also affirmed a distinction between the two: "As opposed to Wahhabism, Salafism refers here to all the hybridations that have taken place since the 1960s between the teachings of Muhammad bin 'Abd al-Wahhab and other Islamic schools of thought. Al-Albani's discourse can therefore be a form of Salafism, while being critical of Wahhabism."
The migration of Muslim Brotherhood members from Egypt to Saudi Arabia and Saudi King Faisal's "embrace of Salafi pan-Islamism resulted in cross-pollination between Muhammad ibn Abd-al-Wahhab's teachings on tawhid, shirk and bid'ah and Salafi interpretations of the sayings of Muhammad.

Contemporary Salafism

Salafism is attractive to its adherents because it underscores Islam's universality. ISBN 0-8050-7941-6. It insists on affirmation of the literal truth as understood by its apparent meaning of Qur'anic scripture and Hadeeth, yet may challenge secularism by appropriating secularism's traditional role of defending the socially and politically weak against the powerful. 258–259. ISBN 1-4051-0900-9.

Views on extremism

In recent years, Salafi methodology has come to be associated with the jihad of extremist groups and related groups that advocate the killing of innocent civilians. While some terrorists claim to be Salafi, these acts have consistently been strongly opposed by some Salafi scholars such as Muhammad Nasiruddin al-Albani, Muhammad ibn al Uthaymeen and Abd al-Aziz ibn Abd Allah ibn Baaz who have all issued fatawa (religious verdicts) forbidding suicide bombing, declaring it as being totally haram (forbidden).com., Grand Mufti of Saudi Arabia, Shaykh Abdul Aziz Aal Al Shaykh's fatwa against suicide bombing at islamagainstextremism.Shaykh Al Albaani's fatwa on suicide bombings (audio with English translation) at islamagainstextremism.Shaykh Ubayd Al Jaabiree refuting suicide bombings and Anwar Al Awlaki at islamagainstextremism.  The Saudi scholar, Muhammad ibn al Uthaymeen considered suicide bombing to be unlawful Gabriel G. Tabarani, Jihad's New Heartlands: Why the West Has Failed to Contain Islamic Fundamentalism, p 26.Gabriel G. Tabarani, Jihad's New Heartlands: Why the West Has Failed to Contain Islamic Fundamentalism, p 26. Muhammad Nasiruddin al-Albani stated that "History repeats itself. Everybody claims that the Prophet is their role model. Our Prophet spent the first half of his message making da'wa, and he did not start it with jihad".
Nevertheless a few Salafi scholars appear to support extremism and acts of violence. The Egyptian Salafi cleric Mahmoud Shaaban "appeared on a religious television channel calling for the deaths of main opposition figures Mohammed ElBaradei – a Nobel peace prize laureate – and former presidential candidate Hamdeen Sabahy."The Observer, Violent tide of Salafism threatens the Arab spring, by Peter Beaumont and Patrick Kingsley, 10 February 2013.  The popular salafi preacher Zakir Naik speaking of Osama bin Laden, said that he would not criticise bin Laden because he had not met him and did not know him personally. He added that, "If bin Laden is fighting enemies of Islam, I am for him," and that "If he is terrorizing America – the terrorist, biggest terrorist – I am with him. Every Muslim should be a terrorist. The thing is that if he is terrorizing the terrorist, he is following Islam. Whether he is or not, I don't know, but you as Muslims know that, without checking up, laying allegations is also wrong."Von Drehle, David; Ghosh, Bobby: "An Enemy Within: The Making of Najibullah Zazi". Time. p. 2. 1 October 2009. Retrieved 16 April 2011.
Some other Islamic groups, particularly some Sufis, have also complained about extremism among some Salafi. It has been noted that the Western association of Salafi ideology with violence stems from writings "through the prism of security studies" that were published in the late 20th century ands that continue to persist.

Trends sometimes associated with Salafism

According to at least one observer,Natana J. DeLong-Bas, in Wahhabi Islam: From Revival and Reform to Global Jihad, Salafism can be divided into three trends, one focusing on education and missionary work to solidify the tawhid prior to any political movement (sometimes called Madkhalism); another focusing on re-establishing a caliphate through the means of evolution, but not violence (sometimes called Salafist activism); and a third sharing similar political goals as the second group, but engaging in violent Jihad (sometimes called Salafi jihadism and/or Qutbism).()

Purists, Madkhalism

"Purists" are Salafists who focus on non-violent da'wah, education, and "purification of religious beliefs and practices". They dismiss politics as "a diversion or even innovation that leads people away from Islam".
Madkhalism is a term typically referring to the strain of Salafists viewed as supportive of authoritarian regimes in the Middle East. 41. New York: Routledge, 2013. 49. New York: Columbia University Press, 2009. 317. London: I.B. Tauris, 2013. Taking its name from the controversial Saudi Arabian cleric Rabee Al-Madkhali, the movement lost its support in Saudi Arabia proper when several members of the Permanent Committee (the country's clerical body) denounced Madkhali personally. Nicolet Boekhoff-van der Voort, Kees Versteegh and Joas Wagemakers, pg. 382. Leiden: Brill Publishers, 2011. Influence of both the movement and its figureheads have waned so much within the Muslim world that analysts have declared it to be a largely European phenomenon.

Salafist activism

It has sometimes been described as a third strain of the global movement, being different from the Salafist Jihadists by eschewing violence and from the Salafist Madkhalists by engaging in modern political processes. 48. Due to numerical superiority, the movement has been referred to the mainstream of the Salafist movement at times. This trend, sometimes called "politicos", see politics as "yet another field in which the Salafi creed has to be applied" in order to safeguard justice and "guarantee that the political rule is based upon the Shari'a".

Salafist jihadism

"Salafi Jihadism" was a term coined by Gilles KepelThe Salafist movement by Bruce LiveseyComing to Terms: Fundamentalists or Islamists?, Martin Kramer, Middle East Quarterly, Spring 2003, pp. 65–77. to describe those self-claiming Salafi groups who began developing an interest in jihad during the mid-1990s. Practitioners are often referred to as "Salafi jihadis" or "Salafi jihadists". Journalist Bruce Livesey estimates Salafi jihadists constitute less than 0.5 percent of the world's 1.9 billion Muslims (i.e., less than 10 million). However, those who take their actions beyond the limits of the shari'ah (such as terrorist attacks against civilians) are seen as deviant and not true Salafis.
Another definition of Salafi jihadism, offered by Mohammed M. Hafez, is an "extreme form of Sunni Islamism that rejects democracy and Shia rule." Hafez distinguished them from apolitical and conservative Salafi scholars (such as Muhammad Nasiruddin al-Albani, Muhammad ibn al Uthaymeen, Abd al-Aziz ibn Abd Allah ibn Baaz and Abdul-Azeez ibn Abdullaah Aal ash-Shaikh), but also from the sahwa movement associated with Salman al-Ouda or Safar Al-Hawali. Hafez
An analysis of the Caucasus Emirate, a Salafi jihadist group was made in 2014 by Darion Rhodes.

Qutbism

Qutbism is a movement which has, at times, been described both as a strain of Salafism and an opposing movement, providing the foil to Madkhalism in that the movement is typically found in radical opposition to the ruling regimes of the Middle East. Qutbism has, at times, been associated with the above mentioned Salafist Jihadist trend.
Despite some similarities, the different contemporary self-proclaimed Salafist groups often strongly disapprove of one another and deny the other's Islamic character.62-8

Comparison with other movements

Some Salafi Muslims often preach disengagement from Western activities, and advocate being apolitical and being against any form of extremism, "even by giving them an Islamic slant."Globalized Islam :the Search for a New Ummah, by Olivier Roy, Columbia University Press, 2004 (p.245) Instead, it is thought that Muslims should stick to traditional activities, particularly Dawah. Nevertheless, Salafis do not preach willful ignorance of civil or state law.

Arab Spring

Salafi have been notable following insurrections in Egypt, Tunisia and Libya. In the 2011–12 Egypt parliamentary elections, the Islamist Bloc led by the Al-Nour Party managed to receive 27.8% of the vote despite only "a few months of party politicking experience", gaining 127 of the 498 parliamentary seats contested and forming the second-largest bloc in the parliament. According to Ammar Ali Hassan of al-Ahram, while Salafis and the Muslim Brotherhood agree on many issues such as the need to "Islamize" society and restricting private property rights by legally requiring all Muslims to give alms, the former has nevertheless rejected the flexibility of the latter on the issue of whether women and Christians should be entitled to serve in high office, as well as its relatively tolerant attitude towards Shia Iran.

Criticism

Salafism has been recently criticized by Professor Khaled Abou El Fadl of the UCLA School of Law. El Fadl argues that the Salafi methodology "drifted into stifling apologetics" by the mid-20th century, a reaction against "anxiety" to "render Islam compatible with modernity," by its leaders earlier in the century. 77 He attacks those who state "any meritorious or worthwhile modern institutions were first invented and realized by Muslims". He argues the result was that "an artificial sense of confidence and an intellectual lethargy" developed, according to Abou El Fadl, "that took neither the Islamic tradition nor" the challenges of the modern world "very seriously."Abou El Fadl, pp. 52–56, 78–9
According to the As-Sunnah Foundation of America, the Salafi and Wahhabi movements are strongly opposed by a long list of Sunni scholars. This article lists 65 Sunni scholars from different time periods, whom the article claims were opposed to either the Salafi or the Wahhabi movements. The article claims that the Wahhabi movement is the same thing as the Salafi movement. The Saudi government has been criticised for damaging Islamic heritage of thousands of years in Saudi Arabia. The article says that the Saudis are dismantling some old parts the Grand Mosque at Mecca, as part of work to make the mosque larger, and that the sites of other very old buildings in Mecca and Medina have been redevloped over the past twenty years. The article claims that many senior Wahhabis believe that preserving historic relics for their own sake is undesirable because it encourages idolatry (shirq).. Though Salafis when told about this were as opposed to it as other Muslims. The Salafi movement has been linked by Marc Sageman to some terrorists group around the world.Third public hearing of the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States, Statement of Marc Sageman to the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States, 9 July 2003

Salafism in China

Salafism is intensely opposed by a number of Hui Muslims in China and by the Gedimu, Sufi Khafiya and Jahriyya, to the extent that even the fundamentalist Yihewani (Ikhwan) Chinese sect, founded by Ma Wanfu after Salafi inspiration, condemned Ma Debao and Ma Zhengqing as heretics when they attempted to introduce Salafism as the main form of Islam. Ma Debao established a Salafi school, called the Sailaifengye (Salafi) menhuan in Lanzhou and Linxia. It is completely separate from other Muslim sects in China.

German government's statement on Salafism

German government officialsFederal Office for the Protection of the Constitution (Bundesamt für Verfassungsschutz) 7/18/2012: latest 2011 report on Islamic Salafist extremism in Germany (English) have stated that Salafism has a strong link to terrorism but have clarified that not all Salafists are terrorists. The statements by German government officials criticizing Salafism were televised by Deutsche Welle during April 2012.Deutsche Welle article of May 8, 2012 regarding Salafism and its adherents' activities in Germany (English) Online "Pipeline" German news agency article from July 17, 2012 on the German government's view of Salafist extremism

Prominent Salafi scholars by country








