[[Farm-to-market road]]

CATEGORIES: Farm to Market Roads in Texas, Roads in the United States, Types of roads

In the United States, a farm-to-market road or ranch-to-market road (sometimes farm road or ranch road for short) is a state road or county road that connects rural or agricultural areas to market towns. These are better quality roads, usually a highway, that farmers and ranchers use to transport products to market towns or distribution centers.
Specifically, in the state of Texas, the terms Farm to Market Road and Ranch to Market Road indicate roadways that are part of the state's system of secondary and connecting routes, built and maintained by the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT). Texas established this system in 1949 to provide access to rural areas. The system consists primarily of paved, two-lane roads. Generally, roads west of  (the Emmett F. Lowry Expressway between Interstate 45 and Texas City, Texas). 
These roads are signed with route markers that contain the words FARM ROAD or RANCH ROAD, but the formal name is Farm to Market Road and Ranch to Market Road (hence the abbreviation "FM" and "RM" on signs). The only road that explicitly uses the name Ranch Road is Ranch Road 1, which runs near the former ranch home of former President Lyndon B. Johnson.
As with other state-maintained highways in Texas, all Farm or Ranch to Market roads are paved. Speed limits along these roads vary, but may be as high as 75 mph in rural areas, such as in Andrews and Pecos Counties (for example, along ).

History

The first farm to market road in Texas was completed in January 1937. It connected Mount Enterprise and the former community of Shiloh in Rusk County. The route was 
In 1945, the highway commission authorized a three-year pilot program for the construction of  The system now accounts for over half of the mileage in the Texas Department of Transportation system.

Identification

Signs designating a Farm to Market or Ranch to Market road are a black square background containing a white shape of the state of Texas, with the words "FARM ROAD" or "RANCH ROAD" appearing in white text on the background and the route number in black text within the shape of Texas. Guide signs (the large green signs usually found along highways in the United States) designating these roads use a simple white rectangle with the abbreviation "F.M." or "R.M." and the route number appearing below the abbreviation in black text.
As a result of population growth and the expansion of urban areas, many Farm to Market and Ranch to Market roads that originally served rural areas now serve urban areas, sometimes exclusively. An effort was made to rename such roads "Urban Roads" in 1995, but residents opposed the effort, arguing that removing the "Farm" and "Ranch" from the designations was "un-Texan," and that the cost of changing signage was not justified. Other than a few route markers, such as on  
Farm to Market and Ranch to Market roads are numbered as a single set of roads. There is not an FM and an RM with the same route number, unless it crosses US 281. Urban Roads are designated with the same route number as the FM or RM from which the mileage was transferred.

Image:FM544-Plano. The white sign below the shield indicates State Maintenance Ends, as the segment of FM 544 within Collin County was removed from the state highway system in 2000.  This sign has since been removed.
File:Texas guide sign SL SH FM.

Business routes

Texas currently has three signed business routes of Farm to Market Roads: Business  These routes are former alignments that have been bypassed by newer routings.

Other states

Missouri has a similar state-operated system of farm-to-market roads, called Missouri supplemental routes. Missouri uses single (e.g., "A", "B", etc.) and double letters (e.g., "AA", "BB", etc.).
Iowa also has a farm-to-market road system. Those roads are under county jurisdiction,Iowa Code 2003: Section 306.3. Retrieved March 28, 2006 but are eligible for state aid from a dedicated fund.5. Retrieved March 28, 2006.








