[[Courtney Love]]

CATEGORIES: Courtney Love, 1964 births, Living people, 20th-century American actresses, 20th-century American singers, 21st-century American actresses, 21st-century American singers, 21st-century American writers, 21st-century women writers, Actresses from San Francisco, California, Alternative rock guitarists, Alternative rock singers, American alternative rock musicians, American Buddhists, American female erotic dancers, American female guitarists, American female rock singer-songwriters, American film actresses, Faith No More members, Feminist musicians, Guitarists from San Francisco, California, Hole (band) members, Kurt Cobain, LGBT rights activists from the United States, Musicians from California, Musicians from Oregon, Portland State University alumni, San Francisco Art Institute alumni, Singers from San Francisco, California, Songwriters from San Francisco, California, Sympathy for the Record Industry artists, People educated at Nelson College for Girls



Courtney Michelle Love (born Courtney Michelle Harrison, July 9, 1964) 
Love received critical adulation for Hole's 1991 hardcore punk-influenced debut album, and the band's second release, Live Through This (1994), went certified platinum and received wide critical acclaim.

Biography

1964–81: Early life and education

Love was born Courtney Michelle Harrison in San Francisco, California, to psychotherapist Linda Carroll (née Risi) and Hank Harrison, publisher and brief manager of the Grateful Dead. 
Love attended elementary school in Eugene, where she struggled academically and had trouble making friends, though was described as a "creative" child. At age nine, she was diagnosed with mild autism.
In 1972, Love's mother divorced Rodriguez and moved the family to New Zealand, where she enrolled Love at the Nelson College for Girls,
In 1981, Love was granted a small trust fund through her adoptive grandparents, which she used to travel to Ireland; there, she was accepted into Trinity College, and studied theology for two semesters.

1982–88: Faith No More, early projects

Love initially began several music projects in the 1980s, first forming Sugar Babydoll in Portland with friends Ursula Wehr and Robin Barbur. In 1982, Love attended a Faith No More concert in San Francisco, and "convinced" the members to let her join as a singer.

1989–96: Hole, critical success

In 1989, Love taught herself to play guitar and relocated to Los Angeles, where she placed an ad in a local music zine, reading: "I want to start a band. My influences are Big Black, Sonic Youth, and Fleetwood Mac"Who Killed Kurt Cobain?: The Mysterious Death of an Icon (pg. 54) to which guitarist Eric Erlandson replied. Love recruited Erlandson as lead guitarist, Lisa Roberts, her neighbor, as bassist, and drummer Caroline Rue. Love named the band Hole after a line from Euripedes' Medea. Hole played their first show in November 1989 at Raji's after three months of rehearsal. The band's debut single, "Retard Girl", was issued in April 1990 through the Long Beach indie label Sympathy for the Record Industry, and was given air-time by Rodney Bingenheimer's local station, KROQ. The following year, the band released their second single, "Dicknail" through Sub Pop Records.
With Love influenced by no wave, noise rock and grindcore bands, Hole's first studio album, Pretty on the Inside, captured a particularly abrasive sound and contained disturbing lyrics, described by Q Magazine as "confrontational and genuinely uninhibited."Q Magazine Review: Pretty on the Inside by Hole. 1995–10. p. 138 The record was released in September 1991 on Caroline Records, produced by Kim Gordon of Sonic Youth, with assistant production from Gumball's Don Fleming. Though Love would later say it was "unlistenable" and "unmelodic", In support of the record, the band toured in Europe headlining with Mudhoney, and extensively in the United States opening for The Smashing Pumpkins, including shows at the Whisky A Go Go opening for Sonic Youth, and performances at CBGB. Love designed and distributed flyers promoting the shows, which included cutouts of women and young girls, as well as scattered lyrics and quotes from poems.
After the release of Pretty on the Inside, Love began dating Kurt Cobain and became pregnant, which temporarily put her music career on hold. During Love's pregnancy, Hole recorded a cover of "Over the Edge" for a Wipers tribute album, and recorded their fourth single, "Beautiful Son", which was released in April 1993. On September 8, 1993, Love and husband Kurt Cobain made their only public performance together at the Rock Against Rape benefit in Hollywood, California, performing two duets, both acoustic versions, of "Pennyroyal Tea" and "Where Did You Sleep Last Night". Love also performed electric versions of two of Hole's new songs, "Doll Parts" and "Miss World", both of which were written for the band's upcoming second release.
In October 1993, Hole recorded their second album, titled Live Through This, in Atlanta, Georgia. The album featured a new lineup, with bassist Kristen Pfaff and drummer Patty Schemel. Live Through This was released on Geffen's subsidiary DGC label in April 1994, four days after Love's husband, Cobain, was found dead of a self-inflicted shotgun wound in their home. Two months later, in June 1994, bassist Kristen Pfaff died of a heroin overdose, and Love recruited Melissa Auf der Maur for the band's impending tour. Throughout the months preceding the tour, Love was rarely seen in public, spending time at her Seattle home, or visiting the Namgyal Buddhist Monastery in New York.
Live Through This was a commercial and critical success, hitting platinum sales in April 1995 and receiving unanimous critical accolades. Three days later, Spin reviewed another "devastating" performance by the band in Cleveland, Ohio, writing:
 During "Doll Parts", after moaning "He only loves those things because he loves to see me break" (instead of "them"), Love wobbled back from the mic almost punch-drunk. By this time, the band had bailed, and Love was alone singing, "Someday you will ache like I ache," again and again, her voice a faint sob. She finally stumbled over to a huge speaker and leaned into it like she was about to pass out. Then, while being led off by an assistant, she stepped back, pulled up her top, then flipped us off with both hands. 
In February 1995, Hole performed a well-reviewed acoustic set on MTV Unplugged at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, and continued to tour late into the year, concluding their world tour with an appearance at the 1995 MTV Video Music Awards, in which they performed "Violet", and were nominated for Best Music Video for "Doll Parts".

1997–2000: Mainstream success

After Love spent the majority of 1996 acting in films, which included a leading role in The People vs. Larry Flynt, Hole released a compilation album, My Body, The Hand Grenade as well as an EP titled The First Session which consisted of the band's earliest recordings. In September 1998, Hole released their third studio album, Celebrity Skin, which marked something of a transformation for Love, featuring a stark power pop sound as opposed to the group's earlier punk rock influences. Love divulged her ambition of making an album where "art meets commerce ... there are no compromises made, it has commercial appeal, and it sticks to the our original vision." She claimed to have been influenced by Neil Young, Fleetwood Mac, and My Bloody Valentine when writing the album.
Prior to the release and promotion of Celebrity Skin, Love and Fender designed a low-priced Squier brand guitar, called Vista Venus.
After touring for Celebrity Skin finished, Auf der Maur left the band to tour with the Smashing Pumpkins; Hole's touring drummer Samantha Maloney left soon after. Love and Erlandson continued with the band, and released the single "Be A Man"— an outtake from the Celebrity Skin sessions— for the soundtrack of the Oliver Stone film Any Given Sunday (1999). The group became dormant in the following two years, and, in May 2002, officially announced their breakup amid continuing litigation with Universal Music Group over their record contract.

2001–07: Solo career, America's Sweetheart

With Hole in disarray, Love began a "punk rock femme supergroup" called Bastard during autumn 2001, enlisting Schemel, Veruca Salt co-frontwoman Louise Post, and bassist Gina Crosley. Though a demo was completed, the project never reached fruition.
In 2002, Love began composing an album with Linda Perry, titled America's Sweetheart, also reuniting with drummer Patty Schemel. Love signed with Virgin Records to release it, and initially recorded it in France, but was forced by the label to re-record the entire album in the summer of 2003. America's Sweetheart was released in February 2004, and was embraced by critics with mixed reviews. Spin called it a "jaw-dropping act of artistic will and a fiery, proper follow-up to 1994's Live Through This" and awarded it eight out of ten stars, Shortly after the record was released, Love told Kurt Loder on TRL: "I cannot exist as a solo artist. It's a joke."Love, Courtney. Interview with Kurt Loder, 2004. Total Request Live on MTV
In 2006, Love started recording what was going to be her second solo album, How Dirty Girls Get Clean, collaborating again with Perry and Billy Corgan in the writing and recording. Love had written several songs, including an anti-cocaine song titled "Loser Dust", during her time in rehab in 2005.

2008–present: Nobody's Daughter, Hole reunion

On June 17, 2009, NME reported that Hole would be reuniting. Former Hole guitarist Erlandson stated in Spin magazine that contractually no reunion can take place without his involvement; therefore Nobody's Daughter would remain Love's solo record, as opposed to a "Hole" record. Love responded to Erlandson's comments in a Twitter post, claiming "he's out of his mind, Hole is my band, my name, and my Trademark". Nobody's Daughter was released worldwide as a Hole album on April 27, 2010. For the new line-up, Love recruited guitarist Micko Larkin, Shawn Dailey (bass guitar), and Stu Fisher (drums, percussion). Nobody's Daughter featured a great deal of material written and recorded for Love's aborted solo album, How Dirty Girls Get Clean, including "Pacific Coast Highway", "Letter to God", "Samantha", and "Never Go Hungry", although they were re-produced with Larkin. The first single from Nobody's Daughter was "Skinny Little Bitch", which became a hit on alternative rock radio in early March 2010.
The album received mixed reviews. Rolling Stone gave the album three out of five stars, saying that Love "worked hard on these songs, instead of just babbling a bunch of druggy bullshit and assuming people would buy it, the way she did on her 2004 flop, America's Sweetheart." Love and the band toured internationally from 2010 into late 2012 promoting the record, after which she dropped the Hole name and returned to a solo career.
Following a two year tour to promote Nobody's Daughter, Love collaborated with Michael Stipe for the track "Rio Grande", "songs are not my usual (style)," Love said. "I don't have any Fleetwood Mac references on it. Usually I always have a Fleetwood Mac reference as well as having, like, Big Black references. These are very unique songs that sort of magically happened." However, in an April 2014 interview with BBC, Love revealed that she and former Hole guitarist Eric Erlandson had reconciled, and had been rehearsing new material together, along with former bassist Melissa Auf der Maur and drummer Patty Schemel, though did not confirm a reunion of the band.
On April 22, 2014, Love debuted the song "You Know My Name" on BBC Radio 6 to promote her tour of the United Kingdom. It is slated for release as a double A-side single with the song "Wedding Day" on May 4, 2014 on her own label Cherry Forever Records via Kobalt Label Services. 
On May 1, 2014, in an interview with Pitchfork, Love commented further on the possibility of Hole reuniting, saying: 
 I'm not going to commit to it happening, because we want an element of surprise. There's a lot of i's to be dotted and t's to be crossed. It's next year's concern, but we've hung out, we've sat down, we've met, we've jammed. There's some caveats, there's some things people need. We're older—we're all mainlining vegan food, you know what I mean? Nobody smokes other than me. No one's on drugs ... the reason it's not happening this year is because I was too late to come to the conclusion that it should be done, and to find the manager we all agree on. To make it have some ass-kicking. No one's been dormant. Patty teaches drumming and drums in three indie bands. Melissa has her metal-nerd thing going on—her dream is to play Castle Donington with Dokken. Eric hasn't flipped—I jammed with him, he's still doing his Thurston Moore-crazy tunings, still corresponding with Kevin Shields. We all get along great.
 
Musicianship

Influences and style

Love was exposed to the music of Patti Smith and the Pretenders in juvenile hall, which she was greatly influenced by: "You had these two iconic women, and I realized that you could do something that was completely subversive that didn't involve violence or felonies," said Love. "I stopped making trouble. I stopped." As a teenager, Love named Flipper, Kate Bush, Soft Cell, Lou Reed, and Dead Kennedys among her favorite artists. Most prominently, Love was influenced by a multitude of new wave and post-punk bands, such as Echo and the Bunnymen, The Smiths, Love has also expressed great admiration for Fleetwood Mac, with Hole covering their track "Gold Dust Woman" in 1996, as well as using sampling from "Rhiannon" on their noise track "Starbelly" from Pretty on the Inside.
Musically, it was remarked in an October 1991 review of her first album that Love's layering of harsh and abrasive riffs buried more sophisticated musical arrangements. Hole's incorporation of both punk rock and power pop sounds illustrates the band's often divergent musical style, which drew influence from alternating genres. In 1998, Love stated that Hole had "always been a pop band. We always had a subtext of pop. I always talked about it, if you go back ... what'll sound like some weird Sonic Youth tuning back then to you was sounding like the Raspberries to me, in my demented pop framework."
Love possesses a contralto vocal range,
Love writes from a female's point of view, and her earlier work, particularly on Hole's first two albums, was noted for being notably aggressive and critical toward cultural definitions of women.

Equipment and gear

Love has frequently played a multitude of Fender guitars, including a Jaguar and a vintage 1965 Jazzmaster, the latter of which was purchased by the Hard Rock Cafe and is on display in New York City. Love is seen playing her Jazzmaster in the music video for "Miss World". Earlier in Hole's career, between 1989 and 1991, Love primarily played a Rickenbacker 425 because she "preferred the 3/4 neck", but she destroyed the guitar onstage at a 1991 concert opening for The Smashing Pumpkins. She also often played a guitar made by Mercury, an obscure company that manufactured custom guitars, which she purchased in 1992. Fender's Vista Venus, designed by Love in 1998, was partially inspired by Rickenbacker guitars as well as her Mercury. Love's setup has included Fender tube gear, Matchless, Ampeg, Silvertone and a solid-state 1976 Randall Commander. During her 2010 and more recent tours, Love has played a Rickenbacker 360 onstage.

Acting career

Love's first acting role was in a 1984 student short film titled Club Vatican directed by her tutor George Kuchar, while studying at the San Francisco Art Institute. In 1989, Love abandoned her career as an actress to pursue music.
In 1996, Love began obtaining small acting parts again in Basquiat and Feeling Minnesota (1996), before landing the co-starring role of Larry Flynt's wife, Althea, in Miloš Forman's 1996 film The People vs. Larry Flynt, against Columbia Pictures' reluctance due to her low profile and "troubled" past.
Other roles include: starring opposite Jim Carrey in the Andy Kaufman biopic Man on the Moon (1999); as Joan Vollmer in Beat (2000) alongside Kiefer Sutherland; and a leading role in Julie Johnson (2001) as Lili Taylor's lesbian lover, for which she won an Outstanding Actress award at L.A.'s Outfest. She followed with another leading part in the thriller film Trapped (2002), alongside Kevin Bacon and Charlize Theron.
Love has also appeared in a multitude of documentary films as herself, including 1991: The Year Punk Broke, Not Bad for a Girl, Mayor of the Sunset Strip, Bob and the Monster, and Hit So Hard, which documents Hole drummer Patty Schemel's time in the band with Love, Erlandson, Kristen Pfaff, and Melissa Auf der Maur.

Other endeavors

Inbetween the recording of Hole's Live Through This and Celebrity Skin, Love acted as an executive soundtrack coordinator and assembled the soundtrack to the 1995 film Tank Girl, based on a comic series of which Love was a fan.
In 2006, Love published a memoir titled Dirty Blonde: The Diaries of Courtney Love, consisting of diary entries, poems, letters, drawings, personal photos, and lyric compositions spanning from Love's childhood up until the year 2006, shortly after her release from a six-month rehab sentence. The book was generally well reviewed by critics,The Stranger, Salon, Playboy, New York Times, and Venus Zine all gave the book positive reviews, as exhibited on the back cover artwork. and Love did book readings in promotion for it.
In May 2012, Love debuted an art show at Fred Torres Collaborations in New York titled "And She's Not Even Pretty", which contained over forty drawings and paintings by Love composed in ink, colored pencil, pastels, and watercolors.

Public image

Love has consistently attracted media attention for her brash and outspoken nature, and for "subverting mainstream expectations of how a woman should look, act, and sound."
On the opening date of Lollapalooza in 1995, Love notoriously got into a physical fight backstage with Kathleen Hanna and punched her in the face. In retrospect, Love said: "I was completely high on dope that time— I cannot remember much about it."[ref]
</ref><ref name="pattydoc"></ref>
Love's aesthetic image, particularly in the early 1990s, often consisted of "thrift shop" babydoll dresses, and her face adorned with smeared makeup;
As a result of Love's high-profile marriage to Kurt Cobain, comparisons have been made of her to Yoko Ono. Shortly following their marriage, and particularly after Cobain's suicide, she was often negatively compared to John Lennon's widow Ono by Cobain's fans. This media comparison was addressed by Love in 1992, prior to Cobain's death, in the song "20 Years in the Dakota", which she explicitly wrote about Ono. 

Personal life

Love has been a practicing Buddhist since 1989, and has been noted throughout her career for her subversive feminism and "self-conscious parody of female sex roles".
Love has struggled with substance abuse problems for a great deal of her life. She experimented with numerous opiates in her early adult years, and tried cocaine at age 19. She became addicted to heroin in the early 1990s, but quit in 1996 at the insistence of director Miloš Forman when she landed a leading role in The People vs. Larry Flynt. Love was ordered to take multiple urine tests under the supervision of Columbia Pictures while filming the movie, and passed all of them.

Family and relationships

Love has publicly acknowledged her estrangement from her parents, Linda Carroll and Hank Harrison, as well as her maternal grandmother, Paula Fox, who gave up Love's mother Linda for adoption after having her out of wedlock. According to Love, she has not been in contact with her father since age fifteen, and has "never forgiven" her mother over the way she was raised; she has, however, maintained relationships with her half-siblings.
She was briefly married to James Moreland (vocalist of The Leaving Trains) in 1989 for several months, but has said that Moreland was a transvestite and that their marriage was "a joke", ending in an annulment filed by Love.
Her most documented romantic relationship was with Kurt Cobain. It is uncertain when they first met; according to Love, she first met Cobain at a Dharma Bums show in Portland where she was doing a spoken word performance, Another portion of his ashes was taken by Love to the Namgyal Buddhist Monastery in Ithaca, New York in 1994, where they were ceremonially blessed by Buddhist monks and mixed into clay which was made into memorial sculptures.
Between 1996 and 1999, Love dated actor Edward Norton,Alan Carr: Chatty Man. Courtney Love Interview. 2010-02-25. Channel 4 (UK)

Charitable work

In 1993, Love and husband Kurt Cobain performed an acoustic set together at the Rock Against Rape benefit in Los Angeles, California, which raised awareness and provided resources for victims of sexual abuse. Love has also contributed to amfAR's AIDS research benefits and held live musical performances at their events.
Love has also worked with LGBT and LGBT youth charities; specifically with the Los Angeles Gay and Lesbian Center, where she has taken part in performances at the center's "An Evening with Women", where she headlined the event's debut in 2007. 

In culture

The artist Barbara Kruger used one of her quotes on her NYC bus project.complex.

Discography

Filmography






