[[Goodwill Industries]]

CATEGORIES: 501(c)(3) nonprofit organizations, Organizations established in 1902, Charities based in the United States, International charities, Social welfare charities

Goodwill Industries International Inc. is a nonprofit 501(c)(3) organization that provides job training, employment placement services, and other community-based programs for people who have disabilities. In addition, Goodwill Industries may hire veterans, individuals that lack education or job experience, or face employment challenges. Goodwill is funded by a massive network of retail thrift stores which operate as nonprofits as well.  Goodwill's answer to its profit status is "As a unique hybrid called a social enterprise, we defy traditional distinctions.  Instead of a single bottom line of profit, we hold ourselves accountable to a triple bottom line of people, planet, and performance." agency
Goodwill operates as a network of 165 independent, community-based organizations in   Venezuela, Brazil, Mexico, Panama, Uruguay, the United States, Canada and 8 other countries.Goodwill.2 million individuals.
Goodwill's logo, a stylized letter g, resembles a smiling face. It was designed by Joseph Selame in 1968.
Currently Goodwill has two spokespeople helping spread the word about its mission. Organization expert Lorie Marrero is the face of the Donate Movement, which began in 2010, and ABC correspondent Evette Rios joined Goodwill's cause in 2012 to help appeal to the Latin American market.goodwill.pdf

Vision statement

In this pledge, Goodwill promises to fulfill the goals of success within each individual:

History

In 1902, Reverend Edgar J. Helms of Morgan Methodist Chapel in Boston, Massachusetts started Goodwill as a mission of his ministry. The products were then redistributed to those in need or were given to the needy people who helped to repair them. In 1915, Helms hosted a visit to Morgan Memorial by representatives of a workshop mission in Brooklyn, NY, and they learned about the innovative programs and the operating techniques of the "Morgan Memorial Cooperative Industries and Stores, Inc." Helms was subsequently invited to visit in New York. Out of these exchanges came Brooklyn's willingness to adopt and adapt the Morgan Memorial way of doing things, while Helms was persuaded that Brooklyn's name for its workshop, "Goodwill Industries," was a marked improvement over the Morgan Memorial name. Thus was officially born Morgan Memorial Goodwill Industries, and that, plus Brooklyn's interest and ties, became the foundation on which Goodwill Industries was to be built as an international movement.
Today Goodwill has become an international nonprofit that takes in more than $4.8 billion in annual revenue and provides more than six million people with job training and community services each year. Helms described Goodwill as an "industrial program as well as a social service enterprise...a provider of employment, training and rehabilitation for people of limited employability, and a source of temporary assistance for individuals whose resources were depleted."

Operations

In 1999, over 84 million pounds of used goods were donated to the stores in Portland, Oregon, part of the Goodwill Industries of the Columbia Willamette (GICW). Around the same year, Goodwill launched the first and only nonprofit internet auction site in the United States. By 2004, Goodwill Industries International had a network of 207 member organizations in the United States, Canada, and 23 other countries.
The clothing and household goods donated to Goodwill are sold in more than 2,600 Goodwill retail stores, on its Internet auction site shopgoodwill.  Goodwill also generates income in order to help businesses and the federal government fill gaps caused by labor shortages, time constraints and limited space or equipment. Local Goodwill branches train and employ contract workers to fill outsourced needs for document management, assembly, mailing, custodial work, grounds keeping and more. Goodwill claims that more than 84 percent of its total revenue is used to fund education and career services and other critical community programs. In 2010, Goodwill has provided people with training careers in industries such as banking, IT and health care as well as offering English-language training, education, transportation, and child care services.
When merchandise cannot be sold at a normal Goodwill store, it is taken to a 'Goodwill Outlet' or 'Bargain Store.' Items are mostly sold by weight, with prices ranging from $0.49 to $1.69 per pound, depending on the location. The wide selection and massive discounts on a variety of household goods typically attract a fervent following of regular customers, some of whom make a full-time living buying and re-selling goods. There are also many vendors who buy this merchandise in bulk, and they send the merchandise to third world countries.
Charity Watch rates the Goodwill Industries an "A".Charity Rating Guide and Watchdog Report, Volume Number 59, December 2011

Castro pop up

In November, 2010, for the first time, Goodwill opened a store, in San Francisco, California, specifically designed to hire employees who are transgender, gay, or lesbian. The temporary or "Pop-up" store was a unique partnership between Goodwill of San Francisco and Transgender Economic Empowerment Initiative. The Castro Pop-up store closed in April 2011, but the staff were transferred to various Goodwill stores throughout San Francisco.

POP! at South by Southwest

Goodwill Industries International and Goodwill Industries of Central Texas (Austin) hosted their first pop-up retail shop, POP!, at South by Southwest in 2013. Goodwill has been around for more than 110 years, but in recent years has revamped its retail strategy to include boutiques, trunk shows and other venues that appeal to a younger audience. During the POP! shop, consumers chose from a selection of unique items, including vintage and contemporary fashions and accessories, and designer labels. Revenue generated from the shop are helping put people to work in Austin. Spokespeople Evette Rios and Lorie Marrero were on hand for the event.

Donate Movement

In 2010, Goodwill launched the Donate Movement to  demonstrate the value that donated goods have for people and the planet. Goodwill's vision for the Donate icon is a universal reminder to 'recycle' through responsible donation, helping provide opportunities for others while diverting usable items from landfills.

21st-century initiative

On the occasion of its 100th anniversary in 2002, Goodwill Industries launched an international workforce development initiative designed to integrate 20 million people into the workplace by the year 2020.
Known as the Goodwill Industries 21st Century Initiative, the plan includes broad strategies for getting people into good jobs that enable them to become self-sufficient. These strategies include providing job and technology training for a 21st-century workforce, offering family strengthening services to support workers and their families, and developing business opportunities to employ individuals who were previously considered unemployable.

Women Veterans initiative

As part of First Lady Michelle Obama and Dr. Jill Biden's Joining Forces campaign, Goodwill has hired nearly 1,800 veterans and military family members, and has served nearly 100,000 more with job training and placement services.
In June 2013, Goodwill announced an initiative with the goal of engaging 3,000 women veterans over the next two years with services and support that lead to economic self-sufficiency.

Donation policies

Goodwill has various policies on donations, including items that they can and cannot accept.  Broadly speaking, Goodwill will accept items that they can re-sell, either in the retail stores or as bulk lots.
Goodwill generally will not accept donations of auto parts, furniture showing signs of damage, large appliances such as stoves, refrigerators, washers/dryers, or exercise equipment. Most stores also cannot accept hazardous materials like paint, medications, or building materials such as doors, wood, nails, etc. For liability reasons, Goodwill generally will not accept baby cribs or car seats. Sanitary regulations prohibit Goodwill from accepting mattress donations, and although some Goodwills do sell brand new mattresses most Goodwills can not. Recently, due to safety concerns (in particular, concerns over lead content in painted products), some Goodwill stores will not accept some toys, particularly those made in China.
Goodwill will generally always accept donations of clothing, shoes, books, accessories (handbags, belts), dishes, pieces of furniture in good condition, household decorations, and consumer electronics (e.g.: alarm clocks, blenders, etc.). Even if they are deemed unfit to be sold in Goodwill's retail stores, these items can be sold as bulk lots, and thus can still generate income.
Depending on regional laws, the value of the goods donated can be used as a tax deduction.

Criticism

Executive compensation

In 2005, Goodwill Industries of the Columbia Willamette (GICW), Goodwill's Portland, Oregon branch, came under scrutiny due to executive compensation that the Oregon attorney general's office concluded was "unreasonable."The President of the Portland, Oregon branch - Michael Miller, received $838,508 in pay and benefits for fiscal year 2004, which was reportedly out of line in comparison to other charity executives and placed him in the top one percent of American wage earners. After being confronted with the state's findings, Miller agreed to a 24% reduction in pay, and GICW formed a new committee and policy for handling matters of employee compensation.

Wages

Goodwill Industries International has been criticized by some for using a provision of federal labor law to pay workers with disabilities less than the federal minimum wage. Under Section 14(c) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, organizations can obtain a "special wage certificate" to pay workers with disabilities a commensurate wage based on performance evaluations.
A 2013 article on Watchdog.7 million in total compensation to top executives. The former CEO of the Goodwill of Southern California was the highest paid Goodwill executive in the country. He received more than $1.1 million in total compensation.  "In 2011, the Columbia Willamette Goodwill, one of the largest in the country, says it paid $922,444 in commensurate wages to approximately 250 people with developmental disabilities. These employees worked 159,584 hours for an average hourly wage of $5.78. The lowest paid worker received just $1.40 per hour."

Lobbying

A coalition of smaller charities in California have complained about Goodwill's support for legislation encouraging greater regulation of donation boxes, Local Goodwills have argued that donation boxes divert money from the community and contribute to blight, and have pushed for state legislation that requires owners of a donation box to clearly display information about whether it was a for-profit or nonprofit organization.

Andrew Anderson case

In September 2013, former Goodwill employee Andrew Anderson, a 19-year-old Naples, Florida resident, was jailed on a felony grand theft charge for allegedly giving discounts to customers amounting to $2,728.88 USD in a 12 day period.huffingtonpost.html The case garnered significant critical media coverage, as well as social media attention, including news aggregation sites such as Reddit.reddit."






