[[Seminal vesicle]]

CATEGORIES: Exocrine system, Mammal male reproductive system

The seminal vesicles () or vesicular glands  are a pair of simple tubular glands posteroinferior to the urinary bladder of some male mammals. Carnivores, marsupials, monotremes, and cetaceans do not have seminal vesicles.jhu.php Seminal vesicles are located within the pelvis.

Structure

The seminal vesicles are a pair of glands that are positioned below the bladder and lateral to the ductus deferens. The seminal vesicles are arranged as a series of glands which drain into a central duct. The duct unites with the ductus deferens to form the ejaculatory duct.
The excretory duct of each seminal gland opens into the vas deferens as it enters the prostate gland.
Each seminal vesicle spans approximately 5 cm, though its full unfolded length is approximately 10 cm, but it is curled up inside the gland's structure.

Development

Each vesicle forms as an outpocketing of the wall of the ampulla of one vas deferens. The seminal vesicles develop as one of three structures of the male reproductive system that develops at the junction between the urethra and vas deferens. Both the urethra and vas deferens are derived from the mesonephric ducts, structures that develop from mesoderm.

Histology

Under microscopy, the seminal vesicles can be seen to have a mucosa, consisting of a lining of interspersed columnar cells and a laminar propria; and a thick muscular wall. The lumen of the glands is highly irregular and stores secretions from the glands of the vesicles. In detail:
The height of these columnar cells, and therefore activity, is dependent upon testosterone levels in the blood.
Spermatazoa may occasionally be found within the lumen of the glands, even though the vesicles are blind-ended in nature. This is thought to be because of slight reflux due to muscular contractions of the urethera during ejaculation.

Image:Seminal vesicle low mag. H&E stain.
Image:Seminal vesicle high mag. H&E stain.
Histologically, the seminal vesicles are notable for their tortuous pathways, diverticula, pseudo-stratified columnar epithelium and cuboidal cells along the basal layer.
Image:Seminal vesicles and rectum.JPG|Seminal vesicles

Function

The seminal vesicles secrete a significant proportion of the fluid that ultimately becomes semen. Lipofuscin granules from dead epithelial cells give the secretion its yellowish color.  About 50-70% of the seminal fluid in humans originates from the seminal vesicles, but is not expelled in the first ejaculate fractions which are dominated by spermatozoa and zinc-rich prostatic fluid. The excretory duct of each seminal gland opens into the corresponding vas deferens as it enters the prostate gland.
Seminal vesicle fluid is alkaline, resulting in human semen having a mildly alkaline pH.
The alkalinity of semen helps neutralize the acidity of the vaginal tract, prolonging the lifespan of sperm. Acidic ejaculate (pH The thick secretions from the seminal vesicles contain proteins, enzymes, fructose, mucus, vitamin C, flavins, phosphorylcholine and prostaglandins. The high fructose concentrations provide nutrient energy for the spermatozoa when stored in semen in the laboratory.
In vitro studies have shown that sperm expelled together with seminal vesicular fluid show poor motility and survival, and the sperm chromatin is less protected. Therefore the exact physiological importance of seminal vesicular fluid is not clear.

Additional images

 Image:Illu repdt male.
 File:Seminal vesicles.jpg|Seminal vesicles
 Image:Gray402. Viewed from behind.
 Image:Gray1136.
 Image:Gray1152.
 Image:Gray1153.
 Image:Gray1156.
 Image:Seminal vesicle.

Clinical significance

Seminal vesicles are nearly affected by the diseases. Most common diseases are various tumors, cysts and seminal vesiculitis.

Inflammation

Seminal vesiculitis is an inflammation of seminal vesicles, most often caused by bacterial infection. Symptoms of the vesiculitis are abdominal pain, hematospermia and sometimes painful ejaculation. It is usually treated by administration of antibiotics. In intractable cases, in case of patient discomfort, transurethral seminal vesiculoscopy may be considered.






