[[Show Me!]]

CATEGORIES: 1974 books, 1990 books, Photographic collections and books, St. Martin's Press books, Sex manuals

Show Me! is a controversial sex education book by photographer Will McBride. It appeared in 1974 in German under the title Zeig Mal!, written with psychiatrist Helga Fleischhauer-Hardt for children and their parents. It was translated into English a year later and was widely available in bookstores on both sides of the Atlantic for many years, but later became subject to expanded child pornography laws in jurisdictions including the United States. In Germany, the book was followed in 1990 by a second edition that included, among other additions, a discussion of the AIDS epidemic.

Publication history

While many parents appreciated Show Me! for its frank depiction of pre-adolescents discovering and exploring their sexuality, others called it child pornography. In 1975 and 1976, obscenity charges were brought against the publisher by prosecutors in Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Oklahoma, and Toronto, Canada. In all four cases, the judges ruled as a matter of law that the title was not obscene.
However, starting in 1977, some states began to criminalize the distribution of even non-obscene so-called "child pornography," or "images of abuse," which arguably is not protected by the First Amendment. New York State, home of the publisher, St. Martin's Press, criminalized the distribution of non-obscene "child pornography" in 1977, but the publisher promptly went to court and obtained an injunction against the State.  The court granted the injunction because the First Amendment was interpreted to permit the banning of only obscene material.
In 1982, the U.S. Supreme Court issued a decision, New York v. Ferber,New York v. Ferber, Findlaw. Citing a chilling effect, St. Martin's Press then pulled the book, stating that though they believed  Show Me! was not pornographic, they could no longer afford the legal expenses to defend it, and they did not want to risk criminal prosecutions of their own personnel and/or vendors who sold the book.    The Court overruled a decision of the New York Court of Appeals, The People  v. Paul Ira Ferber which held that  the First Amendment protected the dissemination of non-obscene sexual depictions. Show Me! was not the direct subject of the Ferber case, but the book was prominently featured by both sides in the litigation, and it played a significant role in the oral argument before the U.S. Supreme Court.org. Accessed 23 May 2008
In its country of origin, Germany, the book first won several awards, even from church organisations, but due to rising pressure from a newly arising "moral majority" the publishers and McBride decided to take it off the market in 1996. By then over one million copies in seven languages had been sold. It was never officially banned in Germany. Public libraries there keep it on hand and out of print copies are openly sold at collectors' premium prices.
In New Zealand the book was banned by the Indecent Publications Tribunal in 1976. The ban was upheld in 1996.

Critical reception

Show Me! received mixed reviews from the mass media when it was first published. The Los Angeles Times called the photographs "beautiful...""Is America Ready?", Los Angeles Times, March 9, 1975  The Washington Post, on the other hand, described the photographs as "beautiful, assaultive, grotesque, and seductive," and concluded that Show Me! was only suited for "avant garde" parents."Kiss the Stork Goodbye," Washington Post May 5, 1975 Reviewer Linda Wolfe was more hostile in the New York Times, calling the book a "child-abusive joke.""The birds and the bees were never like this", New York Times July 13, 1975 The 13-year-old daughter of Chicago Tribune reviewer Carol Kleiman commented:

Recent reviews

A recent review by Dr. Russell A. Rohde claims that the book, "appropriately delves into the issues of breast feeding, adolescence, pubertal changes, menses, sexual anatomies, pregnancy, masturbation, contraception, sexual behavioral disturbances and venereal disease. ... I am not aware of any book comparable to this illustrated primer that fills the needs of sexual education so well."
D. F. Janssen places it at the one extreme of a late 20th-century visual and textual revolution that enabled parents to illustrate information that up to that time had been transmitted orally. He sees the work as subversive not for its "too frank" portrayal of childhood sexuality, but instead for the primacy that the image takes over the text. In his eyes, the work "comes out of a culture with a long history of pathologising so-addressed 'primal scenes,'" a history that became manifest in particular with regard to the works of Will McBride.D. F. Janssen, Growing Up Sexually. Volume II: The Sexual Curriculum: The Manufacture and Performance of Pre-Adult Sexualities (October 2002)
The book is also analyzed in an article on "Picturing Sex Education" (Discourse Volume 27, Number 4 / December 2006).

Bibliographic details






