[[Listerine]]

CATEGORIES: Dentifrices, Antiseptics, Johnson & Johnson brands, 1914 introductions

Listerine is a brand of antiseptic mouthwash product. It is promoted with the slogan "Kills germs that cause bad breath", and was named after Joseph Lister who advocated the idea of sterile surgery by sterilizing instruments.
Originally marketed by the Lambert Pharmacal Company (which later became Warner-Lambert), it has been manufactured and distributed by Johnson & Johnson since that company's acquisition of Pfizer's consumer healthcare division in late December 2006.
The Listerine brand name is also used in toothpaste, Listerine Whitening rinse, Listerine Fluoride rinse (Listerine Tooth Defense), Listerine SmartRinse (children's fluoride rinse), PocketPaks, and PocketMist. In September 2007, Listerine began selling its own brand of self-dissolving teeth whitening strips.

History

Formulated by Dr. Joseph Lawrence and Jordan Wheat Lambert in St. Louis, Missouri, in 1879 as surgical antiseptic, it was given to dentists for oral care in 1895 and it was the first over-the-counter mouthwash sold in the United States, in 1915.
In 1885, Lawrence sold his share to the Lambert Pharmacal Company.
According to Freakonomics:[ref]
<br/>Note that previous editions of ''Freakonomics'' incorrectly described halitosis as a "faux medical term", which this Wikipedia article previously reflected.</ref>
In this way, Listerine became a clear and early example of a larger trend: marketing campaigns inventing problems that the product is alleged to solve.
In 1955, Lambert Pharmacal merged with New York-based Warner-Hudnut and became Warner-Lambert Pharmaceutical Company and incorporated in Delaware with its corporate headquarters in Morris, New Jersey. ( Early Warner-Lambert Company ) - goantiques.2000: Pfizer joins forces with Warner-Lambert - pfizer. Louis International Airport. Louis Post-Dispatch - February 7, 2010
From 1921 until the mid-1970s, Listerine was also marketed as preventive and remedy for colds and sore throats. In 1976, the Federal Trade Commission ruled that these claims were misleading, and that Listerine had "no efficacy" at either preventing or alleviating the symptoms of sore throats and colds. Warner-Lambert was ordered to stop making the claims, and to include in the next $10.2 million worth of Listerine ads specific mention that "contrary to prior advertising, Listerine will not help prevent colds or sore throats or lessen their severity." The preamble "contrary to prior advertising" was not included in the court order. Business Its Legal, Ethical, and Global Environment by Marianne M. Jennings 8th edition page 324, Given these safeguards, we believe the preamble "Contrary to prior advertising" is not necessary.
For a short time, beginning in 1927, the Lambert Pharmaceutical Company marketed Listerine Cigarettes.[ref]
</ref><ref></ref>
From the 1930s into the 1950s, advertisements claimed that applying Listerine to the scalp could prevent "infectious dandruff".[ref]
</ref>
Listerine was packaged in a glass bottle inside a corrugated cardboard tube for nearly 80 years before the first revamps were made to the brand; in 1992, Cool Mint Listerine was introduced in addition to the original Listerine Antiseptic formula and, in 1994, both brands were introduced in plastic bottles for the first time. In 1995, FreshBurst was added, then in 2003 Natural Citrus. In 2006 a new addition to the "less intense" variety, Vanilla Mint, was released. Eight different kinds of Listerine are on the market in the U.S. and elsewhere: Original, Cool Mint, FreshBurst, Natural Citrus, Vanilla Mint, UltraClean (formerly Advanced Listerine), Tooth Defense (mint shield), and Whitening pre-brush rinse (clean mint). The most recent addition is Listerine Naturals, a natural formula antiseptic mouthwash.

Composition

The active ingredients listed on Listerine bottles are essential oils which are menthol 0.042%, thymol 0.064%, methyl salicylate 0.06%, and eucalyptol 0.092%. In combination all have an antiseptic effect and there is some thought that methyl salicylate may have an anti inflammatory effect as well
::Materials Safety Data Sheet for Listerine Antiseptic Mouthwash, Original-05/22/2008 

Effectiveness

In a January 6, 2005, decision, Judge Denny Chin of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York ruled that an advertising campaign by Pfizer, claiming that the mouthwash Listerine is as effective as flossing in fighting tooth and gum decay, is false and misleading and poses a public health risk.
In 2010 a study was published that noted that performing a brief 30 second rinse with Listerine (Vanilla Mint Flavor) prior to applying topical lidocaine to patients mouths masks the unpleasant flavor of topical lidocaine. It is suspected this may help improve the comfort of a variety of oral procedures performed by dentists and oral surgeons.

Safety

There has been concern that the use of alcohol-containing mouthwash such as Listerine may increase the risk of developing oral cancer. 
In January 2009, Andrew Penman, chief executive of The Cancer Council New South Wales, called for further research on the matter. 
In a March 2009 brief, the American Dental Association said "the available evidence does not support a connection between oral cancer and alcohol-containing mouthrinse".Science brief on alcohol-containing mouthrinses and oral cancer, American Dental Association, March 2009
In 2009, Johnson and Johnson launched a new alcohol-free version of the product called Listerine Zero.Listerine cancer claim triggers court battle, The Guardian, 27 August 2011
On April 11, 2007, McNeil-PPC disclosed that there were potentially contaminants in all Listerine Agent Cool Blue products sold since its launch in 2006, and that all bottles were being recalled. According to the company, Listerine Agent Cool Blue is the only product affected by the safety issue and that no other products in the Listerine family were under recall.






