[[Nudibranch]]

CATEGORIES: Nudipleura

A nudibranch 
The word "nudibranch" comes from the Latin nudus, naked, and the Greek βραγχια, brankhia, gills.
Nudibranchs are often casually called sea slugs, but many sea slugs belong to several taxonomic groups which are not closely related to nudibranchs. A number of these other sea slugs, such as the colorful Aglajidae, are often confused with nudibranchs.

Distribution and habitat

Nudibranchs occur in seas worldwide, including both the tropics and Antarctica.
Nudibranchs live at virtually all depths of salt water, from the intertidal zone to depths of well over 
Nudibranchs are benthic animals, found crawling over the bottom substrate. An exception to this is the neustonic Glaucus and Glaucilla nudibranchs, which float upside down just under the ocean's surface. Another exception is the pelagic nudibranch, Cephalopyge trematoides, which swims in the water column.[ref]
J.E. Steinberg, The pelagic nudibranch, Cephalopyge trematoides (Chun, 1889), in New South Wales with a note on other species in this genus, Proceedings of The Linnean Society of New South Wales 81:184-192 (1956)  
[/ref][ref]
G.M. Mapstone & M.N. Arai, Siphonophora (Cnidaria, Hydrozoa) of Canadian Pacific Waters, p.33. "The best documented predators of pelagic cnidarians from the phylum Mollusca are the neustonic nudibranchs and snails ....."[/ref]

Anatomical description

The body forms of nudibranchs vary a great deal, but because they are opisthobranchs, unlike most other gastropods they are bilaterally symmetrical both externally and internally because they have undergone secondary detorsion. They lack a mantle cavity. Some species have venomous appendages (cerata) on their sides, which deter predators. Many also have a simple gut and a mouth with a radula.
Their eyes are simple and able to discern little more than light and dark.  The eyes are set into the body, are about a quarter of a millimeter in diameter, and consist of a lens and five photoreceptors.[ref]
</ref>
They vary in adult size from .
The adult form is without a shell or operculum (in shelled gastropods the operculum is a bony or horny plate that can cover the opening of the shell when the body is withdrawn).
The name nudibranch is appropriate, since the dorids (infraclass Anthobranchia) breathe through a "naked gill" shaped into branchial plumes in a rosette on their backs. By contrast, on the back of the aeolids in the clade Cladobranchia there are brightly colored sets of protruding organs called cerata.
Nudibranchs have cephalic (head) tentacles, which are sensitive to touch, taste, and smell. Club-shaped rhinophores detect odors.

Defense mechanisms

This group includes some of the most colorful creatures on earth. In the course of their evolution,  nudibranchs have lost their shell while developing alternative defense mechanisms. Some species evolved an external anatomy with textures and colors that mimicked surrounding plants to avoid predators (see camouflage). Other nudibranchs, as seen especially well on chromodorids, have an intensely bright and contrasting color pattern that makes them especially conspicuous in their surroundings.  This is believed to be an example of aposematic coloration; the shocking coloration warns potential predators that the slugs are distasteful or poisonous.
Nudibranchs that feed on hydrozoids can store the hydrozoids' nematocysts (stinging cells) in the dorsal body wall, the cerata. These stolen nematocysts, called kleptocnidae, wander through the alimentary tract without harming the nudibranch. Once further into the organ, the cells are assimilated by intestinal protuberances and brought to specific placements on the creature's hind body.  Nudibranchs can protect themselves from the hydrozoids and their nematocysts; the specific mechanism is yet unknown, but special cells with large vacuoles probably play an important role.  Similarly, nudibranchs can also take in plant cells and reuse the chloroplasts (plant cell organelles used for photosynthesis) to make food for themselves.
Nudibranchs use a variety of chemical defenses to aid in protection, but it is not necessary for the strategy to be lethal in order to be effective: some successful toxins induce bradycardia or hypotension in a predator, allowing the nudibranch to escape consumption while its attacker is incapacitated.
Another method of protection is the release of an acid from the skin. Once the specimen is physically irritated or touched by another creature, it will release the mucus automatically.

Life cycle

Nudibranchs are hermaphroditic, and thus have a set of reproductive organs for both sexes, but they cannot fertilize themselves.
Nudibranchs typically deposit their eggs within a gelatinous spiral.

Feeding and ecological role

All known nudibranchs are carnivorous. Some feed on sponges, others on hydroids,(e.g. Cuthona) others on bryozoans (phanerobranchs such as Tambja, Limacia, Plocamopherus and Triopha), and anemones (e.g. the Aeolidiidae and other Cladobranchia).
The surface dwelling nudibranch, Glaucus atlanticus is a specialist predator of siphonophores, such as the Portuguese Man O' War. This predatory mollusk sucks air into its stomach to keep it afloat and using its muscular foot it clings to the surface film. If it finds a small victim Glaucus simply envelops it with its capacious mouth, but if the prey is a larger siphonophore the mollusk nibbles off its fishing tentacles, the ones carrying the most potent nematocysts. Like some others of its kind Glaucus does not digest the nematocysts; instead, it uses them to defend itself by passing them from its gut to the surface of its skin.
For a comprehensive list of nudibranch feeding preferences, see the electronic supplement from McDonald and Nybakken.

Taxonomy

Nudibranchs are commonly divided into two main kinds, dorid nudibranchs and aeolid (also spelled eolid) nudibranchs:Hans Bertsch, Nudibranchs: Marine slugs with verve. Navanax inermis.. is the bane of all nudibranchs, because it is one of the few known predators on this group of slugs. ... Dorids mainly eat sponges, bryozoans and tunicates, whereas aeolids principally eat cnidarians.
The exact systematics of nudibranchs are a topic of recent revision. Traditionally nudibranchs have been treated as the order Nudibranchia, located in the gastropod mollusc sub-class Opisthobranchia (the marine slugs: which consisted of nudibranchs, sidegill slugs, bubble snails, algae sap-sucking sea slugs, and sea hares). Since 2005, pleurobranchs (which had previously been grouped among sidegill slugs) have been placed alongside nudibranchs in the clade Nudipleura (recognising them as more closely related to each other than to other opisthobranchs). Poppe & Sheila P. Tagaro, The New Classification of Gastropods according to  Bouchet & Rocroi, 2005; Visaya, February 23, 2006 Since 2010, it has been recognised that Opisthobranchia was not a valid clade (it is paraphyletic) and instead Nudipleura has been placed as the first offshoot of Euthyneura (which is the dominant clade of gastropods).Jörger K. M., Stöger I., Kano Y., Fukuda H., Knebelsberger T. & Schrödl M. (2010). "On the origin of Acochlidia and other enigmatic euthyneuran gastropods, with implications for the systematics of Heterobranchia". BMC Evolutionary Biology 10: 323. . "At the basis of the Euthyneura the Nudipleura split off"

Traditional hierarchy

This classification was based on the work of Johannes Thiele (1931), who built on the concepts of Henri Milne-Edwards (1848).
Order Nudibranchia:

Early revisions

Newer insights derived from morphological data and gene-sequence research, seemed to confirm those ideas. On the basis of investigation of 18S rDNA sequence data, there is strong evidence for support of the monophyly of the Nudibranchia and its two major groups, the Anthobranchia/Doridoidea and Cladobranchia. They were thus divided into two major clades:
However, according to the taxonomy by Bouchet & Rocroi (2005), currently the most up-to-date system of classifying the gastropods, the Nudibranchia are a subclade within the clade of the Nudipleura. The Nudibranchia are then divided into two clades:

Gallery

This gallery shows some of the great variability in the color and form of nudibranchs, and also shows a nudibranch egg ribbon.

File:Tritoniopsis elegans.jpg|Tritoniopsis elegans
File:Nembrotha cristata bunaken.jpg|Nembrotha cristata, in Bunaken National Park
File:Nudibranch in tidepool.jpg|Clown nudibranch Triopha catalinae, Northern California
File:Chromodoris annae.JPG|Chromodoris annae from Lembeh Straits, Indonesia
File:Bailarina Española por Gustavo Gerdel.jpg|Spanish Dancer  taken at night, Red Sea
File:Nembrotha chamberlaini (AA1).
File:Glossodoris atromarginata.jpg|Glossodoris atromarginata
File:Chromodoris dianae (AA2).
File:Nembrotha milleri mating.
File:Regal Sea Goddess Nudibranch.jpg|Regal Sea Goddess Felimare picta (synonym =Hypselodoris edenticulata) in the Gray's Reef National Marine Sanctuary, Savannah, Georgia
File:Eggs of nudibranch.JPG|Dorid nudibranch egg ribbon in Moss Beach, California
File:Nudibranch egg ribbon at Shaab Mahmoud.JPG|Nudibranch egg ribbon at Shaab Mahmoud (Red Sea, Egypt)
File:Nudibranch egg ribbon at Malahi.JPG|Nudibranch egg ribbon at Malahi (Red Sea, Egypt)



Further reading



Videos


