[[Lamotrigine]]

CATEGORIES: Anticonvulsants, Mood stabilizers, Triazines, Organochlorides

Lamotrigine, marketed in the US and most of Europe as Lamictal 

Medical uses

Epilepsy and seizures

Lamotrigine is approved in the US for the treatment of partial seizures. 
It is considered a first-line drug for primary generalised tonic-clonic seizures (includes simple partial, complex partial and secondarily generalised seizures), and as an adjuvant therapy in partial seizures (focal onset tonic-clonic, atypical absence, myoclonic, and due to Lennox-Gastaut syndrome). As well, it is used as an alternative drug for absence seizure and atypical absence, myoclonic, and atonic.
Lamotrigine is one of a small number of FDA-approved therapies for seizures associated with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome, a severe form of epilepsy. Typically developing before four years of age, LGS is associated with developmental delays. There is no cure, treatment is often complicated, and complete recovery is rare. Symptoms include the atonic seizure (also known as a "drop attack"), during which brief loss of muscle tone and consciousness cause abrupt falls. Lamotrigine significantly reduces the frequency of LGS seizures, and is one of two medications known to decrease the severity of drop attacks.

Bipolar disorder

Lamotrigine is approved in the US for maintenance treatment of Bipolar I disorder. While traditional anticonvulsant drugs are predominantly antimanics, lamotrigine is most effective for preventing the recurrent depressive episodes of bipolar disorder. The drug seems ineffective in the maintenance of current rapid-cycling, mania, or depression bipolar disorder; however, it is effective at prophylaxis or delaying the mania, depressive, or rapid cycle.
There is less evidence of therapeutic benefit when lamotrigine is used to treat a current mood episode. It has not demonstrated effectiveness in treating acute mania,

Other uses

Off-label uses include the treatment of peripheral neuropathy, trigeminal neuralgia, cluster headaches, migraines, and reducing neuropathic pain.


Pharmacology

Lamotrigine is a member of the sodium channel blocking class of antiepileptic drugs.
It is a triazine derivate that inhibits voltage-sensitive sodium channels, leading to stabilization of neuronal membranes. It also blocks L-, N-, and P-type calcium channels and has weak 5-hydroxytryptamine-3 (5-HT3) receptor inhibition. These actions are thought to inhibit release of glutamate at cortical projections in the ventral striatum limbic areas,
Lamotrigine does not have pronounced effects on any of the usual neurotransmitter receptors (adrenergic, dopamine D1 and D2, muscarinic, GABA, histaminergic H1, serotonin 5-HT2, and N-methyl-D-asparate). Inhibitory effects on 5-HT, norepinephrine, and dopamine transporters are weak.
These studies suggested that lamotrigine acts presynaptically on voltage-gated sodium channels to decrease glutamate release. Several electrophysiological studies have investigated the effects of lamotrigine on voltage-dependent sodium channels. For example, lamotrigine blocked sustained repetitive firing in cultured mouse spinal cord neurons in a concentration-dependent manner, at concentrations that are therapeutically relevant in the treatment of human seizures. In cultured hippocampal neurons, lamotrigine reduced sodium currents in a voltage-dependent manner, and at depolarised potentials showed a small frequency-dependent inhibition. These and a variety of other results indicate that the antiepileptic effect of lamotrigine, like that of phenytoin and carbamazepine, is at least in part due to use- and voltage-dependent modulation of fast voltage-dependent sodium currents. However, lamotrigine has a broader clinical spectrum of activity than phenytoin and carbamazepine and is recognised to be protective against generalised absence epilepsy and other generalised epilepsy syndromes, including primary generalised tonic–clonic seizures, juvenile myoclonic epilepsy, and Lennox-Gastaut syndrome.
The basis for this broader spectrum of activity of lamotrigine is unknown, but could relate to actions of the drug on voltage-activated calcium channels. Lamotrigine blocks T-type calcium channels weakly, if at all. However, it does inhibit native and recombinant high-voltage–activated calcium channels (N- and P/Q/R-types) at therapeutic concentrations. Whether this activity on calcium channels accounts for lamotrigine's broader clinical spectrum of activity in comparison with phenytoin and carbamazepine remains to be determined.
It antagonises the following receptors with the following IC50 values:

Pharmacokinetics

The pharmacokinetics of lamotrigine follow first-order kinetics, with a half-life of 13.5 hours and volume of distribution of 1.36 L/kg.
Lamotrigine is metabolised predominantly by glucuronic acid conjugation. Its major metabolite is an inactive 2-n-glucuronide conjugate.
Lamotrigine has fewer drug interactions than many anticonvulsant drugs, although pharmacokinetic interactions with carbamazepine, phenytoin and other hepatic enzyme inducing medications may shorten half-life.

Side Effects

Lamotrigine prescribing information has a black box warning about life-threatening skin reactions, including Stevens–Johnson syndrome, DRESS syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis. The manufacturer states that nearly all cases appear in the first 2 to 8 weeks of therapy and if medication is suddenly stopped then resumed at the normal dosage. Patients should seek medical attention for any unexpected skin rash, as its presence is an indication of a possible serious or even deadly side-effect of the drug. Not all rashes that occur while taking lamotrigine progress to SJS or TEN. Between 5 to 10% of patients will develop a rash, but only one in a thousand patients will develop a serious rash.   Rash and other skin reactions are more common in children, so this medication is often reserved for adults.
There is also an increased incidence of these eruptions in patients who are currently on, or recently discontinued a valproate-type anticonvulsant drug, as these medications interact in such a way that the clearance of both is decreased and the effective dose of lamotrigine is increased.
As of December 2010, lamotrigine carries an FDA black box warning for aseptic meningitis.drugs.html
Side-effects such as rash, fever, and fatigue are very serious, as they may indicate incipient Stevens–Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis, DRESS syndrome or aseptic meningitis.
Other side-effects include loss of balance or coordination, double vision, crossed eyes, pupil constriction, blurred vision, dizziness and lack of coordination, drowsiness, insomnia, anxiety, vivid dreams or nightmares,  dry mouth, mouth ulcers,  memory and cognitive problems, mood changes, runny nose, cough, nausea, indigestion, abdominal pain, weight loss, missed or painful menstrual periods, and vaginitis. The side-effect profile is different for different patient populations.
Lamotrigine has been associated with a decrease in white blood cell count (leukopenia).
Cases of lamotrigine-induced neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS — a condition characterised by muscle rigidity, tremors, autonomic dysregulation (high heart rate), hypertension (high blood pressure), diarrhoea, diaphoresis (profuse sweating), etc., mental status change hallucinations, agitation, delusions, stupor, coma, etc. and hyperthermia body temperature; in patients that had been stabilised on atypical antipsychotics for several months without NMS symptoms) have been reported.

Effects in women

In clinical trials women were more likely than men to have side-effects. This is the opposite of most other anticonvulsants.
There is evidence showing interactions between lamotrigine and female hormones, which can be of particular concern for women on estrogen-containing hormonal contraceptives. Ethinyl estradiol, the ingredient of such contraceptives, has been shown to decrease serum levels of lamotrigine. However, these increases were not in conjunction with increased progesterone, indicating that oral contraceptives maintained suppression of ovulation.

Pregnancy and breastfeeding

Lamotrigine is rated Pregnancy  Category Risk C. Use during pregnancy is recommended only if benefits outweigh potential risks. In September 2006, the FDA issued a warning stating that taking lamotrigine during the first trimester of pregnancy may increase the risk for cleft lip and palate malformation in newborns.
Lamotrigine is found in breast milk; the manufacturer does not recommend breastfeeding during treatment. In "Medications and Mothers' Milk," a frequently updated review of scientific literature, lamotrigine is rated as L3: moderately safe.

Other types of effects

Lamotrigine binds to melanin-containing tissues such as the iris of the eye.  The long-term consequences of this are unknown.
Some patients have reported experiencing a loss of concentration, even with very small doses. Lamotrigine has been implicated in the apoptotic neurodegeneration of the developing brain.
Lamotrigine is known to affect sleep. Studies with small numbers (10-15) of patients reported that lamotrigine increases sleep stability (increases the duration of REM sleep, decreases the number of phase shifts and decreases the duration of slow-wave sleep),
Lamotrigine can induce a type of seizure known as a myoclonic jerk, which tends to happen soon after the use of the medication.ehealthme. Myoclonic Jerk in the use of Lamictal. When used in the treatment of myoclonic epilepsies such as juvenile myoclonic epilepsy, lower doses (and lower plasma levels) are usually needed, as even moderate doses of this drug can lead to induction of seizures, including tonic-clonic seizures, which can develop into status epilepticus, which is a medical emergency. It can also cause myoclonic status epilepticus.
In overdose, lamotrigine can cause uncontrolled seizures in most people.

History

Availability

GlaxoSmithKline's trademarked brand of lamotrigine, Lamictal, is manufactured in scored tablets (25 mg, 50 mg, 100 mg, 150 mg and 200 mg) and chewable dispersible tablets (2 mg, 5 mg and 25 mg). Five-week sample kits are also available; these include titration In medicine, titration is the process of gradually adjusting the dose of a medication until optimal results are reached. instructions and scored tablets (25 mg for patients taking valproate, 25 mg and 100 mg for patients not taking valproate). Lamotrigine is also available in un-scored tablet form. In 2005, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd. began selling generic lamotrigine in the United States, but only in 5 mg and 25 mg chewable dispersible tablets. in the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada and Australia. It should be noted that brand name Lamictal is not available in 200 mg tablets in Canada, at all registered pharmacies (while 25, 100, and 150 mg are all offered). Starter kits are also not available in Canada.
Lamotrigine is marketed as Lamotrine in Egypt, Lamitrin in Bangladesh 

Lamictal XR

In 2009 GlaxoSmithKline received FDA Approval for an extended-release version of lamotrigine branded Lamictal XR.  Lamictal XR tablets are a novel preparation of lamotrigine, delivered in a tablet with an enteric coating that GlaxoSmithKline has branded DiffCORE.  The extended release formulation is analogous to the instant release version, such that treatment may begin without titration or recalibration of the dosage.

Chemistry

Lamotrigine can be prepared from 2,3-dichlorobenzoyl cyanide.[ref]
[/ref]






