[[Silesian language]]

CATEGORIES: Languages of Germany, Languages of Poland, Languages of the Czech Republic, Silesian language, Lechitic languages

Silesian or Upper Silesian (Silesian: ) is a West Slavic lect, related to Polishprof. Bogusław Wyderka:   Its vocabulary has been significantly influenced by Central German due to the existence of numerous Silesian German speakers in the area prior to World War II and after, until the 1990s. 2013. The Silesian Language in the Early 21st Century: A Speech Community on the Rollercoaster of Politics (pp 1-35). Die Welt der Slaven. Vol 58, No 1.
There is no consensus on whether Silesian is a separate language or a somewhat divergent dialect of Polish.

Distribution

Silesian speakers currently live in the region of Upper Silesia, which is split between southwestern Poland and the northeastern Czech Republic. At present Silesian is commonly spoken in the area between historical border of Silesia on the east and a line from Syców to Prudnik on the west as well as in the Rawicz area. Until 1945 Silesian was also spoken in enclaves in Lower Silesia, Lower Silesian, a variety of Central German, was spoken by the ethnic German majority population of that region at the time.
According to the last official census in Poland in 2011, about 509,000 people declared Silesian as their native language (in census 2002, about 60,000National Minorities in the Slovak Republic - Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Slovak Republic

Recognition

In 2003, the National Publishing Company of Silesia () and it prints books about Silesia and books in Silesian language.
In July 2007, the Slavic Silesian language was given the ISO 639-3 code szl.
On 6 September 2007, 23 politicians of the Polish parliament made a statement about a new law to give Silesian the official status of a regional language.
The first official National Dictation Contest of the Silesian language (
On 30 January 2008 and in June 2008, two organizations promoting Silesian language were established: Pro Loquela Silesiana and 
On 26 May 2008, Silesian Wikipedia was founded.
On 30 June 2008 in the edifice of the Silesian Parliament in Katowice, a conference took place on the status of the Silesian language. This conference was a forum for politicians, linguists, representatives of interested organizations and persons who deal with the Silesian language. The conference was titled "Silesian — Still a Dialect or Already a Language?" (
In 2012, the Ministry of Administration and Digitization registered the Silesian language in Annex 1 to the Regulation on the state register of geographical names.Dz.U. 2012 nr 0 poz. 309 - Internet System of Legal Acts

Writing system

Ślabikŏrzowy szrajbōnek is the relatively new alphabet created by the Pro Loquela Silesiana organization to reflect the sounds of all Silesian dialects. It was approved by Silesian organizations affiliated in Rada Górnośląska. Ubuntu translation is in this alphabet It is used in a few books, including the Silesian alphabet book. Pro Loquela Silesiana. ISBN 978-83-62349-01-2
One of the first alphabets created specifically for Silesian was Steuer's Silesian alphabet, created in the Interwar period and used by Feliks Steuer for his poems in Silesian. The alphabet consists of 30 graphemes and eight digraphs:
Sometimes other alphabets are also used, such as the "Tadzikowy muster" (for the National Dictation Contest of the Silesian language) or the Polish alphabet, but writing in this alphabet is problematic as it does not allow for the differentiation and representation of all Silesian sounds.

Grammar

While the morphological differences between Silesian and the neighboring language of Polish have been researched extensively, grammatical differences have not been studied in great depth. One example is that, in contrast with Polish, Silesian retains the pluperfect ( — "I would have slipped").
Another major difference is in question-forming. In Polish, questions that do not contain interrogative words are formed either by using intonation or the interrogative particle ); there is no interrogative particle.

Example

The Lord's Prayer in Silesian, Polish and Czech.

Dialects of Silesian

Silesian has many dialects:

Dialect vs language

Opinions are divided among linguists about whether Silesian is a distinct language or a dialect of Polish. The issue can be contentious, because some Silesians consider themselves to be a nationality within Poland. Some linguists from Poland such as Jolanta Tambor,"Ekspertyza naukowa prof. UŚ Dr hab. Jolanty Tambor" (en: "The scientific expertise of Juan Lajo"), 2008 Juan Lajo,"Ekspertyza naukowa pana Juana Lajo" (en: "The scientific expertise of Juan Lajo"), 2008 Dr Tomasz Wicherkiewicz"Ekspertyza naukowa dra Tomasza Wicherkiewicza" (en: "The scientific expertise of Tomasz Wicherkiewicz"), 2008 and philosopher Dr hab Jerzy Dadaczyński,"Ekspertyza naukowa ks. dra hab. Jerzego Dadaczyńskiego") (en: "The scientific expertise of Jerzy Dadaczyński"), 2008 sociologist Dr Elżbieta Anna Sekuła"Ekspertyza naukowa dr Elżbiety Anny Sekuły" (en: "The scientific expertise of Elżbieta Anna Sekuła"), 2008 and sociolinguist Tomasz Kamusella
The Silesian linguist Reinhold Olesch supported the status of Silesian as a Slavic language.
Most linguists writing in English, such as Alexander M. Schenker,Alexander M. Schenker, "Proto-Slavonic," The Slavonic Languages (1993, Routledge), pages 60-121. Robert A. Rothstein,Robert A. Rothstein, "Polish," The Slavonic Languages (1993, Routledge), pages 686-758. and Roland Sussex and Paul CubberleyRoland Sussex & Paul Cubberley, The Slavic Languages (2006, Cambridge University Press). in their respective surveys of Slavic languages, list Silesian as a dialect of Polish, as does Encyclopædia Britannica''.
A similar disagreement exists concerning the neighboring Lach varieties, sometimes considered separate languages and sometimes dialects of Czech, but the latter opinion appears currently dominant.
Czech Óndra Łysohorsky and his translator Ewald Osers (1949), were interested in Lach dialects.
Gerd Hentschel wrote "

Culture

Silesian has recently seen an increased use in culture, for example:
[/ref]);








