[[Liv Ullmann]]

CATEGORIES: 1938 births, 20th-century Norwegian actresses, 20th-century women writers, 21st-century Norwegian actresses, 21st-century women writers, Actresses from Boston, Massachusetts, Actresses from Tokyo, Actresses from Toronto, Best Drama Actress Golden Globe (film) winners, Commanders with Star of the Order of St. Olav, David di Donatello winners, European Film Awards winners (people), Women film directors, Women television directors, Living people, National Board of Review Awards, Norwegian autobiographers, Norwegian Christians, Norwegian expatriates in Canada, Norwegian expatriates in Japan, Norwegian expatriates in the United States, Norwegian film actresses, Norwegian film directors, Norwegian screenwriters, Norwegian stage actresses, Norwegian television actresses, Norwegian television directors, Norwegian theatre directors, Norwegian voice actresses, People from Trondheim, UNICEF people, Writers from Boston, Massachusetts, Writers from Tokyo, Writers from Toronto, Women screenwriters, Best Actress Guldbagge Award winners

Liv Johanne Ullmann (born 16 December 1938 Ullman is also one of the "muses" of the Swedish director Ingmar Bergman. Nominated five times for a best actress Golden Globe Award, winning the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Drama during 1972 for the drama movie The Emigrants (1971), Ullmann has also been nominated for the Palme d'Or, twice for the Academy Award, and twice for a  BAFTA Film Award.

Personal life

Ullmann was born in Tokyo, Japan, the daughter of Viggo Ullmann, a Norwegian aircraft engineer who was working in Tokyo at the time, and Janna (née Lund), also Norwegian.  When she was two years old, the family relocated to Toronto, Ontario, Canada, where her father worked at the Norwegian air force base on Toronto Island (in Lake Ontario) during World War II. Four years later, her father died of a brain tumor, an event that affected her greatly.

Career

Ullmann began her acting career as a stage actress in Norway during the mid-1950s. She continued to act in theatre for most of her career, and became noted for her portrayal of Nora in Henrik Ibsen's play A Doll's House, but became better known once she started to work with Swedish movie director Ingmar Bergman. She later acted, with acclaim, for 10 of his most-admired movies, including Persona (1966), The Passion of Anna (1969), Cries and Whispers (1972) and Autumn Sonata (1978), in which her co-actress, Ingrid Bergman, resumed her Swedish cinema career. She co-acted often with Swedish actor and fellow Bergman collaborator, Erland Josephson, with whom she made the Swedish television drama, Scenes from a Marriage (1973), which was also edited to feature-movie length and distributed theatrically. Ullmann acted with Laurence Olivier in A Bridge Too Far (1977), directed by Richard Attenborough.
Nominated more than 40 times for awards, including various lifetime achievement awards, she won the best actress prize three times from the National Society of Film Critics, three times from the National Board of Review, received three awards from the New York Film Critics Circle and a Golden Globe. During 1971, Ullmann was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actress for the movie The Emigrants, and again during 1976 for the movie Face to Face.
Ullmann made her New York City stage debut in 1975 also in "A Doll's House."  Appearances in "Anna Christie" and "Ghosts" followed, as well as the less than successful musical version of I Remember Mama. This show, composed by Richard Rodgers, experienced numerous revisions during a long preview period, then closed after 108 performances. She also featured in the widely deprecated musical movie remake of Lost Horizon during 1973.
In 1980 Brian De Palma, who directed Carrie, wanted Liv Ullmann to play the role as Kate Miller in the erotic crime thriller Dressed to Kill and offered her the role, but she declined because of the violence.
During 1984 she was chairperson of the jury at the 34th Berlin International Film Festival, and during 2002 chaired the jury of Cannes Film Festival. She introduced her daughter, Linn Ullmann, to the audience with the words: "Here comes the woman whom Ingmar Bergman loves the most". Her daughter was there to receive the Prize of Honour on behalf of her father; she would return to serve the jury herself during 2011.
In 2004 Ullmann revealed that she had gotten an offer in November 2003 to play in the popular American show, Sex and the City.
Ullmann narrated the Canada–Norway co-produced animated short movie The Danish Poet (2006), which won the Academy Award for Animated Short Film at the 79th Academy Awards during 2007. 
In 2008 she was the head of the jury at the 30th Moscow International Film Festival.
She published two autobiographies, Changing (1977) and Choices (1984).
During 2012, she attended the International Indian Film Academy Awards in Singapore, where she was honored her for Outstanding Contributions to International Cinema and she also showed her movie on her relationship with Ingmar Bergman.

Directing career

Ullmann's first film as a director was Sofie (1992), in which she directed her friend and former co-actor, Erland Josephson. She later directed the Bergman-composed movie Faithless (2000) and reprised her role for Scenes from a Marriage in Saraband (2003), Bergman's final telemovie. Faithless garnered nominations for both the Palme d'Or and Best Actress at the Cannes Film Festival.
During 2006 Ullmann announced that she had been forced to end her longtime wish of making a movie based on A Doll's House. According to her statement, the Norwegian Film Fund was preventing her and writer Kjetil Bjørnstad from pursuing the project. Australian actress Cate Blanchett and British actress Kate Winslet had been cast intended in the main roles of the movie. She later directed Blanchett in the play A Streetcar Named Desire, by Tennessee Williams, at the Sydney Theatre Company in Sydney, Australia, which was performed September through October 2009, and then continued from 29 October to 21 November 2009 at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington, D.C., where it won a Helen Hayes Award for Outstanding Non-resident Production as well as actress and supporting performer for 2009. The play was also performed at the Brooklyn Academy of Music in Brooklyn, New York.
In 2013 it was announced that Ullmann would direct a film adaptation of Miss Julie. The film, set to be released in 2014, stars Jessica Chastain, Colin Farrell and Samantha Morton.latimes.com/2013/feb/01/entertainment/la-et-cm-jessica-chastain-miss-julie-liv-ullman-20130131

Private life

In addition to Norwegian, Ullmann speaks Swedish, English and other European languages.
Ullmann has been married and divorced twice. Her first marriage was to Hans Jacob Stang, a Norwegian psychiatrist, whom she divorced during 1965. According to her biographer, Ketil Bjørnstad, the marriage was marred by infidelities on both sides. She had a long affair with her colleague, Ingmar Bergman, from 1965-70. One result of the affair was her only child, Linn Ullmann, born 9 August 1966.
During the 1980s, she married Boston real estate developer Donald Saunders, whom she divorced during 1995. The couple continued to live together until 2007.  "Donald L. Saunders Donald L. Saunders Campaign Donation Profile".  Mother Jones.  Retrieved 11 October 2012..
She is a UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador

Filmography

Awards





Further reading




