[[Lateral consonant]]

CATEGORIES: Lateral consonants


A lateral is an L-like consonant, in which airstream proceeds along the sides of the tongue, but is blocked by the tongue from going through the middle of the mouth.
Most commonly the tip of the tongue makes contact with the upper teeth (see dental consonant) or the upper gum (the alveolar ridge) just behind the teeth (see alveolar consonant). The most common laterals are approximants and belong to the class of liquids, though lateral fricatives and affricates are common in some parts of the world.
The labiodental fricatives  often—perhaps usually—have lateral airflow, as the lip blocks the airflow in the center, but they are nonetheless not considered lateral consonants because no language makes a distinction between the two possibilities. Plosives are never lateral—although they may have lateral release—and the distinction is meaningless for nasal stops and for consonants articulated in the throat.
Consonants are not necessarily lateral or central. Some, such as Japanese r, are not defined by centrality; Japanese r varies between a central flap .

Examples

English has one lateral phoneme: the lateral approximant  but do not have a plain l.
In many British accents (e.g. Cockney), dark ) as compared with English Vistula.
In central and Venice dialects of Vèneto, intervocalic . The orthography uses the letter ł to represent this phoneme (not that it doesn't specifically represent the e̯ sound, it represents the phoneme which in some dialects is e̯ and in some l).
Many aboriginal Australian languages have a series of three or four lateral approximants, as do various dialects of Irish. Rarer lateral consonants include the retroflex laterals that can be found in many Languages of India, found in many Native North American languages, Welsh and Zulu . In Adyghe and some Athabaskan languages like Hän both voiceless and voiced alveolar lateral fricatives occur, but there is no approximant. Many of these languages also have lateral affricates. Some languages have palatal or velar voiceless lateral fricatives or affricates, such as Dahalo and Zulu but the IPA has no symbols for these sounds. However, appropriate symbols are easy to make by adding a lateral-fricative belt to the symbol for the corresponding lateral approximant (see below). Failing that, a devoicing diacritic is added to the approximant.
Nearly all languages with such lateral obstruents also have the approximant. However, there are a number of exceptions, many of them located in the Pacific Northwest area. For example, Tlingit has . Other examples from the same area include Nuu-chah-nulth and Kutenai, and elsewhere, Chukchi and Kabardian.
Standard Tibetan has a voiceless lateral approximant, usually romanized as lh, as in the name Lhasa.
Pashto has a retroflex lateral flap.
There are a large number of lateral click consonants; seventeen occur in !Xóõ.
Lateral trills are possible (but occur in no known language). It is also possible to articulate uvular laterals, but they are also too hard to pronounce to occur as a phoneme in any known language.

List of laterals

Approximants

Fricatives

Affricates

Flaps

Ejective

Clicks

Other symbols

The symbol for the voiceless alveolar lateral fricative  forms the basis for the occasional ad hoc symbols for other voiceless lateral fricatives—retroflex, palatal, and velar (the latter two only known from affricates): 
The symbol for the alveolar lateral flap  is the basis for the expected symbol for the retroflex lateral flap: 
Such symbols are rare, but are becoming more common now that font-editing software has become accessible. The letter for the voiceless retroflex lateral fricative was included in Unicode 6.0 as ). Also note that although the Charis SIL and Doulos SIL fonts have those glyphs in the Private Use Area (PUA), PUA code points should not be used for data exchange.

Notes






