[[Master of Puppets]]

CATEGORIES: Metallica albums, 1986 albums, Elektra Records albums, Vertigo Records albums, Cthulhu Mythos music, English-language albums, Albums produced by Flemming Rasmussen, Albums certified multi-platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America, Thrash metal albums, Anti-war songs

Master of Puppets is the third studio album by the American heavy metal band Metallica. It was released on February 24, 1986, and was the band's last album to feature bassist Cliff Burton, who died in a bus crash in Sweden while touring to promote the album. The album peaked at number 29 on the Billboard 200 and became the first thrash metal album to be certified platinum. In 2003, it was certified 6× platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), having shipped six million copies in the United States.
Master of Puppets was released to rave reviews from music critics and has been included in several publications' best album lists. Its driving, virtuosic music and angry, political lyrics drew praise from critics outside of the metal community. The album is widely accepted as the band's strongest effort at the time, serving as one of the most influential heavy metal albums of all time. Many bands from all genres of heavy metal have covered the album's songs throughout the years, including tribute albums as well. Since the beginning of the SoundScan era in 1991, Master of Puppets has sold 4,578,000 copies.
The front cover depicts a cemetery field of white crosses tethered to strings, manipulated by a pair of hands in a blood-red sky. The album's cover concept was invented by Metallica and Peter Mensch, while the cover artwork was painted by Don Brautigam, who had worked with bands such as AC/DC, ZZ Top, and The Rolling Stones. The original artwork was later auctioned at Rockefeller Plaza, New York City for the price between $20,000 and $30,000.

Background and recording

In the fall of 1984, Metallica signed with Elektra Records. The label re-released Ride the Lightning on November 19, as the band began touring larger venues and festivals throughout 1985. After parting ways with their former manager, Jon Zazula, they hired Q Prime's Cliff Burnstein and Peter Mensch. During a busy summer, they played the Monsters of Rock festival at Castle Donington, along with Bon Jovi and Ratt, in front of 70,000 fans.
The group began writing new material early in the summer of 1985. Lars Ulrich and James Hetfield initially gathered at a garage in El Cerrito, going through ideas of their own, before inviting Cliff Burton and Kirk Hammett to rehearse along with them. As a result, Hetfield and Ulrich would become the main songwriters on all of the tracks that would make the next album, already entitled Master of Puppets.
In the fall of 1985, they returned to Copenhagen to record Master of Puppets with Flemming Rasmussen. Metallica started to record this album in Denmark on September 1, 1985, and ended the recording session with Flemming Rasmussen on December 27 the same year. Unfortunately, Flemming and Metallica did not manage to complete the mixtapes to their mutual satisfaction. Instead, the master tapes were handed over to Michael Wagener in January 1986. Wagener, who had previous production experience with Mötley Crüe, Dokken, and Accept, successfully finished the album's mixing.

Lyrics

The songs from Master of Puppets follow the same lyrical theme of control and the abuse of power. In general, the lyrics describe the consequences of alienation and oppression, as people are "powerless to resist the institutions that control them". The theme of the title track centers around the horror of drug addiction, specifically cocaine, which according to an editor, Tom King, was a theme "you couldn't be open about at the time". The lyrics of the third track, "The Thing That Should Not Be", are inspired by H.P. Lovecraft's short story The Shadow Over Innsmouth, whose main protagonist is battling against unearthly forces. Referring to the epic proportions of the songs, Eamonn Stack from BBC Music noted that "at this stage in their careers Metallica weren't even doing songs, they were telling stories".
The ballad, "Welcome Home (Sanitarium)", is based on Ken Kesey's novel One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest. The story conveys the thoughts of a patient who is unjustly caged in a mental institution, and according to philosopher William Irwin, among Metallica songs dealing with insanity, it is "perhaps the most revealing one". "Disposable Heroes" is a tale of a young soldier and his superiors who control his fate, while "Leper Messiah" unveils "the flimsy ruses of false prophets". Irwin wrote that the song "describes how people are willingly turned into blind religious followers". He further explained that it's not the fact that "people are religious" that annoys Metallica, but that they "mindlessly do whatever they are told." A writer, Ryan Moore, concluded that the lyrics of the album as a whole depict "ominous yet unnamed forces of power wielding total control over helpless human subjects".

Critical reception

Master of Puppets received rave reviews from music critics.
In a retrospective review, AllMusic's Steve Huey viewed it as Metallica's best album and remarked that, although it was not as unexpected as Ride the Lightning, Master of Puppets is a more musically and thematically consistent album. Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune wrote that the songs were the band's most intense at that point, despite veering towards "the progressive tendency of Rush." Adrien Begrand of PopMatters praised the production as "a metal version of Phil Spector's Wall of Sound" and felt that none of Metallica's subsequent albums could match its passionate and intense musical quality. In a less enthusiastic review, Robert Christgau said that the band's energy and political motivations are respectable, but felt that they evoke clichéd images of "revolutionary heroes" who are "male chauvinists too inexperienced to know better".

Accolades

Master of Puppets has been included in several publications' best album lists. In 2003, the album was ranked number 167 on Rolling Stone
In 2007, IGN named Master of Puppets the best heavy metal album of all time. The website's editor Spence D. stated that Metallica's third studio album was certainly their best because it was "built upon and perfected everything they had experimented with prior" and that "all the pieces come together in glorious cohesion".

Sales and impact

Released in early 1986, the record had a 72-week run on the Billboard 200 album charts and became the band's first gold record. On March 29, 1986, the album debuted at number 128
Master of Puppets  became thrash metal's first platinum album and by the early 1990s it helped thrash metal to successfully challenge the mainstream of metal and redefine it. Metallica and a few other bands were able to headline arena concerts and appear regularly on MTV, although radio play remained incommensurate with their popularity.
Most of the album, with the exceptions of "Leper Messiah" and "Damage, Inc.", was featured as playable songs on the music video game Guitar Hero: Metallica.

Touring

Metallica spent the period between March and August 1986 touring as the opening act for Ozzy Osbourne in the United States. The band usually played a 55 minute set often followed by encore. Referring to that occasion, Lars Ulrich stated: "We think Ozzy is great. He's been really good to us on this tour. We're honored to play with him. He's one of the people who started this whole thing." Kirk Hammett recalls Ozzy calling Metallica "the Black Sabbath of the 80's". According to Ulrich, the audience from the bigger cities was already familiar with Metallica's music, unlike the smaller towns they've visited. "In the B-markets, people really don't know what we're all about. But after 45 or 50 minutes we can tell we've won them over. And fans who come to hear Ozzy go home liking Metallica."
The band was touring Europe in support of Master of Puppets when the band's bus rolled over on a patch of icy road outside of Stockholm. The tragedy occurred the night of September 27, after the performance in Stockholm. Cliff Burton was thrown through a window and was killed instantly. The driver claimed that he hit the patch of black ice, but James Hetfield always disputed that. The band returned home to San Francisco and hired Flotsam and Jetsam bassist Jason Newsted to replace Burton.

Live performances

The title track has become a permanent staple of the band's live setlist and is the most played Metallica song. When played live, the crowd fills in some of the vocal parts while the group performs the instrumentals. Loudwire's Chad Childers characterizes the band's performance as "furious" and the song as the set's "highlight".
"Battery" and "Welcome Home (Sanitarium)" are also regularly played live. "Battery" is usually played at the end of the setlist or during the encore, accompanied by lasers and plumes of flame. "Welcome Home (Sanitarium)" is the second most performed song from the album.
The rest of the tracks are rarely played live. "Orion" is the least-performed song from the album, having been played only 45 times. The first live performance was made during the Escape from the Studio '06 tour, when the band performed the album in its entirety, honoring the 20th anniversary of its original release.

Track listing

Personnel

Credits are adapted from the album's liner notes.

Charts

Certifications








