[[Center for American Progress]]

CATEGORIES: Political blogs, Political and economic think tanks in the United States, Center for American Progress, Sustainability organisations, Non-profit organizations based in Washington, D.C., Foreign policy and strategy think tanks in the United States, Organizations established in 2003, 2003 establishments in Washington, D.C., 501(c)(3) nonprofit organizations

The Center for American Progress is a partisan liberal public policy research and advocacy organization. Its website states that the organization is "dedicated to improving the lives of Americans through progressive ideas and action". The Center presents a liberal[ref]E.g.,
Its President and chief executive officer is Neera Tanden, who worked for the Obama and Clinton administrations and  for Hillary Clinton's campaigns. "Think-tank post puts spotlight on veteran Democratic operative Neera Tanden". The Washington Post. Retrieved 2012-01-19. Its first President and chief executive officer was John Podesta, who served as chief of staff to then U.S. President Bill Clinton. Podesta remains with the organization as chairman of the board. The Center for American Progress has a campus outreach group, Campus Progress, and a sister advocacy organization, the Center for American Progress Action Fund. Citing Podesta's influence in the formation of the Obama Administration, a November 2008 article in Time stated that "not since the Heritage Foundation helped guide Ronald Reagan's transition in 1981 has a single outside group held so much sway". "Inside Obama's Idea Factory in Washington", Time. Retrieved 2009-12-02.

History and mission

The Center for American Progress was created in 2003 as a left-leaning alternative to think tanks such as the Heritage Foundation and the American Enterprise Institute.Robert Dreyfuss, "An Idea Factory for the Democrats", The Nation March 1, 2004
Since its inception, the Center has gathered a group of high-profile senior fellows, including Lawrence Korb, Assistant Secretary of Defense under President Ronald Reagan; Gene Sperling, Director of the National Economic Council under Presidents Bill Clinton and Barack Obama; Ruy Teixeira, political scientist and author of The Emerging Democratic Majority; and, most recently, former Senate Minority Leader Tom Daschle and Elizabeth Edwards, late wife of former Presidential candidate and former U.S. Sen. from North Carolina John Edwards.  Sarah Rosen Wartell, a co-founder and Executive Vice-President of the Center, has been named President of the Urban InstituteSarah Rosen Wartell, Think Tank Executive and Housing Finance Expert, to be the Urban Institute's Third President
The Center was often featured prominently on the Al Franken Show on the now defunct Air America Radio network, where Christy Harvey and Al Franken criticized the Bush administration at length, accusing it of dishonesty and incompetence.
The Center helped Congressman John Murtha (D-PA) develop "strategic redeployment",CAP article, strategic redeployment. Retrieved November 15, 2006. a comprehensive plan for the Iraq War that includes a timetable and troop withdrawals.

Media outlets

The Center for American Progress publishes a daily email newsletter entitled The Progress Report, which is a recap and analysis of major political news in the United States, providing a progressive perspective on the day's stories. The authors are Faiz Shakir, Amanda Terkel, Satyam Khanna, Matthew Corley, Ali Frick, and Benjamin Armbruster.
The newsletter has four main sections:
The Center for American Progress began experimenting with video delivered over the internet to complement their policy work in early 2006. This video strategy, currently known as SEEPROGRESS, is distributed through the Center's website as well as YouTube and other video distributors, such as Google video, Blip.

Climate Progress

The Center publishes the daily global warming blog Climate Progress.  In 2009, Thomas L. Friedman, in his column in The New York Times, called the blog "indispensable",Friedman, Thomas L. "The Inflection Is Near?", The New York Times, March 7, 2009. and Rolling Stone magazine named Romm to its list of "100 People Who Are Changing America"."The 100 People Who Are Changing America", Rolling Stone magazine, March 18, 2009  Time magazine named Romm one of its "Heroes of the Environment (2009)", calling him "The Web's most influential climate-change blogger""Heroes of the Environment 2009". Time magazine feature, September 2009, linking to full article: Walsh, Bryan. "Heroes of the Environment 2009 – Activists: Joe Romm", Time magazine, September 2009. and, in 2010, it included Climate Progress in a list of the 25 "Best Blogs of 2010""Best Blogs of 2010". Time magazine, June 28, 2010. Romm's 2010 book, Straight Up is a compilation of some of his best blog entries from Climate Progress, with introductions and analysis by Romm.

ThinkProgress

ThinkProgress is a blog edited by Judd Legum that "provides a forum that advances progressive ideas and policies."  It is an outlet of the Center for American Progress.

Education Reform and Privatization


The Center for American Progress has signed on to pro-charter initiatives and created a policy paper in favor of alternative certification programs for teachers.  Policy paper on alternative certification for teachers.  This puts them at odds with unionized teachers and public school and community activists.

Campus Progress

Campus Progress, now known as Generation Progress, was launched in February 2005 and is the Center for American Progress's comprehensive effort to help young people make their voices heard on issues and to empower new generations of progressive leaders. Campus Progress is active on over 500 U.S. campuses and in communities across the United States.
Campus Progress has five main components:
David Halperin, former speechwriter to President Bill Clinton and to 2004 presidential candidate Howard Dean, served as the Director of Campus Progress from its inception in 2004 until January 2012.

Center for American Progress Action Fund

Formerly known simply as the American Progress Action Fund, the Center for American Progress Action Fund is a "sister advocacy organization" and is organizationally and financially separate from the Center for American Progress, although they share many staff and a physical address. Politico wrote in April 2011 that "The Center for American Progress Action Fund openly runs political advocacy campaigns, and plays a central role in the Democratic Party's infrastructure, and the new reporting staff down the hall isn't exactly walled off from that message machine, nor does it necessarily keep its distance from liberal groups organizing advocacy campaigns targeting conservatives." The action fund is headed by Jennifer Palmieri.

Criticism

Some open government groups, such as the Sunlight Foundation and the Campaign Legal Center, criticize the Center's failure to disclose its contributors, particularly since it is so influential in appointments to the Obama administration.
In March 2008, ThinkProgress, a blog outlet of the Center for American Progress, posted that John McCain had plagiarized from a 1996 speech by Rear Admiral Timothy Ziemer. However, it was revealed that McCain had used similar lines in a speech during 1995 and ThinkProgress retracted the error the next day.
In October 2010, ThinkProgress posted that the U.S. Chamber of Commerce was bypassing campaign finance laws by using foreign money to fund campaign attack ads.
CAP was criticized by several Jewish organizations after some center staffers for the CAP "publicly used language that could be construed as anti-Israel or even anti-Semitic". Officials at CAP said the "inappropriate" language came only in personal tweets – not on CAP's Web site or its ThinkProgress blog. The tweets were deleted, and the authors apologized.

Green jobs

A report from the Center for American Progress concludes that a $100 billion federal investment in clean energy technologies over 2009 and 2010 would yield 2 million new U.S. jobs, cutting the unemployment rate by 1.3% and put the nation on a path toward a low-carbon economy. The report, prepared by the Political Economy Research Institute at the University of Massachusetts, proposes $50 billion in tax credits for energy efficiency retrofits and renewable energy systems; $46 billion in direct government spending for public building retrofits, mass transit, freight rail, smart electrical grid systems, and renewable energy systems; and $4 billion for federal loan guarantees to help finance building retrofits and renewable energy projects. The Center believes that clean energy investments would yield about 300,000 more jobs than if the same funds were distributed among U.S. taxpayers. The clean energy investments would also have the added benefits of lower home energy bills and reduced prices for non-renewable energy sources, due to the reduced consumption of those energy sources.

Contributors

Funding

The Center for American Progress is classified as a 501(c)(3) organization under U.S. Internal Revenue Code. The institute receives approximately $25 million per year in funding from a variety of sources, including individuals, foundations, and corporations, but it declines to release any information on the sources of its funding. No funders are listed on its website or in its Annual Report. From 2003 to 2007, the Center received about $15 million in grants from 58 foundations. Major individual donors include George Soros, Peter Lewis, Steve Bing, and Herb and Marion Sandler. The Center receives undisclosed sums from corporate donors. In December 2013 the organization released a list of its corporate donors.americanprogress.org/about/our-supporters/








