[[Sonic the Hedgehog (TV series)]]

CATEGORIES: 1990s American animated television series, 2003 anime television series, 1993 American television series debuts, 1995 American television series endings, American Broadcasting Company network shows, Television programs featuring anthropomorphic characters, Television series by DIC Entertainment, American children's television series, American science fiction television series, Sonic the Hedgehog animated series, Animated series based on video games, Dystopian fiction, Cyberpunk television series, YTV shows

Sonic the Hedgehog (promotionally titled Sega's Sonic the Hedgehog and also known as Sonic SatAM) is an American animated television series created by Len Janson and produced by DIC Entertainment with the partnership of Sega of America. The show is very loosely based on the Sonic the Hedgehog video game series and aired two seasons on ABC from September 18, 1993, until December 3, 1994 and reran until May 1995. The series received praise from fans and has since then gained a loyal cult following. An ongoing comic book continuation of the show has been published by Archie Comics since 1993.

Background

Initial run

The show's first season focuses its subplots on subject matter that is unusual for, and darker than, most American children's cartoons; placing its setting in a dystopian fantasy world, and using story concepts such as losing family members to war. The first season possesses some minced oaths and various innuendos.Sonic the Hedgehog series episode "Super Sonic"
Nevertheless, the cartoon remains family friendly, as this subject matter is depicted in a softened manner.
ABC decided that the second season would have several episodes devoted entirely to humor, while "darker" plot developments and possibilities, as well as all violence, were reduced in magnitude.sonicsatam.  Further changes in design include a new color palette for Rotor, Bunny's upper arm no longer being roboticized (as opposed to her forearm and shoulder, which remained roboticized) and a flashier look for the creation of power rings in the power ring pool.
The series sharply contrasts with Adventures of Sonic the Hedgehog, another cartoon series starring Sonic, which had premiered in the same month. While Adventures of Sonic the Hedgehog was very lighthearted and comical, Sonic the Hedgehog featured a more complex plot and dramatic atmosphere. This series is the primary inspiration for the Archie comic book series of the same name, which continues to use elements and characters from this series, albeit with a separate continuity.

Syndication

After the series' initial run, it was aired on the USA Network's Action Extreme Team in reruns from June 1997 to January 1998. Reruns aired in syndication from 2004 to 2005.
The series aired in Canada on the CTV Network, with a bonus summer run between June 10 and September 2, 1995, that ABC did not replicate (they instead replaced it with reruns of Free Willy until September 2, 1995). Sonic the Hedgehog has not been re-run in Canada since its cancellation on CTV.
It initially had a complete run on the UK television channel Channel 4 from 1994 to 1996. Season one was broadcast in the Republic of Ireland on RTÉ Two in December 1994.

Plot summary

The show takes place on a planet called Mobius sometime in its 33rd century. A human warlord and former scientist named Dr. Robotnik (voiced by Jim Cummings), and his assistant and nephew Snively (voiced by Charlie Adler), invaded and conquered Mobotropolis, the capital city of Mobius, with an army of robot soldiers called Swatbots.
The show's backstory explains that Robotnik had once been leader of the Mobotropolis War Ministry, and that his creation and use of Swatbots led the country's victory in "The Great War". In the war's aftermath, he was to be appointed Minister of Science by the King of Mobius, Maximillian Acorn, who had decided to close the War Ministry and dismantle the Swatbots following the War. However, Robotnik overthrew the kingdom and declared himself to be the new King. King Maximillian is never seen or heard from again.
Robotnik captures most of the citizens, including an intelligent old hedgehog named Sir Charles Hedgehog and his crowning invention, the Roboticizer. This invention, created with the intention to prolong life, changes living creatures into robots, but had the unintended effect of robbing the individual of their free will. Robotnik uses this technology to enslave the population.
Some citizens managed to escape the coup, and fled to Knothole Village in the Great Forest to hide from Robotnik's army. Under Princess Sally, they formed a group called the Freedom Fighters to restore Mobius and end Robotnik's rule.

Characters

Freedom Fighters

Villains

Episodes

In other media

Comics

The Sonic the Hedgehog comic done by Archie Comics was based on the Sonic the Hedgehog cartoon. Themes and storylines in early issues of the comic paralleled the cartoon, while characters and locales are still currently used.

Video games

Numerous different video games were intended to use the Sonic the Hedgehog TV series license, although only one was ever completed and released. This was Sonic Spinball, released in 1993 for the Sega Mega Drive/Genesis, which contained references to the show, such as the inclusion of Princess Sally, Bunnie Rabbot, Rotor and Muttski. The franchise was also planned to be used in a game that had tentatively been titled Sonic-16. The team would then go on to work on the infamous Sonic Xtreme project, which was also cancelled, but by that point, the game had dropped any connections to the television series.

Reception

The program initially ranked #9 in its time slot with a rating of 5.2, an estimated 4.8 million viewers.
Todd Douglass Jr. of DVDTalk found the show to be dated, though he said "Out of the 26 episodes that make up the complete series there were quite a few that were actually enjoyable. For instance, I got a kick out of "Ultra Sonic" where Sonic finds his now robotic Uncle Chuck. "Blast to the Past Parts 1 & 2" and "Doomsday Project" stood out alongside "Ultra Sonic" as the crème of the crop though there were a few episodes here and there that entertained on some level (even if it was low)."
GamesRadar called the show the worst thing to happen to Sonic, criticizing its plot and original characters, which it called "unwanted".

Release history

This set was discontinued in 2012 along with Adventures of Sonic the Hedgehog after Shout!'s deal with Cookie Jar Entertainment expired.






