[[Dave Bancroft]]

CATEGORIES: 1891 births, 1972 deaths, National Baseball Hall of Fame inductees, Major League Baseball shortstops, Philadelphia Phillies players, New York Giants (NL) players, New York Giants (NL) coaches, Boston Braves players, Brooklyn Robins players, Baseball players from Iowa, Boston Braves managers, Major League Baseball player–managers, People from Sioux City, Iowa, Duluth White Sox players, Superior Blues players, Superior Red Sox players, Portland Beavers players, Portland Colts players, Sioux City Cowboys players, All-American Girls Professional Baseball League managers

David James Bancroft (April 20, 1891 – October 9, 1972) was an American baseball shortstop and manager. Nicknamed "Beauty" for his penchant for calling good pitches "beauties", he played in Major League Baseball (MLB) from 1915 to 1930, for the Philadelphia Phillies, New York Giants, Boston Braves, and Brooklyn Robins.
Born in Sioux City, Iowa, Bancroft played in minor league baseball from 1909 through 1914, at which point he was bought by the Phillies. The Giants traded for Bancroft during the 1920 season. After playing for the Giants through the 1923 season, he became player-manager of the Braves, serving in that role for four years. After he was fired by the Braves, Bancroft played two seasons for the Robins and ended his playing career with the Giants the next season. He coached with the Giants, then managed in the minor leagues and the All-American Girls Professional Baseball League.
Bancroft was part of the Giants' World Series championship teams in 1921 and 1922. He was also a part of the National League pennant-winning teams of 1915 and 1923. Considered an excellent defensive shortstop and a smart ball player, Bancroft was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame by the Veterans Committee in 1971. However, his election was not without controversy, as the Veterans Committee included former teammates of Bancroft, resulting in charges of cronyism against the Veterans Committee.

Early life

Bancroft was born in Sioux City, Iowa, the youngest of three children of Ella (née Gearhart) and Frank Bancroft. Frank worked as a news vendor on the Milwaukee Railroad. Bancroft attended Hopkins Grade School and Sioux City High School.

Career

Early career

In the summer after his junior year of high school, at the age of 18, Bancroft began his professional career in 1909 with the Duluth White Sox of the Class-D Minnesota-Wisconsin League. Bancroft did not have immediate success, registering a .210 batting average and .917 fielding percentage in 111 games, but he developed a positive reputation in the league. The Superior Blues acquired Bancroft at midseason, and he remained there through the 1911 season. Bancroft finished the 1911 season with a .273 batting average and 41 stolen bases, and the Blues won the league championship.
The Portland Beavers of the Class-AA Pacific Coast League (PCL) drafted Bancroft from Superior for the 1912 season. He struggled in 1912, batting .207, and was demoted to the Portland Colts of the Class-B Northwestern League in 1913. After batting .244 for the Colts, he was promoted back to the Beavers in 1914, where he batted .271 and drew comparisons to former Beavers star shortstop Roger Peckinpaugh as the team won the PCL championship. While with the Beavers, Bancroft earned the nickname "Beauty", for his habit of referring to pitches as "beauties" while he batted.

Major League Baseball

=Philadelphia Phillies=

Before the 1915 season, the Philadelphia Phillies purchased Bancroft from Portland for $5,000 ($
Bancroft batted third in the Phillies' lineup in 1916.
Bancroft feuded with Cravath, who became the Phillies' manager in 1919.

=New York Giants=

With the Giants, Bancroft was an able performer.
Bancroft played in all 156 games in the 1922 season. He tied Jack Smith for third with 117 runs scored, finished third with 209 hits, and tied Bob O'Farrell for second with 79 walks.
Serving as team captain,

=Boston Braves=

With a young Travis Jackson ready to succeed Bancroft as the Giants' shortstop, and with Bancroft desiring an opportunity to manage, McGraw traded Bancroft to the Boston Braves with Bill Cunningham and Casey Stengel for Joe Oeschger and Billy Southworth after the 1923 season.
Bancroft served as player–manager for the Braves for three seasons, from 1924 through 1927. Upon becoming manager, he became the youngest manager in the National League (NL). He missed time during the 1924 season with appendicitis.

=Brooklyn Robins and return to the Giants=

Failing to turn the Braves into a winning team, Bancroft requested his release from the team after the 1927 season. He signed with the Brooklyn Robins the same day.
The Robins released Bancroft after the 1929 season, and he returned to the Giants as assistant manager and coach, serving under McGraw. When McGraw retired in 1932, the Giants appointed Bill Terry as player-manager. Surprised and disappointed that Terry was chosen over him, Bancroft left the Giants.

Later career

After retiring as a player, Bancroft managed in minor league baseball. He managed the Minneapolis Millers of the Class-AA American Association in 1933.
After the season, Bancroft interviewed for the managerial job with the Cincinnati Reds;

Legacy

Grover Cleveland Alexander, Bancroft's teammate in Philadelphia, and Hughie Jennings, his coach in New York, considered Bancroft one of the best shortstops in MLB.
After failing to be elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame by the Baseball Writers Association of America (BBWAA), the Veterans Committee elected Bancroft in 1971.
Despite the criticism of players elected to the Hall of Fame by the Veterans Committee in this period, Bancroft grades well in terms of sabermetric statistics. He finished fourth in the NL in Wins Above Replacement in 1920 (6.5) and third in 1921 (7.2) and 1922 (6.0).s Iowa Sports Hall of Fame.

Personal life

Bancroft married Edna Harriet Gisin while he played minor league baseball. They had no children and lived in Superior, Wisconsin for the remainder of their lives.
After retiring from baseball, Bancroft worked as a warehouse supervisor for Interprovincial Pipeline Company. He retired in 1956 and spent his later years hunting and fishing. Bancroft died on October 9, 1972 in a hospital in Superior at the age of 81.








