[[Ernie Banks]]

CATEGORIES: Chicago Cubs coaches, Chicago Cubs players, Kansas City Monarchs players, Gold Glove Award winners, National Baseball Hall of Fame inductees, National League Most Valuable Player Award winners, National League All-Stars, National League home run champions, National League RBI champions, Major League Baseball players with retired numbers, Major League Baseball shortstops, Major League Baseball first basemen, Negro league baseball players, African-American baseball players, Baseball players from Texas, Sportspeople from Los Angeles, California, People from Chicago, Illinois, Sportspeople from Dallas, Texas, 1931 births, Living people

Ernest "Ernie" Banks (born January 31, 1931), nicknamed "Mr. Cub" and "Mr. Sunshine", is a retired American professional baseball player. He was a Major League Baseball (MLB) shortstop and first baseman for 19 seasons,  1953 through 1971. He spent his entire MLB career with the Chicago Cubs. He was a National League (NL) All-Star for 11 seasons, playing in 14 All-Star Games.Midsummer Classics: Celebrating MLB's All-Star Game. "there were two games a year from 1959 to 1962"... "all players who were named to the AL or NL roster were credited with one appearance per season." Retrieved July 17, 2013.
Banks was born and raised in Dallas. He entered Negro league baseball in 1950, playing for the Kansas City Monarchs. He served in the military for two years and returned to the Monarchs before beginning his major league career in September 1953. He made his first MLB All-Star Game appearance in 1955. Banks had his best seasons in 1958 and 1959, when he received back-to-back National League Most Valuable Player awards. In 1958, he hit .313 and led the NL with 47 home runs (HR) and 129 runs batted in (RBI). In 1959,  he hit .304 with 45 HRs and led the NL with 143 RBIs.
During the 1961 season, Banks was transferred to left field followed by a final position change to first base. Cubs manager Leo Durocher became frustrated with Banks in the mid-1960s, saying that the slugger's performance was faltering, but he felt that he was unable to remove Banks from the lineup due to the star's popularity among Cubs fans. Banks was a player-coach from 1967 through 1971. In 1970, he hit his 500th career home run. In 1972, he joined the Cubs coaching staff after his retirement as a player.
Banks was active in the Chicago community during and after his tenure with the Cubs. He founded a charitable organization, became the first black Ford Motor Company dealer in the United States, and made an unsuccessful bid for a local political office. He was inducted into the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 1977. In 1999, he was named to the Major League Baseball All-Century Team. In 2013, he was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom for his contribution to sports. Banks lives in the Los Angeles area.

Early life

Banks was born in Dallas, Texas, to Eddie and Essie Banks on January 31, 1931. He had eleven siblings, ten of them younger. His father who had worked in construction and was a warehouse loader for a grocery chain, played baseball for black semi-pro teams in Texas. As a child, Banks was not very interested in baseball, preferring swimming, basketball and football. His father bought him a baseball glove for less than three dollars at the local five and dime store. He bribed Banks with nickels and dimes to play catch.
He graduated from Booker T. Washington High School in 1950.
In 1951, Banks was drafted into the US Army and served in Germany during the Korean War. He suffered a knee injury in basic training, but recovered after a few weeks of rest and therapy. 55. He served as a flag bearer in the 45th Anti-Aircraft Artillery Battalion at Fort Bliss and while there he played with the Harlem Globetrotters on a part-time basis. In 1953, he was discharged from the army and finished playing for the Monarchs that season with a .347 batting average. 57. Banks later said, "Playing for the Kansas City Monarchs was like my school, my learning, my world. It was my whole life." In fact, when he was sold to the Chicago Cubs, Banks was reluctant to leave his Monarchs teammates.

MLB career

Early career

Banks signed with the Cubs on September 14, 1953. He made his major league debut at Wrigley Field on September 17 at age 22, and played in ten games. He became one of a handful of former Negro league players who joined MLB teams without playing in the minor leagues. He also was the first Cubs black player. In regard to Banks' view of race in baseball, authors Larry Moffi and Jonathan Kronstadt wrote that Banks "just was not the crusading type. He was so grateful to be playing baseball for a living, he did not have time to change the world, and if that meant some people called him an Uncle Tom, well, so be it. Banks was not about changing anyone's mind about the color of his skin; he was about baseball, pure and simple."
He received a visit from Jackie Robinson during that first game he played that influenced his quiet presence in baseball. Robinson told Banks, "Ernie, I'm glad to see you're up here so now just listen and learn." "For years, I didn't talk and learned a lot about people." Over time when Banks felt like becoming more vocal, he discussed the issue with teammate Billy Williams, who advised him to remain quiet. Williams drew the analogy of fish that get caught once they open their mouths. "I kept my mouth shut but tried to make a difference. My whole life, I've just wanted to make people better", Banks said. (Chicago Tribune article, 2013)
In 1954, Banks' double play partner during his official rookie season was Gene Baker, the second Cubs black player. Banks and Baker roomed together on road trips and became the first all-black double-play combination in major league history. Banks hit 19 home runs and finished second in Rookie of the Year voting. Banks became a participant in a trend toward much lighter baseball bats after he accidentally picked up a teammate's bat and liked how easy it was to generate bat speed.
In  He finished the season with 28 home runs, 85 RBIs, and a .297 batting average. In 1957, he finished the season with 43 home runs, 102 RBIs, and a .285 batting average.
Banks won the NL MVP Award in  In 1960, Banks hit a league-leading 41 home runs, had 117 RBIs, and led the league in games played for the sixth time in seven years. He also received the league's annual Gold Glove award for shortstop that year.
Joe Reichler, a writer for the Associated Press, reported on the eve of the 1960 World Series, that the Milwaukee Braves were prepared to pay cash and trade pitchers Joey Jay, Carlton Willey, and Don Nottebart, outfielder Billy Bruton, shortstop Johnny Logan, and first baseman Frank Torre in exchange for Banks from the Cubs.Braves reported making big pitch for Ernie Banks

Move to first base

In 1961, Banks began having problems with his knee while playing shortstop when moving to his left or right side. It was the same knee he had injured while in the army. After playing in 717 consecutive games, he pulled himself from the Cubs lineup for at least four games, ending his pursuit of the NL consecutive games played streak (895 games) set by Stan Musial. In May, the Cubs announced that Jerry Kindall would replace Banks at shortstop and that Banks would move to left field. 96. Banks later said, "Only a duck out of water could have shared my loneliness in left field."Banks and Enright, p. 129. Banks credited center fielder Richie Ashburn with helping him learn how to play left field; in 23 games he committed only one error. In June, he was moved to first base, learning that position from former first baseman and Cubs coach Charley Grimm. 129-130.
The Cubs began playing under the College of Coaches in 1961, a system in which decisions were made by a group of 12 coaches rather than by one manager. 43. By the 1962 season, Banks hoped to return to shortstop, but the College of Coaches had determined that he would remain at first base indefinitely. 211. In May 1962, Banks was hit in the head by a fastball from former Cubs pitcher Moe Drabowsky and was taken off the field unconscious.
In May 1963, Banks set a single-game record for putouts by a first baseman (22).
Leo Durocher was hired to be the Cubs manager in 1966. The Cubs hoped that Durocher could inspire renewed interest in the Chicago fan base.
In Mr. Cub, a memoir published around the time that Banks retired, the slugger said that too much had been made of the racial implications in his relationship with Durocher and he summarized his thoughts on race relations:

The Cubs named Banks a player-coach for the 1967 season. Banks competed with John Boccabella for a starting position at first base. today) in any season. Banks had received a pay increase from $33,000 to $50,000 between his MVP seasons in 1958 and 1959, but Ebony reported that several MLB players were making $100,000 at the time.

Final seasons

Banks won the Lou Gehrig Memorial Award in 1968, an honor recognizing playing ability and personal character. The 37-year-old Banks hit 32 home runs, had 83 RBI's, and finished that season with a .246 batting average. 
In 1969, Banks came the closest to helping the Cubs win the National League pennant; the Cubs fell out of first place after holding an 
Banks finished his career with 512 home runs, and his 277 home runs as a shortstop were a career record at the time of his retirement. (Cal Ripken, Jr now holds the record for most home runs as a shortstop with 345. - SportingNews. Banks excelled as an infielder as well. He won a National League Gold Glove Award for shortstop in 1960. He led the NL in putouts five times and was the NL leader in fielding percentage as shortstop three times and once as first baseman.
Banks holds the major league record for most games played without a postseason appearance (2,528). Banks was known for his catchphrase, "It's a beautiful day for a ballgame... Let's play two!", expressing his wish to play a doubleheader every day out of his pure love for the game of baseball.

Personal life

Banks married his first wife Mollye Ector in 1953. He had proposed to her in a letter from Germany and they married when he returned to the US. 105. He filed for divorce a few years later. The couple briefly reconciled in early 1959. Shortly thereafter, Banks eloped with Eloyce Johnson. Within a year, the couple had twin sons. They gave birth to a daughter four years after that. 133-135.
Banks ran for alderman in Chicago in 1962. He lost the election and later said, "People knew me only as a baseball player. They didn't think I qualified as a government official and no matter what I did I couldn't change my image... What I learned, was that it was going to be hard for me to disengage myself from my baseball life and I would have to compensate for it after my playing days were over."
In 1966, Banks worked for Seaway National Bank in the offseason and enrolled in a banking correspondence course. He also bought into several business ventures during his playing career, including a gas station. Though he had been paid modestly in comparison to other baseball stars, Banks had taken the advice of Wrigley and invested much of his earnings. He later spent time working for an insurance company and for New World Van Lines. Banks began building assets that would be worth an estimated $4 million by the time he was 55 years old.
Banks and Bob Nelson became the first black owners of a U.S. Ford Motor Company dealership in 1967. Nelson had been the first non-white commissioned officer in the United States Army Air Forces during World War II; he operated an import car dealership before the venture with Banks. On a trip to Europe, Banks was able to visit the Pope, who presented him with a medal that became a proud possession.
Banks was divorced from Eloyce in 1981. She received several valuable items from his playing career as part of their divorce settlement, including his 500th home run ball. She sold the items not long after the divorce. In 1993, Marjorie was part of group that met with MLB executives about race relations in baseball after allegations of racial slurs surfaced against Cincinnati Reds owner Marge Schott.[ref]
