[[Baptist Faith and Message]]

CATEGORIES: Southern Baptist Convention, Baptist statements of faith, 1925 works, 1925 in religion

The Baptist Faith and Message (BF&M) is the statement of faith of the Southern Baptist Convention (SBC). It summarizes key Southern Baptist thought in the areas of the Bible and its authority, the nature of God as expressed by the Trinity, the spiritual condition of man, God's plan of grace and salvation, the purpose of the local church, ordinances, evangelism, Christian education, interaction with society, religious liberty, and the family.

History

Although the Southern Baptist Convention was organized in 1845, no formal confession of faith was adopted until internationally known Baptist theologian Edgar Y. "E.Y." Mullins led the denomination to adopt the Baptist Faith and Message in 1925. Described as "the New Hampshire Confession of Faith 1833, revised at certain points, and with some additional articles growing out of present needs," it was intended as "a reaffirmation of Christian fundamentals," which was deemed necessary because of "the prevalence of naturalism in the modern teaching and preaching of religion."The Baptist Faith and Message, accessed January 20, 2007. 
The BF&M was revised in 1963, amended in 1998, and again revised in 2000. In 1963, it was updated under the chairmanship of pastor-theologian Herschel H. Hobbs, and in 2000 under the chairmanship of pastor-author Adrian Rogers. The major revisions of 2000 incorporated sociological as well as theological changes.

Position Statements

The BF&M includes 18 topics which are position statements of the SBC.  Each article or position is followed by Scripture which they use to support their position.

Reception

There was both praise and criticism for the significant changes to the BF&M in the 2000 revision. 

Affirmations

Some of the changes that were particularly well received (affirmations) by some Baptist theologians include the following:

Criticisms

Baptists say their only creed is the Bible. Historically, Baptists have tenaciously defended the privilege of every believer, with the illumination of the Holy Spirit, to interpret Scripture according to his or her own conscience. This deeply engrained anti-creedal sentiment is said to be responsible for many negative reactions to the newly revised document. Dilday. An Analysis of the Baptist Faith and Message 2000. Online: 
Additionally, both the 1998 and 2000 revisions were particularly controversial in the following three respects:Smith, James A., Sr. "A confession of faith worthy of support." Editorial, Florida Baptist Witness, April 25, 2002. Accessed July 11, 2007. 

=Gender-based roles=

For the first time in Southern Baptist Convention history, provisions were added to define male-headship gender roles in both the ministry and in marriage. 

==In ministry==

The Baptist Faith and Message now explicitly defines the pastoral office as the exclusive domain of men — thus prohibiting female pastors.
While not stated in the 2000 BF&M, some churches also apply this interpretation to deacons, being a pastoral office of the church, and will not ordain women or allow them to serve as deacons.

==In marriage==

=Exegetical standard=

Second, the 2000 revision of the BF&M removed the assertion that the person of Jesus Christ was to be the exegetical standard by which the Bible was to be interpreted, over concerns that some groups were elevating the recorded words of Jesus in Scripture over other Scriptural passages. The traditional SBC view is that all Scripture is equally inspired by God.

=Homosexuality=

The 2000 BF&M is also noted as taking a stand on the issue of a homosexual lifestyle. This section was originally added as an amendment in 1998 to the 1963 BF&M.

Role in Baptist life

In keeping with Southern Baptist polity, which eschews creeds generally, and considers each affiliated congregation to be independent and autonomous in its faith and practice (and, therefore, not bound by the actions of the Southern Baptist Convention, or a state convention or local association), the BF&M is not binding on SBC-affiliated churches.  An individual church may choose to adopt the BF&M in whole without alteration, or may create its own statement (which may or may not incorporate parts of the BF&M).
Despite the fact that the BF&M is not a creed, faculty at SBC-owned seminaries and missionaries who apply to serve through the various SBC missionary agencies must affirm that their practices, doctrine, and preaching are consistent with the BF&M.






