[[Antichrist Superstar]]

CATEGORIES: 1996 albums, Albums certified double platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association, Albums certified gold by the Argentine Chamber of Phonograms and Videograms Producers, Albums certified gold by the Asociación Mexicana de Productores de Fonogramas y Videogramas, Albums certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association, Albums certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America, Albums produced by Sean Beavan, Albums produced by Trent Reznor, Concept albums, Interscope Records albums, Marilyn Manson (band) albums, Nothing Records albums, Albums produced by Marilyn Manson

Antichrist Superstar is the second full-length studio album by American rock band Marilyn Manson. It was released on October 8, 1996 in the US through Nothing and Interscope Records. The record's success in mainstream charts turned the band overnight into a household name and its frontman into a bonafide rock icon. This led to numerous protests from religious and civic groups such as the American Family Association due to the band's perceived anti-Christian stance as well as the transgressive and confrontational nature of their music, performance and appearance.
A rock opera concept album, it is the first installment in a trilogy which includes Mechanical Animals and Holy Wood (In the Shadow of the Valley of Death). After the release of Holy Wood, Manson said that the overarching story within the trilogy is presented in reverse chronological order; Antichrist Superstar, therefore, is the finale despite being the first to be chronologically released. It was recorded at Nothing Studios in New Orleans and produced by Trent Reznor of Nine Inch Nails.
The album has sold over 7 million copies worldwide, It spawned two commercial singles ("The Beautiful People" and "Tourniquet"), and an autobiography (The Long Hard Road Out of Hell). The band supported the album with the controversial Dead to the World Tour. The album debuted at No. 3 on the Billboard 200.allmusic.com/artist/marilyn-manson-p45021/charts-awards

Background

The album's title is a takeoff on Andrew Lloyd Webber's 1971 musical Jesus Christ Superstar. Similarly, the record is a rock opera which, in an issue of Kerrang! magazine edited by the band's frontman, is stated as a tribute to—and inspired by—the works of German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche.
After the release of Holy Wood (In the Shadow of the Valley of Death), Marilyn Manson divulged that his concept album trilogy is an autobiographical story told in a reverse timeline (chronologically reverse from their actual release dates). That means Holy Wood opens the storyline followed by Mechanical Animals and concludes with Antichrist Superstar. Furthermore, though Antichrist Superstar and Mechanical Animals made sense as individual concept albums on their own, there was a hidden overarching story running through the three releases.

Packaging

Antichrist Superstar has elaborate packaging, consisting of a black cardstock sleeve covering the plastic jewel case with graphics of Manson on both the front and back, the latter of which is flanked by the red Superstar Shock logo and the Roman numerals IX, VI, III and VII. The booklet contains pictures of the band, a visual worm-to-angel metamorphosis, medical diagrams, printed lyrics to each song, and liner notes including traditional thanks and credits as well as a curious entry found under the lyrics to the song "Irresponsible Hate Anthem", stating it was recorded live on February 14, 1997, despite the album being released well before that in October 1996.
Also, found on the front of the album cover is a circle surrounded by the words Heart, Mind, Complacent, and Malice. If one folds the booklet just right they can also find the hidden words Heart, Mind, Complacent, and Malice made up of folding the words Heaven/Comfort, Minister/Fiend, Complaisant/Magnificent and Master/Lice respectively. The booklet also makes reference to Revelation chapter twelve, verses one through five, in the Bible.
The album, despite containing a gap of silence a few minutes long, is cyclical, as both opening and closing seconds include the distorted phrase "When you are suffering, know that I have betrayed you." When the album is placed on loop, the pacing between the sentences matches that of the additional distorted recitation found in the preceding hidden track. The names of the two latter cycles seem to be a reference to two films by avant-garde filmmaker Kenneth Anger: Inauguration of the Pleasure Dome and Lucifer Rising.

Singles and music videos

"The Beautiful People" is the first single of Antichrist Superstar. The video was released on September 22, 1996 and directed by Canadian director and photographer Floria Sigismondi. According to Manson, the title "The Beautiful People" was inspired by a book that came out in the mid 60s by Marilyn Bender. This book contains information on the life of the Kennedy family, politics, fashion and culture. Moreover, the single was awarded gold record certification by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI),  reached number twenty-six in the US Billboard and number eighteen in the UK. The music channel VH1 named this single twenty-eight of their 40 Greatest Metal Songs.
"Tourniquet" is the second single from the album. It was released on September 8, 1997 and was also directed by Floria Sigismondi. In the video Manson is a humanoid moving through a wheel. The band uses a variety of bizarre costumes for each scene. This is one of three music videos where Manson appears without makeup, the other two videos are "Get Your Gunn" and "Lunchbox".
"Cryptorchid" is the third video from the album. The video was directed by E. Elias Merhige and displays images from his 1991 experimental film Begotten. Some scenes were replaced by Manson to avoid the original publications of the tape. 
"Antichrist Superstar" was released as the fourth video. The video was also directed by E. Elias Merhige and depicts Manson on a podium bearing a lightning bolt symbol. In one scene, Manson tears apart the Bible, dumping it on the public. Before its planned launch, the video was screened at the 1997 San Francisco Film Festival, however, Interscope Records was appalled by its content and prevented its release. In 2010, the unedited video of "Antichrist Superstar" was leaked on YouTube. 
"Man That You Fear" was the last video from Antichrist Superstar. The music video was directed by W.I.Z. and adapted from the Shirley Jackson short story The Lottery. The video also contains aesthetic and symbolic references to the 1973 film The Wicker Man and the 1989 Alejandro Jodorowsky film Santa Sangre.

Reception

Critical reception


The album received generally positive reviews by critics. Lorraine Ali of Rolling Stone commented "The rise of Marilyn Manson marks the end of the reign of punk realism in rock & roll ... The layered effect of the music recalls that of Ministry, but Marilyn Manson's execution is not as dense. Instead, Antichrist Superstar writhes with a cool, sinister and taunting feel ... before lurching out from the shadows with hammering percussion and static-loaded feedback ... For all of the album's attractions, the band could have compressed Antichrist Superstar into a more powerful blast of evil."

Commercial performance

The album debuted at number three on the Billboard 200. According to Soundscan, the record moved 132,000 units in its first week. The album has sold over 7 million copies worldwide.

Accolades

According to AcclaimedMusic.net Antichrist Superstar is the 14th best album of 1996,

Dead to the World Tour

Following the release of Antichrist Superstar, Marilyn Manson staged a worldwide stadium tour, titled the Dead to the World Tour. Beginning on September 5, 1996 and lasting until September 16, 1997, the tour included eight legs spanning Europe, Japan, Oceania, Hawaii, North America and South America with a total of 175 shows.
A concert film was recorded to depict the tour, titled Dead to the World, and released on February 10, 1998 in VHS format by Interscope Records. It features live concert footage of 11 songs culled from performances across the world. "Apple of Sodom", "My Monkey", "Rock 'n' Roll Nigger" and a selection of songs from Antichrist Superstar are on the release.

Track listing

Outtakes

Charts and certifications

Album

Certifications

Singles

Credits and personnel






