[[Business performance management]]

CATEGORIES: Performance management, Business intelligence, Information technology management

Business performance management is a set of management and analytic processes that enables the management of an organization's performance to achieve one or more pre-selected goals. Synonyms for "business performance management" include "corporate performance management (CPM)""Introducing the CPM Suites Magic Quadrant", Lee Geishecker and Frank Buytendijk, 2 October 2002, www.com, M-17-4718 and "enterprise performance management".
Business performance management is contained within approaches to business process management. & Rosemann, M. (2010), Handbook on Business Process Management: Strategic Alignment, Governance, People and Culture (International Handbooks on Information Systems). Berlin: Springer
Business performance management has three main activities:
Although presented here sequentially, typically all three activities will run concurrently, with interventions by managers affecting the choice of goals, the measurement information monitored, and the activities being undertaken by the organization.
Because business performance management activities in large organizations often involve the collation and reporting of large volumes of data, many software vendors, particularly those offering business intelligence tools, market products intended to assist in this process.  As a result of this marketing effort, business performance management is often incorrectly understood as an activity that necessarily relies on software systems to work, and many definitions of business performance management explicitly suggest software as being a definitive component of the approach.[ref]BPM Mag, What is BPM?
[/ref]
This interest in business performance management from the software community is sales-driven - "The biggest growth area in operational BI analysis is in the area of business performance management."
Since 1992, business performance management has been strongly influenced by the rise of the balanced scorecard framework.  It is common for managers to use the balanced scorecard framework to clarify the goals of an organization, to identify how to track them, and to structure the mechanisms by which interventions will be triggered.  These steps are the same as those that are found in BPM, and as a result balanced scorecard is often used as the basis for business performance management activity with organizations.
, owners have sought to drive strategy down and across their organizations, transform these strategies into actionable metrics and use analytics to expose the cause-and-effect relationships that, if understood, could give insight into decision-making.

History

Reference to non-business performance management occurs:
Prior to the start of the Information Age in the late 20th century, businesses sometimes took the trouble to laboriously collect data from non-automated sources. As they lacked computing resources to properly analyze the data, they often made commercial decisions primarily on the basis of intuition.
As businesses started automating more and more systems, more and more data became available.  However, collection often remained a challenge due to a lack of infrastructure for data exchange or due to incompatibilities between systems.  Reports on the data gathered sometimes took months to generate.  Such reports allowed informed long-term strategic decision-making.  However, short-term tactical decision-making often continued to rely on intuition.
In 1989 Howard Dresner, a research analyst at Gartner, popularized "business intelligence" (BI) as an umbrella term to describe a set of concepts and methods to improve business decision-making by using fact-based support systems. Performance management builds on a foundation of BI, but marries it to the planning-and-control cycle of the enterprise - with enterprise planning, consolidation and modeling capabilities.
Increasing standards, automation, and technologies have led to vast amounts of data becoming available.  Data warehouse technologies have allowed the building of repositories to store this data.  Improved ETL and enterprise application integration tools have increased the timely collecting of data.  OLAP reporting technologies have allowed faster generation of new reports which analyze the data. 

Definition and scope

Business performance management consists of a set of management and analytic processes, supported by technology, that enable businesses to define strategic goals and then measure and manage performance against those goals. Core business performance management processes include financial planning, operational planning, business modeling, consolidation and reporting, analysis, and monitoring of key performance indicators linked to strategy.
Business performance management involves consolidation of data from various sources, querying, and analysis of the data, and putting the results into practice.

Methodologies

Various methodologies for implementing business performance management exist. The discipline gives companies a top-down framework by which to align planning and execution, strategy and tactics, and business-unit and enterprise objectives. Reactions may include the Six Sigma strategy, balanced scorecard, activity-based costing (ABC), Total Quality Management, economic value-add, integrated strategic measurement and Theory of Constraints.
The balanced scorecard is the most widely adopted performance management methodology.
Methodologies on their own cannot deliver a full solution to an enterprise's CPM needs. Many pure-methodology implementations fail to deliver the anticipated benefits due to lack of integration with fundamental CPM processes.

Metrics and key performance indicators

Some of the areas from which bank management may gain knowledge by using business performance management include:
Though the above list describes what a bank might monitor, it could refer to a telephone company or to a similar service-sector company.
Items of generic importance include:
Business performance management integrates the company's processes with CRM or 

Application software types

People working in business intelligence have developed tools that ease the work of business performance management, especially when the business-intelligence task involves gathering and analyzing large amounts of unstructured data.
Tool categories commonly used for business performance management include:

Design and implementation

Questions asked when implementing a business performance management program include:





Further reading



| url         = 
| title       = Giving the Boss the Big Picture: A dashboard pulls up everything the CEO needs to run the show
| work        = BusinessWeek| publisher = Bloomberg L.P.
| accessdate  = 2010-02-22}}

