[[Chadron State College]]

CATEGORIES: Chadron State College, American Association of State Colleges and Universities, Buildings and structures in Dawes County, Nebraska, Chadron, Nebraska, Education in Dawes County, Nebraska, Educational institutions established in 1911, Nebraska State College System, North Central Association of Colleges and Schools, Universities and colleges in Nebraska

Chadron State College is a four-year public college in the Nebraska State College System in Chadron, Nebraska, United States. The college is located in the northern part of the Nebraska Panhandle, in the Pine Ridge area.
The school opened in June 1911, although a previous institution dated from the late 19th century. The college has an enrollment of about 3,000 students. Five of its 25 major buildings are listed in the National Register of Historic Places.

History

Chadron State College was founded in 1909 by the Nebraska Legislature to provide a higher education institution in northwest Nebraska.  The Board of Education of State Normal Schools selected Chadron as the location of its fourth institution in January, 1910. The school opened in June, 1911.
Chadron State College is the only four-year and graduate-degree granting college in western Nebraska, and is accredited by the Higher Learning Commission of the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools and subject-oriented accrediting agencies.

Presidents

2006 Spotted Tail wildfire

In late July 2006, the college was in danger of damage from a wildfire. The Spotted Tail fire was caused by a lightning strike July 26 about seven miles (11 km) south of Chadron. By July 28, the wildfire, fueled by dry grass and winds, reached the edge of Chadron and the college campus. Fire crews prevented the wildfire from reaching the campus. The pine ridge escarpment south of the college, including C-Hill, was blackened as a result of the fire.

Location

Chadron State College is located in northwest Nebraska in the Pine Ridge area, where opportunities for outdoor recreational activities such as fishing, hunting and cross-country skiing abound.
Outside Magazine selected Dawes County, where Chadron is located, as one of the nation's top 100 counties in which to live.
In early 2000, Sports Afield magazine rated Chadron among the "top 50 outdoor-sports towns" in the nation
and also chose Chadron as one of the four best mountain-biking towns in the United States.
Many trails have been constructed in recent years, to accommodate the growing interest.  Chadron is a community of about 6,000 people.

Facilities

The  campus has 25 major buildings, five of which are listed in the National Register of Historic Places.  Their replacement value is more than $60 million and they provide more than 1 million square feet (92,900 square meters) of floor space.  Classrooms and laboratory and research facilities are available in seven classroom buildings and the library.
The library contains the equivalent of more than 250,000 volumes.  Its automated catalogue is part of the Nebraska State College network.
During the past 15 years, the college has built several new facilities, including the Edwin and Avis Nelson Physical Activity Center, a wood-fired heating plant, the Student Center, and the Lindeken-Carillon Clock Tower.  Three buildings have been renovated since 1998, including Joseph Sparks Hall, which houses administrative and alumni offices, and Edna Work Hall, a dormitory.
Students can live in five residence halls or a family apartment complex.

Buildings

Dormitories
Other campus buildings, areas and offices

Academics

Chadron State College offers more than 50 majors leading to bachelor's degrees and professional studies options. Pre-professional programs in the health sciences are available, including the Rural Health Opportunities Program conducted jointly with the University of Nebraska Medical Center.
Training is offered in several academic and pre-professional programs. The academic areas are divided into the School of Arts and Sciences; the School of Business, Economics, Applied and Mathematical Sciences; and the School of Education, Human Performance, Counseling, Psychology and Social Work. The college offers four-year degrees as well as graduate programs leading to master's degrees. Pre-professional training is offered for careers such as medicine, law and engineering. The college recently closed its Honors program and Spanish program, leaving it without any foreign language offerings.
Through its distance and alternative learning programs, the college provides off-campus and online services throughout western Nebraska. About 50 courses are available each semester in Scottsbluff at Western Nebraska Community College or the Panhandle Education Center. Courses also are offered at Alliance, North Platte and Sidney.
Chadron State College offers courses and workshops each summer. The college has online classes available throughout the year. Chadron State College has some of the most affordable online degree programs in the United States. 
GetEducated.

Activities

There are more than 70 student clubs and organizations on campus. Athletes have earned 97 All-American and 38 Academic All-American/Scholar-Athlete honors since 1980. In addition, the college has an Army ROTC program and a rodeo team.
The college helps support the Post Playhouse at nearby Fort Robinson each summer. The Galaxy Series and Distinguished Speaker Series have brought noted entertainers and speakers to the college, including 2005 U.S. Poet Laureate Ted Kooser.
The APVMA Pre-Vet Symposium was held at Chadron State College in March 2004.  It was the first time a school without a College of Veterinarian Medicine had hosted the symposium.

Athletics

Chadron State College, whose athletic teams are known as the Eagles, competes in the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division II. Chadron State sponsors 11 varsity athletic teams: men's and women's basketball, men's and women's cross country, football, women's golf, softball, men's and women's track and field, women's volleyball, and wrestling.

Notable alumni

|url =  = A Better Way to Measure Twitter Influence
|date = 2011-03-24|accessdate =2011-03-25|author = Leonhardt, David |work = The New York Times}}[/ref] Attended Chadron in 1999.






