[[Imaginary friend]]

CATEGORIES: Children's games, Developmental psychology, Fictional characters, Interpersonal relationships, Imagination

Imaginary friends or imaginary companions are a psychological and social phenomenon where a friendship or other interpersonal relationship takes place in the imagination rather than external physical reality. Imaginary friends are fictional characters created for improvisational role-playing. They often have elaborate personalities and behaviors. Although they may seem very real to their creators, children usually understand that their imaginary friends are not real. (1999) Imaginary Companions and the Children Who Create Them. New York: Oxford University Press. The first studies focusing on imaginary friends are believed to have been conducted during the 1890s.
Imaginary friends are made often in childhood, sometimes in adolescence, and rarely in adulthood. They often function as tutelaries when played with by a child. Imaginary friends are more often seen as abnormal in adults, whereas quite common in children.
Few adults report having imaginary friends; however, as Eileen Kennedy-Moore points out, "Adult fiction writers often talk about their characters taking on a life of their own, which may be an analogous process to children's invisible friends."Kennedy-Moore, Eileen (2013) "Imaginary Friends: Are invisible friends a sign of social problems?" Psychology Today; Growing Friendships blog. 31 January 2013.  (accessed: 24 May 2013) In addition, Marjorie Taylor and colleagues have found that fiction writers are more likely than average to have had imaginary companions as children., Hodges, S. D., & Kohányi, A. (2002-2003). The Illusion of Independent Agency: Do adult fiction writers experience their characters as having minds of their own? Imagination, Cognition and Personality, 22(4), 361-380.

Research

It has been theorized that children with imaginary companions may develop language skills and retain knowledge faster than children without them, which may be because these children get more linguistic practice than their peers as a result of carrying out "conversations" with their imaginary friends.
Kutner (n.d.) reported that 65% of seven-year old children report they have had an imaginary companion at some point in their lives. He further reported:
 
 Imaginary companions are an integral part of many children's lives. They provide comfort in times of stress, companionship when they're lonely, someone to boss around when they feel powerless, and someone to blame for the broken lamp in the living room. Most important, an imaginary companion is a tool young children use to help them make sense of the adult world.d.). Insights for Parents: Midnight Monsters and Imaginary Companions. Source:  (accessed: Monday May 18, 2009)
Taylor, Carlson & Gerow (c2001: p. 190) hold that:
 
 despite some results suggesting that children with imaginary companions might be superior in intelligence, it is not true that all intelligent children create them.[ref]
Taylor, Marjorie; Carlson, Stephanie M.; Gerow, Lynn (c. 2001). "Imaginary Companions: Characteristics and Correlates" in Reifel, Robert Stuart (2001). Theory in Context and Out. Greenwood Publishing Group. Edition: illustrated. ISBN 1-56750-486-8. Source:  (accessed: Monday May 18, 2009)[/ref]

Some psychologists
Other professionals feel that imaginary friends are common among school-age children and are part of normal social-cognitive development. 1173-87.  Marjorie Taylor identified middle school children with imaginary friends and followed up six years later as they were completing high school. At follow-up, those who had imaginary friends in middle school displayed better coping strategies but a "low social preference for peers." She suggested that imaginary friends may directly benefit children's resiliency and positive adjustment., Hulette, A.C., Dishion, T. J., (2010). Longitudinal Outcomes of Young High-Risk Adolescents With Imaginary Companions. Developmental Psychology, 46(6), 1632-1636.

In movies

In other media





Further reading


