[[Julianna Margulies]]

CATEGORIES: 1966 births, Actresses from New York City, American film actresses, American people of Austrian-Jewish descent, American people of Hungarian-Jewish descent, American people of Romanian-Jewish descent, American stage actresses, American television actresses, Best Drama Actress Golden Globe (television) winners, Jewish American actresses, Living people, Outstanding Performance by a Lead Actress in a Drama Series Primetime Emmy Award winners, Outstanding Performance by a Supporting Actress in a Drama Series Primetime Emmy Award winners, Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Drama Series Screen Actors Guild Award winners, People from Manhattan, Sarah Lawrence College alumni, Waldorf school alumni

Julianna Luisa Margulies (pronounced ; born June 8, 1966) is an American actress and producer.
After several small television roles, Margulies achieved both critical and commercial success in her role as Nurse Carol Hathaway on NBC's long-running medical drama ER, for which she won an Emmy Award. After her departure from ER in 2000, Margulies appeared in the 2001 miniseries The Mists of Avalon and voiced the role of Neera in Disney's CGI film Dinosaur. In 2009, she took the lead role of Alicia Florrick in the American legal drama The Good Wife on CBS, for which she has won a Golden Globe, a Television Critics Association Award and the 2011 Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series.
Margulies has won seven Screen Actor Guild Awards; three for her performance as an actress in a leading role in a drama series, and four for being the member of the best ensemble cast in a drama series.

Early life

Julianna Luisa Margulies, the youngest of three daughters, was born in Spring Valley, New York. Her mother, Francesca (née Gardner), was a ballet dancer and eurythmy teacher, and her father, Paul Margulies, was a writer. The Margulies family lived in Israel for a period of time before Julianna's birth, then moved back to the Upper West Side of New York City.
Margulies attended grade school at Green Meadow Waldorf School As a child, she lived in New York, France and England. Margulies obtained a BA from Sarah Lawrence College, where she appeared in several campus plays.

Career

Margulies's first acting role was as a prostitute looking to go straight in Steven Seagal's film Out for Justice. In 1994, Margulies was cast in a role in the pilot episode of ER as an emergency care nurse who, despondent over her relationship with George Clooney's character, Doug Ross, attempted suicide. Her character was originally intended to die; however, the producers changed the plot and she went on to play the role of Nurse Carol Hathaway for six years.  She won an Emmy Award for Best Supporting Actress in a Television Drama in 1994, and was nominated for this award every year during her tenure. She was the only series regular cast member to win an Emmy Award.Julianna Margulies Emmy Award Winner
Following her departure from ER, Margulies worked on stage and screen.  On stage she appeared in a MCC Theater production of Kate Robin's Intrigue With Faye, a Lincoln Center production of Jon Robin Baitz's Ten Unknowns, and The Vagina Monologues. Her film work after ER included Evelyn with Pierce Brosnan and Ghost Ship with Gabriel Byrne and Ron Eldard. She starred as the protagonist and narrator (Morgaine) in the 2001 TNT miniseries The Mists of Avalon and participated in the 2002 documentary film Searching for Debra Winger. In 2004, she guest-starred in a two-episode arc in season 4 of the hit TV show Scrubs as Neena Broderick, an unscrupulous lawyer who sues Turk and has a brief sexual relationship with J.D. She starred in another miniseries on TNT, The Grid, in 2004. In April 2006, she appeared in four episodes of the sixth season of The Sopranos, portraying realtor Julianna Skiff. In August 2006, she appeared in Snakes on a Plane as flight attendant Claire Miller. In December 2006, she played Jennifer Bloom in the Sci Fi Channel miniseries The Lost Room.
In an August 2006 interview with tvguide. However, she decided against it at the last minute. Margulies was again invited to return during ER's final season, but the actress initially turned down the offer, saying that she felt like she left Carol Hathaway in the perfect place and could not imagine bettering her departure episode.
She had a minor role in 2007's The Darwin Awards. In 2008, Margulies starred in the legal series Canterbury's Law, a Fox mid-season replacement show.  She played the title character, Elizabeth Canterbury, a lawyer described as "a tough-minded defense attorney who isn't afraid to push boundaries in order to protect innocent clients."  She was also credited as a producer of the show. Retrieved 2009-08-20. The series was severely impacted by the 2007–2008 Writers Guild of America strike and cancelled after only six episodes.
In 2009, Margulies began starring in the CBS legal drama The Good Wife. She plays Alicia Florrick, an attorney returning to legal practice after her husband Peter Florrick (played by Chris Noth) resigned as Illinois State's Attorney amidst a sex and corruption scandal.
In 2009, she received a NYWIFT Muse Award celebrating the achievements of women who work in film and television. On January 17, 2010, Margulies won a Golden Globe award for her role in The Good Wife. On January 23, Margulies won her record third Screen Actors Guild award for a role. Also that year, Margulies was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress – Drama Series, her seventh Emmy nomination, losing to The Closer's Kyra Sedgwick. On January 30, 2011, she won another Screen Actors Guild award for her role, while The Good Wife was once again nominated for best ensemble in a drama show, but lost to Boardwalk Empire. On July 14, 2011, Margulies was nominated for a second Emmy for Best Actress in a Dramatic Series; and at the Emmy ceremony on September 18, 2011, she won the award.
In 2011, by the third season, she has been listed as a producer of The Good Wife.

Personal life

Margulies and attorney Keith Lieberthal were married on November 10, 2007, in Lenox, Massachusetts. Margulies's father-in-law is the academic Kenneth Lieberthal.

Filmography

Film

Television

Awards and nominations






