[[Rockefeller Republican]]

CATEGORIES: Political terminology of the United States, Political party factions in the United States, Political philosophy by politician, Republican Party (United States) terminology

Rockefeller Republican (or "liberal Republican") was a faction of the American Republican Party who held moderate to liberal views on domestic issues similar to those of Nelson Rockefeller, Governor of New York (1959-1973) and later Vice President of the United States (1974–77). The term largely fell out of use by the end of the twentieth century, and has been replaced by the terms "moderate Republican"  and, pejoratively, "RINO" (Republican In Name Only). Decline and Fall of the Liberal Republicans: 1952 to The Present (1989)   Rockefeller Republicans were  typically center-right, vehemently rejected conservatives like Barry Goldwater and his policies, and were often, but not necessarily, culturally liberal. They espoused government and private investments in environmentalism, healthcare, and higher education as necessities for the nation's growth, in the tradition of Nelson Rockefeller. In general, Rockefeller Republicans opposed socialism and the redistribution of wealth while supporting some regulation of business and federal social programs in matters pertaining to the public good. A critical element in the Republican liberalism was their support for labor unions. The building trades, especially, appreciated the heavy spending on infrastructure. In turn, the unions gave these politicians enough support to overcome the anti-union rural element in the Republican Party. As the unions weakened after the 1970, so too did the need for Republicans to cooperate with them. This transformation played into the hands of the more conservative Republicans, who did not want to collaborate with labor unions in the first place, and now no longer needed to do so carry statewide elections.
In foreign policy, most were "hawks" against communism and strong supporters of American business abroad. Richard Nixon, a moderate establishment Republican within the Party's contemporary ideological framework, but who ran against Rockefeller from the Right in 1968 and was widely identified with the cultural Right of the time, nevertheless was influenced by this tradition within his party (much stronger then than since 1994) as he founded the Environmental Protection Agency, supported expanded welfare programs, imposed wage and price controls  in 1971 announced he was a Keynesian. 295 Rockefeller Republicans were most  common in the New England, West Coast, and the Middle Atlantic States, where there historically were larger liberal constituencies.Reiter (1981)

History

Thomas E. Dewey, the Governor of New York from 1942 to 1954 and the Republican presidential nominee in 1944 and 1948, was the leader of the moderate wing of the Republican Party in the 1940s and early 1950s, battling conservative Republicans from the Midwest led by Senator Robert Taft of Ohio, known as "Mr. Republican." With the help of Dewey, General Dwight D. Eisenhower defeated Taft for the 1952 presidential nomination and became the leader of the moderates. Eisenhower coined the phrase "Modern Republicanism" to describe his moderate vision of Republicanism.
After Eisenhower, Nelson Rockefeller, the Governor of New York emerged as the leader of the moderate wing of the Republican party, running for President in 1960, 1964 and 1968. Rockefeller Republicans suffered a crushing defeat in 1964 when conservatives captured control of the Republican party and nominated Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona for President.
Other prominent figures in the GOP's Rockefeller wing included Pennsylvania Governor Raymond P. Shafer, Illinois Senator Charles H. Percy, Oregon Senator Mark Hatfield, Arkansas Governor Winthrop Rockefeller, Nelson's younger brother (who was somewhat of an aberration in a conservative, heavily Democratic Southern state), and, according to some, President Richard Nixon. (1993). The Fifties. The Random House Publishing Group. New York. ISBN 0-449-90933-6. (pp.312-315)"If Nixon Were Alive Today,He Would Be Far Too Liberal to Get Even the Democratic Nomination"
After Vice President Rockefeller left the national stage in 1976, this faction of the party was more often called "moderate Republicans" or Nixonians, in contrast to the conservatives who rallied to Ronald Reagan.
Historically, Rockefeller Republicans were moderate or liberal on domestic and social policies. They typically favored New Deal programs and a social safety net; they sought to run these programs more efficiently than the Democrats. They were strong supporters of big business and Wall Street; many Republicans of the Eisenhower-Rockefeller vein were major figures in business, such as auto executive George W. Romney and investment banker C. Douglas Dillon. In fiscal policy they favored balanced budgets, and were not averse to raising taxes in order to achieve them; Connecticut Senator Prescott Bush once called for Congress to "raise the required revenues by approving whatever levels of taxation may be necessary".
In state politics, they were strong supporters of state colleges and universities, low tuition, and large research budgets. They favored infrastructure improvements, such as highway projects. In foreign policy, they tended to be Hamiltonian, espousing internationalist and realist policies, supporting the United Nations and promoting American business interests abroad.
Barry Goldwater crusaded against the Rockefeller Republicans, beating Rockefeller narrowly in the California primary of 1964. That set the stage for a conservative resurgence, based in the South and West in opposition to the Northeast Rockefeller wing. However, in 1968 the moderate contingent captured control of the GOP again and nominated Richard Nixon. He was easily reelected in 1972 and after he resigned, moderate-to-conservative Republican Gerald Ford replaced him as President. Four years after nearly toppling the incumbent Ford in the 1976 presidential primaries, Ronald Reagan won the party's presidential nomination at the 1980 convention, and served two terms in the White House. By 1988, the Republicans had chosen Prescott Bush's son, George H. W. Bush as its presidential candidate on a conservative platform. Bush's national convention pledge to stave off new taxation were he elected president ("Read my lips: no new taxes!") marked the candidate's full conversion to the conservative movement and, perhaps, the political death knell for Rockefeller Republicanism as a prevailing force within Party politics.
Yet the Rockefeller Republican label is sometimes applied to such modern-day politicians as Senators Olympia Snowe, Susan Collins of Maine and Governor Lincoln Chafee of Rhode Island."How Maine's GOP Senators Are Key to Obama's Agenda",Cox, Stephen. A Liberal in Conservative Clothing. Liberty. March 2004Christian Science Monitor: "And in the Senate, the epitome of the Rockefeller Republican, Senator Chafee" The departure of U.S. Senator Jim Jeffords from the Republican party in 2001 dramatized the still-existing tension between the liberals of the party and what is today its generally more influential socially conservative wing. The term could also be applied to former U.S. Representative Connie Morella of Maryland, who lost re-election in 2002 to Democrat Chris Van Hollen. In the 2006 elections after many moderate Republicans were defeated, including then-Senator Lincoln Chafee, Nancy Johnson and Rob Simmons of Connecticut, Charlie Bass of New Hampshire and Jim Leach of Iowa, the prominence of Rockefeller Republicans dwindled even further. The 2009 departure of Pennsylvania Senator Arlen Specter from the Republican Party further reduced their numbers. However, in 2010 Bass won his old seat and Chafee won the Rhode Island gubernatorial election, albeit as an Independent.
Ethnic changes in the Northeast may have led to the demise of the Rockefeller Republican. Many Republican leaders associated with this title were WASPs like Charles Mathias of Maryland. New York Republican U.S. Senator Jacob Javits, was Jewish. As time went on, the local Republican parties tended to nominate Catholic candidates who appealed to middle class, social values-laden concerns, such as George Pataki, Al D'Amato, Rick Lazio, Tom Ridge, Bobby Jindal, Paul Ryan, and others, who in many cases represented the Party's diversity more on the basis of religion and were often otherwise like their Protestant conservative counterparts.

Recent use of the term

The term "Rockefeller Republican" is now somewhat archaic (Nelson Rockefeller having died in 1979), and Republicans with these views are now generally referred to as simply "moderate Republicans" or, pejoratively, Republican In Name Only. The retired four-star generals Colin Powell and David Petraeus have both described themselves as "Rockefeller Republicans."Steve Coll, The General's Dilemma: David Petraeus, the pressures of politics, and the road out of Iraq The New Yorker 8 September 2008Forbes 2008/10/19Fort Worth Star-Telegram Christine Todd Whitman, former Governor of New Jersey, referred to herself as a Rockefeller Republican, in a speech on Governor Rockefeller at Dartmouth College in 2008.org Lloyd Blankfein, Chairman and CEO of Goldman Sachs, who is a registered Democrat, referred to himself as a "Rockefeller Republican" in a CNBC interview in April 2012.CNBC Press Release





Further reading




