[[Room on Fire]]

CATEGORIES: 2003 albums, RCA Records albums, Rough Trade Records albums, The Strokes albums, English-language albums, Albums certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of Japan

Room on Fire is the second studio album by American indie rock band The Strokes. Released in October 2003, the album follows 2001's Is This It and includes three singles: "12:51", "Reptilia", and "The End Has No End." Grammy-winning producer Nigel Godrich was initially in charge of production, but The Strokes felt he made the songs seem "soulless".[ref]Matthew McKinnon
(July 24, 2006). Everything In Its Right Place cbc.ca. Retrieved 10 December 2011.[/ref] The band went back to work with Is This It producer Gordon Raphael. The album features a slightly smoother sound than its predecessor. The bass guitar is less present except for several moments when it becomes the focal point of the song. The album title Room on Fire was drawn from a line in "Reptilia": "The room is on fire as she's fixing her hair." The record received positive reviews upon release. It reached number two on the UK Albums Chart and debuted at number four in the U.S. on the Billboard 200, where it went on to sell 597,000 units by October 2006 and was certified Gold.

Recording

Immediately after touring for their debut album Is This It, the band returned to the studio to record songs, initially with renowned producer Nigel Godrich. Those sessions were ultimately scrapped and the band returned to their original producer, Gordon Raphael. The Strokes  had exactly only three months of studio time to record the album. Guitarist Nick Valensi stated that "the album would've ended up a lot better if we'd had another couple of weeks."Jonathan Garrett (7 March 2011). Is This It: Ten Years of the Strokes Pitchfork Media. Retrieved 10 December 2011.

Reception

Commercial performance

The album peaked at number four on the Billboard 200 in the U.S., and was later certified Gold by the RIAA in December 2003. Retrieved 10 December 2011. Note: reader must define search parameters as "Strokes".

Critical response

While reviews for the album were generally positive, gaining a 77 out of 100 on review aggregating site Metacritic based on 31 reviews,"Critic Reviews for Room On Fire". Metacritic. Retrieved 10 December 2011. the general consensus on the album was that it was too similar to Is This It. Rob Mitchum of Pitchfork Media gave the album an 8 out of 10, but stated that the band "have all but given birth to an identical twin." A positive review from Rolling Stone said that "the Strokes have resisted the temptation to hit the brakes, grow up and screw around with a sound that doesn't need fixing — yet." The review also stated that "if you want comfort and clarity, you're definitely in the wrong room. This record was built for thrills and speed." Dan Tallis of BBC Music gave it a favorable review and said, "Bands should think themselves lucky to achieve such heights just once in their careers. However, they've done all they could have done. They've made Is This It part two. It's more of the same plus extras. And I'm more than happy to settle for that."
Not all reviews were positive, however.  Raoul Hernandez of The Austin Chronicle gave the album a score of two stars out of five and stated that "Even the half-hearted retreads... cashing in on the notoriously unwashed NYC quintet's debut can't muster a wink."

Track listing

All songs written by Julian Casablancas, except where noted. 

Singles

Personnel

Chart positions




