[[Opposed-piston engine]]

CATEGORIES: Locomotive parts, Two-stroke diesel engines, Opposed piston engines, Piston ported engines, Piston engine configurations

An opposed-piston engine is a reciprocating internal combustion engine in which each cylinder has a piston at both ends, and no cylinder head.

The first opposed piston engine

The first opposed piston engine commercially produced was by the French company Gobron-Brillié in 1900.
The first diesel engine with opposed pistons, was a prototype built at the Kolomna plant in Russia. The designer Raymond A. Koreyvo on November 6, 1907 patented the engine in France, then displayed the engine at international exhibitions. After these demonstrations similar engines were produced by other companies. Koreyvo filed a claim against these companies which was rejected by the Kolomna plant as the managing director did not want any quarrels with influential foreigners. In the USSR, the opposed piston engine was used only after meetings with German aircraft makers, Junkers, relating to the Jumo 205 opposed piston diesel engine. In the USSR locomotive diesel engines adapted American Fairbanks-Morse designs. These engines were also used in military boats, set out under the world war two Lend-Lease contracts.

Configurations

Opposed piston engines should not be confused with flat engines, which are horizontally opposed with one piston per cylinder, and cylinder heads.
Some variations of the opposed piston or OP designs use a single crankshaft. The Gobron-Brillié, and Doxford ship engines used a crankshaft at one end of the cylinders and a crosshead for the opposing piston. The crank throws for each end were often unequal giving a shorter motion for the end having the higher reciprocating weight in order to help balance.
The Commer TS3 3-cylinder truck engines (originally designed by Tilling-Stevens) have a single crank beneath the centre of the cylinders with both pistons connected by levers. This type of engine configuration dates at least back as far as 1914, as a 2-stroke petrol engine referred to as the "Simpson's balanced two-stroke" was described in the Motor Cycle magazine of this date."A Horizontally Opposed Two-stroke Engine", The Motor Cycle, August 6th, 1914, p204 This design used crankcase compression, and used one piston to uncover the transfer port, and another to open the exhaust port allowing the fresh charge to flow from one end of the cylinder to the other, thereby avoiding the need for deflector pistons used in 2-strokes at that time. The levers operating the pistons allowed for a large piston travel with smaller crank throw.
A more common layout uses two crankshafts, with the crankshafts geared together, or even three geared crankshafts in the Napier Deltic diesel engines. The Deltic uses three crankshafts serving three banks of double-ended cylinders arranged in an equilateral triangle, with the crankshafts at the corners. These were used in railway locomotives and to power fast patrol boats. Both types are now largely obsolete, although the Royal Navy still maintains some Deltic-powered Hunt-class mine countermeasures vessels.
The first opposed-piston diesel engines were developed in the beginning of the 20th century. In 1907, Russian Raymond Koreyvo, the engineer of Kolomna Works, built an opposed-piston two-stroke diesel with two crankshafts connected by gearing. Although Koreyvo patented his engine in France in November 1907, the management would not go on to manufacture opposed-piston engines.
The first Junkers engines had one crankshaft, the upper pistons having long connecting rods outside the cylinder. These engines were the forerunner of the Doxford marine engine, and this layout was also used for two- and three-cylinder car engines from around 1900-1922 by Gobron-Brillié.
This configuration has also been used for marine auxiliary generators and for larger marine propulsion engines, notably Fairbanks-Morse 38 8-1/8 diesel engines used in both conventional and U.S. nuclear submarines. Fairbanks-Morse also used it in diesel locomotives starting in 1944. With the addition of a supercharger or turbocharger, opposed-piston designs can make efficient two-stroke cycle Diesel engines. Attempts were made to build non-diesel 4-stroke engines, but as there is no cylinder head, the bad location of the valves and the spark plug makes them inefficient.
Koreyvo, Jumo and Napier Deltic engines used one piston per cylinder to expose an intake port, and the other to expose an exhaust port. Each piston is referred to as either an intake piston or an exhaust piston depending on its function in this regard. This layout gives superior scavenging, as gas flow through the cylinder is axial rather than radial, and simplifies design of the piston crowns. In the Jumo 205 and its variants, the upper crankshaft serves the exhaust pistons, and the lower crankshaft the intake pistons. In designs using multiple cylinder banks, such as the Junkers Jumo 223 and the Deltic, each big end bearing serves one inlet and one exhaust piston, using a forked connecting rod for the exhaust piston.
The Doxford Engine Works of the UK designed and built very large opposed-piston engines for marine use. These engines differ in design from Jumo and Fairbanks-Morse engines by having external connecting rods linking the upper and lower pistons, thus requiring a single crankshaft. The first engine of this type was developed by Karl Otto Keller in 1912. Doxford obtained a sole UK license from Oechelhauser and Junkers to build this design of engine. After World War I, these engines were produced in a number of models, such as the P and J series, with outputs as high as 

Assembly and function

