[[Xcode]]

CATEGORIES: Integrated development environments, OS X text editors, OS X-only software made by Apple Inc., IOS (Apple), History of software, OS X programming tools, 2003 software

Xcode is an integrated development environment (IDE) containing a suite of software development tools developed by Apple for developing software for OS X and iOS. First released in 2003, the latest stable release is version 5.1 and is available via the Mac App Store free of charge for Mac OS X Lion and OS X Mountain Lion users.

Major features

Previously Xcode supported distributing a product build process over multiple systems. One technology involved was called Shared Workgroup Build, which used the Bonjour protocol to automatically discover systems providing compiler services, and a modified version of the free software product distcc to facilitate the distribution of workloads. Earlier versions of Xcode provided a system called Dedicated Network Builds. These features are absent in the supported versions of Xcode.
Thanks to the Mach-O executable format, which allows for "fat binaries," containing code for multiple architectures, Xcode can build universal binaries, which allow software to run on both PowerPC and Intel-based (x86) platforms and that can include both 32-bit and 64-bit code for both architectures. Using the iOS SDK, Xcode can also be used to compile and debug applications for iOS that run on the ARM processor.
Xcode also includes Apple's WebObjects tools and frameworks for building Java web applications and web services (previously sold as a separate product). As of Xcode 3.0, Apple dropped should be used instead. Xcode 3 still includes the WebObjects frameworks.
Xcode includes the GUI tool Instruments, which runs atop DTrace, a dynamic tracing framework created by Sun Microsystems and released as part of OpenSolaris.

Composition

The main application of the suite is the integrated development environment (IDE), also named Xcode. The Xcode suite also includes most of Apple's developer documentation, and built-in Interface Builder, an application used to construct graphical user interfaces.
Up to Xcode 4.1, the Xcode suite included a modified version of the GNU Compiler Collection.  In Xcode 3.1 up to Xcode 4.6.3, it included the llvm-gcc compiler, with front ends from the GNU Compiler Collection and a code generator based on LLVM, and, starting with Xcode 5.0, it was the only compiler provided.
Up to Xcode 4.6.3, the Xcode suite used the GNU Debugger (GDB) as the back-end for the IDE's debugger. Starting with Xcode 4.3, the LLDB debugger was also provided and, starting with Xcode 4.5, replaced GDB as the default back-end for the IDE's debugger; as of Xcode 5.0, GDB was no longer supplied. 
Xcode supports C, C++, Objective-C, Objective-C++, Java, AppleScript, Python, Ruby and Rez source code with a variety of programming models, including but not limited to Cocoa, Carbon, and Java. Third parties have added support for GNU Pascal, and D.

Version history

1.x series

Xcode 1.0 was released in fall 2003. Xcode 1.0 was based on Project Builder, but had an updated UI, ZeroLink, Fix & Continue, distributed build support, and Code Sense indexing.
The next significant release, Xcode 1.5, had better code completion and an improved debugger.

2.x series

Xcode 2.0 was released with Mac OS X v10.4 "Tiger". It included the Quartz Composer visual programming language, better Code Sense indexing for Java, and Ant support. It also included the Apple Reference Library tool, which lets you search and read online documentation from Apple's website and local documentation installed on your machine.
Xcode 2.1 could create universal binaries. It supported Shared Precompiled Headers, unit testing targets, conditional breakpoints, and watchpoints. It also had better dependency analysis.
The final version of Xcode for Mac OS X v10.4 was 2.5.

3.x series

Xcode 3.0 was released with Mac OS X v10.5 "Leopard". Notable changes since 2.1 includeApple - Mac OS X Leopard - Features - 300+ New Features the DTrace debugging tool (now called Instruments), refactoring support, context-sensitive documentation, and Objective-C 2.0 with garbage collection.  It also supports Project Snapshots, which provide a basic form of version control; Message Bubbles, which show build errors debug values alongside code; and building four-architecture fat binaries (32 and 64-bit Intel and PowerPC).
Xcode 3.1 was an update release of the developer tools for Mac OS X, and was the same version included with the iPhone SDK. It could target non-Mac OS X platforms, including iPhone OS 2.0. It included the GCC 4.2 and LLVM GCC 4.2 compilers. Another new feature since Xcode 3.0 is that Xcode's SCM support now supports Subversion 1.5.
Xcode 3.2 was released with Mac OS X v10.6 "Snow Leopard" and will not install on any earlier version of Mac OS X.  It supports static program analysis, among other features. It also drops official support for targeting versions earlier than iPhone OS 3.0. But it is still possible to target older versions, and the simulator supports iPhone OS 2.0 through 3.1. Also, Java support is "exiled" in 3.2 to the organizer.
Xcode 3.2.6 is the last version that can be downloaded for free for users of Mac OS X v10.6. Downloading it requires a free registration at Apple's developer site.

4.x series

In June 2010 at the World Wide Developers Conference, Apple announced version 4 of Xcode during the Developer Tools State of the Union address. Version 4 of the developer tools consolidates the Xcode editing tools and Interface Builder into a single application, among other enhancements.
Xcode 4.1 was made available for free on July 20, 2011 (the day of Mac OS X Lion's release) to all users of Mac OS X Lion on the Mac App Store. On August 29, 2011, Xcode 4.1 was made available for Mac OS X Snow Leopard for members of the paid Mac or iOS developer programs. Xcode 4.1 was the last version to include GCC instead of only LLVM GCC.
On October 12, 2011, Xcode 4.2 was released concurrently with the release of iOS 5.0, and it included many more and improved features, such as storyboarding and automatic reference counting (ARC). Xcode 4.2 is the last version to support Mac OS X 10.6 "Snow Leopard", but is only available to registered developers with paid accounts; without a paid account, 3.2.6 is the latest download that appears for Snow Leopard.2
Xcode 4.3, released on February 16, 2012, is distributed as a single application bundle, Xcode. Xcode 4.3 reorganizes the Xcode menu to include development tools.
Xcode 4.4 was released on July 25, 2012.
It runs on both Mac OS X Lion (10.7) and OS X Mountain Lion (10.8) and is the first version of Xcode to contain the OS X 10.8 "Mountain Lion" SDK. Xcode 4.4 includes support for automatic synthesizing of declared properties, new Objective-C features such as literal syntax and subscripting, improved localization, and more. On August 7, 2012, Xcode 4.4.1 was released with a few bug fixes.
Xcode 4.5 was released on September 19, 2012, on the same day that iOS 6 was released. It added support for iOS 6 and the 4-inch Retina display found on iPhone 5 and iPod touch 5th generation. It also brought some new Objective-C features to iOS, simplified localization, and added auto-layout support for iOS. On October 3, 2012, Xcode 4.5.1 was released with bug fixes and stability improvements. Less than a month later,  Xcode 4.5.2 was released, with support for iPad mini and iPad with Retina display, and bug fixes and stability improvements.
Xcode 4.6 was released on January 28, 2013, on the same day that iOS 6.1 was released.

5.x series

In June 2013 at the World Wide Developers Conference, Apple announced version 5 of Xcode.

Versions compare table

Toolchain Versions






