[[Lichfield Gospels]]

CATEGORIES: Gospel Books, Hiberno-Saxon manuscripts, Lichfield, 8th-century biblical manuscripts, 8th-century illuminated manuscripts, Illuminated manuscripts of Welsh origin

The Lichfield Gospels (also known as the Chad Gospels, the Book of Chad, the Gospels of St. Chad, St. Teilo Gospels, the Llandeilo Gospels, and numerous variations on these) is an eighth century Insular Gospel Book housed in Lichfield Cathedral.  There are 236 surviving folios, eight of which are illuminated.  Another four contain framed text.  The pages themselves measure 30.8 cm by 23.5 cm.  The manuscript is also important because it includes, as marginalia, some of the earliest known examples of written Old Welsh, dating to the early part of the 8th century.Medieval Vision: The Visual Culture of Wales. University of Wales Press, Cardiff, 2003, pg. 25.
The manuscript was rebound in 1962 by Roger Powell, at which time it was discovered that in the rebinding of 1862 the manuscript had been cut into single leaves and that the pages had been trimmed during the rebinding of 1707.
In 2010, Dr. Bill Endres led a team from the University of Kentucky, assisted by Dr. Brent Seales, director of Kentucky's Center for Visualization and Virtual Environments, and imaged the St Chad Gospels and Lichfield Cathedral's Wycliffe New Testament. 

Provenance

Paleographic and stylistic similarities link it to Northumbria and Iona: the painting techniques resemble those of the Lindisfarne Gospels and the Book of Kells. The manuscript was most probably written in Wales Llandeilo Fawr,Encyclopaedia Wales; University of Wales Press; main editor: John Davies; page 577 South Wales, particularly due to the Welsh marginalia. 26; and Dafydd Jenkins and Morfydd E. Owen, "The Welsh Marginalia in the Lichfield Gospels, Part I," Cambridge Medieval Studies, 5 (Summer 1983), 37-66.
The actual creation of the book may be placed between 698 and 800 based upon the style. Interlaced bird patterns on the cross-carpet page on page 216 of the book strikingly resemble the ornament on a cross-shaft of Aberlady, Lothian, a Northumbrian site of the mid 8th century: the author/artist of the book and the sculptor of the cross-shaft ornament may have had similar source for their designs. Although it is not known how the book came to be in Lichfield, it was certainly there by the end of the 10th century. The opening folio contains a faded signature reading Wynsige presul which probably refers to the Wynsige who was Bishop of Lichfield from circa 963 to 972-5.  Folio four contains a reference to Leofric who was bishop from 1020 to 1026.
Wherever it originated and however it came to Lichfield, it has been there since the tenth century. In 1646, during the English Civil War, Lichfield Cathedral was sacked and its library looted. The books and manuscripts were given to Frances, Duchess of Somerset, who returned them in 1672 or 1673. This is probably when the second volume of the Gospels was lost.  Precentor William Higgins is credited with saving the remaining volume.E. (1907):Ecclesiastical History of Shropshire during the Civil War, Commonwealth and Restoration, p.259 in Transactions of the Shropshire Archaeological and Natural History Society, 3rd series, vol. VII, 1907, p.249-310, accessed 17 November 2013 at Internet Archive.
They were put on public display in 1982.  The bishops of Lichfield still swear allegiance to the crown on the Lichfield Gospels.
Other Insular illuminated manuscripts of possible Welsh origin include the Ricemarch Psalter and the Hereford Gospels.

Text and Script

The manuscript contains the Gospels of Matthew and Mark, and the early part of the Gospel of Luke.  A second volume disappeared about the time of the English Civil War.  The text is written in a single column and is based on the Vulgate.  The manuscript has almost 2000 variances from the Vulgate, almost a third of which it shares with the Hereford Gospels.  There are fewer variations in the text which agree with the Macregol Gospels and the Book of Armagh, 370 agree with the Book of Kells and 62 with the Lindisfarne Gospels.
The script is predominantly Insular majuscule but has some uncial characteristics and is thus called semi-uncial.  There was a single scribe. The script forms strong links between the Lichfield manuscript and Northumbrian, Iona, and Irish manuscripts.

Decoration

The manuscript has two evangelist portraits (St. Mark and St. Luke), a carpet page, initial pages for Mathew ("Lib"), Mark (initium), and Luke (Quoniam), a Chi Rho monogram page, and a page with the Four evangelist symbols.  The Genealogy of Christ is framed (3 pages) and the last page is framed.

Marginalia

There are eight marginal inscriptions written in Latin and Old Welsh, which are some of the earliest written Welsh extant. The first records in Latin the gift of the manuscript "to God on the altar of St. Teilo" by a man named Gelhi, who had bought the manuscript for the price of his best horse from Cingal. The 'altar of St. Teilo" has in the past been associated with the monastery at Llandaff but, as it has been determined that the third, fourth and sixth marginal inscriptions refer to lands within fifteen miles of Llandeilo Fawr, it is now thought that the book originated there. The second such inscription contains a unique example of early Welsh prose recording the details of the resolution of a land dispute. These two inscriptions have been dated to the mid ninth century. The marginalia were edited by J. Gwenogvryn Evans with John Rhys in their 1893 edition of the Book of Llandaff.
Gifford Thomas-Edwards and Helen McKee have also identified 9 dry-point glosses - glosses that are scratched into parchment without ink and so are only visible from an angle and hard to decipher. The first and final groups of three are decipherable as Anglo-Saxon personal names and it is likely that the others are as well. In order, they appear in the glosses as follows;
It is possible there are other glosses on this text, and on other Insular gospel books, that have not yet been identified. The names themselves are significant if they can be dated, as the provenance of the manuscript is disputed between Anglo-Saxon England and Wales. An eighth-century date would support an Anglo-Saxon origin but if they were added after the end of the 10th century (at Lichfield) then the Llandeilo origin is confirmed. However, the form of dry-point writing means it is difficult to determine if the same hand wrote the text and added the glosses but Charles-Edwards and McKee do not believe so. The letters contain elements of Insular minuscule, which appears to be a late-ninth century invention, in response to Carolingian minuscule, and continued in use until at least the eleventh century. It is therefore more likely these were additions after the Gospels had been moved to Lichfield."Lost Voices from Anglo-Saxon Lichfield", G. Charles-Edwards and H. McKee, Anglo-Saxon England 37 (2008)








