[[Susan Hampshire]]

CATEGORIES: 1937 births, Living people, Outstanding Performance by a Lead Actress in a Drama Series Primetime Emmy Award winners, Outstanding Performance by a Lead Actress in a Miniseries or Movie Primetime Emmy Award winners, English film actresses, English stage actresses, English television actresses, English non-fiction writers, Officers of the Order of the British Empire, Actresses from London, People from Kensington, 20th-century English actresses, Writers from London

Susan Hampshire, Lady Kulukundis, OBE (born 12 May 1937) is a three-time Emmy award winning English actress, best known for her many television and film roles. Accessed 2006-09-03.

Biography

Early life

Susan Hampshire was born in Kensington, London,
Her childhood ambition was to be a nurse, but she did not have the O level in Latin it required, so she decided to become an actress.

Career

Hampshire's first film appearance was in The Woman in the Hall. She decided to become an actress as a child and worked in a theatre before moving on to film and television work. During this period she took the title role in a dramatised version of Little Black Sambo recorded by HMV Junior Record Club (words by David Croft, music by Cyril Ornadel).45cat. Soon afterwards, she was taken up by Walt Disney, and starred in The Three Lives of Thomasina (opposite Patrick McGoohan) and The Fighting Prince of Donegal. She would later appear opposite McGoohan again, in two episodes of Danger Man. She co-starred with Cliff Richard in Sidney J. Furie's 1964 musical Wonderful Life.
In 1966, she was introduced to American TV viewers in the pilot episode of The Time Tunnel as a young passenger on the Titanic who befriends Dr. Tony Newman. She later portrayed conservationist Joy Adamson in Living Free, the sequel to Born Free. In 1972, she played three different characters in Malpertuis, directed by Harry Kumel. She is well known for her work on television. She appeared in several popular television serials, including The Andromeda Breakthrough (1962) in which she replaced Julie Christie, who was not available for the show but had played the part of Andromeda in the first season A for Andromeda (1961). Her most notable television role in the 1960s came in the BBC's 1967 adaptation of The Forsyte Saga, in which she played Fleur.
1973 saw Hampshire again on U.S. television with Kirk Douglas in a musical version of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. More recent TV roles include Molly Macdonald in Monarch of the Glen (2000–05), and an appearance in Casualty (Series 26, No Goodbyes, 19 November 2011) as Caitlin Northwick (alongside Michael Jayston). She was the subject of This Is Your Life in 1992 when she was surprised by Michael Aspel at the Ritz Hotel. She received Emmy Awards from the Academy of Television Arts & Sciences for her roles in The Forsyte Saga (1970), The First Churchills (1971) and Vanity Fair (1973). Other miniseries in which she appeared are The Pallisers, The Barchester Chronicles and Coming Home. In 1997 she appeared in the ITV television series The Grand. She played a madame residing in the hotel.
Hampshire has been active on the stage, taking the lead roles in many leading plays. In 2007, she was in a ground-breaking play, The Bargain, based on a meeting between Robert Maxwell and Mother Teresa. She played the Fairy Godmother in pantomime at the New Wimbledon Theatre in 2005–06 and at the New Victoria Theatre in Woking in 2006–07. In 2008, she joined the relatively small band of actors who have played two generations in the same play on different occasions. Her appearance at Chichester Festival Theatre in Somerset Maugham's The Circle as Lady Catherine Champion-Cheney in summer 2008 followed on from her appearance in the same play (and venue) as Elizabeth Champion-Cheney (Lady Catherine's daughter-in-law) in 1976."Susan Hampshire turns full Circle", Chichester Observer, 30 July 2008

Author

Until the publication of her autobiography, Susan's Story, in 1981 few people were aware of her struggle with dyslexia. Since then she has become a prominent campaigner in the UK on dyslexia issues and was President of the Dyslexia Institute from 1995–1998. In 1995, she was appointed an OBE (Officer of the Order of the British Empire) in connection with her work.
Her second book, The Maternal Instinct (1984), discussed women and fertility issues and she published a collection of interviews Every Letter Counts: Winning in Life Despite Dyslexia in 1990. She has written children's books, including Lucy Jane at the Ballet, Lucy Jane and the Russian Ballet, Lucy Jane and the Dancing Competition, Lucy Jane on Television, Bear's Christmas, Rosie's First Ballet Lesson and Rosie's Ballet Slippers, and various books and videos about her lifelong hobby of gardening, including Easy Gardening, My Secret Garden and Trouble Free Gardening.

Personal life

Hampshire was married to the French film producer Pierre Granier-Deferre from 1967 until 1974; the couple have a son, Christopher and daughter Lorraine. She has been married to theatre impresario Sir Eddie Kulukundis since 1981. She currently lives a quiet life in the outskirts of Bedford, England.

Filmography






