[[Hokkaido University]]

CATEGORIES: Educational institutions established in 1918, Japanese national universities, National Seven Universities, Hokkaido University, Universities and colleges in Sapporo

. It is a member of the National Seven Universities, which were established as the best national higher education or research institute. It is located in downtown Sapporo, just north of Sapporo Station, and stretching approximately 2.4 kilometers northward. It is considered as one of the top universities in Japan.

History

Hokkaido University (Hokudai for short) was originally founded in 1876 as  on April 1, 1918. It was one of nine Imperial Universities. The School of Medicine was established in 1919, at which time the Agricultural College became the Faculty of Agriculture. This was followed by the Faculty of Engineering, the Faculty of Science, and finally in 1947, the Faculty of Law and Literature.  The current name of Hokkaido University also came into use in 1947. In 1953, the Graduate School was established.Brief History
Since 2004 the university has been incorporated as a National University Corporation under a new law which applies to all national universities. Although the incorporation has led to increased financial independence and autonomy, Hokkaido University is still partially controlled by the Japanese Ministry of Education.

Faculties and graduate schools

Faculties

Graduate schools

Institutes

The University's Institute of Seismology and Volcanology, Hokkaido University|Institute of Seismology and Volcanology is represented on the national Coordinating Committee for Earthquake Prediction.Organizations with ties to CCEP CCEP, accessed 2011-03-19

Campus

Sapporo Campus

The main Sapporo campus is located just north of Sapporo Station, and holds every programs available in Hokkaido University except its Faculty of Fisheries Science, and also Graduate School of Fisheries Science.

Hakodate Campus

The campus is located in Hakodate, the city located in southern part of Hokkaidō. Faculty and Graduate School of Fisheries Science are practiced in this campus. However, the students of Fisheries Science start their education in Hakodate campus from the second semester of their sophomore year, due to the fact that it is required for all freshmen and sophomores at their first semester to take courses in liberal arts at Sapporo campus.

Educational philosophy

Academic rankings

Hokkaido University is one of the most prestigious universities in Japan. It can be seen in the several rankings such as shown below.

General rankings

The university has been ranked 9th, 10th and 14th in 2008, 2009 and 2010 respectively in the ranking "Truly Strong Universities" by Toyo Keizai. In another ranking, Japanese prep school Kawaijuku ranked Hokkaido as the 9th best university in Japan.
In 2011, QS World University Rankings ranked Hokkaido University 139th in the world. Its subject rankings were: 158th in Engineering & IT, 204th in Life Sciences & Biomedicine,  and 133rd in Natural Sciences. In 2012, Hokkaido University was ranked overall as 23rd best university in Asia  by QS Asian University Rankings.
The 2012, QS World University Rankings ranked Hokkaido University one place higher than previous year at 138th in the world . In Material Science research the university was placed in top 50-100th rankings in the world in 2012, while its ranking in Asia was unchanged at 23rd.

Research performance

According to Thomson Reuters, Hokkaido is the 6th best research university in Japan. Its research standard is especially high in Materials Science (7th in Japan, 86th in the world), Chemistry (8th in Japan, 52nd in the world), and Biology & Biochemistry (6th in Japan, 104th in the world). (this raking includes non-educational institutions)
Weekly Diamond reported that Hokkaido has the 10th highest research standard in Japan in terms of research funding per researchers in the COE Program."週刊ダイヤモンド" ダイヤモンド社 2010/2/27 
In addition, Nikkei Shimbun　on 16 February 2004 surveyed the research standards in Engineering studies based on Thomson Reuters, Grants in Aid for Scientific Research and questionnaires to heads of 93 leading Japanese Research Centers, and Hokkaido was placed 17th in this ranking.nifty.htm
According to the Qs World university rankings　in September 2012, Hokkaido University was placed 135th (worldwide) and 6th (in Japan) for general standards in engineering and technology.
It also has a good research standard in Economics, as RePec ranked Hokkaido as the 16th best Economics research university in Jan 2011.
The university received attention in 2010 when Professor Akira Suzuki won the Nobel Prize for Chemistry jointly with Richard F. Heck and Ei-ichi Negishi.nobelprize.html

Graduate school rankings

Hokkaido Law School was ranked 6th in 2010 (8th in 2009) in the passing rate of Japanese Bar Examination.shikakuseek.html 
Eduniversal ranked Hokkaido as 2nd in the rankings of "Excellent Business Schools nationally strong and/or with continental links " in Japan.eduniversal-ranking.html

Alumni rankings

According to the Weekly Economist's 2010 rankings, graduates from Hokkaido have the 49th best employment rate in 400 major companies in Japan.

Popularity and selectivity

Hokkaido is one of the most selective universities in Japan. Its entrance difficulty is usually considered as one of the top in Japan.e.g. Yoyogi seminar published Hensachi (the indication showing the entrance difficulties by prep schools) rankings  journalist Kiyoshi Shimano ranks Hokkaido's entrance difficulty as SA (most selective/out of 11 scales) in Japan. 

Notable alumni

Points of interest

Notes






