[[Max and Ruby]]

CATEGORIES: Canadian children's television series, Canadian animated television series, Series of children's books, Animated duos, Fictional hares and rabbits, Television programs featuring anthropomorphic characters, Nick Jr. shows, Television programs based on children's books, 2002 Canadian television series debuts, 2002 American television series debuts, Flash cartoons, YTV shows, Treehouse TV shows, 2000s American animated television series, 2000s animated television series, 2000s Canadian television series, Television series by Nelvana, Boomerang Latin America shows

Max and Ruby is a Canadian-American animated series that debuted in 2002 (following a pilot episode in 2001) that is aimed at a preschool audience. Created by children's book author/illustrator Rosemary Wells and based on the world of her Max and Ruby books, the episodes present stories about Max, a rambunctious and determined preschool-aged rabbit, and his older sister, Ruby, a patient, goal-oriented, sometimes restrictive rabbit., About Max & Ruby A pilot episode for this series aired in 2001 and the program appeared as a regular series on October 3, 2002. According to Rosemary Wells on the Nick Jr. website, "Max & Ruby celebrates the relationship between Ruby and her younger brother, Max, and the universal nature of sibling relationships."Nick, Jr., Meet Rosemary Wells
In an exclusive interview with Nick Jr., Rosemary Wells, the author of the highly acclaimed children's books the show is based on, says: "We don't see Max and Ruby's parents because I believe that kids resolve their issues and conflicts differently when they're on their own. The television series gives kids a sense about how these two siblings resolve their conflicts in a humorous and entertaining way."
Samantha Morton was the voice of Ruby until the third season. Billy Rosemberg was the voice of Max until the following season. In Season 3, Rebecca Peters replaced Samantha Morton as the voice of Ruby. In Season 4, Tyler Stevenson replaced Billy Rosemberg as the voice of Max. 
A fifth season began December 10, 2011.9story.php and ended on February 11, 2013. It is unknown whether the show will return for new episodes in the future.



Each episode consists of three self-contained vignettes. Within each, Ruby is typically engaged in some sort of project or activity (which usually involves Max whether he's willing to participate or not), while Max has a particular interest of his own which either runs counter to his sister's or distracts her. Generally, Max's dialog within each story is usually limited to just one word or a two-word phrase, which he repeats periodically for the rest of the episode until the end, sometimes saying a different word (or on rare occasions a full sentence). Since he only uses the same word when communicating, what he is trying to say is often misinterpreted. By the end of the story, Max usually ends up helping Ruby in some way, to her benefit and delight, or outsmarts her when she is trying to restrict him. Their parents are never seen or mentioned although there is a family photo hanging in the entry room, however, their grandmother makes regular appearances.

Characters

Main characters

Max – A white rabbit who is Ruby's little brother. His typical role in every episode of the TV series is to come up with an idea or desire against Ruby's will. Ruby will try to talk him out of it, but Max would keep asking for what he wants, but Ruby would continue her will, making Max lose hope in getting what he desires and then find a way to outsmart Ruby and her friends. He usually says just one repeated word per episode to express his desire or idea, such as "faster", sometimes a phrase such as "bad egg", or even short sentences. This makes communicating with others difficult as they often misinterpret him. He wears blue overalls with a red-striped cream shirt, however, sometimes Max wears other outfits. His best friend is Louise's cousin, Morris who acts as if he was Max's sidekick. He often manages to be more clever than his older sister and her friends. But sometimes manages to help Ruby and her friends from his tricks. He often plays with his toys.
Ruby – A white rabbit and Max's older sister.

Other characters

Grandma – Max and Ruby's grandmother. She likes to have fun and has an attic full of clothes and a treasure box that has a memory picture of herself and her husband (who has not made any appearances in the TV series) wearing some fancy clothes to a festival. She has gray fur, wears a blue dress and is frequently involved with her grandchildren. She loves her grandchildren equally but Max is often Grandma's confidant when she plans something special, since she knows Max can keep a secret. Even though Ruby believes that Grandma won't like Max's ideas she is always revealed to like both Max and Ruby's ideas equally, however she usually sides with Max when Max outsmarts Ruby and when Ruby assumes Grandma will love her ideas better than Max's. She once lived with their grandfather who went to an annual festival with her but since he has not appeared nor mentioned it is presumed that he has been deceased for a while. .
Louise – An orange rabbit and is Ruby's best friend. She likes to have fun and has a cousin named Morris who is friends with Max, and Morris also manages to be more clever than her. She is also known for liking to attend parties and events like Max's birthday, and beach parties. She has auburn fur and wears a green tartan dress. Physically, she looks similar to Ruby except she's slightly taller. She sometimes isn't sure about Ruby's ideas but decides to help her out anyway and mostly decides to join her in her ideas.
Valerie – A friend of Ruby's, she is brown, wears a red and gold dress, has glasses and is shorter than Ruby and her other friends. She is very talented at playing the recorder and is in Bunny Scouts with Ruby.
Martha – A friend of Ruby's; however she is not seen as often as Louise or Valerie. She goes to, and is usually seen, at Bunny Scouts with Ruby, Louise, and Valerie, but sometimes joins them when playing. She has gold fur and is the only one of Ruby's friends with eyelashes.
The Huffingtons – A family consisting of Mrs. Huffington, Mr. Huffington, and Baby Huffington. Mrs. Huffington is a talented Baton twirler, and she taught Ruby and Louise how to twirl batons and is one of the new Bunny Scout leaders since the episode "Max's Nightlight".  Mr. Huffington is shown with various jobs, he has appeared as a clown and a photographer.
The Piazzas – A family who owns and operates the Market, consisting of Roger and Mr. Piazza. Roger's mother has never been seen. Roger is "almost seven and a half" years old. Roger has a cameo in the episode "Max's Rocket Run" where he sleds down the biggest sledding hill, Rocket Run with a large group of bunnies, three days after Christmas which is his first appearance. Louise and Ruby are infatuated with him. In the first two seasons all he ever says is "Uh-huh" and "Uh-uh", but speaks completely in season three, season four, and season five.  He often helps his father at his store and helps out with Max and Ruby's projects.
Bunny Scout Leader – The leader of the Bunny Scouts, to which Ruby, Louise, Martha, and Valerie are members. She is only referred to as Bunny Scout Leader; her real name is unknown. She is seen infrequently, usually testing the girls to earn badges.
Morris – Max's best friend and Louise's cousin. He doesn't know how to talk as well as Max. Upon their first meeting, he was unfriendly towards Max, but they quickly became friends and he is Max's sidekick, going along with whatever Max is doing.
Candi – Owner of a candy shop. Ruby has worked in her store and visits her occasionally.
Rosalinda – Owner of a gift shop that sells jewelry and collectibles and a friend of Max and Ruby's grandmother.
Katie – Waitress at the diner.

Episodes

International versions

Max and Ruby on stage

Max & Ruby Live (Our Favorite Things) is a live touring show of the series' two stars.
A musical version of Max and Ruby, entitled Max and Ruby, is produced by Theatreworks USA and tours the United States. The show was written by Carol Hall and Glen Berger.

Broadcast

Max and Ruby is broadcast in the United States on Nickelodeon and Nick Jr..  In Canada, the series airs on Nickelodeon Canada and Treehouse TV.  The series is also shown in the United Kingdom on Nick Jr. and Nick Jr. 2.






