[[Induced representation]]

CATEGORIES: Group theory

In mathematics, and in particular group representation theory, the induced representation is one of the major general operations for passing from a representation of a subgroup . Therefore induced representations are rich objects, in the sense that they include or detect many interesting representations. The idea is by no means limited to the case of finite groups, but the theory in that case is particularly well-behaved.

Alternate formulations

The central theorem in the finite group case is the Frobenius reciprocity theorem. It is stated in terms of another construction of representations, the restriction map (which is a functor): any linear representation of , which is the 'small' group.
The Frobenius formula states that if  of the induced representation is given by
where 
Frobenius reciprocity shows that Res and Ind are adjoint functors. More precisely, Ind is the right adjoint to Res. But in the finite group case, it is also a right adjoint, so (Res, Ind) is a Frobenius pair. The content of that statement is more than the dimensions: it requires that the isomorphism of vector spaces of intertwining maps be natural, in the sense of category theory. It actually suggests that induced representation can in this case be defined by means of the adjunction. That's not the only way to do it - and perhaps not the only helpful way - but it means that the theory will not be ad hoc in its start.
One can therefore make the reciprocity theorem the way to define the induced representation. There is another way, suggested by the permutation examples of the introductory paragraph. The induced representation  (this must be said carefully with explicit talk about left- and right-actions; see below). This approach allows the induced representation to be a kind of free module construction. 
The two approaches outlined above can be reconciled in the case of finite groups, by using the tensor product with .
The reciprocity formula can sometimes be generalized to more general topological groups; for example, the Selberg trace formula and the Arthur-Selberg trace formula are  generalizations of Frobenius reciprocity to discrete cofinite subgroups of certain locally compact groups.

Construction

Algebraic

Let  can be thought of as acting on the following space:
Here each  as follows:
As mentioned earlier this construction is equivalent to defining , without requiring any finiteness.5

Analytic

If  into a Hilbert space V.  We can then let:
Here  acts on the induced representation space by right translation, that is, (g·f)(x) = f(xg).
This construction is often modified in various ways to fit the applications needed.  A common version is called normalized induction and usually uses the same notation.  The definition of the representation space is as follows:
Here  respectively.  With the addition of the normalizing factors this induction functor takes unitary representations to unitary representations.
One other variation on induction is called compact induction.  This is just standard induction restricted to functions with compact support. Formally it is denoted by ind and defined as:
Note that if  is compact then Ind and ind are the same functor.

Geometric

Suppose  as follows:
where .
Define the equivalence relation
Note that this equivalence relation is invariant under the action of ,
In other words,  as the fiber.
Now suppose . The space of sections of this vector bundle is the induced representation.
In the case of unitary representations of locally compact groups, the induction construction can be formulated in terms of systems of imprimitivity.

Examples

For any group, the induced representation of the trivial representation of the trivial subgroup is the right regular representation.  More generally the induced representation of the trivial representation of any subgroup is the permutation representation on the cosets of that subgroup.
An induced representation of a one dimensional representation is called a monomial representation, because it can be represented as monomial matrices.  Some groups have the property that all of their irreducible representations are monomial, the so-called monomial groups.
In Lie theory, an extremely important example is parabolic induction: inducing representations of a reductive group from representations of its parabolic subgroups. This leads, via the philosophy of cusp forms, to the Langlands program.






