[[Zimbabwe African National Union]]

CATEGORIES: Zimbabwe African National Union – Patriotic Front, Political parties in Rhodesia, Political parties in Zimbabwe, Left-wing parties, Communism in Zimbabwe, History of Zimbabwe, Guerrilla organizations, Political parties disestablished in 1987, Rebel groups in Zimbabwe, African and Black nationalism, National liberation movements, National liberation armies, Black liberation movements in the British Empire, Organizations formerly designated as terrorist

The Zimbabwe African National Union was a militant organisation that fought against the white minority government in Rhodesia, formed as a split from the Zimbabwe African People's Union (ZAPU). ZANU won the 1980 elections under the leadership of Robert Mugabe, and seven years later merged again with Joshua Nkomo's ZAPU to form ZANU-PF, the current governing party of the country.

Formation

ZANU was formed 8 August 1963 The founders were dissatisfied with the militant tactics of Nkomo. In contrast to future developments, both parties drew from both the Shona and the Ndebele, the two major tribes of the country. Both ZANU and ZAPU formed political wings within the country (under those names) and military wings: the Zimbabwe African National Liberation Army (ZANLA) and the Zimbabwe People's Revolutionary Army (ZIPRA) respectively to fight the struggle from neighbouring countries – ZANLA from Mozambique and Zambia, and ZIPRA from Zambia and Botswana.

Operations in exile

Most of ZANU's terrorism and murder operations were planned from exile, where the party leadership was based throughout the 1970s, when the party had offices in Lusaka, Dar-es-Salaam, Maputo and London.

Relationship with armed wing

ZANLA was ZANU's military wing. Before 1980, it was very heavily dependent on China and other communist countries for finance and for arms supplies and for terrorism training. Thus, it is easy to understand why ZANU wanted it to appear that they were receptive to Communist and Maoist ideology.

Leadership and splits

There were two splits within ZANU prior to independence. The first was with Nathan Shamuyarira and others leaving to join the Front for the Liberation of Zimbabwe (FROLIZI) in 1973
Following the assassination of Chitepo on 18 March 1975, Sithole assumed leadership of the party, but faced immediate opposition from the more militant wing of ZANU, as Sithole was a proponent of détente.
 Both groups continued to use the name ZANU.
Sithole joined a transitional government of whites and blacks in 1979, led by Bishop Abel Muzorewa. When sanctions remained in place, he joined Muzorewa for the Lancaster House Agreement in London, where a new constitution and elections were prepared.

Zimbabwe independence

In the independence elections Mugabe and ZANU-PF (registered as a party with the added moniker of Patriotic Front to distinguish themselves from Sithole's group) were swept to power but Sithole's group (registered as ZANU in 1980 and subsequently as ZANU-Ndonga) failed to win any seats.






