[[Aloha Stadium]]

CATEGORIES: College football venues, Hawaii Rainbow Warriors football, NCAA bowl game venues, High school football venues in the United States, Defunct minor league baseball venues, Defunct baseball venues in the United States, Sports in Honolulu, Hawaii, Buildings and structures in Honolulu, Hawaii, American football venues in Hawaii, Tulsa Roughnecks sports facilities, Soccer venues in Hawaii, Sports venues completed in 1975, Visitor attractions in Honolulu, Hawaii, Rugby league stadiums in the United States, North American Soccer League (1968–84) stadiums

Aloha Stadium, also known as Hawaiian Airlines Field at Aloha Stadium, is a stadium located in Halawa, Hawaii; a western suburb of Honolulu (though with a Honolulu address). Aloha Stadium is currently home to the University of Hawaii Islanders of the Pacific Coast League from 1975 to 1987 before the team moved to Colorado Springs.

History

Located west of downtown Honolulu and two miles north of Honolulu International Airport, Aloha Stadium was constructed in 1975 at a cost of $37 million. It was built as a replacement for the aging Honolulu Stadium on King Street, demolished in 1976.
The first sporting event ever held at Aloha Stadium was a football game played between the University of Hawaii and Texas A&I (now Texas A&M-Kingsville) on September 13, 1975. The crowd was 32,247.net
As originally built, Aloha Stadium could be reconfigured into various configurations for different sport venues and other purposes. Four movable 7,000-seat sections, each 3.5 million pounds could move using air casters into a diamond configuration for baseball (also used for soccer), an oval for football, or a triangle for concerts. A 2005 study by Honolulu engineering firm Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc. determined that the stadium required $99 million to be completely restored and an additional $115 million for ongoing maintenance and refurbishment over the next 20 years to extend its useful life.
There have been numerous discussions with Hawaii lawmakers who are concerned with the physical condition of the stadium. There are several issues regarding rusting of the facility, several hundred seats that need to be replaced, and restroom facilities that need to be expanded to accommodate more patrons.  Much of the rust is due to a design flaw in the weathering steel used to build the stadium.  It was intended to create a protective patina that would eliminate the need for painting.  However, in the ocean salt-laden air of Honolulu, it has never stopped rusting.
In early 2007, the state legislature proposed to spend $300 million to build a new facility as opposed to spending approximately $216 million to extend the life of Aloha Stadium for another 20–30 years. The new stadium may also be used to attempt to lure a Super Bowl to Hawaii in the future.
One council member has said that if immediate repairs are not made within the next seven years, then the stadium will probably have to be demolished due to safety concerns. In May 2007, the state alloted $12.4 million to be used towards removing corrosion and rust from the structure.

Expansion and improvements

In 2003, the stadium surface was changed from AstroTurf (which had been in place since the stadium opened) to FieldTurf. up until 2011.
In July 2011 the field was upgraded to UBU Sports Speed S5-M synthetic turf system that features the exclusive Removable Active Panel system as part of the multimillion dollar renovation to Aloha Stadium.  The synthetic turf system covers 110,000 sq ft and has 22 Removable Active Panel's located in 7 locations.  The RAP's have inlaid logos for the University of Hawaii and Aloha Bowl as well as blank panels to accommodate the NFL Pro Bowl and NCAA Bowl Games that will be custom painted for each event.
In 2008, the state of Hawaii approved the bill of $185 million to refurbish the aging Aloha Stadium.  In 2010, Aloha Stadium completely retrofitted its scoreboard and video screen to be more up to date with its high definition capability. The Aloha Stadium Authority plans to add more luxury suites, replacing all seats, rusting treatments, parking lots, more restrooms, pedestrian bridge supports, enclosed lounge, and more. There is also a proposal that would close the 4 opening corners of the stadium to add more seats.
In 2011, the playing field was refurbished in part due to a naming rights sponsorship from Hawaiian Airlines. As a result of the sponsorship deal, the field is now referred to as Hawaiian Airlines Field at Aloha Stadium.Hawaiian Airlines Grabs Naming Rights To Aloha Stadium Field; SponsorPitch; 08-04-2011

Events

In , a three-game regular season series between Major League Baseball's St. Louis Cardinals and San Diego Padres was held at the stadium. The series was played as a doubleheader on April 19 and a nationally broadcast (ESPN) game on April 20. In 1975, the Padres had played an exhibition series against the Seibu Lions of Japan's Pacific League.
Aloha Stadium hosted the inaugural Pan-Pacific Championship (February 20–23, 2008), a knockout soccer tournament, involving four teams from Japan's J-League, North America's Major League Soccer (MLS) and Australia/New Zealand's A-League.
In 2013 the stadium played host to a rugby league test where the USA played Samoa.khon2.com/news/local-news/tomahawks-get-ready-for-match-up-with-na-toa-samoa-at-aloha-stadium
Aloha Stadium is also the venue for five public high school graduation ceremonies. Radford High School, Mililani High School, Aiea High School, James Campbell High School, and Pearl City High School hold their graduation ceremony at the stadium in early June.









the 
Hawaii Bowl |
 | start = 2002
 | before = first st


