[[Anissa Jones]]

CATEGORIES: Accidental deaths in California, Actresses from Indiana, American child actresses, American film actresses, American television actresses, American people of Lebanese descent, Cocaine-related deaths in California, 1958 births, 1976 deaths, 20th-century American actresses

Mary Anissa Jones (

Early years

Jones was born in West Lafayette, Indiana. Her maternal grandparents were Lebanese: her middle name means little friend in Arabic. At the time of her birth, father John Paul Jones was an engineering graduate and faculty board member at Purdue University and mother Mary Paula Jones (née Tweel) was a zoology student there. Soon after the birth of Anissa's brother John Paul Jones, Jr., they moved to Playa Del Rey, California. When she was two years old, her mother enrolled Jones in dance classes. In 1964, when she was six, Jones's mother took her to an open audition for a breakfast cereal commercial, which became her first television appearance. She attended Paseo Del Rey Grammar School, and later, Orville Wright Junior High School.

Career

Jones was eight when her acting skills drew the attention of television producers, and she was cast as Ava Elizabeth "Buffy" Patterson-Davis on the CBS sitcom Family Affair (1966). In the opening plotline, Buffy, her twin brother, Jody (Johnny Whitaker) and older sister, Cissy (Kathy Garver) are sent to live with their Uncle Bill (Brian Keith) and his valet Mr. French (Sebastian Cabot) a year after the children's parents die in a car accident That year, she also played the role of Carol Bix in the Elvis Presley comedy film The Trouble with Girls.
Family Affair was a grueling, full-time, year-round job for Jones: she was often either shooting or promoting the show in public, seven days a week. Through each of the first three seasons, up to 30 episodes were broadcast. This contrasts with later American television series that shoot fewer than 25 episodes each season, allowing more breaks in filming and requiring fewer promotional appearances for the actors. In April 1969, Jones broke her leg in a playground accident, and the producers had her injury written into the show's scripts.
Jones' Buffy character had a doll named "Mrs. Beasley", which she claimed talked to her, often making funny comments. When the show became a hit, the doll was marketed by Mattel and became a best-seller in North America. Jones took part in several other lucrative Family Affair product marketing campaigns such as Buffy paper dolls, lunch boxes, a clothing line, coloring books and a 1971 cookbook with her picture on the cover.
Family Affair was cancelled abruptly by CBS in 1971 after five seasons and 138 episodes. By then, Jones was 13 years old and said she was happy at the thought of no longer needing to be seen with the doll. She wanted to act in films but, as can happen with any successful actor, whether child or adult, Jones could not find the kind of work she wanted. She auditioned for the part of Regan MacNeil in the film The Exorcist, but the director felt that, with Family Affair still in popular consciousness at the time through syndicated daytime reruns, movie audiences might have thought Buffy was the one being possessed. Meanwhile, Brian Keith kept in touch with Jones through letters and offered her a young-adult role on The Brian Keith Show (1972–1974). Keith told her she would not need to audition for the part, but, by then, Jones no longer wanted to work in television.

Later teens

Jones believed she had been typecast. She enrolled in Westchester High School and returned to a life outside the entertainment industry.
Jones's parents initiated a bitter divorce in 1965 and carried on a long feud over custody of Anissa and her younger brother, Paul. In 1973, custody of both children was awarded to their father, but he died of heart disease shortly thereafter. While her brother went to live with their mother, Jones moved in with a friend and began skipping school. Her mother reported Jones to the police as a runaway. She was sent to juvenile hall and spent many months in state custody, after which she was allowed to live with her mother; however, Jones began shoplifting and taking drugs. In 1975, she dropped out of high school altogether and briefly worked at Winchell's Donut shop in Playa Del Rey. She often felt embarrassed whenever customers recognized who she was. 
On her 18th birthday, in March 1976, Jones gained control of saved earnings from her work in Family Affair, about $180,000 (equal to $ today), which was being held in a trust fund and U.S. Savings Bonds. Jones and her brother Paul then rented an apartment together not far from their mother.

Death

Shortly before noon on August 28, 1976, after partying all night in the beach town of Oceanside, California, with her new boyfriend Allan "Butch" Koven and others, Jones was found dead in the bedroom of a house belonging to the father of a 14-year-old friend named Helen Hennessey.
Jones had no funeral and was cremated. Her ashes were scattered over the Pacific Ocean. She left $63,000 in cash and more than $100,000 in savings bonds when she died.
Six days after Jones' death, Dr. Don Carlos Moshos, who had prescribed the Seconal identified in Jones's toxicology report, was arrested and charged with illegally prescribing the drug to Jones, among other drugs-for-profit charges from a concurrent criminal investigation. While awaiting trial, Moshos died of a terminal illness. His estate was sued by Jones' surviving family for $400,000; in July 1979, the verdict found Dr. Moshos 30% liable and Jones 70% responsible for her death and the resulting judgment was reduced to $79,500.
In 1978, Canadian punk-rock group The Diodes recorded Child Star, detailing Anissa's death by overdose in a sound and style reminiscent of The Ramones.youtube.
In 1984, her brother Paul also died of a drug overdose. He was 24 years old.  In 2010, her mother Mary Paula Jones died. There were no surviving heirs to the family name.

Filmography






