[[Kingdom of Heaven (film)]]

CATEGORIES: 2005 films, British films, British epic films, American films, American epic films, German films, English-language films, Arabic-language films, Russian-language films, Latin-language films, Films directed by Ridley Scott, Epic films, Crusades films, Films about religion, Epic films based on actual events, Films set in Jerusalem, Films set in Israel, Films set in France, Films set in Sicily, Films set in the 12th century, Films shot in Morocco, Historical films, Scott Free Productions films, 20th Century Fox films, Richard I of England

Kingdom of Heaven is a 2005 epic action film directed by Ridley Scott and written by William Monahan. It stars Orlando Bloom, Eva Green, Jeremy Irons, David Thewlis, Brendan Gleeson, Marton Csokas, Liam Neeson, Edward Norton, Ghassan Massoud, Khaled El Nabawy, and  Alexander Siddig.
The story is set during the Crusades of the 12th century. A French village blacksmith goes to aid the Kingdom of Jerusalem in its defense against the Ayyubid Muslim sultan Saladin, who is battling to reclaim the city from the Christians leading to the Battle of Hattin. The film script is a heavily fictionalized portrayal of the life of Balian of Ibelin (ca. 1143–93).
Filming took place in Ouarzazate, Morocco, where Scott had previously filmed Gladiator and Black Hawk Down. Filming also took place in Spain, at the Loarre Castle (Huesca), Segovia, Ávila, Palma del Río and Casa de Pilatos in Sevilla.com: "Kingdom of Heaven - Production Notes"

Plot

In 1184, Balian, a French blacksmith, is haunted by his wife's recent suicide. A group of Crusaders arrives in his village; one of them introduces himself as Balian's father, Baron Godfrey of Ibelin. Godfrey asks Balian to return with him to Jerusalem. Balian refuses and the Crusaders leave. The town priest, Balian's half-brother, reveals that he ordered Balian's wife beheaded before burial, a customary practice for people who commit suicide. Balian notices his brother wearing the cross that his wife wore before she was to be buried. In a fit of rage, Balian kills his brother, retrieves the crucifix, and flees the village. Balian pursues his father in the hope of gaining forgiveness and redemption for himself and his wife in Jerusalem. After he reaches Godfrey, soldiers sent by the priest's Bishop arrive, ostensibly to arrest Balian. In reality, the priest's nephew intends to assassinate Balian and Godfrey so that his father, and eventually he, may inherit Godfrey's barony. Godfrey refuses to surrender Balian, and the nephew launches a sneak attack against Godfrey. The attack fails, and Godfrey kills his nephew but is struck by an arrow that breaks off in his body.
In Messina, Godfrey knights Balian and, before succumbing to his injuries, orders Balian to serve the King of Jerusalem and protect the helpless. During Balian's journey to Jerusalem his ship runs aground in a storm, leaving Balian and a horse as the only survivors. When Balian releases the horse from the wreckage it flees in panic. Following the horse, Balian is confronted by a Muslim cavalier and what appears to be the cavalier's servant.  A fight over the horse follows and Balian reluctantly slays the cavalier when attacked but spares the servant, asking him to guide him to Jerusalem. Upon arriving, Balian gives the horse to the servant and releases him. The man tells Balian his slain master was an important knight amongst the Saracens; his deed will gain him fame and their respect.
Balian becomes acquainted with Jerusalem's political arena: the leper King Baldwin IV, Tiberias the Marshal of Jerusalem, the King's sister, Princess Sibylla, and her husband Guy de Lusignan, who supports the anti-Muslim activities of brutal factions like the Knights Templar. Guy intends to rule after Baldwin's death and seeks to provoke a war that will allow him to dispose of the Muslims and claim the Kingdom for the Christians.
Guy and his ally, Raynald of Châtillon, attack a Saracen caravan with the aid of the Templars. This triggers Saladin, leader of the Muslim forces to invade the Christian Kingdom. He advances first on Kerak, Raynald's castle, to punish him for his crime. The King and Tiberias send word to Balian, who arrives just in time to screen the villagers entering the castle from Saladin's cavalry, despite a request from Raynald to withdraw. Though outnumbered, Balian and his knights charge Saladin's cavalry, allowing the villagers time to flee. A fierce, but one-sided battle ensues in which Balian's surviving knights are captured. In the enemy camp, Balian encounters the servant he freed, Imad ad-Din, and learns he is actually Saladin's Chancellor. Imad ad-Din releases Balian to enter Kerak, in repayment of the debt he owes to Balian. Saladin arrives with his army to besiege Kerak, and King Baldwin IV approaches with his. They negotiate a Muslim retreat, and Baldwin swears to punish Raynald. Baldwin confronts Raynald, forcing him onto his knees. As Raynald grovels for mercy, Baldwin slaps him a few times and forces Raynald to kiss his diseased hand. The exertion associated with these events causes Baldwin to collapse, weakened beyond recovery. In his camp, Saladin assures his fanatical generals that he will reclaim Jerusalem, but only when he is confident of victory.
Baldwin asks Balian to marry Sibylla, knowing they have affection for each other, but Balian refuses because in order for the marriage to occur, Guy would have to be killed. After Baldwin dies, Sibylla succeeds her brother and names Guy King of Jerusalem. Guy releases Raynald, asking him to give him a war, which Raynald does by murdering Saladin's sister. When Saladin's emissary relays demands for the return of his sister's body, the heads of those responsible and the surrender of Jerusalem, Guy decapitates the emissary and sends his head back to Damascus. Guy sends three Templars to assassinate Balian, the most strident voice against a war, though Balian survives the assassination attempt.
In council, Guy and the Templars are finally free to make war. Despite sound advice, they march into the desert to fight Saladin, leaving Jerusalem unguarded except for Balian, Tiberias, their knights, a few remaining Crusader soldiers, and the townspeople. Saladin's army attacks the Crusaders, and in the ensuing battle the Crusaders are annihilated. Guy and Raynald are captured. Saladin executes Raynald and then marches on Jerusalem, sparing Guy as king only out of tradition. Tiberias and his men leave for Cyprus, believing Jerusalem is lost, but Balian and his knights remain to protect the villagers. Knowing they cannot defeat the Saracens, they hope to hold their enemies off long enough for the Saracens to offer terms. After a battle that lasts three days, with the Saracens repeatedly denied entrance to Jerusalem, a frustrated Saladin parleys with Balian. In the end, when Balian threatens to burn down the city and destroy all the holy places (christian, jewish and muslim), he relents and agrees to allowing all the inhabitants safe conduct to Christian lands.
In the marching column of citizens, Balian finds Sibylla, who has renounced her claim as Queen of Jerusalem and other cities. After Balian returns to his village in France, English knights ride through looking for Balian, defender of Jerusalem.  Balian replies that he is merely the blacksmith, the man leading the knights identifies himself as King Richard the Lionheart, and they commence a new Crusade to retake Jerusalem. Richard rides off, Balian is joined by Sibylla, and passing by Balian's wife's grave, they ride toward a new life together.
An epilogue states that the Third Crusade ended in an uneasy truce between Richard and Saladin after three years of war, and concludes that "nearly a thousand years later, peace in the Holy Land still remains elusive".

Cast

Many of the characters in the film are fictionalized versions of historical figures:

Historical accuracy

Bloom's character, Balian of Ibelin, was a close ally of Raymond III of Tripoli, the film's Tiberias, and a member of that faction which sought a place within the patchwork of the near east and opposed the aggressive policy of Raynald of Châtillon, the Templars, and "fanatics newly from Europe," who refused to come to terms of peace with the Muslims. II: The Kingdom of Jerusalem. Cambridge University Press, 1952. However, Balian was a mature gentleman, just a year or two younger than Raymond, and one of the most important nobles in the kingdom, not a French blacksmith. His father Barisan (the French "Balian") founded the Ibelin family in the east, and probably came from Italy. Balian and Sibylla were indeed united in the defense of Jerusalem; however, no romantic relationship existed between the two. Balian married Sibylla's stepmother Maria Comnena, Dowager Queen of Jerusalem and Lady of Nablus. Nablus, rather than Ibelin, was Balian's fief at the time of Jerusalem's fall.
The Old French Continuation of William of Tyre (the so-called Chronicle of Ernoul) claimed that Sibylla had been infatuated with Balian's older brother Baldwin of Ibelin, a widower over twice her age, but this is doubtful; instead, it seems that Raymond of Tripoli attempted a coup to marry her off to him to strengthen the position of his faction; however, this legend seems to have been behind the film's creation of a romance between Sibylla and a member of the Ibelin family.
King Baldwin IV of Jerusalem, who reigned from 1174 to 1185, was a leper, and his sister Sibylla did marry Guy of Lusignan, though on her own initiative. Baldwin IV had a falling out with Guy before his death, and so Guy did not succeed Baldwin IV immediately. Baldwin crowned Sibylla's son from her previous marriage to William of Montferrat, five-year-old Baldwin V co-king in his own lifetime, in 1183.  The little boy reigned as sole king for one year, dying in 1186 at nine years of age. After her son's death, Sibylla and Guy (to whom she was devoted) garrisoned the city, and she claimed the throne. The coronation scene in the movie was, in real life, more of a shock: Sibylla had been forced to promise to divorce Guy before becoming queen, with the assurance that she would be permitted to pick her own consort. After being crowned by Patriarch Heraclius of Jerusalem (who is unnamed in the movie), she chose to crown Guy as her consort. Raymond of Tripoli was not present, but was in Nablus attempting a coup, with Balian of Ibelin, to raise her half-sister (Balian's stepdaughter), princess Isabella of Jerusalem, to the throne; however, Isabella's husband, Humphrey IV of Toron, refusing to precipitate a civil war, swore allegiance to Guy. Penguin, 2006.
Raymond of Tripoli was a cousin of Amalric I of Jerusalem, and one of the Kingdom's most powerful nobles, as well as sometime regent. He had a claim to the throne himself, but, being childless, instead tried to advance his allies in the Ibelin family. He was often in conflict with Guy and Raynald of Châtillon, who had risen to their positions by marrying wealthy heiresses and through the king's favor. Saladin's abortive march on Kerak followed Raynald's raid on the Red Sea, which shocked the Muslim world by its proximity to the holy cities of Mecca and Medina. Guy and Raynald also harassed Muslim caravans and herders, and the claim that Raynald captured Saladin's sister is based on the account given in the Old French Continuation of William of Tyre. This claim, unsupported by any other account, is generally believed to be false. In actuality, after Raynald's attack on one caravan, Saladin made sure that the next one, in which his sister was traveling, was properly guarded: the lady came to no harm."Making the Crusades Relevant in KINGDOM OF HEAVEN" by Cathy Schultz
Balian was present at the Battle of Hattin, but escaped and fled to Tyre and then Jerusalem, to retrieve his wife and children. The defenders of the city, including the military orders and the Patriarch Heraclius, named him the leader of the city's defense. On the ninth day of the siege of Jerusalem, Saladin's forces breached the wall, but the defenders held out until the tenth day, when Balian surrendered the city to Saladin. However, the Christians of the city were made to ransom themselves, and Balian was unable to raise the funds to ransom all the city's poor; thousands marched out into safety and thousands into slavery. II: The Kingdom of Jerusalem. Cambridge University Press, 1952, pp. 463-467.
Balian and Sibylla remained in the Holy Land during the events of the Third Crusade. Sibylla was one victim of an epidemic during the Siege of Acre (1189–1191). Balian's relations with Richard I of England were far from amicable, because he supported the claim to kingship of Conrad of Montferrat against Richard's vassal Guy. He and his wife Maria arranged her daughter Isabella's forcible divorce from Humphrey of Toron so she could marry Conrad. Ambroise, who wrote a poetic account of the crusade, called Balian "more false than a goblin" and said he "should be hunted with dogs".google.com/books?id=kA6EqrDKpWMC&pg=PA149&lpg=PA149&dq=%22more+false+than+a+goblin&source=bl&ots=ANJ4qtkfbU&sig=tFJvYl5lTgOcQEV7H-5-ey3m77k&hl=en&ei=GviFS6SdGoLWNsKy7Z8M&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=7&ved=0CBsQ6AEwBg#v=onepage&q=%22more%20false%20than%20a%20goblin&f=false
An episode of The History Channel's series History vs. Hollywood analyzed the historical accuracy of the film. This program and a Movie Real (a series by A&E Network) episode about Kingdom of Heaven were both included on the DVD release.

Production

Cinematography

The visual style of Kingdom of Heaven emphasizes set design and impressive cinematography in almost every scene. It is notable for its "visually stunning cinematography and haunting music".
Cinematographer John Mathieson created many large, sweeping landscapes,
where the cinematography, supporting performances, and battle sequences are meticulously mounted.
The cinematography and scenes of set-pieces have been described as "ballets of light and color" (as in films by Akira Kurosawa).[ref]
     Uncut, Review of Kingdom of Heaven, ''Uncut'', 2005-07-01, page 129, web:
     [ BuyCom-Uncut]:
     noted "Where Scott scores is in the cinematography and set-pieces,
     with vast armies surging across sun-baked sand in almost
     Kurosawa-like ballets of light and color."
[/ref]
Director Ridley Scott's visual acumen was described as the main draw of Kingdom of Heaven with the stellar, stunning cinematography and "jaw-dropping combat sequences" based on the production design of Arthur Max.

Music

The music differs in style and content from the soundtrack of Scott's earlier 2000 film GladiatorFilmtracks – Kingdom of Heaven and many other subsequent films depicting historical events. Jerry Goldsmith's "Valhalla" theme from The 13th Warrior and "Vide Cor Meum" (originally used by Scott in the Hannibal movie and composed by Patrick Cassidy and Hans Zimmer), sung by Danielle de Niese and Bruno Lazzaretti were used as replacements for original music by Gregson-Williams.

Reception

Critical response

Upon its release, it was met with a mixed reception, with many critics being divided on the film. Critics such as Roger Ebert, found the film's message to be deeper than Scott's Gladiator.
The cast was widely praised. Jack Moore described Edward Norton's performance as "phenomenal", and "so far removed from anything that he has ever done that we see the true complexities of his talent".Manolha Dargis, New York Times review of Kingdom of Heaven  Also commended were Eva Green, who plays Princess Sibylla "with a measure of cool that defies her surroundings", and Jeremy Irons.reelviews.html
Lead actor Bloom's performance generally elicited a lukewarm reception from American critics, with the Boston Globe stating Bloom was "not actively bad as Balian of Ibelin", but nevertheless "seems like a man holding the fort for a genuine star who never arrives".
Bloom had gained 20 pounds for the part, and the Extended Director's Cut (detailed below) of Kingdom of Heaven reveals even more complex facets of Bloom's role, involving connections with unknown relatives. Despite the criticism, Bloom won two awards for his performance.
Online, general criticism has been also divided, but leaning towards the positive. Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 39% based on reviews from 185 critics.rottentomatoes. As of early 2006, the Yahoo! Movies rating for Kingdom of Heaven was a "B" from the critics (based on 15 Reviews). This rating equates to "good" according to Yahoo! Movie's rating system.
Academic criticism has focused on the supposed peaceful relationship between Christians and Muslims in Jerusalem and other cities depicted. Crusader historians such as Jonathan Riley-Smith, quoted by The Daily Telegraph, called the film "dangerous to Arab relations", claiming the movie was Osama bin Laden's version of the Crusades and would "fuel the Islamic fundamentalists". Riley-Smith further commented against the historical accuracy stating "nonsense like this will only reinforce existing myths", arguing that the film "relied on the romanticized view of the Crusades propagated by Sir Walter Scott in his book The Talisman, published in 1825 and now discredited by academics."Charlotte Edwardes, " Ridley Scott's new Crusades film 'panders to Osama bin Laden'" The Daily Telegraph January 17, 2004 Fellow Crusade historian Jonathan Phillips also spoke against the film. Paul Halsall defended Ridley Scott, claiming that "historians can't criticize filmmakers for having to make the decisions they have to make... is not writing a history textbook".
Thomas F. Madden, Director of Saint Louis University's Center for Medieval and Renaissance Studies, criticized the film's presentation of the Crusades:

Scott himself defended this depiction of the Muslim-Christian relationship in footage on the DVD version of the movie's extra features. Scott sees this portrayal as being a contemporary look at the history. He argued that peace and brutality are concepts relative to one's own experience, and since contemporary society is so far removed from the brutal times in which the movie takes place, he told the story in a way that he felt was true to the source material, yet was more accessible to a modern audience. In other words, the "peace" that existed was exaggerated to fit modern ideas of what such a peace would be. At the time, it was merely a lull in Muslim-Christian violence compared to the standards of the period. The recurring use of "Assalamu Alaikum", the traditional Arabic greeting meaning "Peace be with you", is spoken both in Arabic and English several times.
The "Director's Cut" of the film is a four-disc set, two of which are dedicated to a feature-length documentary called "The Path to Redemption". This feature contains an additional featurette on historical accuracy called "Creative Accuracy: The Scholars Speak", where a number of academics support the film's contemporary relevance and historical accuracy. Among these historians is Dr. Nancy Caciola, who said that despite the various inaccuracies and fictionalized/dramatized details she considered the film a "responsible depiction of the period."Creative Accuracy: The Scholars Speak
Screenwriter William Monahan, who is a long-term enthusiast of the period, has said "If it isn't in, it doesn't mean we didn't know it... What you use, in drama, is what plays. Shakespeare did the same."
Caciola agreed with the fictionalization of characters on the grounds that "crafting a character who is someone the audience can identify with" is necessary in a film. She said that "I, as a professional, have spent much time with medieval people, so to speak, in the texts that I read; and quite honestly there are very few of them that if I met in the flesh I feel that I would be very fond of." This appears to echo the sentiments of Scott himself.
The historical content and the religious and political messages present have received praise and condemnation, sentiments and perceptions. John Harlow of the Times Online wrote that Christianity is portrayed in an unfavorable light and the value of Christian belief is diminished, especially in the portrayal of Patriarch Heraclius of Jerusalem.

Box office

The film was a box office flop in the U.S. and Canada, earning $47 million against a budget of around $130 million, but did better in Europe and the rest of the world, with the worldwide box office earnings totaling at $211,643,158.
Like some other Scott films, Kingdom of Heaven found success on DVD in the U.S., and the release of the Director's Cut has reinvigorated interest in the film. Nearly all reviews of the 2006 Director's Cut have been positive, including a four-star review in the British magazine Total Film and a perfect ten out of ten from IGN DVD.ign.html

Accolades

European Film Awards:
Satellite Awards:
VES Awards:
Satellite Awards:
Teen Choice Awards:

Extended director's cut

An extended director's cut was released on December 23, 2005, at the Laemmle Fairfax Theatre in Los Angeles, unsupported by advertising from 20th Century Fox. This version has been widely praised; at approximately 45 minutes longer than the original theatrical cut, it is reportedly the version Ridley Scott originally wanted released to theaters. The DVD of the extended Director's Cut was released on May 23, 2006. It comprises a four-disc box set with a runtime of 194 minutes, and is shown as a road show presentation with an overture, intermission, and entr'acte; the Blu-ray release omits the roadshow elements, running for 189 minutes. Scott gave an interview to STV on the occasion of the extended edition's UK release, when he discussed the motives and thinking behind the new version.Ridley Scott interview
The Director's Cut (DC) has received a distinctly more positive reception from film critics than the theatrical release, with some reviewers suggesting it is the most substantial Director's Cut of all time offering a much greater insight into the motivations of individual characters.








