[[Stan Mikita]]

CATEGORIES: 1940 births, Living people, Art Ross Trophy winners, Canada's Sports Hall of Fame inductees, Canadian ice hockey forwards, Canadian people of Slovak descent, Canadian sports announcers, Chicago Blackhawks captains, Chicago Blackhawks players, Czechoslovak emigrants to Canada, Hart Memorial Trophy winners, Hockey Hall of Fame inductees, Lady Byng Memorial Trophy winners, Lester Patrick Trophy recipients, National Hockey League All-Stars, National Hockey League broadcasters, National Hockey League players with retired numbers, People from St. Catharines, St. Catharines Teepees players, Stanley Cup champions

Stanislav "Stan" Mikita (born Stanislav Guoth; May 20, 1940), is a Slovak-born Canadian retired professional ice hockey player for the Chicago Black Hawks of the National Hockey League, generally regarded as the best centre of the 1960s. 

Biography

Early life

Mikita was born in Sokolče, Slovak Republic as Stanislav Guoth, but moved to St. Catharines, Ontario, as a young boy to escape Communist-controlled Czechoslovakia. He was adopted by his aunt and uncle who gave him their surname, Mikita.

Playing career

After three starring junior seasons with the St. Catharines Teepees of the Ontario Hockey Association, Mikita was promoted to the parent Chicago Black Hawks in 1959. In his second full year, in 1961, the Hawks won their third Stanley Cup. The young centre led the entire league in goals during the playoffs, scoring a total of six.
The following season was his breakout year. Stan Mikita became a star as centre of the famed "Scooter Line", (with right wing Ken Wharram and left wingers Ab McDonald and Doug Mohns). He became the most-feared centre of the Sixties. With superstar teammate Bobby Hull, the Black Hawks had the most powerful offense of the decade, generally leading the league in goals scored. Combining skilled defense and a reputation as one of the game's best faceoff men using his innovative curved stick, Mikita led the league in scoring four times in the decade, tying Bobby Hull's single-season scoring mark in 1966–67 with 97 points (a mark broken two years later by former teammate Phil Esposito and currently held by Wayne Gretzky).
In his early years, Mikita was among the most penalized players in the league, but he then decided to play a cleaner game and went on to win the Lady Byng Memorial Trophy for sportsmanlike conduct twice. Mikita's drastic change in behavior came after he returned home from a road trip. His wife told him that while their daughter, Meg, was watching the Black Hawks' last road game on television, she turned and said, "Mommy, why does Daddy spend so much time sitting down?" The camera had just shown Mikita in the penalty box again (from Mikita's autobiography "I Play to Win.")
During his playing career, in 1973, Mikita teamed up with Chicago businessman Irv Tiahnybik to form the American Hearing Impaired Hockey Association (AHIHA), to bring together deaf and hard-of hearing hockey players from all over the country.

=Use of curved stick=

Mikita and teammate Bobby Hull were the most formidable forward duo of the Sixties, notorious for using sticks with curved blades. Such sticks gave a comparative advantage to shooters versus goalies. As a result, the NHL limited blade curvature to 1/2" in 1970.The 10 best player-inspired NHL rules changes

Retirement

Mikita's latter years were marred by chronic back injuries, leading to his retirement during the 1979–80 season. At that time only Gordie Howe and Phil Esposito had scored more points in the NHL, and just six players had appeared in more games. Mikita was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1983, and into the Slovak Hockey Hall of Fame in 2002. He currently serves as a good will ambassador for the Blackhawks' organization.
Mikita is currently 14th in regular season points scored in the history of the NHL, and just three other players have appeared in more games while playing for only one team over their career.
Mikita appeared as himself in the film Wayne's World, which featured a "Stan Mikita" doughnut shop, spoofing a Canadian doughnut chain named after a retired hockey player, Tim Hortons. A restaurant named "Stan Mikita's" and closely resembling the movie's version opened in 1994 at the Virginia amusement park Kings Dominion and at Paramount Carowinds in Charlotte. The Virginia restaurant was later converted to a Happy Days theme.
Mikita provided the foreword to the children's book "My Man Stan" by Tim Wendel. Mikita is featured as a main character in the book.

Career statistics

Awards and accomplishments

Cultural references

The Wayne's World movies include scenes in the fictional "Stan Mikita's Donuts" which is a thinly disguised homage to Tim Hortons, a Canadian donut shop named after former Toronto Maple Leaf Tim Horton. Wayne's World star and creator Mike Myers is originally from the Toronto suburb of Scarborough, Ontario, however, as Wayne's World is set in Chicago various Toronto-area references and landmarks have been transposed to Chicagoland and thinly disguised.








