[[Married... with Children]]

CATEGORIES: 1987 American television series debuts, 1997 American television series endings, 1980s American comedy television series, 1990s American comedy television series, American television sitcoms, English-language television programming, Fox network shows, Television series about dysfunctional families, Television series by Sony Pictures Television, Television shows set in Chicago, Illinois

Married... with Children is an American sitcom that aired for 11 seasons. It featured a dysfunctional family living in a fictional Chicago suburb. The show, notable for being the first prime-time television series to air on Fox, ran from April 5, 1987, to June 9, 1997. It was created by Michael G. Moye and Ron Leavitt. The show was known for handling nonstandard topics for the time period, which garnered the then-fledgling Fox network a standing among the Big Three television networks.
The series' 11-season, 259-episode run makes it the longest-lasting live-action sitcom on the Fox network. Its famous theme song is "Love and Marriage"  by Sammy Cahn and Jimmy Van Heusen, performed by Frank Sinatra from the 1955 television production Our Town.
The first season of the series was videotaped at ABC Television Center in Hollywood. From season 2 to season 8, the show was taped at Sunset Gower Studios in Hollywood, and the remaining three seasons were taped at Sony Pictures Studios in Culver City. The series was produced by Embassy Communications on its first season and the remaining seasons by ELP Communications under the studio Columbia Pictures Television (and eventually Columbia TriStar Television).
In 2008, the show placed #94 on Entertainment Weekly
On April 22, 2012, Fox re-aired the series premiere in honor of its 25th anniversary.

Synopsis

The show follows the lives of Al Bundy, a once glorious high school football player turned hard-luck women's shoe salesman; his obnoxious wife, Peggy; their attractive, promiscuous, and dim daughter, Kelly; and their girl-crazy, wisecracking son, Bud (who will become the only Bundy to attend college). Their neighbors are the upwardly-mobile Steve Rhoades and his wife Marcy, who later gets remarried to Jefferson D'Arcy, a white-collar criminal who becomes her "trophy husband" and Al's sidekick. Most storylines involve Al's schemes being foiled by his own cartoonish dim wit and bad luck. His rivalry with and loathing for Marcy play a significant role in most episodes.

Cast and characters

Recurring characters

Fox broadcast history

Episodes

During its eleven-season run on the Fox network, Married ... with Children aired 258 episodes. A 259th episode, "I'll See You in Court" from season 3, never aired on Fox (see below) but premiered on FX and has since been included on DVD and in syndication packages.  The episode counts in the chart below include it. There were also three specials that aired following the series' cancellation, including a cast reunion.

Nielsen ratings

Despite the show's enduring popularity and loyal fanbase, Married ... with Children was never a huge ratings success. Part of the reason was the simple fact that Fox, being a new startup network, did not have the affiliate base of the Big Three television networks, thus preventing the series from reaching the entire country. In an interview for a special commemorating the series' 20-year anniversary in 2007, Katey Sagal stated that part of the problem the series faced was that many areas of the country were able to get Fox only through low-quality UHF channels well into the early 1990s while some areas of the country did not receive the new network at all.
Another problem lay in the fact that many of the newly developed series on Fox were unsuccessful, which kept the network from building a popular lineup to draw in a larger audience. In its original airing debut, Married ... with Children was part of a Sunday lineup that competed with the popular Murder, She Wrote and Sunday-night movie on CBS. Fellow freshman series included The Garry Shandling Show, Duet, and The Tracey Ullman Show, which were canceled in 1988, 1989, and 1990 respectively. The success of The Simpsons, which debuted on The Tracey Ullman Show in 1987, helped draw some viewers over to Fox, allowing Married ... with Children to sneak into the top 50 of television shows for seasons 4 through 8 doing its best overall rating at number 29 for its sixth season. Although these ratings were small in comparison with the other three networks, they were good enough for Fox to keep renewing the show.
Ratings data for some seasons courtesy of TVTango.

Awards

Casting Society of America:
Emmy Awards:
Golden Globe Awards:
Other:

Controversy and edited content

Rakolta boycott

In 1989, Terry Rakolta, a housewife from Bloomfield Hills, Michigan, led a boycott Offended by the images of an old man wearing a woman's garter and stockings, the scene where Steve touches the pasties of a mannequin dressed in S&M gear, a homosexual man wearing a tiara on his head (and Al's line "...
After advertisers began dropping their support for the show and while Rakolta made several appearances on television talk shows demanding the show's cancellation, Fox executives refused to air the episode titled "I'll See You in Court". This episode would become known as the "Lost Episode" and was aired on FX on June 18, 2002, with some parts cut. The episode was packaged with the rest of the third season in the January 2005 DVD release (and in the first volume of the Married ... With Children Most Outrageous Episode DVD set) with the parts cut from syndication restored.
Rakolta has been referenced twice on the show: "Rock and Roll Girl", when a television show was made about the Bundy family and then was cancelled because (according to Marcy) "some woman in Michigan didn't like it".

DVD releases

Sony Pictures Home Entertainment has released all eleven seasons of Married... with Children on DVD in Regions 1, 2, & 4.  On December 12, 2010, Sony released a complete series set on DVD in Region 1.
On August 27, 2013, it was announced that Mill Creek Entertainment had acquired the R1 rights to various television series from the Sony Pictures library including Married... with ChildrenMill Creek Entertainment Signs Deals With Sony Pictures Home Entertainment To Expand Their Distribution Partnership with the original theme song "Love and Marriage" sung by Frank Sinatra. They subsequently re-released the first two seasons on DVD on January 21, 2014.Short Delay plus Box Art for Mill Creek's 'Seasons 3 & 4' DVDs

DVD special features

(Note: The Big Bundy Box set's Special Features contains interviews with David Faustino and Katey Sagal)
The DVD box sets from season 3 onward do not feature the original "Love and Marriage" theme song in the opening sequence. This was done because Sony was unable to obtain the licensing rights to the theme song for later sets. Despite this, the end credits on the DVDs for season 3 still include a credit for "Love and Marriage." On the Mill Creek sets, Love and Marriage is restored from Season 3 onward.
In December 2007 the Big Bundy Box—a special collection box with all seasons plus new interviews with Sagal and David Faustino—was released.
The DVD box set is rated  PG  for Parental Guidance in Australia and  PG  in New Zealand for sexual references.

Merchandise

Books

=Comic books=

Married... with Children was adapted into a comic book series by NOW Comics in 1990.

Toys

=Board Game=

=Action figures=

Two series (10 in all) of 8" action figures were produced by Classic TV Toys in 2005 and 2006.

International remakes

An Argentine remake was made in 2005, called Casados con Hijos. The success of the series trascended the borders of Argentina, being also issued by local channels in  Uruguay, Paraguay and Peru. It only had two seasons (2005 and 2006), but thanks to the incredible success of the sitcom, still airs Monday through Friday at 2pm and Saturday at 11.30 pm by Telefe.
The character names are: José "Pepe" Argento (based on Al, played by Guillermo Francella), Mónica "Moni" Argento (based on Peggy, played by Florencia Peña), Paola Argento (based on Kelly, played by Luisana Lopilato), Alfio "Coqui" Argento (based on Bud, played by Darío Lopilato), Dardo & María Elena Fuseneco(based on Marcy and Jefferson D'Arcy, played by Marcelo de Bellis and Érica Rivas).
In Armenia a remake made in 2009, with the name Բնակարան N2 (Bnakaran N2) (Apartment #2).Հայկական Երկրորդ Հեռուստաալիք 
In Brazil Rede Bandeirantes made a remake in 1999 with the name A Guerra dos Pintos (The War of The Pintos). 52 episodes were recorded but only 22 aired before cancelation.
In Bulgaria a remake is airing from March 26, 2012 with the name Женени с деца в България (Zheneni s detsa v Bulgaria) (Married with children in Bulgaria).
In Chile a remake was made in 2006 with the name Casados con Hijos (Married with children in Spanish).
In Colombia a remake was made in 2004 with the name Casados con Hijos (Married with children in Spanish).
In Croatia a remake called Bračne vode was broadcast from September 2008 until November 2009 on Nova TV channel. The characters based on the Bundys were called Zvonimir, Sunčica, Kristina and Boris Bandić while the ones based on Marcy and Steve were called Marica and Ivan Kumarica.
In Germany, the 1992 remake "

In 2006, Hungarian TV network TV2 purchased the license rights including scripts and hired the original producers from Sony Pictures for a remake show placed in Hungarian environment. It was entitled 
The Original Married... With Children ran on DTV for almost three years, on a daily basis, broadcasting the episodes from seasons 1–10. The show later aired on Domashniy TV. However, for unknown reasons, most episodes from season 11 were not shown. A Russian adaptation, titled  Happy Together (Sсhastlivy Vmeste; Happy Together), is now airing on TNT channel across the country. 
[/ref]
The character names are: Gena Bukin (based on Al, played by Viktor Loginov), Dasha Bukina (based on Peggy, played by Natalya Bochkareva), Sveta Bukina (based on Kelly, played by Darya Sagalova), Roma Bukin (based on Bud, played by Alexander Yakin), Elena and Anatoliy Poleno (based on Marcy and Jefferson D'Arcy, played by Yulia Zaharova and Pavel Savinkov), Evgeniy Stepanov (based on Steve Rhoades, played by Aleksey Sekirin), Sema Bukin (based on Seven, played by Ilya Butkovskiy), Baron Bukin (based on Buck and Lucky, played by Bayra).
In 1996, the UK production company Carlton Television produced Married for Life, a seven-episode sitcom that lasted one season. The Bundys were renamed as the Butlers, Russ Abbot played Ted/Al, Susan Kydd was Pam/Peggy, Lucy Blakely played Lucy/Kelly, and Peter England was Lee/Bud. The D'Arcys were renamed Hollingsworth and the Steve character was recast with Hugh Bonneville and Marcy was renamed Judy and played by Julie Dawn Cole. The series featured an early performance from Rob Brydon.

Spin-offs

U.S. syndication and international airings

The series ran on Fox for its eleven year run but it has also appeared in syndication reruns on other channels.
Married... with Children originally debuted in off-network syndication distributed by Columbia Pictures Television Distribution (now Sony Pictures Television Distribution) starting in the fall of 1991. The series later began airing on cable on FX from September 1998 until 2007. In June 2002, FX became the first television network to air the controversial, previously banned episode "I'll See You in Court", albeit in an edited format. The fully uncensored version of "I'll See You in Court" can only be seen on the DVD release Married... with Children: The Most Outrageous Episodes Volume 1. The version found on the Third Season DVD set is edited. In 2008, the Spike network reportedly paid US$12 million for broadcast rights to every episode including the unedited version of the infamous episode, "I'll See You in Court".'Married' set for Spike run. Variety, April 6, 2008.
The series started airing on Spike TV on September 29, 2008 with a weeklong marathon. TBS also began airing the show shortly after, acquiring the show in fall 2008 to run in the early morning hours, it runs for two to three hours (on rare occasions four or five) on TBS during the early morning hours (depending on the length of overnight programming). TV Land picked up the rights to broadcast the show from its MTV Networks sister Spike in August 2009. Comedy Central began airing the show on February 8, 2010; Comedy Central acquired rights to air the series from TV Land, who in turn, had earlier acquired the rights to the series from Spike, though Comedy Central dropped the rights to the series in April 2010. Spike picked up the rights to series again, and began airing the series for the second time on July 10, 2010, airing on weekend mornings only. MTV2 added the series on March 21, 2012 and VH1 Classic began airing the series on April 9, 2012. The series has aired on a total of seven MTV Networks owned cable networks since 2008. It airs on Antenna TV, Ion Television and TBS.
Married...

