[[Toronto Life]]

CATEGORIES: Canadian cultural magazines, Local interest magazines, Monthly magazines, St. Joseph Media magazines, Magazines published in Toronto

Toronto Life is a monthly Canadian magazine about entertainment, politics and life in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Toronto Life also publishes a number of annual special interest guides about the city, including Real Estate, Stylebook, Eating & Drinking, City Home and Neighbourhoods.  Established in 1966, it is now owned by St. Joseph Media. It has a circulation of 85,500, and readership of 727,000. The magazine is a major winner of the Canadian National Magazine Awards, leading current publications with 97 gold awards including 3 awards for Magazine of the Year in 1985, 1989, and 2007.

History

Established in 1966, Toronto Life was purchased by Michael de Pencier in 1972 and held until 2002, when it was sold to St. Joseph Media. The publisher also owns the tourism magazine Where Canada (published in several large cities), Fashion, Wish, Wedding Bells, and several smaller magazines. The current editor-in-chief is Sarah Fulford, who succeeded long-time editor John Macfarlane in 2008.
In March of 2014, Toronto Life was required to shut down its unpaid internship programme after the Ontario Ministry of Labour declared that its longstanding practice of not paying interns was in contravention of the Employment Standards Act."Ontario labour ministry cracks down on unpaid internships at Toronto Life, The Walrus", The Canadian Journalism Project, March 27, 2014 The magazine responded, saying "The idea that we can start paying everybody completely misunderstands the nature of the economics of the magazine industry at the moment.""Unpaid Internship Crackdown At Toronto Life, The Walrus Magazines", Huffington Post Canada, March 27, 2014 Toronto Life's first (unpaid) intern, Derek Finkle, started with the magazine in 1993. During his internship he wrote a cover story for the magazine for free. He weighed in on the controversy saying that he backs the decision of the Ontario Ministry of Labour."The Unpaid Internship Conspiracy", TheStoryboard.ca, March 31, 2014

Torontolife.com and digital brand expansion

Toronto Life's website was first launched in 1996 and carried the name "Toronto Life Online."
It was not until 2007 that the magazine began publishing regular online-exclusive stories on the site. Their first major, heavily-marketed web initiative was a daily blog
In December 2007, the magazine ceased printing a longstanding series of monthly subscriber-only City Guides, and began publishing the restaurant reviews and shopping information they contained exclusively to the website, making the content free for all readers. In the same release, Toronto Life also announced that they'd hired Matthew Fox away from Montreal-based Maisonneuve magazine to be their new online editor.
The magazine expanded its online-only reach, tasking regular food writer James Chatto and wine columnist David Lawrason to contribute daily web stories over-and-above to their work in the print magazine. City politics journalist Phillip Preville similarly began writing daily commentary as "Preville on Politics". This online column was rebranded as "City State" in May 2008.
In June 2008, in a widely-criticised move, Toronto Life shut down all of the blogs on its website. The closure of the four blogs was seen as a surprising and sudden end, especially given how two of them had only recently been launched. ("Spectator" in February 2008 and "City State" in May 2008.) Publisher Sharon McAuley later admitted the projects attracted a lower-than-expected audience numbers and did not achieve the advertising and editorial goals that had been set. She further asserted that the decision to stop publishing these blogs reflected a reallocation of resources, rather than an outright budget cut, and promised that new web initiatives would be forthcoming. Editor Matthew Fox reinforced this message, stating that "our analysis of the reader numbers leads us to believe that there is a better approach."
At the end of 2008, Toronto Life hired Gary Campbell away from Quill & Quire magazine to develop a new online strategy for the brand.
The website's new online approach resonated well with readers and critics. In October 2009, Torontolife.
In March 2010, the online team redesigned the website's homepage and expanded its online editorial by adding two more daily blogs: one devoted to politics and real estate ("The Informer") and one about celebrities, TV and movies ("The Hype"). Toronto Life also announced that in six months, site traffic had further grown to 370,000 monthly unique visitors.
In March 2012, Toronto Life released the Best Restaurants App, a smartphone mobile app restaurant finder for iPhone and iPad.
The current Executive Editor and Executive Producer for Torontolife. He replaced Matthew Fox as editor in May 2011. The website's average monthly audience is currently about 600,000 unique visitors.






