[[Alternative comedy]]

CATEGORIES: Comedy genres

Alternative comedy is a term coined in the 1980s for a style of comedy
After his performance in Young Adult, Oswalt clarified the method and attitude of the alt comics he came up with as, "Don't try it, man. Just go up and wing it". He goes on to say how it affected his acting, "I didn't really have the confidence to in the work...I think a lot of that comes from insecurity. It's that fashion of improv and amateurism that comes from the insecurity of saying to the audience, 'Well, it doesn't matter if it doesn't go well, because I didn't even try that hard to begin with.' It's like, 'Oh, that's why you're not trying. If you actually tried hard and it sucked, then you've got to blame yourself.' So that's what makes it hard for some people to sit down and actually just do the fucking work, because doing the work means you're making a commitment."

United Kingdom

The official history of London's Comedy Store credits comedian and author Tony Allen with coining the term, though in his autobiography, the late Malcolm Hardee claims to have coined the term in 1978.
Alternative comedy came to describe an approach to stand-up comedy that was neither racist nor sexist but free-form and devised by the performers themselves. This style won out in a 'civil war'
Alexei Sayle, the Comedy Store's first MC, provided angry character comedy satirising the left. Fellow-MC Tony Allen broke the taboos of personal and sexual politics while actor Keith Allen confronted audiences in a fearless series of 'put-ons' and was a big influence on the early cabaret scene that was about to emerge. with "Late Night Alternative", at the Heriot-Watt Theatre.
The Comedy Store now began advertising itself as 'The Home of Alternative Comedy'
Just about every major British stand up comedian in the last thirty years started their career in alternative comedy clubs, including Ben Elton, Jo Brand, Jack Dee, Lee Evans, Eddie Izzard, Harry Hill, Peter Kay, Jimmy Carr and Ross Noble. Meanwhile, other comics had left the Store with Peter Richardson to form The Comic Strip performing  'Comedy Cabaret' featuring double acts and sketch comedy, at The Boulevard Theatre, Soho in October 1980. The Comic Strip included Manchester University and Drama School graduates Rik Mayall, Ade Edmondson, Nigel Planer and French and Saunders and aimed their talents at television. Ben Elton, who then became The Store's next MC, also became co-writer of BBC2's TV hit The Young Ones – as author William Cook noted, "After The Young Ones made him Alternative Comedy's hidden voice, Saturday Live (Channel 4) made him its most visible face." As 'The Comic Strip Presents..', the team altogether made 42 TV Movies for Channel 4 and the BBC.
If Tony Allen, nicknamed by comics and critics as 'The Godfather of Alternative Comedy' "was the theory of anarchic comedy" wrote comic Arthur Smith, "then Malcolm Hardee was its cock-eyed embodiment". Hardee was the much loved MC at the Tunnel Palladium, The Mitre, Deptford 1984-89 whose audience were famous for their vocal participation and wit. There he influenced the early careers of Vic Reeves and Bob Mortimer, Simon Day, Chris Lynam, Martin Soan, Harry Enfield and many others to whom he gave their first gigs. He also found fame himself as part of 'The Greatest Show on Legs' which had been started by Martin Soan, his part in the legendary 'The Balloon Dance' as well as his many shows at The Edinburgh Festival.

United States

New York City

In New York City, much of what is called alternative or "downtown comedy" In addition, many alternative comics use unusual presentation styles, such as Demetri Martin, Slovin and Allen, opting to play music, give Powerpoint presentations or act out sketches.  Many alternative comics such as Sarah Silverman, Janeane Garofalo, and Todd Barry also perform in mainstream comedy venues. The now-defunct Luna Lounge in New York's Lower East Side was home  to a celebrated weekly alternative comedy stand-up series called "Eating It" from 1995 to 2005, co-created by Garofalo, which featured a changing line-up including Louis CK, Jim Norton, Ted Alexandro, Todd Barry, H. Jon Benjamin, Greg Giraldo, Patrice O'Neal,  Patton Oswalt, Sarah Vowell, Mike Birbiglia, Dave Chappelle, Roseanne Barr, Sarah Silverman, Garofalo, and numerous others until the property was sold and the building razed.
Warren St. John said that the "inspiration" for alternative comedy in New York City is the Upright Citizens Brigade. The group originally formed at the Upright Citizens Brigade Theatre in Chelsea in 1999.  Four years later, in 2003, several performers at the UCB spun off their own theater, and formed the PIT. St. John also argues that one reason that unusual comics can succeed in New York City is that they don't have to tour part-time, as many of them also work as writers on local comedy television shows such as The Daily Show and the Late Show with David Letterman.

Los Angeles

Patton Oswalt cited Dana Gould as the originator of the Alternative Comedy Scene in the early nineties, whom also cites Janeane Garofalo as another pregenitor of the scene. Beth Lapides started the Un-Cabaret shows, which was the flagship of the alternative comedy movement.com/2006/12/27/dana_gould_writ.Nerdist Podcast with Dana Gould
Patton Oswalt was essential in pioneering the alternative comedy on the West Coast. He created The Comedians of Comedy tour, which played across the US in independent music venues intermittently from 2004 to 2008. The original tour was hosted by Oswalt, and featured Maria Bamford, Zach Galifianakis, and Brian Posehn.

South Africa

South African comedy often comprises racial or stereo-type based humour, alternative comedy in South Africa tends to avoid such subject matter. It is hard to define alternative comedy but subject matter may include taboo, dark, non sequitur, geek and various other topics whilst excluding racial, scatological, stereo-type, South Africanised humour and other topics considered mainstream. Although comedians of this genre may include mainstream topics it does not form the majority of their sets.
It is hard to say exactly where it started but The Underground in Melville Johannesburg was known for its risqué humour proliferated by founder John Vlismas. The Comedy UndergroundThe Comedy Underground is dead! was fertile development ground for alternative humour with its anything goes policy. Since its closure in 2010 alternative comedy has found new venues including Foxwood theatre, Picollinos and various others. Johannesburg remains the home of South African alternative.
One of the driving forces behind the increasing prominence of alternative comedy is the Johannesburg Comedy CartelJoburg Comedy Cartel whose members include Shaun Wewege,Shaun Wewege Warren Robertson, Vittorio Leonardi and Alyn Adams. Other South African comedians who fall into the genre are; Dale Amler, Roni Modimola, Mark Banks, John Vlismas.John Vlismas on the post-Fifa apocalypse, Sepp Blatter and Helen Zille
Mel Miller is arguably considered one of the pioneers of the alternative genre in South Africa. During the Apartheid era Millers material was considered "inappropriate" or radical resulting in more than one run-in and detention with the South African Bureau of State Security




