[[D.N.Angel]]

CATEGORIES: 1997 manga, 2003 anime television series, ADV Films, Fantasy anime and manga, Kadokawa Shoten manga, Kaitō anime and manga, Magical girl anime and manga, Odex, Romance anime and manga, Shōjo manga, Tokyopop titles, TV Tokyo shows, Xebec (studio), Yukiru Sugisaki

 is a Japanese manga series written and illustrated by Yukiru Sugisaki. The ongoing manga premiered in Japan in the Kadokawa Shoten shōjo magazine Monthly Asuka in November 1997. The series went on an extended hiatus after the August 2005 issue, returning in the April 2008 issue. Kadokawa Shoten has collected the individual chapters and published them in 15 tankōbon volumes so far. The manga series is licensed for English language release in North America and the United Kingdom by Tokyopop, which has released 13 volumes of the series as of 2011.
Xebec adapted the manga into a 26-episode anime series which aired in Japan on TV Tokyo from April 3, 2003 until September 25, 2003. The anime was later adapted into second two volume manga series, a PlayStation 2 video game, and a series of drama CDs.

Plot

D.N. At the story's opening, Daisuke declares love for his crush, a girl named Risa Harada, on his fourteenth birthday. She rejects him, and later that day, the heart-broken Daisuke undergoes a strange mutation that changes him into another person. He is told calmly by his mother Emiko that, because of a strange genetic condition, all the males in Daisuke's family gain the countenance of Dark Mousy, a famous phantom thief. The transformation occurs every time Daisuke has romantic feelings for his crush or whenever he thinks too long about her. Dark changes back into Daisuke the same way. Daisuke is forced to keep his family's secret and control his alter ego, Dark (who Risa, Daisuke's crush, has fallen for), while dashing his way out of being caught by the commander of the police. Daisuke learns that in order to return to normality, he must have his unrequited love returned. 
The aforementioned commander of the police is a classmate of Daisuke's named Satoshi Hiwatari. Hiwatari suffers from his own version of the phantom-thief curse, and a bond forms between Hiwatari and Daisuke because of their similar afflictions. Hiwatari carries the alter-ego named Krad. However, though Dark and Krad hate one another, Hiwatari and Daisuke maintain a strained but genuine friendship, despite Dark's constant moaning. Dark steals certain artistic objects of value, works made by Satoshi's ancestors, because they contain dangerous magical properties. Some of them, such as "The Second Hand of Time" and "Argentine" also have personalities of their own. Some of the objects that he steals are quite dangerous. Dark's method of stealing is based on garnering attention; before stealing, Emiko will send out a warning of what will be stolen.

Media

Manga

Written and illustrated by Yukiru Sugisaki, D.N. New chapters were serialized monthly until Sugisaki put the series on an extended hiatus after the August 2005 issue. The series eventually returned to serialization, starting in the April 2008 issue of Monthly Asuka, where it continues to run.
Tokyopop licensed the series for an English-language release in North America and the United Kingdom, with the first volume of the series released there on April 6, 2004. On November 8, 2005, Tokyopop released a box set containing the first two volumes of the series. A total of 13 volumes have been translated and released as of December 8, 2009. However, Viz Media recently picked up the digital publication rights to the manga for Kindle. 
In August 2003, while the primary series was on hiatus, a second manga series, D.N. Also written by Sugisaki, the short series was based on the anime adaptation, which had diverged from the storyline of the manga series. D.N. It was published in two tankōbon volumes by Kadokawa Shoten.

Anime

D.N. The series was directed by Koji Yoshikawa and Nobuyoshi Habara.
The series was originally licensed for release in North America and the United Kingdom by ADV Films.
Five pieces of theme music are used in the anime adaptation. The song .

Video game

A PlayStation 2 video game, , was published by Takara. The game was released in Japan on September 25, 2003 to coincide with the conclusion of the anime adaptation.  However, the game storyline is closer to the manga, and even mentions past events from the manga that would make it inconsistent with the anime.

Drama CDs

A trilogy of drama CDs called D.N. Some of the scenes follow the manga word-for-word, while others have either minor differences or do not appear in the manga at all. The first CD is called "Target: Sleeping Beauty" and was released on March 5, 1999. The second is "2nd Target: Love Sick" and was released on November 17, 1999. The third is "3rd Target: Love Pleasure" and was released on December 15, 1999. There is another CD, "A Legend of a Vampire" that uses the same voice cast as the Wink dramas, though it doesn't relate to the manga. This CD was released in 2001. The plot centers around Daisuke's alter ego, Dark, being a vampire. Krad, who wasn't in the Wink dramas, also made an appearance in this CD.
There were also two drama CDs released after the anime titled "Sweet" and "Cute". These CDs use the anime voice actors and are based on the anime with events taking place just before its ending. They also include parodies of scenes in the anime.

Novels

Three novels were released in Japan between September 2000 and September 2001.  The titles are .  Although there was an ad for them left in Tokyopop's translation of the fourth manga volume, they have not been licensed, so little is known about them.

Radio program

A series of seven broadcasts aired Japan  in 2005 called Decade on Net: Radio D.N. It was hosted by Miyu Irino and Akira Ishida, who voiced Daisuke Niwa and Satoshi Hiwatari, respectively.






