[[Hairspray (musical)]]

CATEGORIES: 2002 musicals, Broadway musicals, Culture of Baltimore, Maryland, West End musicals, Musicals based on films, African-American Civil Rights Movement (1955–1968) in popular culture, Laurence Olivier Award winning musicals, Critics' Circle Theatre Award winning musicals, Musicals by Thomas Meehan (writer), Tony Award for Best Musical

Hairspray is a musical with music by Marc Shaiman, lyrics by Scott Wittman and Shaiman and a book by Mark O'Donnell and Thomas Meehan, based on the 1988 John Waters film Hairspray.  The songs include 1960s-style dance music and "downtown" rhythm and blues.  In 1962 Baltimore, Maryland, plump teenager Tracy Turnblad's dream is to dance on The Corny Collins Show, a local TV dance program based on the real-life Buddy Deane Show.  When Tracy wins a role on the show, she becomes a celebrity overnight, and meets a colorful array of characters, such as Corny Collins (The show's singing host who shares Tracy's liberal political views) and Velma Von Tussle (The villainous producer of the show who does everything in her power to further her daughter's career and destroy Tracy's and Corny's). She then launches a campaign to integrate the show.  Hairspray is a social commentary on the injustices of parts of American society in the 1960s.
The musical's original Broadway production opened on August 15th, 2002.
In 2003 it won eight Tony Awards out of thirteen nominations. It ran for over 2,500 performances and closed on January 4, 2009.  Hairspray has also had national tours, a London West End production, and numerous foreign productions and was adapted as a 2007 musical film.  The London production was nominated for a record-setting eleven Laurence Olivier Awards, winning for Best New Musical and in three other categories.
In 2008, popular magazine New York Theatre Monthly included the characters of Tracy, Corny and Edna on its list of "The 100 Greatest Roles in Musical Theatre".

Background

According to interviews included as an extra feature on the 2007 film's DVD release, theatre producer Margo Lion first conceived of Hairspray as a stage musical in 1998 after seeing a television broadcast of the original film. "I was home looking at a lot of movies, and one of those movies was Hairspray". The story was about a unlikely heroine Tracy Turnblad who gets on her local dance show and breaks down their segregation rules. She contacted John Waters, who gave her his blessing, then acquired the rights from New Line Cinema.  Lion contacted Marc Shaiman, who expressed interest in the project only if his partner Scott Wittman could participate, and Lion agreed. The two submitted three songs – one of which, "Good Morning Baltimore", eventually became the show's opening number.  Based on their initial work, Lion felt confident that she had hired the right team. "Riding High With a Big, Bouffant Hit; After 25 Years of Paying Dues, an Independent Producer Scores With 'Hairspray'". The New York Times, October 16, 2002
[/ref]
Lion contacted Rob Marshall about directing the musical.  At the time he was involved in negotiations to direct the screen adaptation of Chicago, but he agreed to become involved in the early development stages of Hairspray with the stipulation he would drop out if assigned the film.  Marshall remembered Marissa Jaret Winokur from her brief appearance in the film American Beauty and arranged a meeting with Shaiman and Wittman.  The two immediately felt she was right for the role of Tracy Turnblad but hesitated to commit without seeing any other auditions.  They hired Winokur to work with them on the project with the understanding she might be replaced later.  One year later, Winokur was diagnosed with cervical cancer.  Certain she would lose the role if the creative team learned about her condition, she underwent a hysterectomy without telling anyone but her immediate family.  The treatment and surgery succeeded, and Winokur returned to the project.com
[/ref]  Meanwhile, Marshall had started work on Chicago, and Lion hired Jack O'Brien and Jerry Mitchell to direct and to choreograph, respectively. Winokur was one of the first to audition for the role of Tracy Turnblad and spent two years preparing with voice and dance lessons."Marissa Jaret Winokur"Encyclopedia of World Biography, accessed February 8, 2010 Tracy's mother had been portrayed by Divine in the original film, and Shaiman liked the idea of maintaining the tradition of casting a male as Edna Turnblad.  Harvey Fierstein auditioned for the role with a "half hour vocal audition".  He thought they were "pacifying" him, but he was told "they don't want anyone but you". "Everything's Coming Up 'Hairspray'". The Advocate,  July 23, 2002
According to Shaiman, one song, "I Know Where I've Been", became controversial during the genesis of the score:

Productions

Original Broadway production

After a successful tryout at Seattle's 5th Avenue Theatre, Hairspray opened on Broadway at the Neil Simon Theatre on August 15, 2002. The production was directed by Jack O'Brien and choreographed by Jerry Mitchell, with set design by David Rockwell, costume design by William Ivey Long, lighting design by Kenneth Posner, sound design by Steve C. Kennedy, and the many distinctive wigs in the show by Paul Huntley. The original Broadway cast included Marissa Jaret Winokur and Harvey Fierstein in the lead roles of Tracy and Edna respectively. The cast also featured Matthew Morrison as Link, Laura Bell Bundy as Amber, Kerry Butler as Penny, Linda Hart as Velma, Mary Bond Davis as Motormouth Maybelle, Corey Reynolds as Seaweed, Jackie Hoffman as Female Authority Figure, Dick Latessa as Wilbur and Clarke Thorell as Corny Collins. The Dynamites were played by Kamilah Marshall, Shayna Steele and Judine Richard.
Hairspray received Tony Award nominations in 12 categories, winning eight, including for best musical, book, score and direction.  Winokur, Fierstein and Latessa received awards for their performances.  The production ran for more than six years, closing on January 4, 2009 after 2,642 performances. Thorell returned to the cast for the final ten months. Fierstein and Winokur returned to the cast for the final performances. "Hairspray to Close Jan. 4, 2009; Fierstein Returns Nov. 11", playbill. "Tony Award Winner Winokur Will Return to Broadway's Hairspray".   Playbill.com, November 18, 2008

Original London production

The West End production opened at the Shaftesbury Theatre on October 11, 2007 for previews before its official opening on October 30. Michael Ball played Edna, with Mel Smith as Wilbur Turnblad, newcomer Leanne Jones as Tracy, Tracie Bennett as Velma, Paul Manuel as Corny Collins, Rachael Wooding as Amber, Elinor Collett as Penny, and Ben James-Ellis as Link.  The original creative team of the Broadway production, with director Jack O'Brien and choreographer Jerry Mitchell, reunited for the London production. "Hairspray Begins London Run Oct 11". Playbill. "London Hairspray Breaks Record With 11 Olivier Award Nominations". An unknown star, Aoife O'Neill from Ireland played the role of Tracy to the joys of the westend audience. Playbill."Olivier Winners 2008".  Oivierawards.Paddock, Terri."'Hairspray' Posts London Closing Notices" whatsonstage.com, 27 January 2010

Original Australian production

An Australian production of Hairspray opened in Melbourne at the Princess Theatre on October 2, 2010 to critical acclaim."'Hairspray Reviews".  Hairspraythemusical.Field, Katherine. "'Hairspray' comes to Australia".  News.com.  The cast includes Jaz Flowers as Tracy, Trevor Ashley as Edna, Jack Chambers as Link, and Tevin Campbell reprising his role from the Broadway production as Seaweed J. Stubbs.  Atkins redesigned the production using new technologies. "'Hairspray' Sets A New Benchmark in Australian Theatre".  Undercover.Graham, Lucy. "'Hairspray': A "Brand New Do" in Music Theatre Technology".  Stagewhispers.au, 2010, accessed August 22, 2011 The musical opened at Sydney's Lyric Theatre at The Star Casino on 11 June 2011 and closed on 9 October 2011, ending its Australian run.

National tours

The First U.S. national tour started in September 2003 in Baltimore and ended in June 2006.com "'Hairspray' National Tour, 2003" broadwayworld.Jones, Kenneth. "'Hairspray' National Tour Cast Announced; Vilanch Bows in Baltimore Sept. 9".  Playbill.Kuryak, Timothy."Hairspray Teases LA" broadwayworld.com, August 1, 2004
In July 2006, a non-Equity U.S. and Asian tour opened in Atlantic City's Harrah's Casino.  The shorter "casino version" was used for a six-week run, but when the tour moved on, it continued with the full version of the show minus the character of Lorraine. The production starred Brooklynn Pulver as Tracy, Jerry O'Boyle as Edna, Dan Ferretti as Wilbur, Constantine Rousouli as Link, Christian Dante White as Seaweed, Alyssa Malgeri as Penny, Jarret Mallon as Corny, Happy McPartlin as Velma, Pearl Thomas as Amber and Yvette Clark as Motormouth Maybelle. Th tour played sit down engagements in Tokyo, Shanghai and Beijing.  It played its final performance on April 25, 2010 at the Fox Performing Arts Center in Riverside, California."Official U.S. tour".  Hairsprayontour.com, accessed August 22, 2011 
After the West End production closed, Hairspray began touring the UK and Ireland, starting at the Wales Millennium Centre in Cardiff on April 7, 2010, following previews from March 30. The tour stars Michael Ball, Brian Conley and Michael Starke alternating as Edna, Les Dennis, Nigel Planer and Micky Dolenz alternating as Wilbur and Laurie Scarth as Tracy. "Casting Confirmed for U.K. Tour of Hairspray; Olivier Winner Michael Ball Returns".  Playbill.com, February 8, 2010
It was recently announced that Hairspray will Tour the UK and Ireland in 2013. The show will open on February 13 in The Lowry Theatre in Manchester with Mark Benton playing Edna Turnblad. Lucy Benjamin playing Velma Von Tussle, Marcus Collins as Seaweed Stubbs and Freya Sutton as Tracy Turnblad, respectively. Further casting to be announced soon.broadwayworld.com/article/HAIRSPRAY-to-Tour-Ireland-and-the-UK-in-2013-Mark-Benton-Stars-as-Edna-Turnblad-20120720

Other productions

A Las Vegas production ran at the Luxor Hotel in 2006 starring Katrina Rose Dideriksen as Tracy, Austin Miller as Link, and Fierstein and Latessa reprising their roles as Edna and Wilbur.  This ninety-minute version was played in one act.  Cut songs included "The Big Dollhouse", "(The Legend of) Miss Baltimore Crabs", "Velma's Revenge", "Good Morning Baltimore (Reprise)", and "Cooties". "'Hairspray' in Vegas: Trimming a Tony Winner for a Move to the Strip".  Broadway.com, December 8, 2005
Royal Caribbean International presents the show on their new ship MS Oasis of the Seas, which made its maiden voyage in December 2009. The show is performed in the ship's 1350 seat Opal Theater three times on each seven-night cruise.
A production at the Hollywood Bowl ran from August 5–7, 2011, directed and choreographed by Jerry Mitchell. "Hollywood Bowl to Offer 'Hairspray' in Summer 2011 Plus 'Grease', 'Sound of Music' Sing-Alongs".  Playbill. The cast also featured Corbin Bleu (Seaweed J. Stubbs), Drew Carey (Wilbur), Diana DeGarmo (Penny), Mo Gaffney (Prudy and others), Nick Jonas (Link Larkin), Darlene Love (Motormouth Maybelle), Susan Anton (Velma Von Tussle) and John Stamos (Corny Collins). "Hollywood Bowl 'Hairspray' to Feature Harvey Fierstein, Marissa Jaret Winokur, Drew Carey, Darlene Love, Nick Jonas".  Playbill. "Susan Anton Joins 'Hairspray' at the Hollywood Bowl".  Playbill.com, July 20, 2011
US regional premiere 
The Riverton Arts Council in Riverton Utah Preformend the US regional premiere at the Sandra N. Lloyd Performing Arts Center July 30-Aug. 21 2010

International productions

The first international production opened in Toronto at the Princess of Wales Theatre in April 2004 and ran for 245 performances. Vanessa Olivarez, a former American Idol contestant, starred as Tracy, and Jay Brazeau starred as Edna. "A Bad Hair Day: 'Hairspray''s Toronto Run Will End Nov. 28".  Playbill.
A South African production opened in Johannesburg in October 2007 with the original direction and choreography recreated by Matt Lenz and Greg Graham.  New set and costume designs were by Michael Bottari and Ronald Case.co.za 
On November 14, 2008, a production of Hairspray in Manila in the Philippines, starring Madel Ching as Tracy and Michael de Mesa as Edna.  The production closed on December 7, 2008."'Hairspray' Manilla A Sneak Peek During Rehearsals" thebachelorgirl. A 2010 Brazilian tour stopped in São Paulo, Brasilia, Curitiba and Porto Alegre.
A Dutch production ran during the 2009/2010 season. Edna Turnblad was played by Arjan Ederveen and Link was Jim Bakkum (runner-up in the first season of the Dutch American Idol).  A re-creation of the Broadway/Wast End production of the show opened in Dubai in July 2010 with Leanne Jones, from the West End production, reprising her role as Tracy and Antony Stuart-Hicks as Edna."'Hairspray' and 'Fame' reviewed" timeoutdubai.com, 14 July 2010
Other productions opened in Canada, Finland, Japan, South Korea,South Korea production website hairspray-musical.co."'Hairspray' in Mexico".  Mexico.com, January 22, 2010 (in Spanish)  Hairspray has been translated into German, Finnish, Spanish, Japanese, Korean, Italian, Portuguese and French.
In Perú, the musical will be released on 14 May 2012 starring Sergio Galliani, Jesús Neyra, Gisela Ponce de León, Rossana Fernández-Maldonado, Bettina Oneto and Oriana Cicconi.El musical de Broadway "Hairspray" será adaptado en Lima
In Germany, a production of Hairspray, directed by Andreas Gergen and choreographed by Danny Costello, will premiere in Munich on July 4, 2012, and in Merzig on July 27. The cast includes Uwe Kröger as Edna Turnblad and Conny Braun as Tracy Turnblad."Hairspray.de
A production of Hairspray, directed and choreographed by Anthony Williams, will be produced by the Aberystwyth Arts Centre, Aberystwyth, UK in the Summer of 2012. The creative team for the production includes musical director Michael Morwood, set designer Ali Allen, and sound designer Martyn J Hunt. It will run from July 2012 to September 2012. The cast includes Andrew Agnew as Edna Turnblad, Jenny O'Leary as Tracy Turnblad, Morgan Crowley as Wilbur Turnblad, and Lori Haley Fox as Velma Van Tussle. 
Other UK productions of the show have included a Curve theatre, Leicester production, as directed by Paul Kerryson, starring Waterloo Road's Rebecca Craven and David Witts, amongst others. This ran from February to April 2014. 
Hairspray will premiere in New Zealand in August 2012 at the Opera House, Wellington.
In 2011 the amateur rights to Hairspray opened in Australia, resulting in over a dozen amateur productions within 12 months of each other within Melbourne alone, beginning with the Australian Amateur Premiere of SLAMS MTC's Production of Hairspray which opened in March 2011 at the Mahon Theatre starring Lucy Johnson as Tracy Turnblad, Joel Batalha as Edna Turnblad, Felicity Eastwood as Motormouth Maybell and Daniel Solomon as Link Larkin. The show received some negative feedback for colour blind casting resulting in fair skinned actors portraying African American characters, however this was stated to be due to an extremely poor turnout of dark skinned auditionees.

School adaptation

In August 2008, the British television channel Sky 1 began broadcasting Hairspray: The School Musical, which followed the development of a North London comprehensive school's production of Hairspray from audition to performance, with input from various actors and creatives, including members of the Broadway production team and the West End cast.
The first amateur MTI production was produced at the French Woods Festival of the Performing Arts in the summer of 2008.
Bedford Girls' School returned to the London theatre version of Hairspray for their performances on February 8 and 9 2013.

Synopsis

Setting: Baltimore, Maryland, June 1962

Act I

As "pleasantly plump" teenager Tracy Turnblad lies in bed, she muses about her love for her hometown, her love of dancing, and her desire to be famous ("Good Morning Baltimore"). She goes to school and is given a warning for "inappropriate hair height". After school, Tracy rushes home with her best friend, Penny, to catch the local teenage dance show, The Corny Collins Show ("The Nicest Kids in Town"). Edna, Tracy's shy and plus-sized mother, is ironing and complains about the noise of the music coming from the television, while Penny's mother, Prudy complains about it being race music. After an announcement that auditions for a place on the show will be held,due to the fact that Brenda (one of the Corny Collins Council Members)leaves the show due to being pregnant. Tracy begs her mother for permission to audition. Edna, fearing that Tracy will be laughed at due to her weight, refuses. Penny and Amber (the main dancer on The Corny Collins Show) have similar arguments with their mothers ("Mama, I'm a Big Girl Now").
After gaining permission and support from her father, Wilbur, Tracy auditions for the show and bumps into teenage heartthrob, Link Larkin, which leads into a dream sequence ("I Can Hear the Bells"). Velma Von Tussle, the racist producer of The Corny Collins Show, rejects Tracy from the audition because of her size ("(The Legend of) Miss Baltimore Crabs"), as well as refusing a black girl, Little Inez.
Back at school, Tracy is sent to detention for her "monumental hair-don't". There she meets black dancer, Seaweed J. Stubbs (the son of the host of "Negro Day" on The Corny Collins Show, Motormouth Maybelle), who teaches her several dance moves. She uses the new dance steps at the Sophomore Hop the following day to introduce herself to Corny Collins ("The Madison"). When Corny sees how well Tracy can dance, he gives her a place on the show ("The Nicest Kids in Town" (Reprise)). During the broadcast, Link, following Corny's suggestion, sings "It Takes Two" to Tracy, much to Amber's dismay. After the show, Mr. Spritzer, the show's worrisome sponsor, appeals to Velma over Tracy's appointment to the Council. Velma, threatening to fire Corny from the show, is eventually left distraught and determines to ruin Tracy ("Velma's Revenge").
At the Turnblad house, Edna is receiving calls from fans who saw Tracy on the show. A call comes in from Mr. Pinky, the owner of a plus-size dress shop, for an endorsement. Tracy pleads with her mother to come with her and to act as her agent although Edna has not left their apartment in years. Finally making it outside, Edna is given a huge makeover, as she is told, ("Welcome to the '60s") and Tracy becomes the spokes-girl for the shop. At school, signs of Tracy's fame are evident in the schoolyard, with graffiti on the walls and another Council Member sporting Tracy's signature hairdo. During a game of dodge ball, a jealous Amber knocks Tracy out, and Link rushes to her side. Penny and Seaweed, who have developed a liking for each other, rush to fetch the school nurse, only to find her out sick. Seaweed, suggesting that some fun would make Tracy feel better, invites all of them to his mother's record shop for a platter party ("Run and Tell That!").
At the shop, Tracy rallies everyone to march against the station on the following day's Mother-Daughter Day, as blacks are not allowed on the show except for the monthly Negro Day. Before they start, Motormouth Maybelle convinces the initially reluctant Edna and Wilbur to march as well. During the protest, led by Motormouth, Velma calls the police and fights break out. When the police arrive on the scene, almost everyone is arrested ("Big, Blonde, and Beautiful").

Act II

After the march, most of the women are locked up in a women's penitentiary ("The Big Dollhouse"). Because of Velma's dirty tactics, the governor pardons and releases both her and Amber. Wilbur bails out the remaining people, excluding Tracy who is forced to remain in jail through another one of Velma's manipulations.  Tracy is alone and wishes that Link could be with her ("Good Morning Baltimore" (Reprise)). Back at the Har-De-Har Hut (Wilbur's joke shop), Wilbur and Edna are left destitute because of the money it cost them to bail everyone out and with Tracy still in prison. Edna sympathizes with her daughter's dream – she had dreamt of making her "own line of queen-sized dress patterns". She and Wilbur reminisce about their past and how they can never be parted from each other ("(You're) Timeless to Me").
During the night, Link sneaks into the jail where he finds Tracy in solitary confinement. As Link and Tracy reunite, Penny's mother, Prudy, punishes Penny for "going to jail without her permission" and ties her up in her bedroom where Seaweed comes to her rescue.  Both couples declare their love for one another ("Without Love"). After escaping from their respective prisons, the couples seek refuge at Motormouth Maybelle's Record Shop. Tracy thinks that it is unfair that after all of their hard work, The Corny Collins Show is still segregated. They devise a plan to help integrate the show, and Motormouth remembers their long fight for equality ("I Know Where I've Been").
On the day of the Miss Teenage Hairspray competition, Corny Collins starts the show with a song ("(It's) Hairspray"). Amber shows off her talents in a bid to get more votes from the viewers ("Cooties"). Just as the results are about to be announced, Tracy (whose hair is straightened as a sign of her "non-conformity to the man") takes over the stage, and is joined by Link, Penny (now transformed from drool to cool), Seaweed, Edna, Wilbur, Little Inez, and Motormouth. Tracy is declared the winner of the competition and Corny declares The Corny Collins Show to finally be racially integrated. When all is announced, Mr. Spritzer runs onstage thrilled with the public's response to the telecast and announces that the governor has pardoned Tracy and he offers Link a recording contract and Motormouth the position of vice president of Ultra Glow – beauty products for women of color. Prudy arrives at the station and, seeing how happy Penny is with Seaweed, accepts her daughter for who she is. At the height of the moment, the company invites Amber and Velma to join the celebration. With the station in joyous celebration, Tracy and Link cement their love with a kiss ("You Can't Stop the Beat").

Characters

Principal roles and casts of major productions of stage productions of Hairspray

Musical numbers

†Not on the cast recording. 

Score revisions and additional songs

Hairspray went through several revisions before and during its pre-Broadway run in Seattle, in the process eliminating and replacing several musical numbers.  One of such songs, an infomercial about safety on the road titled "Blood on the Pavement", followed "The Nicest Kids in Town", and is included on the cast album.  In early revisions, various songs, including "The Status Quo" and "Velma's Cha-Cha" (its short reprise replaced by "Rage," in turn dropped in favor of "Velma's Revenge"), were used during Tracy's audition and dismissal, but the team instead optioned for "(The Legend of) Miss Baltimore Crabs", as the audience did not like seeing Tracy being verbally attacked after "I Can Hear the Bells". 59 After the auditions, there was a scene in the Har-De-Har Hut in which Wilbur tried to cheer up Tracy after her rejection,The Roots, p. 62 singing that "It Doesn't Get Better than This".  Later replaced by the similar "Positivity", the scene was later cut early in the Seattle tryout as it was deemed emotionally redundant.
After Tracy eventually made it on the show, there was a song "The New Girl in Town", which was sung first by the Council girls and later by the black Girls.  Although later cut early during the Seattle tryout, it was included in the 2007 movie and appears in the show's instrumental score.net "The Mother-Daughter Cha-Cha-Cha" was another cut number that originally followed "Big, Blonde, and Beautiful".  Later, the writers absorbed the protest rally and Mother-Daughter Day into the number, thus deleting the song and folding the sequence into a single scene. 109 A song called "Step on Up" was also cut in favor of "I Know Where I've Been". 142-43 Early on in the genesis of the show, the plot involved a "Miss Auto Show" competition, as in the 1988 film, instead of "Miss Teenage Hairspray".  For this competition, later revised due to the cost of cars onstage, there was a song called "Take a Spin" sung by Corny in the place where "(It's) Hairspray" is now. 149 After Amber's rendition of "Cooties", Tracy had a song before the finale called "It Ain't Over 'Til the Fat Lady Sings," though, it was cut after the third reading of the show; it was included as a track on the Special Edition of the 2007 motion picture's soundtrack."Dear Listener", Note included in the Special Edition of the 2007 Hairspray Movie Soundtrack

Instrumentation

Hairspray's orchestration calls for fifteen musicians: three keyboards, the first of which is played by the conductor, bass guitar, two guitars, drums, percussion, trumpet, trombone, two woodwind players, two violins, and cello.  The guitarists both double on acoustic and electric guitars, and the trumpet doubles on flugelhorn; the original Broadway production also featured a piccolo trumpet double.  The first woodwind player doubles on tenor and alto saxophones, flute and clarinet.  The second woodwind player doubles on tenor, alto and baritone saxophones, flute and clarinet.
In the original Broadway production, a few of the actors mimed on musical instruments in order to fulfill a minimum musician requirement at the Neil Simon Theatre.

Response

Critics

According to Variety, Hairspray received thirteen favorable and four mixed reviews., p. 88  Charles Isherwood, in his Variety Magazine review wrote: "... Arriving in an aerosol fog of advance hype, it more than lives up to its promise."Isherwood, Charles. "'Hairspray", Daily Variety, August 16, 2002, p. 2  Ben Brantley wrote: "So what if it's more than a little pushy in its social preaching? Stocked with canny, deliriously tuneful songs by Marc Shaiman and Scott Wittman and directed by Jack O'Brien with a common touch that stops short of vulgarity, 'Hairspray' is as sweet as a show can be without promoting tooth decay. ...  ..... is taking the infectious hooks and rhythms from period pop and R&B and translating them into the big, bouncy sound that Broadway demands.... And while the savvy arrangements... nod happily to Motown, Elvis, Lesley Gore ballads and standards like "Higher and Higher," the score's appeal isn't nostalgic.  It's music that builds its own self-contained, improbably symmetrical world...."Brantley, Ben."Theater Review; Through Hot Pink Glasses, a World That's Nice" The New York Times, August 16, 2002, Section E, Part 1, Column 1 New York's Daily News wrote, "As Tracy, Marissa Jaret Winokur has the heft, the pipes and an enormously appealing stage presence. Her dancing may not be as special as the plot suggests, but she wins your heart... With this role, Fierstein places himself in the great line of Broadway divas."Kissel, Howard. "This Show Has Body And Bounce", Daily News (New York), August 16, 2002, p. 55

Box office and business

Hairspray opened with a $12 million advance; after the Tony Awards show (in June 2003), it was expected to do five times the business it normally did on a Monday."Tony Wins Signal Good News for 'Hairspray', 'Take Me Out', 'Journey', 'Nine' Box Office" playbill.5 million investment was recouped by May 2003 (approximately 9 months after its Broadway opening)."Broadway Smash 'Hairspray' Returns Investment" playbill."Grosses for Hairspray broadwayworld, accessed August 22, 2011

Adaptations

A film version was released in July 2007. The film was directed and choreographed by Adam Shankman and starred John Travolta as Edna Turnblad, Michelle Pfeiffer as Velma Von Tussle, James Marsden as Corny Collins, and Nikki Blonsky as Tracy Turnblad. Hugh Jackman and Joey McIntyre both wanted to play the role of Corny Collins, but lost to Jackman's X-Men co-star Marsden.

Awards and nominations

Original Broadway production

Original London production

Notes






