[[Tony Kushner]]

CATEGORIES: 1956 births, HIV/AIDS activists, American dramatists and playwrights, Columbia University alumni, Primetime Emmy Award winners, Gay writers, Juilliard School faculty, LGBT Jews, LGBT writers from the United States, Living people, Members of the American Academy of Arts and Letters, People from Lake Charles, Louisiana, Princess Grace Awards winners, Pulitzer Prize for Drama winners, Tony Award winners, Lambda Literary Award winners, Jewish American dramatists and playwrights, Tisch School of the Arts alumni, LGBT dramatists and playwrights

Anthony Robert "Tony" Kushner (born July 16, 1956) is an American playwright and screenwriter. He received the Pulitzer Prize for Drama in 1993 for his play Angels in America: A Gay Fantasia on National Themes. He co-authored with Eric Roth the screenplay for the 2005 film Munich, and he wrote the screenplay for the 2012 film Lincoln, both critically acclaimed movies. For his work, he received a National Medal of Arts from President Barack Obama in 2013.washingtontimes.com/blog/inside-politics/2013/jul/3/white-house-honor-star-wars-lucas-playwright-kushn/

Early life and education

Kushner was born in Manhattan, New York, to clarinetist and conductor William Kushner and bassoonist Sylvia Deutscher. His family is Jewish. Shortly after his birth, Kushner's parents moved to Lake Charles, Louisiana, the seat of Calcasieu Parish where he spent his childhood. During high school Kushner was active in policy debate. In 1974, Kushner moved to New York to begin his undergraduate college education at Columbia University, where he received a Bachelor of Arts degree in Medieval Studies in 1978. During graduate school, he spent the summers of 1978-1981 directing both early original works (Masque of the Owls and Incidents and Occurrences During the Travels of the Tailor Max) and plays by Shakespeare (A Midsummer Night's Dream and The Tempest) starring  the children attending the Governor's Program for Gifted Children (GPGC) in Lake Charles, Louisiana.
Kushner has received several honorary degrees: in 2003 from Columbia College Chicago;College Archives: Honorary Degree Recipients in 2008 an honorary Doctor of Letters from SUNY Purchase College, and in May, 2011 an honorary doctorate from CUNY's John Jay College of Criminal Justice.

Career

Kushner's best known work is Angels in America (a play in two parts: Millennium Approaches and Perestroika), a seven-hour epic about the AIDS epidemic in Reagan-era New York, which was later adapted into an HBO miniseries for which Kushner wrote the screenplay. His other plays include Hydriotaphia, Slavs!: Thinking About the Longstanding Problems of Virtue and Happiness, A Bright Room Called Day, Homebody/Kabul, and the book for the musical Caroline, or Change. His new translation of Bertolt Brecht's Mother Courage and Her Children was performed at the Delacorte Theater in the summer of 2006, starring Meryl Streep and directed by George C. Wolfe. Kushner has also adapted Brecht's The Good Person of Szechwan, Corneille's The Illusion, and S. Ansky's play The Dybbuk.
In the early 2000s, Kushner began writing for film. His co-written screenplay Munich was produced and directed by Steven Spielberg in 2005. In January 2006, a documentary feature about Kushner entitled Wrestling With Angels debuted at the Sundance Film Festival. The film was directed by Freida Lee Mock. In April 2011 it was announced that he was working with Spielberg again, writing the screenplay for an adaptation of historian Doris Kearns Goodwin's book Team of Rivals: The Political Genius of Abraham Lincoln.
Kushner is famous for frequent revisions and years-long gestations of his plays. Both Angels in America: Perestroika and Homebody/Kabul were significantly revised even after they were first published. Kushner has admitted that the original script version of Angels in America: Perestroika is nearly double the length of the theatrical version. "Tony Kushner", "BOMB Magazine", Spring, 1993. Retrieved July 25, 2011. His newest completed work, the play The Intelligent Homosexual's Guide to Capitalism and Socialism with a Key to the Scriptures, began as a novel more than a decade ago. Said work finally opened on May 15, 2009.

Political views

Kushner's criticism of Israel's treatment of the Palestinians and of the increased religious extremism in Israeli politics and culture has created some controversy in the American Jewish community,David Zax and Ted Merwin, (2007), The Playwright's Politics Moment Magazine  including some opposition to his receiving an honorary doctorate at the 2006 commencement of Brandeis University.Angels in America During the controversy, quotes critical of Zionism and Israel made by Kushner were circulated. Kushner said at the time that his quotes were "grossly mischaracterized." Kushner told the Jewish Advocate in an interview, "All that anybody seems to be reading is a couple of right-wing Web sites taking things deliberately out of context and excluding anything that would complicate the picture by making me seem like a reasonable person, which I basically think I am."Shayndi Raice. "Brandeis graduation honoree draws fire." The Jewish Advocate. May 4, 2006. In an interview with the Jewish Independent, Kushner commented, "I want the state of Israel to continue to exist. I've always said that. I've never said anything else. My positions have been lied about and misrepresented in so many ways. People claim that I'm for a one-state solution, which is not true." However, he later stated that he hopes that "there might be a merging of the two countries because they're geographically kind of ridiculous looking on a map," although he acknowledged that political realities make this unlikely in the near future.
Kushner has even received backlash from family members due to his political views of Israel.David Zax and Ted Merwin (2007), The Playwright's Politics Moment Magazine
On May 2, 2011, the Board of TrusteesThe Board of Trustees, UNY of the City University of New York (CUNY), at their monthly public meeting, voted to remove (by tabling to avoid debate) Kushner's name from the list of people invited to receive honorary degrees, based on a statement by trustee Jeffrey S. Wiesenfeld about Kushner's purported statements and beliefs about Zionism and Israel.Kushner Crisis (blog), CUNY GC Advocate Three days later, CUNY issued a public statement that the Board is independent.Tony Kushner row deepens as supporters renounce honorary degrees, The Guardian, 6 May 2011 Wiesenfeld has said that if Kushner would renounce his anti-Israel statements in front of the board of trustees, he would be willing to vote for him.

Personal life

Kushner and  Mark Harris, an editor of Entertainment Weekly and author of Pictures at a Revolution – Five Movies and the Birth of the New Hollywood, held a commitment ceremony in April 2003, In summer 2008 they were legally married at the city hall in Provincetown, Massachusetts.

List of works

Plays

the stage performance rights to most of these plays are licensed by Broadway Play Publishing Inc.

Books

Essays

Other works

Interviews

Awards and nominations



Further reading




