[[Hikaru Sulu]]

CATEGORIES: Star Trek: The Original Series characters, Star Trek: The Animated Series characters, Star Trek: Voyager characters, Star Trek (film franchise) characters, Fictional American people of Japanese descent, Fictional aviators, Fictional characters from California, Fictional martial artists, Starfleet officers, Star Trek: Phase II characters, Starfleet lieutenant commanders, Starfleet lieutenants, Starfleet commanders, Starfleet captains, Fictional characters introduced in 1966

Hikaru Sulu is a character in the Star Trek media franchise. and its sequel, Star Trek Into Darkness.

Development and portrayals

Takei recalled Gene Roddenberry wanted the character to represent all of Asia, which symbolized the peace of the Trek universe in spite of the numerous wars in the continent. Roddenberry did not want a nationally specific surname, so he looked at a map and saw the Sulu Sea. "He thought, 'Ah, the waters of that sea touch all shores'," the actor recalled, "and that's how my character came to have the name Sulu."Takei on how Sulu got his name (Archive of American Television 2004 interview)George Takei, Mr. Sulu of Star Trek, Comes Out and Speaks Out
In the book Inside Star Trek: The Real Story, the character's name is noted as a pun on the name of vice president of Desilu Studios, Herb Solow.
Novelist Vonda McIntyre first presents 'Hikaru' as the character's first name in the novel The Entropy Effect.
The name 'Sulu' cannot be used in Japanese due to the language's lack of the "L" phoneme.  Sulu's family name was therefore changed to 'Kato' in the Japanese dub.

Reception

Robert Justman, co-producer of the original Star Trek series, noted that Takei had previously played bad guys, but through Star Trek had become one of the first Asian actors to portray an Asian character in a positive light. Justman described him as "the antithesis of the so-called expressionless-unemotional-inscrutable Asian".

Depiction

The fictional character Hikaru Sulu is born on June 24, 2230 but served as third officer and senior helmsman throughout the rest of the series, during which he held the rank of lieutenant.
Throughout the series, Sulu is shown having many interests and hobbies, including gymnastics, botany,
The character is promoted to lieutenant commander some time before Star Trek: The Motion Picture, and to full commander by the time of Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan. During the first five Star Trek movies, he serves as helmsman aboard both the USS Enterprise and USS Enterprise-A. He is promoted to captain and given command of the USS Excelsior three years before the events of Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country.
Star Trek Generations introduces Hikaru's daughter, Demora Sulu, whose origins are also depicted in Peter David's non-canon novel The Captain's Daughter.

2009 film

John Cho portrays a young Sulu for the 2009 film Star Trek. J. J. Abrams was concerned about casting a Korean-American as the character, but Takei explained to the director that Sulu was meant to represent all of Asia on the Enterprise, so Abrams went ahead with Cho.
Cho portrays a younger Sulu in the 2009 film, though he is actually older than Takei was when he portrayed the role in the original series; Cho was 36 while Takei was 29.
Cho also portrays Sulu in the 2013 sequel Star Trek Into Darkness, taking up the role of acting captain on the USS Enterprise when both Kirk and Spock were absent.

Guest appearances

Takei reprised the role of Sulu, as part of Star Trek 's 30th anniversary, in the Star Trek: Voyager episode "Flashback" aired in 1996. In the episode, Captain Sulu appears in Tuvok's flashbacks of his time serving aboard the USS Excelsior, during events depicted in Star Trek VI. Sulu is also responsible for another future USS Voyager crew member (Chakotay) joining Starfleet.
The non-canon fan production Star Trek: New Voyages episode "World Enough and Time" starred Takei as Captain Sulu on the Excelsior recalling a time on the original Enterprise when a transporter accident caused him to come back thirty years older and with a daughter, Alana.  Demora also appears in this episode, as well as Hikaru's granddaughter.

Other media

The Lost Era novel The Sundered depicts a USS Excelsior mission under Sulu's command.
The novel Forged in Fire depicts an earlier USS Excelsior mission prior to Sulu's assuming command of the ship.
The novelization of Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home includes an encounter in 1986 San Francisco intended to be included in the final film but ultimately cut In another part of the novel as he borrows a helicopter to deliver the whale tank materials, it is revealed that Sulu is part Filipino, as he converses about the Philippine People Power Revolution which had just occurred earlier in 1986.
Simon & Schuster Audioworks released three non-canon Captain Sulu Adventures, featuring voice acting by Takei and various others, in the mid-1990s: Transformations,
The fictional reference/history book Federation: The First 150 Years,  by David A. Goodman, contains an audio introduction by Admiral Hikaru Sulu, indicating that at some point Sulu is promoted to admiral, although this is non-canonical.
In the William Shatner Star Trek novels, it is revealed that Sulu is elected to an unprecedented three terms as President of the United Federation of Planets. Star Trek: the Ashes of Eden.  Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-671-52036-9
In the TV show Scrubs, Turk wants to be married by a priest who looks like Sulu. The priest is actually played by Takei.
Takei reprised the role of Captain Sulu in the PC game Starfleet Command 2, released in December 2000. The introduction video features Takei, as Captain Sulu on board the USS Excelsior, describing the outbreak of an interstellar war between several galactic powers as part of his Captain's Log. Later updates to the game also included several bonus voice-scripted missions, that again featured Takei as Sulu.






