[[Garbage (album)]]

CATEGORIES: Garbage (band) albums, 1995 debut albums, Albums produced by Butch Vig

Garbage is the debut album by American alternative rock group Garbage. It was released in the late summer and autumn of 1995 worldwide, following critical acclaim and promising chart positions for their debut single "Vow", which entered the Billboard Hot 100.
Garbage eventually spent over a year on both the US and UK charts, reaching the top 20 on charts worldwide and receiving multi-platinum certification in numerous territories. The album's success was helped by the band promoting it on a year-long tour, including playing on the European festival circuit and supporting the Smashing Pumpkins throughout 1996, as well as by a run of increasingly successful singles culminating with "Stupid Girl" which in 1997 was nominated for Grammy Awards for Best Rock Song and Best Rock Performance by a Duo or Group.
Garbage was considered innovative for its fusion of pop melodies with alternative rock, trip-hop and electronica genres and its use of loops and sampling including, amongst other things, The Clash's "Train in Vain", the sound of torn sheets of metal, an air conditioning unit and a broken tape deck.

Background

In 1983, Butch Vig and Steve Marker founded Smart Studios in Madison and Vig's production work brought him to the attention of Sub Pop. Vig's old band Spooner reunited in 1990 and released another record, but disbanded in 1993 as Vig and Marker's career as producers gained strength."Welcome to Spooner Town", by Andy Davis, Record Collector, issue #209, January 1997 In 1994, as Vig become "kind of burned out on doing really long records," he got together with Duke Erikson and Marker, and they started doing remixes for acts such as U2, Depeche Mode, Nine Inch Nails and House of Pain, featuring different instrumentation, and often highlighting new guitar hooks and bass grooves. The experience inspired the three men to form a band, where they "wanted to take that remix sensibility and somehow translate it into all of the possibilities of a band setup." An early comment that their work sounded "like garbage" inspired the band's name.
Vocalist Shirley Manson had been performing with the Edinburgh rock band Goodbye Mr. Mackenzie since 1984. In 1993, several band members, including Manson, changed their name to Angelfish. Their only release, the self-titled Angelfish, did not do any better than the preceding albums by Goodbye Mr. Mackenzie, selling only 10,000 copies.153 F.2d 462 RADIOACTIVE, J.V., Plaintiff, v. Shirley MANSON, Defendant. No. 01 Civ.1948 (SAS). United States District Court for the Southern District of New York. (July 29, 2001)
Initial sessions with Vig on vocals, and the member's past work with all-male groups led to the band's desire for a woman on lead. Marker was watching 120 Minutes when he saw the music video for Angelfish's "Suffocate Me". He showed the video to Erikson and Vig while their manager Shannon O'Shea tracked Manson down. When Manson was contacted, she didn't know who Vig was and was urged to check the credits on Nevermind, the popular Nirvana album which Vig produced. On April 8, Manson met Erikson, Marker and Vig for the first time in London. Later that evening Vig was informed of Kurt Cobain's suicide. Garbage was put on hold, until Angelfish were touring North America in support of Live."Thanks For Your, Uhh Support, Absolute Garbage DVD. Retrieved 2008-02-24 Erikson, Marker and Vig attended the Metro Chicago date; and Manson was invited to Madison to audition for the band. The audition did not go well, but Manson socialized with the men while there and they found they had a similar taste in music. Angelfish disbanded at the end of the Live tour. Manson called O'Shea and asked to audition again feeling that "it would work out"."Garbage: Behind The Music, VH1, aired March 31, 2002"(Retrieved - 2008-02-05)

Recording

In her return to Smart Studios, Manson began to work on skeletal versions of the songs "Queer", "Vow" and "Stupid Girl".""Modern Life Is Rubbish", Melody Maker magazine, March 18, 1995 issue (Retrieved 2008-02-05) While looking for a record deal to put the album out, Garbage sent out demo tapes with no bio, to avoid a bidding war over Vig's production history."Record Collector #209". Retrieved 2008-02-24 Garbage signed with Mushroom U.K. worldwide and to Jerry Moss's label Almo Sounds for North America. Manson's contribution was licensed to both Mushroom and Almo by her label Radioactive.
Garbage continued to work on the album throughout the start of 1995, being delayed by Vig's work producing Soul Asylum's Let Your Dim Light Shine album and the songs being "piecemealed together in the studio". Vig described the composing process as a "disfunctional democracy" where someone would bring a loop or a sample, which was followed by jam sessions where the bandmembers would "find one bar that's kind of cool, load that into our samplers, jam on top of that, and Shirley will ad-lib", with the process continuing until the song was finished, often with "all of the original ideas gone, and the song had somehow mutated into something completely different." Among the songs that were completely reworked, "As Heaven is Wide" went from "a big rock track" to a techno song with Tom Jones-inspired beats, only keeping Erikson's fuzz bass and Manson's vocals from the original recording. Given Vig "got bored spending so many years recording really fast, straightforward punk records", the band "didn't want to approach the Garbage record from the angle of a band playing live", making their songs out of samples that would be processed and reworked in a wall of sound process "to create something that sounded fresh."
A major part of the work was Manson rewriting the song lyrics, which Vig said the band attempted to "write from a woman's perspective and I think, initially, some of them were a little pretentious. But as soon as Shirley came on board she simplified the lyrics so that they were a lot more subtle and worked better as songs." Manson detailed that regarding the previous song sketches, "some of the ideas for lyrics I found unsuitable, and others I liked and worked on with them. I always went to bat for what I believed in."  The singer added that because "the lyrics take a while to work on" bandmates would give suggestions and she included the ones that fancied her.

Composition

Garbage has an experimental alternative rock sound that "tried to incorporate different styles and genres, throw it all into a big melting pot and see what would happen", according to Vig.
The band went overboard with experimentation, with Erikson adding that throughout they liked to include "sounds that we found accidentally, like Steve's sample of a tape deck backing up, or the bit in 'Stupid Girl' that was initially a mistake, but when we slowed it down, actually fit the timbre and pace of the song and became the hook."
The lyrics on the record were described by the bandmembers as "a collaborative psycho-therapy session wherein personal demons of various sizes and importance are exorcised, vilified, taken revenge upon and laid to rest." Vig said they tried to deal with "dark themes that I think a lot of people can relate to in some way or another", which included voyeurism, hedonism, perversion, obsession and "the art of self-destruction." Manson stated that while the content was "a lot more poppy" than most of her previous work, the songs ended up describing the dark side of her nature, as "sometimes I'm a bit wee creepy, and that definitely comes out in the music."

Release and promotion

In United States, the album was preceded at alternative radio by "Vow". Despite not being able to actively promote the single, Almo Sounds issued Garbage on August 15, on CD, cassette and double-vinyl.
In the United Kingdom, Garbage was preceded by the single "Only Happy When It Rains". Mushroom Records issued the album on CD, cassette, double-vinyl and a limited edition 7" box set.
In Australia the album was released by White Records, who on September 23 issued a 'Tour Edition' of the album containing a bonus disc of remixes and b-side "Alien Sex Fiend".

Chart performance

Garbage took a while to reach high charts in North America, which Vig considered was "because I don't think it's cool to say you're in a pop band in the States. To be truly PC, you have to be in the grunge zone."
In Australia, Garbage debuted at #5 on the ARIA album chart. In New Zealand, Garbage debuted at #11. Eleven months after release, Garbage topped the New Zealand albums chart and peaked at #4 in Australia.
Garbage debuted on the UK Album Chart at #12 with first week sales of 9,409 copies. A week later the album dropped to #26 before falling out of the Top 40. The album
re-entered the album chart at the start of 1996 and climbed steadily as "Stupid Girl" hit #4 on the UK Singles Chart at the end of March. The album subsequently peaked at #6 

World tour

Vig stated that the band had no initial plans to tour as "not going on the road would really free us up to record tons of stuff". As the bandmembers realized "that if we were going to have a successful record we'd have to go out on tour and promote it", and enjoyed playing live to record the "Vow" video, they decided to perform to audiences as well. To perform the complex and layered tracks live, the band hired Los Angeles bass player Daniel Shulman for the tour, and figured out ways to trigger samples on stage, such as having Marker play a keyboard along with his guitar.
On February 24, 1996, Garbage set off on a 17-date headline tour of North America. Garbage returned to Europe on August 3 promoting Garbage with a month of shows around the festival circuit. Garbage then headed south to Asia and Australia to promote the album, beginning with shows in Singapore on September 28 and ending in Osaka, Japan on October 18. Garbage returned to the US to give Garbage a final push by rejoining the Smashing Pumpkins rescheduled tour from October 23.

Reviews, accolades and nominations

Garbage received universal acclaim upon its release. Garbage was certified silver and certified platinum for one million US sales on July 30. The ARIA certified Garbage platinum, with sales of over 210,000 units.
Garbage had also been certified double platinum in Canada, Australia  Garbage was certified platinum in the UK for the second time on October 16, 1998, and in the US for the second time on February 24, 1999. It was also certified gold in the Philippines on June 20.

Track listing

Personnel

Release history

Comprehensive charts

Charts
Year-End charts
Certifications
Chart procession and succession






