[[Alex Jones (radio host)]]

CATEGORIES: Alex Jones, 1974 births, Living people, American anti–illegal immigration activists, American anti-war activists, American film directors, American film producers, American gun rights advocates, American libertarians, Conservative_talk_radio, Conservatism in the United States, American talk radio hosts, American political pundits, American pro-life activists, American social commentators, Anti-globalism activists, Anti-vaccination activists, Conspiracy theorists, Film directors from Texas, People from Dallas, Texas, Radio personalities from Texas, Writers from Austin, Texas

Alexander Emerick "Alex" Jones (born February 11, 1974) is an American radio host, author, conspiracy theorist
Jones has been the center of many controversies, including his statements about gun control in the wake of Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting. Jones describes himself as a libertarian and a conservative.

Biography

Jones was born on February 11, 1974, in Dallas, Texas,Jones, Alex. Coast to Coast AM. January 27, 2007. and grew up in the suburb of Rockwall and Austin, Texas. His father was a dentist and his mother a homemaker. After high school, Jones attended Austin Community College.
He began his career in Austin with a live, call-in format public-access television cable TV program.  In 1996, Jones switched format to KJFK, hosting a show named The Final Edition. In 1998, he released his first film, America Destroyed By Design.
In 1998, Jones organized a successful effort to build a new Branch Davidian church as a memorial to those who died during the 1993 fire that ended the government's siege of the original Branch Davidian complex near Waco, Texas. He often featured the project on his public-access television program and claimed that David Koresh and his followers were peaceful people who were murdered by Attorney General Janet Reno and the ATF during the siege.
In 1999, he tied with Shannon Burke for that year's "Best Austin Talk Radio Host" poll as voted by The Austin Chronicle readers.
In early 2000, Jones was one of seven Republican candidates for state representative in Texas House District 48, an open seat swing district based in Austin, Texas. Jones stated that he was running "to be a watchdog on the inside", but withdrew from the race after a couple of weeks.
In July, a group of Austin Community Access Center (ACAC) programmers claimed that Jones used legal proceedings and ACAC policy to intimidate them or get their shows thrown off the air.
In 2001, his show was syndicated on approximately 100 stations. After the 9/11 terrorist attack, Jones began to speak of a conspiracy by the Bush administration as being behind the attack, which caused a number of the stations that had previously carried him to drop his program.
On June 8, 2006, while on his way to cover a meeting of the Bilderberg group in Ottawa, Canada, Jones was stopped and detained at the Ottawa airport by Canadian authorities who confiscated his passport, camera equipment, and most of his belongings. He was later allowed to enter Canada lawfully. Jones said regarding the reason for his immigration hold, "I want to say, on the record, it takes two to tango. I could have handled it better."
On September 8, 2007, he was arrested while protesting at 6th Avenue and 48th Street in New York City. He was charged with operating a bullhorn without a permit. Two others were also cited for disorderly conduct when his group crashed a live television show featuring Geraldo Rivera. In an article, one of Jones's fellow protesters said, "It was ... guerrilla information warfare."

Reception and impact

Mainstream sources have described Jones as a conservative, 
Jones has been the center of many controversies, such as the one surrounding his actions and statements about gun control after the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting, and has accused the U.S. government of being involved in the Oklahoma City bombing and September 11 attacks.
On June 9, 2013, Jones appeared as a guest on the BBC's Sunday Politics. After a discussion about conspiracy theories surrounding the Bilderberg Group meetings with presenter Andrew Neil and journalist David Aaronovitch, a critic of such theories, which was dominated by Jones's shouting and regular interruptions, Andrew Neil ended the item, describing Jones as "an idiot" Jones was still shouting, according to Neil on Twitter, until he knew he was off-air.

Media

The Alex Jones Show syndicated radio program is broadcast nationally by Genesis Communications Network to more than 90 AM and FM radio stations in the United States, and to WWCR Radio shortwave. Live-broadcast times are weekdays 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. CST and Sundays from 4:00 to 6:00 p.m. CST. The Sunday broadcast is also broadcast by Emmis Communications' KLBJ Radio.
As of 2013, according to Jones, the radio show has over 15 million listeners a week, which would be 2.5 million per day. Author Will Bunch says that Jones was in part a model for Glenn Beck who "synthesized" some of the paranoia of Jones's commentaries into his persona.
Jones is also the operator of several web sites centered on news and information about civil liberties issues, global government, and a wide variety of current events topics. Several of these sites are www.com, www.tv, www.com, and www.com. As of February 2014, his YouTube channel, TheAlexJonesChannel, has received more than 360 million views and 750,000 subscriptions.
He has been able to mobilize his followers to create "Google bomb" actions that bring particular terms to the top of search engine listing, a tactic which has then inspired other online media, such as The Drudge Report, to cover the story.

Films

Author

Film subject

Acting








