[[Deadsy]]

CATEGORIES: American alternative metal musical groups, Rock music groups from California, Musical trios, Musical groups established in 1995, Musical groups disestablished in 2007

Deadsy is an American synth rock band from California.  The band released a second major label album, Phantasmagore, in 2006 before taking an indefinite hiatus in 2007.

History

Early years and formation (1995–1996)

Deadsy began in 1995, when Elijah Blue Allman (son of Cher and Gregg Allman), also known as Phillips Exeter Blue I, started recording a handful of demos (including Dear and a cover of Texas Never Whispers) with Alec Puro (Alec Pure) and later sent a Juno 106 keyboard to Renn Hawkey (Dr. Nner) as an invitation to join the band. The three members evolved their sound in the studio and sought out a record deal out of "adolescent necessity."
Sire years (1996–1999)

Deadsy was quickly signed to Sire Records, and they got working on writing new songs. Because they had no bass player at the time Jay Gordon (of Orgy) was asked to play bass for their short self-titled album.

DreamWorks years (1999–2003)

While in the process of finding a new label, Carlton Bost was added on Z-Tar and guitar. Ashburn Miller replaced Craig on bass January 2002 after Craig and Deadsy parted ways. Soon after, Jonathan Davis (of the band Korn) signed Deadsy to the new record label Elementree Records and invited the band to join the 2001 Family Values Tour.  This was Deadsy's second song with Jonathan Davis, following "Sleepy Hollow." A second video was filmed for their cover of Sebadoh's "Brand New Love." Amidst promoting Commencement Deadsy had already begun working on a follow-up album.
The support from successful nu metal figures provided Deadsy their most prominent mainstream exposure and media coverage in 2002. However, despite this, neither single managed to chart, and Commencement failed to achieve expected sales. Elementree folded soon after. Nevertheless, Deadsy continued touring and focused on the development of their next record.

Phantasmagore (2003–2007)

Deadsy signed onto Immortal Records to release Phantasmagore in 2006 .  During the 4-year process of writing the album, Deadsy released clips and demos on their official website.  Deadsy was asked back to the Family Values Tour in the summer of 2006, which was co-headlined by the Deftones and Korn. Deadsy went on another tour with the Deftones that began in the fall.
In January 2007, Deadsy parted ways with bassist Ashburn Miller (also known as Creature),  and added Jens Funke to the line up.

Hiatus (2007–present)

In February 2007, a short statement from Elijah was posted on the band's message board "I am making a solo record." Recently, Carlton has joined The Dreaming full-time. On April 16, 2007, a MySpace bulletin was posted with a statement by Alec Püre who said "As you all know we are going to be taking a short break from Deadsy so Elijah can make a solo record and I can continue scoring projects I wasn't able to do from the road."
In early 2008, Elijah Blue and the Trapezoids was revealed as the name of Elijah's solo project.
On September 11, 2008, Renn Hawkey apparently left the band in order to concentrate on carpentry and family life. He is married to actress Vera Farmiga. They have a son named Fynn, born on January 15, 2009. On November 4, 2010, Farmiga gave birth to daughter Gytta Lubov Hawkey. "It was too rough-and-tumble a lifestyle" said the man who has become Renn Hawkey again, full-time.
As of February 2010, Elijah has claimed "Deadsy is sleeping at the moment", although the true state of the band is still questioned by many. In the mean time, he is focusing on his art which was premiered at the Kantor Gallery on February 24, 2010.
Creature (Ashburn Miller) and Carlton Megalodon (Carlton Bost) joined Orgy's new lineup in September 2012. They released a single, "Grime of the Century", to promote the forthcoming studio album.

Musical styles and themes

Elijah describes the band's low and dissonant style as Undercore. Elijah's baritone singing style, down-tuned guitars, Renn's synths and Carlton's Z-Tar all contribute to the band's sound.
"We wanted to make something that was transcendental, really rule-defying, and very against the grain and when people listened to it at first, it would just feel very like a sense of foreignness, almost like watching a David Lynch film." – Elijah Blue
The lyrics and imagery of the songs sometimes focus on many subjects in either sexual, religious, magical or popular culture contexts. Occasionally one notices references to pedophilia, Secret Societies, The Urantia Book, Star Wars, the novel Dune by Frank Herbert and even Disney's 101 Dalmatians.
Many of the multi-color ideas were influenced directly from the 1955 film This Island Earth. Elijah has even stated he took his alter ego name from one of the leading characters of the story, Exeter.

Visual appearance

Elijah has often called the band an "art project", or "art movement". Complete with a manifesto and visual iconography. Each band member represents one element or "entity" that drives human society. Each entity is also represented by their own color and unique appearance.
International Klein Blue – Academia (Phillips Exeter Blue I) 
Yellow – Science / Medicine (Dr Nner) 
Grey – War (Carlton Megalodon) 
Red – Horror (Jens Funke)  (Creature)  (The Beast) 
Green –  Leisure (Alec Püre)

Discography

Albums

=Studio albums=

Singles

Extras

Music videos

Notes




