[[Angel of the North]]

CATEGORIES: Sculptures by Antony Gormley, Colossal statues, Outdoor sculptures in England, Steel sculptures, Ove Arup buildings and structures, 1998 sculptures, Buildings and structures in Gateshead, Culture in Tyne and Wear, Visitor attractions in Tyne and Wear, Buildings and structures completed in 1998, Weathering steel, Statues in the United Kingdom

The Angel of the North is a contemporary sculpture, designed by Antony Gormley, which is located in Gateshead, Tyne and Wear, England.
It is a steel sculpture of an angel, 
It stands on a hill on the southern edge of Low Fell, overlooking the A1 and A167 roads into Tyneside, and the East Coast Main Line rail route, south of the site of Team Colliery.

Concept

According to Gormley, the significance of an angel was three-fold: first, to signify that beneath the site of its construction, coal miners worked for two centuries; second, to grasp the transition from an industrial to information age, and third, to serve as a focus for our evolving hopes and fears.

Construction

Work began on the project in 1994 and cost £1 million. Most of the project funding was provided by the National Lottery. The Angel was finished on 16 February 1998.
Due to its exposed location, the sculpture was built to withstand winds of over 100 mph (160 km/h). Thus, foundations containing 600 tonnes of concrete anchor the sculpture to rock 
The Angel aroused some controversy in British newspapers, at first, including a "Gateshead stop the statue" campaign, while local councillor Martin Callanan was especially strong in his opposition. However, it has since been considered to be a landmark for North East England It has often been used in film and television to represent Tyneside, as are other local landmarks such as the Tyne Bridge and the Gateshead Millennium Bridge.
The sculpture is also known by some local people as the "Gateshead Flasher", because of its location and appearance.

Maquettes

Several maquettes were produced during the development stage of the project.

Other projects

Inspired by the Angel of the North, several similar projects have been proposed. The 'Angel of the South' title has been given by some to the Willow Man which sits to the side of the M5 in Somerset, while a project, informally named the Angel of the South, has been proposed in Ebbsfleet, Kent. The sculpture Brick Man (also by Gormley) was proposed for the Holbeck area of Leeds.

Photo gallery

Image:Angel of the north.JPG|
Image:Angel Of The North.JPG|A front view of the Angel of the North
Image:Gateshead Angel of the North.jpg|Detail of the Angel's body
Image:GatesheadAngel5.jpg|Silhouette
Image:Angel of the north through trees.jpeg
Image:Angel of the North in Miniland, Legoland Windsor.JPG|A Lego model of Angel of the North in Miniland
File:Rear of Angel of the North in Canberra January 2012.jpg|The rear of Angel of the North (life-size maquette) at the National Gallery of Australia








