[[Monthon]]

CATEGORIES: Types of country subdivisions, Subdivisions of Thailand

Monthon ( , literally "control over territory") bureaucratic administrative system, introduced by Prince Damrong Rajanubhab. Together with the monthon also the still existing provinces (changwat), districts (amphoe) and communes (tambon) were established step by step nationwide. Each monthon was led by a royal commissioner also called thesaphiban. The system was officially adopted by the 1897 Local Administration Act, after some monthon were established before and the details of administration were tried out. 

History

Before the thesaphiban reforms, the country consisted of partially independent cities called Mueang, some directly subordinate to the capital, some subordinate to larger Mueang, or to one or more of the tributary kingdoms. Before the reforms, governors inherited their posts within their family lineage, and lived on taxes they collected in their area, a practice formally called tax farming. These were converted from hereditary governors into appointed governmental posts, as had been done by Chinese Yuan, Ming, and Qing-era rulers in first recognizing Tusi (tribal leaders) as imperial officials, then replacing them with imperial appointees. The arrangement resulted in governors being appointed and paid by the central government, and Mueang developed into provinces. An essential step in the ending of tax farming was the creation on 3 September 1885 of the Royal Survey Department. Though first–fruits were not obtained until 1901, the department's cadastral surveys —  i.e., survey of specific land parcels — made possible the defining of ownership for land registration and equitable taxation. The term changwat (จังหวัด จัง truly + หวัด scribe) for the provinces was first used in 1907 for the provinces in Monthon Pattani, and by 1916 had come into general use.
 Resistance to reform == 
It took till around 1910 that the system was implemented in the whole country. The main reason for the slow implementation was the lack of suitable educated officials, but also the resistance of the traditional local leaders, which recalled the 1768–1770 resistance of the monk Chao Phra Faang to Thonburi reestablishment of Siamese authority. In 1902 along both banks of the Mekong, local revolts (). broke out. The most serious of these was led by East-bank rebel Ong Keo against French authority in the former Thai tributary kingdom of Champasak. On the west bank in the area of Ubon Ratchathani, a less-well known former monk and Phu Mi Bun headed a millenarian sect inspired by his apocalyptic prophecies, which spread fear, uncertainty and doubt among almost all the peoples along both banks of the river. The Bangkok government put down West bank resistance with little use of force, and cooperated with French Indochina officials in so far as limiting Thai authority to the West bank, later called Isan. East bank resistance however had no definitive end and became subsumed into the Second Indochina War. Far from the Mekong, resistance to reform still continued into the 21st century in the Southern Thailand insurgency.

Further development

In 1915 there were 19 monthon containing 72 provinces, however due to economic problems several monthon were merged in 1925, monthon Phetchabun was already dissolved in 1915. Only 14 monthon remained: Ayutthaya, Bangkok (Krung Thep), Chanthaburi, Nakhon Chaisi, Nakhon Ratchasima, Nakhon Sawan, Nakhon Si Thammarat, Pattani, Phayap, Phitsanulok, Phuket, Prachinburi, Ratchaburi, and Udon Thani. In 1932 another four were abolished - Chanthaburi, Nakhon Chaisi, Nakhon Sawan and Pattani. Finally in 1933 the whole monthon system was abolished by the Provincial Administration Act 2476 B.E./A.D. 1933, part of the changes made after the coup d'état, which changed from an absolute to a constitutional monarchy, and the 70 provinces to second-level administrative divisions.

List of monthons

North

|url= 
|title= พายัพ
|editor= Glenn Slayden	
|date=  29 September 2013
|format= Dictionary
|work= Royal Institute Dictionary - 1982
|publisher=  Thai-language.com
|accessdate=  2013-09-29
|quote= Royal Institute - 1982
พายัพ  /พา-ยับ/ {Sanskrit: วายวฺย ว่า ของวายุ}
นาม 	ชื่อทิศตะวันตกเฉียงเหนือ.
}}[/ref] In 1899, this northwestern monthon was described in Thai as monthon fai tawan-tok chiang nua (, lit. "monthon side night-fall sector north"). In 1900, this was shortened to Sanskrit for Northwest. The actual administrative reform was established gradually between 1907 and 1915, succeeding the previous high commissionership. It covered the northern principalities of former Lannathai, the provinces Chiang Mai, Lamphun, Mae Hong Son, Lampang, Chiang Rai, Nan and Phrae. 

North-East

South

Central

East

Boriwen

The larger monthon Phayap, Udon Thani and Isan had an additional administrative level between monthon  and provincial administration. Three to five boriwen (บริเวณ), each administrated by a commissioner (khaluang boriwen, ข้าหลวงบริเวณ).






