[[Michelle Shocked]]

CATEGORIES: American female guitarists, American female singers, American folk singers, American female singer-songwriters, Crossover (music), Musicians from Dallas, Texas, Fast Folk artists, Former Latter Day Saints, University of Texas at Austin alumni, 1962 births, Living people, Anti-folk musicians, Mercury Records artists, American Pentecostals, Members of the Church of God in Christ



Michelle Shocked (born Karen Michelle Johnston, February 24, 1962) is an American singer-songwriter.

Early life

Shocked was born Karen Michelle Johnston on February 24, 1962, in Dallas, Texas, at the Baylor University Medical Center. Her stepfather was in the US Army and the family moved from base to base. Her mother was Mormon and she was raised in that faith. Her mother had her committed to a psychiatric hospital for a time during her teenage years. She went through a punk rock phase, wearing a Mohawk hairdo and squatting in abandoned buildings in San Francisco.

Career

In 1984, Shocked adopted the stage name "Michelle Shocked", a play on the expression "Shell Shocked", as she explained in an interview with Green Left Weekly: "The term 'Miss Shell Shocked' is a direct reference to the thousand-yard stare, which was a term that they first used to describe the victims of shell-shock in World War One. These people from outward appearances had survived the war quite well when in fact inside their minds were blown. I first used that name in 1984 at the Democratic Convention in San Francisco where I was arrested for protesting and demonstrating against corporations who contribute money to both the Democratic Party and the Republican Party campaigns."1992 Interview with Green Left Weekly. Retrieved December 29, 2011.
Shocked received her first international exposure after Pete Lawrence recorded her performance on a portable tape recorder at the Kerrville Folk Festival in Texas. Lawrence released the tape in Europe as The Texas Campfire Tapes (1986). The album's success brought major labels asking her to sign a contract. Shocked was resistant to what she saw as the machinations of the music industry, and worked to retain a degree of creative control.

The Mercury Trilogy

Her first US success came with the release of her 1988 debut album Short Sharp Shocked on college radio rotations around the country, which was met with strong acclaim from listeners.  The debut single Anchorage broke into the Billboard Hot 100,Laura Mann, "53 Years Into The Billboard Hot 100's History, A Look At Every Dallas Song To Make The Chart", retrieved 29 March 2014 but a follow-up single from the album, When I Grow Up did not chart.com, retrieved 29 March 2014  Short Sharp Shocked was the first album in what Shocked later described as a "trilogy" for Mercury Records.Interview with Andy Herrman, retrieved 29 March 2014
The second album in the trilogy, Captain Swing, was released in 1989.  Described by reviewer Chris Woodstra as an album of "swing and big-band music" that "no one expected",Chris Woodstra, "Michelle Shocked, Captain Swing", retrieved 29 March 2014 the album was promoted with the release of On the Greener Side, a gender-reversed parody of Robert Palmer's Addicted to Love, in which topless male models performed the motions made famous by the female models in Palmer's video. 16
The trilogy concluded with her 1992 album Arkansas Traveler. Her desire to have the cover portray her in blackface in tribute to the roots of the music featured on the album drew criticism and a change in the cover art.  However, the album received little commercial notice, and Shocked parted ways with the label following an acrimonious lawsuit.Nick Spacek, "Michelle Shocked", retrieved 29 March 2014

Post-Mercury Years

In 1995, Shocked contributed an original song to the soundtrack for the film Dead Man Walking called "Quality of Mercy". In 1996, she released a studio version of an underground release Kind-Hearted Woman (black cover) on the short-lived Private Music label.
Starting in 2002 with the release of Deep Natural, Shocked established her own label, Mighty Sound. She reissued expanded versions of her entire catalog, made possible by having retained complete ownership of her work when she signed with Mercury in 1987.
An acoustic version of her song "How You Play the Game" was featured as the opening and credits soundtrack in the DVD of the 2004 documentary film Bush's Brain.
Shocked continues to make music as an independent artist. In June 2005, she released a trilogy of albums called Threesome (Don't Ask Don't Tell, Mexican Standoff and Got No Strings). In May 2007, she released the album ToHeavenURide; in September 2009, Soul of My Soul.[ref]
</ref>

Personal life

In 1992, Shocked married journalist Bart Bull. They divorced in 2004.

Sexuality

Shocked put forward an ambiguous sexuality from the beginning of her career. Her music appealed to many people including lesbians. According to Gay 100 author Paul Russell, in 1989, she joked to a US broadcast television audience that the Grammy award for Best Contemporary Folk Recording, whose nominees included herself, eventual winner Tracy Chapman, Phranc, and Indigo Girls, should have been called "Best Lesbian Vocalist".

Religion and views on homosexuality

In the mid-1990s, Shocked joined the choir of the West Angeles Church of God in Christ. After attending for several years, she became a born-again Christian. Since her religious conversion, Shocked has made statements against homosexuality, linking this stance to her religious beliefs. In a 2008 interview with the Dallas Voice, a gay newspaper, she said that she would be "honored" to be called an "honorary lesbian" but added:
 There are some inconvenient truths that I'm now a born again, sanctified, saved-in-the-blood Christian. So much of what's said and done in the name of that Christianity is appalling. According to my Bible, which I didn't write, homosexuality is immoral. But homosexuality is no more or less a sin than fornication. And I'm a fornicator with a capital F. 
While performing at the Wild Goose Festival in June 2011, a Christian event at which the inclusion of gay Christians was debated, Shocked responded to an audience member's question about homosexuality by saying, "Who drafted me as a gay icon? You are looking at the world's greatest homophobe. Ask God what He thinks."
On March 17, 2013, Shocked made an impromptu speech against same-sex marriage during a concert at Yoshi's nightclub in San Francisco, which led some audience members to leave in protest, and club management to end the show.
On April 1, 2013, Michelle Shocked appeared on CNN's Piers Morgan Live to clarify her remarks. Morgan asked Shocked three times whether she was in fact "homophobic". Eventually, Shocked stated, "If you want to keep this simple for the audience, let me just give you a straight no, I'm not homophobic. But the truth, I don't think, lies in the simplicity. It's in the nuance, and that's been completely lost in this…" She said that the meaning behind her prior comments was misinterpreted.

Political activity

Shocked was arrested during the November 29, 2011, eviction of the Occupy Los Angeles movement.

Awards

Although it has been reported that Shocked won the 1989 Grammy Award for Best Contemporary Folk Recording, Shocked was honored as having the Folk Album of the Year at the CMJ New Music Awards ceremony in late October 1989, taped in New York City for later broadcast. The award recognized the popularity of Short Sharp Shocked with college radio listeners.

Discography

Albums

Selected recordings:

Re-releases

Mighty Sound has re-released her Mercury releases:

Singles






