[[Ethidium bromide]]

CATEGORIES: Aromatic amines, Bromides, DNA-binding substances, Fluorescent dyes, Mutagens, Quaternary ammonium compounds, Phenanthridine dyes, Staining dyes, Embryotoxicants

Ethidium bromide is an intercalating agent commonly used as a fluorescent tag (nucleic acid stain) in molecular biology laboratories for techniques such as agarose gel electrophoresis. It is commonly abbreviated as "EtBr", which is also an abbreviation for bromoethane.  When exposed to ultraviolet light, it will fluoresce with an orange colour, intensifying almost 20-fold after binding to DNA. Under the name homidium, it has been commonly used since the 1950s in veterinary medicine to treat trypanosomiasis in cattle, a disease caused by trypanosomes.  The high incidence of antibiotic resistance makes this treatment impractical in some areas, where the related isometamidium chloride is used instead.  Ethidium bromide may be a mutagen, a carcinogen, or a teratogen, although this depends on the organism exposed and the circumstances of exposure.

Structure, chemistry, fluorescence

As with most fluorescent compounds, ethidium bromide is aromatic. Its core heterocyclic moiety is generically known as a phenanthridine, an isomer of which is the fluorescent dye acridine. Absorption maxima of EtBr in aqueous solution are at 210 nm and 285 nm, which correspond to ultraviolet light. As a result of this excitation, EtBr emits orange light with wavelength 605 nm.  
The reason for ethidium bromide's intense fluorescence after binding with DNA is probably not due to rigid stabilization of the phenyl moiety, because the phenyl ring has been shown to project outside the intercalated bases. In fact, the phenyl group is found to be almost perpendicular to the plane of the ring system, as it rotates about its single bond to find a position where it will impinge upon the ring system minimally. Instead, the hydrophobic environment found between the base pairs is believed to be responsible. By moving into this hydrophobic environment and away from the solvent, the ethidium cation is forced to shed any water molecules that were associated with it. As water is a highly efficient fluorescent quencher, the removal of these water molecules allows the ethidium to fluoresce.

Applications

Ethidium bromide is commonly used to detect nucleic acids in molecular biology laboratories. In the case of DNA this is usually double-stranded DNA from PCRs, restriction digests, etc. Single-stranded RNA can also be detected, since it usually folds back onto itself and thus provides local base pairing for the dye to intercalate. Detection typically involves a gel containing nucleic acids placed on or under a UV lamp. Since ultraviolet light is harmful to eyes and skin, gels stained with ethidium bromide are usually viewed indirectly using an enclosed camera, with the fluorescent images recorded as photographs. Where direct viewing is needed, the viewer's eyes and exposed skin should be protected.  In the laboratory the intercalating properties have long been used to minimize chromosomal condensation when a culture is exposed to mitotic arresting agents during harvest. The resulting slide preparations permit a higher degree of resolution, and thus more confidence in determining structural integrity of chromosomes upon microscopic analysis.
Ethidium bromide has also been used extensively to reduce mitochondrial DNA copy number in proliferating cells.

Alternatives

There are alternatives to ethidium bromide which are advertised as being less dangerous and having better performance. This may be the case for other "safer" dyes, but whilst mutagenic and toxicity details are available Novel Juice testing report these have not been published in peer reviewed journals.  MSDS for SYBR Safe reports a LD50 for rats of >5 g/kg, which is higher than that of EtBr (1.5g/kg), but both are many orders of magnitude higher than the concentrations used in molecular biology.  Also, many alternative dyes are suspended in DMSO, which has health implications of its own including increased skin absorption of organic compounds. Despite the performance advantage of using SYBR dyes instead of EtBr for staining purposes, many researchers still prefer EtBr since it is considerably less expensive.

Health risks

Ethidium bromide is thought to act as a mutagen because it intercalates double stranded DNA (i.e., inserts itself between the strands), deforming the DNA.  The above studies do not support the commonly held idea that ethidium bromide is a potent mutagen in humans, but they do indicate that it can be toxic at high concentrations.
Most use of ethidium bromide in the laboratory (0.25–1 microgram/ml) is below the level required for toxicity, and is 3 orders of magnitude lower than the therapeutic dosages used in cattle.
Ethidium bromide can be added to YPD media and used as an inhibitor for cell growth. "Physiological Importance and Identification of Novel Targets for the N-Terminal Acetyltransferase NatB -- Caesar et al. 5 (2): 368 --." Eukaryotic Cell. 16 Dec. 2005. Web. 31 Jan. 2010. .

Handling and disposal

Ethidium bromide is not regulated as hazardous waste at low concentrations, but is treated as hazardous waste by many organizations.  Material should be handled according to the material safety data sheet (MSDS).  Wastes should always be treated in accordance with federal, state and local guidelines.
The disposal of laboratory ethidium bromide remains a controversial subject.  Various commercial products are available for this use.Ethidium Bromide Disposal





Further reading


