[[Remembrance of the Daleks]]

CATEGORIES: Seventh Doctor serials, Dalek television stories, Doctor Who pseudohistorical serials, Doctor Who stories set on Earth, 1988 television episodes

Remembrance of the Daleks is the first serial of the 25th season in the British science fiction television series Doctor Who, which was first broadcast in four weekly parts from 5 October to 26 October 1988. It was written by Ben Aaronovitch and directed by Andrew Morgan.
In the serial, alien time traveller the Doctor (Sylvester McCoy) and his companion Ace (Sophie Aldred) travel back to the beginning of the Doctor's journey to retrieve the Hand of Omega and keep it from the Daleks, the reason why he fled his home planet Gallifrey.
The serial contained many references to the history of the show. It is set in 1963, around the same time as the very first Doctor Who episode, An Unearthly Child. Remembrance of the Daleks returns the Doctor to Coal Hill School and the junkyard at 76 Totter's Lane, locations first seen in that episode. The serial also continues the story arc of a civil war between rival Dalek factions, culminating in a showdown between the Doctor and Dalek Emperor Davros. This was the last appearance of Davros and the Daleks in the original run of Doctor Who; after a brief mention in the 1996 television film, the Daleks would return in the 2005 episode "Dalek".

Plot

The Doctor and Ace arrive in Shoreditch in 1963 and become ingratiated with Professor Jensen and Sergeant Mike Smith, who are tracing "the primary source" of magnetic fluctuations outside Coal Hill School. They are summoned to "the secondary source" at Totter's Lane Junkyard, where Group Captain Gilmore and his men have been attacked by an unidentified assailant. The aggressor is a grey Dalek, which is promptly destroyed by the Doctor using Ace's Nitro-9 explosive.
Meanwhile, Mike enlists the cooperation of his friend, Mr. Ratcliffe, whose fascist association operates from a builders warehouse. His agents recover the remains of the Dalek, which Ratcliffe presents to a Dalek battle computer secreted in his office whom he assures that the Doctor will be followed. The Doctor, troubled by the presence of the "wrong Dalek", travels with Ace back to Coal Hill School, and with the permission of the Headmaster begin searching the school. The Doctor reveals to Ace that the Daleks have followed him through time to this point hoping to secure the Hand of Omega, a device the Doctor had smuggled to Earth when he first arrived. In the basement of the school, the Doctor and Ace discover a transmat device which the Doctor disables, causing a Dalek operator to charge on the saboteurs. While Ace is incapacitated by the controlled Headmaster, the Doctor is locked in the cellar to face a Dalek rising up the stairs, chanting his extermination. Ace overpowers the Headmaster and frees the Doctor, and  they use anti-tank rockets forwarded by Group Captain Gilmore to deal with the Dalek.
Very concerned about the presence of two Dalek factions, the Doctor decides to "bury the past" and leaves Ace in the care of Smith. The Omega Device is awaiting burial in a local undertakers. The Doctor leads the floating casket to a freshly dug grave. The unusual burial is watched by Mike Smith. The Doctor, Smith, Jensen, and her assistant Allison travel to Gilmore's base, where the presence of a large Dalek mothership is detected in geostationary orbit. The mothership dispatches an Imperial Dalek assault squad to the transmat repaired by the Headmaster. The Doctor vetoes a proposal of military action, warning of massive reprisals from the Imperial Faction. He assembles a jamming device to interfere with the Dalek control systems.
A bored Ace realises that she has left her stereo back at the school. She returns there to discover the school crawling with Imperial Daleks. With some assistance from a baseball bat imbued with power from the Omega Device, she proves more than a match for a surprised Dalek scout. However, during her escape, she is cornered by three Daleks. Alerted to Ace's visit to the school, the Doctor arrives just in time to save Ace by using his Dalek Jammer. Deciding to buy himself more time, he then destroys the transmat. The Daleks on the Mothership detect this and decide to wait for the Omega Device to reveal itself. Informed of the location of the buried casket and the Battle Computer's promise of great shared power, Ratcliffe and his association begin digging for the Device. He is unsettled by the presence of a silent school girl who has been observing most of the proceedings. The disturbed device is detected by the Imperial Daleks, and the summoned Dalek Emperor sends a shuttle to recover it from the Grey Renegade Daleks who have rejected his authority.
The Doctor sends Gilmore and his men to establish a defensive position at the school. He reveals to Ace that two sets of Daleks are vying for control of the Omega Device, which was used to give the Gallifreyans mastery of time. Ratcliffe presents the Device to the Battle Computer, which is revealed to contain the little girl. A Supreme Dalek, flanked by Grey Daleks, kills Ratcliffe's men and takes him hostage. They prepare to flee with the device using a time controller. Not wanting this faction to escape with the device, the Doctor disables the controller and is chased back to the school by a squad of Daleks. The Doctor assures his entourage that the approaching Imperial shuttle will not land at the school, as it is so far away from the Renegade base. The group take cover as the shuttle lands in the playground. The Doctor notes with concern that he might have miscalculated.
The Imperial Daleks leave the ship to face the Renegade faction. Using a Special Weapons Dalek for extra firepower, they advance towards the Renegade base. Realising that Smith is Ratcliffe's agent, Gilmore detains him. The Doctor decides to use the transmat remains in the cellar as a communications link with the Mothership. Smith escapes to the Renegade base to find Ratcliffe a prisoner.  The repaired time controller powers up to enable the Renegades' escape, but the base is attacked by the Imperials, who overwhelm the few remaining opponents.  Ratcliffe and Mike flee with the Time Controller, and the Supreme Dalek orders the controlled girl to recover it.  Using Dalek powers, she kills Ratcliffe and pursues Smith. The victorious Imperials return to the shuttle with the Device. The Doctor orders Ace to shadow Smith.
The Imperial Emperor is informed that the Omega Device is in his possession. The Doctor appears on the bridge screen and demands the surrender of the Device.  The Emperor is revealed to be Davros, who announces his plans for his Daleks to overthrow the Time Lords.  Angered by the Doctor's insults, Davros decides to unleash the device on Skaro's sun.  Rather than the desired effect, the device creates a supernova, obliterating the Daleks' home.  The device smashes back into the Mothership just after an escape pod containing Davros drops out of view.  The Doctor announces that the device is travelling back to Gallifrey.
Ace is captured by Smith, who is still holding the Time Controller. The girl tracks him down and kills him before turning her attention to Ace. The Doctor seeks out the Supreme Dalek. Convinced of its absolute defeat, it kills itself, breaking the link with the controlled girl. At Smith's funeral, Ace wonders if what they did was good. "Time will tell," replies the Doctor. "It always does."

Continuity

The undertaker refers to the fact that he thought the Doctor was supposed to be an "old geezer with white hair," referring to his first incarnation. The blind vicar opines that the Doctor's voice has changed in the month since they last spoke. The Doctor replies that his voice "has changed, several times".
The Doctor describes himself to Davros as "President Elect of the High Council of Time Lords". While the Doctor did become President in The Deadly Assassin, assumed the role in The Invasion of Time and was appointed once again as President in The Five Doctors, by the time of his sixth incarnation's trial in The Trial of a Time Lord he had been removed from office due to his absence. While he was offered the opportunity to run for the position again at the end of his trial, he declined.

Production

Conception and writing

Producer John Nathan-Turner wanted to start Doctor Who twenty-fifth anniversary season "with a bang" by doing a story with the Doctor's most famous adversaries, the Daleks. Nathan-Turner and script editor Andrew Cartmel hired Ben Aaronovitch to write the story; Aaronovitch, who had not written for television before, was ecstatic. Aaronvitch was 25 years old at the time, and had previously submitted an unsolicited script to Cartmel; Cartmel suggested he write something for TV, which later became Battlefield (1989). Cartmel then commissioned Aaronovitch to write the Dalek story, originally titled Nemesis of the Doctor. According to deals made with Terry Nation, the creator of the Daleks, the script for a Dalek story had to be approved by Nation if he was not writing it. Despite an initial mix-up, the storyline was approved. One of Cartmel's goals with the story was to have the Doctor be a commanding center, rather than being "pushed and pulled" by the story as he felt had been happening recently. As such, Aaronovitch wanted there to be a spirit of the Doctor just wanting to tackle the Daleks. Two of the first things Aaronvitch thought of when creating the story was the 1963 setting and a Dalek climbing up stairs. He decided to reveal the Daleks in the middle of the first episode instead of as its cliffhanger, and then have the latter be a Dalek levitating up stairs to surprise viewers. The inability of Daleks to climb stairs was an urban myth and a joke, with the Doctor even joking about it in Destiny of the Daleks (1979). Remembrance was intended to put it to rest, though Cartmel noted that the joke was still prevalent. The Dalek civil war seen in Remembrance was intended to be an outcome of the previous Dalek story, Revelation of the Daleks (1985). Aaronvitch felt that destroying Skaro at the end seemed like a logical conclusion, but he noted that it might not be the best decision in the long run.
Remembrance of the Daleks, the first story in Doctor Who
Several scenes from Remembrance of the Daleks were cut or edited in production. McCoy's favourite scene, in which the Doctor muses to a worker at a café, was cut down by about half. As originally shot, Ace diffused the tension between her and the Doctor when he left her at the boarding house. Also cut was the Doctor curing Ace's leg at the beginning of the third episode, and the issuing of instructions from the Dalek controller through an earpiece. A notable deleted line is the Doctor telling Davros that he is "far more than just another Time Lord". The original script also had the Doctor blowing up a Dalek, but McCoy felt this was out of character and offered it to Ace.

Casting

To protect the secret of Davros' presence in the story, Terry Molloy was credited in part three under an anagram, "Roy Tromelly". Ian Ogilvy was approached for the role of Gilmore, but did not accept; Neil Stacy was also considered. The role went to Simon Williams, who was known for his role as James Bellamy in Upstairs, Downstairs. Sophie Aldred and Karen Glendhill, who had watched the programme when they were younger, were awed to work with him. Williams had trouble handling the character's gun, which earned the nickname of "chunky" because it kept jamming. This nickname was carried onto the character, with McCoy adding the line, "Why do they call him chunky?"
The computer was voiced by John Leeson, who previously played the Doctor's robot dog companion K-9. Leeson was asked to make is voice sound like Davros to trick viewers into thinking the computer was Davros, and watched past episodes for reference.  Michael Sheard was chosen to play the headmaster as he would be familiar to children. Sheard had to be released from his work on Grange Hill to participate; Peter Tilbury was briefly considered for the role if Sheard could not make it. Sheard had previously appeared in The Ark (1966), The Mind of Evil (1971), Pyramids of Mars (1975), The Invisible Enemy (1977), and Castrovalva (1982). Peter Halliday, who played the blind Vicar, had also appeared in various Doctor Who stories. Stratford Johns, who had previously appeared in Four to Doomsday, was originally considered for Ratcliffe. Mark McGann, the brother of Eighth Doctor actor Paul McGann, was originally considered for the role of Mike Smith. Pamela Salem had roles in two Fourth Doctor serials, as one of the Xoanon voices in The Face of Evil, and as Toos in The Robots of Death (1977). Simon Williams, Karen Gledhill and Pamela Salem reprised their roles in this serial in an audio spin-off series for Big Finish titled Counter-Measures, which details the adventures of the group after this story.
Remembrance of the Daleks was also the first story in which Aldred's Ace was a regular companion, having joined at the end of Dragonfire. Aldred did many of her own stunts, bonding with the new stunt coordinator, Tip Tipping. She found the experience "terrifying" at first. Aldred has said that she is proud of the scene were Ace beats up a Dalek with a baseball bat, calling it one of the best things she has done in her life. Aldred was also trained in firing guns for the scene where she shoots a Dalek; the stunt was originally intended for the Doctor, but it was viewed as too out-of-character and McCoy suggested that Ace do it.

Filming and effects

The director, Andrew Morgan, wanted to improve upon his last effort, Time and the Rani (1987). Feeling that the script was worth it, extra money was put into the production. However, production on the serial went over-budget by £13,000, and as a result Morgan was barred from directing for the programme again. Filming took place in April 1988. St John's School in Hammersmith was used as Coal Hill School. The Kew Bridge Steam Museum in Brentford was used as the I.M. Forman junkyard. Filming at this location was occasionally interrupted by a radio traffic news helicopter circling overhead. John Nodes Funeral Service in Ladbroke Grove, London was used for the funeral parlour the Doctor retrieves the Hand of Omega from, and the graveyard where he buries the Hand is Willesden Lane Cemetery. The cemetery filming was attended by some Doctor Who fans who came to watch.
For the levitating Dalek, a scaffolding was built over the stairs, and the Dalek prop was place in a tray that was hoisted up by a rail-mounted trolley. The three Renegade Daleks were reused props from the 1960s. The Imperial Daleks were built with bigger wheels that would roll easier on location. Aaronvitch expected the Dalek ship to be cheap-looking and achieved with colour-separation overlay, and was surprised when a model ship was constructed and "landed" with the help of a crane. For the final battle sequence between the Renegade and Imperial Daleks, the BBC Effects Department's pyrotechnics were so loud and the explosions so realistic that the London Fire Brigade was dispatched to the scene by local residents who feared that an IRA bomb had gone off. McCoy recalled that after the first explosions, a number of car alarms in the neighborhood went off, and the emergency services drivers  were surprised when they arrived to see Daleks coming at them from out of the smoke. The junkyard gate was part of ITV's storage facility, and the pyrotechnics not only destroyed it for the effect of the Special Weapons Dalek blowing it up, but also smashed windows in the nearby building. A thermal imaging camera was used for Dalek perspective shots.

Post-production

The first episode begins with a cold open, the second serial to have a specially-shot pretitles sequence after Time and the Rani (1987), though Castrovalva (1982) began with a reprise of Logopolis (1981), and The Five Doctors (1983) featured a clip from The Dalek Invasion of Earth (1964) before the title sequence. Remembrance cold open features a shot of the Earth with audio clips from 1963; many other clips from the early 60s were planned but did not make the final cut. Many songs from the time period can also be heard in the background during several scenes in the serial.

Themes and analysis

James Chapman, in his book Inside the TARDIS (2006), reported that the plot to revisit the Doctor's past and origins has been compared to a comic book trend in the 1980s to reinterpret the origin stories of comic-book characters. He also noted that the many continuity references in the story displayed a knowledge of the series' history, but that Remembrance of the Daleks was "neither a celebration of the Doctor Who legacy" like The Five Doctors (1983), "nor an exercise in fan-obsessive continuity" as was displayed in Attack of the Cybermen (1985).
The battle between the factions of Daleks has been likened to racism, which is apparent in the 1960s setting as Ace sees a sign that says "No Coloureds". The subtext was intentional, as Aaronvitch drew on the Daleks' Nazi theme and applied it to the setting. Cartmel was particularly proud of the scene and, when it was screened to the BBC Head of Drama, rewound the tape because the Head of Drama had missed the sequence due to a phone call. The Head of Drama felt that Ace should have torn the sign down, and Cartmel agreed it was a missed opportunity.

Broadcast and reception

This story was the first time the programme was transmitted — albeit only in the London region — with NICAM stereo sound.
Retrospective reviews have been mostly positive. Paul Cornell, Martin Day, and Keith Topping wrote in The Discontinuity Guide, "The best Doctor Who story in some considerable time, Remembrance of the Daleks reintroduced mystery and magic into the series with much intelligence and revisionist continuity". The A.V. Club reviewer Christopher Bahn, despite noting that the production had not aged well visually, called Remembrance of the Daleks "the Seventh Doctor era at its best". He was positive towards how going back to An Unearthly Child allowed Aaronvitch and Cartmel to "showcase their new, more devious master-planner version of the Doctor", as well as the action and the character moments for Ace.
Patrick Mulkern of Radio Times praised the serial for "attempting to honour the programme's roots, even if, sadly, the effect is more of the present clomping all over the past", and questioned how the Doctor could have known about the Daleks in 1963 if he did not meet them until he left. He was also critical of the supporting characters and McCoy and Ace; he felt McCoy "struggles to convey gravitas" in the changes that had been made to his character, and while Aldred brought "gusto", Ace was "a peculiarly safe, middle-class rendering of a streetwise kid". Mulkern wrote that the action scenes were handled well, but some of the Daleks looked "fragile" and destroying Skaro was double genocide.
Remembrance of the Daleks was placed in 14th position in Doctor Who Magazine's Mighty 200 reader survey in 2009, which ranked every Doctor Who story to that point in order of preference.

Commercial releases

In print

A novelisation of this serial, written by Ben Aaronovitch, was published by Target Books in June 1990. Its use of a "darker Doctor and more modern approach" has been seen as influencing the Virgin New Adventures, a series of more adult original novels that continued the Doctor Who story after the series was canceled. and whose storyline continued into the New Adventures. The novelisation also references Kadiatu Lethbridge-Stewart, who became a recurring character in the New Adventures. Certain phrases are also translated into the Dalek's language and it is established that they refer to the Doctor as the "Ka Faraq Gatri", which is variously translated as "Bringer of Darkness" or "Destroyer of Worlds". The phrase is used throughout the Virgin New Adventures series to refer to the increasingly dark actions of the Seventh Doctor and is referred to again in "Journey's End" where Davros condemns the Tenth Doctor as the "Destroyer of Worlds".
The novelisation was rereleased in 2013 as part of a 50th anniversary collection of novels reprinted for each Doctor. Remembrance of the Daleks was the only novelisation in the range.

Home media

Remembrance of the Daleks was released on VHS with The Chase in September 1993 as a special Dalek tin set titled The Daleks: Limited Edition Boxed Set. It was re-released in 2001 as part of The Davros Collection,  which was a limited-edition box set, exclusive to UK retailer WH Smith.
The serial was released on DVD in the United Kingdom on 26 February 2001, remastered by the Doctor Who Restoration Team. The original Region 2 DVD release has some video effects missing from episode 1 and the start of episode 2. This was an unforeseen consequence of the Restoration Team using earlier edits of these episodes to minimize generational quality loss, made before certain effects were added.  The problem was corrected with subsequent DVD releases, including Region 1. This DVD also was not able to include two songs by The Beatles, "Do You Want to Know a Secret" and "A Taste of Honey", due to copyright; the former was replaced by the Billy J. Kramer And The Dakotas version of the same song, while the latter was replaced with "generic production music".
The story was included as part of a limited run box set in 2003 with The Dalek Invasion of Earth and Resurrection of the DaleksThe TARDIS Library: 40th Anniversary Dalek box set A remastered version of this story was released on Region 2 in November 2007, as part of The Complete Davros Collection and as a two-disc standalone release (including the 'Davros Connections' documentary from the boxset) on 20 July 2009. It includes the effects that were mistakenly left out and songs by  The Beatles that weren't clearable for the original release but subsequently fall under a blanket music licensing agreement for the UK. There is also a newly remastered stereo and 5.1 surround sound mix. In the original Davros Boxset release version, there were two total mutes of the 5.1 soundtrack during episode one. 2entertain fixed the master within a few days of release and faulty copies could be exchanged for fixed ones via mail-in. The standalone version of the release uses the fixed version. The two-disc Special Edition was delayed due to clearance issues and was held off until it was released in the USA and Canada on 2 March 2010.
This serial was also released as part of the Doctor Who DVD Files in issue 29 on 10 February 2010, the first of the classic series to be released on the partwork. This marks the fourth different separate release of the serial on DVD.





Reviews

Target novelisation


