[[Random graph]]

CATEGORIES: Graph theory, Random graphs

In mathematics, random graph is the general term to refer to probability distributions over graphs.  Random graphs may be described simply by a probability distribution, or by a random process which generates them.Béla Bollobás, Random Graphs, 2nd Edition, 2001, Cambridge University Press The theory of random graphs lies at the intersection between graph theory and probability theory.  From a mathematical perspective, random graphs are used to answer questions about the properties of typical graphs.  Its practical applications are found all areas in which complex networks need to be modeled – a large number of random graph models are thus known, mirroring the diverse types of complex networks encountered in different areas. In a mathematical context, random graph refers almost exclusively to the Erdős–Rényi random graph model.  In other contexts, any graph model may be referred to as a random graph.

Random graph models

If instead we start with an infinite set of vertices, and again let every possible edge occur independently with probability 0 It turns out that if the vertex set is countable then there is, up to isomorphism, only a single graph with this property, namely the Rado graph. Thus any countably infinite random graph is almost surely the Rado graph, which for this reason is sometimes called simply the random graph. However, the analogous result is not true for uncountable graphs, of which there are many (nonisomorphic) graphs satisfying the above property.
Another model, which generalizes Gilbert's random graph model, is the random dot-product model. A random dot-product graph associates with each vertex a real vector.  The probability of an edge uv between any vertices u and v is some function of the dot product u • v of their respective vectors.
For M ≃ pN, where N is the maximal number of edges possible, the two most widely used models, G(n,M) and G(n,p), are almost interchangeable. and Riordan, O.M. "Mathematical results on scale-free random graphs" in "Handbook of Graphs and Networks" (S. Bornholdt and H.G. Schuster (eds)), Wiley VCH, Weinheim, 1st ed., 2003
Random regular graphs form a special case, with properties that may differ from random graphs in general.
Once we have a model of random graphs, every function on graphs, becomes a random variable. The study of this model is to determine, or at least estimate the probability a property may occur.

Terminology

The term 'almost every' in the context of random graphs refers to a sequence of spaces and probabilities, such that the error probabilities tend to zero.

Properties of random graphs

The theory of random graphs studies typical properties of random graphs, those that hold with high probability for graphs drawn from a particular distribution.  For example, we might ask for a given value of n and p what the probability is that G(n,p) is connected.  In studying such questions, researchers often concentrate on the asymptotic behavior of random graphs—the values that various probabilities converge to as n grows very large. Percolation theory characterizes the connectedness of random graphs, especially infinitely large ones.

(threshold functions, evolution of G~)
Random graphs are widely used in the probabilistic method, where one tries to prove the existence of graphs with certain properties. The existence of a property on a random graph can often imply, via the Szemerédi regularity lemma, the existence of that property on almost all graphs.
In random regular graphs, G(n,r-reg) are the set of r-regular graphs with r = r(n) such that n and m are the natural numbers, 3 ≤ r The degree sequence of a graph G in Gn depends only on the number of edges in the sets
If edges, M in a random graph, GM is large enough to ensure that almost every GM has minimum degree at least 1, then almost every GM is connected and, if n is even, almost every GM has a perfect matching. In particular, the moment the last isolated vertex vanishes in almost every random graph, the graph becomes connected.
Almost every graph process on an even number of vertices with the edge raising the minimum degree to 1 or a random graph with slightly more than (n/4)log(n) edges and with probability close to 1 ensures that the graph has a complete matching, with exception of at most one vertex.
For some constant c, almost every labelled graph with n vertices and at least cnlog(n) edges is Hamiltonian. With the probability tending to 1, the particular edge that increases the minimum degree to 2 makes the graph Hamiltonian.

Coloring of Random Graphs

Given a random graph G of order n with the vertex V(G) = {1, ..., n}, by the greedy algorithm on the number of colors, the vertices can be colored with colors 1, 2, ... (vertex 1 is colored 1, vertex 2 is colored 1 if it is not adjacent to vertex 1, otherwise it is colored 2, etc).

Random trees

A random tree is a tree or arborescence that is formed by a stochastic process. In a large range of random graphs of order n and size M(n) the distribution of the number of tree components of order k is asymptotically Poisson. Types of random trees include uniform spanning tree, random minimal spanning tree, random binary tree, treap, rapidly exploring random tree, Brownian tree, and random forest.

History

Random graphs were first defined by Paul Erdős and Alfréd Rényi in their 1959 paper "On Random Graphs"Erdős, P. Rényi, A (1959) "On Random Graphs I" in Publ. Math. Debrecen 6, p. 290–297 






