[[Balance of Power (video game)]]

CATEGORIES: 1985 video games, Amiga games, Anti-war video games, Apple II games, Apple IIGS games, Atari ST games, Cold War video games, Government simulation video games, Mac OS games, Windows games, Chris Crawford (game designer) games

Balance of Power is a computer strategy game of geopolitics during the Cold War, created by Chris Crawford and published in 1985. The game is notable for engaging the player in nail-biting brinkmanship without using any graphics more complicated than an outline map of the world.

Gameplay

The goal of the game is simple: the player may choose to be either the President of the United States or the General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, and must lead the chosen superpower for eight years, seeking to maximize "prestige" and avoiding a nuclear war. Each turn is one year long; at the beginning of each year, the player is presented with a set of incidents and crises in various countries around the globe, and must choose a response to each one.  Responses may range from no action, to diplomatic notes to the other superpower, to military maneuvers. Each response is then met with a counter-response, which may vary from backing down to escalation. The player then gets a chance to initiate actions, and deal with the opponent's responses.
This core mechanic is similar to that of Bruce Ketchledge's 1983 game Geopolitique 1990, published by SSI. One difference from the earlier game is how negotiations are resolved. In both games, backing down in a negotiation results in a loss of prestige, which will reverberate politically. Likewise, in both games brinkmanship may result in a global war. In Geopolitique, such wars were actually fought in-game, after which the game continued. In Balance of Power, such a war ends the game instantly, with the following message: "You have ignited a nuclear war. And no, there is no animated display of a mushroom cloud with parts of bodies flying through the air. We do not reward failure."

Development

In 1984 Crawford stated at Origins Game Fair that he was "working on a game for the Macintosh entitled ARMS RACE based on the philosophy that 'H-bombs don't kill people, Geopolitics kills people.'"
Crawford had difficulty in finding a publisher for Balance of Power. Random House agreed to publish it but canceled the contract and demanded that Crawford return its $10,000 advance payment, almost causing him to lose his home. The game was released by Mindscape for the Apple Macintosh and Apple II, then ported to Windows (1986), Atari ST (1987) and Amiga. It was a sensation when it came out, but as a brutally realistic (some would say cynical) depiction of superpower maneuvering. In 1986, Crawford published a book also called Balance of Power, which goes into great depth on the game, including the background of the politics, the formulas used to calculate prestige and related parameters, and an account of its (lengthy) gestation.
Crawford stated "I'm very proud of Balance of Power for what it has done ... I feel it has made the world a better place ... I think it has made a small number of people much more realistic in their appraisal of world affairs". It adds more countries, advisors to help out the player, a new "multi-polar" level that allows countries to generate events of their own (such as declaring war on other countries), and a few miscellaneous features including a 2 player Hotseat mode.  However, with the ending of the Cold War, interest declined.

Sequel

Chris Crawford in 1992 made the "Dragon Speech" where he explained that he was going to leave the game industry to make something more interactive and artistic. After all these years working, he released the sequel to Balance of Power called Balance of Power: 21st Century, where instead of a Cold War scenario it has a scenario of a modern USA vs Asia vs the Middle East with the game's plot beginning September 12, 2001 and with the player taking the role of US President.
Since 2007 there have been forum games titled Balance of Power and based on the video game, most having a Cold War theme.  The most notable place for them has been eRegime.

Reception

Computer Gaming World stated that Balance of Power "stands in a prestigious circle: that of the most innovative computer games of all time. If there were Academy Awards for computer games, 
Compute! presented opposing views of the game in May 1988. The magazine included Balance of Power in its list of "Our Favorite Games", calling it "an impressive recreation of the world's geopolitical landscape ... call one too many bluffs and you'll see the chilling message You have ignited a nuclear war".
In 1996, Computer Gaming World ranked it as the 78th best game of all time, calling it "a wonderful  game of political intrigue that felt just like the Cold War and didn't require the detail of Shadow President or CyberJudas."CGW 148: 150 Best Games of All Time That same year, it was ranked as the 75th top game of all time by Next Generation.48.








