[[Market Drayton]]

CATEGORIES: Market towns in Shropshire, Towns in Shropshire, Post towns in the TF postcode area

Market Drayton is a small market town in north Shropshire, England, close to the Welsh Border. It is on the River Tern, between Shrewsbury and Stoke-on-Trent, and was formerly known as "Drayton in Hales" (c. 1868) and earlier simply as "Drayton" (c. 1695).
Market Drayton is on the Shropshire Union Canal and on Regional Cycle Route 75. The A53 road by-passes the town. The counties of Staffordshire and Cheshire, and the Welsh Border are both close by.

Industry

In 1965, sausage maker Palethorpe's built a new factory employing 400 people in the town.  Purchased by Northern Foods in 1990, the company was merged with Bowyers of Trowbridge, Wiltshire and Pork Farms of Nottingham to form Pork Farms Bowyers.  The sausage brand was sold in 2001 to Kerry Group, but the factory remains open to this day as the town's largest employer.  It produces various meat based and chilled food products, under both the Pork Farms brand and for third parties, including Asda.
Müller Dairies have a factory making yogurts.  The town is also the home of Tern Press, a highly respected and collectible small press publisher of poetry. Image on Food also makes local gingerbread.
Recent developments in the local service industry include the retailers Argos, Wilkinsons and B & M which have all brought new employment to the town. It is widely considered to be the "Home of Gingerbread".

Sites of interest

The great fire of Drayton destroyed almost 70% of the town in 1651. It was started at a bakery, and quickly spread through the timber buildings. The Buttercross in the centre of the town still has a bell at the top for people to ring if there was ever another fire.
Ancient local sites include: Audley's Cross, Blore Heath, and several Neolithic standing stones, "The Devil's Ring and Finger", just three miles (5 km) from the town.
Other notable landmarks in the area include: Pell Wall Hall, Adderley Hall, Buntingsdale Hall, Salisbury Hill, Tyrley Locks on the Shropshire Union Canal and the Thomas Telford designed aqueduct. Fordhall Farm, which consists of  of community-owned organic farmland located off of the A53 between the Müller and Tern Hill roundabouts.  The farm trail is open to the public during farm shop opening hours, and included along the path is the site of Fordhall Castle, an ancient motte and bailey structure which overlooks the River Tern valley.
To the south-east near the A529 an eighteenth-century farmhouse stands on the site of Tyrley Castle, which was probably built soon after 1066 and later rebuilt in stone in the thirteenth century.
Many of the streets in the town are named after famous castles, such as Balmoral Drive, Caernavon Close, Windsor Drive, Warwick Close, and many others.

Image:DraytonViaduct.JPG|Aqueduct
Image:DraytonStMarys. Mary's Church
File:StMary's, Market Drayton-geograph-771033-by-Geoff-Pick. Mary's Church
Image:DraytonLocks.JPG|Tyrley Locks
File:PellWall.jpg|Pell Wall Hall

Notable residents

Nearby at Styche Hall is the birthplace of Robert Clive, first Lord Clive, "Clive of India", (1725–1774). The Georgian house, designed by Sir William Chambers, the architect of Somerset House, replaced the half-timbered house where Clive was born. It was built for his father and paid for by Clive from the income from his Indian career.
Amongst the many schools he attended is the town's old grammar school, next to St Mary's church. A school desk with the initials RC can still be seen in the town.
Thomas Povey, the colonial civil servant and friend of Samuel Pepys, was a Londoner, but a branch of his family lived at Woodseaves, Market Drayton; the most prominent of this branch was Sir John Povey, Lord Chief Justice of Ireland 1673-9.
The town was the birthplace of pioneering photographer Samuel Bourne (b. 1834). He is famous for having spent six years in India from 1862 to 1870;Photographs of India. circa 1862 - circa 1872 - Samuel Bourne Biography Cambridge University Library. there he founded a major studio, Bourne & Shepherd, trekked into and photographed many of India's remotest places and, with his printer Charles Shepherd, became the most notable photographer of the Raj.
John Lewis (1855-1926), football referee and a founder of Blackburn Rovers F.C., was born at Market Drayton.
The 1930s British fascist leader Oswald Mosley was born nearby in 1896, at Betton Hall, the home of his mother's parents. When his parents separated, Oswald and his brother went with their mother to live in Smithfield Road.  Mosley attended a dame school in Shropshire Street until he went to public school at the age of eight.  Apart from holidays he never lived in Drayton again.
Mosley was deeply ashamed of their reduced circumstances and he did everything to hide the years in Drayton.  Their middle class status contrasted with the huge estate of his paternal grandparents in Staffordshire. Years later, following the death of their mother, he obtained her diaries from his brother and burned them.
In the 1930s at the height of his "fame", he returned to the town where he held a meeting in the square.
Market Drayton has always been a hotbed for musical 'talent' producing a number of bands who have progressed on to achieve national acclaim. In 1981 the town boasted the 'second best' School Rock Band in the country, TSB National School Band runners up, Monovision (Winners were "Mother Hen").  At the same time the local youth club were represented by the Platinum Needles in the NAYC Opportunity Rocks competition final. In early 1981 The Platinum Needles were also featured on the Stoke Musicians Collective album released on Slip Records "Cry Havoc".yolasite. In more recent times Sonic State another local band have produced the theme music for a TV programme while sharing their lead singer Jenny Z with the more famous Sigue Sigue Sputnik (formed by former Generation X guitarist Tony James).  During the late seventies and early eighties, Drayton also boasted one of the only recording studios in Shropshire, Redball Records.  More recently Heidi Browne won the national OpenMic Uk competition in 2013 with her own original music and songwriting 

Education

Market Drayton has four schools:
The Grove School is a large secondary school, of approximately 1100 students all of whom live within  of the town.

Transport

Currently, Arriva provides a local bus service to Shrewsbury, Newcastle-under-Lyme and Hanley (as services 64 and 164).  Beginning on 7 September 2012 Bennetts Travel Cranberry Ltd run an evening service 164 to Hanley on Fridays and Saturdays with a day service to Newcastle under Lyme on Sunday. Arriva provide services 341/342 to Wellington from Monday to Saturday.
Shropshire council also run a number of bus services under the 'ShropshireLink' brand in addition to the 301 and 302 Market Drayton Town Services.
Market Drayton had a railway station which opened in 1870 and closed during the Beeching cuts in 1963. The station was located on the Nantwich to Wellington line of the Great Western Railway network and was also the terminus of the Newcastle under Lyme line of the North Staffordshire Railway network.

Sports

Market Drayton Town F.C. play on Greenfields Sports Ground in Market Drayton, which has capacity for 1,000 attendees

Twin towns

Market Drayton is twinned with:Arlon Twinning on Council site






