[[Dosa]]

CATEGORIES: Karnataka cuisine, Fermented foods, Indian breads, Indian fast food, Andhra cuisine, Mangalorean cuisine, Pancakes, Singaporean cuisine, South Indian cuisine, Tamil cuisine, Kerala cuisine, Staple foods

Dosa (), is a fermented crepe or pancake made from rice batter and black lentils. This staple dish is widely popular in all southern Indian states Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Kerala, as well as being popular in other countries like Sri Lanka, Malaysia and Singapore.lonelyplanet.com/singapore/singapore-city/restaurants/indian-vegetarian/dosa-corner

History

The origins of Dosa have been widely discussed in literature and books. A few of them are listed below:

Orthography and transliteration

There are various ways of transliterating the word dosa. The standard transliterations and pronunciations in various South Indian languages is shown in the table below.
Various non-standard spellings are used, including dosé, dosai, dhosa, dosey, dosay, doza, dozé, dozai, dhoza, dozey, dozay, thosa, thosé, thosai, thhosa, thosey, thosay, thoza, thozé, thozai, thhoza, thozey and thozay.

Nutrition

Dosa, a common breakfast dish and street food,

Basic preparation

A mixture of rice and urad dal that has been soaked in water is ground finely to form a batter. The proportion of rice to lentils is basically 4:1 or 5:1. The batter is allowed to sit overnight and ferment. Sometimes a few fenugreek seeds are added to the rice-dal mixture. The rice can be uncooked or parboiled. The mixture of  urad dal (black lentils) and rice can be replaced with highly refined wheat flour to make a maida dosa, or semolina for a rava dosa.
A thin layer of the batter is then ladled onto a hot tava (griddle) greased with oil or ghee (clarified butter). It is spread out evenly with the base of a ladle or bowl to form a pancake. A dosa is served hot, either folded in half or rolled like a wrap.
It is also served usually with aloo curry, chutney, or sambar.

Serving methods

Dosa can be stuffed with fillings of vegetables and sauces to make a quick meal. They are typically served with a vegetarian side dish which varies according to regional and personal preferences. Common side items are:

Variations

Though dosa typically refers to the version made with rice and lentils, many other versions exist, often specific to an Indian region. Some variations include egg dosa, which is spread with an omelette, and cheese dosa, which is stuffed with cheese.

Masala dosa

A masala dosa is a south Indian delicacy made by stuffing a dosa with a lightly cooked filling of potatoes, fried onions and spices. The dosa is wrapped around an onion and potato curry or sabjiand is originally invented by Udupi Hotels. One of the stories of its invention is that one day the Mysore Maharaja ted a big festivals and at the end of it there were lot of foods left wasted. So he order all the Chefs to think creatively and make sure no food is left waste, and the brilliant chefs came up with this unique recipe and it was a no doubt instant hits, they stuffed the plain Dosa with potato and spices and lot of Ghee too
It is listed as number 49 on World's 50 most delicious foods compiled by CNN Go in 2011.  It is also cited as top ten tasty foods  of the world (2012).
Some variants are:
In Bangalore, the masala dosa is usually served with a red chutney applied to its inside surface. The red chutney usually has generous amounts of garlic.

Similar foods

Gallery

File:Sada dosa.jpg|Sada (Plain) Dosa
File:Paper Masala Dosa.jpg|Paper Masala Dosa
File:Dosa and ghee.jpg|Dosa and Ghee
File:Masala Thosai.jpg|Masala Dosa
File:Rava dosa.JPG|Rava Dosa
File:நெய் தோசை ......jpg|Ghee Dosa
File:ദോശയും ചമ്മന്തിയും.JPG|Chutney and Dosa








