[[Sharp-shinned Hawk]]

CATEGORIES: Accipiter, Birds of Puerto Rico, Birds of the Bahamas, Birds of Cuba, Birds of Jamaica, Birds of Haiti, Birds of the Dominican Republic, Birds of Mexico, Birds of Central America, Birds of Guatemala, Birds of Belize, Birds of Honduras, Birds of El Salvador, Birds of Nicaragua, Birds of Costa Rica, Birds of Panama, Birds of South America, Birds of Venezuela, Birds of Colombia, Birds of Ecuador, Birds of Peru, Birds of Bolivia, Birds of Paraguay, Birds of Uruguay, Birds of Argentina, Birds of Brazil, True hawks, Birds of prey, Animals described in 1807

The Sharp-shinned Hawk (Accipiter striatus) is a small hawk described from Hispaniola, with males being the smallest hawks in the United States and Canada, but with the species averaging larger than some Neotropical species, such as Tiny Hawk. The taxonomy is far from resolved, with some authorities considering the southern taxa to represent three separate species: White-breasted Hawk (A. chionogaster), Plain-breasted Hawk (A. ventralis), and Rufous-thighed Hawk (A. erythronemius). 

Distribution

This species is widespread in North America, Central America, South America and the Greater Antilles. Below, the distributions of the four groups (see taxonomy) are described as they occur roughly from north to south:

Taxonomy

Sharp-shinned Hawk is often separated into four species, with the northern group (see distribution) retaining both the scientific name and the common name: Sharp-shinned Hawk (A. striatus). In addition to the nominate taxon (A. s. striatus), it includes subspecies perobscurus, velox, suttoni, madrensis, fringilloides, and venator. The three remaining taxa, each considered a monotypic species if split, are the White-breasted Hawk (A. chionogaster; Kaup, 1852), Plain-breasted Hawk (A. ventralis; Sclater, 1866) and Rufous-thighed Hawk (A. erythronemius; Kaup, 1850). The breeding ranges of the groups are entirely allopatric, although the wintering range of the nominate group partially overlaps with the range of chionogaster (as is also the case with certain taxa within the nominate group). This allopatry combined with differences in plumage (see appearance) and, apparently, certain measurements, has been the background for the split, but hard scientific data are presently lacking (AOU). Disregarding field guides, most material published in recent years (e.g. AOU, Ferguson-Lees et al. p. 586, and Dickinson et al.) has therefore considered all to be members of a single widespread species – but not without equivocation: Ferguson-Lees et al. say that if they were to make a world list, they would include the three taxa as separate species (p. 75), and the AOU's comment includes the note "split almost certainly good".
Storer (1952) suggested that the southernmost populations within the nominate group were paler below, thus approaching chionogaster. This has also been reflected in recent guides, where A. s. madrensis of southern Mexico is described as being relatively pale below (compared to more northern subspecies), but if this is a sign of intergradation with chionogaster or a north-south cline which includes both the members of the nominate group and chionogaster remains unclear. In Bolivia, ventralis and  erythronemius approach each other, but no evidence of intergradation is known – something that, without actual specimens, also would be hard to prove due to the variability in the plumage of ventralis.

Habitat

It occurs in a wide range of woodland and forest types, both dominated by conifers and by various types of broad-leaved trees (especially oaks) The largest populations of the nominate group (see taxonomy) are thought to occur in the temperate boreal forests, but winter in warmer regions farther south (see distribution). The taxa suttoni, madrensis (both from the nominate group), chionogaster (White-breasted Hawk) and ventralis (Plain-breasted Hawk), are found in upper tropical to temperate highlands; mainly at altitudes of . The taxon erythronemius (Rufous-thighed Hawk) is found in tropical and subtropical regions; both in lowlands and highlands.

Appearance

This is a small Accipiter hawk, with males . Measurements given here are for the northern group, but they are comparable for the remaining subspecies. Houghton Mifflin (2001), ISBN 0-618-12762-3 Adults have short broad wings and a medium-length tail banded in blackish and gray with the tip varying among individuals from slightly notched through square to slightly rounded (often narrowly tipped white). The remiges (typically only visible in flight) are whitish barred blackish. The legs are long and very slender (hence the common name) and yellow. The hooked bill is black and the cere is yellowish. The remaining plumage varies depending on group:

Identification

Food and hunting

These birds surprise and capture most their prey from cover or while flying quickly through dense vegetation. They are adept at navigating dense thickets and many attacks are successful, although this hunting method is often hazardous to the hawk. The great majority of this hawk's prey are small birds, especially various songbirds such as sparrows, wood-warblers, finches, wrens, nuthatches, tits, icterids and thrushes. Birds caught range in size from a  Ruffed Grouse and virtually any bird within this size range is potential prey. Typically, males will target smaller birds, such as sparrows and wood-warblers, and females will pursue larger prey, such as American Robins and flickers, leading to a lack of conflict between the sexes for prey. These hawks often exploit backyard bird feeders in order to target congregations of ideal prey. They often pluck the feathers off their prey on a post or other perch. Rarely, Sharp-shinned Hawks will also eat rodents, lizards, frogs, snakes, and large insects, the latter typically being dragonflies captured on the wing during the hawk's migration.

Reproduction

Sharp-shinned Hawks construct a stick nest in a large conifer or dense group of deciduous trees. Clutches of 3 to 8 eggs have been recorded, but 4 to 5 eggs is the typical clutch size. The eggs measure . The eggs are prized by egg-collectors, because they are heavily marked with surprisingly colorful and varied markings. The incubation period is thought to average at about 30 days. After hatching, the young are brooded for 16 to 23 days by the female, while the male defends the territory and catches prey. The young fledge at about a month old and rely on their parents for feeding and protection another four weeks. The nesting sites and breeding behavior of Sharp-shinned Hawks are generally secretive, in order to avoid the predation of larger raptors, such as the Northern Goshawk and the Cooper's Hawk. While in migration, adults are sometimes preyed on by most of the bird-hunting, larger raptors, especially the Peregrine Falcon. The breeding behavior of the taxa chionogaster (White-breasted Hawk), ventralis (Plain-breasted Hawk) and erythronemius (Rufous-thighed Hawk) are comparably poorly known, but based on the available knowledge they appear to differ little from that of the nominate group

Conservation

In North America this species declined in numbers in the 1960s and 1970s, probably as a result of the use of DDT and other pesticides. The population of USA and Canada has rebounded since and might even exceed historical numbers today, probably due to the combination of the ban on DDT and the proliferation of backyard bird feeders in North America which create unnaturally reliable and easy prey Accipiters. Migratory Sharp-shinned Hawks are one of the most numerous raptors recorded at "hawk watches" across the country. An exception is the subspecies from Puerto Rico, Accipiter striatus venator, which is rare and listed as endangered by the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service. The remaining resident subspecies from the Greater Antilles, fringilliodes from Cuba and nominate (A. s. striatus) from Hispaniola, are uncommon, local, and, at least in the case of the latter, decreasing. Both ventralis (Plain-breasted Hawk) and erythronemius (Rufous-thighed Hawk) are fairly common (but easily overlooked due to their secretive behavior) and presently considered safe. The situation for chionogaster (White-breasted Hawk) is potentially more problematic due to its limited range, although it, at least locally, remains fairly common.






