[[Reproduction and pregnancy in speculative fiction]]

CATEGORIES: Works about human pregnancy, Science fiction themes

Because speculative genres explore variants of reproduction, as well as possible futures, SF writers have often explored the social, political, technological, and biological consequences of pregnancy and reproduction.

Themes

As real-world reproductive technology has advanced, SF works have become increasingly interested in representing alternative modes of reproduction. Among the uses of pregnancy and reproduction themes regularly encountered in science fiction are:
The phenomenon of pregnancy itself has been the subject of numerous works, both directly and metaphorically. These works may relate pregnancy to parasitism or slavery, or simply use pregnancy as a strong contrast with horror. For example, in the film, Rosemary's Baby (1968) (based on the 1967 novel by Ira Levin) a woman is tricked into a satanic pregnancy by her husband.31, n.3, pp. 3–16 (1992).32, no. 3, pp.116–135 (Summer 2005).

Alien–human hybrids

Inter-species reproduction and alien-human hybrids frequently occur in science fiction, and women being impregnated by aliens is a common theme in SF horror films, including I Married a Monster from Outer Space, Village of the Damned, Xtro, and Inseminoid. 215 The theme has even been parodied, such as in the soft porn Wham Bang! Thanks You Mister Spaceman. They are sometimes used as metaphors for social anxieties about miscegenation or hybridization,
In Alien Resurrection, the 1997 film, Ellen Ripley has been cloned to facilitate study of the alien queen embryo with which she was implantedA. Samuel Kimball, "Conceptions and Contraceptions of the Future: Terminator 2, The Matrix, and Alien Resurrection", Camera Obscura, v.17, n.2 (2002).4, n.1, pp. 90–107 (2002). Annette Kuhn (1990).  In Octavia E. Butler's  Lilith's Brood trilogy (1987, 1988, 1989) alien and human females impregnated by alien intermediary-sex individuals with the DNA of males, in "fivesomes". 6, n.1, pp. 103–118 (Spring 2000).7, n.1, pp. 28–38 (Spring 1996).

Reproduction and technology

Speculative fiction in technology of reproduction may involve cloning and ectogenesis, i.e., artificial reproduction).
The latter part of the 2000s decade has also seen an upswing of films and other fiction depicting emotional struggles of assisted reproductive technology in contemporary reality rather than being speculation.com --> Heartache of infertility shared on stage, screen By Colleen Mastony, Tribune reporter. June 21, 2009

Large-scale infertility or population growth

Fertility and reproduction have been frequent sites for examination of concerns about the impact of the environment and reproduction on the future of humanity or civilization.  For example, The Children of Men by P.D. James is just one of many works which have considered the implications of global infertility; Make Room! Make Room! by Harry Harrison is one of many works which have examined the converse, the implications of massive human population surges. Numerous other works, such as Venus Plus X and More Than Human by Theodore Sturgeon examine the future of humanity as it evolves, or particular breeding programs.

Politics and gender politics

Pregnancy and control of human reproduction have often been used as proxies for treating gender issues or broader themes of social control; works dealing with pregnancy and human reproduction have also been used to closely explore gender politics.  For instance, "male pregnancy" has been used to comedic effect in mainstream literature and films such as Junior (1994 film, dir. Ivan Reitman),Amy Cuomo, "The Scientific Appropriation of Female Reproductive Power in Junior", Extrapolation, v.39, n.4, pp. 352–363 (Winter 1988). Sawyer, Male Pregnancy and has developed a following in fan fiction — the "m-preg" genre."Within fan fiction, a number of subgenres are well recognized...."
The genre of feminist science fiction has explored single-sex reproduction in depth, particularly parthenogenesis, as well as gendered control over the ability and right to reproduce. See also numerous dystopian stories about state-controlled reproduction, abortion, and birth control, such as Atwood's The Handmaid's Tale, or her short story, "Freeforall". These works have often been analyzed as explorations of contemporary political debates about reproduction and pregnancy. 61–90.





Further reading


