[[Witney]]

CATEGORIES: Towns in Oxfordshire, West Oxfordshire, Civil parishes in Oxfordshire, Post towns in the OX postcode area

Witney is a town on the River Windrush,  west of Oxford in Oxfordshire, England.
The place-name 'Witney' is first attested in a Saxon charter of 969 as 'Wyttannige'; it appears as 'Witenie' in the Domesday Book of 1086. The name means 'Witta's island'. 528.

Notable buildings

The Church of England parish church of St Mary the Virgin was originally Norman. The north porch and north aisle were added in this style late in the 12th century, and survived a major rebuilding in about 1243. In this rebuilding the present chancel, transepts, tower and spire were added and the nave was remodelled, all in the Early English style. In the 14th century a number of side chapels and some of the present windows were added in the Decorated style. In the 15th century the south transept was extended and the present west window of the nave were added in the Perpendicular style.Oxford Diocesan Guild of Church Bell ringers, Witney & Woodstock Branch
Holy Trinity parish church in Wood Green was built in 1849 in the Early English style. Both St. Mary the Virgin and Holy Trinity are now members of a single team parish.
Witney Market began in the Middle Ages. Thursday is the traditional market day but there is also a market on Saturday. The buttercross in the market square is so called because people from neighbouring towns would gather there to buy butter and eggs. It was built in about 1600 and its clock was added in 1683.Sherwood & Pevsner, 1974, page 846
The town hall is 18th-century. A local legend holds that it was designed by Sir Christopher Wren, but there is little evidence to support this claim.
Witney has long been an important crossing over the River Windrush. The architect Thomas Wyatt rebuilt the bridge in Bridge Street in 1822. 847
The Friends Meeting House in Wood Green was built in the 18th century. Since 1997 Quakers in Witney have met at the corn exchange.Burford Quakers
West End, part of the road to Hailey, is one of Britain's best-preserved streets Although it is called West End, it is actually on the northern side of the town and gets its name from when it was not actually in Witney parish but at the west end of the adjacent Hailey parish.
Witney Workhouse was on Razor Hill (now Tower Hill). It was built in 1835–36 by the architect George Wilkinson. It had four wings radiating from an octagonal central building, similar to Chipping Norton workhouse, which also was built by Wilkinson. His younger brother William Wilkinson added a separate chapel to Witney Workhouse in 1860.Sherwood & Pevsner, 1974, page 851The Workhouse: Witney

Industry

Witney has been famous for its woollen blankets since the Middle Ages. The water for the production of these blankets is drawn from the River Windrush, which was believed to be the secret of Witney's high quality blankets. The Blanket Hall in High Street was built in 1721 for weighing and measuring blankets. At one time there were five blanket factories in the town but with the closure of the largest blanket maker, in 2002, Early's, the town's blanket industry completely ceased production. Early's factory, once a vital and important part of the town's history, has now been demolished, and is the site of several new housing estates. Witney United FC retains its nickname "The Blanketmen" from the town's traditional trade.
For many years Witney had its own brewery and maltings: J.W. Clinch and Co, which founded the Eagle Maltings in 1841. Courage took over Clinch's and closed it down, but since 1983 Refresh UK's Wychwood Brewery has brewed real ales in the Eagle Maltings. In 2002 Refresh UK contracted to produce ales for W.H. Brakspear, who had sold their former brewery in Henley-upon-Thames for redevelopment. Refresh UK also brews ale for the Prince of Wales' Duchy Originals company.
The Witney Railway opened Witney's first station in 1861, linking the town to . The Great Western Railway operated services on both lines and eventually took them over. In 1962 British Railways closed the EGR completely and withdrew passenger services from the Witney Railway. In 1970 British Railways closed the Witney Railway completely and it was dismantled.

Museums

Witney has three museums. Cogges Manor Farm Museum, in the 13th-century manor house and farm of Cogges, represents farming and countryside history. The Witney and District Museum has many artefacts and documents representing the history of the town. the Wychwood Brewery has a museum open at weekends.

Education

Witney has three county secondary schools: Henry Box School, Wood Green School and Springfield School. In 1660 Henry Box founded Witney Grammar School. In 1968 it became the comprehensive Henry Box School. Wood Green was substantially expanded from 2000 to 2004; an additional block with 15 teaching rooms was added, together with purpose-built sixth form centre, school restaurant and new AstroTurf pitch. 2009 saw part of the old Lower School being remodelled to provide new changing and shower facilities for the AstroTurf pitch and its many users from local community sports clubs.
The King's School is independent of Oxfordshire Local Education Authority. It was founded by Oxfordshire Community Churches,
Cokethorpe School is an independent secondary school, founded in 1957.
St. Mary's School beside Church Green was established in 1813. It was a Church of England primary school but in 1953 it became a Church of England controlled School for Infant children, and the Junior children transferred to the Batt School premises. in Cogges Hill Road.
Our Lady Of Lourdes Catholic Primary School is a Roman Catholic school founded in 1958.
Witney has five community primary schools: Madley Park Community Primary School,
The former Witney Technical College is now part of Abingdon and Witney College. A complete rebuilding of its premises began in September 2008.

Sports

Witney United Football Club
Witney was also the home of Toleman later Benetton Formula One team hq, until the team moved to its current base, Enstone in 1992 where the team is currently under the Lotus guise.

Politics

Witney is known as a Conservative safe seat, and as such has been the constituency for both Douglas Hurd and the current leader of the Conservative Party, and Prime Minister, David Cameron. This clear party preference led to controversy when Shaun Woodward was appointed to succeed the retiring Hurd as Conservative candidate. Woodward was elected in the 1997 General Election, but switched allegiance to the Labour Party in 1999. In the 2001 General Election Woodward stood as the Labour candidate for St Helens South and David Cameron retook Witney for the Conservatives. Witney MP David Cameron became Prime Minister following a Coalition agreement with the Liberal Democrat leader Nick Clegg, May 2010.

Twinning

Witney is twinned with:

Floods

In July 2007 Witney saw its worst flooding in more than 50 years. Homes and businesses were evacuated and Bridge Street, a major road into the town and the only road across the Windrush, was closed. About 200 properties in central Witney were flooded, with areas around Bridge Street, Mill Street and West End the worst affected. The new and incomplete housing development Aquarius also suffered substantial flooding.
In 2008 further flooding contributed to the death of a 17-year-old boy who drowned in a culvert.

Climate

Witney has a maritime climate type typical to the British Isles, with evenly spread rainfall, a narrow temperature range, and comparatively low sunshine totals. The nearest official weather station is Brize Norton, just under 4 miles to the South West.
The absolute maximum recorded was 35.4c(95.7f) during August 1990, although in a typical year the warmest day should only reach 29.5c(85.1f) with an average of 14.6 days reporting a maximum temperature of 25.1c(77.2f) or above.
The absolute minimum is −20.7c(−5.3f), recorded in January 1982. In a more typical year the annual minimum temperature should be −8.1c(17.4f), although a total of 47.1 nights should report an air frost.
Rainfall averages slightly under 644mm per year
with over 1mm of rain falling on just under 115 days of the year.

Media

In May 2010, WitneyTV  was launched as a non-profit online broadcaster with a weekly show that features local news and upcoming events within West Oxfordshire for the benefit of the community. An archive of videos featuring local attractions, clubs, organisations and previous shows is also available.
November 30, 2012 saw WitneyRadio launch. Providing hyper local news, music and current affairs to the people of Witney & West Oxfordshire.

Gallery

File:WitneyHighStreet.jpg|Witney High Street
File:Holy Trinity Church, Woodgreen, Witney.jpg|Holy Trinity Church, Woodgreen Hill
File:One of the West Oxfordshire Council Buildings.jpg|West Oxfordshire District Council Building

Famous people

Famous people associated with Witney include:





Sources & further reading




