[[Michael Cullen (politician)]]

CATEGORIES: 1945 births, Alumni of the University of Edinburgh, Attorneys General of New Zealand, Australian National University faculty, English emigrants to New Zealand, People from London, Living people, New Zealand finance ministers, New Zealand Labour Party MPs, University of Canterbury alumni, University of Otago faculty, People educated at Christ's College, Canterbury, New Zealand list MPs, New Zealand MPs for Dunedin electorates, Deputy Prime Ministers of New Zealand, Members of the New Zealand House of Representatives, Knights Companion of the New Zealand Order of Merit

Sir Michael John Cullen  and chairman from 1 November 2010.

Early life

Born in London, Cullen emigrated to New Zealand while young. He attended secondary school at Christ's College in Christchurch, and achieved an MA in history at Canterbury University. Receiving a Commonwealth Scholarship he then gained a PhD in social and economic history from the University of Edinburgh. From 1971 to 1981 he was a lecturer at Otago University, with a term as a Visiting Fellow at the Australian National University from 1975 to 1976.

Honours

In the 2012 Queen's Birthday and Diamond Jubilee Honours List, Cullen was appointed Knight Companion of the New Zealand Order of Merit.

Member of Parliament

Cullen joined the Labour Party in 1974, and served on the party's Executive and Council between 1976 and 1981. In 1981 he was elected MP for the Dunedin electorate of St Kilda.

Fourth Labour Government

When Labour entered government in 1984, Cullen became Senior Whip. Due to his knowledge of economics, Cullen became increasingly involved in the disputes surrounding the Minister of Finance, Roger Douglas, who supported the liberalisation of trade and the sale of state assets plus deep tax cuts. These goals, which were against traditional Labour policies, angered both party members and the public. When the Prime Minister, David Lange, attempted to limit the influence Douglas had on the government's direction, Cullen became involved on Lange's side. After Labour's re-election in 1987, Cullen was made Associate Minister of Finance (an attempt by Lange to provide an anti-reform counterbalance to the radical Douglas) and Minister of Social Welfare (an attempt to limit the impact of the reforms in that area).
Eventually, Douglas was forced to resign, but a month later the political controversies around the dispute prompted the resignation of Lange himself. Douglas was succeeded as Finance Minister by David Caygill, one of his allies (albeit a considerably less radical one). Cullen was made Associate Minister of Health, again to reduce the effect of reforms on that sector.

Opposition

When Labour lost the 1990 election (something attributed by many people to public anger at Douglas' reforms, and disarray within the Labour Party), Cullen returned to being Labour's spokesperson on social welfare. The following year, he replaced David Caygill as the party's chief finance spokesperson. When Caygill retired from politics in 1996 Cullen took the deputy leader's post as well. Before Labour's position in the polls improved, Cullen was also involved in an attempt to oust Helen Clark as party leader, which was not successful. The two do not appear to bear each other any resentment, however. Cullen has claimed to be happy with his position as second, saying that in terms of personality, he is "a number two sort of person". Many commentators agree, believing that Cullen's strength lies more in administration than leadership.

Fifth Labour Government

Labour's electoral victory in 1999 resulted in Cullen becoming Minister of Finance. After the 2002 election, the size of Labour's junior coalition partner was not sufficient to justify its leader holding the Deputy Prime Minister position, resulting in Jim Anderton being replaced as Deputy Prime Minister by Michael Cullen.
In 2004 Cullen declared his support for the monarchy of New Zealand, he was "a sort of token monarchist in the Cabinet these days."
In 2005 Cullen was appointed Attorney-General, following the election of Margaret Wilson as Speaker of the House. His appointment was controversial because of his non-legal background (he was only the second non-lawyer to hold the post) and because of his previous criticisms of the judiciary, including the Chief Justice Dame Sian Elias. His term in the position ended following the 2005 general election. However, with the resignation of David Parker in March 2006, Cullen took over the position again.
When Cullen was first appointed Minister of Finance, many parts of the business community were concerned that he would adopt unrealistic positions driven by his political views. Slowly, however, the business world lost much of its fear of him, and most people conceded that he was a competent administrator. Viewed as secure in his role as deputy prime minister, he was not thought of as a likely contender as a possible future replacement for prime minister Helen Clark. He was considered to be one of the Labour Party's best parliamentary debaters, and is known for his sometimes "acerbic" sense of humour.
The day after the defeat of Labour in the 2008 general elections and Helen Clark's resignation as party leader, Cullen announced his resignation as deputy leader of the Labour Party. When he resigned from Parliament in 2009 he was replaced from the party list by Damien O'Connor.





|-
|-
|-
|-
|-
|-


