[[Reichenbach Falls]]

CATEGORIES: Arthur Conan Doyle, Bernese Oberland, Geography of the canton of Bern, Oberhasli, Visitor attractions in Switzerland, Visitor attractions in the Canton of Bern, Waterfalls of Switzerland

The Reichenbach Falls (
In popular literature, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle gave the falls as the location of the final confrontation of his hero Sherlock Holmes with the criminal Professor Moriarty in "The Final Problem".

Location

The falls are located in the lower part of the Reichenbachtal valley, on the Reichenbach stream, a tributary of the Aar river. They are some  
The falls are made accessible by the Reichenbachfall funicular. The lower station is some 20 minutes walk, or a 6 minute bus ride, from Meiringen station on the Brünig railway line that links Interlaken and Lucerne.

In popular culture

Arthur Conan Doyle's Sherlock Holmes stories

The town and the falls are known worldwide as the setting for a fictional event: it is the location where Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's hero, Sherlock Holmes, fights to the death  with Professor Moriarty, at the end of "The Final Problem", first published in 1893. A memorial plate at the funicular station commemorates Holmes and there is also a Sherlock Holmes museum in the nearby town of Meiringen. 
Out of many waterfalls in the Bernese Oberland, the Reichenbach Falls seems to have made the greatest impression on Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, who was shown them on a Swiss holiday by his host Sir Henry Lunn, the founder of Lunn Poly. Sir Henry's grandson, Peter Lunn, recalled, "My grandfather said 'Push him over the Reichenbach Falls' and Conan Doyle hadn't heard of them, so he showed them to him." So impressed was Doyle that he decided to let his hero die there.
The actual ledge from which Moriarty and Holmes apparently fell is on the other side of the falls from the funicular; it is accessible by climbing the path to the top of the falls, crossing the bridge and following the trail down the hill. The ledge is marked by a plaque as illustrated here; the English inscription reads: "At this fearful place, Sherlock Holmes vanquished Professor Moriarty, on 4 May 1891."  The pathway on which the duel between Sherlock Holmes and Professor Moriarty occurs ends some hundred metres away from the falls. When Doyle viewed the falls, the path ended very close to the falls, close enough to touch it, yet over the hundred years after his visit, the pathway has become unsafe and slowly eroded away, and the falls have receded farther back into the gorge.

In other media

The Reichenbach Falls are the subject of several early 19th-century paintings by the Romantic landscape painter JMW Turner. 
The indie band Ravens & Chimes has named its debut album (released in 2007) after the falls.
Reichenbach Falls was also the title of a 2008 BBC Four TV drama by James Mavor, based on an idea by Ian Rankin and set in Edinburgh. Numerous historical characters associated with the city, including Conan Doyle and his mentor Dr Joseph Bell, are mentioned in the story.
Sherlock Holmes: A Game of Shadows, a 2011 film adaptation inspired by "The Final Problem", also hosts the falls, although in this adaptation, a large castle has been built over them, replacing the pathway.
The third and final episode from the 2012 second series of the BBC drama Sherlock, "The Reichenbach Fall" (inspired by "The Final Problem"), is a play on the waterfall's name.

File:Sherlock Holmes plaque.jpg|The Holmes plaque on the ledge
Image:Fina-01. Art by Sidney Paget.
File:BigReichenbach. The original is in the collection of the Higgins Art Gallery and Museum, Bedford. Cecil Higgins Art Gallery & Bedford Museum.






