[[Philippine Basketball Association]]

CATEGORIES: Philippine Basketball Association, 1975 establishments in the Philippines, Organizations established in 1975

The Philippine Basketball Association (PBA) is a men's professional basketball league in the Philippines composed of ten company-branded franchised teams. It was the first professional basketball league in Asia and is the second oldest in the world after the NBA. "Pacific Rims". New American Library, 2010, p. 13. The league's regulations are a hybrid of rules from FIBA and the NBA.
The league played its first game at the Araneta Coliseum in Quezon City on April 9, 1975. 13. Its individual team offices are directed out of PBA head offices located in Eastwood City in Quezon City. The league is currently headed by Commissioner Chito Salud.

History

The Philippine Basketball Association was founded when nine teams left the now-defunct Manila Industrial and Commercial Athletic Association (MICAA), which was tightly controlled by the Basketball Association of the Philippines (BAP; now defunct), the FIBA-recognized national association at the time. Mercado, InterAKTV, April 8, 2012 With the BAP controlling the MICAA, the league was de jure amateur, as players were only paid allowances. This is much like what was done in other countries to circumvent the amateur requirement and to play in FIBA-sanctioned tournaments such as the Olympics. With the PBA out of the BAP's control, they could freely pay salaries to their players, making the PBA the oldest professional basketball league outside the United States. However, this also led to the league's players being barred from playing in FIBA-sanctioned tournaments.
Leopoldo Prieto, the coach for the Philippines at the 1956 Melbourne Olympics, was appointed as the first commissioner and Domingo Itchon of Tanduay was chosen as the league's first president. The first game of the league was held at the Araneta Coliseum on April 9, 1975, featuring Mariwasa-Noritake and Concepcion Carrier.
The league's first 10 years was known for the intense rivalry of the Crispa Redmanizers and the Toyota Tamaraws, still considered as one of the greatest rivalries in league history. Big names such as Robert Jaworski, Ramon Fernandez, Francis Arnaiz, Atoy Co, Bogs Adornado and Philip Cezar played for those squads before the two teams disbanded in 1983 and 1984 respectively. Following their disbandment, the league moved from the Araneta Coliseum to ULTRA in Pasig. There, the league continued to be popular, as several former Toyota and Crispa players suited up for different teams.
During the mid to late 80s, Jaworski and Ginebra San Miguel became the league's most popular squad for its "never say die" attitude. Mercado, InterAKTV, March 7, 2012 The team had intense rivalries with the Tanduay Rhum Masters and Jaworski's then-rival Fernandez, and later the expansion Purefoods Corporation and players Alvin Patrimonio, Jerry Codiñera, Jojo Lastimosa and Fernandez.
By the end of the 1980s, San Miguel Beer won numerous championships that included the 1989 Grand Slam, led by coach Norman Black and former national team stars Samboy Lim and Hector Calma.
In 1989, FIBA voted to allow professionals to play in their sanctioned tournaments, hence the PBA's players are now able to represent the country internationally. In 1990, the league sent its first all-professional squad to the Asian Games, earning a silver medal. The PBA would later send three more all-pro squads to the event.
The early 1990s saw Ginebra and Shell forming an intense rivalry that included Ginebra's walkout in 1990 finals against Shell and the team's dramatic comeback from a 3-1 deficit to beat Shell in the 1991 First Conference. Patrimonio, Allan Caidic, and a host of others became the league's main attraction.
By 1993, the league moved to the Cuneta Astrodome in Pasay and later saw the Alaska Milkmen win the 1996 grand slam and nine titles in the decade.
From 1999-2000, the PBA endured controversy. Several expatriate cagers arrived on the scene (such as Asi Taulava, Danny Seigle and Eric Menk). Their lineage was questionable and most of them were deported for falsifying documents. The arrival of dozens of these players was a counter to the fledging Metropolitan Basketball Association, a regional-based professional league formed in 1998. After ABS-CBN's 2001 abandonment, the MBA faced mounting expenses and would fold within a year. Despite the MBA's disbandment and the arrival of those players to the PBA, attendance went sour for the PBA in 2002 and was even worse the following year.
In 2004, the league introduced drastic scheduling changes, when it decided to begin the season in October instead of January. The change in starting the season allowed the league to accommodate international tournaments held from June to September and it fit better with college hoops, the NCAA and the UAAP, whose seasons run from June to October. The league also reduced the number of conferences from three to two, renaming the All-Filipino Cup as the Philippine Cup and introducing a new import laden tournament named as the Fiesta Conference. To accommodate these changes, a transitional tournament, the 2004 PBA Fiesta Conference was held from February to July, which was won by the Barangay Ginebra Kings. The league also began to hold the annual All-Star weekend in the provinces, alternating from Luzon and Visayas/Mindanao provinces every year.
The league gained some popularity by this year, thanks in large part to Barangay Ginebra's three PBA championships led by Eric Menk, JayJay Helterbrand and Mark Caguioa. Solid marketing and arrival of collegiate stars from the UAAP and the NCAA also worked in the PBA's favor.
By 2005, the league would take on the role of Philippine national representation under Chot Reyes, when FIBA lifted the suspension of the country following the formation of the Samahang Basketbol ng Pilipinas despite a ninth place finish in the 2007 FIBA Asia Championship. In 2009, however, the all-amateur Smart Gilas team became the country's official representative in international competitions. The PBA's role in forming a national team was thus reduced to sending up reinforcements to beef up the national squad.
After the appointment of Chito Salud, son of former commissioner Rudy Salud as the commissioner of the PBA, the league returned the three-conference format starting in the 2010-11 season. This also ushered the return of the previously retired conferences, the Commissioner's and Governors' cups.
The beginning of 2010's also saw the dominance of the Talk 'N Text Tropang Texters, who nearly got the Grand Slam in the 2010–11 season and won the Philippine Cup in three consecutive years (2010–11, 2011–12, 2012–13) enabling them to permanently keep possession of the Jun Bernardino Trophy, the trophy given to the Philippine Cup champions.
On May 19, 2013, the third game of the PBA Commissioner's Cup Finals between the Alaska Aces and the Barangay Ginebra San Miguel set the all-time basketball attendance record of 23,436 at the Smart Araneta Coliseum,Alaska-Ginebra Game Three sets new all-time Araneta Coliseum basketball attendance record, InterAKTV, May 19, 2013 which broke the previous record of 23,108 set 11 days earlier that featured the semifinals series doubleheader between Alaska vs. San Mig Coffee and Barangay Ginebra vs. Talk 'N Text.

Season format

Unlike other leagues, there is no "season champion" of the PBA. Instead, the season is divided into conferences or tournaments (not to be confused with the definition of a "conference" in a sporting context as a grouping of teams based on geography or historical affiliation), wherein the teams compete for a conference cup. The winners of the conference cups do not face each other at the end of the season to determine the season; instead all conference champions are league champions, with the Philippine Cup being the most prestigious conference of the season.
A season was usually composed of three conferences. From the 2010-11 season, the conferences were named Philippine, Commissioner's and Governors' Cups, usually ending in a best-of-seven series where the winner took the conference cup. If the same team won all of the conferences, the team was said to be the "Grand Slam" champion. A draft was held in August with the season-ending Governors Cup ending in July. An  opening ceremonies is held before the start of the first game of the season.

Teams

All franchises are owned by corporations. They are not based on geographic locale, so they do not play in a "home stadium." The league rents the different stadiums in which the teams play.
A team's name is often divided into three parts; the first is the company name, then the product, then a nickname - usually connected to the business of the company. For example, the Petron Blaze Boosters is a team owned by San Miguel Corporation, with the " boosters" nickname denoting the Petron's Blaze product. Product names are sometimes omitted or merged with the team's nickname. Though the company name rarely changes, the product name and nickname change frequently, maximizing the publicity that the league can give to a company's goods.

Current teams

Team Popularity

Barangay Ginebra has owned the distinction of most popular team in the league for many years. Its popularity can be traced to the recruitment of the backcourt tandem of Robert Jaworski and Francis Arnaiz, both former Toyota players. Fans of Toyota followed the two stalwarts to Ginebra after the Toyota team disbanded in 1983.
In 2008, however, a survey showed that Purefoods shares the honor of league's most popular ballclub with Ginebra.
Notably, the top three teams that have the most supporters have also been considered as the most talent-laden teams. They also fall under the San Miguel Corporation umbrella. With these three teams acquiring players through allegedly lopsided trades and performing strong in the past several seasons, the PBA has been considered by some as an "SMC league".
In August 2010, rumors surfaced about a possible Purefoods departure from the league. There were reports that San Miguel tried to sell the food processing company.

Defunct and guest teams

The most prominent defunct teams were the Crispa Redmanizers and the Toyota Super Corollas.
Among guest teams, most notable was the American Nicholas Stoodley team that won the 1980 Invitational Conference.

Rules

The PBA has a hybrid of FIBA and NBA rules:

Key figures

Commissioners

Players

Most of the league's present star players are also members of the Philippine national team. In a 39-year historical period, Filipino basketball fans have seen the likes of Samboy Lim, Allan Caidic, Hector Calma, Ramon Fernandez, Robert Jaworski, Benjie Paras, Ronnie Magsanoc, Alvin Patrimonio, Vergel Meneses, Johnny Abarrientos, Danny Seigle and Danny Ildefonso take center stage.  Ramon Fernandez and Alvin Patrimonio are the only players to win four Most Valuable Player (MVP) awards.
Benjie Paras was the first and only player to win the league Rookie of the Year and MVP awards in the same year (1989). Vergel Meneses is the only player to win four All-Star MVP awards, while Danny Ildefonso is the only player to have won five Philippine Basketball Association Best Player of the Conference Awards.
The league has awarded the MVP award since 1975 and the Rookie of the Year award since 1976. Other lesser awards are handed out at the end of the season; the Best Player and Best Import of the Conference awards are handed out at the end of the conferences.

PBA champions

The San Miguel-Petron franchise (under the names Beermen and Blaze Boosters) currently is the winningest team (19 championships) followed by Alaska Aces with 14 crowns. Among disbanded teams, the Crispa Redmanizers have the most championships (13), while rival Toyota Super Corollas ended with nine.  The Jun Bernardino Trophy is awarded to the winner of the Philippine Cup while the Commissioner's and Governors' cups were awarded to their respective tournament winners.

PBA records and clubs

There are all-time records written in Philippine Basketball Association records, as well as distinctions like the PBA 2,000 Assists Club, PBA 500 Three-Point Club, PBA 600 Most Game Club, and PBA Top 40 Rebounder.

Rivalries

The most famous matchup was the Crispa-Toyota rivalry of the 1970s.  Fans faithfully supported their favorite squads and appeared in the multitudes at the Araneta Coliseum, or wherever the archrivals had met.  In those days, the players were very passionate.  On one occasion, they engaged in a major brawl, leading to the arrest and detention of several players from both clubs at Fort Bonifacio.
The most heated rivalry in the PBA today is that of two teams representing the Ginebra franchise and the Purefoods franchise. The rivalry is now commonly known as the Manila Clasico. It traces its roots on the original Añejo–Purefoods rivalry of the late 1980s.
Other short-lived or less intense rivalries include:
 |url=

Media coverage

The PBA has been covered by television and other media since its opening day. Their current TV and radio partners are TV5, AksyonTV, Fox Sports and Radyo5 respectively. Former radio partners include DZRH 666 and DZRJ Radyo Bandido 810. The PBA can also be watched worldwide on AksyonTV

Playing venues

A majority of elimination round games are held in the Smart Araneta Coliseum in Quezon City

Current season








