[[Microfluidics]]

CATEGORIES: Fluid dynamics, Nanotechnology, Microfluidics, Biotechnology, Gas technologies

Microfluidics is a multidisciplinary field intersecting engineering, physics, chemistry, biochemistry, nanotechnology, and biotechnology, with practical applications to the design of systems in which small volumes of fluids will be handled. Microfluidics emerged in the beginning of the 1980s and is used in the development of inkjet printheads, DNA chips, lab-on-a-chip technology, micro-propulsion, and micro-thermal technologies. 
It deals with the behavior, precise control and manipulation of fluids that are geometrically constrained to a small, typically sub-millimeter, scale.
Typically, micro means one of the following features:
Typically fluids are moved, mixed, separated or otherwise processed. Numerous applications employ passive fluid control techniques like capillary forces. In some applications external actuation means are additionally used for a directed transport of the media. Examples are rotary drives applying centrifugal forces for the fluid transport on the passive chips. Active microfluidics refers to the defined manipulation of the working fluid by active (micro) components as micropumps or micro valves. Micro pumps supply fluids in a continuous manner or are used for dosing. Micro valves determine the flow direction or the mode of movement of pumped liquids. Often processes which are normally carried out in a lab are miniaturized on a single chip in order to enhance efficiency and mobility as well as reducing sample and reagent volumes.

Microscale behavior of fluids

The behavior of fluids at the microscale can differ from 'macrofluidic' behavior in that factors such as surface tension, energy dissipation, and fluidic resistance start to dominate the system. Microfluidics studies how these behaviors change, and how they can be worked around, or exploited for new uses.S.C.H.B.Electron Devices,ED-26,12(1979)1880-1886.
At small scales (channel diameters of around 100 nanometers to several hundred micrometers) some interesting and sometimes unintuitive properties appear. In particular, the Reynolds number (which compares the effect of momentum of a fluid to the effect of viscosity) can become very low. A key consequence of this is that fluids, when side-by-side, do not necessarily mix in the traditional sense; molecular transport between them must often be through diffusion.
High specificity of chemical and physical properties (concentration, pH, temperature, shear force, etc.) can also be ensured resulting in more uniform reaction conditions and higher grade products in single and multi-step reactions.V. Chokkalingam, B. Weidenhof, M. Kraemer, W. F. Maier, S. Herminghaus, and R. Seemann,"Optimized droplet-based microfluidics scheme for sol–gel reactions" Lab Chip, 2010, .

Effects of micro domain

Key application areas

Microfluidic structures include micropneumatic systems, i.e. microsystems for the handling of off-chip fluids (liquid pumps, gas valves, etc.), and microfluidic structures for the on-chip handling of nano- and picolitre volumes.  To date, the most successful commercial application of microfluidics is the inkjet printhead. Significant research has been applied to the application of microfluidics for the production of industrially relevant quantities of material.[ref]
Wei Li, Jesse Greener, Dan Voicu and Eugenia Kumacheva "Multiple modular microfluidic (M3) reactors for the synthesis of polymer particles" Lab Chip, 2009, 9, 2715 - 2721, .[/ref]
Advances in microfluidics technology are revolutionizing molecular biology procedures
for enzymatic analysis (e.g.,  glucose and lactate assays), DNA analysis
(e.g., polymerase chain reaction and high-throughput sequencing), and proteomics.
The basic idea of microfluidic biochips is to integrate assay operations such as detection,
as well as sample pre-treatment and sample preparation on one chip.
An emerging application area for biochips is clinical pathology,
especially the immediate point-of-care diagnosis of diseases.
In addition, microfluidics-based devices, capable of continuous sampling and real-time
testing of air/water samples for biochemical toxins and other dangerous
pathogens, can serve as an always-on "bio-smoke alarm" for early warning.

Continuous-flow microfluidics

These technologies are based on the manipulation of continuous
liquid flow through microfabricated channels.
Actuation of liquid flow is implemented either by external pressure sources, external mechanical pumps,
integrated mechanical micropumps, or by combinations of capillary forces and electrokinetic mechanisms.cytonix.html  Continuous-flow microfluidic operation is the mainstream approach because it is easy to implement and less sensitive to protein fouling problems. Continuous-flow devices
are adequate for many well-defined and simple biochemical applications, and for certain tasks such
as chemical separation, but they are less suitable for tasks requiring a high
degree of flexibility or ineffect fluid manipulations. These closed-channel
systems are inherently difficult to integrate and scale because the parameters
that govern flow field vary along the flow path making the fluid flow at any
one location dependent on the properties of the entire system. Permanently etched microstructures also lead to limited reconfigurability and poor fault tolerance capability.
Process monitoring capabilities in continuous-flow systems can be achieved with highly sensitive microfluidic flow sensors based on MEMS technology which offer resolutions down to the nanoliter range.

Droplet-based microfluidics

Droplet-based microfluidics as a subcategory of microfluidics in contrast with continuous microfluidics has the distinction of manipulating discrete volumes of fluids in immiscible phases with low Reynolds number and laminar flow regimes. Interest in droplet-based microfluidics systems has been growing substantially in past decades. Microdroplets offer the feasibility of handling miniature volumes of fluids conveniently, provide better mixing and are suitable for high throughput experiments. Figdor, Wilhelm T.S. Huck, Probing cellular heterogeneity in cytokine-secreting immune cells using droplet-based microfluidics, Lab on a Chip, 13, 4740-4744, 2013, DOI: 10.1039/C3LC50945A,  Exploiting the benefits of droplet based microfluidics efficiently requires a deep understanding of droplet generation, droplet motion, droplet merging, and droplet breakup

Digital microfluidics

Alternatives to the above closed-channel continuous-flow systems include novel open structures, where discrete, independently controllable droplets
are manipulated on a substrate using electrowetting. Following the analogy of digital microelectronics, this approach is referred to as digital microfluidics. Le Pesant et al. pioneered the use of electrocapillary forces to move droplets on a digital track., Electrodes for a device operating by electrically controlled fluid displacement, U.S. Pat. No. 4,569,575, Feb. 11, 1986. The "fluid transistor" pioneered by Cytonix The technology was subsequently commercialized by Duke University. By using discrete unit-volume droplets,V. Chokkalingam, S. Herminghaus, and R. Seemann,"Self-synchronizing Pairwise Production of Monodisperse Droplets by Microfluidic Step Emulsification" Applied Physics Letters 93, 254101, 2008.  a microfluidic function can be reduced to a set of repeated basic operations, i.e., moving one unit of fluid over one unit of
distance. This "digitization" method facilitates the use of a hierarchical
and cell-based approach for microfluidic biochip design. Therefore, digital
microfluidics offers a flexible and scalable system architecture as well as
high fault-tolerance capability. Moreover, because each droplet can be
controlled independently, these systems also have dynamic reconfigurability,
whereby groups of unit cells in a microfluidic array can be reconfigured to
change their functionality during the concurrent execution of a set of
bioassays. Although droplets are manipulated in confined microfluidic channels, since the control on droplets is not independent, it should not be confused as "digital microfluidics". One common actuation method for digital microfluidics is electrowetting-on-dielectric (EWOD). Many lab-on-a-chip applications have been demonstrated within the digital microfluidics paradigm using electrowetting. However, recently other techniques for droplet manipulation have also been demonstrated using Surface Acoustic Waves, optoelectrowetting, mechanical actuation,J. Shemesh, A. Bransky, M. Khoury, S. Levenberg,"Advanced microfluidic droplet manipulation based on piezoelectric actuation" Biomedical Microdevices   etc.

DNA chips (microarrays)

Early biochips were based on the idea of a DNA microarray,
e.g., the GeneChip DNAarray from Affymetrix, which is a piece of glass,
plastic or silicon substrate on which pieces of DNA (probes) are affixed in a microscopic
array. Similar to a DNA microarray, a protein array is a miniature array
where a multitude of different capture agents, most frequently monoclonal
antibodies, are deposited on a chip surface; they are used to determine the
presence and/or amount of proteins in biological samples, e.g., blood. A
drawback of DNA and protein arrays is that they are neither
reconfigurable nor scalable after manufacture. Digital microfluidics has been described as a means for carrying out Digital PCR.

Molecular biology

In addition to microarrays biochips have been designed for two-dimensional electrophoresis, Other applications include various electrophoresis and liquid chromatography applications for proteins and DNA, cell separation, in particular blood cell separation, protein analysis, cell manipulation and analysis including cell viability analysis  and microorganism capturing.

Evolutionary biology

By combining microfluidics with landscape ecology and nanofluidics, a nano/micro fabricated fluidic landscape can be constructed by building local patches of bacterial habitat and connecting them by dispersal corridors. The resulting landscapes can be used as physical implementations of an adaptive landscape,  by generating a spatial mosaic of patches of opportunity distributed in space and time. The patchy nature of these fluidic landscapes allows for the study of adapting bacterial cells in a metapopulation system. The evolutionary ecology of these bacterial systems in these synthetic ecosystems allows for using biophysics to address questions in evolutionary biology.

Microbial behavior

The ability to create precise and carefully controlled chemoattractant gradients makes microfluidics the ideal tool to study motility, chemotaxis and the ability to evolve / develop resistance to antibiotics in small populations of microorganisms and in a short period of time. These microorganisms including bacteria Ahmed T., T.S. Shimizu, R. Stocker "Microfluidics for bacterial chemotaxis" Integrative Biology, 2010, 2, 604-629,  responsible for regulating much of the oceans' biogeochemistry.

Cellular biophysics

By rectifying the motion of individual swimming bacteria,

Optics

The merger of microfluidics and optics is typical known as optofluidics. Examples of optofluidic devices : 

Tuneable Microlens Array[ref]Liquid micro-lens array activated by selective electrowetting on lithium niobate substrates
S. Grilli, L. Miccio, V. Vespini, A. Finizio, S. De Nicola, and P. Ferraro
Optics Express 16, 8084-8093 (2008).  Ferraro, L. Miccio, S. Grilli, A. Finizio, S. De Nicola, and V. Vespini, "Manipulating Thin Liquid Films for Tunable Microlens Arrays," Optics & Photonics News 19, 34-34 (2008)


Optofluidic Microscopes Microfluidic Flow-Scanning Optical Tomography N. C. Pégard and J. W. Fleischer, Frontiers in Optics, (2013) C. Pégard and J. W. Fleischer, Journal of Biomedical Optics 18 040503 (2013) Lu, N. C. Pégard and J. W. Fleischer, 2013, Applied Physics Letters, 102 161115 (2013)

Acoustic droplet ejection (ADE)

Acoustic droplet ejection uses a pulse of ultrasound to move low volumes of fluids (typically nanoliters or picoliters) without any physical contact. This technology focuses acoustic energy into a fluid sample in order to eject droplets as small as a millionth of a millionth of a liter (picoliter = 10−12 liter). ADE technology is a very gentle process, and it can be used to transfer proteins, high molecular weight DNA and live cells without damage or loss of viability. This feature makes the technology suitable for a wide variety of applications including proteomics and cell-based assays.

Fuel cells

Microfluidic fuel cells can use laminar flow to separate the fuel and its oxidant to control the interaction of the two fluids without a physical barrier as would be required in conventional fuel cells.Water Management in PEM Fuel Cells Building a Better Fuel Cell Using MicrofluidicsFuel Cell Initiative at MnIT Microfluidics Laboratory

A tool for cell biological research

Microfluidic technology is creating powerful tools for cell biologists to control the complete cellular environment, leading to new questions and new discoveries.elvesys.com/" Many diverse advantages of this technology for microbiology are listed below:

Future Directions





Further reading

Review Papers

Books

 | last = Bruus
 | first = Henrik
 | year = 2008
 | title = Theoretical Microfluidics
 | publisher = Oxford University Press
 | location = 
 | isbn = 0199235090
 | isbn = 978-0199235094
}}
 | last = Tabeling
 | first = P
 | year = 2006
 | title = Introduction to Microfluidics
 | publisher = Oxford University Press
 | location =
 | isbn = 0-19-856864-9
}}
 | author = Jenkins, G; Mansfield, CD (editors)
 | year = 2012
 | title = Microfluidic Diagnostics
 | publisher = Humana Press
 | isbn = 978-1-62703-133-2
 | url = 
}}
 | author = Li, Xiujun (James); Zhou, Yu (editors)
 | year = 2013
 | title = Microfluidic devices for biomedical applications
 | publisher = Woodhead Publishing
 | isbn = 978-0-85709-697-5
 | url = 
}}



Latest articles on Fluidics: 

Tutorials and summaries


