[[Stephen Dorrell]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, 1952 births, People educated at Uppingham School, Alumni of Brasenose College, Oxford, British Secretaries of State, Members of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom, Conservative Party (UK) MPs, Members of the United Kingdom Parliament for English constituencies, UK MPs 1979–83, UK MPs 1983–87, UK MPs 1987–92, UK MPs 1992–97, UK MPs 1997–2001, UK MPs 2001–05, UK MPs 2005–10, UK MPs 2010–

Stephen James Dorrell (born 25 March 1952) is a British politician. A member of the Conservative Party, he served in the Cabinet of Prime Minister John Major as Secretary of State for National Heritage (1994–95) and Secretary of State for Health (1995–97). He has been a Member of Parliament (MP) since 1979, representing the constituency of Charnwood in northern Leicestershire since 1997, and is a Patron of the Tory Reform Group.

Early life and  education

Dorrell was born in Worcester. He was educated at Uppingham School, an independent school for boys in the small market town of Uppingham in Rutland in central England, followed by Brasenose College, Oxford, where he was awarded a Bachelor of Arts degree. Dorrell was a member of the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve for two years from 1971.

Political career

During the February 1974 general election, Dorrell acted as a personal assistant to Conservative minister Peter Walker. He contested the safe Labour seat of Hull East at the October 1974 general election, when aged only 22, but was soundly defeated by the sitting MP and later Deputy Prime Minister John Prescott, who was returned with a majority of 25,793 votes.
At the 1979 general election, the Conservatives were returned to office under the leadership of Margaret Thatcher. Dorrell, still only 27, was elected to the House of Commons for the marginal seat of Loughborough, ousting the veteran Labour MP John Cronin by 5,199 votes. He has remained an MP since.
On his election he was the Baby of the House of Commons, an informal title for the youngest member.  He was succeeded as the Baby of the House on 9 April 1981 when Bobby Sands was elected at the April 1981 Fermanagh and South Tyrone by-election, however Sands died on 5 May 1981 whilst on hunger strike in Long Kesh Prison. Dorrell again became the Baby of the House until 20 August 1981, when Sands' successor Owen Carron was elected at the August 1981 Fermanagh and South Tyrone by-election.
Following his election to parliament in 1979 he was a member of the Transport Select Committee. After the 1983 general election he was appointed as the Parliamentary Private Secretary to his old boss Peter Walker, who had now become the Secretary of State for Energy.

In government

Dorrell was promoted to government after the 1987 General Election by the Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher as an Assistant Government Whip, and in 1988 became a Lord Commissioner to the Treasury 'full whip'. He was appointed as the Parliamentary Under Secretary of State at the Department of Health in 1990 under the premiership of John Major. After the 1992 General Election he became the Financial Secretary to the Treasury.
Dorrell was promoted to the Major Cabinet as the Secretary of State for National Heritage in 1994, and on appointment became a Member of the Privy Council. He  headhunted Jennie Page for the job of Millennium Dome Chief Executive according to The Observer. Page was sacked shortly after the Dome's opening night fiasco. He was transferred to become the Secretary of State for Health in 1995, and remained in position until the end of the Conservative administration at the 1997 general election.
Dorrell was often deployed in the media as a spokesman for the Major government, as it was felt he conveyed an air of approachability and popular appeal. During party conference season in the late nineties he was followed by a camera crew from the BBC's Breakfast show, capturing the behind-the-scenes build-up to his conference speech. The actual speech was also shown, including his joke (at the height of tensions in the Conservative party over Europe) that he considered himself a 'bureausceptic'. Unfortunately the joke, a reference to trying to reduce the level of red tape in the Health Service fell on deaf ears. As a nineties Conservative Ministerial remark, it was on a par with that of Roger Freeman, another 'approachable Tory'.

After government

When constituency boundaries were revised for the 1997 election, he moved with his key rural voters into the new Charnwood Constituency.  He won the seat comfortably with a majority of 5,900, Loughborough itself being lost to Andy Reed of Labour.
He launched a bid for the leadership of the Conservative Party in 1997 but withdrew before the first ballot when it became clear his support amongst Conservative MPs was negligible. Instead he threw his support behind Kenneth Clarke's bid. Under William Hague he became shadow Secretary of State for Education and Employment, but left the shadow cabinet in 1998, and has remained a backbencher since.
When David Cameron was elected to lead the Conservative party in December 2005, Dorrell was appointed co-chairman, with Baroness Perry, of the Public Service Improvement policy group.

=Chairman of Health Select Committee and views on NHS reforms=

In June 2010, Dorrell was elected Chairman of the Health Select Committee. In June 2011, following concerns over the unpopularity of Andrew Lansley's NHS reforms Dorrell was tipped as a possible successor but stated that he wanted to continue as the committee chairman for the full parliament. An alternate view was that David Cameron would not want any more "Tory retreads" from previous governments. Dorrell acknowledged that resources would become tighter but changes driven by new medicines and new expectations were inevitable and integration of health care and social care would be both better and more efficient.
Interviewed in 2012, Dorrell stated that the 4% per year for four years efficiency targets agreed before the 2010 election, "a huge challenge" were taking too long to achieve. Whilst the bill had good points, e.g. involving clinicians and local authorities, more independence for public health etc. savings required a change in the way care is delivered not just changes in management structure. 
The reforms were acting as a "disruption and distraction".  They were a secondary issue compared with the need to make efficiency savings of £20bn.

Criticisms of Business Practice.

Dorrell has been criticised for his actions when his family owned firm went into a prepack administration in 2009, a "controversial" but legal procedure which the Government's Insolvency Service said was "mocking rules".  
David Blake, director of the Cass Business School in London, believes the method is used to dump pension fund liabilities. The controversy may have deterred David Cameron from inviting Dorrell to join the Front Bench.
Dorrell was a director of clothing company, Faithful, a family business established in the 19th Century which made blue collar workwear in Worcester.
According to the finance director,Steve Hall the company had been quite profitable until 2004 when it was split between Dorrell and his brother.  By 2005, after a number of unsuccessful acquisitions the company pensions deficit was almost £3m. The scheme was changed to money purchase and the factory site was pledged to support it.
However when the site was sold, some of the money was used to buy another business and the firm merged with stock market listed Wensom. None of the money was paid into the scheme.  According to Dorrell, the pension now required 10% of the annual turnover making restructuring impossible.
An independent trustee was appointed and the pension fund received nothing though Wensum was able to continue in business.
In May 2009 the company was put into a prepack administration which allowed a new company, GG125 to acquire Wensum's assets for £7.9m whilst leaving its debts unpaid.
 
GG125 was subsequently renamed Wensum Group Limited. The deal was completed in a day, Dorrell receiving a director salary (increased to £200,000 in September 2009) plus 15% share ownership in the new company. 
As company contributions had ceased, the workers were put into the Pension Protection Fund (PPF) which caps the maximum payable and has limited protection against inflation. 
Finance director Steve Hall expects to lose 30-40% of his pension because of the cap. Both Dorrell and his wife had already withdrawn their pensions but Dorrell claimed he had lost £550,000 because of the failure and that alternative to the prepack would have offered less.
The prepack was also criticised as "completely immoral" and inappropriate for listed companies by a South African creditor LA group. They sold a clothing manufacturer to Wensum in May 2009 in exchange for Wensum shares which became worthless after the prepack. Another Wensum shareholder compared the deal to a "spider eviscerating a fly it has caught, taking all the good bits, then dropping the useless carcass, which is the creditors, the shareholders, and of course the taxpayer."
In April 2012, the Daily Mail reported that the Fraud Squad were investigating allegations in relation to the sale of "worthless" Wensum shares to LA Group.

Personal life

Dorrell is married to Penelope Taylor and has three sons and a daughter.
He is a Trustee at Uppingham School and a Governor, Loughborough Endowed Schools.





|-
|-
|-
|-
|-
|-
|-


