[[Muhammad]]

CATEGORIES: Muhammad, 570s births, 632 deaths, 7th-century rulers, Angelic visionaries, Arab Muslims, Arab politicians, Founders of religions, Islam, Medina, People from Mecca, Prophets of Islam, Quraish

Abū al-Qāsim Muḥammad ibn ʿAbd Allāh ibn ʿAbd al-Muṭṭalib ibn Hāshim (), was a man from Mecca who unified Arabia into a single religious polity under Islam. Believed by Muslims and Bahá'ís to be a messenger and prophet of God, Muhammad, with the exception of Ahmadi Muslims,[ref]The Ahmadiyya Muslim Community considers Muhammad to be the "Seal of the Prophets" (Khātam an-Nabiyyīn) and the last law-bearing Prophet but not the last Prophet. See:
Born in about 570 CE in the Arabian city of Mecca,[ref]
Muhammad gained few followers early on, and was met with hostility from some Meccan tribes. To escape persecution, Muhammad sent some of his followers to Abyssinia before he and his followers in Mecca migrated to Medina (then known as Yathrib) in the year 622. This event, the Hijra, marks the beginning of the Islamic calendar, which is also known as the Hijri Calendar.
In Medina, Muhammad united the tribes under the Constitution of Medina. After eight years of fighting with the Meccan tribes, his followers, who by then had grown to 10,000, took control of Mecca in the largely peaceful Conquest of Mecca. He destroyed the pagan idols in the citySahih-Bukhari, Book 43, #658 and then sent his followers out to destroy all of the remaining pagan temples in Eastern Arabia. Translated by Nabih Amin Faris. Princeton University Press, pg. 21–22 In 632, a few months after returning to Medina from The Farewell Pilgrimage, Muhammad fell ill and died. By the time of his death, most of the Arabian Peninsula had converted to Islam, and he had united Arabia into a single Muslim religious polity."Muhammad," Encyclopedia of Islam and the Muslim world[ref]See:
[/ref]
The revelations (each known as Ayah, lit. "Sign God") which Muhammad reported receiving until his death form the verses of the Quran, regarded by Muslims as the "Word of God" and around which the religion is based. Besides the Quran, Muhammad's teachings and practices (sunnah), found in the Hadith and sira literature, are also upheld by Muslims and used as sources of Islamic law. Muslims discuss Muhammad and other prophets of Islam with reverence, adding the phrase peace be upon him whenever their names are mentioned. 212 While conceptions of Muhammad in medieval Christendom and other premodern contexts were largely negative, appraisals in modern history have been far less unfavorable. 231

Names and appellations in the Quran

The name Muhammad means "praiseworthy" and occurs four times in the Quran.

Sources for Muhammad's life

Quran

The Quran is the central religious text of Islam. Muslims believe that it represents the words of God revealed to Muhammad through the archangel Gabriel.
Although it mentions Muhammad directly only four times,[ref]
