[[Christian Social Union in Bavaria]]

CATEGORIES: Catholic political parties, International Democrat Union member parties, Regional, separatist and ethnic parties in Germany, Political parties established in 1945, Politics of Bavaria, Conservative parties in Germany, Christian democratic parties in Germany, 1945 establishments in Germany

The Christian Social Union in Bavaria ( political party in Germany. It operates only in the Free State of Bavaria, while its larger sister party, the Christian Democratic Union (CDU), operates in the other 15 states of Germany. The CSU has 45 seats in the Bundestag, making it the smallest of the five parties represented.
The CSU was founded in some ways as a continuation of the Weimar-era Catholic Bavarian People's Party. At the federal level, the CSU forms a common 'CDU/CSU' faction in the Bundestag with the CDU, which is frequently referred to as the Union Faction (die Unionsfraktion). Until the 2013 election, the CSU governed at the federal level along with the CDU in a coalition government with the liberal Free Democratic Party (FDP). In the state of Bavaria, the CSU governed as the major party in a coalition government with the FDP from 2008 to 2013. Since the last Bavaria state election the CSU governs alone with absolute majority again.
The CSU is a member of the European People's Party (EPP) and its MEPs sit in the EPP Group. The CSU currently has three ministers in the cabinet of Germany of the federal government in Berlin, while party leader Horst Seehofer serves as Minister-President of Bavaria: a position that CSU representatives have held since 1957.

History

Franz Josef Strauß (1915–1988) had left behind the strongest legacy as a leader of the party, having led the party from 1961 until his death in 1988. His political career in the federal cabinet was unique in that he had served four ministerial posts in the years between 1953 and 1969. From 1978 until his death in 1988 he served as the minister-president of Bavaria. He was the first leader of the CSU to be a candidate for the German chancellery, in 1980. In the 1980 elections he ran against the incumbent Helmut Schmidt of the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD), but lost thereafter, as the SPD and the Free Democratic Party (FDP) managed to secure an absolute majority together, forming a Social-liberal coalition.
The CSU has led the Bavarian government since it came into existence in 1946, save from 1950 to 1953 when the Bavaria Party formed a state government in coalition with the German Branches of the SPD and FDP. Before the 2008 elections in Bavaria, the CSU perennially achieved absolute majorities at the state level by itself. This level of dominance is unique among Germany's 16 states. Edmund Stoiber took over the CSU leadership in 1999. He ran for Federal Chancellor in 2002, but his preferred CDU/CSU and FDP coalition lost against the SPD candidate Gerhard Schröder's SPD-Green alliance. In 2003, the CSU was re-elected as the Bavarian government with a majority (60.7% and 124 of 180 seats in the state parliament). On 18 January 2007, Stoiber announced his decision to step down from the posts of Minister-President and CSU chairman by 30 September of that year.
On 28 September 2008, the CSU failed to gain an absolute majority, attaining 43%, of the vote in the Bavaria state election for the first time since 1966 on a percentage basis and was forced into a coalition with the FDP. Even after the 2009 general election, the CDU/CSU emerged as the largest party in Germany, yet both lost votes predominantly to the FDP. The CSU received only 42.5% of the vote in Bavaria in the 2009 election, which constitutes its weakest showing in the party's history. They have three ministers in Berlin: Hans-Peter Friedrich (Federal Ministry of the Interior), Peter Ramsauer (Federal Minister of Transport, Building and Urban Affairs) and Ilse Aigner (Minister of Food, Agriculture and Consumer Protection).

Relationship with the CDU

The CSU is the sister party of the Christian Democratic Union.
Since its formation, the CSU has been more conservative than the CDU. The CSU and the state of Bavaria decided not to sign the GrundungsVertrag of the Federal Republic of Germany, as they could not agree with the division of Germany into two states, after World War 2. Although Bavaria has a separate police and justice system (distinctive and non-federal), the CSU has actively participated in all political affairs of the German Parliament, the German Government, the German Bundesrat, the parliamentary elections of the German President, the European Parliament, and meetings with Gorbachev in Russia.

Leaders

Party chairmen

Ministers-President

The CSU has contributed eleven of the twelve Ministers-President of Bavaria since 1945, with only Wilhelm Hoegner (1945–46, 1954–57) of the SPD also holding the office.

Politicians

See: List of Bavarian Christian Social Union politicians



Notes and references

 




