[[Force H]]

CATEGORIES: Gibraltar in World War II, Military units and formations of the Royal Navy in World War II, Military units and formations established in 1940, Royal Navy ad hoc formations, 1940 establishments in the United Kingdom, 1943 disestablishments in the United Kingdom, Military units and formations disestablished in 1943

Force H was a British naval formation during the Second World War. It was formed in 1940 to replace French naval power in the western Mediterranean that had been removed by the French armistice with Nazi Germany.
It occupied an odd place within the naval chain of command. Normal British practice was to have various naval stations and fleets around the world whose commanders reported to the First Sea Lord via a flag officer. Force H was based at Gibraltar, but there was already a flag officer at the base - Flag Officer Commanding, North Atlantic. However, the commanding officer of Force H did not report to this officer; instead, he reported directly to the First Sea Lord.

Operation Catapult

One of the first operations that Force H took part in was connected with the reason for its formation. French naval power still existed in the Mediterranean, and the British Government viewed it as a threat to British interests. It was feared that the Vichy government of Philippe Pétain would hand the ships over to Germany, despite a vow that that would never happen. Such an incidence would almost certainly decisively tip the balance against Britain in the Mediterranean. Consequently, Force H was ordered to execute Operation Catapult.
The most powerful of the remaining French forces was in port at Mers-el-Kébir in Algeria. It consisted of the French battleships , two older battleships, along with escorting vessels. Force H steamed to off the Algerian coast, and an envoy was sent to the French commander. Various terms were offered, including internment of the fleet in a neutral country, joining the British forces and scuttling the fleet at its berths. However, the commander of the French forces reported only the scuttling option to his superiors. He was thus ordered to fight. The reasons for the omission have been debated by many. It is often thought that the anti-British bias of the French commander was to blame.
The result of the action was that the remains of the French fleet escaped to Toulon, a French base on the Mediterranean coast of metropolitan France. They did so at heavy cost. The French battleship  was also badly damaged; Strasbourg and Dunkerque were also hit, although Strasbourg escaped with four destroyers.

Convoy operations

After this unpleasant operation, Force H settled down to its more normal operations. These involved general naval tasks in the western basin of the Mediterranean. Prominent amongst these tasks was fighting convoys through to Malta. The early convoys came through with relatively light losses. That changed in 1941, when the Germans sent the Luftwaffes X. Fliegerkorps to Sicily. Its bombers took a high toll of both warships and merchantmen.
In November 1940, screening convoys to Malta, Force H made an important contribution to Operation MB8, and the resulting success of Operation Judgement, the attack on Taranto harbour. Sea Battles in Close-up: World War 2 (Shepperton, Surrey: Ian Allan, 1988), pp.37-8.

"Sink the Bismarck!"

The most famous incident involving Force H in 1941 did not occur in the Mediterranean, but in the Atlantic Ocean. The German battleship . The engagement was a disaster for the Royal Navy; Prince of Wales was damaged and Hood blew up and sank with only three out of 1,400 crew aboard surviving. Every Royal Navy unit available was then given the task of destroying Bismarck.
Force H set sail from Gibraltar to intercept Bismarck with the aircraft carrier .

Britain at rock bottom

The end of 1941 saw the nadir of British naval fortunes in the Mediterranean. The Mediterranean Fleet lost the services of its aircraft carrier to bomb damage, had one battleship sunk off Crete by  in November 1941. It was only the lack of action by the Italians that prevented a complete disaster for British fortunes.
The year 1942 opened on a low note. The most urgent task during the first part of the year was supplying Malta. The island had been under heavy attack for many months, and supply convoys had to be very heavily escorted to stand any chance of getting through. Enough succeeded that Malta was kept from starving, but it was very close. The most heavily escorted convoy in the whole of the Second World War was the key to this. In August, Operation Pedestal was mounted which lead to enough supplies being sent to the island to keep it going.

Amphibious assaults and the end of Force H

Force H was not actually extant for a portion of 1942. It was stripped bare in May to provide ships for the assault on Vichy French forces at Diego Suarez in Madagascar during Operation Ironclad. This operation succeeded, but many argue that it was a waste of British naval resources at a critical time in the war.
November saw the turning point of the conflict. Operation Torch saw British and American forces landed in Morocco and Algeria under the British First Army. Force H was reinforced to cover these landings. The two main threats were the Italian fleet and French forces. In the end, only French forces fought, and the most significant battles took place at Casablanca where only American naval units supported the operations.
The end of the campaign in North Africa saw an interdiction effort on a vast scale. The aim was to cut Tunisia completely off from Axis support. It succeeded and 250,000 men surrendered to the 18th Army Group; a number equal to those who surrendered at Stalingrad. Force H again provided heavy cover for this operation.
Two further sets of landings were covered by Force H against interference from the Italian fleet. Operation Husky in July 1943 saw the invasion and conquest of Sicily, and Operation Avalanche saw an attack on the Italian mainland at Salerno.
Following the Allied landings on Italy itself, the Italian government surrendered. The Italian fleet mostly escaped German capture and much of it formed the Italian Co-Belligerent Navy. However, two German Fritz X radio-controlled missiles did hit and sink the battleship , killing the Commander-in-Chief of the Italian Royal Navy (Regia Marina), Admiral Carlo Bergamini.
Force H met the Italian fleet near Sardinia and escorted it to Malta. Admiral Cunningham sent a very traditional signal to the Admiralty in London:
With the surrender of the Italian fleet, the need for heavy units in the Mediterranean disappeared. The battleships and aircraft carriers of Force H dispersed to the Home and Eastern Fleets and the command was disbanded. Naval operations in the Mediterranean from now on would be conducted by lighter units.

Modern Force H

Today, the only Royal Navy ships attached to Gibraltar and the Western Mediterranean is the Gibraltar Squadron.

Battles and Operations of Force H

Major combatant ships in Force H








