[[Take-Two Interactive]]

CATEGORIES: Take-Two Interactive, Companies established in 1993, Entertainment Software Association, Video game companies of the United States, Video game development companies, Video game publishers, Companies listed on NASDAQ

Take-Two Interactive Software, Inc. (stylized as Take2), also known as Take-Two, is an American multinational publisher, developer, and distributor of video games and video game peripherals. Take-Two wholly owns Rockstar Games and 2K Games. The company's headquarters are in New York City, with international headquarters in Windsor, United Kingdom. Development studio locations include San Diego, Vancouver, Toronto and Novato, California. Take-Two has published many notable games, including its most famous series Grand Theft Auto, the Midnight Club racing series, the Manhunt series and more recently BioShock. As owner of 2K Games, Take-Two publishes its popular 2K Sports titles. It also acted as the publisher of Bethesda Softworks's 2006 game, The Elder Scrolls IV: Oblivion.

History

1993-2004

Take-Two was founded in 1993 by Ryan Brant, the son of Peter Brant, newsprint heir and co-owner of Interview. In March 1998, Take-Two strengthened itself in a number of areas by acquiring the BMG Interactive unit from Bertelsmann AG for approximately $14.2 million. Take 2 published a game called "Rats!" in 1998, developed by Tarantula Games. Later BMG Interactive was re-formed into Rockstar Games in late 1998.
In February 1999, Take-Two published the game Biosys through the company Jumpstart Interactive. The game is a point-and-click adventure which follows protagonist Professor Alan Russell.  It is set inside the fictional ecological facility, Biosphere Four. In July 1999, Take-Two published Hidden & Dangerous, one of the pioneering tactical first/third person shooters, and its follow-up Hidden & Dangerous 2 in 2003.
In 2004, Take-Two paid 

2005-present

In 2005, Take-Two began a host of acquisitions, spending more than 
In February 2007 Ryan Brant pleaded guilty to falsifying business records. He faced up to four years in prison and received a lighter sentence by agreeing to cooperate in a plea agreement to cooperate with prosecutors.
On May 22, 2007, Oasys Mobile signed a deal to bring several of the Sid Meier licenses to the mobile market. The original Sid Meier games are developed by Take-Two's company Firaxis Games. Oasys was to bring these games to the mobile market some time in 2008. In March 2007, Take-Two filed a lawsuit against Jack Thompson, to prevent him from filing a public nuisance complaint in Florida court as he did with Bully.
On September 8, 2008, they entered into an outsourcing agreement with Ditan Distribution LLC. Ditan assumes the responsibility for the pick, pack, ship and warehousing functions for Take-Two's publishing and distribution businesses previously handled by Take-Two's Jack of All Games subsidiary. The agreement allows Jack of All Games, to primarily sell third-party products, to focus on purchasing, sales and service for their customers.
In January 2013, while being dissolved, THQ sold the rights of the WWE wrestling games series to Take-Two.
In March 2013, Karl Slatoff, chief operating officer of Take-Two Interactive, revealed that the company has an "extensive pipeline of unannounced titles in development," along with the announced Grand Theft Auto V and Agent games in development. While he did not share any further information regarding the game, he did mention that the Red Dead, Mafia, Borderlands, L.A. Noire and Max Payne franchises as being important to the company.
On December 2013, former Marvel editor-in-chief Bill Jemas announced that he had joined Take-Two to start a "graphic fiction imprint".

Attempted takeover by Electronic Arts

In mid-February 2008, rival game company Electronic Arts (EA) made a 
According to Game Informer's April 2008 issue, EA CEO John Riccitiello said that EA considered a deal for Take-Two in the previous spring but axed it at the last minute. Take-Two's board of directors declined the cash deal. However, EA was still pursuing the acquisition of Take-Two, stating in a letter, "If you are unwilling to proceed on that basis, however, we may pursue other means, including the public disclosure of this letter, to bring our offer and the compelling value it represents to the attentions of Take-Two's shareholders." Later, Take-Two released a statement explaining why the company has rejected the offer, "In addition to undervaluing key elements of our business, EA's proposal fails to recognize the value we are building through our ongoing turnaround efforts, which will further revitalize Take-Two."
Take-Two offered to discuss the offer after Grand Theft Auto IV offer to buy Take-Two expire.

Subsidiaries

Current

Defunct

Sold






