[[Tuxedo Mask]]

CATEGORIES: Sailor Moon characters, Earth in fiction, Fictional orphans, Fictional princes, Fictional kings, Fictional doctors, Fictional characters with precognition, Fictional gentleman thieves, Anime and manga martial artists, Comics characters introduced in 1992, Male characters in anime and manga, Fictional swordsmen

, he disguises himself in order to support the series' central heroines, the "Sailor Senshi". Wearing a mask to conceal his identity, he interferes with enemy operations, offers the Senshi advice, and sometimes physically aids them in battle.
Like the Senshi, Tuxedo Mask possesses a power item like theirs: a Sailor Crystal, which gives him guardianship over the planet Earth. He also has psychic powers, including psychometry and healing, which evolve and become important to the storyline in the manga, but which play only a minor role and remain static in the anime. Along with his primary love interest Sailor Moon, a significant player in much of the story, he has royal credentials in the "past life" storyline as well as in the future.
The Japanese version refers to him as "Tuxedo Kamen" while the dub refers to him as "Tuxedo Mask" when calling this character by his codename, literally translating the word Kamen, a word in Japanese which means 'mask' or 'masked', into its English equivalent. Chibiusa and Usagi, in particular, also commonly refer to him with the nickname "Mamo-chan". The English-language dub often shortens his name, "Darien", to "Dar" as a nickname; however, this happens inconsistently. His traits are somewhat similar to Batman and James Bond.

Profile

Mamoru Chiba becomes the major romantic interest of Usagi Tsukino. The series often portrays him as stoic, steady and introverted. At a young age he lost his parents in a car crash. This blocked his childhood memories of his current lifetime and opened up the memories of his previous life as Prince Endymion. In the beginning of the series, dreams of Princess Serenity haunt Mamoru.  Unaware of his dual-identity as Tuxedo Mask, he suffers painful headaches and visions whenever Usagi gets into trouble, and he transforms unknowingly into Tuxedo Mask.  As Mamoru, he tries to piece together his strange dreams, and as Tuxedo Mask, he tries to remember his past and identity, while searching for Princess Serenity.  Early in the manga he seeks the Silver Crystal in the belief that this will fully restore his memories. In the anime, he seeks it because Princess Serenity tells him to in a dream.  Of all the characters, Mamoru gets brainwashed and captured the most throughout the series, probably because of his importance to Usagi.
Mamoru and Usagi become lovers during the series, although they hate each other initially.  In the anime, Usagi and Mamoru don't know each other's shared histories, and don't know that they work together as Sailor Moon and Tuxedo Mask.  In both the manga and anime he and Usagi feel antagonism towards each other and only develop romantic feelings later on. In the anime, Mamoru explains that when Usagi comes close, he doesn't know what comes over him, and for some reason he feels compelled to insult her.  Their bantering sets up for a very passionate relationship.  In the manga their feelings develop well before they discover their identities; in the anime such feelings emerge only shortly before the revelation of their true roles.  In the future, they become king and queen and have a child together whom they name, Small Lady, but is in the majority of the series known as Chibiusa.
The manga develops Mamoru more extensively, showing that the car-crash happened on his birthday, and it gives a glimpse of his parents. Mamoru also struggles with his identity and function throughout the manga, worrying first about his true nature, then later whether he gets in the way of the Sailor Soldiers. Mamoru also has his left ear pierced in the manga, a trait that does not carry over to his anime counterpart.
The anime tends not to develop Mamoru as much, but shows him as more social than his manga counterpart. He demonstrates interests in a variety of subjects and emerges as smart. Part 1; Before Kaze no Shijin; Saito Kun (Kunzite):"Are you going to be a doctor?" Mamoru:"Yeah" He also "dates" Rei Hino for a short time before the revelation of all the past-life identities,  though he believes they are just friends.
Tuxedo Mask plays a significantly more important role in the manga than in the anime. In fact, many of Sailor Moon's transformations and final victories come as a result of her and Tuxedo Mask fusing their powers together. In the final battle against the Dark Kingdom, Queen Metaria absorbs Sailor Moon and Tuxedo Mask into her body. However, they succeed in combining their powers through the Silver Crystal and destroy Queen Metaria from within.
The manga tends to show Mamoru as quiet, studious, mysterious and stoic. The student body of his high school often admires him for these qualities. The anime also tends to make him appear in every episode to save Sailor Moon's life. His attacks in the anime resemble those shown in the manga, but are not named.
The dub did not make many significant changes to Mamoru's character. He appears a little more extroverted than his original anime counterpart in the voicing.
In the musicals, Mamoru protects Usagi and generally appears at her side. However. several of his relationships change in different settings: for example, one musical reveals Queen Beryl as Mamoru's fiancé from his time as Prince of the Earth. Associating with the Moon Kingdom was against Earth law, and Endymion violated this law when he fell in love with Princess Serenity. In this version of events, Serenity and Endymion are outlaws (similar to Romeo and Juliet) who drive an otherwise innocent woman, Beryl, to evil by making her jealous.
[/ref]
Another variation occurs in the Ryuusei Densetsu musical, when Galaxia does not kill Mamoru, leaving him able to fight alongside the Senshi. Mamoru typically gets very involved in Senshi battles, fighting alongside the Senshi as opposed to his anime rôle of throwing a rose and then letting Sailor Moon deliver the finishing blow.
Tuxedo Mask always gets his own song; these songs vary from musical to musical. One musical featured multiple songs as both the present Mamoru appeared as Tuxedo Mask and later King Endymion appeared in disguise as Space Knight to look out for Chibiusa.
[/ref]
The live-action version presents Mamoru as a much more silent, yet dedicated person. For example, he stays loyal to his girlfriend Hina, despite not loving her, on the basis of a promise they made as children.

Aspects and forms

As a character with different incarnations, special powers, transformations and a long lifetime spanning the Silver Millennium era and the 30th century, Mamoru gains multiple aspects and aliases as the series progresses.

Tuxedo Mask

"Tuxedo Mask" represents a disguise Mamoru created for himself in order to hunt for the Silver Crystal incognito and—later—to assist the Sailor Senshi in battle. In addition to his white mask, he wears a full-dress tailcoat (as opposed to the dinner jacket of an actual tuxedo) with a red-lined black cape, and in the anime and live-action series he carries a black cane which he uses like a sword. He takes the place of Sailor Earth.
The anime shows him standing on poles, defying gravity, and acting as a "swoop-in" type. He appears less developed, and has no special powers or named attacks, but remains a constant force in helping the Sailor Senshi throughout the series when they are in trouble. At the beginning he cannot control the transformation and his body automatically (and painfully) transforms if Sailor Moon is in danger. By the end of the first story arc he can willingly activate the transformation; in a stylized henshin sequence, this is indicated by pulling a rose out of his pocket which then changes colors, and his tuxedo and mask fly in. Later in the series he is shown transforming instantaneously.
In the manga he starts out as an ordinary thief trying to find the Silver Crystal. Luna initially tells Usagi not to trust him, but relents when they begin to fall in love and his true identity emerges. His function goes beyond that of the rescuer portrayed so often in the anime – it is frequently Sailor Moon who goes to his rescue, and he lends her strength, support, and guidance to use the Silver Crystal to defeat the enemies in return.
In the fourth story arc of the manga Helios reinforces Tuxedo Mask's role as a hero by revealing that he, as the Prince of the Golden Kingdom, Elysion, possesses a holy stone in the same way that the Princess of the Silver Millennium owns the Silver Crystal. said by Helios. This holy stone is the Golden Crystal, the Sailor Crystal of the Earth.

Prince Endymion

 He is reincarnated in the 20th century as Mamoru Chiba.
The manga often portrays Prince Endymion as the silent protagonist; his past life remains a mystery. Mamoru usually does not transform into Prince Endymion willfully, but is usually used as a power-up from his Tuxedo Mask form. He was brainwashed by Queen Metallia of the Dark Kingdom during part of the Dark Kingdom arc, and was referred to as "Endou." Endou was supposed to be a friend of Motoki Furuhata/Motoki'. Motoki was brainwashed into believing dark Mamoru was his friend Endou. During his time serving the Dark Kingdom Mamoru appears as an evil form of Endymion.
In the anime, Mamoru can transform into Prince Endymion. Often this occurs when Sailor Moon transforms into Princess Serenity. As in the manga, he wears black armor.
In the live-action series, Endymion wears white, and after obtaining this form it becomes Mamoru's primary combat form.

King Endymion

Later in the series Mamoru emerges as King Endymion, King of 30th-century Crystal Tokyo. He is the husband of Neo-Queen Serenity, and father of Chibiusa. As king of Crystal Tokyo his royal garments are a white and lavender tuxedo, as well as a royal staff.
King Endymion's first appearance is at the end of manga Act 18. He is not actually in a physical form but a spiritual entity guarding the Crystal Palace while his real body sleeps.
During this time he helps to guide the Sailor Senshi and his past self against the Dark Moon Kingdom. It is then revealed to the Senshi that Mamoru never aged due to the Silver Crystal's power. It is the ghost of King Endymion who instructs Tuxedo Mask in the first use of his attack "Tuxedo La Smoking Bomber." Prince Endymion becomes King at the end of the battle with the Dead Moon Circus when Helios, the priest of his former home, Elysion, hands him his sacred golden crystal atop his king's staff. After this, both Tuxedo Mask and Sailor Moon turn into their respective future selves, all of the Sailor Senshi transform into their princess forms.
However, after this point, Mamoru is not seen in this form again.
The anime shows King Endymion only in the future as the father of Small Lady and the King of Crystal Tokyo. He also appears as a computerized image when they first meet him. However, he is never shown to fight in battle. Diana makes a comment about the future King and Queen. She says in SuperS that the King and Queen like to fake being sick to be excused from attending important banquets and meetings. In the English dub, he was not referred to as Endymion; only the "King of the Earth" or "The King".

Moonlight Knight

 The Moonlight Knight could co-exist in the same space and time as Mamoru. As with Tuxedo Mask, Usagi thought every cute guy she knew was him, and was surprised when she discovered who he was. Once Mamoru recovered his memories, the Moonlight Knight disappeared and rejoined with Mamoru. Mamoru returned to being Tuxedo Mask once again after that point on. The Moonlight Knight mainly dresses in Arabian robes and carries a saber. He also throws white roses, instead of Tuxedo Mask's trademark red roses. Moonlight Knight may be a reference to Moonlight Mask, another Japanese superhero.

Special powers and items

Even in civilian form, Mamoru demonstrates a variety of psychic powers throughout each series. In both the anime and manga he uses psychometry to read past, present, and future events through touch,For example in the manga, Act 14 and in the anime, Episode 61. and heals others' wounds through psychokinesis.As in manga Act 14 and 
and several times as Prince Endymion in the live-action series.
Mamoru also demonstrates a spiritual connection with Usagi: he can detect when she has transformed into Sailor Moon., Tuxedo Mask was nowhere in sight... and suddenly appears.
On one occasion the anime gives Tuxedo Mask a stylized transformation sequence, with his tuxedo and accessories forming around him as he flings a rose. He does not shout any special phrase, although his voice-actor jokingly ad-libbed the line "Tuxedo Power! Make up!"Liner notes, manga volume 3. He also acquires a transformation in the live-action series, using the same phrase, which is a part of an outrageous story he tells Usagi about how he became Tuxedo Mask. This transformation is initiated with a special band-aid, and the sequence consists of Mamoru pulling on his pants and coat with dramatic flair.
Once transformed, Tuxedo Mask displays additional powers. In the anime shows these as mainly physical, while the manga depicts them as rare and magical. His iconic mainstay in the anime involves the use of roses, thrown like darts to injure or distract enemies. He seems to have an unlimited supply of these roses, which are supernaturally strong and embed themselves in most any material, including concrete. In addition, when Mamoru takes on different forms or aspects, his roses change color accordingly. Tuxedo Mask's roses are red, the evil Prince Endymion's are black (and electrified), and the Moonlight Knight's are white.
Tuxedo Mask's secondary weapon, his cane, often serves as a sword, As both Prince Endymion and Moonlight Knight, he uses real swords of different styles.
In the manga, Tuxedo Mask can blast energy from his hand, crying "Tuxedo La Smoking Bomber!" He also has a combination attack with his daughter, Sailor Chibi Moon: "Pink Sugar Tuxedo Attack." The musicals reproduce this attack.
Mamoru's most important magical possession in the manga, the Golden Crystal, serves as both his star seed and as the Sailor Crystal of the Earth. He uses it in combination with Sailor Moon's Silver Crystal to defend the solar system. In the anime, although Mamoru has the "golden star seed" of Earth, it differs from the Golden Crystal, which instead is possessed by Pegasus and can be used by people with good intentions.

Development

Takeuchi designed the character of Tuxedo Mask as her own ideal of a man,Interview of Naoko Takeuchi at the San Diego Comic-con describing him as "strong, silent, unshakeable, a little like Captain Harlock".
[/ref]
The name "Mamoru Chiba" started as the prototypical name for Makoto Kino.
Originally Naoko Takeuchi used the codename "Mysterious 2098 Face" for Tuxedo Mask. She later expressed bewilderment at herself for the idea. She later had the same problem with Sailor Galaxia's costume.
Tōru Furuya stated in a "making-of" extra that he had an influence on the development of the anime persona of Tuxedo Mask. When asked about any differences between the anime and manga counterparts, he ad-libbed "I'm driving." Because of this, Tuxedo Mask became more comical.
[/ref]
The name Endymion fits particularly appropriately as a reference to Greek mythology. The Greek Endymion falls in love with Selene, the Greek goddess of the moon.[ref]
[/ref]

Actors

Veteran voice actor Tōru Furuya voices Mamoru Chiba in the Japanese anime series and movies. In the English adaptations, the voice of "Darien Chiba" is provided by an uncredited Rino Romano for episodes 1-11, Toby Proctor for episodes 12-65, and Vince Corazza for episodes 66-159 and movies. For the Swedish dub another veteran voice actor, Fredrik Dolk, was employed. Dolk is most known to Swedish audiences as the Swedish voice of Buzz Lightyear.
In the stage musicals eight different actors and an actress have played Mamoru: Mizuki Sano, Yuuta Mochizuki, Yuuta Enomoto, Kousei Amano, Hidemasa Edo, Kenji Urai, Yuu Shirota, Gyo Miyamoto and Yūga Yamato. Yuuta Mochizuki, the longest-running among the musical actors, went on to perform as King Endymion during Fumina Hara's musicals,Sailor Moon Musical, 1998 Shin Densetsu Kourin, 1999 Kaguya Shima Densetsu and 1999 Kaguya Shima Densetsu kaiteiban and Yu Shirota performed as Kunimitsu Tezuka in The Prince of Tennis musical series, "Tenimyu".
In the live action series Pretty Guardian Sailor Moon Jouji Shibue played Mamoru: he later went on to portray Ibuki in Kamen Rider Hibiki; thus fans giving him the moniker of "Tuxedo Kamen Rider" due to the short super hero transitions between the shows .

Reception and influence

The official Sailor Moon-character popularity-polls listed Mamoru Chiba, Tuxedo Mask, and Endymion as separate entities. In 1992, readers ranked Tuxedo Mask as the twelfth most popular character, Prince Endymion as the fifteenth most popular character, and Mamoru Chiba as the sixteenth most popular character out of thirty eight choices. Moonlight Knight, being an anime only form, was never included in the manga popularity polls.  Tuxedo Mask was the fourth favorite male character in a May 1993 Animage poll, and Mamoru was seventh the following year.jp/gp/gp_1994.html
Although Takeuchi herself had a soft spot for Mamoru, she has said that friends complained to her about Usagi being in love with "such a useless guy".
[/ref]
The image of the top hat and cape also influenced the early making of Tuxedo Umino Kamen (Tuxedo Umino Mask) in the anime.
In Pokémon Season 7 Episode 21 ("Disaster In Disguise") when Team Rocket introduce themselves they dressed up like Tuxedo Mask while effectively running around using Rosalia's petal attacks to reference Tuxedo Mask's use of roses. The Disgaea anime has the recurring character "Mid-Boss" copy Mamoru's rose throw, down to the music cues.








