[[Red-baiting]]

CATEGORIES: Anti-communism, Anti-anarchism, Marxism, McCarthyism, Political terminology, Right-wing populism, Socialism

Red-baiting is the act of accusing, denouncing, attacking or persecuting an individual or group as communist,"red-baiting." Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary. 2010. socialist, or anarchist, or sympathetic toward communism, socialism, or anarchism. The word "red" in "red-baiting" is derived from the red flag signifying radical left-wing politics."Story of the Red Flag", Revolution, 05-19-2006. Retrieved 1-08-2010. In the United States the term "red-baiting" dates from at least 1927."New York Times" 23 August 1927 'City Crowds Silent On News Of Deaths' In 1928, black-listing by the Daughters of the American Revolution was characterized as a 'red-baiting relic'."New York Times" 3 April 1928 'D.A.R. Head Defends Order's Blacklist' It is a term commonly used in the United States, and in United States history, red-baiting is most often associated with McCarthyism, which originated in the two historic Red Scare periods of the 1920s (First Red Scare) and 1950s (Second Red Scare)."red-baiting." The Free Dictionary by Farlex. 2010. In the 21st century, red-baiting does not have quite the same effect it previously did due to the fall of Soviet-style Communism, as the New Black Bogeyman: Red-Baiting and Racism

History

20th century

Red-baiting was employed in opposition to anarchists in the United States as early as the late 1870s when businessmen, religious leaders and editorial writers tried to rally middle class workers to oppose dissident railroad workers and again during the Haymarket affair in the mid-1880s. Red-baiting was well established in the U.S. during the decade before World War I. In the post-war period of 1919-1921 the U.S. government employed it as a central tactic in dealing with labor radicals, anarchists, communists, and foreign agents. These actions in reaction to the First Red Scare and the concurrent Red terror, served as part of the organizing principle shaping counter-revolutionary policies and serving to institutionalize anti-communism as a force in American politics. Nation Books, October 2010Ronald Edsforth and Larry Bennett (1991), Popular culture and political change in modern America , SUNY PRESS, ISBN 978-0-7914-0765-3
The period between the first and second Red Scares was relatively calm owing to the success of government anti-communism, the suppressive effects of New Deal policies on radical organized labor, and the patriotism associated with total mobilization during World War II. Red-baiting reemerged in the late 1940s and early 1950s during the period known as the Second Red Scare due to mounting Cold War tensions and the spread of communism abroad. U.S. Senator Joseph McCarthy's controversial red-baiting of suspected communists and communist sympathizers in the U.S. Department of State, and the creation of an entertaintment industry blacklist, led to the term "McCarthyism" being coined to signify any type of reckless political persecution or witch-hunt.farlex.com/redbaiting
The history of anti-communist red-baiting in general, and McCarthyism in particular, continues to be hotly debated, and political divisions this controversy created continue to make themselves felt. Conservative critics contend that revelations such as the Venona project decryptions and the FBI Silvermaster File at least mute if not outright refute the charge that red-baiting in general was unjustified. Historian Nicholas von Hoffman wrote in The Washington Post that evidence revealed in the Venona project forced him to admit that McCarthy was "closer to the truth than those who ridiculed him". Woods, The politically incorrect guide to American history, pg.170 ISBN 978-0-89526-047-5
Liberal critics contend that, even if someone could prove that the U.S. government was infiltrated by Soviet spies, McCarthy was censured by the U.S. Senate because he was in fact reckless and politically opportunistic, and his red-baiting ruined the lives of countless innocent people. Emphasis in original.

21st century

In the 21st century, red-baiting does not have quite the same effect it previously did due to the fall of Soviet-style Communism, but some pundits have argued that notable events in current American politics indicates a resurgence of red-baiting consistent with the 1950s. The United States government's measures in 2008 to address the subprime mortgage crisis, such as TARP, were not only criticized as "corporate welfare" but red-baited as a "gateway to socialism"."TARP Is The Gateway To Socialism Doesn't Add Up." New Ledger. 2010.org. 2010.- TARP, Stimulus fraud" glennbeck. 2010. Political activist and author Tim Wise, however, argues that the emergence of red-baiting may be motivated by racism towards U.S. President Barack Obama and fear that the progressive policies of his administration will erode white privilege in the United States.
Some commentators argue that red-baiting was used by John McCain, Republican presidential nominee in the 2008 United States election, when he argued that Democratic nominee Barack Obama's improvised comments on wealth redistribution to "Joe the Plumber" was a promotion of "socialism". Journalist David Remnick, who wrote the biography The Bridge: The Life and Rise of Barack Obama, countered that it should now be obvious that after one year in office Obama is a centre-left president and the majority of his policies are in line with the center-left Democratic tradition; 2011 and author and columnist Chris Hedges argues that the Obama administration's policies are mostly right-wing.Chris Hedges, The World as It Is: Dispatches on the Myth of Human Progress (ISBN 9781568586403), a collection of original Truthdig columns, Nation Books, November 2011
In April 2009, U.S. Representative Spencer Bachus claimed that 17 of his Congressional colleagues were socialists, but would only name one, Bernie Sanders, who has been openly describing himself as a democratic socialist for years. He argued that the United States would benefit from a serious debate about comparing the quality of life for the middle class in the U.S. and in Nordic countries with a long social-democratic tradition like Sweden, Norway, and Finland....and socialism
In May 2009, a number of conservative members of the Republican National Committee were pressing the committee and by extension, RNC chairman Michael Steele, to officially adopt the position that the Democratic Party is socialist. Over a dozen members of the conservative wing of the RNC submitted a new resolution, to be eventually voted on by the entire RNC, that would call on the Democratic party to rename itself the "Democrat Socialist Party." If the RNC adopted this resolution, the RNC's official view would become that Democrats are socialists. Hallow: Steele urged to label Obama a socialist
From the resolution:
On Wednesday 20 May 2009, supporters of the resolution instead agreed to accept language urging Democrats to "stop pushing our country towards socialism and government control", thus ending a fight within the ranks of the Republican Party that reflected the divide between those who want a more centrist message and those seeking a more aggressive, conservative voice,Ben Havens: GOP Votes To Condemn Democrats' "March To Socialism" such as the one expressed by the Tea Party movement. Frank Llewellyn, national director of Democratic Socialists of America, argued that Republicans never really define what they mean by "socialism" and are simply engaging in the politics of fear.Frank Llewellyn: Socialism And The Politics Of Fear
In July 2009, talk show host Glenn Beck began to devote what would become many episodes on his TV and radio shows, focusing on President Obama's Director of White House Council on Environmental Quality, Van Jones. Beck was especially critical of Jones' previous involvement in radical protest movements, and referred to him as a "communist-anarchist radical".






