[[Dubna]]

CATEGORIES: Cities and towns in Moscow Oblast, Populated places established in 1956, Populated places on the Volga, Nuclear research centers, Cities and towns built in the Soviet Union, Naukograds

Dubna () is a town in Moscow Oblast, Russia. It has a status of naukograd (i.e. town of science), being home to the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research, an international nuclear physics research center and one of the largest scientific foundations in the country. It is also home to MKB Raduga, a defense aerospace company specializing in design and production of missile systems. The modern town was developed in the middle of the 20th century and town status was granted to it in 1956. Population: 73,357 (2012).2012 population in Russia by city

Geography

The town is  north of Moscow, on the Volga River, just downstream the Ivankovo Reservoir. The reservoir is formed by a hydroelectric dam across the Volga situated within the town borders. The town lies on both banks of the Volga, and the dam serves as the only bridge. The western boundary of the town is defined by the Moscow Canal joining the Volga, while the eastern boundary is defined by Dubna River joining the Volga.
Dubna is the northernmost town of Moscow Oblast.

History

Pre-World War II

Fortress Dubna ( was located in the area and was a part of the Principality of Tver.
Before the October Revolution, few villages were in the area: Podberezye was on the left bank of the Volga, and Gorodishche, Alexandrovka, Ivankovo, Yurkino, and Kozlaki () were on the right bank.
Right after the Revolution one of the first collective farms was organized in Dubna area.
In 1931, Orgburo of the Communist Party made a decision to build Volga-Moscow canal. Genrikh Yagoda, then the leader of State Political Directorate, was put in charge of construction. The Canal was completed in 1937. Ivankovo Reservoir and Ivankovo hydroelectrical plant were also created as a part of the project. Many villages and the town Korcheva were submerged under water.

Science

The decision to build a proton accelerator for nuclear research was taken by the Soviet government in 1946. An impracticable place where the current town is situated was chosen due to remoteness from Moscow and the presence of the Ivankovo power plant nearby. The scientific leader was Igor Kurchatov. The general supervisor of the project including construction of a settlement, a road and a railway connecting it to Moscow (largely involving penal labour of Gulag inmates) was the NKVD chief Lavrentiy Beria. After three years of intensive work, the accelerator was commissioned on December 13, 1949.
The town of Dubna was officially inaugurated in 1956, together with the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research (JINR), which has developed into a large international research laboratory involved mainly in particle physics, heavy ion physics, synthesis of transuranium elements, and radiobiology. In 1960 a town of Ivankovo situated on the opposite (left) bank of the Volga was merged into Dubna.
Outstanding physicists of the 20th century including Nikolay Bogolyubov, Georgy Flyorov, Vladimir Veksler, Bruno Pontecorvo used to work at the institute. A number of elementary particles and transuranium nuclei (most recently, the 118th element) have been discovered and investigated there. In recognition of that, in 1997 the chemical element 105 dubnium (Db) was named after the town. In 1964, Dubna hosted the prestigious International Conference on High Energy Physics.

Administrative and municipal status

Within the framework of administrative divisions, it is incorporated as Dubna Town Under Oblast Jurisdiction—an administrative unit with the status equal to that of the districts.Law #84/2005-OZ

Demographics

Economy

Before the dissolution of the Soviet Union, JINR and MKB Raduga were the main employers in the town. Since then their role has decreased significantly. Several small industrial enterprises have emerged, however the town still experiences some employment difficulties. Proximity to Moscow allows many to commute and work there. Plans by AFK Sistema and other investors including government structures have been announced to build a Russian analogue of silicon valley in Dubna. As of the beginning of 2007, nothing has commenced.

Transportation

The public transport connections to Moscow include express trains, suburban trains and bus shuttles which depart from the Savyolovsky Rail Terminal.

Culture

Since 2007 Dubna is a headquarters and primary location of international jazz festival MuzEnergoJazz festival "MuzEnergo" official web site with free for public one-day open air festival in summer and one-week events in local venues in spring and autumn.
There are several museums in Dubna, including:Official list of Dubna museums

Sports

Dubna's sports facilities include two stadiums, a waterski stadium on the Volga River, three swimming pools, tennis courts, and five sports complexes.
Popular water sports in Dubna include windsurfing, kitesurfing, and water-skiing.
Since 2004, Dubna has been a venue for Waterski World Cup stops. Dubna is a venue for the 2011 World Waterski Championships (July, 17-24 2011).The Organizing Committee of the 2011 World Waterski Championships official web site

Trivia

One of the world's tallest statues of Vladimir Lenin,  high, built in 1937, is located at Dubna at the confluence of the Volga River and the Moscow Canal. The accompanying statue of Joseph Stalin of similar size was demolished in 1963 during the period of de-stalinization.

Gallery

File:Dubna Ilyushin Il-2 1 of 4.JPG|Ilyushin Il-2 as a War Memorial in Dubna
File:Dubna Ilyushin Il-2 3 of 4.JPG|Plaque concerning the Ilyushin Il-2 as a War Memorial in Dubna
File:Dubna 9P512 3 of 3.JPG| Russian locomotive class 9P number 9P512 outside Bolshoi Volga railway station in Dubna

International relations

Twin towns and sister cities

Dubna is twinned with:Dubna partnership



Notes

Sources




