[[Nichiren Shū]]

CATEGORIES: Buddhism in Japan, Nichiren Buddhism, Buddhism articles needing expert attention

 is a confederation of four of the original Nichiren Buddhist Schools that date back to Nichiren's original disciples, and part of the fifth:Nichiren Shu
The school's Head Temple, Kuon-ji, is located on Mount Minobu where Nichiren lived in seclusion and where he asked to be buried.org/AboutUs/major/minobu.jnto.go.html Another important temple of Nichiren Shū is Ikegami Honmon-ji where Nichiren died. Its temples have many of Nichiren's most important personal artifacts and writings (which are considered National Treasures of Japan) in their safekeeping.

Overview of Nichiren Shū

Nichiren Shū does not believe Nichiren designated a single successor, as taught for instance by Nichiren Shoshu, but that he designated Six Senior Disciples to succeed him. The Six Senior Disciples designated by Nichiren were: Nissho (1221-1323); Nichiro (1245-1320); Nikko (1246-1333); Nikō (1253-1314); Nitchō (1252-1317); and Nichiji (1250-unknown). These six were: Nissho (1221-1323), Nichiro (1245-1320), Nikko (1246-1333), Niko (1253-1314), Nitcho (1252-1317), and Nichiji (1250-1305?)." 
Nichiren Shū states that the Buddha, to take refuge in, is the Eternal Shakyamuni Buddha of the 16th chapter of the Lotus Sutra. Nichiren is regarded as the appearance in this world of Superior Practice Bodhisattva who is given the mission in chapter 21 of the Lotus SutraNichiren Shonin to uphold the true Dharma in the Latter Day of the Law. Nichiren is seen as the votary of the Lotus Sutra fulfilling its prophecy in acting as the appearance of Bodhisattva Jōgyō ("Superior Practice"), who leads all bodhisattvas in propagating the Lotus Sutra. Shakyamuni Buddha is regarded as the Eternal Buddha as revealed in the 16th chapter of the Lotus Sutra. 
Nichiren Shū regards Nichiren as the messenger of the Eternal Shakyamuni Buddha or Original Buddha, but does not consider him as more important than Shakyamuni. The Original Buddha occupies the central role in Nichiren Shū; Nichiren—referred to as Nichiren Shōnin ("Saint Nichiren")—is the saint who refocused attention on Shakyamuni by rebuking other Buddhist schools for solely emphasizing other buddhas or esoteric practices or for neglecting or deriding the Lotus Sutra.
This can be seen in the emphasis of training in Nichiren Shū. The Lotus Sutra is paramount in study and in practice, and Nichiren's writings—called Gosho (御書) or Goibun (御遺文)—are seen as commentaries or guides to the doctrines of Buddhism. They include the Five Major Writings of Nichiren in which he establishes doctrine, belief, and practice, as well as many pastoral letters he wrote to his followers. Nichiren Shū is currently in the process of translating many of the writings of Nichiren into English using the extant documents from Nichiren's life or copies known to have been made by his original disciples.  In total there will be 7 volumes published through the University of Hawaii Press.
Nichiren wrote frequently, and readers can verify or correct their understanding of the doctrines of Nichiren Buddhism through his surviving works. Unlike Nichiren Shōshū, Nichiren Shū is far more selective about which Gosho it deems authentic. Many Gosho that are accepted by the Nichiren Shoshu are not accepted as genuine by Nichiren Shū on grounds that scholars have not verified their authenticity.  The primary reason for this dispute arises over an inability to verify those various disputed writings as actually having been authored by Nichiren Shonin. This does not mean those gosho or alleged oral transmissions (like the Ongi Kuden) are rejected, but it does mean that they are viewed as secondary to authenticated materials and it is admitted that while they might have pastoral value they can not be definitively asserted as Nichiren's own teaching.

Nichiren Shu Practice and Beliefs

In the Lotus Sutra, according to Nichiren Shū,  there are five kinds of practices that one should perform. They are:
The Primary Practice in Nichiren Shū however, is chanting Odaimoku to an object of devotion. The Secondary Practice is to chant Chapter 2 (Expedient Means) and Chapter 16 (Life Span of the Thus Come One) of the Lotus Sutra, or any other chapter of The Lotus Sutra or the complete Sutra. Nichiren Shū regards the Odaimoku (the mantra Namu Myōhō Renge Kyō) and the mandala or Gohonzon as the summit of the Dharma, but does not ignore other Buddhist practices. Forms of silent meditation (shōdai-gyō), artistic copying of the Odaimoku (shakyō), and the study of fundamental Buddhist concepts such as the Four Noble Truths, Threefold Training, Noble Eightfold Path and Taking Refuge are used as supporting practices in Nichiren Shū.

Object of Devotion in Nichiren Shū

Nichiren Shū issues calligraphic Gohonzons to its members, but statue arrangements may also be used to represent the Gohonzon. In Nichiren Shū, the following may be used as the Gohonzon:
All fully ordained Nichiren-shū ministers are able to inscribe and consecrate mandalas, but in practice few of them do. They usually bestow a copy of a Nichiren inscribed mandala, called the Shutei Gohonzon,Who's Who on the Gohonzon? upon their members.

Holidays

Holidays observed in Nichiren Shū:

Nichiren-shū temples of historic importance

Nichiren Shū Today

The  Nichiren Shū first spread overseas with Japanese immigrants to the United States, then Kingdom of Hawaii, Brazil and other locations in the latter half of the 19th century and the early 20th century. Presently, there are Nichiren Shū temples and Sanghas in the United States, Japan, Canada, Mexico, Costa Rica, much of South America, India, Korea, Southeast Asia (Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore and Taiwan), and Europe.Temples Near You
Nichiren Shū also ordains non-Japanese and non-Japanese speaking men and women, and continues to expand its presence overseas. Nichiren Shū maintains relations with other Nichiren Schools and non-Nichiren Schools.
In 2010 the Nichiren Shu described itself as a "religious organization consisting of about 5,000 temples, 8,000 ministers and 3.8 million members world wide". Chishin Hirai, History of Nichiren Shū, Nichiren Buddhist International Center, The Bridge 53, p.1 (2010) PDF

Differences and Similarities with other Nichiren Schools

Apart from other fundamental issues on dogma,Nichiren Shū Houston Sangha: 'The Lineage of Nichiren Buddhism'  Ryuei: 'The Six Major Disciples of Nichiren'   Tarabini: 'A response to questions from Soka Gakkai practitioners regarding the similarities and differences among Nichiren Shu, Nichiren Shoshu and the Soka Gakkai'  Enkyoji Nichiren Shu (Series1/Part 4/4) Difference Between Nichiren Shu and Shoshu-SGI  Nichiren Shū does not believe the Dai-Gohonzon, which is revered in Nichiren Shōshū, to be superior to other Gohonzons nor that it has been inscribed by Nichiren at all: "Although the Daigohonzon in itself is a valid Mandala Gohonzon, this concept of a super Gohonzon that empowers all the others blatantly contradicted Nichiren Daishonin's teachings and consequently, created a great feeling of mistrust with other Nikko temples."Rev. Tarabini   page 5 This view is very similar to SGI teaching on this matter: "First, the power of any Gohonzon, including the Dai-Gohonzon, can be tapped only through the power of faith. In other words, we should be clear that it is wrong to think that the Dai-Gohonzon alone has some kind of unique mystic power that no other Gohonzon possesses. The Dai-Gohonzon and our own Gohonzon are equal."
The major difference in beliefs, however, centres on the spiritual identity of the founder, Nichiren. Nichiren Shū regards Nichiren as Superior Practice Bodhisattva, and teaches that Shakyamuni "... is known as "the" Buddha, not because he attained something that ordinary people cannot attain, but because he was the first person in recorded history to awaken to the truth and to show the way whereby others could do so as well. In that sense, the title "Buddha" is reserved for Shakyamuni simply because he happened to be the one to fulfil the role of teacher and model for all those who follow his path."Lotus Seeds, The Essence of Nichiren Shu Buddhism, page 61, (ISBN 0970592000) Nichren Shoshu believes that Nichiren was the "Original Buddha of kuon ganjo" while SGI views Nichiren as simply an ordinary person who attained Buddhahood "I, Nichiren, vowed ... to attain Buddhahood".tripleworld.pdf Another differences is the belief, as taught for instance by Nichiren Shōshū, that Nichiren allegedly designated Nikko his successor, Nichiren Shū disputes this as a claim based on counterfeit documents . Fire in the Lotus, The Dynamic Religion of Nichiren, London: Mandala, ISBN 1852740914, p. 147-151, p. 169 Also the authenticity of  some of the writings attributed to Nichiren  are disputed and therefore considered apocryphal within Nichiren Shū.
A similarity, common to most Nichiren schools, is the shared doctrine of  The Three Great Hidden Dharmas,Rev. Ryuei: 'The Three Great Hidden Dharmas'  it was in order to put the insight of Ichinen Sanzen into actual practice that Nichiren Shonin taught The Three Great Secret Dharmas: the Gohonzon, the Essential Focus of Reverence, the Odaimoku, the great Title of the Lotos Sutra; and the Kaidan, the Precept Platform."Lotus Seeds, The Essence of Nichiren Shu Buddhism, page 72, (ISBN 0970592000)






