[[Sian Elias]]

CATEGORIES: 1949 births, Chief Justices of New Zealand, Recipients of the New Zealand 1990 Commemoration Medal, High Court of New Zealand judges, Living people, People from London, British lawyers, New Zealand lawyers, British people of Armenian descent, New Zealand people of Armenian descent, New Zealand people of Welsh descent, New Zealand women judges, People educated at Diocesan School for Girls, Auckland, Stanford Law School alumni, Supreme Court of New Zealand judges, University of Auckland alumni, New Zealand Queen's Counsel, Women chief justices

Dame Sian Seerpoohi Elias (born 13 March 1949) Department of the Prime Minister & Cabinet is the 12th and current Chief Justice of New Zealand,Courts of New Zealand and is therefore the most senior member of the country's judiciary. She is the presiding judge of the Supreme Court of New Zealand and has on several occasions acted as Administrator of the Government.

Early life and family

Born in London in the United Kingdom of an Armenian father and a Welsh mother (hence her Welsh forename and Armenian surname), Elias attended Diocesan School for Girls in Auckland. She completed a law degree from the University of Auckland in 1970, and then undertook further study at Stanford University. She took up employment with an Auckland law firm in 1972, beginning her career as a barrister three years later. She also served as a member of the Motor Sports Licensing Appeal Authority and of the Working Party on the Environment.
Elias is married to Hugh Fletcher, former CEO of Fletcher Challenge and a former Chancellor of the University of Auckland. In 1994, her brother-in-law, Jim Fletcher, was stabbed to death by an intruder in his Papamoa beach house.Call for chief justice to resign, Stuff website 17 July 2009

Early judicial career

Elias served as a Law Commissioner from 1984 to 1988. She is also known for her work in relation to various Treaty-related cases. In 1990, she was awarded a New Zealand 1990 Commemoration Medal in recognition of her services. In 1988 she and Lowell Goddard were made the first women Queen's Counsel in New Zealand. Elias became a judge of the High Court in 1995, and occasionally sat on the Court of Appeal.

Appointment as chief justice

On 17 May 1999, Elias was sworn in as Chief Justice of New Zealand, the first woman to hold that position in New Zealand.

Appointment as Administrator of the Government

One aspect of the role of Chief Justice is the role of Administrator of the Government when the Governor-General is unable to fulfil their duties (due to illness or absence from New Zealand or some other cause).

Support for Maori Treaty claims

In 1984, Elias helped Nganeko Minhinnick's Manukau Harbour claim to the Waitangi Tribunal. This led to work on other treaty cases, including a claim to prevent the Government selling radio frequencies, and the case challenging the 1994 Maori electoral option. This work gave her an appreciation of Maori custom and aspirations that she still fosters among the judiciary and in her private life. In June 2003 she was involved in a landmark case which allowed for the possibility that the Maori Land Court could issue freehold title over the foreshore and seabed.  The subsequent legal uncertainties and upheavals in Maoridom dominated the political agenda for the next 18 months.Elias - top judge and judicial activist, NZ Herald 28 March 2005

The Blameless Babes speech

In July 2009 Elias caused controversy with her remarks in the annual Shirley Smith address, organised by the Wellington Branch of the New Zealand Law Society's Women-in-Law committee. The annual lecture is given in honour of noted criminal defence lawyer, Shirley Smith. The speech was entitled "Blameless Babes" after a quote from Smith, who wrote "providing a prison at the bottom of the cliff is not a solution. Criminals will just go on falling into it, at great cost to the community. We have to find out why blameless babes become criminals."Shirley Smith "Kneejerk reaction" The Dominion (17 November 1999, ed 2, 12).
In her speech, Elias expressed concern about prison overcrowding and argued against what she described as the "punitive and knee-jerk" attitude of politicians towards the criminal justice system. She said prison overcrowding had to be managed to prevent "significant safety and human rights issues". She also said several other changes were needed in the criminal justice system including increased education and understanding by the community that, since "criminal justice processes are largely irrelevant to crime reduction", we need to address the causes not just the effects of crime.Tapu Misa: More prisoners doesn't equal less crime, 20 July 2009
As a final point, Elias said that unless New Zealand takes action to address the underlying causes of crime, Government may be forced into the position of using executive amnesties to reduce the growing number of prisoners. The chief justice's comments were widely reported in the media and led to a public rebuke from Simon Power, the Minister of Justice, who said: "The Chief Justice's speech does not represent Government policy in any way, shape or form".Irate Power tells Chief Justice to butt out of policy, NZ Herald 17 July 2009





|-
|-
|-


