[[Matt Stone]]

CATEGORIES: 1971 births, American agnostics, American animators, American atheists, American film producers, American Jews, American male film actors, American male voice actors, American people of Irish descent, American screenwriters, American skeptics, American television producers, Critics of Scientology, Emmy Award winners, Grammy Award-winning artists, Jewish agnostics, Jewish American male actors, Jewish atheists, Living people, Peabody Award winners, People from Houston, Texas, People from the Denver metropolitan area, South Park, University of Colorado Boulder alumni

Matthew Richard "Matt" Stone is an American actor, animator, screenwriter, television director, producer, comedian, and recording artist. He is best known for being the co-creator of South Park along with his creative partner and best friend Trey Parker, as well as co-writing the 2011 multi-Tony Award winning musical The Book of Mormon.
Stone and Parker launched their largely collaborative careers in 1989 when they met at the University of Colorado. In 1992 they made a holiday short titled Jesus vs. Frosty which would eventually become South Park. Their first success came from Alferd Packer: The Musical, subsequently distributed as Cannibal! The Musical. From there he made another short title Jesus vs. Santa, leading him and college friend Parker to create South Park, which has been airing for over fifteen years. He has four Emmy Awards for his role in South Park, winning for both "Outstanding Programming More Than One Hour" and "Outstanding Programming Less Than One Hour".

Early life

Stone was born in Houston, Texas, to economics professor/textbook author Gerald Whitney Stone, Jr. (1941-2010) and Sheila Lois Belasco. The South Park characters Gerald and Sheila Broflovski were named after them. Gerald was of Irish descent. Sheila is Jewish.

Career

South Park

In 1992, Stone and Parker created the short film Jesus vs. Frosty.
In June 1999, Stone and Parker made South Park: Bigger, Longer & Uncut, which gave the series prominence. The film's music was nominated for an Academy Award, but lost to "You'll Be In My Heart" from Tarzan.
As of 2007, Parker is credited with directing and writing the vast majority of South Park episodes, and voicing most of the regular and guest characters, leading fans to question Stone's involvement in the creative process. According to a 2007 Maclean's article by Jaime J. Weinman, however, Stone handles the business side of the series as its production coordinator, responsible for assembling its various elements, and making sure they arrive on time and under budget. Stone commented to IGN, "I am not a good director, I know that. I am not a very good actor either, and I know it, but it is good to know that." As Parker is "self-admittedly anti-social" and non-confrontational, Stone is the one who handles conflicts with the network over issues of censorship and contracts, grants interviews with the media in the wake of controversial episodes, and acts as a go-between between Parker and others when Parker says provocative things. Weinman compared Parker and Stone's relationship to that of Larry David and Jerry Seinfeld, in which the diplomatic Seinfeld would defuse tension created by more volatile David, and suggested that Parker would not be able to get away with saying offensive things without Stone. (April 23, 2007). "South Park has a silent partner". Maclean's On September 25, 2013, South Park's seventeenth season premiered.

=Voices on South Park=

Other projects

In September 1997, Stone and Parker released Orgazmo, a movie rated NC-17. In July 1998, they starred in (but did not write or direct) BASEketball, another feature film, while being renewed for a second season of South Park. In 2001, the duo announced they would do 39 shorts between the lengths of 2 and 5 minutes. Although originally thought to be South Park related, they decided they would do something different. The result was the shorts Princess.
Stone claimed that he and Parker were on acid at the time of the 72nd Academy Awards in 2000, where they wore dresses popularized by Jennifer Lopez and Gwyneth Paltrow at previous awards shows.
On September 28, 2007, Parker and Stone acquired the US rights to the Canadian-made Kenny vs. Spenny, which premiered November 14, 2007 on Comedy Central with ten old and new episodes.
In April 2010, Stone and Parker received a "warning" for allegedly representing the Muslim prophet Muhammad in a bear costume: "We have to warn Matt and Trey that what they are doing is stupid and they will probably wind up like Dutch director Theo van Gogh for airing this show." It was revealed in the next episode that the person in the bear costume was actually Santa Claus and not Muhammad; the "real" Muhammad was supposed to appear as well, but Comedy Central had him censored out against Stone and Parker's wishes.
On January 14, 2013, Stone and Parker announced that they would be starting a film production company called Important Studios. Inspired by the production work of Lucasfilm and DreamWorks, Stone and Parker considered founding the studio for approximately two years before committing. The initial financial assets of the studio are valued at $300 million, with the majority of the money originating from South Park, The Book of Mormon, while $60 million is from an investment from Joseph Ravitch of the Raine Group, giving him a 20 percent minority stock.
On January 24, 2013, Stone and Parker announced that they would be producing a fishing show. The show will star Dean Ween and Les Claypool and that the show will "fuse sportfishing with music and comedy." The premise of the show is that Deaner and Claypool will bring celebrity guests out on the water for fishing trips. Other than mentioning it will be a "cable" show, there's no word yet on what station the show to air on.
Stone is also a member of the band DVDA with Trey Parker.

Theater productions

Parker and Stone collaborated with Avenue Q composer Robert Lopez on the religious comedy musical The Book of Mormon, which stars Andrew Rannells and Josh Gad as two young Mormon missionaries whose lives are juxtaposed with the story of Mormonism founder Joseph Smith. "'South Park' and 'Avenue Q' Guys Bringing 'Book of Mormon' to Broadway". The New York Times. It has been produced by Scott Rudin and Anne Garefino. It opened at the Eugene O'Neill Theatre on March 24, 2011, following previews from February 24, 2011. "Missionary Men With Confidence in Sunshine". Theater Reviews. The New York Times. The Book of Mormon won nine Tony Awards in 2011, including that of Best Direction of a Musical for Parker and co-director Casey Nicholaw. "Advertise with usReport this ad 'Book of Mormon' musical wins 9 Tony Awards". Deseret News/Associated Press. As of March 2013, Stone and Parker are developing a movie version of the musical. "'South Park's Trey Parker to become a dad for first time". Digital Spy.

Personal life

In 2008, Stone married Angela Howard. Together they have two children. "Latter-Day Saints". New York Magazine. March 6, 2011, Page 2
Regarding religion, Stone describes himself as "ethnically Jewish", on account of his mother's religion, but grew up agnostic, and has no other adherence to the religion. He identifies himself as an atheist."Swanson, Carl (March 11, 2011). "Trey Parker and Matt Stone Talk About Why The Book of Mormon Isn't Actually Offensive, and the Future of South Park". Vulture/New York Magazine.

Discography

Filmography

Film

Television

Theater

Video games

Music videos






