[[Michael Vartan]]

CATEGORIES: 1968 births, Living people, American male film actors, American male television actors, American people of Bulgarian descent, American people of Polish-Jewish descent, American people of Armenian descent, French male film actors, French emigrants to the United States, French Jews, French people of Bulgarian descent, French people of American descent, French people of Armenian descent, French people of Polish-Jewish descent, French male television actors, Ethnic Armenian actors, Jewish American male actors, People from Boulogne-Billancourt, Polish Jews, 20th-century French male actors, 21st-century French male actors, 20th-century American male actors, 21st-century American male actors

Michael S. Vartan (born November 27, 1968) is a French American J.Lo in 'Monster' catfight that goes ogre the top. Oh well, that's shrew biz film and television actor, known for his role as Michael Vaughn on the American television action drama Alias, and his role on the TNT medical drama Hawthorne.

Early life

Vartan was born in Boulogne-Billancourt, Hauts-de-Seine, France. He is the son of Doris (née Pucher), a painter and artist, and Eddie Vartan, a Bulgarian-born musician. Vartan has said about his French background that "The funny thing is I'm actually a Polish Jew who happens to be born in France. My mom is Polish and my dad is Bulgarian. I don't have an ounce of French blood. But I work it".j. – Celebrity Jews He has stated that he tends to be considered a Frenchman in the United States and an American in France.Interview Michael Vartan – Alias
His parents divorced when he was five and he moved to America with his mother. He moved back to France to be with his father until his high school years, and grew up a "farm kid" in a "simple environment" in Fleury, Manche, a small town in Normandy. because he did not wish to fulfill the mandatory military service required in France. In Los Angeles, he attended an acting school after he was told he possessed acting talent. He had also attended the prestigious Lycée Français de Los Angeles. Vartan now considers himself to be American and stated on the talk show Rove that he would like Australia to be his second home. He is bilingual, speaking both English and French fluently.:: Michael Vartan – vartanfandotcom – fan site ::

Career

After starring roles in European films, including an acclaimed performance in the Taviani Brothers' Fiorile, and several smaller film roles, Vartan had noticeable supporting roles in major Hollywood movies, including Never Been Kissed (1999), One Hour Photo (2002) and Monster-in-Law (2005). In 2007, he appeared in the Australian horror film Rogue, and starred in the film Jolene in 2008.
Vartan's most notable role to date has been as Michael Vaughn in the American television series Alias (2001–2006).  Vartan has also had guest appearances on Friends (as Dr. Tim Burke, Tom Selleck's character's son) and Ally McBeal (as Jonathan Basset). He also appeared on the show Kitchen Confidential, which starred his former Alias co-star Bradley Cooper, as a French chef who was Cooper's rival. In September 2007, Vartan played James Walker, a main role in the ABC drama Big Shots. However, the show was canceled after one season.
Vartan is co-starred opposite Jada Pinkett Smith in TNT's series Hawthorne. Vartan replaced Jeffrey Nordling, who played the role in the pilot.

Personal life

Over the course of his relationship with Alias co-star Jennifer Garner, he never made any public appearances with her. Garner confirmed their relationship in August 2003. Entertainment Weekly. August 14, 2003. Vartan began dating Garner in mid-2003, and though rumors of their break-up began in March 2004,Buzzle Staff and Agencies, "Garner & Vartan Split?". Buzzle. March 24, 2004. Garner only confirmed the end of their relationship in August 2004."Jennifer Garner and Michael Vartan". Moono. August 21, 2004."Garner Confirms Love Split". AskMen. August 19, 2004.  On March 5, 2010, he announced his engagement to Lauren Skaar, whom he met in a Whole Foods Market parking lot in Los Angeles in 2009."Michael Vartan of Alias is Engaged!".  People.  March 19, 2010. The couple married on April 2, 2011 at the Pelican Hill Resort in Newport Beach, California."Alias Star Michael Vartan Gets Married!".  Us Weekly.  April 2, 2011. He has a dog named Millie, with whom he appeared in a PETA video about good canine care and to whom he wrote a "love letter" for an anthology."Michael Vartan Pens Love Letter To His Dog," People, 7 December 2011.
Vartan is a keen supporter of Australian rules football, having watched the game on numerous visits to Australia, in particular Melbourne. He is good friends with Brendan Fevola and supports Carlton."Outback tests Michael Vartan". November 10, 2007.
After the completion of the film Rogue, Vartan got a Southern Cross tattoo on his right arm to show his love for Australia."Rogue star Michael Vartan answers back". November 16, 2007. Retrieved on April 19, 2010

Filmography






