[[Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide]]

CATEGORIES: Cellular respiration, Nucleotides, Photosynthesis, Coenzymes

Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, abbreviated NAD+, is a coenzyme found in all living cells. The compound is a dinucleotide, since it consists of two nucleotides joined through their phosphate groups. One nucleotide contains an adenine base and the other nicotinamide.
In metabolism, NAD metabolism are targets for drug discovery.
In organisms, NAD, but it has different roles in metabolism.
Although NAD is written with a superscript plus sign because of the formal charge on a particular nitrogen atom, at physiological pH for the most part it is actually a singly-charged anion (charge of minus 1), while NADH is a doubly-charged anion.
NAD is considered the "V factor" required for the growth of Haemophilus influenzae.

Physical and chemical properties

Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, like all dinucleotides, consists of two nucleotides joined by a pair of bridging phosphate groups. The nucleotides consist of ribose rings, one with adenine attached to the first carbon atom (the 1' position) and the other with nicotinamide at this position. The nicotinamide moiety can be attached in two orientations to this anomeric carbon atom. Because of these two possible structures, the compound exists as two diastereomers. It is the β-nicotinamide diastereomer of NAD
In metabolism, the compound accepts or donates electrons in redox reactions. reduced to NADH by transfer of the hydride to the nicotinamide ring.
From the hydride electron pair, one electron is transferred to the positively charged nitrogen of the nicotinamide ring of NAD and NADH forms without being consumed.
In appearance, all forms of this coenzyme are white amorphous powders that are hygroscopic and highly water-soluble.
Both NAD This difference in the ultraviolet absorption spectra between the oxidized and reduced forms of the coenzymes at higher wavelengths makes it simple to measure the conversion of one to another in enzyme assays – by measuring the amount of UV absorption at 340 nm using a spectrophotometer.
NAD

Concentration and state in cells

In rat liver, the total amount of NAD
Data for other compartments in the cell are limited, although, in the mitochondrion the concentration of NAD
The balance between the oxidized and reduced forms of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide is called the NAD These different ratios are key to the different metabolic roles of NADH and NADPH.

Biosynthesis

NAD.

De novo production

Most organisms synthesize NAD The quinolinic acid is converted to nicotinic acid mononucleotide (NaMN) by transfer of a phosphoribose moiety. An adenylate moiety is then transferred to form nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide (NaAD). Finally, the nicotinic acid moiety in NaAD is amidated to a nicotinamide (Nam) moiety, forming nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide.
In a further step, some NAD

Salvage pathways

Besides assembling NAD
Despite the presence of the de novo pathway, the salvage reactions are essential in humans; a lack of niacin in the diet causes the vitamin deficiency disease pellagra. between oxidized and reduced forms in redox reactions does not change the overall levels of the coenzyme.
The salvage pathways used in microorganisms differ from those of mammals.

Functions

Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide has several essential roles in metabolism. It acts as a coenzyme in redox reactions, as a donor of ADP-ribose moieties in ADP-ribosylation reactions, as a precursor of the second messenger molecule cyclic ADP-ribose, as well as acting as a substrate for bacterial DNA ligases and a group of enzymes called sirtuins that use NAD and can therefore have important extracellular roles.

Oxidoreductase binding

The main role of NAD
When bound to a protein, NAD
When bound in the active site of an oxidoreductase, the nicotinamide ring of the coenzyme is positioned so that it can accept a hydride from the other substrate. Since the C4 carbon that accepts the hydrogen is prochiral, this can be exploited in enzyme kinetics to give information about the enzyme's mechanism. This is done by mixing an enzyme with a substrate that has deuterium atoms substituted for the hydrogens, so the enzyme will reduce NAD
Despite the similarity in how proteins bind the two coenzymes, enzymes almost always show a high level of specificity for either NAD

Role in redox metabolism

The redox reactions catalyzed by oxidoreductases are vital in all parts of metabolism, but one particularly important area where these reactions occur is in the release of energy from nutrients. Here, reduced compounds such as glucose and fatty acids are oxidized, thereby releasing energy. This energy is transferred to NAD
Since both the oxidized and reduced forms of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide are used in these linked sets of reactions, the cell maintains significant concentrations of both NAD/NADPH ratio is kept very low.
Although it is important in catabolism, NADH is also used in anabolic reactions, such as gluconeogenesis.

Non-redox roles

The coenzyme NAD
NAD 
Another function of this coenzyme in cell signaling is as a precursor of cyclic ADP-ribose, which is produced from NAD
NAD
Other NAD-dependent enzymes include bacterial DNA ligases, which join two DNA ends by using NAD

Extracellular actions of NAD+

In recent years, NAD+ has also been recognized as an extracellular signaling molecule involved in cell-to-cell communication. and is proposed to be a novel neurotransmitter that transmits information from nerves to effector cells in smooth muscle organs. Further studies are needed to determine the underlying mechanisms of its extracellular actions and their importance for human health and diseases.

Pharmacology and medical uses

The enzymes that make and use NAD
The coenzyme NAD 
NAD
Since a large number of oxidoreductases use NAD
Because of the differences in the metabolic pathways of NAD For example, the enzyme nicotinamidase, which converts nicotinamide to nicotinic acid, is a target for drug design, as this enzyme is absent in humans but present in yeast and bacteria.

History

The coenzyme NAD
A source of nicotinamide was identified in 1938, when Conrad Elvehjem purified niacin from liver and showed this vitamin contained nicotinic acid and nicotinamide. consequently, de novo synthesis is often called the Preiss-Handler pathway in their honor.
The non-redox roles of NAD(P) are a recent discovery. The first of these functions to be identified was the use of NAD





Further reading

Function
History




