[[Wishart distribution]]

CATEGORIES: Continuous distributions, Multivariate continuous distributions, Multivariate statistics, Random matrices, Conjugate prior distributions, Exponential family distributions, Probability distributions

In statistics, the Wishart distribution is a generalization to multiple dimensions of the chi-squared distribution, or, in the case of non-integer degrees of freedom, of the gamma distribution. It is named in honor of John Wishart, who first formulated the distribution in 1928.
It is any of a family of probability distributions defined over symmetric, nonnegative-definite matrix-valued random variables ("random matrices"). These distributions are of great importance in the estimation of covariance matrices in multivariate statistics. In Bayesian statistics, the Wishart distribution is the conjugate prior of the inverse covariance-matrix  of a multivariate-normal random-vector.

Definition

Suppose -variate normal distribution with zero mean:
Then the Wishart distribution is the probability distribution of the  has that probability distribution by writing
The positive integer  is invertible.
If  degrees of freedom.

Occurrence

The Wishart distribution arises as the distribution of the sample covariance matrix for a sample from a multivariate normal distribution.

Probability density function

The Wishart distribution can be characterized by its probability density function as follows:
Let .
Then, if  degrees of freedom if it has a probability density function given by
where  is the multivariate gamma function defined as
In fact the above definition can be extended to any real 

Use in Bayesian statistics

In Bayesian statistics, in the context of the multivariate normal distribution, the Wishart distribution is the conjugate prior to the precision matrix  is the covariance matrix.

Choice of 

The least informative, proper Wishart prior is obtained by setting .
The prior mean of  is some prior guess for the covariance matrix.

Properties

Log-expectation

Note the following formula:C.M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer 2006, p. 693.
where  is the digamma function (the derivative of the log of the gamma function).
This plays a role in variational Bayes derivations for Bayes networks involving the Wishart distribution.

Entropy

The information entropy of the distribution has the following formula:
where  is the normalizing constant of the distribution:
This can be expanded as follows:

Characteristic function

The characteristic function of the Wishart distribution is
In other words,
where  is the square root of −1).[ref]
</ref>

Theorem

Corollary 1

If  constant vector, then:

Corollary 2

Consider the case where -th element is one and all others zero). Then corollary 1 above shows that 
gives the marginal distribution of each of the elements on the matrix's diagonal.
Noted statistician George Seber points out to reserve the term multivariate for the case when all univariate marginals belong to the same family.

Estimator of the multivariate normal distribution

The Wishart distribution is the sampling distribution of the maximum-likelihood estimator (MLE) of the covariance matrix of a multivariate normal distribution.C. Chatfield and A. J. Collins, 1980,"Introduction to Multivariate Analysis" p.103-108 A derivation of the MLE uses the spectral theorem.

Bartlett decomposition

The Bartlett decomposition of a matrix  degrees of freedom is the factorization:
where , and:

Marginal distribution of matrix elements

Let  Wishart distribution is
The diagonal elements, most evidently in the first element, follow the  distribution.  The corresponding marginal probability density for the off-diagonal element is therefore the variance-gamma distribution
where  equation 10) although the probability density becomes an infinite sum of Bessel functions.

The possible range of the shape parameter

It can be shown  belongs to the set
This set is named after Gindikin, who introduced it in the seventiesin the context of gamma distributions on homogeneous cones. However, for the new parameters in the discrete spectrum of the Gindikin ensemble, namely,
the corresponding Wishart distribution has no Lebesgue density.

Relationships to other distributions








