[[Melvyn Bragg]]

CATEGORIES: 1939 births, Living people, Alumni of Wadham College, Oxford, BAFTA fellows, BAFTA winners (people), BBC Radio 4 presenters, English journalists, English novelists, English radio presenters, English screenwriters, English television presenters, Fellows of St Catherine's College, Oxford, Fellows of the British Academy, Fellows of the Royal Society of Literature, Fellows of the Royal Television Society, Ivor Novello Award winners, John Llewellyn Rhys Prize winners, Honorary Fellows of the Royal Society, Labour Party (UK) life peers, People associated with the London School of Economics, People associated with the University of Leeds, People from Wigton

Melvyn Bragg, Baron Bragg, FRS, FBA, FRSA, FRSL, FRTS (born 6 October 1939), is an English broadcaster and author, best known for his work with ITV as editor and presenter of the The South Bank Show (1978–2010). 
Earlier in his career, Bragg worked for the BBC in various roles including presenter, a connection which resumed in 1988 when he began to host Start the Week on Radio 4. After his ennoblement in 1998, he switched to presenting the new In Our Time, a discussion radio programme which has run to over 600 editions. He is currently Chancellor of the University of Leeds.ac.uk; retrieved 8 April 2013

Background

Bragg was born on 6 October 1939 in Carlisle, the son of Mary Ethel (née Park), a tailor, and Stanley Bragg, a stock keeper turned mechanic."Family detective: Melvyn Bragg"  The Telegraph. He attended the Nelson Thomlinson School in Wigton and read Modern History at Wadham College, Oxford in the late 1950s and early 1960s.

Broadcasting career

Bragg began his career in 1961 as a general trainee at the BBC, spending his first two years in radio at the BBC World Service, then at the BBC Third Programme and BBC Home Service. 7. He joined the production team of Huw Wheldon's Monitor arts series on BBC Television. and won an award for his screenplay on Debussy. He presented the BBC books programme Read All About It (also editor, 1976-77)Andrew Quicke [ situation comedy sic", Museum of Broadcast Communications and The Lively Arts, an arts series which included Whose Doctor Who (1977), the earliest documentary on the television series. 
He is best known for the London Weekend Television (LWT) arts programme The South Bank Show, which he edited and presented from 1978 to 2010. He was Head of Arts at LWT from 1982 to 1990 and Controller of Arts at LWT from 1990. He is also known for his many programmes on BBC Radio 4, including Start the Week (1988 to 1998),Simon Elmes, And Now on Radio 4: A Celebration of the World's Best Radio Station, Random House Books, 2007, pp. 72-73. The Routes of English, (mapping the history of the English language), and In Our Time (1998 to present), which in March 2011 broadcast its 500th programme. In February 2012, he began Melvyn Bragg on Class and Culture, a three-part series on BBC2 examining popular media culture with an analysis of the British social class system."Melvyn Bragg on Class and Culture", bbc.co. 
In 2012 he brought back The South Bank Show to Sky Arts 1, and is expected to stay with Sky until 2015. In June 2013 he wrote and presented The Most Dangerous Man in Tudor England, broadcast by the BBC. This told the dramatic story of William Tyndale's mission to translate the Bible from Latin to English.
A novelist and writer of non-fiction, Bragg has written a number of television and film screenplays. Some of his early television work was in collaboration with Ken Russell, for whom he wrote the biographical dramas The Debussy Film (1965) and Isadora Duncan, the Biggest Dancer in the World (1967), as well as Russell's film about Tchaikovsky, The Music Lovers (1970). He is president of the National Academy of Writing. His 2008 novel Remember Me is part of a series of autobiographical fictions.
Bragg is a Vice President of the Friends of the British Library, a charity set up to provide funding support to the British Library.
Bragg appeared on the Front Row "Cultural Exchange" on May Day 2013. He nominated a self-portrait by Rembrandt as a piece of art which he had found especially interesting.

Intellectual contributions

Bragg has described the rise of a mass intelligentsia in Britain."Melvyn Bragg on the rise of the 'mass intelligentsia'", Philosophy For Life. He is credited with bringing the term "intelligentsia" into common consciousness; it was earlier used only in specialist sociological studies.

Personal life

Bragg married his first wife, Marie-Elisabeth Roche, in 1961, and they had one child, a daughter. Ten years later she killed herself. He did not know that his wife had a history of suicide attempts. "I could have done things which helped and I did things which harmed", he told The Guardian in 1998. "So yes, I feel guilt, I feel remorse.""Plato or Nietzsche? You choose", guardian.co.
Bragg's second wife, Catherine Mary Haste, whom he married in 1973, is also a television producer and writer, having, among other things, edited the 2007 memoir of Clarissa Eden, widow of Sir Anthony Eden, and collaborated with Cherie Booth, wife of Tony Blair, on a  2004 book about the wives of British Prime Ministers. They have a son and a daughter.
Bragg has publicly discussed two nervous breakdowns that happened in his life, one in his teens, and another in his 30s.
A friend of Tony Blair, in 1998 Bragg was named in a list of the largest private financial donors to the Labour Party. and Carlisle United (London Branch Hon President).

Selected honours and awards

Bibliography

Novels

Non-fiction books

Children's books

Screenwriting






