[[Titles of Nobility Amendment]]

CATEGORIES: United States nationality law, Unratified amendments to the United States Constitution

The Titles of Nobility Amendment (TONA) was proposed as an amendment to the United States Constitution by the 11th Congress in 1810. The amendment would strip United States citizenship from any citizen who accepted a title of nobility from a foreign country. 
TONA was ratified by 12 state legislatures, and on two occasions between 1812 and 1816 was within two states of the required three-quarters, though it never reached that threshold and thus is not part of the Constitution.  Because Congress did not impose a time limit for ratification, TONA technically could still become part of the Constitution if it were ratified by an additional 26 states. 

Text



Proposal and rationale

The United States Senate approved the measure by a vote of 19–5 on April 26, 1810.20 Annals of Congress 670–672 It was then adopted by the United States House of Representatives with a vote of 87–3 on May 1, 1810.20 Annals of Congress 2050–2051 After the Congress passed it, the amendment was submitted to the state legislatures for ratification.
The proposed amendment was intended to expand upon Article I, Section 9 and Section 10 of the Constitution, which prohibits the states and the federal government from issuing titles of nobility or honor.
There is speculation that the Congress proposed the amendment in response to the 1803 marriage of Napoleon Bonaparte's younger brother, Jerome, and Betsy Patterson of Baltimore, Maryland, who gave birth to a boy for whom she wanted aristocratic recognition from France. The child, named Jérôme Napoleon Bonaparte, was not born in the United States, but in Great Britain on July 7, 1805—nevertheless, he would have held U.S. citizenship through his mother. Another theory is that his mother actually desired a title of nobility for herself and, indeed, she is referred to as the "Duchess of Baltimore" in many texts written about the amendment. The marriage had been annulled in 1805—well before the amendment's proposal by the 11th Congress. Nonetheless, Representative Nathaniel Macon of North Carolina is recorded to have said, when voting on the amendment, that "he considered the vote on this question as deciding whether or not we were to have members of the Legion of Honor in this country."21 "Annals of Congress" 2050

Reaction in the state legislatures

This amendment was ratified by 12 state legislatures:
The amendment was rejected by three state legislatures:
South Carolina's Senate voted to ratify the amendment on November 28, 1811, but its House of Representatives rejected the amendment three years later on December 21, 1814. Although Virginia has long maintained that there are no surviving records indicating any action having been taken relative to officially ratifying or rejecting the amendment, state legislative records indicate that the Virginia House of Delegates approved the amendment on February 2, 1811,Journal of the House of Delegates of the Commonwealth of Virginia 91 (Richmond, Samuel Pleasants, 1810 1811) but the Virginia Senate rejected the amendment on February 14, 1811. Also, the War may have delayed the voting process on the amendment.
Per Coleman v. Miller, , the amendment is technically still subject to being approved by the nation's state lawmakers, as no deadline for ratification was specified when Congress proposed the amendment for the consideration of the states. As there are now 50 states, the legislatures of at least 26 more states (38 in total) would have to ratify the amendment in order for it to become part of the Constitution.

Misconceptions

It has been claimed that the TONA became part of the U.S. Constitution—indeed many printings of the Constitution during the 19th century erroneously included it as a Thirteenth Amendment. Many other 19th century printings omit it, especially after the Civil War.
There is a further misapprehension that the TONA was, at some stage in the ratification process, just one state's adoption shy of being incorporated into the United States Constitution.
When the Congress submitted TONA to the state legislatures on May 1, 1810, the approval of 13 of them would indeed have been required. Massachusetts ratified TONA on February 27, 1812, thereby bringing the total to 11. However, with the addition of Louisiana into the Union on April 30, 1812, the threshold increased to 14 states. New Hampshire's subsequent ratification brought the amendment again within two states of ratification. However, the threshold was raised by the admission of further states in subsequent years, while no further states have ratified the amendment. In 1819–67, Virginia published TONA as the "13th" amendment by the state legislature. Some argued it as authentic and accurate to prove the state's ratification, but the website Discerning History called an inclusion as part of the Constitution "a clerical mistake" by the state legislature.
The term "Thirteenthers" is sometimes used to refer to those who mistakenly believe this amendment was ratified or to those who would like to see ratification of this proposed amendment.Why Some Republicans Want to 'Restore' the 13th Amendment, Newsweek, July 27 2010Iowa Republicans ponder changes to anti-slave amendment, National Post, July 29 2010
Not until 1865 was a proposed Thirteenth Amendment adopted. That amendment abolished slavery throughout the United States.

Courts

The assertion that TONA was validly ratified has never been upheld by any court in the United States. In the few instances in which courts have been confronted with the assertion that TONA was indeed ratified, judges have brushed those claims aside. In Campion v. Towns, No.1 (D. Ariz. 2005), a tax protester raised TONA as one of his defenses to a charge of tax evasion. Towns, No.1 (D. Ariz. 2005). The court replied that it would "correct any misunderstanding Plaintiff has concerning the text of the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution":
In another case, Sibley v. Culliver, 243 F. Supp. 2d 1278, 1283 (M.D. Ala. 2003), aff'd 377 F.3d 1196 (11th Cir. 2004), a federal appellate court found that the defendant's invocation of TONA worked to his detriment. The court took note of documents produced by the defendant, a convicted murderer who submitted documents in support of his appeal claiming that TONA rendered his conviction invalid: The Sibley court dismissed the appeal, concluding in part that the defendant was simply not seeking relief through the courts.






