[[Israel Gelfand]]

CATEGORIES: 1913 births, 2009 deaths, 20th-century mathematicians, American mathematicians, American people of Russian-Jewish descent, American people of Ukrainian-Jewish descent, Foreign Members of the Royal Society, Full Members of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Full Members of the USSR Academy of Sciences, Functional analysts, MacArthur Fellows, Mathematical analysts, Members of the French Academy of Sciences, Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences, Moscow State University alumni, Operator theorists, Soviet biologists, Soviet emigrants to the United States, Soviet Jews, Soviet mathematicians, People from Highland Park, New Jersey, People from Krasni Okny Raion, People from Kherson Governorate, Recipients of the Order of Lenin, three times, Ukrainian emigrants to the United States, Ukrainian Jews, Wolf Prize in Mathematics laureates

Israel Moiseevich Gelfand, also written Israïl Moyseyovich Gel'fand, or Izrail M. Gelfand ( – 5 October 2009) was a Soviet mathematician who made major contributions to many branches of mathematics, including group theory, representation theory and functional analysis.  The recipient of numerous awards and honors, including the Order of Lenin and the Wolf Prize, he was a Fellow of the Royal Society and a lifelong academic, serving decades as a professor at Moscow State University and, after immigrating to the United States shortly before his 76th birthday, at the Busch Campus of New Jersey's Rutgers University.
He is known for having educated and inspired generations of students through his legendary seminar at Moscow State University. His legacy continues in the mathematicians who were his students, such as Endre Szemerédi, Alexandre Kirillov, Edward Frenkel, Joseph Bernstein, Dmitry Fuchs as well as his own son, Sergei Gelfand.

Early years

A native of Kherson Governorate of the Russian Empire, Gelfand was born into a Jewish family in the small southern  Ukrainian town of Okny (subsequently, Krasni Okny).  According to his own account, Gelfand was expelled from high school because his father had been a mill owner. Bypassing both high school and college, he proceeded to postgraduate study at Moscow State University, where his advisor was the preeminent mathematician Andrei Kolmogorov. He nevertheless managed to attend lectures at the University and began postgraduate study at the age of 19.

Work

Gelfand is known for many developments including:

Influence outside of mathematics

The Gelfand–Tsetlin basis (also in the common spelling Zetlin) is a widely used tool in theoretical physics and the result of Gelfand's work on the representation theory of the unitary group and Lie groups in general.
Gelfand also published works on biology and medicine.:ru:Гельфанд, Израиль Моисеевич For a long time he took an interest in cell biology and organized a research seminar on the subject.V.I. Agol, Notes about I.M. Gelfand's Seminar, Russian Journal Developmental Biology, Volume 39, Number 6, 367-368.L.V. Beloussov, Short notes about Gelfand's Seminar, Russian Journal Developmental Biology, Volume 39, Number 6, 369-370.
He worked extensively in mathematics education, particularly with correspondence education. In 1994, he was awarded a MacArthur fellowship for this work.

Family

Gelfand was married to Zorya Shapiro, and their two sons, Sergei and Vladimir both live in the United States.  A third son, Aleksandr, died of leukemia.  Following the divorce from his first wife, Gelfand married his second wife, Tatiana.  Gelfand and Tatiana became the parents of a daughter, Tatiana. The family also includes four grandchildren and three great-grandchildren. "Israel Gelfand, Math Giant, Dies at 96", The New York Times (October 7, 2009)
The memories about I.com/ site dedicated to Israel M. Gelfand handled by his family.

Honors and awards

Gelfand held several honorary degrees and was awarded the Order of Lenin three times for his research.  In 1977 he was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society. He won the Wolf Prize in 1978, Kyoto Prize in 1989 and MacArthur Foundation Fellowship in 1994. He held the presidency of the Moscow Mathematical Society between 1968 and 1970, and was elected a foreign member of the U.S. National Academy of Science, the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, the Royal Irish Academy, the American Mathematical Society and the London Mathematical Society.
In an October 2003 article in The New York Times, written on the occasion of his 90th birthday, Gelfand is described as a scholar who is considered "among the greatest mathematicians of the 20th century",Kochman, Marilyn. "In Person: An Equation for Success", The New York Times (October 5, 2003) having exerted a tremendous influence on the field both through his own works and those of his students.

Death

Israel Gelfand died at the Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital near his home in Highland Park, New Jersey.  He was less than five weeks past his 96th birthday.  His death was first reported on the blog of his former collaborator Andrei Zelevinsky "Скончался И.М. Гельфанд" ("I.M. Gelfand has died"), accessed 2009-10-06 and confirmed a few hours later by an obituary in the Russian online newspaper Polit.ru."5 октября ушел из жизни выдающийся математик Израиль Моисеевич Гельфанд. "Эпоха Гельфанда ушла, но она продолжится в существующих поколениях" {"Renowned Mathematician Israil Moiseyevich Gelfand Departed on October 5. Gelfand's era has gone, but it shall continue in succeeding generations"}

Publications





Notes

Sources




