[[Bradley Cooper]]

CATEGORIES: 1975 births, 20th-century American male actors, 21st-century American male actors, Male actors from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, American male film actors, American film producers, American male stage actors, American male television actors, American people of Irish descent, American people of Italian descent, American Roman Catholics, Georgetown University alumni, Living people, The New School alumni, People from Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, Villanova University alumni, Actors Studio alumni, Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture Screen Actors Guild Award winners

Bradley Charles Cooper

Early life

Cooper was born in Philadelphia and grew up in nearby Jenkintown, Pennsylvania. His mother, Gloria (née Campano), is of Italian descent and worked for the local NBC affiliate. While he was studying at The New School, Cooper worked as a doorman at the Morgans Hotel.

Career

Cooper began his professional acting career with a small role in the television show Sex and the City in 1999 and served as a presenter in the adventure series Globe Trekker. After his film debut, Wet Hot American Summer in 2001, Cooper landed his role as Will Tippin in the successful television drama Alias. He returned twice to Alias as a guest star after leaving the show in 2003, and he also guest-starred on the short-lived TV series Miss Match in the same year. Cooper shot scenes for the 2002 psychological thriller Changing Lanes, the footage was removed from the finished film but is featured on the film's DVD and Blu-ray releases.
Cooper played the part of cowboy and race horse trainer Morgan Murphy in the TV movie The Last Cowboy, which aired on the Hallmark Channel on January 17, 2003. He wants to help the heroine, Jacqueline "Jake" Cooper (Jennie Garth) despite her father's resistance to Morgan's "newfangled" ranching methods. Jake is an estranged daughter who returns home for a funeral to find that she is now needed at the family ranch.
He also co-starred in the ABC Family film I Want to Marry Ryan Banks with Jason Priestley, and appeared as a regular guest star in the WB series Jack & Bobby. He played the popular villain Sack Lodge in the hit comedy Wedding Crashers and appeared in the film Failure to Launch as a friend of Demo (Matthew McConaughey). Cooper played the lead role in the Fox sitcom Kitchen Confidential, based on a memoir by chef Anthony Bourdain, which debuted in September 2005. Despite positive reviews for the series, Fox canceled it after four episodes.
In March 2006, Cooper starred in Three Days of Rain on Broadway with Julia Roberts and Paul Rudd at the Bernard B. Jacobs Theater.
In 2007, Cooper starred in Season 5 of Nip/Tuck as Aidan Stone, a television star on the fictional show Hearts 'N Scalpels. He also starred in Yes Man with Jim Carrey and in The Rocker with Rainn Wilson in 2008. On February 7, 2009, Cooper hosted Saturday Night Live with musical guest TV on the Radio. He impersonated Christian Bale in a fake commercial for a DVD featuring celebrities yelling at movie crew members called, "No, Bruce! Let Me Finish! The Best of Celebrity Tirades."
In 2009, Cooper starred in the films He's Just Not That Into You, Case 39,
In 2010, Cooper appeared in two films, such as the ensemble romantic comedy Valentine's Day, directed by Garry Marshall, which also starred Ashton Kutcher, Jessica Alba, Jessica Biel, Anne Hathaway, Julia Roberts, and former Alias co-star Jennifer Garner, among others. On November 16, 2011, People magazine named him Sexiest Man Alive."Bradley Cooper Named Sexiest Man Alive", Access Hollywood, November 16, 2011
In 2012, he appeared in the drama The Words, and David O. Russell's Silver Linings Playbook, an adaptation of Matthew Quick's serio-comic novel, with Robert De Niro and Jennifer Lawrence.,
In 2013, Cooper appeared in the third and final installment of The Hangover trilogy, The Hangover Part III. The Hangover Part III was almost universally panned by critics and was most heavily criticized for its dark tone. 'He also appeared in the ensemble cast of David O. Russell's dramedy American Hustle alongside Christian Bale, Amy Adams, Jeremy Renner, and Jennifer Lawrence. His performance as an unhinged FBI Agent earned him a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor.
On May 2, 2013, it was announced that Cooper will star in the movie American Sniper, the story of U.S. sniper Chris Kyle that was to be directed by Steven Spielberg,

Personal life

Cooper married actress Jennifer Esposito in late 2006. He is Catholic.yahoo.html
Cooper has been dating model Suki Waterhouse since March 2013.

Filmography

Film

Television

Theatre

Awards and nominations






