[[Trey Parker]]

CATEGORIES: 1969 births, Living people, American animators, American film directors, American libertarians, American screenwriters, American television producers, American male voice actors, Berklee College of Music alumni, Critics of religions, Critics of Scientology, Emmy Award winners, Peabody Award winners, South Park, Tony Award winners, University of Colorado Boulder alumni, American skeptics, Grammy Award-winning artists

Randolph Severn "Trey" Parker III is an American actor, animator, screenwriter, director, producer, comedian, and recording artist. He is best known for being the co-creator of South Park along with his creative partner and best friend Matt Stone, as well as co-writing and co-directing the 2011 musical The Book of Mormon, which won nine Tony Awards, include the award for Best Musical.
Parker started his film career in 1989 when he created the film Giant Beavers of Southern Sri Lanka. In 1992 he and Matt Stone made a holiday short titled Jesus vs. Frosty, which was an early forerunner of South Park. His first success came from Cannibal! The Musical. From there he made another short titled Jesus vs. Santa, which led him and college friend Stone to create South Park, which first aired in 1997. He has won five Primetime Emmy Awards for his work on South Park, winning one award for Outstanding Animated Program (for Programming One Hour or More) and four for Outstanding Animated Program (for Programming Less Than One Hour) (of eleven nominations).

Early life

Parker was born in Denver, Colorado, the son of Randy (a geologist) and Sharon (an insurance broker). The two share the first names and occupations of South Park characters Randy and Sharon Marsh.
While in school, Parker had a part-time job in a pizza restaurant and was described as a film geek and music buff.

Career

South Park

In 1992, Parker and Stone created Jesus vs. Frosty. It included four boys, two resembling Stan Marsh and Kyle Broflovski, one called Kenny who looked like Cartman, and a fourth unnamed boy who looked like Kenny. Both Jesus vs. Frosty and Cannibal! The Musical were made while they were students at the University of Colorado film school, studying under both Stan Brakhage and Jerry Aronson. Afterwards, the two friends set off for Hollywood in hopes of making more movies. Brian Graden, then an executive at Fox, put Parker to work making a pilot for a musical children's television series called Time Warped. The pilot, called "Rom and Jul," was a love story about a Homo erectus and an Australopithecus. Fox passed on the series, but Graden paid Parker and Stone $1,200 to make a new version of The Spirit of Christmas he could send out as a video Christmas card.
They came up with two worthwhile ideas; one a sequel to Jesus vs. Frosty, titled Jesus vs. Santa, and one about a character that would later be recurring in South Park, Mr. Hankey.

=Voices on South Park=

Other projects

In September 1997, they also released Orgazmo, a movie rated NC-17. In July 1998, they starred in (but did not write or direct) BASEketball, another feature film, while being renewed for a second season of South Park. In June 1999, Parker and Stone made South Park: Bigger, Longer & Uncut, which gave the series a new level of prominence.
Trey claimed to have been on acid with Matt Stone at the time of the 72nd Academy Awards in 2000, where they wore dresses popularized by Jennifer Lopez and Gwyneth Paltrow at previous awards shows.
On September 28, 2007, Parker and Stone acquired the rights to the Canadian-made Kenny vs. Spenny, which premiered November 14, 2007 on Comedy Central with ten old and new episodes.
In April 2010, Trey Parker and Matt Stone received a "warning" from Zachary Adam Chesser for representing the Prophet Muhammad in a bear costume: "We have to warn Matt and Trey Park creators that what they are doing is stupid and they will probably wind up like Theo van Gogh for airing this show." It was revealed in the next episode that the person in the bear costume was really Santa Claus and not the Prophet Muhammad.
On January 14, 2013, Parker and Stone announced that they would be starting a film production company called Important Studios. Inspired by the production work of Lucasfilm and DreamWorks, Parker and Stone considered founding the studio for approximately two years before committing. The initial financial assets of the studio are valued at $300 million, with the majority of the money originating from South Park and The Book of Mormon, plus a $60-million investment from Joseph Ravitch of the Raine Group, giving him a 20 percent minority stock.
On January 24, 2013, Parker and Stone announced that they would be producing a fishing show. The show will star Dean Ween and Les Claypool and that the show will "fuse sportfishing with music and comedy." The premise of the show is that Deaner and Claypool will bring celebrity guests out on the water for fishing trips. Other than mentioning it will be a "cable" show, there's no word yet on what station the show to air on.
Parker is also a member of the band DVDA with Matt Stone.

Theater productions

Parker and Stone have collaborated with Avenue Q composer Robert Lopez on a musical about Mormons; it is titled The Book of Mormon, and initially starred Andrew Rannells and Josh Gad. "'The Book of Mormon'". Rolling Stone. "'Two By Two': Josh Gad and Andrew Rannells Will Be Succeeded By Jared Gertner and Nic Rouleau in Book of Mormon". Playbill.Gilbert, Ryan (December 21, 2012). "Watch the Best Friend Adventures of Former Mormon Buddies Andrew Rannells & Josh Gad in New Funny or Die Video". Broadway. It has been produced by Scott Rudin and Anne Garefino. It opened at the Eugene O'Neill Theatre on March 24, 2011, following previews from February 24, 2011. The Book of Mormon won nine Tony Awards in 2011 including that of Best Direction of a Musical for Parker and co-director Casey Nicholaw. "Advertise with usReport this ad 'Book of Mormon' musical wins 9 Tony Awards". Deseret News/Associated Press. As of March 2013, Parker and Stone are developing a movie version of the musical. "'South Park's Trey Parker to become a dad for first time". Digital Spy.

Personal life

In 2006, Parker married Emma Sugiyama. The officiant was 1970s sitcom producer Norman Lear. "Latter-Day Saints". New York Magazine. p. 2. That marriage ended in 2008. "Trey Parker and Matt Stone Talk About Why The Book of Mormon Isn't Actually Offensive, and the Future of South Park". Vulture/New York Magazine."South Park - South Park Creator Trey Parker To Be A Dad". Contactmusic. March 22, 2013 In March 2013, Parker had been dating Boogie Tillmon and living with her, and her then-11-year-old son, for the previous few years. It was reported that Tillmon was pregnant and expecting to give birth later that year.
In a September 2006 edition of the ABC News program Nightline, Parker expressed his views on religion, stating that he believes in "a God" and that "there is knowledge that humanity does not yet possess" while cautioning that it would take a long time to explain exactly what he meant by his belief in God. Parker believes all religions are "silly". He states that "All the religions are superfunny to me... The story of Jesus makes no sense to me. God sent his only son. Why could God only have one son and why would he have to die? It's just bad writing, really. And it's really terrible in about the second act." Parker further remarked, "Basically... out of all the ridiculous religion stories which are greatly, wonderfully ridiculous — the silliest one I've ever heard is, 'Yeah... there's this big giant universe and it's expanding, it's all gonna collapse on itself and we're all just here just 'cause... just cause'. That, to me, is the most ridiculous explanation ever."Jake Tapper and Dan Morris (September 22, 2006). "Secrets of South Park". Nightline/ABC News.

Discography

Filmography

Film

Television

Theater

Video games

Music videos






