[[Indore]]

CATEGORIES: Indore, Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011, Cities and towns in Indore district, Cities in Malwa, Former Indian capital cities, Metropolitan cities in India

Indore () is a tier 2 city, the largest city of the Indian state of Madhya Pradesh. A central power city, Indore exerts a significant impact upon commerce, finance, media, art, fashion, research, technology, education, and entertainment and has been described as the commercial capital of the state.
Located on the southern edge of Malwa Plateau, the city is located 190 km west of the state capital of Bhopal. With a Census-estimated 2011 population of 2,167,447 largest city in the world.
Indore traces its roots to its 16th century founding as a trading hub between the Deccan and Delhi. The city and its surroundings came under Maratha Empire on 18 May 1724 after Maratha Peshwa assumed the full control of Malwa. During the days of the British Raj it was a 19 Gun Salute (21 locally) princely state (a rare high rank) ruled by the Maratha Holkar dynasty, until they acceded to the Union of India. Indore served as the capital of the Madhya Bharat from 1950 until 1956.
Indore's financial district, anchored by central Indore, functions as the financial capital of the Madhya Pradesh and is home to the Madhya Pradesh Stock Exchange, India's third oldest stock exchange. Indore's real estate market is among the most expensive in the state and its Lokmanya Nagar incorporates the highest concentration of Marathi People in the Western part of the city.

Etymology

Legends say that while on a journey to conquer Ujjain, Raja Shailendra Singh laid a camp beside the river Kanh (modern name Khan) and was very impressed by the scenic greenery of the place. And thus he laid a Shivling at the meeting place of the rivers Kanh and Saraswati and got the Indreshwar temple constructed along with the settlement Indrapur. Years later under the Maratha Rule, when it was given to the Maratha Subedar (General) 'Malhar Rao Holkar', its name had evolved to Indur. This name was changed to Indore during the British raj

History

Origins

Indore kill its early growth to trade and commerce, which is still a dominant feature of the city. The present city is about 500 years old . Till the end of 15th century its original nucleus was a river side village, which occupied the bank of river Saraswati. This area is now known as Juni Indore.
The area of the modern Indore city was a part of the Kampel pargana (administrative unit) during the Mughal Empire. Kampel was administered by the Ujjain sarkar (government) of Malwa Subah (province). The area was controlled by the local zamindars (feudal landlords), who accepted the suzerainty of the Mughal empire. The zamindars received the title of Chaudhari, which established their claim to the land.
The modern settlement was developed by Rao Nandlal Chaudhary, the chief local zamindar, who had an army of 2000 soldiers. Under the Mughal rule, his family enjoyed great influence and was accorded confirmatory sanads by the Emperors Aurangzeb and Farrukhsiyar, confirming their jagir (land ownership) rights. When Nandlal visited the Mughal court at Delhi, he received a special place in the emperor's court along with two jewel studded swords (now on display in the Royal British Museum under the family's name) and confirmatory sanads. Jai Singh II, a personal friend of his, gave him a special "Gold Langar" which guaranteed a special place to him in all the courts of India.
In the mid-1710s, Nandlal was caught in the struggle between the Marathas and the Nizam of Hyderabad (who had been appointed as the governor of the Deccan region by the Mughal emperor). Once, while visiting the Indreshwar Temple near the banks of river Saraswati, Nandlal found the location to be safe and strategically located, being surrounded by rivers on all sides. He started moving his people in, and constructed the fort of Shree Sansthan Bada Rawala to protect them from harassment by the warring forces. This marked the establishment of the present-day Indore city, which became an important trade center on the Delhi-Deccan route.

The Maratha Raj (Holkar Era)

By 1720, the headquarters of the local pargana were transferred from Kampel to Indore, due to the increasing commercial activity in the city. On 18 May 1724, the Nizam accepted the rights of the Maratha Peshwa Baji Rao I to collect chauth (taxes) from the area. In 1733, the Peshwa assumed the full control of Malwa, and appointed his commander Malhar Rao Holkar as the Subhedar (Governor) of the province. During the Maratha rule, the Chaudharis came to be known as "Mandloi"s (derived from Mandals meaning districts). The Holkars conferred the title of Rao Raja upon Nandlal's family. 68–70 The family retained its possessions of royalty, in addition to the right of performing the first puja of Dushera (Shami Pujan) before the Holkar rulers. The respectability and influence of Nandlal's family in the region was instrumental in the ascent of the Peshwas and Holkars to rulership of this region.
On 29 July 1732, Bajirao Peshwa-I granted Holkar State by merging 28 and half parganas to Malhar Rao Holkar, the founder ruler of Holkar dynasty. His daughter-in-law Ahilyabai Holkar moved the state's capital to Maheshwar in 1767, but Indore remained an important commercial and military centre.

British Era (Holkar State)

In 1818, the Holkars were defeated by the British during the Third Anglo-Maratha War, in the Battle of Mahidpur by virtue of which the capital was again moved from Maheshwar to Indore. A residency with British resident was established at Indore, but Holkars continued to rule Indore as a princely state mainly due to efforts of their Dewan Tatya Jog. During that time, Indore was established the headquarters of British Central Agency. In 1906 electric supply was started in the city, fire brigade was established in 1909 and in 1918, first master-plan of city was made by noted architect and town planner, Patrick Geddes.
During the period of Maharaja Tukoji Rao Holkar II (1852–86) efforts were made for the planned development and industrial development of Indore. With the introduction of Railways in 1875, the business in Indore flourished till the reign of Maharaja Shivaji Rao Holkar, Maharaja Tukoji Rao Holkar III and Maharaja Yeshwant Rao Holkar.

Post Independence

After India's independence in 1947, Holkar State, along with a number of neighbouring princely states acceded to Indian Union. In 1948 with the formation of Madhya Bharat, Indore became the summer capital of state. On 1 November 1956, when Madhya Bharat was merged into Madhya Pradesh, the state capital was shifted to Bhopal. Indore a nearly 2.1 million city today has transformed from a traditional commercial urban center into a modern dynamic commercial capital of the state.

Geography

Indore is located in the western region of Madhya Pradesh, on the southern edge of the Malwa plateau. It lies on the Saraswati and Khan rivers, which are tributaries of the Shipra River and has an average elevation of 553.00 meter above mean sea level. It is located on an elevated plain, with the Vindhyachal range to the south.
Apart from Yashwant Lake, there are many lakes that supply water to the city including Sirpur Tank, Bilawali Talab, Sukhniwas Lake and Piplyapala Talab. Soil cover in the city region is predominantly black. In the suburbs, the soil cover is largely red and black. The underlying rock of the region is composed of black basalt, and their acidic and basic variants dating back to the late Cretaceous and early Eocene eras. The area is classified as Seismic Zone III region, which means an earthquake of up to magnitude 6.5 on the Richter-scale may be expected.
To the west, Indore borders the administrative district of Dhar with cities such as Pithampur and Betma; to the northwest with Hatod and Depalpur; to the north the Ujjain with Sawer; to the northeast the Dewas with Manglaya Sadak; to the southeast the city of Kampel and Simrol; to the south Khandwa with Mhow, Choral and Manpur.
Together with these cities (and some larger nearby cities, e.g. Rau, Hatod, Rangwasa, Palda, Sinhasa) Indore forms a contiguous built-up urban area called Indore Metropolitan Region which is an unofficial administrative district.

Climate

Indore has a borderline humid subtropical climate (Köppen climate classification Cwa) and tropical savanna climate  (Aw). Three distinct seasons are observed: summer, monsoon and winter.
Summers start in mid-March and can be extremely hot in April and May. The daytime temperatures can touch  but humidity is very low.
Winters are moderate and usually dry. Lower temperatures can go as low as  on some nights. Usually the temperature ranges between 8 to 26 °C during winters.
Rains are due to southwest monsoons. The typical monsoon season goes from 15 June till mid-September, contributing 32–35 inches of annual rains. 95% of rains occur during monsoon season.
Indore gets moderate rainfall of  during July–September due to the southwest monsoon.

Demographics

Indore is the most populous city in the central India, with an estimated 2,160,631 residents as of 2011. As of the 2001 Indian Census, the city's population stood at a record high of 1,516,918, significantly greater than any other city from central province. Males constitute 52% of the population and females 48%. In 2010, the city had a population density of 25,170 people per square mile (9,718/km²), rendering it the most densely populated of all municipalities with over 100,000 population in the Madhya Pradesh. As per 2011 census, the city of Indore has an average literacy rate of 87.38%, higher than the national average of 74%. Male literacy was 91.84%, and Female literacy was 82.55%Statistics of Indore. District Administration of Indore. Retrieved 16 August 2009 In Indore, 12.72% of the population is under 6 years of age (as per census 2011). The average annual growth rate of population is around 2.85% as per the statistics of census 2001.
The Indore City metropolitan area is ethnically diverse. It is home to the large Jain community outside Gujarat and Rajasthan. Indore contains the highest total Marathi population of any M.P. city proper (as it was a Maratha ruled city), many of them living in the western part alone viz. Lokmanya Nagar and Rajendra Nagar. The Gujarati community also have a notable presence in the city which can be easily identified in the city culture. Indore has a high degree of income disparity. Ethnically, Hindi linguistics form major sub groups in the city followed by Marathi, Punjabis, Sindhis, Gujaratis and others. The disparity is driven by wage growth in high income brackets, while wages have stagnated for middle and lower income brackets. Indore is always ranked as the home to the highest number of billionaires in the state.
Indore has the highest percentage of constant foreign migrants among Indian cities. As of now, around 10,000 Pakistani Hindus have migrated into the state out of which nearly 6,000 are in Indore. More than 1,000 Pakistani immigrants arrive in the Indore area every year.  No single nationality or culture dominates the city's immigrant population, placing it among the most diverse cities in India.

Architecture

Indore is all fascinating with the charm of its architectural grandeur and historical enigma. Indore has architecturally significant buildings in a wide range of styles spanning distinct historical and cultural periods of Holkar (Maratha), Mughal and British era. These include the Rajwada Palace (1766), a blend of Maratha and Mughal styles with a giant wooden door covered with iron studs and seven storied entrance; Lal Bagh Palace, the grandest monument of Holkar dynasty reflecting the taste, grandeur and lifestyle of the Holkars with European flavor; Krishnapura Chhatris, the royal cenotaphs of typical Maratha style architecture with domes and pyramidal spires allures with its historical enigma.
Indore has significant number of high-rises. Most of the high-rise buildings in Indore are located in the financial district of Vijay Nagar in the upper east city.
The tallest structure in Indore is the replica of Eiffel Tower at All India Radio campus, which rises 337 metres (1,106 ft). However, the observation tower is not generally considered a high-rise building as it does not have successive floors that can be occupied. The tallest habitable building in Indore is the Radisson Blu. The second-tallest building in the city is the Bombay Hospital while the tallest residential buildings are at Ocean Park on Indore-Dewas Bypass Road near Delhi Public School.
There are many landmarks in Indore which make it a tourist attraction.

Parks and Recreation

Government and Jurisdiction

The khatiya Indore is formed of two tiers—a city-wide, and a local tier. Most of the regions surrounding the city are administered by the Indore Development Authority (IDA). IDA works as an apex body for planning and co-ordination of development activities in the Indore Metropolitan Region (IMR) comprising Indore and its agglomeration covering an area of 398.72 km2.
The IDA consists of two appointed components; the collector of district, who has executive powers, and the IDA Board which includes a chairman appointed by Government of Madhya Pradesh, Municipal Commissioner of Indore and five members form Town and Country Planning Department, Forest Department, Public Health Engineering, Public Works Department and MP Electricity Board who scrutinize the collector's decisions and can accept or reject his budget proposals each year. The headquarters of the IDA is at Race Course Road, Indore.
Indore City has been a metropolitan municipality with a mayor-council form of government. Indore Municipal Corporation (IMC) was established in 1956 under the Madhya Pradesh Nagar Palika Nigam Adhiniyam. The IMC is responsible for public education, correctional institutions, libraries, public safety, recreational facilities, sanitation, water supply, local planning and welfare services. The mayor and councillors are elected to five-year terms. The Indore Municipal Corporation is a unicameral body consisting of 69 Council members whose districts are divided into 12 zones and these zones have been further divided into 69 wards defined by geographic population boundaries.
Indore is also a seat for one of the two permanent benches of Madhya Pradesh High Court with Gwalior, the city, its agglomerates and other 12 districts of western Madhya Pradesh falls under the jurisdiction of Indore High Court.

Infrastructure

Information Technology

The Information Technology sector is growing rapidly growing in Indore. Companies like Infosys and TCS have started the construction of their respective offices in Indore near Super Corridor. Both the companies are approximately 5 km from Indore airport.  It is believed to create about 5000 jobs in coming 5–6 years.

Health and Medicine

Indore is a centre of health care in central India. India's first medical institution, Maharaja Yeshwantrao Hospital (later known as King Edward Medical School, presently known as Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Medical College) was established in the city in early 1848. Originally named after Yashwantrao Holkar, Maharaja of Indore, the last Holkar ruler, this was the first public hospital to be computerised. When it was re-inaugurated in 1955, it was Asia's largest government hospital with 1200 beds, and it has remained the largest public hospital in the state. The eight-storied hospital building is surrounded by a group of its special purpose hospitals, namely the 300-bed Chacha Nehru Children hospitals, the 100-bed M.R TB hospital, the 100-bed cancer hospital, a mental hospital and a medical college within the hospital campus.
Indore is home to 51 public health institutions, including 1 district hospital, 2 civil hospitals, 8 primary health center, 21 sub-health centers, 13 civil dispensaries, 2 poly clinics, 2 maternity home, 1 TB hospital and 1 TB sanatorium which is higher The city hosts a good number of private hospitals too. The prominent hospitals of Indore include Maharaja Yeshwantrao Hospital, Bombay Hospital, T. Choithram Hospital, CHL Apollo,  and Dr Jafrey's Indore Chest Centre etc. and with the new additions like leading hospital brands including Fortis, Medanta and Max Hospitals it is becoming a centre for quality health care treatment in years to come.
Indore also has some specialized hospitals located outside of the core city. These hospitals include Choithram Netralaya for comprehensive eye care and the Bombay Hospital which is the largest private hospital in central India and recently was awarded the India Healthcare Award for "Multi Specialty Hospital of the Year" by Dr Montek Singh Ahluwalia, deputy chairman, Planning Commission of India. The awards are conferred on the best hospitals across India based on a rigorous and objective evaluation process, scope of service, infrastructure, patient safety record,  innovation and research.

Transport

=Air=

Indore is served by the state of the artDevi Ahilyabai Holkar International Airport, about 8 km from the city. It is the busiest airport in the states of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh and also serves as a hub for international cargo.  The new integrated international terminal was inaugurated in February 2012. The airport has been operating services by Air India, Jet Airways Konnect, Jet Airways, Jet Lite, IndiGo, SpiceJet connecting Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Bhopal, Chandigarh, Delhi, Hyderabad, Jabalpur, baroda, Jaipur, Jodhpur, Kolkata, Lucknow, Mumbai, Nagpur, Patna, Pune, Raipur, Srinagar and Visakhapatnam.
The Indore airport has a history of its own. It was commissioned by the erstwhile ruler Yeshwantrao Holkar II. He gave the construction work of the Indore airport to the pioneers of civil aviation in India - Tata & Sons - in 1935. Indore was connected to New Delhi & Bombay (Mumbai) on July 26, 1946 and was handed over to the central government on April 1, 1950.

=Rail=

The Indore Junction is an A-1 grade railway station with a revenue of more than Rs. 50 crore(500 million). The City Railway Division comes under Ratlam Division of the Western Railways. Indore Junction BG is the main and terminal station on the broad gauge line connecting it to the rest of the country. In the Railway budget of 2009 Indore main railway station was listed for upgrade along with other 300 stations across India. Indore is directly connected to the metro cities like Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Pune, Lucknow, Kochi, Jaipur and other cities like Ahmedabad, Hyderabad, Trivandrum, Chandigarh, Kollam, Gorakhpur, Coimbatore, Calicut etc.
It has both meter gauge and broad gauge in operational. Regular train services connect Indore to most parts of the country. Electrification of the Indore – Dewas – Ujjain is completed in June 2012.
Indore lies on the Ratlam and Akola metre gauge railway line, the longest remaining functional meter gauge line in India. This section is scheduled for conversion to standard broad gauge under Indian Railways' projected Unigauge system.
The city of Indore has 5 other railway stations which are:

Road

Indore is connected to other parts of India through national and state highways. The major national highways passing through the city are:
The Mumbai- Indore section of the National Highway No. 3 and the Ahmedabad – Indore section of the National Highway No. 59 are undergoing multi laning under the NHDP program.
Other important regional highways passing through the city are:

=Local transport=

Indore has a well developed transport system. Atal Indore City Transport Services Ltd, a PPP scheme operates buses and radio taxis in the city. The buses – designated as City Bus today operate on 36 Routes, with around 170 bus stop stations. The buses are color-coded according to their route.
Indore BRTS is a bus rapid transit system under construction (as of 2012). It has 6 corridors, which will have air-conditioned (AC) and non-AC buses. Some of these buses are also equipped with services like GPS and IVR (around 300) which are used to track the position of the bus with information displayed on LED displays installed on the bus stops.
Noted writer Gurcharan Das wrote in his blog on how Indore's bus service could prove to be helpful in solving New Delhi's bus transport problems. Gurcharan writes "Indore is now quoted (with Bogota) as having the best bus service in the world".

=Taxis=

Metro Taxi service of Indore is supposed to be best in India. It includes Government run Maruti Suzuki SX4 Cars, which are GPS enabled and air conditioned. These taxis can always be found outside the major stations, at the central station, the bus stations, the airport and in the crowded inner-city shopping streets. The common way to obtain a taxi is to either call a taxi operator or to go to a taxi. However, although not the norm, one can hail a passing taxi on the street.
Local transport also includes auto rickshaw, vans and CNG Tata Magic replaced by Nagar Seva. Many cab services serve the city, including City Cabs and Star Cab. The major bus terminals are Sarwate bus terminal, Gangwal bus terminal, Navlakha bus stand and Vijaya Nagar bus stand.
Star Cabs Taxi also available here .Rates 15/Km

Economy

Indore is a dominant commercial center and host multi-level market for maximum goods and services. Indore is witnessing rapid growth owing to the new unambiguous Industrial Policy framework, good Investment environment,Infrastructure development and growth, Improved living standards, and High Educational standards. The city also host prestigious Global Investors' Summit which attract investors from 21 countries, including the US, Australia, Japan, Singapore, the UK, Germany and Finland.
Following are Major industrial areas surrounding the city Pithampur(phase I,II,III - alone host 1500 Large, Medium and Small Industrial Set-up), Electronic Complex, Individual SEZ such as TCS SEZ, Infosys SEZ, Impetus SEZ,etc., Daimond Park,Gems and Jewellery Park, Food Park, Apparel Park, Namkeen Cluster and Pharma Cluster.
Pithampur is also known as the Detroit of India. Pithampur industrial area houses many production plants of various Pharmaceutical companies like Ipca Laboratories, Cipla, Lupin, Glenmark, Unichem and big auto companies prominent among these are Force Motors, Volvo Eicher commercial, Avtec, Mahindra 2 wheelers Ltd.
Madhya Pradesh Stock Exchange (MPSE) originally set up in 1919 is the only exchange in Central India and the third oldest stock exchange in India is located in Indore an now the National Stock Exchange (NSE) established an Investor Service Center in the city. Industrial employment influenced the economic geography of Indore. After 1956 merger, Indore experienced suburban expansion aided by high levels of car ownership. Workforce decentralization and transport improvements made it possible for the establishment of small-scale manufacturing in the suburbs. Many firms took advantage of relatively cheap land to build spacious, single-storey plants in suburban locations where parking, access and traffic congestion were minimal.
While the Textile manufacturing and Trading is the oldest business to contribute to economy, the Real Estate has emerged very fast in past few years. National Real Estate Players DLF Limited, Suncity (ZEE Group), Omaxe, Sahara, Parsvnath, Ansal API, Emaar MGF have already launched their residential projects in Indore. These projects are generally on the Indore bypass. This road also houses the projects of many local and regional Real estate players like Pumarth, Casa Greens, Silver spring, Kalindi, Milan Heights etc.
Infosys is setting up new development centre at Indore at an investment of Rs 100 crore in phase one at Super corridor. Besides these, there are several small and medium size software development firms in Indore.

Education

Indore is a home to a range of colleges and schools. Indore has a large student population and is a big educational center in central India. Most primary and secondary schools in Indore are affiliated with the Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE); however, quite a few number of schools are affiliated with ICSE board, NIOS board and the state level M.P. Board as well.
The Daly College, founded in 1882, is one of the oldest co-educational boarding school in the world, which was established to educate the rulers of the Central Indian Princely States of the 'Marathas' and Rajputs'. Published by Macmillan and co., limited, 1906. Page 233. Speech: "4th November, 1905"...."The old Daly College was founded here as long ago as 1881, in the time of that excellent and beloved Political Officer, Sir Henry Daly"... The Holkar Science College, officially known as Government Model Autonomous Holkar Science College was established in 1891.
Also, Indore has quite a few prominent higher education institutions. It is the only city in India to house both Indian Institute of Technology and Indian Institute of Management.
Devi Ahilya Vishwavidyalaya, also known as "DAVV" in popular culture (formerly known as University of Indore) is a renowned university in Indore with several colleges operating under its aegis. It has two campuses within the city, one at Takshila Parisar (near Bhavarkuan Square)and another at Rabindra Nath Tagore Road, Indore. The university runs several departments including Institute of Management Studies (IMS), School of Law (SoL),Institute of Engineering and Technology (IET), Educational Multimedia Research Centre (EMRC), International Institute of Professional Studies (IIPS), School of Pharmacy, School of Energy & Environmental Studies - one of the primer schools for M. Tech. (Energy Management), School of Journalism and School of Futures Studies and Planning, which runs two M. Tech. Courses with  specializations in Technology Management & Systems Science & Engineering, MBA (Business Forecasting), and M. Sc. in Science & Technology Communication. The huge campus is replete with several other research and educational departments, many hostels, playgrounds and cafes aiming to provide a fulfilling experience to its students.
The Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Medical College (MGMMC) is another old institution, and was formerly known as the King Edward Medical College. website: Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Medical College Shri Govindram Seksaria Institute of Technology and Science (SGSITS) is an engineering college, established in 1952.
'''It's the only city in India to have both an IIT and an IIM

IIM Indore Acad block iimi.jpg|IIM Indore
PACL Campus, IIT Indore.jpg|PACL Campus, IIT Indore
Mgmmccollege.jpg|MGM Medical College
Academic block,sgsits.jpg|SGSITS, Indore
Daly College, Indore.jpg|The Daly College
Holkar college.jpg|Holkar Science College

Media

Arts and theatre

The major art centers in Indore are Ravindra Natya Grah (RNG, Mai Mangeshkar Sabha Grah, Anand Mohan Mathur Sabhagrah, DAVV auditorium, etc. Many artists from around the world perform here regularly; Abhivyakti Centre of Fine Arts & Performing Arts; Deolalikar Kala Vithika and Jal Sabha Grah are also similar centers for arts and theater. There are also various cultural clubs like Sanand Nyas, Ras Bharati and Kala Abhivyakti, who invite performers from around the globe to perform in Indore. Yeshwant Club and Sayaji Club also sponsor and invite talents from across world.
Maharastra Sahitya Sabha was also a prominent place for Theatre.
Indore also holds the Guinness World Record for the Longest Variety Show (Cultural Show) in the World. The longest variety show lasted 12 hr 8 min at an event organised by Shri Vision Social Empowerment and Welfare Association (www.org),in Indore, India, on 11 November 2011. The show consisted of 107 acts, including musical performances, dance, poetry and comedy, and featured 145 performers (including 4 comperes).

Print media

There are about 20 Hindi dailies, 7 English dailies, 26 weeklies and monthlies, 4 quarterlies, 2 Bi-monthly Magazine, one annual paper, and one monthly Hindi language educational tabloid named "Campus Diary"  published from the city.Indian Journal of Science Communication (Volume 2/ Number 1/ January – June 2003)
The major Hindi dailies include the:- Today Raj Express, Nai Dunia, Dainik Bhaskar,'Dainik Dabang Duniya," Dainik Jagran, Patrika, BPN Times, Agnibaan, & PrabhatKiran and SatyaRaj. The major English dailies are The Times of India, Hindustan Times, The Hindu, Free Press, Business Standard, The Economic Times, and DNA  . Several state newspapers and national media houses have their regional offices in Indore.

Electronic media

