[[ʻIolani School]]

CATEGORIES: Preparatory schools in Hawaii, Private high schools in Hawaii, ʻIolani School alumni, Schools in Honolulu, Hawaii, Private elementary schools in Hawaii, Private middle schools in Hawaii, Episcopal schools in the United States

Iolani School is affiliated with the Episcopal Church in the United States. It is administered by a Board of Governors and is one of the largest independent schools in the United States.

History

Early years

On December 16, 1861, Lord Bishop Thomas Nettleship Staley arrived in Hawaii. The school was originally named for Saint Alban.
In 1863, Staley's companion Father Scott purchased land in Lāhaina and established Luaehu School, a school for boys.  When Father Scott fell ill and returned to Britain, Father George Mason was summoned by Staley to administer the school.  When Staley, too, left the islands for Britain in 1870, Father Mason moved the school to the Cathedral Church of Saint Andrew in downtown Honolulu.  It was there that the widowed Queen Emma gave the school its current name.
With the overthrow of the Kingdom of Hawaiuanu from 1927 to 1953, when it was moved to the present Ala Wai site.
In 1979, the school officially became co-educational, ending its all-male enrollment policy.

Development

Iolani School education  .i.e., in the sixth grade, all students must be involved in a performing art.

Campus

The campus is divided into Upper and Lower School.
Buildings include Castle Building, Weinberg Building, the I-Wing, the art building, and the Nangaku Building.  Other facilities include the Upper Gym and the Lower Gym, the Ranzman Library, the Dillingham Pool, and St. Alban's Chapel.  Iolani School also has a stadium (Kozuki Stadium), a baseball field, an outdoor basketball court (the One Team Field house), and several tennis courts.[ref]
</ref>
They are planning to, and bought the land for an expansion.  Currently, The Sullivan Center for Innovation and Leadership is being constructed.

Athletics

Iolani School is a member of the Interscholastic League of Honolulu, an athletic conference composed of Honolulu-area private schools.
Since the formation of the HawaiIolani has the most consecutive state championships in Boys Wrestling, and is the first ILH school to win a Girls Wrestling State Championship in 2005.

Education

Iolani School's campus is divided into two sections: Lower School and Upper School.
Lower School is for elementary students, kindergarten through 6th grade.[ref]
</ref>
Upper School is for 7th through 12th grade.  The schedule has eight periods, which rotate weekly. Each student normally has one study hall/free period and one elective, although new students who do not take a language normally have a second study hall or elective. Iolani summer school allows students to earn graduation credits; credit courses offered during summer include art, history, science, computers, and language.

Harold Keables

Harold Keables was first a teacher in Denver, where he was named the National Teacher of the Year by LIFE magazine; in 1965 he started teaching at Iolani School.[ref]
</ref>  Each year he is honored by the Keables Chair, which brings "outstanding teachers, writers, and artists to Iolani."<ref name=keables/>
Iolani students, teachers typically mark grammatical mistakes using the Keables Guide codes. An example of a code would be C3: not marking commas within a series of objects.[ref]
</ref>

Other activities

Iolani students are involved in many extracurricular activities.

Imua Iolani

Imua 

Speech and Debate

Iolani Debate Tournament, one of three State-Qualifying tournaments of the season.iolani.htm, 

Real World Design Challenge

In 2009, Iolani team took first at the state level and second at the national level.Design Team First in State

Robotics

Iolani's team number for VEX and FRC is 2438.

=Vex=

In 2008, 
Iolani School typically hosts the East Oahu VEX Robotics Competition.
On December 6, 2008, the Vex team competed in the 2008 VEX Pan Pacific Competition, held at the Hawaii Convention Center. The Iolani team (2438a) was part of the winning alliance, and qualified for the 2009 VEX World Robotics Competition, to be held at Dallas, Texas. They won the Community award and the Champion award. 
In 2010, Iolani's VEX team again qualified for the World Competition by being part of the winning alliance at the Kahala VEX Regional. At the 2010 VEX World Robotics Competition, they won the notable CREATE award for design, as well as placing as division semifinalists.
In the 2011 VRC season, Iolani's VEX team again was in the winning alliance at the Pan Pacific Competition.

=FLL=

i.
Two of the FLL teams competed in the Niu Valley qualifier on December 6, 2008; both teams qualified for the Hawaii State Championships to be held in January 2009.  The teams took first and second place, and merged to form one team that traveled to Dayton, Ohio for the US Open Championships.  They won third place in Quality Robot Design and first place in the Alliance Rounds along with the Landroids and the ZBots.  Iolani's FLL team is the only FLL team to win twice at the Hawaii FLL State Championships.

Economics Challenge

Every spring, the Iolani Economics Challenge team led by coach Richard Rankin competes in the state, regional, and national economics challenge.  Iolani has won ten consecutive state championships and has won the national championship in 2005 and 2006 at the A.P. level and in 2007 at the non-A.P. level.  In May 2010, the team of Sean Cockey, Andrew Ellison, Jesse Franklin-Murdock, and Mark Grozen-Smith defeated a team from Bellaire High School in Bellaire, Texas to win another national title.

Notable alumni

Athletics

Authors, editors & journalists

Business

Clergy

Education

Entertainment

Faculty & coaches

url= Bulletin: The Legacy of Eddie Hamada '46|accessdate=20 November 2010}}[/ref]

Government

=State government=

=International government=

Medical & dental

Royalty

Notes






