[[Timothy Gowers]]

CATEGORIES: Combinatorialists, Number theorists, 20th-century mathematicians, 21st-century mathematicians, English mathematicians, Fields Medalists, Knights Bachelor, Members of the Department of Pure Mathematics and Mathematical Statistics, Fellows of the Royal Society, Fellows of Trinity College, Cambridge, People educated at Eton College, People from Wiltshire, 1963 births, Living people, Alumni of Trinity College, Cambridge, Whitehead Prize winners, International Mathematical Olympiad participants

Sir William Timothy Gowers, FRS (

Academic positions

After his PhD, Gowers was elected to a Junior Research Fellowship at Trinity College. From 1991 until his return to Cambridge in 1995 he was a lecturer at University College London. He was elected to the Rouse Ball Professorship at Cambridge in 1998. For the academic years 2000-1 and 2001-2 he was a visiting professor at Princeton University.

Education

Gowers attended King's College School, Cambridge, as a choirboy in the King's College choir, and then Eton College as a King's Scholar. He completed his PhD, with a dissertation entitled Symmetric Structures in Banach Spaces, at Trinity College, Cambridge in 1990, supervised by Béla Bollobás.

Academic Work

Gowers began his career working on Banach Spaces. He used combinatorial tools in proving several of Stefan Banach's conjectures in the subject, in particular constructing a Banach space with almost no symmetry, serving as a counterexample to several other conjectures.1998 Fields Medalist William Timothy Gowers from the American Mathematical Society With Bernard Maurey he resolved the "unconditional basic sequence problem" in 1992, showing that not every infinite-dimensional Banach space has an infinite-dimensional subspace that admits an unconditional Schauder basis.
After this work Gowers switched his attention to combinatorics and combinatorial number theory. In 1997 he provedW.T. Gowers, A lower bound of tower type for Szemeredi's uniformity lemma, GAFA 7 (1997), 322-337 that the Szemerédi regularity lemma necessarily comes with tower-type bounds.
In 2003, Gowers established a regularity lemma for hypergraphs,W.T.
In 2005, he introduced the notion of a quasirandom group.
More recently Gowers has worked on Ramsey theory in random graphs and random sets with David Conlon, and has turned his attention to other problems such as the P versus NP problem. He has also developed an interest, in joint work with Mohan Ganesalingam, in automated problem solving.

Honours

In 1996 he received the Prize of the European Mathematical Society, and in 1998 the Fields Medal for research on functional analysis and combinatorics. In 1999 he became a Fellow of the Royal Society and in 2012 was knighted by the British monarch for services to mathematics He also sits on the selection committee for the Mathematics award, given under the auspices of the Shaw Prize.

Popularization Work

Gowers has written several works popularising mathematics, including Mathematics: A Very Short Introduction (2002), which describes modern mathematical research for the general reader. He was consulted about the 2005 film Proof, starring Gwyneth Paltrow and Anthony Hopkins. Recently, he has edited The Princeton Companion to Mathematics (2008), which traces the development of various branches and concepts of modern mathematics. For his work on this book, he won the 2011 Euler Book Prize of the Mathematical Association of America.

Blogging

After asking on his blog whether "massively collaborative mathematics" was possible,
In 2009, with Olof Sisask and Alex Frolkin, he invited people to post comments to his blog to contribute to a collection of methods of mathematical problem solving

Elsevier boycott

In 2012, Gowers posted to his blog to call for a boycott of the publishing house Elsevier.

Family relations and personal life

His father is Patrick Gowers, a composer, and his great-grandfather was Sir Ernest Gowers, a British civil servant who was best known for guides to English usage and who was the son of Sir William Gowers, a neurologist. He has five children and plays jazz piano.
In November 2012 he opted to undergo catheter ablation to treat a sporadic atrial fibrillation, after performing a mathematical risk-benefit analysis to decide whether to have the treatment.

Selected research articles

Popular mathematics books

Notes




