[[Marvin Hamlisch]]

CATEGORIES: American film score composers, American Jews, American musical theatre composers, Best Original Music Score Academy Award winners, Best Song Academy Award winning songwriters, Drama Desk Award winners, Emmy Award winners, Golden Globe Award winning musicians, Grammy Award-winning artists, Jewish American composers and songwriters, Juilliard School Pre-College Division alumni, People from Manhattan, Pulitzer Prize for Drama winners, Queens College, City University of New York alumni, Songwriters Hall of Fame inductees, Tony Award winners, 1944 births, 2012 deaths, Burials at Mount Zion Cemetery (Maspeth, New York), American people of Austrian-Jewish descent, American Theater Hall of Fame inductees, Deaths from respiratory failure, Deaths from hypertension, Disease-related deaths in California

Marvin Frederick Hamlisch (June 2, 1944 – August 6, 2012) was an American composer and conductor. He is one of only twelve people to win an Emmy, Grammy, Oscar, and Tony (also known as an EGOT). He is one of ten people to win three or more Oscars in one night and the only one other than a director or screenwriter to do so. He is one of only two people to have won those four prizes and a Pulitzer Prize (Richard Rodgers is the other). Hamlisch also won two Golden Globes.

Biography

Early life

Hamlisch was born in Manhattan, to Viennese-born Jewish parents, Lilly (née Schachter) and Max Hamlisch. His father was an accordionist and bandleader. Hamlisch was a child prodigy, and, by age five, he began mimicking the piano music he heard on the radio. A few months before he turned seven, in 1951, he was accepted into what is now the Juilliard School Pre-College Division.com, retrieved April 2, 2009.
His first job was as a rehearsal pianist for Funny Girl with Barbra Streisand. Shortly afterward, he was hired by producer Sam Spiegel to play piano at Spiegel's parties. This connection led to his first film score, The Swimmer. His favorite musicals growing up were My Fair Lady, Gypsy, West Side Story, and Bye Bye Birdie. Pat."InDepth Interview Marvin Hamlisch" Broadwayworld. Hamlisch attended Queens College, earning his Bachelor of Arts degree in 1967.

Music for films

Although Liza Minnelli's debut album included "The Travelin' Life," a song he wrote in his teens (originally titled "Travelin' Man"), His first film score was for The Swimmer, after the film's producer Sam Spiegel hired Hamlisch based on a piano performance Hamlisch did at a party. Later he wrote music for several early Woody Allen films such as Take the Money and Run and Bananas. In addition, Hamlisch co-wrote the song "California Nights" (also with Liebling), which was recorded by Lesley Gore for her 1967 hit album of the same name. The Bob Crewe-produced single peaked at #16 on the Hot 100 in March 1967, two months after Gore had performed the song on the Batman TV series, in which she guest-starred as an accomplice to Julie Newmar's Catwoman.
Among his better-known works during the 1970s were adaptations of Scott Joplin's ragtime music for the motion picture The Sting, including its theme song, "The Entertainer".  It hit #1 on Billboards Adult Contemporary chart and #3 on the Hot 100, selling nearly 2 million copies in the U.S. alone. He had great success in 1973, winning two Academy Awards for the title song and the score for the motion picture The Way We Were and an Academy Award for the adaptation score for The Sting. He won four Grammy Awards in 1974, two for "The Way We Were". In 1975, he wrote what, for its first 12 years, would be the original theme music for Good Morning America---it was built around four notes. He co-wrote "Nobody Does It Better" for  The Spy Who Loved Me (1977) with his then-girlfriend Carole Bayer Sager, which would be nominated for an Oscar. In the 1980s, he had success with the scores for Ordinary People (1980) and Sophie's Choice (1982). He also received an Academy-Award nomination in 1986 for the film version of A Chorus Line. His last projects included The Informant! (2009), starring Matt Damon and directed by Steven Soderbergh. Prior to his death, he completed the score for the HBO film Behind the Candelabra (2013), also directed by Soderbergh and starring Damon and Michael Douglas as Liberace.

Stage

Hamlisch's first major stage work was in 1972 playing piano for Groucho Marx at Carnegie Hall for An Evening with Groucho. Hamlisch acted as both straight man and accompanist while Marx (at age 81) reminisced about his career in show business. The performances were released as a 2-record set, and remained very popular.dk
He then composed the scores for the 1975 Broadway musical A Chorus Line, for which he won both a Tony Award and a Pulitzer Prize; and for the 1978 musical They're Playing Our Song, loosely based on his relationship with Carole Bayer Sager.
At the beginning of the 1980s, his romantic relationship with Bayer Sager ended, but their songwriting relationship continued. The 1983 musical Jean Seberg, based on the life of the real-life actress, failed in its London production at the UK's National Theatre and never played in the U.S."Hamlisch biography.  In 1986, Smile was a mixed success and had a short run on Broadway. The musical version of Neil Simon's The Goodbye Girl (1993) closed after only 188 performances, although he received a Drama Desk nomination, for Outstanding Music."The Goodbye Girl listing", IMDb, retrieved August 18, 2011.
Shortly before his death, Hamlisch finished scoring a musical theatre version of The Nutty Professor, based on the 1963 film.

Conductor

Hamlisch was Musical Director and arranger of Barbra Streisand's 1994 concert tour of the U.S. and England as well as of the television special, Barbra Streisand: The Concert, for which he received two of his Emmys. He also conducted several tours of Linda Ronstadt during this period, most notably on her successful 1996 Dedicated to the One I Love tour of arenas and stadiums. 
He held the position of Principal Pops Conductor for the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra,"Hamlisch Biography", Pittsburgh Symphony, retrieved April 2, 2009.  the Milwaukee Symphony Orchestra,"Hamlisch Listing" Milwaukee Symphony Orchestra, retrieved August 18, 2011. the San Diego Symphony,"Musicians and Conductors Listing", San Diego Symphony, retrieved August 18, 2011. the Seattle Symphony,"Hamlisch Listing" Seattle Symphony, retrieved August 18, 2011. the Dallas Symphony Orchestra,"Conductors", Dallas Symphony Orchestra, retrieved August 18, 2011. Buffalo Philharmonic Orchestra,"Composer Marvin Hamlisch dies at 68", Buffalo News, retrieved August 7, 2012. The National Symphony Orchestra Pops, and the Baltimore Symphony Orchestra.latimes.story, Los Angeles Times, retrieved 23 Apr 2013  At the time of his death, he was preparing to assume responsibilities as Principal Pops Conductor for The Philadelphia Orchestra.

Honors and awards

Hamlisch was one of only twelve people to win all four major U.S. performing awards: Emmy Award, Grammy Award, the Oscar and Tony Award. This collection of all four is referred to as an "EGOT". Hamlisch and Richard Rodgers are the only two people to have won this series of awards and a Pulitzer Prize."Tony Legacy, They're the Top", tonyawards.
He earned ten Golden Globe Award nominations, winning twice for Best Original Song, with "Life Is What You Make It" in 1972 and "The Way We Were" in 1974."Marvin Hamlisch Golden Globes Awards", goldenglobes. He also received six Emmy Award nominations, winning four times, twice for music direction of Barbra Streisand specials, in 1995 and 2001."Hamlisch Award Listing", Internet Movie Database, retrieved April 2, 2009. He shared the Pulitzer Prize for Drama in 1976 with Michael Bennett, James Kirkwood, Nicholas Dante, and Edward Kleban for his musical contribution to the original Broadway production of A Chorus Line.
Hamlisch received a Lifetime Achievement Award in 2009 at the World Soundtrack Awards in Ghent, Belgium. He was also  inducted into the Long Island Music Hall of Fame in 2008.org "The Long Island Music Hall of Fame Second Induction Award Gala on October 30 at the Garden City Hotel", limusichalloffame. In 2008, he appeared as a judge in the Canadian reality series Triple Sensation which aired on the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. The show was aimed to provide a training bursary to a talented young man or woman with the potential to be a leader in song, dance, and acting.

Personal life

In May 1989, Hamlisch married Terre Blair, a native of Columbus, Ohio, who was the weather and news anchor for that city's ABC affiliate, WSYX-Channel 6."Marvin Hamlisch to Marry Ms. Blair, Producer, in May", The New York Times, March 19, 1989."People Are Talking About", Jet, June 19, 1989 (books.com)."Hamlisch, Marvin". Entertainment Celebrities, Trafford Publishing, 2005, p. 285 (books.com). The marriage lasted until his death.
Hamlisch's prior relationship with lyricist Carole Bayer Sager inspired the musical They're Playing Our Song. "A New Approach for Marvin Hamlisch", The New York Times, August 22, 1993.

Death

Hamlisch's health began to suffer and he required a kidney transplant but told his wife "he would rather die than be ahead of someone on a waiting list." A close friend stepped in to resolve the problem and donated a kidney to him.
The Associated Press described him as having written "some of the best-loved and most enduring songs and scores in movie history".
At 8:00 p.m. EDT on August 8, the marquee lights of the 40 Broadway theaters were dimmed for one minute in tribute to Hamlisch,
Barbra Streisand, Aretha Franklin and Liza Minnelli took turns singing songs by Hamlisch during a memorial service for the composer on September 18, 2012. At the 2013 Academy Awards, Barbra Streisand sang "The Way We Were" in Hamlisch's memory.

Work

Symphony

Marvin Hamlisch was the primary conductor for the Pittsburgh Pops from 1995 until his death.google.com/site/pittsburghmusichistory/pittsburgh-music-story/pop/marvin-hamlisch
The Dallas Symphony Orchestra performed a rare Hamlisch classical symphonic suite titled Anatomy of Peace (Symphonic Suite in one Movement For Full Orchestra/Chorus/Child Vocal Soloist) on November 19, 1991. "Chronicle", The New York Times, November 19, 1991. It was also performed at Carnegie Hall in 1993,Alvin Klein. "A New Approach for Marvin Hamlisch", The New York Times, August 22, 1993. and in Paris in 1994 to commemorate D-Day. "Hamlisch Symphony", Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, May 30, 1994, p. 19. The work was recorded by the Dallas Symphony Orchestra in 1992."Dallas Symphony Orchestra Discography", dallassymphony. 4, retrieved February 4, 2010. Anatomy of Peace was a book by Emery Reves which expressed the world-federalist sentiments shared by Albert Einstein and many others in the late 1940s, in the period immediately following World War II.

Theatre

Film

Pulitzer Prize

Academy Awards





Further reading





