[[Lasers (album)]]

CATEGORIES: 2011 albums, Lupe Fiasco albums, Albums produced by Alex da Kid, Albums produced by The Neptunes, Albums produced by Needlz, Albums produced by Kane Beatz, Atlantic Records albums, Concept albums, English-language albums

Lasers is the third studio album by American rapper Lupe Fiasco, released on March 7, 2011 by Atlantic Records. Production for the album took place between 2008 and 2010. Lasers features production by The Audibles, The Neptunes, Needlz, Alex da Kid, Syience, and long-time collaborator Soundtrakk, among others. Trey Songz, John Legend, Skylar Grey, Sway, Matt Mahaffey, MDMA, Eric Turner and Sarah Green contribute vocals to the album.
Lasers was preceded by the lead single "The Show Goes On" and its follow-up "Words I Never Said" featuring Skylar Grey. The former became Fiasco's highest charting song on the Billboard Hot 100 and has been certified double platinum in the US. The latter, however, only achieved moderate success on the Hot 100.
The album has received "mixed or average reviews" from most major music critics, having a score of 57 out of 100 at the review aggregator Metacritic. It fared better commercially however, debuting at number one on the US Billboard 200 with first-week sales of over 200,000 copies sold, making the album Fiasco's second top ten album as well as his highest entry on the chart.

Background

Lupe Fiasco was originally going to release the album as a triple album, titled LupE.N.D. as his third and final record, but his contract with Atlantic Records prevented him from doing so. He then postponed LupE.N.D. indefinitely and intended on releasing an album tentatively called The Great American Rap Album in June 2009. Lupe Fiasco to Release 'The Great American Rap Album'. TheBoombox. Retrieved on 2011-03-16. Instead, the album was also postponed and he announced that a new album was in the works, originally titled We Are Lasers and then changed to Lasers. "Lasers" is a backronym for "Love Always Shines Everytime, Remember 2 Smile".
In 2010, to promote the message of the album, Fiasco released a viral video onto the internet titled "The L.A.S.E.R.S. Manifesto", which can be found on both YouTube and the official website. The manifesto reads:
On January 4, 2011, Billboard revealed two guest appearances on Fiasco's album Lasers. The guests confirmed were Trey Songz and British rapper Sway. In the interview with Billboard, Fiasco expressed his thoughts on music piracy and fighting track leaks on various blogs. Speaking about the problems with his record label, Fiasco has stated: "I think I set the precedent for record labels — showed everyone that you can have rappers that don't fit the format and still have a presence ... You look at a person like me, or Kanye West, and it was sort of a shock to the system. I definitely think I was part of changing that, and an influence to a lot dudes that are coming out today."Frazier, Walter (December 30, 2010). Lupe Fiasco Drops Label Beef to Focus on 'Lasers'. Billboard. Retrieved on 2011-03-16.
In a 2011 interview with MTV UK, Fiasco said that the album "doesn't have a storyline, whereas The Cool was a concept album and this is more just a collection of songs that share some of the same tones, which is basically just positivity and consciousness. Some of the records are controversial, but it's less cohesive than The Cool." He has also stated that the creation of the album was "a very painful, dark, fucked-up process."
In a February 2011 interview with Complex, Fiasco has stated: 

Speaking about the album with the Chicago Sun-Times, Fiasco has stated: "Lasers is a great album. I'm actually happy with the record. I feel I got to say what I wanted even with -- It doesn't make up for what it took to get through it. It's still being argued and debated upon. ... The climate of this record was very weird, in some instances surreal. I became very abstract. I had to create this commercial art that appeases the corporate side. I had to acquiesce to certain forces. Hopefully within that I snuck in some things I actually wanted to say any way I can."

Release conflict and petition

Lupe Fiasco had announced on Twitter that the album was complete and was waiting for Atlantic Records to release it. A fan awaiting the release of the album, put together an online petition with the help of Rhymestyle from the "LupEND Blog" fan site, demanding that Atlantic Records release Lasers, due to the fact that the album was announced for a 2010 release and at the time still did not have a release date.
and MTV.
Speaking in a March 2011 interview with New York about the support that his fans have given him to release the album, Fiasco has said: "It was amazing, humbling, and inspiring, to the point where I went back in the studio and did more records … it made everything real, that your music is actually something that people want. And it's something that is successful, not in selling records, but the way it moves people and inspires them to do better for themselves."

Singles and leaked material

During a concert at Boston College, Fiasco played the chorus of a song called "Shining Down", which eventually led to a snippet being leaked onto the internet.
In a February 2010 interview with Australian radio station Triple J, Fiasco revealed that although the album had been submitted to his label, they still had no solid release date for it. He stated: "It's one of the sadder parts of being on a major record label. At a certain point it's out of your hands. About a date for Lasers, it's truly on them. I have no idea what they're going to do."Staff (April 2, 2010). Lupe Fiasco interview with The Doctor | media|triple j. Triple J. Retrieved 2010-02-10. It has also been reported that Fiasco had initially recorded B.o.B's "Nothin' on You"

Singles

On October 26, 2010, the official first single from Lasers, "The Show Goes On", premiered on Fiasco's official website.
On January 11, 2011, Fiasco revealed during an interview with Providence's Hot 106 that the follow-up single to "The Show Goes On" is titled "Words I Never Said", he said about the song that "It's gonna be really big. It's a big, controversial record".
"Out of My Head" featuring American R&B singer Trey Songz was confirmed as the album's third single. The song was released on May 10, 2011 and has since peaked at number 40 on the US Billboard Hot 100, 11 on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart and four on the Hot Rap Songs chart.
"I Don't Wanna Care Right Now", featuring MDMA, was confirmed to be the album's fourth single. The single's official music video was released on December 2, 2011 on YouTube. The video was filmed during a concert at Iowa State University.

Commercial performance

The album debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 chart, with first-week sales of 204,000 copies. Lupe Fiasco's 'Lasers' Lands at No. 1 on Billboard 200. Billboard. Retrieved on 2011-03-16.

Critical response

Lasers received mixed reviews from most music critics. Metacritic. Retrieved on 2011-03-10. At Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the album received an average score of 57, based on 27 reviews, which indicates "mixed or average reviews". Allmusic editor Andy Kellman gave it three out of five stars and criticized its "lumbering, overwrought choruses", writing that "If there is one MC whose rhymes should not be dulled for the sake of chasing pop trends, it's Lupe Fiasco".

Track listing

Personnel

Credits for Lasers adapted from Allmusic.

Charts

Release history






