[[The Units]]

CATEGORIES: Musical groups from San Francisco, California, American punk rock groups

The Units were an American early electronic music/punk rock/New Wave/synthpunk band, founded in San Francisco in 1979 and were active until 1983. They were one of America's early electronic New Wave bands, they are sometimes cited (along with The Screamers) as pioneers of the genre now known as synthpunk.  The Units were notable for their use of synthesizers in place of guitars, and multimedia performances featuring multiple projections of satirical, instructional films critical of conformity and consumerism.

Members

Primary members were Scott Ryser and Rachel Webber.  Other various members that played live shows and toured with The Units included Brad Saunders, Tim Ennis, Ron Lantz, Richard Driskell, Lx Rudis, Seth Miller, Jon Parker, David Allen Jr., Jabari Allen, Marc Henry, James Reynolds, Raymond Froehlich, D.C. Carter and their projectionist, Rick Prelinger.

History

The Units were one of the most popular bands of the San Francisco punk and performance art scene during the late 1970s and early 1980s, headlining at the Mabuhay Gardens (aka The Fab Mab), The Savoy Tivoli, The Berkeley Square, The Deaf Club, Valencia Tool & Die, Geary Theater and other punk clubs. The Units also opened for such bands as  Soft Cell, Gary Numan, Ultravox, XTC, Bow Wow Wow, the Psychedelic Furs, the Police, Iggy Pop, Dead Kennedys, Sparks and toured the United States with Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark.
Under Wikipedia's definition of "Synthpunk", The Units "are candidates for the earliest synthpunk recording."needed "While a number of art bands moved more towards ambient, or art gallery collage sounds (Ant Farm, Ralph Records) The Units nailed it with ferocious singles like "i-night" which foreshadows The Prodigy and the more intense early work of the Chemical Brothers's "Block Rockin' Beats" for its intensity."
Notable performance art appearances included "Punk Under Glass","Punk Under Glass" by Jeff Jarvis, S.F. EXAMINER, Fri., Jan. 26,1979. where the Units performed in the windows of the JC Penney building in downtown San Francisco, as part of a  two day art installation, and the Labat / Chapman Fight at Kezar Pavilion,"Ring Cycle" by Bill Mandel, S.F. Examiner, June 5, 1981. a performance art boxing match between two artists  where the Units played the national anthem.
The Units' DIY, self stamped, 7" EP entitled "Units" was released in 1979. It was followed by another record in early 1980, "Warm Moving Bodies"/"iNight". The Units' first album, Digital Stimulation, was released in 1980, and was the first album released by 415 Records.
In 1982, the Units released a single on UpRoar Records entitled "The Right Man". The song was recorded at the Different Fur recording studio, founded by the electronic music composer Patrick Gleeson.org. The recording was produced by Michael Cotten, the synthesizer player of The Tubes. The song went to No. 18 on Billboard's Dance Chart and stayed on the chart for 13 weeks. Joel Webber, radio promotions man and the Units manager at the time, was also one of the founders of the New Music Seminar.  Subsequent productions by UpRoar included spoken word recordings by performance artists including Karen Finley, Eric Bogosian, and Ann Magnuson.
After the success of "The Right Man", the Units signed with Epic/CBS Records and produced a music video for "A Girl Like You" that went into medium rotation on early MTV. They released an EP titled New Way to Move on Epic Records, but typical of a hard-luck recording career, the Units' second and third albums — both produced by Bill Nelson for Epic/CBS, were never released.
In 1984, after recording the sound and music for the artist Tony Oursler's film EVOL, Ryser and Webber moved to New York, putting an effective end to the Units.

Visual and multimedia components

The film Unit Training Film#1, produced by Scott Ryser and Rachel Webber, compiled from films the band projected during performances, was shown sans band in movie theaters around the San Francisco Bay Area, including the Roxie Cinema, San Francisco Cinematheque, The Intersection, and the Mill Valley Film Festival.org.

Critical response

The alternative press publisher V. Vale called the Units "the first San Francisco band to perform using no guitars",V. Vale, "Ultrasonic Security", Slash, Vol. 2, No. 6. June 1979. and the Los Angeles music critic  Kickboy Face of the fanzine Slash wrote of a Units performance, "That night, watching the Units pound their machines into submission, I knew that another cliched concept of mine was biting the dust once and for all.  I also knew that there probably was a future to rock n roll after all, and that future did not necessarily include anything resembling guitars."Bessy, Claude ("Kickboy Face"). "untitled," Slash, Vol. 2, No. 9, September 1979.

Later releases

In 2005, Ryser signed a licensing contract with EMI.  Once again, the recordings were not released. In 2007, the record label Golden Goose  released a 12" remix of "High Pressure Days" by DJ Garth.
In 2009, the Community Library label released a 21 song compilation album by the Units entitled The History of The Units that included a booklet "The Unit Training Manual".
In February 2010, a 12" EP was released on the UK label Hungry Beat Recordings including Rory Phillips remix of "High Pressure Days".
In April 2011, The Dark Entries music label from San Francisco released Bart - Bay Area Retrograde (Vol. 1), a 12" compilation that included  "Mission". 
In 2011 The Opilec Music label from Italy released The Units - Connections, a triple boxed set of 25 songs written by The Units, that were remixed by over 40 international DJs, producers and bands from 13 different countries.
In 2012, The Opilec Music label from Italy released an EP. with three songs written by The Units and remixed by Todd Terje from Norway and I-Robots from Italy.
In 2013, The Units are included (two songs performed live) in a film The Seven Deadly Synths, along with six other synthesizer bands including Suicide, Sun Ra, and Our Daughter's Wedding.

Influence and cultural significance

Jandek is an outsider musician, who has self-released 59 albums without ever granting an interview (save for one in 1985 to Spin). His first album, Ready for the House, was first accredited to a band called "The Units". Jandek stopped using the Units name and started using his own, after being contacted by Scott Ryser, who holds a U.S. Trademark on the name "Units".
In September of 2013, The Units song "High Pressure Days", written by Scott Ryser,  was included in the game and soundtrack album for the new "Grand Theft Auto 5" game. " Three days after release, the game had surpassed one billion dollars in sales, making it the fastest selling entertainment product in history."

Discography

Videography

Filmography






