[[Northeast Kingdom]]

CATEGORIES: Vermont culture, Northeast Kingdom, Vermont

The Northeast Kingdom is the northeast corner of the U.S. state of Vermont, comprising Essex, Orleans and Caledonia counties and having a population at the 2010 census of 64,764. In Vermont, the written term "NEK" is often used. The term "Northeast Kingdom" is attributed to George D. Aiken, former Governor of Vermont and a U.S. senator, who first used the term in a 1949 speech. The area is often referred to by Vermonters simply as "The Kingdom".

Geography

The Northeast Kingdom is bisected by Interstate 91 and U.S. Route 5. It is bordered on the east by the Connecticut River and on the west by the Green Mountains. The highest point is Jay Peak, a summit on the main ridge of the Green Mountains, at .U.S. Geological Survey Seneca Mountain, Vermont 7½-minute quadrangle, 1988
The Kingdom encompasses 55 towns and gores, with a land area of , about 21% of the state of Vermont.archive.nvda.pdf The city of Newport is the single incorporated city in the tri-county area.
As of 1997, 80% of the Northeast Kingdom was covered by forest.nvda.pdf 59% was northern hardwood, 29% spruce or fir.
The Northeast Kingdom has been listed in the North American and international editions of "1,000 Places to See Before You Die", the New York Times best-selling book by Patricia Schultz. In 2006, the National Geographic Society named the Northeast Kingdom as the most desirable place to visit in the country and the ninth most desirable place to visit in the world.
The largest municipalities in the Northeast Kingdom are the towns of St. Johnsbury (population 7,603), Lyndon (5,981), and Derby (4,621), and the city of Newport (4,589). See American Factfinder.

Geology

The presence of kame terraces in the counties are of interest in connection with the glacial drift that gave the Northeast Kingdom its soil and its surface stones and boulders. These terraces have beds of sand and clay from which bricks were once manufactured.
Two land masses collided at the end of the Ordovician Period about 466 million years ago. This collision first formed what are now the Green Mountains which extend into the westernmost part of the Northeast Kingdom.
The remaining geology was created during the Silurian-Devonian Period, about 400 million years ago, and left behind slate, with some granite, schist, and limestone.
An expansion of the polar glaciers resulted in an ice age which greatly affected the geology. A 
The retreat of the Laurentide glacier allowed the Green Mountains again to arise, but much eroded. A saltwater incursion resulting in the Champlain Sea from the Atlantic Ocean covered much of Vermont including what is now Lake Memphremagog. This incursion stopped 11,000 years ago and became fresh water. Forests later appeared after the water receded.

Fauna

In 1996, the moose population totalled 2,000, about 1.75/mi² (0.676/km²). In 2005, the population was 5,000; 3.4/mi² (1.313/km²). State officials determined that the herd had become stressed due to overpopulation, and that the 1996 figure was more desirable. As a result, 1,260 hunting permits were issued in 2008 to cull the herd.
There are also black bear, deer, bobcat, coyote, fox, fisher cat, loon, wild turkey, and ruffed grouse.
In 2013, Canadian lynxes were spotted. These prey on the snowshoe hare.
Martens, extinct in Vermont by the early 20th century, have found their way back to the Northeast Kingdom in small groups in the 21st century from New Hampshire or Canada. 
The Virginia opossum moved into the area in the 1950s.

Climate

The average growing season is about 123-130 frost-free days.Draft Environmental Assessment retrieved May 28, 2008
On December 30, 1933, the lowest recorded temperature in the New England states was registered as 
The 2007 Valentine's Day Blizzard brought 

History

Early human history

The retreating glacier allowed the northern migration of early humans around 9300 BCE, descendants of Asian immigrants during the Ice Age. By 7300 BCE, people and a changing environment had eliminated large game from the area such as caribou and mastodons.
From 1000 BCE to 1600 CE, Abenakis inhabited the Kingdom.
Perhaps as many as a thousand Cowasuck Indians lived in Essex County near the Connecticut River in 1500. This tribe included all people from the Cahass, Cohassiac, Coos, Coosuc, and Koes tribes.
European diseases, such as typhus, contracted from exposure to traders, killed many of the Cowasucks until only a few hundred were left in the Northeast Kingdom by 1600.

Modern history

In 2010, Yankee magazine named the NEK the second favorite romantic getaway and the third favorite family getaway in New England.

Demographics

In all three counties, estimated population dropped between 2010 and 2012 by about 200 people. State population declined slightly as well.

Government

As in the rest of New England, there is a strong state government. Town government often uses unpaid volunteers for its services. There is a superficial county government, all funded by the state. The three counties each have sheriffs, judges, prosecutors, and other officers, all, except for judges, elected by the county, but funded by the state.
Recognizing the need for services on an intermediate level, state legislation created the Regional Planning Commissions (RPC), to aid the towns in land use issues, and Economic Development Commissions (EDC), tasked with fostering economic development in their jurisdictions. These RPCs and EDCs report to the Vermont Agency of Commerce and Community Development. They must also report to their boards, which are made up of representatives of each town in the commission. As with some state agencies there is provision for these commissions to also organize as nonprofit groups, yet still maintain status as government agencies. This method of organization permits RPCs and EDCs to augment their state and federal funding with other sources of income. This arrangement also allows the EDCs to own properties such as industrial parks and Business Incubator Facilities.
RPCs and EDCs have no taxing or regulatory authority. However, RPCs do write a regional plan (as towns can have town plans). Town plans can not run contrary to the regional plans. RPCs also have automatic party status to any ACT 250 applications. ACT 250 permits are the state's Land Use Permit issued by the Land Use Panel of the Vermont Natural Resources Board. ACT 250 applications must be in compliance with the RPC's Regional Plan. A copy of all ACT 250 permit applications must be submitted (by the applicants) to the RPCs for review. 
The Northeast Kingdom is unique, as they have the only agency that is both the Economic Development Commission as well as the Regional Planning Commission, known as the Northeastern Vermont Development Association and Regional Planning Commission (NVDA). Under the legislators' study to lower state government spending, they have been looking to the Northeast Kingdom's RPC/EDC as a model for possible consolidation of agencies throughout the state.
Municipalities are governed by an elected Board of Selectmen and managed by an elected town or city clerk.

Public health

Various organizations are tasked with aiding public health including the Northeast Kingdom Human Services.

Economy

Farming

In 2010 the largest dairy farmer in the state was in Orleans County with 5,000 head and 2,500 milkers, spread over five farms.
Maple syrup is produced in the region.org/retail.php?county=Caledonia

Tourism

The area offers mountain biking,

NGOs

There are a number of non-profit, non-governmental agencies, that either offer services or promote business or housing. These include the Northern Community Investment Corporation, based in St. Johnsbury, and the Gilman Housing Trust. Joseph Gresser

Transportation

In 2008, 74% of the roads were rated in poor or very poor condition. There were 480 bridges with spans of 

Railroads

Two railroads traverse the Northeast Kingdom of Vermont: 

Bus

Rural Community Transportation runs out of Saint Johnsbury and serves Caledonia, Essex, Lamoille and Orleans counties.

Airports

There are three state airports: Caledonia County State Airport in Lyndonville; Newport State Airport in Newport/Coventry, and John H. Boylan State Airport in Island Pond. Light private and business aircraft land there.

Media

Author Howard Frank Mosher has written works of fiction set in the Northeast Kingdom, typically in the fictitious Kingdom County.
Archer Mayor's second "Joe Gunther" novel, "Borderlines," is set in the fictitious village of Gannet, in Essex County.
The literary suspense novels of author Don Bredes are set in the fictional Northeast Kingdom village of Tipton, just south of the Quebec border.
Peacham was used as the filming location for the 1993 movie Ethan Frome, based on the novel of the same name.New York Times accessed February 1, 2008
Robert Frost wrote a poem with the Kingdom as its topic entitled "A Servant to Servants".New York Times retrieved June 29, 2008

Newspapers

Radio

List of Vermont Radio Stations

Television








