[[Scream queen]]

CATEGORIES: Film and video terminology, Horror films

A scream queen is an actress who has become associated with horror films, either through an appearance in a notable entry in the genre as a frequent victim or through constant appearances as the female protagonist. Jamie Lee Curtis is noted as a seminal example for her performance in the popular slasher films of the  Halloween franchise.

Definition

The term "scream queen" is more specifically used to refer to the "attractive young damsels-in-distress" characters that have appeared in a number of films in the horror genre. Lloyd Kaufman, co-founder of Troma Entertainment, noted that being a scream queen is "more than just crying and having ketchup thrown on you. You not only have to be attractive, but you also have to have a big brain. You have to be frightened, you have to be sad, you have to be romantic."
Debbie Rochon, often described as a scream queen herself, wrote in an article originally published in GC Magazine that "a true Scream Queen isn't The Perfect Woman. She's sexy, seductive, but most importantly 'attainable' to the average guy. Or so it would seem." And although the earlier scream queens might be women that "just had to look pretty and shriek a lot until the hero of the film got around to save (them)", the later scream queens "showcase women worrying about something other than a guy... thedailybeast.com; interview with Karyn Kusama (director of "Jennifer's Body")

History

Early beginnings

The use of women in horror films dates back to the silent film era, with films such as The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari (1920) and Nosferatu (1922). George Feltenstein, film historian and senior vice president of theatrical catalog marketing at Warner Home Video, states, "Women screaming in terror has been a Hollywood mainstay — even when films were silent". 

1970s

In Halloween, Jamie Lee Curtis, daughter of Psycho actress Janet Leigh, had her first film role. Portraying Laurie Strode in Halloween, Curtis established herself as the "ultimate 'scream queen'" and was even referenced as such in the horror film Scream (1996) by Randy Meeks. Curtis went on to star in several other horror films after that, two of them being The Fog and Halloween H20, in both of which she appears together with Janet Leigh.

1980s

The success of Halloween made slasher films known again, and so that type of film saw a revival during the late '70s and entire '80s.postgazette.stm postgazette.dreadcentral.com  A Nightmare on Elm Street, now considered a slasher-classic, Linnea Quigley became a scream queen during the 1980s. Mark Patton, star of A Nightmare on Elm Street 2: Freddy's Revenge (1985), has since 2010 been touted at horror conventions as mainstream horror's first "male scream queen".A Nightmare in Hollywood Couldn't Kill Mark Patton

1990s

During the 1990s, Debbie Rochon starred in dozens of Troma Production horror films and was voted by Draculina magazine as its "Scream Queen of the Decade". Neve Campbell also began her career in horror with The Craft (1996), and later went on to star as Sidney Prescott in the Scream film series.  Jennifer Love Hewitt was reckoned a scream queen after her 
''I Know What You Did Last Summer films.ugo.asp|ugo.com scream queens
The first film of that trilogy also had a starring role for Sarah Michelle Gellar, who started her career on television as the title character in the show Buffy the Vampire Slayer and went on to appear in other horror films made during the '90s and new millennium. These include the second part of the aforementioned Scream series and  ''The Grudge franchise''.

2000s

2006 saw Kate Beckinsale earn the award for "Best Scream Queen" at the Scream Awards for her role in Underworld: Evolution (2006). In 2007, USA Today published an article listing its opinion of who qualified as a modern scream queens; the list included Sheri Moon Zombie, Jaimie Alexander, Andrea Bogart, Mercedes McNab, Tiffany Shepis, and Cerina Vincent. Since 2007 and her appearance in Halloween, Danielle Harris has increased her genre work, being subsequently called "horror's reigning scream queen" by the NY Daily News.nydailynews.html nydailynews.com 






