[[Houston Museum District]]

CATEGORIES: Neighborhoods in Houston, Texas, Museums in Houston, Texas, Museum districts

The Houston Museum District is an association of 20 museums, galleries, cultural centers and community organizations located in Houston, Texas, dedicated to promoting art, science, history and cultural.
The Houston Museum District currently includes 20 museums that recorded a collective attendance of just over 8 million in 2012. All of the museums offer free times or days and 11 of the museums are free all the time.
Bordered roughly by Rice University, the Neartown area and Texas Medical Center, the Museum District specifically refers to the area located within a 1.5-mile radius of the Mecom Fountain in Hermann Park. The Museum District is served by four stops on the METRORail, one specifically named for it and is easily accessible from US 59, State Highway 288 and Main Street.
The beginnings of the Museum District are found in 1977, when it became apparent that some action needed to be taken to provide easier access to the museums of the area. This call for community improvement evolved into the non-profit Montrose Project by the mid-80s but changed into the Museum District Development Association of Houston (MDDAH) shortly thereafter.  Based on the works of this organization, the Museum District was formally recognized by the City of Houston in 1989. The founding organization was dissolved in 1994, but the Museum District is now under the auspices of the Houston Museum District Association, founded in 1997.
The Museum District attracts visitors, students and volunteers of all ages, backgrounds, and ethnicities to learn about and celebrate art, history, culture, and nature around the world.  More information on the 20 institutions of Houston's Museum District may be found on their official website, 

History

In the late 1970s, the area currently including the Houston Museum District had fallen into disrepair, badly needing attention from local, county and state governments to improve roads and beautify the area, then unsafe for pedestrian traffic and cyclists.
The Houston Museum District began as a grassroots community movement in 1977 led by Alexandra R. Marshall whose concept was to create a pedestrian-friendly district with the Museum of Fine Arts, at the intersection of Bissonnet Street and Montrose Boulevard, as its core.    In such a strongly vehicle-oriented city, and one which to this day retains the title of the largest city in the United States without zoning, this was fairly progressive.
The Museum District Development Association of Houston proposed a multi-phase plan to beautify and make more pedestrian-friendly the area located between Allen Parkway, Buffalo Bayou and Hermann Park. It took advantage of the opportunity to create in Houston an area of vital urban importance, similar to the French Quarter in New Orleans, St. Germain in Paris, and Georgetown in Washington, DC.
Since its creation, the numerous efforts of the Houston Museum District organizations have included community improvement projects, tree planting, sidewalk planning, construction and expansion, esplanade design, development and beautification, establishment of public transportation to and from the area, police support and various cultural events
The Montrose Association, the Museum Area Municipal Association, the South Main Civic Association, the Cultural Arts Center of Houston and TALA (Texas Accountants and Lawyers for the Arts) all played a part in the development and subsequent success in the creation of the Houston Museum District.

Timeline

Founding members

According to 1st board meeting notes (Oct 4, 1986):
Directors:

Ex Officio members

Participating civic leaders at founding

Current museum members

Parks and other institutions

Funding

Originally, funding was completely based on private sources—association member dues and members' donations. Later, with growing awareness of the MDDAH and their work, funding came from numerous other sources.
Today, total operating budgets for the member museums exceed $80 million, funded almost completely from revenues and private donations. Museum District funding includes approximately $1.5 million in Hotel Occupancy Tax funds from the City of Houston and the Houston Arts Alliance; the Houston Chronicle, Texas Monthly, Exxon, and Cadillac.

Programs

Museum District Day

During the annual Museum District Day, museums offer free general admission and shuttle service for visitors in order to raise awareness of the District. In 2009, there were seventeen participating museums with over 66,000 visits. Museum District Day 2012 is Scheduled for Saturday, September 15. This was the last Museum District Day.

Museum Experience

The Museum Experience replaced the Museum District's annual open house—instead creating quarterly events to highlight four walkable zones. Each zone showcases a handful of museums at a time and each of the featured venues offer special programming, food trucks and pedicabs. This programming model provides visitors a more intimate experience and the ability to walk or bike between museums.

Educators Open House

Each year, museums in the District host an open house for area teachers (public, private and home-school teachers) to experience the museums and learn about school programs available at the museums. Teachers receive continuing education credits for attending the 3 one hour presentations & prize drawings. Museum Educators Open House 2010 is scheduled for Saturday, January 23.

Cultural collaborations

The District has taken a leadership role in seeking collaborative opportunities with the Theater District, Miller Outdoor Theatre, the reorganized Houston Arts Alliance and city-wide cultural organizations to foster greater public awareness of Houston's cultural attractions.

Public issues

The District plays an ongoing role in forming responses to public concerns and opportunities that include transportation improvements, signage, visitor information, area beautification, flood control and urban planning considerations.
The HMDA also serves as an intermediary, which fosters an ongoing dialogue among the museums in the district to maintain continuing interest and visitation in the area.

Leadership

Laurette Canizares, Executive Director, Houston Museum District Association 

Jarrod Gullett, Office Manager, Houston Museum District Association 

Education

Primary and secondary schools

The Houston Independent School District operates area public and private schools.
The Post Oak High School, a Montessori high school, opened in the northern hemisphere fall of 2012. "Museum District a study playground for new high school." Houston Chronicle. March 28, 2013. Ultimate Bellaire. It is the first high school in the Museum District. "School turns Museum District into a classroom." Houston Chronicle. September 25, 2011.

Public libraries

The Houston Public Library Clayton Library, Center for Genealogical Research is located in the Museum District. The genealogical collection, originally housed in the Julia Ideson Building in Downtown Houston, moved to the William Clayton Home, a Georgian-style house built in 1917, in the Museum District in 1968. A site for a new building, adjacent to the Clayton Home, was purchased in 1986. The new building, which was built in 1988, was designed to complement the Clayton Home.








