[[Melissa George]]

CATEGORIES: 1976 births, Living people, Artistic roller skaters, Australian film actresses, Australian soap opera actresses, Australian child actresses, Australian television actresses, American film actresses, American soap opera actresses, American child actresses, American television actresses, Australian emigrants to the United States, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, Actresses from Perth, Western Australia

Melissa Suzanne George (born 6 August 1976) is an Australian-born film  and television actress who has worked in Australia, the United Kingdom and the United States. George is perhaps best known in Australia for her role as Angel Parrish on the Australian soap opera Home and Away (1993–1996). After moving to America, she appeared in television series such as Friends (2003), Alias (2003–2004), In Treatment (2008), Grey's Anatomy (2008–2009) and Lie to Me (2010), earning a nomination for a Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress – Series, Miniseries or Television Film for In Treatment.
She made her film début in the neo-noir science fiction feature Dark City (1998) and later appeared in supporting roles in films, including The Limey (1999) and Mulholland Drive (2001). She has gone on to have lead roles in films, including the remake of The Amityville Horror (2005), the thriller Turistas (2006), the vampire horror film 30 Days of Night (2007) and garnered critical acclaim for her starring role in Triangle (2009).
Her most recent credits include the thriller A Lonely Place to Die (2011), the Australian drama series The Slap (2011), for which she won a Logie Award for Most Outstanding Actress, and the British-American spy drama series Hunted (2012).

Early life

Melissa George was born in Perth, Western Australia, the daughter of Pamela, a nurse, and Glenn George, a construction worker.com William Ward, a grandfather on her mother's side, worked as a prison warden at Rottnest Island,Yeap, Sue (4 April 2012). "Family brings actress to tears", The West Australia. Retrieved 10 March 2013. offshore from Perth. The second of four children, George developed an interest in dancing and began studying jazz, tap, ballet, and modern dance at the age of seven. Her enthusiasm for dance eventually evolved into a passion for artistic roller skating. She is an Australian national roller skating champion and won bronze medals in the National Championships in 1989 and 1990. She won a silver medal at the Junior World Championship in 1991.

Career

Early work (1992–1998)

George began modeling in her early teens, and in 1992 she was named Western Australia's Teenage Model of the Year. At the age of sixteen she met casting agent Liz Mullinar and won the role of Angel Parrish on the popular Australian soap Home and Away.
Her role earned her five consecutive Logie Award nominations, of which she won two. She moved to Sydney to start her acting career. She made a health and fitness video, Mind, Body and Soul (1996), created a sleepwear line called "An Angel at My Bedside", and had a recurring role on the short-lived Fox Broadcasting Company television fantasy drama series Roar (1997), opposite Heath Ledger, before leaving Australia to move to Los Angeles to try her luck in Hollywood.
She scored a small role in the critically favored[ref]
[/ref]

Career breakthrough (1999–2007)

After a supporting role in Steven Soderbergh's 1999 neo-noir crime film The Limey, she was cast in a supporting role, Cleo Miller, in the 2001 black comedy Sugar & Spice and had a minor role in David Lynch's critically acclaimed Mulholland Drive, which opened at the 2001 Cannes Film Festival. She starred in several unaired TV pilots, such as Lost in Oz. She starred in the short-lived ABC drama-comedy Thieves, co-starring John Stamos. She starred in the sixth season premiere of the WB series Charmed, and had a minor role opposite Renée Zellweger and Ewan McGregor in the 2003 romantic comedy Down with Love.
In 2003, she landed the role of Lauren Reed on the ABC television series Alias. Her first starring role in a feature film was Kathy Lutz in the 2005 remake of the 1979 horror film, The Amityville Horror. The film was not well received by critics, and that she "does an impeccable American accent, but otherwise she is unremarkable as Kathy Lutz. Her physical beauty is sometimes distracting, but not enough to keep the audience awed by her acting." That same year, she played Deanna Schine in the thriller Derailed, co-starring Clive Owen and Jennifer Aniston. In 2006, she filmed the horror-thriller Turistas with Josh Duhamel and Olivia Wilde.
In 2007, she landed the lead role, Christine, in the drama Music Within, opposite Ron Livingston. The film had a limited release. In an interview, she said that she "knew that Christine's a true character, and the woman responsible for Richard Pimentel's sort of success in a way. She was the driving force behind him and behind every good man is a good woman, and Christine was that woman."

Recent roles (2008–present)

George returned to television in 2008 in the HBO half-hour drama In Treatment, co-starring Gabriel Byrne and Dianne Wiest, receiving a 2009 Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Supporting Actress – Series, Miniseries, or Television Film,
In September 2008, it was announced that George was joining the cast of Grey's Anatomy for eleven episodes as Sadie Harris, a bisexual intern," 'Grey's Anatomy' Enlists 'Alias' Badass to Play Callica Spoiler" 25 September 2008, EW.
On 9 November 2009, it was announced that George would guest-star in at least two episodes of Fox's Lie to Me playing Clara Musso. George also stars in the British thriller film A Lonely Place to Die,Melissa George Pays Her Respects at The Grave at Angel's Peak and Finds A Lonely Place to Die directed by Julian Gilbey.Melissa George Climbs to 'The Grave at Angel's Peak'
In November 2010, George was named the new face of L'Oreal Melbourne Fashion Festival.
In 2012, George appeared as Rosie in the Australian TV series The Slap

Personal life

George met film director Claudio Dabed in Bali in 1998 and they married two years later.
George is the cousin of the opera singer Taryn Fiebig.
She climbed Ben Nevis mountain for the role of A Lonely Place to Die. In an interview with The Sun, she stated, "It was tough because it's a pretty dangerous location, and it wasn't fit for a large crew, but we did it, we made it...I was climbing with Di Gilbert who has climbed Everest many times so that was incredible. And when you get up there, it's just a huge sense of achievement."
She is credited as the inventor of "Style Snaps", a device intended to allow changing pant hem length without sewing and marketed via direct response TV.

Filmography






