[[Acetazolamide]]

CATEGORIES: Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, Mountaineering and health, Anticonvulsants, Sulfonamides, World Health Organization essential medicines, Thiadiazoles, Amides

Acetazolamide, usually sold under the trade name Diamox in some countries, is a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor that is used for the medical treatment of glaucoma, epileptic seizure, idiopathic intracranial hypertension, altitude sickness, cystinuria, periodic paralysis, central sleep apnoea, and dural ectasia. Acetazolamide is a diuretic, and it is available as a generic drug in the United States. Diamox is now available as Diamox Sequels in the United States since the original product is no longer made or sold there.
It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines, a list of the most important medication needed in a basic health system.

Medical uses

It is used in the treatment of glaucoma, drug-induced oedema, heart failure-induced oedema, centrencephalic epilepsy and in reducing intraocular pressure after surgery. It has also been used in the treatment of mountain sickness, Ménière's disease, increased intracranial pressure and neuromuscular disorders. 
In epilepsy, the main use of acetazolamide is in menstrual-related epilepsy and as an adjunct in refractory epilepsy. 
It has also been used to prevent methotrexate-induced kidney damage by alkalinalising one's urine, hence speeding up methotrexate excretion by increasing its soluble in the urine.

Pregnancy and lactation

Acetazolamide is pregnancy category B3 in Australia, which means that studies in rats, mice and rabbits in which acetazolamide was given intravenously or orally caused an increased risk of foetal malformations, including defects of the limbs. Despite this there is insufficient evidence from studies in humans to either support or discount this evidence. It is also excreted in breast milk and hence breastfeeding is advised against in mothers taking this drug.

Side-effects

Common adverse effects of acetazolamide include: paraesthesia, fatigue, drowsiness, depression, decreased libido, bitter or metallic taste, nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramps, diarrhoea, black faeces, polyuria, kidney stones, metabolic acidosis and electrolyte changes (hypokalaemia, hyponatraemia). Whereas less common adverse effects include: stevens-johnson syndrome, anaphylaxis and blood dyscrasias.

Contraindications

Contraindications include:

Interactions

It is possible that it might interact with:

Mechanism of action

Acetazolamide is a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, hence causing the accumulation of carbonic acid
hence lowering blood pH, by means of the following reaction that carbonic acid undergoes:
which has a pKa of 6.3.
In the eye this results in a reduction in aqueous humour.
The mechanism of diuresis involves the proximal tubule of the kidney. The enzyme carbonic anhydrase is found here, allowing the reabsorption of bicarbonate, sodium, and chloride. By inhibiting this enzyme, these ions are excreted, along with excess water, lowering blood pressure, intracranial pressure, and intraocular pressure. By excreting bicarbonate, the blood becomes acidic, causing compensatory hyperventilation, increasing levels of oxygen and decreasing levels of carbon dioxide in the blood.

Chemistry

The tablets are made with acetazolamide in its original form, whereas the injection is in the sodium salt form. Its free form is fairly insoluble in water and alcohol. Its free form is white-faintly yellow, in colour. It also degrades upon contact with light. 




