[[Shinji Ikari]]

CATEGORIES: Comics characters introduced in 1995, Fictional bisexual males, Fictional child soldiers, Fictional genetically engineered characters, Fictional Japanese people in anime and manga, Fictional people with neurological or psychological disorders, Fictional private military members, Fictional soldiers, LGBT characters in animation, Male characters in anime and manga, Neon Genesis Evangelion characters, Science fiction film characters

 is a fictional character from the Neon Genesis Evangelion franchise created by Hideaki Anno. He was first introduced as the protagonist from the television anime series from 1995. Shinji Ikari is a young boy who is requested by his distant father, Gendo Ikari, to pilot a mecha known as the Evangelion Unit 01 to protect the city of Tokyo-3 from creatures known as Angels that threaten to destroy mankind. While Shinji is forced to pilot Unit 01, during his time in Tokyo-3 he socializes with comrades and gains friends. 
Shinji's portrayal differs depending on the media in which he is shown such as in the official manga adaptation where he is written from the author Yoshiyuki Sadamoto's point of view as well as other spinoff series. The character of Shinji became highly popular, having appeared in multiple popularity polls. 

Conception

Director Hideaki Anno described the hero, Shinji Ikari, as a boy who "shrinks from human contact", and has "convinced himself that he is a completely unnecessary person, so much so that he cannot even commit suicide." He describes Shinji and Misato Katsuragi as "extremely afraid of being hurt" and "unsuitable — lacking the positive attitude — for what people call heroes of an adventure." When compared to the stereotypical hero, Shinji is characterized more by lack of energy and emotion than by any sort of heroism or bravery."This, the opening episode is constructed around all the conventions of the classic "saving the world" narrative, only to undermine them by showing IKARI  Shinji, its fourteen-year-old ostensible hero, in a far from heroic light … In a more conventional anime sf narrative, Shinji would climb into the EVA with gusto and proceed to save the world. In fact he does pilot the EVA and succeeds in destroying the Angel – who turns out to be the third of seventeen – but only with the greatest reluctance and after a display of temper, fear, and vulnerability that seems less than conventionally heroic." pg 424–425 of Napier 2002
Shinji's relationship with his Evangelion and status as a pilot is very ambivalent; the entire series can be seen as a bildungsroman centered around Shinji."The animation, 'Evangelion,' is a kind of bildungsroman about the soul-searching of a 14-year-old boy who has to fight mysterious enemies in a new Tokyo in the year 2015 by piloting a human-shaped robot named 'Eva.'" from Japan Economic Newswire, MAY 8, 1997, THURSDAY. "Cartoon 'Eva' captures sense of void among Japanese youth". by Yoichi Kosukegawa. TOKYO, May 8 Kyodo
Shinji has often been seen as a version or reflection of the creator of Evangelion and Anno has referred to the plot line as a metaphor of his life.
"Ikari" means "anchor" in Japanese.  Shinji was named for Gainax co-founder Shinji Higuchi; it can be translated to "child of god."pg 121 of Neon Genesis Evangelion: The Unofficial Guide, by Kazuhisa Fujie and Martin Foster, 2004, ISBN 0-9745961-4-0  Evangelion character designer Yoshiyuki Sadamoto based his design of Shinji on his design of Nadia, the title character of Gainax's popular 1990-1991 TV series, Nadia: The Secret of Blue Water. 2, bonus materials
Megumi Ogata, who voiced Shinji, found the last scene of End of Evangelion difficult to perform.  She became overwhelmed with emotion and strangled Yuko Miyamura, Asuka's voice actor, during that scene, making it "very hard" for Miyamura to say her lines immediately after that.  Ogata regards Shinji Ikari as one of her "most memorable" roles.

Appearances

Neon Genesis Evangelion

Shinji acts as the main protagonist of Neon Genesis Evangelion and makes his first appearance in the first episode where he is invited to Tokyo-3 by his father Gendo Ikari.
After Shinji is forced to fight the Bardiel-controlled Eva-03 while Toji is trapped within,

The End of Evangelion

The End of Evangelion continues Shinji's story, portraying his downward spiral into depression and eventual loss of the will to live. He is in this state for the majority of the film, remaining practically catatonic while all of his friends, including Misato and Asuka, are killed. After witnessing the corpse of Unit-02 being carried by the Mass Production Evas, Shinji loses his last grip on sanity as Third Impact begins. Shinji goes through many introspective hallucinations until he finally decides that he wants to live and returns to Earth. Asuka appears next to him and Shinji attempts to strangle her, but stops himself and breaks down after Asuka regains consciousness and gently caresses his face.animenewsnetwork.com/feature/2002-06-11

Rebuild of Evangelion

In Rebuild of Evangelion Shinji returns as the central protagonist in Evangelion: 1.0 You Are (Not) Alone where he is shown to be more outspoken than his TV counterpart. In this film, Shinji's role is very much the same as that of the anime series. He is assigned to be the pilot of Unit-01 and works alongside Rei to defeat the Angel Ramiel.

In other media

Shinji appears in most manga adaptations of Neon Genesis Evangelion, including Yoshiyuki Sadamoto's manga adaptation. The manga generally follows the plot of the anime with occasional alterations in events. In this manga, Shinji's role is very similar to his anime counterpart, although changes in characterization are apparent. This is due to the fact the manga is written from Sadamoto's point of view involving Shinji. Sadamoto was inspired to write the manga after learning of Shinji's role in the first episode of the television series. Shinji is also a primary protagonist in the Shinji Ikari Raising Project and Neon Genesis Evangelion: Campus Apocalypse where he is portrayed in a different light than his anime counterpart.
Shinji, alongside  other Evangelion characters, makes frequent appearances in video games, such as Neon Genesis Evangelion for the Nintendo 64. Shinji is also a playable character in the popular cross-over video game franchise Super Robot Wars where he and other Evangelion characters work with characters from various other mecha series.

Reception

Shinji ranked 25th on IGN's top 25 anime characters list. Editor Chris Mackenzie commented that the IGN staff loved him "not for what he is, but for what he could be".
Spike Spencer, Shinji's English voice actor has received praise for his role, particularly for his performance in The End of Evangelion. Mike Crandol of Anime News Network praised the subtle nuances that Spencer brought to the role, as he felt that Spencer had improved over his previous performances where he tended to parody Shinji's inner turmoil.




