[[John Jervis, 1st Earl of St Vincent]]

CATEGORIES: 1735 births, 1823 deaths, British military personnel of the French and Indian War, British MPs 1780–84, British MPs 1784–90, British MPs 1790–96, British naval commanders of the Napoleonic Wars, Royal Navy personnel of the American Revolutionary War, Royal Navy personnel of the French Revolutionary Wars, Earls in the Peerage of Great Britain, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath, First Lords of the Admiralty, Members of the Parliament of Great Britain for English constituencies, Members of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom, People from Meaford, Staffordshire, Royal Navy admirals of the fleet, Whig (British political party) MPs, Members of the Parliament of Great Britain for constituencies in Cornwall, Politics of Great Yarmouth, Members of Trinity House

Admiral of the Fleet John Jervis, 1st Earl of St Vincent GCB, PC (9 January 1735 – 14 March 1823) was an admiral in the Royal Navy and Member of Parliament in the United Kingdom. Jervis served throughout the latter half of the 18th century and into the 19th, and was an active commander during the Seven Years' War, American War of Independence, French Revolutionary War and the Napoleonic Wars. He is best known for his victory at the 1797 Battle of Cape Saint Vincent, from which he earned his titles, and as a patron of Horatio Nelson. 1, p.35Mahan Vol. 1, p.101
Jervis was also recognised by both political and military contemporaries as a fine administrator and naval reformer. 1, p.173 As Commander-in-chief of the Mediterranean, between 1795 and 1799 he introduced a series of severe standing orders to avert mutiny. He applied those orders to both seamen and officers alike, a policy that made him a controversial figure. He took his disciplinarian system of command with him when he took command of the Channel Fleet in 1799. In 1801, as First Lord of the Admiralty he introduced a number of reforms that, though unpopular at the time, made the Navy more efficient and more self-sufficient. He introduced innovations including block making machinery at Portsmouth Royal Dockyard. St Vincent was known for his generosity to officers he considered worthy of reward and his swift and often harsh punishment of those he felt deserved it.
Jervis' entry in the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography by P. K. Crimmin describes his contribution to history: "His importance lies in his being the organiser of victories; the creator of well-equipped, highly efficient fleets; and in training a school of officers as professional, energetic, and devoted to the service as himself."

Early life

John Jervis was born in Meaford, Staffordshire on 9 January 1735 the second son of Swynfen and Elizabeth Jervis. Vol.1, p.277The Naval Chronicle Vol. 4, p.2Brenton. Vol.1, p.12 His father was a barrister, counsellor to the Admiralty Board and auditor of Greenwich Hospital. 4, pp.2–3 Swynfen Jervis intended that his son should follow him to the bar. Vol. 1, p.6 The young Jervis was educated at Burton-upon-Trent Grammar SchoolThe Naval Chronicle Vol. 4, p.3 and subsequently at Reverend Swinden's Academy in Greenwich, London. 1, p.5Brenton. Vol.1, p.15
Their family name Jervis is pronounced 'jerviss'.

Early naval career

At the age of thirteen Jervis ran away and joined the navy at Woolwich, London. Vol.1, p.16 After a short time he returned home as he had heard his family were very upset at his disappearance. Lady Jane Hamilton (mother of Sir William Hamilton) and Lady BurlingtonBrenton. Vol.1, p.17 became aware of Jervis' desire to join the navy and lobbied his family on his behalf. Eventually they introduced the Jervis family to Admiral George Townshend who agreed to take the boy aboard one of his ships. Vol. 1, p.7
On 4 January 1749 Jervis entered the navy as an able seaman aboard the 50-gun  in December of the same year and then from the end of December until February 1755 was assigned to HM Yacht William and Mary under the navigational expert Captain John Campbell. Vol. 1, p.11
Jervis passed his lieutenant's examination on 2 January 1755 and was assigned as sixth lieutenant to the first-rate , a ship that had been captured by Henry Osborn's fleet at the Battle of Cartagena. He followed Saunders once more when the admiral was promoted to command the North American station; Jervis was promoted to Lieutenant of HMS Prince. Vol. 1, p.16

Quebec and promotion to captain

The fleet, part of an expedition to capture the French possessions in North America, left England in February 1759. They stopped first at Louisbourg which had been captured from the French the previous year. By June, the ice along the Saint Lawrence River had broken up and the fleet along with the military transports headed up river to the assault of Quebec City. Vol. 1, p.17  On 15 May 1759, Jervis had been  promoted acting commander of the sloop  led the armed transports past Quebec to land up river. One biographer, Jedediah Tucker, notes that as the approach was so critical, both Wolfe and the subsequently famous James Cook boarded the Porcupine to ensure the success of the mission. Vol. 1, p.18
For his efforts Jervis was promoted commander and took command of . Vol. 1, pp.15–20 Jervis returned to England in September but immediately returned to North America in command of the Albany. In May 1760 Jervis was attached to Admiral Sir George Rodney's Channel squadron.
In October 1760 he was made post-captain in command of the 44-gun  under Captain Joshua Rowley, convoyed the East and West Indian trade to the westward, and successfully protected it from the squadron of Commodore de Ternay.
By the end of 1763 the Gosport has been paid off and Jervis remained unemployed until February 1769 when he was appointed to the 32-gun  boats. They were forcibly removed; Jervis made an official protest and promised retaliation if they were not handed over. The slaves were produced and Jervis took custody of them. Vol. 1, pp.24–26
On 30 March 1770 the Alarm was driven ashore off MarseillesBrenton. Vol.1, p.22 but with the efforts of Jervis, the crew and the local French authorities under the governor of Marseilles, Georges René Le Peley de Pléville she was brought off and repaired. Jervis personally returned to Marseilles with a letter of thanks from the Board of the Admiralty to the governor for his assistance. Vol. 1, pp.27–33
In 1771 Alarm returned to England to collect the Duke of Gloucester, King George III's brother in order that he could winter in Italy. Vol. 1, pp.35–37 He lived aboard with his entourage until May 1772 when Alarm returned to England and was paid off. Vol. 1, p.38

Touring Europe and Russia

Between October 1772 and June 1775, Jervis travelled extensively. He began in France where he studied the language and made observations about French life. Vol. 1, p.39 He accompanied Captain Samuel Barrington to Russia where they spent time in Saint Petersburg and inspected the arsenal and dockyards at Kronstadt and took a tour of the yacht designed by Sir Charles Knowles for Catherine of Russia. Vol. 1, p.40 The pair continued on to Sweden, Denmark and northern Germany. All the while Jervis made notes on defences, harbour charts and safe anchorages. They came home via the Netherlands,Tucker. Vol. 1, p.46 Jervis once again making extensive studies of the area and taking copious notes describing any useful information. He and Barrington then took a private cruise along the Channel coast calling at various harbours including Brest, making and improving their charts as they went. When Jervis later became the Commander-in-Chief of the Channel Fleet he was aided significantly in his blockade of Brest by these charts. In later years, he commented: "Had the young Captain Jervis not performed such a complete survey of this port then the Earl St Vincent would not have been able to effect such a thorough blockade of it."Tucker. Vol. 2, p.15

American War of Independence

First Battle of Ushant

At the outbreak of the American War of Independence in 1775 Jervis was given the command of ; however, she was surveyed by the dockyard and found unfit for service. Vol. 1, p.47 He was therefore appointed instead to command of HMS Foudroyant, the ship he had brought to England as a prize seventeen years earlier. For the first few years of the war, the French supplied arms, funding, and military advice on an informal and limited basis to the newly emerging nation of America. With the signing of the Treaty of Alliance in 1778 and the creation of the Franco-American alliance, the war widened.[ref]
</ref><ref name="LSK27">
