[[Lincoln Alexander]]

CATEGORIES: 1922 births, 2012 deaths, Black Canadian politicians, Canadian autobiographers, Canadian Baptists, Lawyers in Ontario, Chancellors of the University of Guelph, Canadian military personnel of World War II, Canadian people of Jamaican descent, Canadian people of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines descent, Companions of the Order of Canada, Knights of Justice of the Order of St John, Recipients of the Canadian Forces Decoration, Lieutenant Governors of Ontario, McMaster University alumni, Members of the House of Commons of Canada from Ontario, Members of the Order of Ontario, Members of the Queen's Privy Council for Canada, Progressive Conservative Party of Canada MPs, Recipients of the Canadian Volunteer Service Medal, People from Hamilton, Ontario, People from Old Toronto

Lincoln MacCauley Alexander,  (January 21, 1922 – October 19, 2012) was a Canadian politician and statesman who served as a Member of Parliament in the House of Commons, the federal Minister of Labour, and later as the 24th Lieutenant Governor of Ontario, from 1985 to 1991. Alexander was also a governor of the Canadian Unity Council.

Early life

Alexander was born in Toronto, Ontario, to Mae Rose, who migrated from Jamaica, and Lincoln Alexander, Sr., a porter on the Canadian Pacific Railway who came to Canada from St. Vincent and the Grenadines. He then practiced law in Hamilton with the firms Okuloski & Okuloski; Duncan & Alexander; and Millar, Alexander, Tokiwa & Issacs.

Politics

In 1968, Alexander ran in the Canadian federal election as the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada candidate in the Hamilton West electoral district. He won, becoming Canada's first black Member of Parliament. He held the seat through four successive elections until stepping down in 1980.
While in office, he spoke to the press about then Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau's alleged profanity in the fuddle duddle incident and was an observer to the United Nations in 1976 and 1978. In the brief government headed by Joe Clark from 1979 to 1980, Alexander served as Minister of Labour. He resigned his seat in 1980 to serve as chairman of the Ontario Worker's Compensation Board.

Viceregal service

In 1985, on the advice of Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, Governor General Jeanne Sauvé appointed Alexander as Lieutenant Governor of Ontario. He became the first black person to serve in a viceregal position in Canada. (James Douglas, who was of mixed descent, was Governor of Vancouver Island and of British Columbia prior to Canadian Confederation when these were British colonies with no connection to the Canadas.) During his appointment, he focused attention on education, racism and youth issues.

Later life and death

In 1992, Alexander was appointed to the Order of Ontario. He also became a Companion of the Order of Canada. From 1991 to 2007, he served as Chancellor of the University of Guelph. His term exceeded that of any of his predecessors, and he assumed the office of Chancellor Emeritus.
In 2000, Alexander was named Chair of the Canadian Race Relations Foundation, where he remained an active spokesman on race relations and veterans' issues. Until the time of his death, he was the Honorary Patron of the Hamilton, Ontario branch of St. John Ambulance, as well as Honorary Chief of the Hamilton Police Service.
In November 2006, his autobiography Go to School, You're a Little Black Boy: The Honourable Lincoln M. Alexander: A Memoir was published.
Alexander died in his sleep on the morning of October 19, 2012, with his wife Marni (Margaret Beal-Alexander) at his side at the age of 90.[/ref]
Alexander was accorded a state funeral  co-ordinated by his wife Marni, with the co-operation of thousands of officials both Provincial and Federal, Police Services across Canada, featuring the Burlington Teen Tour Band and Police Pipe and Drum band, and was conducted at Hamilton Place and attended by 1,500 people including the Mayor of Hamilton Bob Bratina, Ontario Premier Dalton McGuinty, former Premier David Peterson, Governor General David Johnston, former Governor General Michaëlle Jean, Prime Minister Stephen Harper, former Prime Minister Joe Clark and federal cabinet minister Julian Fantino, His Honour David Onley, current lieutenant governor of Ontario and Dr. Alastair Summerlee, President of the University of Guelph, and Dr. Peter George, former President of MacMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario.  The service was presided over by Rev. Allison Barrett, wife of Dr. Peter George. His wife Marni Beal-Alexander encouraged the Province of Ontario to proclaim January 21. as Lincoln Alexander Day in Ontario becoming law in December 2013.  At this writing Marni is co-ordinating efforts to have Lincoln Alexander Day January 21, Lincoln's birthday, recognized as Lincoln Alexander Day across Canada with Royal Assent by the Prime Minister expected in the spring of 2014.

Titles, styles, honours, and arms

Titles

Honours

Lincoln Alexander Received Honorary Degrees from Numerous Universities Including

Honorific eponyms

Arms






