[[Chris Pérez]]

CATEGORIES: 1969 births, American guitarists, American male singers, American musicians of Mexican descent, American rock guitarists, American rock songwriters, American writers, Capitol Records artists, Cumbia musicians, Hollywood Records artists, Grammy Award-winning artists, Kumbia All Starz members, Kumbia Kings members, Lead guitarists, Living people, Los Dinos members, Musicians from Texas, People from Corpus Christi, Texas, People from San Antonio, Texas, Rock en Español musicians, Selena, Songwriters from Texas, Tejano pop musicians

Christopher Gilbert "Chris" Pérez (born August 14, 1969) is an American guitarist, songwriter and author best known as lead guitarist for the Tejano band Selena y Los Dinos. He married the frontwoman of the group, Selena, on April 2, 1992. Pérez grew up in San Antonio, Texas as one of two children of Gilbert Pérez and Carmen Medina. In 1986, he joined Shelly Lares' band. By the late 1980s, Pérez was reputed among Tejano musicians for his guitar skills. This caught A.B. Quintanilla III's attention; at the time, Quintanilla was seeking another guitarist for the band he produced, Selena y Los Dinos. Shortly after Pérez joined the band, he and Selena began a personal relationship.
Selena's father, Abraham Quintanilla, Jr., forced them to end their relationship because he felt Pérez' image might damage Selena's career. They ignored his threats to disband the group, and continued their relationship. Quintanilla Jr. fired Pérez from the band, forbidding Selena to go with him. They later eloped, and Selena's father accepted the relationship. Pérez was asked to collaborate on several of Selena's songs with A.B. and other members of the band, using his guitar to piece out melodies and incorporating a number of musical genres into their songs.
During the early 1990s Pérez was arrested for driving under the influence in San Antonio, but was released without charge. Within months of his first arrest, Pérez was involved in a trashed-hotel-room incident; he and two members of Selena y Los Dinos were intoxicated and began wrestling in a room, breaking the door and punching holes in the walls. On March 31, 1995 Selena was killed by her friend and former manager of her boutiques, Yolanda Saldivar. Her death devastated Pérez, who began abusing drugs and alcohol.
In 1998 he met Venessa Villanueva through his friend John Garza, and began dating her. That year, Pérez formed the Chris Pérez Band and began writing songs for their debut album. They signed with Hollywood Records and released their first album, Resurrection, which won a Grammy Award for Best Latin Rock or Alternative Album. The band disbanded after their second album, Una Noche Mas (2002), was released. Pérez and Villanueva had two children, Cassie and Noah, before divorcing in 2008. Pérez continued in the music business and often played with A.B.'s groups, the Kumbia Kings and the Kumbia All-Starz. He left both groups and formed another band (the Chris Pérez Project, which included Puerto Rican singer Angel Ferrer) in 2010. In 2012 Pérez wrote a book about his and Selena's relationship entitled To Selena, With Love, which received a positive reception from critics and fans.

Early life

Chris Pérez was born on August 14, 1969 in San Antonio, Texas to Gilbert Pérez, a computer programmer,
When Pérez was seventeen years old, he wanted to run away to Los Angeles, California to start a rock band. At the time, he shared an apartment with his father and worked at a library.

Career

1989—1995: Selena y Los Dinos and legal problems

In 1989 Roger Garcia, lead guitarist for Selena y Los Dinos, married and left the music business.
Pérez auditioned for the group's manager (A.B.'s father Abraham Quintanilla, Jr.), who initially disliked Pérez' rocker image; A.B. insisted that he change his appearance for the band. The elder Quintanilla feared that allowing Pérez in the group might affect his daughter Selena's "perfect image" and ruin her career. A.B. finally convinced him to accept Pérez,
In 1991, Pérez was arrested for driving under the influence and speeding in San Antonio, Texas. A police officer became involved in an altercation with Perez' cousin, and Pérez came to his cousin's aid.
Several months after his arrest, Pérez shared a hotel room with two road crew members of Selena y Los Dinos. The two brothers (who were intoxicated) began wrestling, and Pérez (who was also drunk) joined them. One brother knocked the door off its hinges, and holes in the wall were later found inside the room. Pérez decided to sleep at home, instead of at the hotel.

=Relationship with Selena=

In 1989 Pérez and A.B. wrote Selena's Coca-Cola commercial jingle, and after the company accepted the lyrics and  Selena filmed the commercial A.B. treated the band to a vacation in Acapulco, Mexico.
The band's drummer, Selena's sister Suzette Quintanilla, found Pérez and Selena flirting with each other.
After Pérez was fired from the band,
Selena believed that her father would leave her and Pérez alone if they were married, and they would not have to hide.

1995–1998: After Selena, remarriage and fatherhood

In early 1995 Abraham found out Yolanda Saldivar, who managed Selena's boutiques and fan club, was embezzling money. They held a meeting in early March, with Saldivar denying that she had anything to do with the fiscal discrepancies in checks that were found written in her name. Selena tried to repair her friendship with Saldivar, despite her father's warnings.
After Selena's murder, Pérez did not eat for two days.

1999–2009: Chris Perez Band and other projects

Pérez' friend, John Garza, moved into Pérez' house six months after Selena's death. They began writing music, which Pérez found healing.
"Another Day" (about Pérez' devotion to Selena) was included on the album.

2010 to present

In the early 2010s Pérez formed a new group (the Chris Pérez Project) with Puerto Rican singer Angel Ferrer, releasing "Todo es Diferente".
In March 2012 Pérez wrote To Selena, With Love, which described his and Selena's relationship and their struggles.

Personality and musical influences

According to The Dallas Morning News, Hollywood.com,
Leila Cobo of Billboard magazine believed that Pérez' musical styles included contemporary cumbia music, reminiscent of music produced by A.B., R&B, rap and funk music.

Discography

Published works



Bibliography




