[[University of Bradford]]

CATEGORIES: University of Bradford, Educational institutions established in 1966, Education in Bradford, 1966 establishments in England, University Alliance

The University of Bradford is a public, plate glass university located in the city of Bradford, West Yorkshire, England. The university received its Royal Charter in 1966, making it the 40th university to be created in Britain, but its origins date back to the early 19th century. There are two campuses: the main campus located on Richmond Road and the School of Management, at Emm Lane.
The student population includes 10,525 undergraduate and 3,050 postgraduate students. Mature students make up around a third of the undergraduate community. 22% of students are foreign, and come from over 110 different countries. There were 14,406 applications to the university through UCAS in 2010, of which 3,421 were accepted.
It was the first British university to establish a Department of Peace Studies in 1973, which is currently the world's largest university centre for the study of peace and conflict.

History

Early history and founding

The university's origins date back to the Mechanics Institute, founded in 1832, formed in response to the need in the city for workers with cutting-edge skills relevant to the workplace. In 1882, the institute became the Bradford Technical College. In 1957, the Bradford Institute of Technology, was formed as a College of Advanced Technology to take on the running of higher education courses. Construction of the Richmond Building, the largest building on campus, began in 1963. The Horton Building and Chesham building were subsequently added, on the opposite side of Richmond Road.
The Charter of Incorporation was granted in 1966, to create the University of Bradford; the then Prime Minister Harold Wilson became the university's first chancellor.

1980s and 1990s

Expansion of the main campus continued in the 1980s, with the addition of the Library and Computer Centre, Communal Building, Pemberton Building and Ashfield Building. An extension to the Library and Computer Centre was completed in the mid-1990s. In 1996, the university joined with the former Bradford and Airedale College of Health, which then became the School of Health Studies within the university. The Department of Physics was closed in the 1980s. The Department of Mathematics was closed to new undergraduates in 1997, with the remaining postgraduate activities and lecture support being integrated into the Department of Computing as the Mathematics Unit. The Department of Mathematics has since been reopened within the School of Computing, Informatics and Media.Mathematics Department
In 1987, the University became one of the twelve founding members of the Northern Consortium.

21st century

In September 2009, it was announced that the University was to merge with Leeds College of Music. The college had originally announced a merger with Leeds Metropolitan University in April 2009,
It was later announced that this merger would not go ahead due to financial constraints, although both institutions are committed to building up a working relationship and the University validates LCM's courses.
The university is currently undergoing a £84 million redevelopment programme, including Student Central, which is now home to the brand new student union, social and study zones and bars. The School of Health Studies was recently moved from the Trinity Road Campus to the university's City Campus in summer 2011, after major refurbishment, offering brand new state of the art facilities.Review by The Independent

Campus

Facilities

In 2005, a £84 million redevelopment of the campus was announced, and a project to create the world's first 'Ecoversity' was formed. The university aimed to reduce its environmental footprint by reducing waste and using sustainable materials. As part of this, Bradford became a Fairtrade University in December 2006.
As of 2008, several of the redevelopment projects have been completed. The Richmond Building has been partially re-clad with extra insulation and a new atrium; designed by local Saltaire based architects Rance Booth & Smith; opened in December 2006, the roof of which uses ETFE - the same material used in the Eden Project.
Redevelopment of the sports facilities was completed in summer 2009, and a new student village called "The Green" was constructedBradford Student Village which opened in September 2011. Of the existing halls owned by the university, those on the Laisteridge Lane site were sold to Corporate Residential Management in 2005, and Shearbridge Green Halls were demolished in December 2006. Longside Lane halls and Kirkstone Halls were demolished during the first half of 2009.
The university has a "leading-edge 100-seat PC cluster" for teaching, learning and computer-based assessment, and there is an art gallery, theatre and music centre. The university has recently invested £84m in the campus, including a major refurbishment of the laboratories in the school of life sciences, creation of a new MBA suite and library at the school of management, refurbishment of the student union building, Student Central, as well as the creation of a new accommodation student village, The Green.

Library

The J B Priestley library is open 24 hours on weekdays and more limited hours at weekends, it has 530,000 volumes, more than 1,100 printed periodical titles and more than 7,000 electronic journals. In addition to the university library, there is a Blackwell bookshop located on campus.
The university has won its campus the award for 'Outstanding Contribution to Sustainable Development' in The Times Higher Education Awards two years running. The Green is an accommodation student village situated on-campus and has the highest ever BREEAM rating for any building.BREEAM: The Green, Bradford University, UK

Motto

The motto which appears on most current University of Bradford publications is Making Knowledge Work, which relates to the institution's focus on courses that lead to employment. The university announced in June 2007 it was to use this phrase as a trademark.
However, the motto inscribed beneath the official coat of arms is Give Invention Light, which is taken from Shakespeare's Sonnet 38. It has also used the slogans Be Inspired and Confronting Inequality, Celebrating Diversity in recent promotional material.

Reputation and rankings

The Times Good University Guide ranked Bradford 7th in UK for graduate employment in 2005University of Bradford in Global Ranking and 2nd in 2006.Graduate Placement
The university has a strong reputation for research and knowledge transfer. It is ranked in the Top 50 English Universities based on research funding (HEFCE 2009–10).
Staff-student ratios are amongst the best in the UK (The University of Bradford is in the 2nd quartile for staff-student ratios in The Independent, The Times and The Guardian League Tables). The 2008 RAE reported that 80 per cent of academics at the university who submitted research to the panel are doing international or world-leading research.Research Reputation

Organisation and governance

Chancellor

The current chancellor is the former world-class cricketer and Pakistani politician Imran Khan, who was installed on 7 December 2005.
Prior chancellors have included;

Vice-Chancellor

The current Vice-Chancellor (as of 1 October 2013) is Brian Cantor CBE,Professor Brian Cantor appointed as our new Vice-Chancellor 24 April 2013 who was previously the VC at the University of York. Cantor took over from Mark Cleary, who joined the university from the University of Plymouth where he was the Acting Vice-Chancellor (Academic). He was due to start in his new position following Chris Taylor's retirement on 1 May. However due to the sudden death of Roland Levinsky, the vice-chancellor of Plymouth, his appointment was delayed until the summer of 2007.
Cleary succeeded Chris Taylor who held the post from 1 October 2001 to 30 April 2007, when he retired from the university. Taylor took over from Colin Bell, who was Vice-Chancellor between 1998 and 2001 and who was later Vice-Chancellor at the University of Stirling. Bell died suddenly in April 2003 and the University of Bradford now holds an annual memorial lecture in his name discussing widening participation.

Accommodation

The Green, which opened September 2011, is a new £40 million purpose built student accommodation village. Designed for eco-friendly living, The Green has the highest ever BREEAM rating for any building (95.05%), awarded for sustainable building development and operation. It is also the first BREEAM 'Outstanding' student accommodation in the country.

Schools

The diverse course available at the university have been divided into five academic 'schools' which each cover a broad range of specialisms. Four schools are based at the city campus, and share many facilities, whilst the School of Management is a short bus ride away.

=Engineering & Informatics=

On 1 October 2013, the School of Engineering, Design and Technology and the School of Computing, Informatics and Media were merged to form the School of Engineering and Informatics. Three schools make up this new over-arching school: the School of Engineering (Mechanical, Medical, Civil & Chemical Engineering programmes), the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science (Electrical & Electronic Engineering, Computing & Maths programmes) and the School of Media, Design & Technology (Media & Design programmes)
The following describes the former schools of EDT & SCIM:

==Computing, Informatics and Media==

thumb|right|Chesham Building in the University of BradfordThe second-largest school in the university consists of the departments of Computing, Bradford Media School (BMS), Creative Technology (CT) and Mathematics.
SCIM offers over 40 undergraduate degrees and postgraduate study in various areas including computing, ICT, robotics, mathematics, media and television. The School has a very lively research culture with over 100 students registered for MPhil/PhD.
The Department of Computing was one of the first in the UK to run an MSc course in Computing back in 1967. Undergraduate courses began in 1970.
The EIMC department was founded in 1991 and developed its courses in conjunction with the School of Art, Design & Textiles at Bradford and Ilkley Community College (now known as Bradford College) and the National Museum of Photography, Film and Television (now the National Media Museum). It was one of the first departments to offer BSc courses in media technology, going on to introduce some of the first animation and computer games degrees, and more recently expanding to offer a new range of similar BA courses.  Today, SCIM no longer works in association with the college, but has strengthened its relationship with the nearby National Media Museum. In association with the Department of Computing, it obtained a research grade 4 at RAE 2001.
A non-linear video editing / training suite is named in honour of the Shipley born film director Tony Richardson, and was opened by his daughter, the film actress Natasha Richardson in 1996.
In 2007 the School launched a partnership with East Coast Media at the Grimsby Institute and the National Media Museum to bid for Skillset Media Academy status, which was granted in 2008. Accreditation mainly covers courses in the Bradford Media School.
A core part of the school is the Innovations Unit, which offers the expertise of specialists within SCIM to commercial and social enterprises. This collaboration is part of a Government initiative called Knowledge Transfer, which also includes partnerships with national and international companies. The IIU is also home to "Simula", which using knowledge transfer and resources for commercial projects including the school's motion capture suite for video games including Driver Parallel Lines, World Snooker Championships and GTR.

==Engineering, Design and Technology==

The university inherited several engineering courses from the Bradford Institute of Technology and some of these courses, such as Civil Engineering are still taught today. All of the engineering courses are accredited by their relevant institute. The school also has a large number of both undergraduate and postgraduate design and technology courses. Its research areas include  automotive engineering, polymers, telecommunications and advanced materials engineering.
From the establishment of the university in 1966, the individual branches of engineering were taught in separate departments. When reorganisation of the three faculties of the university took place, a single School of Engineering, Design and Technology was created and incorporated the Department of Mechanical Engineering, the Department of Civil & Structural Engineering, the Department of Electrical & Electronic Engineering and the Department of Industrial Studies. The Department of Chemical Engineering was closed shortly before the creation of the new school. However in 2010, an undergraduate programme in Chemical Engineering was re-launched in 2010 with support from the Institute of Chemical Engineers - the first graduates from the 3 year BEng version of this course graduated in June 2013. In 2012 a postgraduate course was also launched.bradford.ac.uk/courses/view/?c=chemical-engineering-meng-4-years

=Health Studies=

Formerly the Bradford and Airedale College of Health, this became part of the university in 1996; previously it was an associate college with the university validating its degrees and diplomas.
It specialises in courses in nursing, physiotherapy, midwifery, occupational therapy and radiography. A specialist drug therapy course is run by the department and there are also part-time courses in dementia care. The department's student demographics are largely female, with a higher proportion of mature students.

=Life Sciences=

The School of Life Sciences has the highest number of students of all of the schools, with more than 2,000 students admitted to a variety of undergraduate courses in the areas of Biomedical Sciences, Chemical and Forensic Science, Clinical Sciences, Optometry, Pharmacy and Archaeological, Geographical and Environmental Sciences.
The Bradford School of Optometry and Vision Science (BSOVS)Bradford School of Optometry & Vision Science has its own Eye Clinic, situated on the nearby Science Park, providing Primary Care for the local community in conjunction with a student training facility. BSOVS also provides a variety of other clinical services (e.g. an Electro-diagnostic Unit opened October 2010) that people may be referred to by practitioners.
The Division of Chemical and Forensic Science runs a number of forensic science courses in conjunction with the Division of Biomedical Sciences and further undergraduate and postgraduate courses are being developed in the area of Biotechnology. The Division of Biomedical Sciences is also a major contributor to a new Clinical Sciences degree, which commenced in 2002.  Although the Division of Clinical Sciences provides a degree in its own right, as importantly there is provision for students to transfer to Leeds Medical School's MBChB programme.
The Institute of Cancer Therapeutics has an excellent reputation for research and there is very close collaboration with staff from other divisions within the School.
The Division of Archaeological, Geographical and Environmental Sciences is located in refurbished, late 19th century mill buildings, housing extensive specialist facilities. Formerly a separate school, it was merged with Life Sciences in 2006.

=Management=

The Bradford School of Management is located  parkland campus, Emm Lane. It teaches courses in business, finance, accountancy, management and marketing. As of 2005 the department commenced teaching an accredited LLB law degree. It has a number of masters degrees,  MBA programmes and doctoral programmes running alongside undergraduate programmes.
Its research is both international and interdisciplinary and has five main research groups covering all the main areas of management, and co-operative links and exchange agreements with 20 universities in America, Australia, Canada, Denmark, France, Holland, Spain and Sweden.
School of Management has full Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) accreditation for DBA and PhD programmes, portfolio Association of MBAs accreditation for MBA programmes and EQUIS accreditation.

=Social and International Studies=

The School of Social and International Studies covers the areas of development, economics, humanities (including English and history), politics, international relations, peace studies, psychology, criminology and social work. The school offers a range of taught undergraduate and postgraduate courses and has a number of active research areas, especially in conflict resolution. The school is actively engaged in the Programme for a Peaceful City initiative.
The recently launched Centre for Psychology Studies offers a psychology course for undergraduates, accredited by the British Psychological Society. In 2008, Lord Robert Winston officially opened new state of the art psychology laboratories, for teaching and research. One of the university's most popular courses, The National Student Survey ranked Psychology at Bradford as being within the Top 5 in the UK with 94% Student Satisfaction.

Student life

Students' Union

Membership at the University of Bradford's Students' Union, (UBU), is automatic upon confirmation of enrolment. The UBU has a union shop, several bars and advice services, a radio station, a newspaper, cinema and other entertainment facilities. The University of Bradford Union (UBU) is run by an executive committee of six full-time sabbatical officers and up to six part-time executive officers, elected annually. The committee is unusual in not having a Union President: the post was abolished by Shumon Rahman in 2001, who was elected the Union's first Asian President in 2000.
The Union is located in the newly refurbished Student Central on campus, and is politically active, running regular campaigns.

=Activities=

Students get to make use of the Unique Fitness and Lifestyle centre which is located on campus. Facilities at the Unique centre include a top of the range fitness suite, an indoor 25-metre pool and a climbing wall.
The largest student involvement in their Union comes in the forms of the sports clubs (through the Athletics Union, commonly known as the AU),UBU - List of Sports Teams and the societies (through the Societies Federation). Students are also free to start their own societies.
The Student Union also has Ramair, one of the UK's longest running student radio stations, as well as a student newspaper and the long-established Bradford Student Cinema cinema that now regularly screens recent releases to students and staff for free. RamAir was also able to host the Student Radio Conference in 2012 with student Ian Thursfield winning a national award for Radio in 2011.

University Challenge

The University were champions of University Challenge in 1979 on 28 January 1979. When Bradford defeated Lancaster University in the third leg by 215 points to 160.

Notable former students







}}

