[[Chikungunya]]

CATEGORIES: Arthropod-borne viral fevers and viral haemorrhagic fevers, Biological weapons, Health disasters in India, Insect-borne diseases, Tropical diseases

Chikungunya (in the Makonde language "that which bends up") virus (CHIKV) is an arthropod-borne virus, of the genus Alphavirus, that is transmitted to humans by virus-carrying Aedes mosquitoes. There have been recent breakouts of CHIKV associated with severe illness.
CHIKV infection causes an illness with a similar mode of transmission as dengue fever, with an acute febrile phase lasting two to five days, followed by a longer period of joint pains in the extremities. The pain associated with CHIKV infection of the joints may persist for weeks or months, or in some cases years.
Prevention is via mosquito control and preventing bite by infected mosquitoes. There is no specific treatment with medications used to help with symptoms.

Signs and symptoms

The incubation period of chikungunya disease ranges from one to twelve days, usually two to three. Its symptoms include a fever up to  Pedal oedema (swelling of legs) is observed in many patients, the cause of which remains obscure as it is not related to any cardiovascular, renal or hepatic abnormalities.
Typically, the fever lasts for two days and then ends abruptly. However, other symptoms—namely joint pain, intense headache, insomnia and an extreme degree of prostration—last for a variable period; usually for about five to seven days. Patients have complained of joint pains for much longer time periods; some as long as two years, depending on their age. Recovery from the disease varies by age.  Younger patients recover within 5 to 15 days; middle-aged patients recover in 1 to 2.5 months.  Recovery is longer for the elderly.  The severity of the disease as well as its duration is less in younger patients and pregnant women.  In pregnant women, no untoward effects are noticed after the infection.

Chronic disease

Observations during recent epidemics have suggested chikungunya may cause long-term symptoms following acute infection. Following the La Reunion outbreak in 2006, greater than 50% of subjects over 45 reported long term musculoskeletal pain

Virology

Chikungunya virus is an alphavirus with a positive sense single-stranded RNA genome of approximately 11.6kb. It is a member of the Semliki Forest Virus complex and is closely related to Ross River Virus, O'Nyong Nyong virus and Semliki Forest Virus.
Human epithelial, endothelial, primary fibroblasts and monocyte-derived macrophages are permissive for chikungunya virus in vitro and viral replication is highly cytopathic but susceptible to type I and II interferon.

Type 1 interferon

Upon infection with chikungunya, the host's fibroblasts will produce type 1 (alpha and beta) interferon.  Mice that lack the interferon alpha receptor die in 2–3 days upon being exposed to 102 chikungunya PFU, while wild type mice survive even when exposed to as much as 106 PFU of the virus. 
At the same time, mice that are partially type 1 deficient (IFN α/β +/−) are mildly affected and experience symptoms such as muscle weakness and lethargy.
Several studies have attempted to find the upstream components of the type 1 interferon pathway involved in the host's response to chikungunya infection. So far, no one knows the chikungunya specific pathogen associated molecular pattern.
Chikungunya counters the Type I interferon response by producing NS2, a non-structural protein that degrades Rpb and turns off the host cell's ability to transcribe DNA.

Diagnosis

Common laboratory tests for chikungunya include RT-PCR, virus isolation, and serological tests.

Prevention

The most effective means of prevention are protection against contact with the disease-carrying mosquitoes and mosquito control. These include using insect repellents with substances such as DEET (N,N-diethyl-meta-toluamide; also known as N,N'-diethyl-3-methylbenzamide or NNDB), icaridin (also known as picaridin and KBR3023), PMD (p-menthane-3,8-diol, a substance derived from the lemon eucalyptus tree), or IR3535. Wearing bite-proof long sleeves and trousers (pants) also offers protection.
In addition, garments can be treated with pyrethroids, a class of insecticides that often has repellent properties. Vaporized pyrethroids (for example in mosquito coils) are also insect repellents. Securing screens on windows and doors will help to keep mosquitoes out of the house. In the case of the day-active Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus, however, this will have only a limited effect, since many contacts between the mosquitoes and humans occur outside.

Vaccine

There are currently no approved vaccines available. A phase II vaccine trial, used a live, attenuated virus, developing viral resistance in 98% of those tested after 28 days and 85% still showed resistance after one year.

Treatment

Currently there is no specific treatment.

Chronic arthritis

In those who have more than two weeks of arthritis, ribavirin may be useful. The effect of chloroquine is not clear. It does not appear to help acute disease but there is tentative evidence that it might help the chronic arthritis. Steroids do not appear useful either.

Epidemiology

Chikungunya virus is an alphavirus closely related to the o'nyong'nyong virus,
Three genotypes of this virus have been described: West African, East/Central/South African and Asian genotypes.
Chikungunya is generally spread through bites from Aedes aegypti mosquitoes, but recent research by the Pasteur Institute in Paris has suggested chikungunya virus strains in the 2005-2006 Reunion Island outbreak incurred a mutation that facilitated transmission by Asian tiger mosquito (Aedes albopictus).
Concurrent studies by arbovirologists at the University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston, Texas, confirmed definitively that enhanced chikungunya virus infection of A. albopictus was caused by a point mutation in one of the viral envelope genes (E1). Archive Number 20071209.3973 Enhanced transmission of chikungunya virus by A. albopictus could mean an increased risk for chikungunya outbreaks in other areas where the Asian tiger mosquito is present. A recent epidemic in Italy was likely perpetuated by A. albopictus.
In Africa, chikungunya is spread via a sylvatic cycle in which the virus largely resides in other primates in between human outbreaks.
On 28 May 2009 in Changwat Trang of Thailand where the virus is endemic, the provincial hospital decided to deliver by Caesarean section a male baby from his chikungunya-infected mother, Khwanruethai Sutmueang, 28, a Trang native, to prevent mother-fetus virus transmission. However, after delivering the baby, the physicians discovered the baby was already infected with the virus, and put him into intensive care because the infection had left the baby unable to breathe by himself or to drink milk. The physicians presumed the virus might be able to be transmitted from a mother to her fetus, but without laboratory confirmation.T Rath (2009). Trang hospital found Chikungunya transmitted from a mother to her foetus, 28 May 2009. Accessed: 29 May 2009.
In December 2013, chikungunya was confirmed on the Caribbean island of St. Martin with 66 confirmed cases and suspected cases of around 181.cidrap.edu/news-perspective/2013/12/caribbean-chikungunya-outbreak-grows-poses-threat-us This is the first time in the Western Hemisphere that the disease has spread to humans from a population of infected mosquitoes.
In April 2014, Health officials in Antigua and Barbuda confirmed a single case in Antigua, and a few days previously, on 24th April 2014, the Minister of Health for St. Vincent and the Grenadines announced there were three confirmed cases on the island of Bequia, and declared this an outbreak.

History

The word chikungunya is thought to derive from a description in the Makonde language, meaning "that which bends up", of the contorted posture  of patients afflicted with the severe joint pain and arthritic symptoms associated with this disease. in 1955, following an outbreak in 1952 on the Makonde Plateau, along the border between Mozambique and Tanganyika (the mainland part of modern day Tanzania).
According to the initial 1955 report about the epidemiology of the disease, the term chikungunya is derived from the Makonde root verb kungunyala, meaning to dry up or become contorted.  In concurrent research, Robinson glossed the Makonde term more specifically as "that which bends up". Subsequent authors apparently overlooked the references to the Makonde language and assumed the term derived from Swahili, the lingua franca of the region.  The erroneous attribution of the term as a Swahili word has been repeated in numerous print sources. Many other erroneous spellings and forms of the term are in common use including "chicken guinea", "chicken gunaya", and "chickengunya".
Since its discovery in Tanganyika, Africa, in 1952, chikungunya virus outbreaks have occurred occasionally in Africa, South Asia, and Southeast Asia, but recent outbreaks have spread the disease over a wider range.
The first recorded outbreak of this disease may have been in 1779.

Society and culture

Biological weapon

Chikungunya was one of more than a dozen agents the United States researched as potential biological weapons before the nation suspended its biological weapons program."Chemical and Biological Weapons: Possession and Programs Past and Present", James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies, Middlebury College, 9 April 2002, accessed 14 November 2008.



Further reading

|url=
|title=Chikungunya
|accessdate=May 20, 2013
|publisher=European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control
|date=23 January 2008
}}




