[[Crowsnest Highway]]

CATEGORIES: Alberta Primary Highways, 1-216 series, Freeways in Alberta, British Columbia provincial highways, Trans-Canada Highway, Interior of British Columbia, Castlegar, British Columbia, Cranbrook, British Columbia, Medicine Hat, Taber, Alberta, Transport in Lethbridge, Highways in the Okanagan

The Crowsnest Highway, also known as the Interprovincial or, in British Columbia, the Southern Trans-Provincial, is an east-west highway,  and is designated as Highway 3 for its entire length.
The highway, which is mostly two lanes, was officially established in 1932, mainly following a mid-19th century gold rush trail originally traced out by an engineer named Edgar Dewdney.  It takes its name from the Crowsnest Pass, the location at which the highway crosses the Continental Divide between British Columbia and Alberta.  
In British Columbia, the first segment of the highway between the Trans-Canada Highway and Highway 5A is locally known as the Hope-Princeton Highway. In Alberta, the highway forms concurrencies with both the Red Coat Trail and the CANAMEX Corridor from Highway 2 west of Fort Macleod to Highway 4 at the eastern limits of Lethbridge.

Route description

British Columbia

The Crowsnest Highway's total length in British Columbia is  before beginning another long climb up Sunday Summit (1,284m, 4,280 ft).  Soon after Sunday Summit is the descent into Princeton, where Highway 5A begins.
After Princeton, the Crowsnest goes southeast for  southeast, and the Crowsnest reaches the Town of Osoyoos and a junction with Highway 97. The highway then proceeds to hug the Canada-U.S. border east through a stretch of switchbacks known as Anarchist Mountain, which is also the name of the upland rural community beyond the summit.  A few kilometres east of Anarchist Mountain, the Crowsnest enters the Regional District of Kootenay Boundary.
 east, passing through Grand Forks en route, the Crowsnest meets Highway 395 at the southern end of Christina Lake.
Further east from Christina Lake, the Crowsnest travels for  to the Burnt Flat Junction, where Highway 6 diverges south.
East of Burnt Flat, the Crowsnest heads through the Kootenay Pass on a stretch known as the Kootenay Skyway, or Salmo-Creston Skyway.   east, the highway reaches the boundary with Alberta at Crowsnest Pass.

Alberta

The Alberta portion of the Crowsnest Highway is designated Alberta Provincial Highway No. 3. east, crossing the Oldman River, to Highway 3A southeast of Monarch, which feeds Highway 23. 
The highway reaches the first access (Westview Drive W) to the City of Lethbridge  later, Highway 25 (University Drive W) branches to the north before crossing the Oldman River for the second time. The freeway segment ends at Mayor Magrath Drive, which branches as Highway 5 to the south. The highway intersects Highway 4 at the eastern limits of Lethbridge. 
 later at the Trans-Canada Highway in the City of Medicine Hat.

Major intersections

British Columbia

The following is a list of exits along the expressway and freeway portions of British Columbia Highway 3 (Crowsnest Highway).

=Hope to Princeton=

=Castlegar=

=Cranbrook=

Alberta

The following is a list of major intersections along Alberta Highway 3 (Crowsnest Highway) from west to east.

