[[Tom Bosley]]

CATEGORIES: 1927 births, 2010 deaths, Male actors from Chicago, Illinois, American Jews in the military, American military personnel of World War II, American male stage actors, American male television actors, American male voice actors, Burials at Forest Lawn Memorial Park (Hollywood Hills), Cardiovascular disease deaths in California, Deaths from heart failure, DePaul University alumni, Jewish American male actors, Tony Award winners, United States Navy sailors, Woodstock, Illinois, American male film actors

Thomas Edward "Tom" Bosley (October 1, 1927 – October 19, 2010) was an American actor. Bosley is best known for portraying Howard Cunningham on the long-running ABC sitcom Happy Days, and the titular character on the NBC/ABC series Father Dowling Mysteries. He also was featured in a recurring role on Murder, She Wrote. He originated the title role of the Pulitzer Prize–winning Broadway musical Fiorello!, earning the 1960 Tony Award for Best Performance by a Featured Actor in a Musical.

Early life

Bosley was born in Chicago, the son of Dora (née Heyman) and Benjamin Bosley. During World War II, Bosley served in the United States Navy. While attending DePaul University, in Chicago, in 1947, he made his stage debut in Our Town with the Canterbury Players at the Fine Arts Theatre. Bosley performed at the Woodstock Opera House in Woodstock, Illinois, in 1949 and 1950 alongside Paul Newman.

Career

Early roles and stage roles

Bosley played the Knave of Hearts in a Hallmark Hall of Fame telecast of Eva Le Gallienne's production of Alice in Wonderland in 1955. But his breakthrough stage role was New York mayor Fiorello H. La Guardia in the long-running Broadway musical Fiorello! (1959), for which he won a Tony Award. In 1994, he originated the role of Maurice in the Broadway version of Disney's Beauty and the Beast. Bosley also toured as Cap'n Andy in Harold Prince's 1994 revival of Show Boat.com
His first motion picture role was in 1963, as the would-be suitor of Natalie Wood in Love with the Proper Stranger. Other films include The World of Henry Orient, Divorce American Style, Yours, Mine and Ours, Gus and the made-for-television The Triangle Factory Fire Scandal. Bosley shared a heartfelt story about his experience with the Holocaust in the documentary film Paper Clips.  thumb|150px|Bosley as George W. Norris in the television anthology Profiles in Courage, 1965
While he isn't found in the credits, Tom Bosley also appeared in "Act One" in 1963.  His visage and voice are unmistakable.  He is seen about 50 minutes in, at the far right of a table of men, from where he speaks one line.
Among his early television appearances was in 1960 on the CBS summer replacement series, Diagnosis: Unknown, with Patrick O'Neal. In 1962, he portrayed Assistant District Attorney Ryan in the episode "The Man Who Wanted to Die" on James Whitmore's ABC legal drama The Law and Mr. Jones. About this time, he was a guest star on the NBC police sitcom, Car 54, Where Are You?
In 1969, Bosley appeared in a comical episode of The Virginian. He also played the boss of Debbie Reynolds's husband in her eponymous NBC series (1969-1970)

Happy Days and other notable film and television roles

Bosley's best known role was the character Howard Cunningham, Richie and Joanie Cunningham's father, in the long-running sitcom Happy Days. Bosley was also known for portraying Sheriff Amos Tupper on Murder, She Wrote. He portrayed the eponymous Father Frank Dowling on the TV mystery series, Father Dowling Mysteries. Among myriad television appearances, one notable early performance was in the "Eyes" segment of the 1969 pilot episode of Rod Serling's Night Gallery, directed by Steven Spielberg and starring Joan Crawford. In 1979 he played the role of Benjamin Franklin in the television mini-series The Rebels.
He played Ranger Tasker in Little Bigfoot 2: The Journey Home.
Bosley starred in the 2008 Hallmark Channel television movie Charlie & Me. In 2010, he appeared in The Backup Plan starring Jennifer Lopez, which was his final film.
In 1984, Bosley guest-hosted the "Macy's Fourth of July Fireworks Spectacular" with local newscaster Pat Harper.

Voice-over roles

Bosley was known for his unique gravelly voice, leading to a number of voice acting roles.  Bosley hosted The General Mills Radio Adventure Theater, a 1977 radio drama series for children. He voiced many cartoon characters, including Harry Boyle in the animated series Wait Till Your Father Gets Home. He provided the voice of the title character in the 1980s cartoon The World of David the Gnome and the shop owner Mr. Winkle in the children's Christmas special The Tangerine Bear. Bosley also narrated the movie documentary series That's Hollywood. Additionally, he played the narrator B.A.H. Humbug in the Rankin/Bass animated Christmas special The Stingiest Man In Town. Bosley was also the voice of Mister Geppetto, Pinocchio's 'dad' in Filmation's Pinocchio and the Emperor of the Night, released in 1987. Bosley was also the voice of Mr. Winkle in the animated Christmas movie The Tangerine Bear: Home in Time for Christmas! released in 2000.

Commercials

During the 1970s and 1980s, Bosley did several commercials for the Glad Sandwich and Garbage Bags.
Tom Bosley did radio commercials for the new Saturn Car Company a "different kind of car company," in 1990.
Later in life he was the television spokesman for SMC (Specialty Merchandise Corporation), a national wholesaler and dropshipper.
Bosley was also the "face" of LifeBack USA helping bring the benefits of Life Settlements to seniors, having himself sold an unwanted life insurance policy during his later life.

Death

Bosley died of heart failure on October 19, 2010, at a hospital in Rancho Mirage, California, near his home in Palm Springs, California."Tom Bosley, Father on 'Happy Days,' Dies at 83", Associated Press via The New York Times, October 19, 2010. He was 83 years old. His agent, Sheryl Abrams, said Bosley had been battling lung cancer. His remains are interred at Forest Lawn - Hollywood Hills Cemetery.

Happy Days lawsuit

On April 19, 2011, Bosley's estate and four of his Happy Days co-stars, Erin Moran, Don Most, Marion Ross and Anson Williams, filed a $10 million breach-of-contract lawsuit against CBS, which owns the show, claiming they had not been paid for merchandising revenues owed under their contracts. The cast members claimed they had not received revenues from show-related items, including comic books, t-shirts, scrapbooks, trading cards, games, lunch boxes, dolls, toy cars, magnets, greeting cards and DVDs where their images appear on the box covers. Under their contracts, they were supposed to be paid five percent from the net proceeds of merchandising if their sole image were used, and half that amount if they were in a group. CBS said it owed the actors $8,500 and $9,000 each, most of it from slot machine revenues, but the group said they were owed millions. The lawsuit was initiated after Ross was informed by a friend playing slots at a casino of a "Happy Days" machine on which players win the jackpot when five Marion Rosses are rolled.
In October 2011, a judge rejected the group's fraud claim, which meant they could not receive millions of dollars in potential damages.








