[[Columbia Center]]

CATEGORIES: Bank of America buildings, Office buildings completed in 1985, Office buildings in Seattle, Washington, Skyscrapers between 250 and 299 meters, Skyscrapers in Seattle, Washington

Columbia Center (formerly Bank of America Tower and Columbia Seafirst Center) is the tallest skyscraper in the downtown Seattle skyline, as well as (according to real structure and number of habitable floors) the tallest building in the State of Washington. It occupies most of the block bounded by Fourth and Fifth Avenues and Cherry and Columbia Streets. At  it is currently the second tallest structure on the West Coast (after Los Angeles' 72 stories U.S. Bank Tower), when the antenna is counted as structure. It contains 76 stories of class-A office space above ground and seven stories of various use below ground, making it the building with the most stories west of the Mississippi. Construction of this building began in 1982 and finished in 1985. It was designed by Chester L. Lindsey Architects who also designed the Fourth and Blanchard Building in the Belltown neighborhood, and was built by Howard S. Wright Construction.

Design

Columbia Center was designed by Washington architect Chester L. Lindsey. The base of the building is clad in Rosa Purino Carnelian granite.  The building's structure is composed of three geometric concave facades with two setbacks, causing the building to appear like three towers standing side by side.
Ground level elevation on the Fifth Avenue side of the building is higher than on the Fourth Avenue side; the part of Cherry Street it faces was identified as one of the steepest streets in the Central Business District with a slope of 17.1%.  There is an observation deck on the 73rd floor which offers views of Seattle and environs.  The top two floors of the building (75th and 76th) are occupied by the private Columbia Tower Club, which houses a restaurant, bar, library, and meeting rooms. An underground concourse connects the building to the nearby Seattle Municipal Tower and Bank of America Fifth Avenue Plaza.
The tower, originally proposed as Columbia Center, opened under the name Columbia Seafirst Center after its largest tenant and financier, Seafirst Bank, and then changed to the Bank of America Tower, when Seafirst, which had been owned by Bank of America since 1983, was fully integrated into Bank of America.  That name gave it the nickname "BOAT" (Bank of America Tower). In November 2005, the building's name was changed back to Columbia Center after the bank reduced its presence in the building. Bank of America still maintains office space within the building, including a bank branch.
Columbia Center plays host to the largest firefighter competition in the world.  About 1,500 firefighters from around the world yearly make the trek up 69 floors and 1,311 steps wearing their full firefighter gear.  This event benefits the local chapter of the Leukemia and Lymphoma society.

History

Martin Selig, a prominent Seattle developer, borrowed $205 million in 1981 to develop the property.
Controversy regarding the skyscraper's size contributed to the passage of a 1989 law called the Citizen's Alternative Plan (CAP) that enforced more stringent restrictions on the size of buildings in Downtown Seattle.
Equity Office Properties bought Columbia Center from Seafirst in 1998 for $404 million.
On July 1, 2013, the Columbia Center's observation deck, known as the Sky View, was remodeled from 270 degrees to a 360 degree viewing area. It is anticipated that the Sky View will rival the observation deck of the Space Needle.

September 11th attacks

On June 16, 2004, the 9/11 Commission reported that the original plan for the September 11, 2001, attacks called for the hijacking of ten planes, to be crashed into targets including the "tallest buildings in California and Washington State," which would have been the Columbia Center and the U.S. Bank Tower in Los Angeles.

Gallery

File:Seattle palace2.jpg|Columbia Center
File:Columbia Center in Seattle.jpg|Columbia Center when it was called the Bank of America Tower
File:Seattle_Columbia_centre.jpg|Columbia Center from below
File:Field of buildings with the pagoda (Japanese Temple to Buddha) inspired Space Needle, Seattle, Washington.jpg|The Space Needle from the observation deck
File:Seattle-Columbia-Center-looking-north-2320.jpg|Downtown Seattle from the observation deck
File:Columbia Center, by Ww7021.jpg|Beneath Columbia Center
File:Bank-of-america-seattle.jpg|Panorama from the observation deck
File:Columbia_observation_deck.jpg|Inside the observation deck








