[[Knot (unit)]]

CATEGORIES: Navigation, Units of velocity, Water transport

The knot (pronounced not) is a unit of speed equal to one nautical mile (1.852 km) per hour, approximately 1.151 mph. Worldwide, the knot is used in meteorology, and in maritime and air navigation—for example, a vessel travelling at 1 knot along a meridian travels approximately one minute of geographic latitude in one hour. 
Etymologically, the term derives from counting the number of knots in the line that unspooled from the reel of a chip log in a specific time.

Definitions

).

Usage

The speeds of vessels relative to the fluids in which they travel (boat speeds and air speeds) are measured in knots. For consistency, the speeds of navigational fluids (tidal streams, river currents and wind speeds) are also measured in knots. Thus, speed over the ground (SOG) (ground speed (GS) in aircraft) and rate of progress towards a distant point ("velocity made good", VMG) are also given in knots.

Origin

Until the mid-19th century, vessel speed at sea was measured using a chip log. This consisted of a wooden panel, attached by line to a reel, and weighted on one edge to float perpendicularly to the water surface and thus present substantial resistance to the water moving around it. The chip log was "cast" over the stern of the moving vessel and the line allowed to pay out.. The difference from the modern definition is less than 0.02%.

Modern use

Although the unit knot does not fit within the SI system, its retention for nautical and aviation use is important because standard nautical charts are on the Mercator projection and the scale varies with latitude. On a chart of the North Atlantic, the scale varies by a factor of two from Florida to Greenland. A single graphic scale, of the sort on many maps, would therefore be useless on such a chart. Since the length of a nautical mile, for practical purposes, is identical to a minute of latitude, a distance in nautical miles on a chart can easily be measured by using dividers and the latitude scales on the sides of the chart. Recent British Admiralty charts have a latitude scale down the middle to make this even easier.e.g. BA Chart 73, Puerto de Huelva and Approaches, 2002
Speed is sometimes incorrectly expressed as "knots per hour", which is in fact a measure of acceleration.

Aeronautical terms

Prior to 1969, airworthiness standards for civil aircraft in the United States Federal Aviation Regulations specified that distances were to be in statute miles, and speeds in miles per hour. In 1969 these standards were progressively amended to specify that distances were to be in nautical miles, and speeds in knots.For example, Part 23 of the Federal Aviation Regulations, amendment 23-7, September 14, 1969
The following abbreviations are used to distinguish between various measurements of airspeed:U.S. Federal Aviation Regulations, Part 1 Definitions and Abbreviations
Note that the indicated airspeed is close to the true airspeed only at sea level in standard conditions and at low speeds. At ), an indicated airspeed of 300 kn may correspond to a true airspeed of 500 kn in standard conditions.





Further reading


