[[Hearst Castle]]

CATEGORIES: Houses completed in 1947, State parks of California, Castles in California, History of California, Houses in California, Gardens in California, Mediterranean Revival architecture in California, Spanish Revival architecture in California, Spanish Colonial Revival architecture in California, Neoclassical architecture in California, Gothic Revival architecture in California, Landscape design history of the United States, National Historic Landmarks in California, Institutions accredited by the American Alliance of Museums, Historic house museums in California, Open air museums in California, Museums in San Luis Obispo County, California, History of San Luis Obispo County, California, Houses in San Luis Obispo County, California, Protected areas established in 1957, Hearst family

Hearst Castle is a National and California Historical Landmark mansion located on the Central Coast of California, United States.  It was designed by architect Julia Morgan between 1919 and 1947 for newspaper magnate William Randolph Hearst, who died in 1951. The Hearst Corporation donated the property to the state of California in 1957.  Since that time it has been maintained as a state historic park where the estate, and its considerable collection of art and antiques, is open for public tours. Despite its location far from any urban center, the site attracts about one million visitors per year.
Hearst formally named the estate "La Cuesta Encantada" ("The Enchanted Hill"), but usually called it "the ranch".  Hearst Castle and grounds are also sometimes referred to as "San Simeon" without distinguishing between the Hearst property and the adjacent unincorporated area of the same name.

History

Invitations to Hearst Castle were highly coveted during its heyday in the 1920s and 1930s. The Hollywood and political elite often visited, usually flying into the estate's airfield or taking a private Hearst-owned train car from Los Angeles.  Charlie Chaplin, Cary Grant, the Marx Brothers, Charles Lindbergh, Joan Crawford, Clark Gable, James Stewart, Bob Hope, Calvin Coolidge, Franklin Roosevelt, Dolores Del Rio, and Winston Churchill were among Hearst's A-list guests.  While guests were expected to attend the formal dinners each evening, they were normally left to their own devices during the day while Hearst directed his business affairs. Since "the Ranch" had so many facilities, guests were rarely at a loss for things to do. The estate's theater usually screened films from Hearst's own movie studio, Cosmopolitan  Productions. 
Hearst Castle was the inspiration for the "Xanadu" mansion of the 1941 Orson Welles film Citizen Kane, a fictionalization of William Randolph Hearst's career.
thumb|The Gothic Study. Patty Hearst, a granddaughter of William Randolph, related that as a child, she hid behind statues in the Neptune Pool while tours passed by. Although the main estate is now a museum, the Hearst family continues to use an older Victorian house on the property as a retreat — the original house built by George Hearst in the late 19th century. The house is screened from tourist routes by a dense grove of eucalyptus, to provide maximum privacy for the guests. In 2001, Patty Hearst hosted a Travel Channel show on the estate, and Amanda Hearst modeled for a fashion photo shoot at the estate for a Hearst Corporation magazine, Town and Country, in 2006.
Hearst Castle joined the National Register of Historic Places on June 22, 1972 and became a United States National Historic Landmark on May 11, 1976.
Hearst Castle was included as one of America's "10 Amazing Castles" by Forbes Travel. Forbes said, "Quite possibly the nation's most famous castle, William Randolph Hearst went to great lengths to bring back the best of European architecture — most notably ceilings from churches and monasteries — which were pieced back together in California to create his highly eclectic Central Coast getaway."

Location

Hearst Castle is located near the unincorporated community of San Simeon, California, approximately .  The region is sparsely populated because the Santa Lucia Range abuts the Pacific Ocean, which provides dramatic seaside vistas but few opportunities for development and hampered transportation.  The surrounding countryside visible from the mansion remains largely undeveloped.  Its entrance is adjacent to San Simeon State Park.
Hearst Castle was built on Rancho Piedra Blanca that William Randolph Hearst's father, George Hearst, originally purchased in 1865.  The younger Hearst grew fond of this site over many childhood family camping trips.  He inherited the ranch, which had grown to  and fourteen miles (21 km) of coastline, from his mother Phoebe Hearst in 1919.

Design

Hearst first approached American architect Julia Morgan with ideas for a new project in April 1915, shortly after he took ownership. Hearst's original idea was to build a bungalow, according to a draftsman who worked in Morgan's office who recounted Hearst's words from the initial meeting:
 I would like to build something upon the hill at San Simeon. I get tired of going up there and camping in tents. I'm getting a little too old for that. I'd like to get something that would be a little more comfortable. 
After approximately one month of discussion, Hearst's original idea for a modest dwelling swelled to grand proportions.  Discussion for the exterior style switched from initial ideas of Japanese and Korean themes to the Spanish Revival that was gaining popularity and that Morgan had furthered with her work on the Los Angeles Herald Examiner headquarters in 1915.  Hearst was fond of Spanish Revival, but dissatisfied with the crudeness of the colonial structures in California.  Mexican colonial architecture had more sophistication but he objected to its profusion of ornamentation.  Turning to the Iberian Peninsula for inspiration, he found Renaissance and Baroque examples in southern Spain more to his tastes.  Hearst particularly admired a church in Ronda and asked Morgan to pattern the Main Building towers after it.  The Panama-California Exposition of 1915 in San Diego held the closest approaches in California to the look Hearst desired.  He decided to substitute a stucco exterior in place of masonry in deference to Californian traditions.
By late summer 1919 Morgan had surveyed the site, analyzed its geology, and drawn initial plans for the Main Building.  Construction began in 1919 and continued through 1947 when Hearst stopped living at the estate due to ill health.  Morgan persuaded Hearst to begin with the guest cottages, because the smaller structures could be completed more quickly.
The estate is a pastiche of historic architectural styles that its owner admired in his travels around Europe.  Hearst was a prolific buyer who did not so much purchase art and antiques to furnish his home as he did build his home to get his bulging collection out of warehouses.  This led to incongruous elements, such as the private cinema, whose walls were lined with shelves of rare books.  The floor plan of the Main Building is chaotic due to his habit of buying centuries-old ceilings, which dictated the proportions and decor of various rooms.
Hearst Castle featured 56 bedrooms, 61 bathrooms, 19 sitting rooms,  knoll less than a mile southeast from Hearst Castle.org
One highlight of the estate is the outdoor Neptune Pool, located near the edge of the hilltop, which offers an expansive vista of the mountains, ocean and the main house.  The Neptune Pool patio features an ancient Roman temple front, transported wholesale from Europe and reconstructed at the site.  Hearst was an inveterate tinkerer, and would tear down structures and rebuild them on a whim. For example, the Neptune Pool was rebuilt three times before Hearst was satisfied. As a consequence of Hearst's persistent design changes, the estate was never completed in his lifetime.  
Although Hearst Castle's ornamentation is borrowed from historic European themes, its underlying structure is primarily steel reinforced concrete.  The use of modern engineering techniques reflects Morgan's background as a civil engineering graduate of the University of California, Berkeley and the first female architecture graduate of the École nationale supérieure des Beaux-Arts in Paris. Morgan designed tiles for the castle, and used several tile companies to produce them: Solon & Schemmel (San Jose), Grueby Faience Company (Boston), Batchelder (Pasadena), and California Faience (Berkeley). Albert Solon and Frank Schemmel came to Hearst Castle to perform the tile work. xi
During Hearst's ownership a private power plant supplied electricity to the remote location.  Most of the estate's chandeliers have bare light bulbs, because electrical technology was so new when Hearst Castle was built.

Size

The total square footage of the buildings on the estate exceeds 90,000 square feet (8,300 m²).  The area of Casa Grande, the "castle", is 60,645 square feet (5,634 m²).  The area of the guest houses on the property are:Facts and Stats from the official Hearst Castle website

Gallery

File:Hearst castle12.JPG|View from the mansion
File:HearstCastle-Darter-4.jpg|Hearst Castle, Veranda looking west
File:HearstCastle-Darter-1.jpg|Hearst Castle, Neptune Pool
File:Mashrabiyya.jpg|Hearst Castle, Exterior detail
File:HearstCastle-Darter-3.jpg|Hearst Castle, "Casa Grande"
File:Zebras at Hearst Castle.
File:Hearst Castle01.jpg|Hearst Castle dining room
File:Hearst Castle p1080617.jpg|The Roman (indoor) Pool
File:Hearst Castle 2011 Vacation.jpg|Egyptian Artifacts - Oldest Pieces In The Collection
File:Hearst_Castle_Vacation_2011.jpg|View of the vistas in the rear of the castle
File:Hearst_Castle_Vacation_2011-3.jpg|View of the main terrace/stack
File:Hearst_Castle_Vacation_2011-4.jpg|Front of The Casa Grande
File:Hearst_Castle_Vacation_2011-5.jpg|Rear Palm Trees & View
File:Hearst_Castle_2011-6.jpg|Italian Cypress Trees
File:Hearst_Castle_2011-7.jpg|Neptune Pool Main Courtyard
File:Hearst_Castle_2011-8.jpg|Neptune Pool Roman Pillars





Sources




