[[Blandford Forum]]

CATEGORIES: Civil parishes in Dorset, Towns in Dorset, Post towns in the DT postcode area

Blandford Forum (), commonly Blandford, is a   market town on the River Stour in Dorset, England. The town is noted for its Georgian architecture."It took a major fire and a pair of Bastards to give Blandford Forum the Georgian flavour for which it is celebrated."  
In the 2011 Census the town had a population of 11,694.lovemytown.co.asp Blandford is the administrative headquarters of North Dorset District Council. Blandford Camp, a military base, is sited on the hills a mile to the east of the town.

Location

Blandford is situated between Cranborne Chase and the Dorset Downs, at the south eastern corner of the Blackmore Vale,  southwest of Salisbury.

History

Blandford has been a fording point since Anglo-Saxon times, when it was recorded as Blaen-y-ford and as Blaneford in the Domesday Book, meaning ford of the river of blay, or bleak (Alburnus alburnus).v. "blay". By the 13th century it had become an important market town
In 1731 much of the town was destroyed in a fire. John and William Bastard rebuilt the town over the following 30 years and the town centre features Georgian architecture from the 1730s to 1760s.

Architecture

Blandford Forum is often given as an example of a Georgian town, as the entire centre was rebuilt at once in the 18th century, due to the fire of 1731, and is hence uniformly Georgian. All façades remain in fair to good condition, and notable buildings include the Corn Exchange, and the 1732 parish church of St Peter and St Paul, a classical building with a cupola on top of the tower. The interior remains relatively unaffected by Victorian interference and retains its galleries, font, pulpit, box-pews and mayoral seat. In 1893 the church was enlarged by moving the apsidal sanctuary out on rollers onto new foundations and building a new chancel behind it. (1968) Collins Pocket Guide to English Parish Churches; the South. London: Collins; p. 172
To the south of the town a six arch stone bridge spans the River Stour.

Demography

Five district electoral wards (Blandford Damory Down, Blandford Hilltop, Blandford Langton St. Unemployment varied between 0.5% and 2.3% between 1997 and 2009. Census figures for the town are shown in the table below:
|-
!  Census !!   1931 !!   1951 !!   1961 !!   1971 !!   1981 !!   1991 !!   2001
|-
| Population ||   3,370 ||   3,670 ||   3,570 ||   3,650 ||   3,920 ||   7,850 ||   8,760
|}

Economy

North Dorset District Council employs a large number of residents. Other employers in nearby parishes are the Hall & Woodhouse (Badger) Brewery, which supplies beer to public houses across the region, Tesco and Morrisons.
Blandford Camp is  north east of the town and has long been home to the Royal Corps of Signals, the communications wing of the British Army. The base incorporates a modern technology training college plus a cinema for military personnel, and the National Signals Museum – a museum of items relating to the history of the Royal Signals since its inception, which is open to the public. The museum contains many items of interest including uniforms, medals, signals equipment, and an Enigma cryptographic machine, used to produce German high level ciphers during World War 2 but cracked by the Allies.
There are a number of busy industrial estates (with, for example, builder's supply yards) on the bypass road to the North-East of Blandford.
The early 21st century saw a number of private housing development projects in and around Blandford. These developments were built  with traditional architectural styles.
A Georgian Fayre is held in the first week of May every other year in the town centre and attracts thousands of visitors. The Fayre combines Georgian celebrations with cultural presentations, stalls, and a fun fair on the meadows along the banks of the Stour.

Transport

Road

The town lies at the junction of the A350 and A354 main roads but is skirted by an eastern bypass. The main road running through the town is the B3082, connecting Blandford Forum to Wimborne Minster. Buses run from the town to locations including Poole, Bournemouth, Salisbury and Shaftesbury with the primary operator being Wilts & Dorset.

Air

The town is  from Bournemouth Airport.

Railway

The town is  from Poole railway station.
From 1860 to 1964,  and Broadstone, the railway was still open until the closure of the Blandford's goods yard in 1969, after which the track was lifted. The station was immortalised in 1964 in the song "Slow Train" by Flanders and Swann.

Education

Blandford Forum has two primary schools, Archbishop Wake and Milldown schools. A new Archbishop Wake school, built on the old St Leonards Middle School site at the bottom of Black Lane, opened in November 2008. The other feeder schools for The Blandford School are Blandford St Mary, Downlands, Dunbury and Durweston, Pimperne, and Spetisbury Primary Schools. Pupils move at the age of 11 to The Blandford School, which is a secondary school lying in the West of Blandford; the school also has a sixth form.
A number of independent schools are also located near Blandford, such as Bryanston School, Canford School, Clayesmore School, Hanford School, Knighton House School and Milton Abbey School.

Sport and leisure

Blandford Forum has a Non-League football club Blandford United F.C. who play at Blandford Recreation Ground.

Literature

Blandford features in Thomas Hardy's novels as the Wessex town of Shottesford Forum.[ref]
</ref>
In 1590, Edmund Spenser mentioned the Stoure flowing through the town in The Faerie Queene.[ref]
</ref>
Blandford Forum railway station which is now gone — the train line to Blandford was removed in the 1960s — was mentioned in the song Slow Train by Flanders and Swann.[ref]
</ref>

Natural history

An unpleasant local resident is the Blandford fly (Simulium posticatum), a biting insect. In recent years the weed beds in the river have been sprayed to reduce numbers.

Twin towns

Blandford Forum is twinned with:






