[[Origin of the Romanians]]

CATEGORIES: Romanian language, History of Romania, Origin hypotheses of ethnic groups

The origin of the Romanians has been for centuries subject to scholarly debate, often driven by political bias. Two basic theories can be differentiated; one theory posits  Daco-Romanian continuity and the other is an immigrationist theory, but interim views also exist. Scholars of the first school argue that the Romanians are mainly descended from the Daco-Romans, a people emerging through the cohabitation of the native Dacians and the Latin-speaking Roman colonists in the Roman province of Dacia north of the river Danube. Accordingly, they suggest that a significant part of the territory of modern Romania has continuously been inhabited by the Romanians' ancestors. Followers of the opposite view argue that the Romanians' ethnogenesis commenced in Moesia and other provinces south of the Danube. Consequently, they propose a northward migration of the Romanians across the river.

Theories on the Romanians' ethnogenesis

Romanians, known by the exonym Vlachs in the Middle Ages,
The exact place where these idioms developed has for centuries been debated by scholars because there is "a certain disaccord between the effective process of Roman expansion and Romanization and the present ethnic configuration of Southeastern Europe".


Theory of Daco-Romanian continuity

Followers of the continuity theory argue that the Romanians descended from the inhabitants of "Dacia Traiana",
Although for a millennium migratory peoples invaded the lands now forming Romania,


Immigrationist theory

Gottfried Schramm,
The Romanians' ancestors came into close contact with sedentary Slavic-speaking communities in the 10th century at the latest.


Further theories

The followers of the "admigration theory" argue that the formation of the Romanian people occurred in the former "Dacia Traiana" province, and in the central regions of the Balkan Peninsula.

Historic background

Three major ethnic groups
The Romans annihilated the Dacian kingdom to the north of the Lower Danube under Emperor Trajan in 106.
Meanwhile, from 313 under the Edict of Milan, the Roman Empire began to transform itself into a Christian state.
The next arrivals, the Bulgars, established their own state on the Lower Danube in 681.
The Byzantines occupied the greater part of Bulgaria under Emperor John I Tzimiskes (r. 969–976).
The first bishop consecrated for the Hungarians was a Greek from Constantinople,
The Byzantine authorities introduced new taxes, provoking an uprising in the Balkan Mountains in 1185.
The unification of small polities ruled by local Romanian leaders in Oltenia and Muntenia

Historiography: origin of the theories

As a result of their lack of state organization, Romanians are missing from historical sources older than the second half of the 10th century. 
Byzantine authors were the first to write of the Romanians.3.260), p. 195. 
The Russian Primary Chronicle from 1113 contains possible references to the Vlachs.
William of Rubruck wrote that the Vlachs of Bulgaria descended from the Ulac people,The Mission of Friar William of Rubruck (21.3.), p. 139. who lived beyond Bashkiria.
Poggio Bracciolini, an Italian scholar wrote around 1450 that the Romanians' ancestors had been Roman colonists settled by Emperor Trajan.
A Romanian legend on their origin, preserved in the Moldo-Russian Chronicle from around 1505,

Evidence

Written sources

=Sources on present-day Romania=

In the 400s BC, Herodotus was the first author to write a detailed account of the natives of south-eastern Europe.
Literary tradition on the conquest of Dacia was preserved by 3-4 Roman scholars.
Barbarian attacks against "Dacia Traiana" were also recorded.
In less than a century, the one-time province was named "Gothia",Paulus Orosius: The Seven Books of History against the Pagans (1.54.), p. 13. by authors including the 4th-century Orosius.
The 6th-century author Jordanes who called Dacia "Gepidia"The Gothic History of Jordanes (12:74), p. 72.
The Ravenna Geographer wrote about a Dacia "populated by the ... Avars",
Emperor Constantine VII's De Administrando Imperio contains the most detailed information on the history of the region in the first decades of the 10th century.
The Gesta Hungarorum from around 1150 or 1200
The late 12th-century chronicle of Niketas Choniates contains another early reference to Vlachs living north of the Danube.

=Sources on the Balkan Vlachs=

The words "torna, torna fratre"The Chronicle of Theophanes Confessor (258.10-21.), p. 381. recorded in connection with a Roman campaign across the Balkan Mountains by Theophylact Simocatta and Theophanes the Confessor evidence the development of a Romance language in the late 6th century.
John Skylitzes's chronicle contains one of the earliest records on the Balkan Vlachs.
The late 11th-century Kekaumenos relates that the Vlachs of the region of Larissa had "the custom of having their herds and families stay in high mountains and other really cold places from the month of April to the month of September".
Most information on the 1185 uprising of the Bulgars and Vlachs and the subsequent establishment of the Second Bulgarian Empire is based on Niketas Choniates's chronicle.

=Sources on Medieval Vlach lands=

The Vlachs' pre-eminent role in the Second Bulgarian Empire is demonstrated by Blacia, and other similar denominations under which the new state was mentioned in contemporary sources.
Pope Innocent III used the terms "Vlachia and Bulgaria" jointly when referring to the whole territory of the Second Bulgarian Empire.
An old Russian chronicleРусскій хронографъ, 2, Хронографъ Западно-Русской редакціи, in PSRL, XXII,2, Petrograd, 1914, p.211 investigated by V. SpineiSpinei, Victor. The Romanians and the Turkic Nomads North of the Danube Delta from the Tenth to the Mid-Thirteenth Century, Brill, 2009, p.118 writes about a raid of Romanians and Pechenegs in Transylvania in 1068. The identification of the Vlachs and the Bolokhoveni of the Hypatian Chronicle whose land bordered on the Principality of Halych is not unanimously accepted by historians (for instance, Victor Spinei refuses it).

Archaeological data

=To the north of the Lower Danube=

Tumuli erected for a cremation rite appeared in Oltenia and in Transylvania around 100 BC, thus preceding the emergence of the Dacian kingdom.
The conquering Romans destroyed all fortresses
Colonization and the presence of military units gave rise to the emergence of most towns in "Dacia Traiana": for instance, Ulpia Traiana Sarmizegetusa was founded for veterans, Apulum and Potaissa started to develop as canabae.
Archaeological finds suggest that attacks against Roman Dacia became more intensive from the middle of the 3rd century: an inscription from Apulum hails Emperor Decius (r. 249–251) as the "restorer of Dacia"; and coin hoards ending with pieces minted in this period have been found.  
The differentiation of archaeological finds from the periods before and after the Roman withdrawal is not simple, but Archiud, Obreja, and other villages produced finds from both periods.
A new cultural synthesis, the "Sântana de Mureş-Chernyakhov culture", spread through the plains of Moldavia and Wallachia in the early 300s.
Coin hoards ending with pieces from the period between 375 and 395 unearthed at Bistreţ, Gherla, and other settlements
In contrast with the regions east of the Carpathians, Transylvania experienced the spread of the "row grave" horizon of inhumation necropolises in the 5th century,
The earliest examples in Transylvania of inhumation graves with a corpse buried, in accordance with nomadic tradition, with remains of a horse were found at Band.
In the meantime, the "Suceava-Şipot horizon" disappeared in Moldavia and Wallachia, and the new "Dridu culture" emerged on both sides of the Lower Danube around 700.
Small inhumation cemeteries of the "Cluj group",
Thomas Nägler proposes that a separate "Ciugud culture" represents the Vlach population of southern Transylvania.

=Central and Northern Balkans=

Fortified settlements built on hill-tops characterized the landscape in Illyricum before the Roman conquest.
Hand-made pottery of local tradition remained popular even after potter's wheel was introduced by the Romans.
Emperors born in Illyricum, a common phenomenon of the period,
Under Justinian the walls of Serdica, Ulpianum and many other towns were repaired.
The new horizon of "Komani-Kruja" cemeteries emerged in the same century.

Linguistic approach

=Development of Romanian=

The grouping of Dacian, Illyrian and Thracian languages into a Thraco-Illyrian branch of the Indo-European language family, a widespread idea in the first half of the 20th century, has lost popularity because of the lack of convincing evidence.
Around 20% of the entries of the 1958 edition of the Dictionary of the Modern Romanian have directly been inherited from Latin.
In addition to words of Latin or of possible substratum origin, a great number of loanwords can be detected. and in fact a later dating of Romanian is further confirmed by the fact that most Slavic loans into Romanian derive from Serbian and Bulgarian rather than the preceding "Common Slavic" stage. J Horvath, P Wexler, 1997
The number of borrowings exceeds that of the inherited terms in several semantic fields, including that of the natural environment
In a work from 1976, the philologist Alexandru Rosetti states that of the basic words used most frequently, 60 percent are of Latin origin and 20 percent are of Slavic origin. Schiţă de istorie a limbii române de la origini şi pînă în zilele noastre p. 14 Lucian Boia also states that "the essential Romanian vocabulary is to a large degree Latin" 
An extreme view point sees Romanian simply as a 're-lexified' Slavic language - i.e. one where Vlach and Turkic boyars actively began introducing Romanisms into an essentially South Slavic language, as a sociolinguistic strategem to distinguish themselves politically and ethnically from neighbouring polities in Southeastern Europe. J Horvath, P Wexler. 1997 Chapter 4

=Romanian place names=

Place names provide a significant proportion of modern knowledge of the extinct languages of South-eastern Europe.
Although some towns preserved their ancient namesFor instance, Poetovio (Ptuj, Slovenia), and Siscia (Sisak, Croatia) (Tóth 2004, p. 60.). in South-eastern Europe up until now, the names of all Roman settlements attested in Roman Dacia in Antiquity disappeared.
Place names of Latin origin abound in the region of Lake Shkodër, along the rivers Drin and Fan and other territories to the north of the Viga Egnatia.



Notes



Sources

Primary sources

Secondary sources

Further reading




