[[Potters Bar]]

CATEGORIES: Towns in Hertfordshire, Hertsmere, Populated places established in the 13th century, Potters Bar, Post towns in the EN postcode area

Potters Bar is a town in the Hertsmere borough of Hertfordshire, England,Hertsmere Borough Council - Community Strategy First Review (PDF) 
The town originated in the early 13th century; it remained a small settlement economically with significant agriculture until the arrival of the Great Northern Railway in 1850.North Hertfordshire - A Housing Strategy for the London Commuter Belt Sub-region 2005 - 2008 (PDF)

Etymology

The origin of the Potters element of the town's name is uncertain but is generally thought to be either a reference to a Roman pottery, believed to have been sited locally, or alternatively to the Pottere family who lived in neighbouring South Mimms parish.  See also Temple Bar which is a gate by St Paul's Cathedral.

History

Potters Bar is located on the Great North Road, one of two road routes from the City of London to the north of England.
Potters Bar was historically part of MiddlesexPBHistory - Potters Bar, Middlesex and formed the Potters Bar Urban District of that county from 1934.Vision of Britain - South Mimms RD (historic map) In 1965 the district was transferred to Hertfordshire while most of the rest of Middlesex became part of Greater London. 33, s. 3 (1)
The urban district covered an area of . In 1939 it had a population of 13,681, increasing to 24,613 in 1971. Having been part of Middlesex, the area continued to form part of the Metropolitan Police District;  with the creation of the Greater London Authority it was transferred to the Hertfordshire Constabulary in 2000. 1999 c. 29

Geography

Climate

Potters Bar experiences an oceanic climate (Köppen climate classification Cfb) similar to almost all of the United Kingdom.

Transport

The A1 was built as a major 'arterial' road  and a crossroads at Bignells Corner linked it to the Barnet - St Albans road. Potters Bar is now also served by junctions 23 and 24 of the M25 motorway.
Potters Bar railway station is the highest on the line between London's King's Cross railway station and York. The First Capital Connect route serving Potters Bar links the town to various North London suburbs to the south before terminating at either King's Cross or Moorgate station. Northbound, the railway connects Potters Bar to Peterborough, Cambridge and Letchworth Garden City as well as towns en route to these destinations such as Hatfield, Welwyn Garden City and Stevenage.First Capital Connect - Network and Stations
The nearest London Underground station is at Cockfosters, which is approximately 2.5 miles south on the A111 from junction 24 of the M25.
Potters Bar has a bus depot that services local bus routes as well as some London bus routes. The 84 bus route travels south to New Barnet and north-west to St. Albans. Other routes include the 298 to Arnos Grove, the 313 to Enfield and Chingford, the 242 to Waltham Cross, the 398 to Borehamwood and the 610 to Enfield (on weekdays) and Hatfield. There are also school bus services run from various places to Dame Alice Owen's School and to Chancellor's School, as well as a service that runs once on a Wednesday from Hatfield to Potters Bar via Cuffley and Colney Heath, numbered 312.

Potters Bar rail accidents

Potters Bar has been the scene of three train crashes; two major and one minor. On 19 March 1898, a train crashed on the platform, but no one was killed or seriously injured. On the night of 10 February 1946, a local train hit buffers at the station, became derailed, and two express trains travelling in opposite directions struck the wreckage. On 10 May 2002, a northbound train derailed at high speed, killing seven people and seriously injuring another 11. On 10 May 2003, a small piece of art that resembles seven faces was erected at the station as a memorial to those killed.BBC News - In Depth Potters Bar Crash

Churches

There are eight churches in Potters Bar. These include St Mary the Virgin and All Saints Church at the top of the Walk, the first Anglican parish in the town created from the parish of South Mimms in the 1800s.

Education

There are six primary and infant state schools in Potters Bar and the surrounding area; they are Cranborne School, Ladbrooke JMI, Little Heath Primary, Oakmere Primary, Pope Paul RC Primary and Wroxham School.
There are five secondary schools in Potters Bar, which includes its large green buffer zone;
Mount Grace School is a mixed grant maintained School in Potters Bar opened in 1954.
Lochinver house school is an all-boys preparatory school in Potters Bar, which opened in 1947.  
Dame Alice Owen's School is a mixed grant-maintained school in Potters Bar.UniServity School Portal - Dame Alice Owen's School history The trustees of the Dame Alice Owen Foundation are the Worshipful Company of Brewers. It is a partly selective school (25% of its intake is on the basis of pupils doing well on its entry test).  It also reserves some places for children from Islington.  It specialises in languages, and offers GCSEs in a wide range of languages. It has recently become a music and science college in addition to being a language college.
The town also houses many Veterinary Medicine (mostly third, fourth and fifth-year) students from the Royal Veterinary College.

Sports, entertainment and recreation

Potters Bar has a King George's Field in memorial to King George V, which is situated behind the Furzefield Centre. There is a swimming pool and leisure centre run by Hertsmere council, which is home to St Albans and Hertsmere Canoe Club.C., Potters Bar Swimming Club (PBSC),Potters Bar Swimming Club a Scuba diving Club (the Potters Bar Sub Aqua Club), a tennis club, a cricket club, and a golf course. The Wyllyotts Centre is a theatre, cinema and events venue, and is also the location of the town's museum.Hertfordshire Showband
In 1983, the area around Potters Bar was used for the on-location filming of the comic-horror film, Bloodbath at the House of Death. Also, in 2005, David Walliams and Matt Lucas shot two scenes for the third season of the comedy, Little Britain, one scene at Mount Grace School gym, the other at a wedding shop on the High Street.

Notable residents

Twinnings

Notes and references




