[[Plus-minus sign]]

CATEGORIES: Elementary arithmetic, Mathematical symbols

  
The plus-minus sign () is a mathematical symbol with multiple meanings.
The sign is normally pronounced "plus or minus".

History

A version of the sign, including also the French word "ou" (meaning "or") was used in its mathematical meaning by Albert Girard in 1626, and the sign in its modern form was used as early as William Oughtred's Clavis Mathematicae (1631)..

Usage

In mathematics

In mathematical formulas, the  symbol may be used to indicate a symbol that may be replaced by either the + or − symbols, allowing the formula to represent two values or two equations.
For example, given the equation x2 = 1, one may give the solution as x = ±1. This indicates that the equation has two solutions, each of which may be obtained by replacing this equation by one of the two equations x = +1 or x = −1. Only one of these two replaced equations is true for any valid solution. This notation is commonly used in the quadratic formula
describing the two solutions to the quadratic equation ax2 + bx + c = 0.
Similarly, the trigonometric identity
can be interpreted as a shorthand for two equations: one with "+" on both sides of the equation, and one with "−" on both sides. The two copies of the ± sign in this identity must both be replaced in the same way: it is not valid to replace one of them with "+" and the other of them with "−". In contrast to the quadratic formula example, both of the equations described by this identity are simultaneously valid.
A third related usage is found in this presentation of the formula for the Taylor series of the sine function:
Here, the plus-or-minus sign indicates that the signs of the terms alternate, where (starting the count at 0) the terms with an even index n are added while those with an odd index are subtracted.  A more rigorous presentation of the same formula would multiply each term by a factor of (−1)n, which gives +1 when n is even and −1 when n is odd.

In statistics

The use of .
For example, " (5.9). In scientific usage it sometimes refers to a probability of being within the stated interval, usually corresponding to either 1 or 2 standard deviations (a probability of 68.3% or 95.4% in a Normal distribution).
A percentage may also be used to indicate the error margin. For example, .

In chess

The symbols  are used in chess notation to denote an advantage for white and black respectively.

Minus-plus sign

There is another symbol, the minus-plus sign (∓). It is generally used in conjunction with the "" sign, in such expressions as "x ± y ∓ z", which can be interpreted as meaning "x + y − z" or/and "x − y + z", but not "x + y + z" nor "x − y − z". The upper "−" in "∓" is considered to be associated to the "+" of "±" (and similarly for the two lower symbols) even though there is no visual indication of the dependency.  (However, the "±" sign is generally preferred over the "∓" sign, so if they both appear in an equation it is safe to assume that they are linked.  On the other hand, if there are two instances of the "±" sign in an expression, it is impossible to tell from notation alone whether the intended interpretation is as two or four distinct expressions.)  The original expression can be rewritten as "x ± (y − z)" to avoid confusion, but cases such as the trigonometric identity
are most neatly written using the "" sign. The trigonometric equation above thus represents the two equations:
but never
because the signs are exclusively alternating.

Encodings

Similar characters

The plus-minus sign resembles the Chinese characters 士 and 土, whereas the minus-plus sign resembles 干.






