[[Robert Fortune]]

CATEGORIES: Botanists with author abbreviations, British botanists, 1812 births, 1880 deaths, Scottish botanists, Botanists active in China, Botanists active in India, Botanists active in Japan, Plant collectors, People from Berwickshire, Burials at Brompton Cemetery, People from Duns

thumb|right|300px|Robert Fortune
Robert Fortune (16 September 1812 – 13 April 1880) was a Scottish botanist, plant hunter and traveller, best known for introducing tea plants from China to India.
Robert Fortune was born in Scotland on 16 September 1812, at Kelloe, Berwickshire.

Travels and botanical introductions to Europe

Robert Fortune was born in 1812, and died in 1880."Ten Things…You Never Knew About The Scottish." Britain 79.5 (2011): 98. Academic Search Complete. Web. 14 Nov. 2012. He was employed in the Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh, and later in the Horticultural Society of London's garden at Chiswick. As a result of his mission success, the British gained a large profit and they were able to manufacture tea throughout the world. "For All The Tea In China: How England Stole The World's Favorite Drink And Changed History." Humanist 70.6 (2010): 42-47. Academic Search Complete. Web. 14 Nov. 2012.
Following the Treaty of Nanjing in 1842, Fortune was sent out by the Horticultural Society to collect plants in China. The story of Robert Fortune's journey is told For All the Tea in China: How England Stole The World's Favorite Drink and Changed History by Sarah Rose. Fortune, Robert. A Journey to the Tea Countries of China; Including Sung-Lo and the Bohea Hills; With a Short Notice of the East India Company 's Tea Plantations in the Himalaya Mountains. London: John Murray, 1852.   
His travels resulted in the introduction to Europe of many new, exotic, beautiful flowers and plants. His most famous accomplishment was the successful transportation of tea from China to India in 1848 on behalf of the British East India Company. In total, Fortune stayed in China for about two and a half years, from 1848 to 1851. 
Similar to other European travellers of the period, such as Walter Medhurst, Fortune disguised himself as a Chinese merchant during several, but not all, of his journeys beyond the newly established treaty port areas. Not only was Fortune's purchase of tea plants forbidden by the Chinese government of the time, but his travels were also beyond the allowable day's journey from the European treaty ports.  Fortune travelled to some areas of China that had seldom been visited by Europeans, including remote areas of Fujian, Guangdong, and Jiangsu provinces.
Fortune employed many different means to transport tea plants, seedlings, and other botanical discoveries, but he is most well known for his use of Nathaniel Bagshaw Ward's portable Wardian cases to sustain the plants. Using these small greenhouses, Fortune introduced 20,000 tea plants and seedlings to the Darjeeling region of India. He also brought with him a group of trained Chinese tea workers who would facilitate the production of tea leaves. With the exception of a few plants which survived in established Indian gardens, most of the Chinese tea plants Fortune introduced to India perished. The technology and knowledge that was brought over from China, however, may have been instrumental in the later flourishing of the Indian tea industry.. 
In subsequent journeys he visited Formosa (modern day Taiwan) and Japan, and described the culture of the silkworm and the manufacture of rice. He introduced many trees, shrubs and flowers to the West, including the cumquat, a climbing double yellow rose ('Fortune's Double Yellow' (syn. Gold of Ophir) which proved a failure in England's climate) and many varieties of tree peonies, azaleas and chrysanthemums. A climbing white rose that he brought back from China in 1850, believed to be a natural cross between Rosa laevigata and R. banksiae, was dubbed R. fortuniana (syn. R. fortuneana) in his honor. This rose, too, proved a failure in England, preferring warmer climates.  Today both of these roses are still widely grown by antique rose fanciers in mild winter regions.  R. fortuniana also serves as a valuable rootstock in Australia and the southern regions of the United States. 
The incidents of his travels were related in a succession of books. He died in London in 1880, and is buried in Brompton Cemetery.

Publications

Books about Robert Fortune

Non-fiction

Fiction

Plants named after Robert Fortune

Introductions by Robert Fortune

Barnaby Miln, a descendant of Robert Fortune, prepared this list in 1997 with help from the Horticultural Department of the National Trust for Scotland, in advance of Christian Aid Scotland's The Robert Fortune Show Garden at the Royal Horticultural Society Show on 30 May – 1 June 1997, which he designed.  The show garden won a Royal Horticultural Society's Silver Gilt Medal (Flora Range), the highest awarded at that show. Several television gardening programmes were broadcast from the Show Garden together with a BBC Songs of Praise in which HRH The Princess Royal was shown the garden by Barnaby Miln.



Notes




