[[Army of the Republic of Macedonia]]

CATEGORIES: Military of the Republic of Macedonia, Government of the Republic of Macedonia

The Army of the Republic of Macedonia () is the name of the unified armed forces of the Republic of Macedonia. The Macedonian military is a defence force consisting of an army (Армија, Armija); an air force (Воено Воздухопловство, Voeno vozduhoplovstvo); and a professional military unit, the Macedonian Special Forces (Волци, Volci).

Objectives

The national defence policy aims to guarantee:
Its main interests remain the development and maintenance of a credible capability to defend the nation's vital interests and development of the Macedonia Army in such a way that ensures their interoperability with the armed forces of NATO and the European Union member states and their capability to participate in the full range of Alliance missions.Basis of the National Defence Policy And Doctrine Macedonian Ministry of Defence 

NATO accession

Military history

Conscription

The Republic of Macedonia abolished the compulsory military service as of October 2006. The Macedonian Army is the first in the region to consist fully of professional soldiers.setimes.com/cocoon/setimes/xhtml/en_GB/features/setimes/features/2006/04/21/feature-02 

Engagements

Insurgency in the Republic of Macedonia

The Army was heavily involved in trying to maintain order when the ethnic National Liberation Army (NLA) militant group attacked the security forces of the Republic of Macedonia at the beginning of January 2001. The conflict lasted throughout most of the year, although overall casualties remained limited to several dozen for either side, according to the sources from both of the sides in the conflict. The conflict was resolved by the adoption of the Ohrid Framework agreement in August 2001.

War in Afghanistan

The Republic of Macedonia has deployed 244 troops to Afghanistan as part of the NATO-led International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan. On 13 September 2011, Macedonian forces were filmed fighting alongside U.S. troops as they successfully repelled a Taliban attack on the ISAF headquarters in Kabul.NATO in Afghanistan - ISAF fighting insurgents in Kabul (1/2) - YouTube

Organization

The primary arm of the military in the Republic of Macedonia is the Army of the Republic of Macedonia (ARM). The ARM is commanded by the Minister of Defense through the Chief of the General Staff (CGS) of the ARM. Two Deputy CGS positions include the Deputy CGS for planning, operations and readiness, under whom operates the General Staff of the ARM, and the Deputy CGS for civil-military cooperation.

Macedonian Ground Force

It plays the key role in securing the safety and unity of the territory of the Macedonian republic. The army is divided into the rapid reaction force and strategic reserve forces. The rapid reaction forces represent the main active combat capability of the military and consist of the 1st Brigade. The strategic reserve forces provide reserve brigades that can be called up in times of emergency.

Macedonian Aviation Brigade

Macedonian Air Force and Air Defence has an important role as air support element of ground forces and in enhancing flight safety. One of the main goals of the air force is to build up an air surveillance system, which will be the cornerstone of the air traffic safety and airspace control. The air component is made up by the Aviation Forces and the Air Defense Forces.

Special Operations Regiment

Special Operations Regiment, is the main command for Special Units of the Army of Republic of Macedonia. Under the command of Special Operations Regiment are Ranger Battalion,as well as the Special Force Battalion "Wolves". 1 March 1994 - for the first time in the Macedonian Army was formed Special Forces Unit known as "Wolves".
Mission of Special Operations Regiment
Provides fully organized, trained and equipped units to perform special operations and conventional specific operations, independently or in cooperation with other units of the Army and other coalition forces, in all weather and land conditions during peace, crisis and war support peace and conflict prevention as part of overall efforts to support internal security and foreign policy of the Republic of Macedonia.
Missions outside the Republic of Macedonia
Received award:

Command for Training and Doctrines

Command for Training and Doctrines
Organization, coordination and dimensional task of training the individual soldiers, cadets, NCOs and officers of the active and reserve forces, support collective training commands and units of the Army of the Republic and the development of doctrine and lessons learned in the Army of Republic of Macedonia.
In order to improve the quality of training of the Army in 1996,were established several centers for basic and specialized training of individual soldiers, and collective training was done in the units. Centers were established to train: infantry, artillery, logistics, border guards, military police and reconnaissance.

Brigade for Logistics Support

Formed in 2001, the Logistics Command oversees all combat service support operations, and controls the Land Forces Logistic Bas and the Military Hospital.
Mission:
Planning, organizing, coordinating and executing logistical support to commands and units of the Army of the Republic of Macedonia,of level II and III.
Tasks:
1. Planning, organizing, coordinating and executing logistical support in the following functional areas:
2.Management with materials of all classes of supply for the commands and units of the Army
3. Storage and maintenance of material supplies for ARM according to specified criteria
4. Strengthening the logistics capacity of the Army in conducting training, work in field conditions, combat engagement and participation in missions
5. Coordinating support of allied forces in transit or maintain in the territory of the Republic of Macedonia
6. Execution of logistical support for the administrative bodies and bodies of local self-governments, organizations, associations, etc. (in special circumstances and for special orders and instructions)

Other commands

Other commands under the CGS include ELINT Center and the Honor Guard Unit.

Equipment

Vehicles

Artillery

Mortars- 700 total, ex-JNA,
Type-
60mm M57;
81/82mm M37;
81/82mm M69;
120mm M43.

Small arms

Retired Equipment

T-34/85 x4 Inherited from JNA, turned into museum pieces.  
BRDM-2 x10 Retired.  
T-55A x94 Military aid from Bulgaria, retired.  
BTR-60P x31 Retired.






