[[Vector Markup Language]]

CATEGORIES: User interface markup languages, Markup languages, XML-based standards, ISO/IEC standards, XML, Office Open XML, Graphics file formats, Vector graphics, Vector graphics markup languages

Vector Markup Language (VML) is an XML-based file format for two-dimensional vector graphics.
VML is specified in Part 4 of the Office Open XML standards ISO/IEC 29500 and ECMA-376. According to the specification, VML should be considered a deprecated format included in Office Open XML for legacy reasons only.
VML is pervasively used in MS Office 2007 (and later version) documents (i.e. Word, Excel and Powerpoint documents).

History

VML was submitted to the W3C in 1998 by Autodesk, Hewlett-Packard, Macromedia, Microsoft, and Vision.
Microsoft documented VML,

Syntax

Below is a VML instance as produced by Microsoft Excel 2010:
Note that, by specifying a root element named "xml", VML contravenes the XML Recommendation of the W3C, which states that names beginning 'x' 'm' 'l' are "reserved for standardization in this or future versions of this specification".
VML, when embedded within HTML markup, is read and processed by Microsoft Internet Explorer (but not other browsers); for example, the following example displays a solid blue oval:

Implementations

VML is used by most Microsoft Office applications, such as Microsoft Word and Microsoft Visio, within HTML files created using the 'Save As HTML' option (plain HTML or MHT). Such files retain complete vector information, and can be reopened for editing using other Microsoft applications, such as Microsoft PowerPoint. VML was natively supported by Microsoft's Internet Explorer up to version 9 inline within HTML, using an undefined version of SGML namespaces. Support for VML was dropped in Internet Explorer 10 and subsequent versions.tomshardware.html
Support for "ink annotations" in Office Open XML files was added to LibreOffice during the 3.7 development cycle.derivativezero.com/blog/2012/09/importing-ooxml-ink-annotations-into-libreoffice/
VML is not natively supported by most web browsers. Web browsers such as Mozilla Firefox, Opera, Safari or Google Chrome support SVG instead of VML.








