[[University of Glamorgan]]

CATEGORIES: Education in Cardiff, Educational institutions established in 1913, University of Glamorgan, Universities in Wales, Business schools in Wales, 1913 establishments in Wales, Educational institutions disestablished in 2013

The University of Glamorgan () was a university based in South Wales prior to the merger that formed the University of South Wales in April 2013. The university was based in Pontypridd, Rhondda Cynon Taf with campuses in Trefforest, Glyntaff, Merthyr Tydfil, Tyn y Wern (The Glamorgan Sport Park) and Cardiff. The university had four faculties, and was the only university in Wales which had no link with the University of Wales.

History

The University of Glamorgan was founded in 1913 as a School of Mines based in Trefforest, Pontypridd, serving the large coal mining industry in the South Wales Valleys. John Davies, Nigel Jenkins, Menna Baines and Peredur Lynch (2008) pg896 ISBN 978-0-7083-1953-6 The school was owned and funded by the major Welsh coal owners, through a levy of one tenth of a penny on each ton of coal produced by the companies involved. At the outset, the school had 17 mining diploma students, including three from China. The school was taken over by Glamorgan County Council during the Depression, and became Glamorgan Technical College in 1949, reflecting its expanding portfolio, and the Glamorgan College of Technology in 1958. By this time, the institution had expanded to offer a range of full-time, sandwich and part-time courses in science, technology and commerce, to which it added the first ever "Welsh for Adults" course in 1967. In 1970, the college became a polytechnic. Glamorgan Polytechnic merged with the Glamorgan College of Education in Barry and was re-designated as the Polytechnic of Wales in 1975, before being awarded university status as the University of Glamorgan in 1992.  
Between 2003 and the merger, the University had been engaged in an active "growth strategy", merging with Merthyr Tydfil College in 2004/5 and forming a "strategic alliance" with the Royal Welsh College of Music and Drama in 2006, so that the Royal College became part of the 'Glamorgan Group' of institutions. A new Students' Union building at the Treforest Campus was opened in September 2010. 
The University at the time of the merger served around 21,500 students,

Academic rankings

The last rankings showed that the University of Glamorgan was rated the top "new" university in Wales, and one of the top five Welsh universities, by the Sunday Times.
In November 2012, the University of Glamorgan was awarded the Times Higher Education award for "Outstanding Support for Students".

Reputation

The bulk of full-time students entered through the UCAS system with A-levels or equivalent qualifications and many of the University's degree courses are selective in that they require specific A-levels or above average grades for entry. 
In July 2012 the University of Glamorgan and the University of Wales, Newport announced that they had begun talks aimed at integrating the two institutions.
On 17 December 2012 it was announced that the name for the new university is the University of South Wales.

Campuses

The University had several campuses:

List of Former Faculties and Departments

Facilities

The halls of residence were based at the Treforest campus:
Mountain Halls Accommodation blocks opened in September 2011.
The Students Union was also on the Treforest campus. The Student Union was the home to a number of sports teams, sports clubs and societies as well as TAG, the student newspaper. The building opened in September 2010.
The Students' Union was one of only 7 buildings in Wales to be awarded with an internationally recognized RIBA award in 2011. 
The Union has also welfare, education and equality support and there was a democratic structure change to Student Council. 
Additional educational facilities included a 24-hour PC lab, wireless internet access in specified areas, world class equipment for nursing courses (including life sized dummies that simulate human beings, from breathing to giving birth), a TV studio, an Aerospace Centre (with its own plane), an on-campus radio studio, and two theatres. 

Awards

Notable Alumni



Mr. Windsor Coles C.B.E.,H.M. Principal Electrical Inspector (Wales) H.S.E/




