[[Patrick J. Kennedy]]

CATEGORIES: 1967 births, American people of Irish descent, Kennedy family, Living people, American Roman Catholics, Irish diaspora politicians, Members of the United States House of Representatives from Rhode Island, Members of the Rhode Island House of Representatives, People from Boston, Massachusetts, People from Providence, Rhode Island, People with bipolar disorder, Phillips Academy alumni, Providence College alumni, Rhode Island Democrats, 20th-century Roman Catholics, 21st-century Roman Catholics, Mental health activists



Patrick Joseph Kennedy II (born July 14, 1967) is an American politician. He is the former U.S. Representative for , serving from 1995 until 2011. He is a member of the Democratic Party. The district includes all of Bristol County and Newport County, and parts of Providence County. Kennedy did not seek re-election in 2010.
A member of the Kennedy political family, he is the younger son of the longtime Massachusetts Senator Ted Kennedy. At the time of his father's 2009 death, he was the last remaining member of the Kennedy family to serve in an elective office in Washington. When he retired in 2011, it was the first time since 1947 that there were no members of the Kennedy family in public office.

Early life and education

Patrick was born in Brighton, Massachusetts. He is the youngest of three children born to Senator Edward Moore "Ted" Kennedy (1932—2009) and musician/socialite/former model Virginia Joan Bennett (born 1936). His sister Kara (1960—2011) was a television/film producer and his brother Ted Jr. (born 1961) is a lawyer. Patrick was named after his patrilineal great-grandfather, businessman/politician Patrick Joseph "P. J." Kennedy (1858—1929).
He graduated from Phillips Academy in Andover, Massachusetts in 1986, and graduated with a Bachelor of Science degree from Providence College in Providence, Rhode Island in 1991.[ref]
</ref>

Rhode Island House of Representatives

Kennedy became the youngest member of the Kennedy family to hold elected office when, in 1988, he won election to the Rhode Island House of Representatives at age 21. He served two terms in the House serving District 9 in Providence, Rhode Island, choosing not to run for a third term. He was succeeded by Anastasia P. Williams.

U.S. House of Representatives

Committee assignments

From 1999 to 2001, he served as the chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee — the Democratic Hill committee for the U.S. House. It works to elect Democrats to the U.S. House and it plays a critical role in recruiting candidates, raising funds and organizing races in districts that are expected to yield politically notable or close elections. After his tenure as Chairman of the DCCC, Kennedy became a headliner at Democratic political events and fundraisers around the country. He was a Vice-Chairman of the Native American Caucus in the House of Representatives.
From 2001 until his retirement in 2011, Kennedy served on the U.S. House Committee on Appropriations and on its U.S. House standing subcommittees.

Political positions

He was a chief sponsor of one of the major pieces of legislation of 2008, the Mental Health Parity Act, a bill requiring most group health plans to provide coverage for the treatment of mental illnesses that is comparable to what they provide for physical illnesses.
He is a strong proponent of adding a comprehensive prescription-drug benefit to the U.S. Medicare and has consistently opposed attempts to privatize the Medicare program. Kennedy has also made numerous speeches advocating the reorientation of the U.S. health-care system to preventive care. He has received numerous awards for his health-care advocacy, including being named the recipient of the Lymphoma Research Foundation's Paul E. Tsongas Memorial Award as well as the Leukemia & Lymphoma Society Congressional Honors Award.

Health care

Kennedy is a vocal advocate for health care reform. During his career, he joined with Republican U.S. Senator Pete Domenici from New Mexico in introducing legislation that places mental illness under the umbrella of health insurance.
Among the rewards received on behalf of his work include the Society for Neuroscience — Public Service Award (2002), Eli Lilly and Company 2003 Helping Move Lives Forward Reintegration Awards, American Psychoanalytic Association 2003 President's Award, American Psychiatric Association Alliance award (2003), and the Depression and Bipolar Support Alliance — Paul Wellstone Mental Health Award (2003).
In a March 7, 2008, speech to the Cleveland City Club, Kennedy acknowledged having bipolar disorder and being a recovering alcoholic.  He and his siblings have legal custody of their mother, who has long struggled with alcoholism. Kennedy is co-founder of One Mind for Research, which seeks to increase resources and efficiency in brain disorder research.1mind4research.org/

Project SAM

Kennedy co-founded Project SAM (Smart Approaches to Marijuana) in 2013 with Kevin Sabet and David Frum. SAM advocates for a "commonsense, third-way approach to marijuana policy."

Political campaigns

Kennedy campaigned for the seat being vacated by U.S. Representative Ronald Machtley (who was retiring) in the 1994 Rhode Island 1st congressional district election. He won the election, defeating Republican candidate Kevin Vigilante. He was one of four Democrats in the 1994 congressional elections to win a congressional seat that had just been held by a Republican, while Republicans gained dozens of seats to take over the U.S. House. He has been re-elected in each subsequent election.
He considered running against Republican Lincoln Chafee in the 2000 U.S. Senate election in Rhode Island, later won by Chafee. During the 2000 U.S. Senate recruiting phase, U.S. Representative Richard A. Gephardt, then-U.S. House Minority Leader, appointed Kennedy to the U.S. House Committee on Appropriations, a high-profile assignment that led Kennedy to pass up the U.S. Senate opportunity for 2000. He again considered running against Chafee in 2006, but did not.
Kennedy did not run for another term in 2010. He finished his 8th term at the completion of the 111th United States Congress.

2008 presidential election

On January 28, 2008, Kennedy joined his father in endorsing Barack Obama in the 2008 U.S. presidential election, stating that Obama was the "perfect antidote to George Bush".[ref]
 [/ref] Prior to that, Kennedy had joined his first cousin Timothy Shriver in endorsing U.S. Senator Christopher Dodd from Connecticut.

Personal issues and incidents

Drug and alcohol use

Kennedy has acknowledged being treated for cocaine use during his teenage years, and admitted that he abused drugs and alcohol while he was a student at Providence College.  Despite being a cocaine, opiate, and alcohol addict, Kennedy became an anti-marijuana crusader.nytimes.html

Rape accusation against William Kennedy Smith

During Easter weekend in 1991, Kennedy and his father were in Palm Beach, Florida, along with Patrick's cousin, William Kennedy Smith. At Au Bar, Patrick met a 27-year-old Testas Restaurant waitress, Michelle Cassone, and Smith met another woman, Patricia Bowman. Both women returned with the Kennedys to the family's beachfront retreat, where a series of events took place that resulted in Smith being charged with raping Bowman. The prosecution alleged that the three Kennedys collaborated to cover up this alleged crime. In a widely covered trial, Smith was acquitted.  "William Kennedy Smith". "Crime Library"
on truTV. Retrieved August 31, 2009.[/ref]

Capitol Hill intoxicated-driving accident

On May 4, 2006, Kennedy crashed his automobile into a barricade on Capitol Hill in Washington, D.C., at 2:45 a.m.  A Capitol Police official said the congressman had appeared intoxicated when he crashed his car, but Kennedy claimed that he was merely disoriented from prescription medications Ambien and Phenergan.
[/ref] Anonymous sources are alleged to have seen Kennedy drinking at the nearby Hawk & Dove bar prior to the accident.[ref]
[/ref][ref]
[/ref] Kennedy also stated to officers that he was "late for a vote". However, the last vote of the night had occurred almost six hours earlier. The standard field sobriety test was not administered, and Kennedy was driven home by an officer.
On May 5, 2006, Kennedy admitted that he had an addiction to prescription medication and announced he would be re-admitting himself to a drug-rehabilitation facility at the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota where he has sought treatment for prior addictions. He has stated that he has no recollection of the car crash. On May 8, 2006, Kennedy got a show of support when he was endorsed by the Rhode Island Democratic Party. On June 5, 2006, Kennedy was released from drug rehabilitation.[ref]
[/ref]
On June 13, 2006, Kennedy made a deal with prosecutors and pleaded guilty to a charge of driving under the influence of prescription drugs.[ref]
[/ref] He was sentenced to one-year probation and a fine of $350. Two of the three charges (reckless driving and failure to exhibit a driving permit) were dismissed. He was also ordered to attend a rehabilitation program that includes weekly urine tests, twice-weekly meetings with a probation officer, near-daily Alcoholics Anonymous meetings and a weekly meeting of recovering addicts.
On Friday, June 12, 2009, Kennedy again announced that he has "checked into a medical facility for treatment". In a statement to the press, Kennedy said that his recovery is a "lifelong process" and that he will do whatever it takes to preserve his health. "I have decided to temporarily step away from my normal routine to ensure that I am being as vigilant as possible in my recovery," Kennedy said.

Rhode Island auto accident

In an earlier incident, on April 15, 2006, Kennedy was involved in an automobile accident with off-duty U.S. Coast Guard Warrant Officer Thomas Guthlein in Portsmouth, Rhode Island. Portsmouth police did not issue a citation to either driver..... It was just a regular traffic accident".

Political controversies

"Never worked"

In 2003, Kennedy was criticized for saying "I have never worked a fucking day in my life", which his staff later claimed was a satirical reference to repeated charges of his never having worked.

Retention of donor's money

In 2007, the Kennedy camp stated that they would retain $6,600 in donations from Democratic fundraiser Norman Hsu, who had been convicted that year of a Ponzi scheme fraud. Kennedy is one of the few Democrats not to return or donate these contributions.

Communion controversy

In February 2007, Kennedy was asked to refrain from receiving Holy Communion by his Bishop, Thomas Tobin. Kennedy later said that the bishop had asked priests not to give him the sacrament "because of the positions that I've taken as a public official," particularly on abortion. Tobin acknowledged that he had requested Kennedy not to receive communion but not that he had asked priests to deny Kennedy the sacrament.

Criticism of Senator Scott Brown

Kennedy criticized Republican Senator Scott Brown for demanding to be sworn in as a Senator as soon as the election results from the 2010 Massachusetts special senate election were certified. "Brown's whole candidacy was shown to be a joke today when he was sworn in early in order to cast his first vote as an objection to Obama's appointment to the NLRB," 

Troop withdrawal from Afghanistan

On March 10, 2010, Kennedy went on a tirade over the maneuvering stratagem to the war in Afghanistan during a debate of a measure calling for the end of the war. He yelled so loudly at times about the war in Afghanistan that he went hoarse until he was finally finished with his 3 minute time limit.
He anticipated that some would object to his demand to withdraw from Afghanistan by claiming such withdrawal would dishonor those who have already fallen. His comment was, "Somewhere—I can't believe I even heard this—someone said 'Oh, I can't go to a funeral, and tell the parents of someone who just died that they lost their child in vain'. Somewhere, I heard that during the Vietnam War." After requesting an additional 30 seconds and being granted the time, Kennedy also went after the media for lack of coverage of the war, citing only two press members in the gallery at the time and "24/7" media coverage of the resignation of Eric Massa.

Private life and family

He resides in Portsmouth, Rhode Island. Kennedy announced his engagement to sixth-grade history teacher Amy Savell (born c. 1979) (daughter of Jerry and Leni Savell) on March 28, 2011.patrickjkennedy. 2008), from her previous marriage to Mark Petitgout. They married on July 15, 2011 in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts. Patrick and Amy have two children:
His father, Massachusetts Senator Ted Kennedy, died on August 25, 2009. Patrick made a tearful eulogy at the funeral, saying that "He Ted would be very proud to see you all out here today paying a final respect and tribute to his memory". He further elaborated on his experiences with his father as a child, saying his father would stay at his bedside during his frequent bouts of ill health.
Patrick suffers from bipolar disorder.
When Kennedy decided not to run for reelection in 2010, he cited his decision on the fact that his life "has taken a new direction". Mark Weiner, a major Democratic fundraiser in Rhode Island and one of Kennedy's top financial backers, said "It's tough to get up and go to work every day when your partner is not there, I think he just had a broken heart after his father passed away."






