[[Foreign relations of the Republic of Macedonia]]

CATEGORIES: Foreign relations of the Republic of Macedonia


Foreign relations of the Republic of Macedonia are the efforts made by the Macedonian Ministry of Foreign Affairs abroad in the interests of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia.  The Ministry remains dedicated to increased Macedonian inclusion in international organizations, increased recognition by other nations, and assisting in global counter-terrorism operations, in addition to whatever diplomatic needs may arise, including Macedonia naming dispute with Greece. Standard bilateral relations also fall under the purview of the Ministry.

Key priorities

Key priorities in the foreign relations are:Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Macedonia: GOALS AND PRIORITIES

International recognition

The Republic of Macedonia became a member state of the United Nations on April 8, 1993, eighteen months after its independence from the former Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. It is referred within the UN as "the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia", pending a resolution, to the long-running dispute about the country's name. Unusually, the country's flag was not raised at UN Headquarters when the state joined the UN. Other international bodies, such as the European Union,
All UN member states currently recognise Macedonia as a sovereign state, but they are still divided over what to call it. A number of countries recognise the country by its constitutional name – the Republic of Macedonia – rather than the UN reference, notably four of the five permanent UN Security Council members (the UK, the United States, Russia, and the People's Republic of China) and over 130 other UN members.

List of countries and entities recognising the country and established diplomatic relations

List of countries and entities with no formal diplomatic relations with the country

Bilateral relations

Albania

Recently (Aug. 2008) they signed a treaty enabling visa-free movement between the countries. Both countries support each other's ethnic minorities in cultural, political and educational aspects. During the ethnic conflict in 2001, the Albanian government did not interfere and supported peaceful resolution. Albania had recognized Skopje under the UN provisional reference of the "former  Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia",United Nations, A/RES/47/225, 8 April 1993United Nations Security Council Resolutions 817 of 7 April and 845 June 18 of 1993, see UN resolutions made on 1993 abbreviated as FYROM.org

Bulgaria

Macedonia and Bulgaria have cooperative neighbourly relations. On 15 January 1992 Bulgaria was the first country to recognize the independence of the Republic of Macedonia.  Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Bulgaria, official website, 10 September 2011. Bulgaria has however refused to recognise the existence of a separate Macedonian nation and a separate Macedonian language. It argues that the Macedonians are a subgroup of the Bulgarian nation and that the Macedonian language is a dialect of  Bulgarian. This leads to some complications when signing treaties between these countries—they are signed with this long phrase in the end: "done in the official languages of the two states—Bulgarian language, according to the Constitution of Bulgaria and Macedonian language, according to the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia".
Macedonia has generally good relations with Bulgaria in the political, economic, and military spheres. The governments of the two countries work to improve business relations. Bulgaria supports the Macedonian bid to enter the EU and NATO. Bulgaria has also donated tanks, artillery, and other military technology to the Macedonian Army.
The rules governing good neighbourly relations agreed between Bulgaria and the Republic of Macedonia were set in the Joint Declaration of February 22, 1999 reaffirmed by a joint memorandum signed on January 22, 2008 in Sofia.  Sofia: Manfred Wörner Foundation, 2008. 80 pp.  (Trilingual publication in Bulgarian, Macedonian and English)  ISBN 978-954-92032-2-6
Reacting to the publication of a controversialMacedonia's first encyclopedia provokes protests.  Euranet, 23 September 2009.  BalkanInsight.Macedonian Encyclopaedia To Be Changed.  Eurasia Press and News, 24 September 2009.  EMportal, 26 September 2009. Euractiv, 13 October 2009. encyclopedia by the Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts (MANU) in 2009, Bulgaria warned that "it is unacceptable for a country aspirant for NATO and EU membership to resort to terminology typical for the ideology of the Cold War era," and that the encyclopedia "gives no contribution to strengthening of the neighborly relations and curbing down of the 'hatred speech'."Bulgaria joins growing criticism of Macedonian Encyclopedia.  Independent News Agency Makfax, 24 September 2009.
In connection with the administrative, police and other types of pressure allegedly being exercised on Bulgarian citizens and Macedonian citizens with Bulgarian self-identification in the Republic of Macedonia, on 4 August 2009 the Bulgarian Foreign Ministry declared that "Bulgaria will examine the approach of the Macedonian side in such cases as one of the criteria on the basis of which to assess the country's readiness to make the changes that would allow the European integration of the Republic of Macedonia."Bulgarian Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  Official website, 04.08.2009.
Bulgaria has proposed to sign a treaty (based on that 1999 Joint Declaration) guaranteeing the good neighbourly relations between the two countries, in order to enable Bulgarian support for the accession of the Republic of Macedonia to the European Union. The Sofia Echo, 31 July 2006. BalkanInsight, 17 March 2010.
During the last few years thousands of citizens of the Republic of Macedonia have applied for Bulgarian citizenship (amongst them Macedonia's former PM Ljubco GeorgievskiMacedonia's Former PM Ljubco Georgievski Received Bulgarian Citizenship, Macedonian News, July 16, 2006), with 42,372 having already received Bulgarian passports. In order to obtain the passport, the Macedonian citizens who apply for Bulgarian citizenship must prove that they have a Bulgarian origin and a Bulgarian national consciousness. Between 1 January to 18 November 2011, the Bulgarian council for citizenship considered 22,241 applications for citizenship, of which 13,607 were approved.Како преку ноќ се станува Бугарин, Утрински весник, 22.12.2011Македонци на брза лента за бугарски пасош, Утрински весник, 23.12.2011Macedonia Suffers from 'Bulgarian Citizenship Syndrome', Sofia News Agency

P.R. China and R.O. China

On 12 October 1993, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia and the Government of the People's Republic of China (PRC) established diplomatic relations with the Republic of Macedonia expressly declaring that the Government of the PRC is the sole legal government of China, and Taiwan as an inalienable part of the Chinese territory. The Government of the Republic of Macedonia affirmed it would not establish any form of official relations with Taiwan.Joint Commnique on the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations Between the People's Republic of China and the Repulbic of Macedonia
Notwithstanding the above, the Republic of Macedonia and the Republic of China on Taiwan (ROC) established diplomatic relations on 27 January 1999. The PRC was opposed to this and in retaliation vetoed the UN resolution renewing the mandate of the UNPREDEP (a peacekeeping force) in the Republic of Macedonia. On 28 April 1999, the Republic of Macedonia opened an embassy in Taipei, ROC.Joint Communiqué Between The People's Republic of China And The Republic of Macedonia On The Normalization of Relations On the same day, the ROC severed diplomatic relations with the Republic of Macedonia. In the joint communiqué between Macedonia and People's Republic of China, the Republic of Macedonia recognized "emphatically that there is but one China in the world, that the Government of the People's Republic of China is the sole legal government representing the whole of China and that Taiwan is an inalienable part of the Chinese territory".

Denmark

Israel

Mexico

Mexico and Macedonia established diplomatic relations in April 2001 . Both countries are members of the United Nations and have accredited Ambassadors to each other. Mexico is represented in Macedonia through its embassy in Belgrade, Serbia . Macedonia is represented in Mexico through its embassy in Washington, DC, USA.
Mexico has left the naming dispute between Greece and Macedonia to the United Nations for the issue to be resolved .

Serbia

Macedonia and Serbia traditionally have friendly relations. Serbia is a main trading partner and recognizes its neighbour under the constitutional name - Republic of Macedonia. Macedonians in Serbia are a recognized national minority, same as Serbs in the Republic of Macedonia. However, the non-recognition of the Macedonian Orthodox Church by the Serbian Orthodox Church and Macedonia's recognition of Kosovo as an independent state are disturbing the relations of these two countries.

Kosovo

Macedonia and Kosovo have very friendly and cordial neighbourly relations which mainly are due to the ethnic Albanian populations that Live inside Macedonia. In October 2008, the Republic of Macedonia recognized Kosovo as an independent state with plan to establish diplomatic relations. Kosovo recognized the neighbouring country under the constitutional name, Republic of Macedonia.Southeast European Times, Oct. 26 2008: Macedonia, Kosovo agree on border demarcation Kosovo and Macedonia have signed a Free Trade Agreement in 2005 to facilitate trade opportunities, investment conditions and improve good-neighbourly relations. Macedonian investments are the largest in Kosovo since its independence on 17 February 2008 year.UNMIK, Focus Kosovo: Kosovo's Free Trade Agreements

Greece

Macedonia and Greece have excellent economic and business relations, with Greece being the largest investor in the country. However, the indeterminate status of the Republic of Macedonia's name arises from a long-running dispute with Greece. The main points of the dispute are:Floudas, Demetrius Andreas; 
The naming issue was "parked" in a compromise agreed at the United Nations in 1993. However, Greece refused to grant diplomatic recognition to the Republic and imposed an economic blockade that lasted until the flag and constitutional issues were resolved in 1995.

Slovenia

Macedonia and Slovenia have very close political and economic relations. Once part of SFR Yugoslavia, the two republics declared independence in 1991 (Slovenia in June, Macedonia in September) and recognised each other's independence on 12 February 1992.Macedonian Ministry of Foreign Affairs - Established full diplomatic relations with the Republic of Macedonia Slovenia supports Macedonia's sovereignty, territorial integrity, its Euro-integration and visa liberalisation. In 2007, about 70 million euros were invested. Over 70 Slovenian companies are present on the Macedonian market.

Turkey

Due to historical and cultural mutualities and human bonds Macedonia and Turkey have very close and friendly relations.

United States

The United States and the Republic of Macedonia enjoy excellent bilateral relations.  The U.S. Liaison Office was upgraded to an Embassy in February 1996, and the first U.S. Ambassador to Skopje arrived in July 1996.  The development of political relations between the United States and Macedonia has ushered in a whole host of other contacts between the two states. In 2004, the United States recognized Macedonia under its constitutional name - Republic of Macedonia. The consul in New York City is Zvonko Mucunski.

Issues

Flag issue

The Republic of Macedonia's first post-independence flag caused a major controversy when it was unveiled. The use of the Vergina Sun on the flag was seen by Greece as territorial claim to the northern Greek region of Macedonia, where the golden larnax containing the symbol was unearthed in 1977 during excavations in Vergina by Greek archaeologist Manolis Andronikos. The Greek viewpoint was summed up in an FAQ circulated on the Internet in the late 1990s:

[/ref] 
The WIPO-protected Greek state symbol was removed from the flag under an agreement reached between the Republic of Macedonia and Greece in September 1995. The Republic agreed to meet a number of Greek demands for changes to its national symbols and constitution, while Greece agreed to establish diplomatic relations with the Republic and end its economic blockade.Floudas, Demetrius Andreas;  

Constitutional issue

The Republic of Macedonia's first post-independence constitution, adopted on November 17, 1991 included a number of clauses that Greece interpreted as promoting secessionist sentiment among the Slavophone population of northern Greece, and making irredentist claims on Greek territory. Article 49 of the constitution caused particular concern. It read:
The Greek government interpreted this as a licence for the Republic of Macedonia to interfere in Greek internal affairs. Given long-standing Greek sensitivities over the position of the country's minority groups, the government saw this as being the most serious of the three main issues affecting relations between the two countries; the issue of the republic's symbols, by contrast, was seen as being of much less substantive importance, even though it aroused the loudest political controversy. The Greek prime minister at the time, Constantine Mitsotakis, later commented that
The offending articles were removed under the 1995 agreement between the two sides.








