[[Lisa Murkowski]]

CATEGORIES: 1957 births, Alaska lawyers, Alaska Republicans, American people of French-Canadian descent, American people of Irish descent, American people of Polish descent, American Roman Catholics, Appointed United States Senators, Female United States Senators, Georgetown University alumni, Living people, Members of the Alaska House of Representatives, People from Anchorage, Alaska, People from Fairbanks, Alaska, People from Ketchikan Gateway Borough, Alaska, Republican Party United States Senators, United States Senators from Alaska, Willamette University College of Law alumni, Women state legislators in Alaska, American women lawyers

Lisa Ann Murkowski (born May 22, 1957) is the senior United States Senator from the State of Alaska and a member of the Republican Party. She was appointed to the Senate in 2002 by her father, Governor Frank Murkowski. After losing a Republican primary in 2010, she became only the third person ever to win a United States Senate election through write-in votes.
Born in Ketchikan, she is the daughter of former United States Senator and Alaska Governor Frank Murkowski. She received her B.A. from Georgetown University and her J.D. from Willamette University College of Law. After working as an attorney, she was elected to the Alaska House of Representatives in 1998 and was eventually elected House Majority Leader.
Murkowski was appointed to the United States Senate in 2002 and elected to a full term in 2004.  Her 2010 re-election grew turbulent when former magistrate judge Joe Miller defeated her in the Republican primary.  Murkowski mounted a longshot write-in campaign, winning the general election; the campaign made national headlines.  Murkowski is currently the only Republican Senator from any West Coast state.  

Early life, education, and early career

Murkowski was born in Ketchikan, Alaska, the daughter of Nancy Rena (née Gore) and Frank Murkowski. Her paternal great-grandfather was of Polish descent, and her mother had Irish and French Canadian ancestry. As a child, she and her family moved all over the state due to her father's job as a banker.
Murkowski earned a B.A. in economics from Georgetown University in 1980, the same year her father was elected to the U.S. Senate. She is a member of Pi Beta Phi sorority. She was an attorney in private practice in Anchorage, Alaska from 1989 to 1998. She also served, from 1990 to 1991, on the mayor's task force on the homeless.

Alaska House of Representatives

In 1998, Murkowski was elected to the Alaska House of Representatives and named as House Majority Leader for the 2003–2004 session. She never served as Majority Leader, due to her appointment to the Senate. Murkowski sat on the Alaska Commission on Post Secondary Education and chaired both the Labor and Commerce and the Military and Veterans Affairs Committees. In 1999 she introduced legislation establishing a Joint Armed Services Committee.

U.S. Senate career

Committee assignments

Caucus memberships

Political positions

Since winning re-election, her voting record has become more moderate when compared to her previous years in the Senate.alaskadispatch.adn.html She is a member of the Republican Majority For Choice, Republicans For Choice, and The Wish List (Women in the Senate and House), a group of pro-choice women Republicans.
Murkowski is a signer of Americans for Tax Reform's Taxpayer Protection Pledge.

Natives issues

Murkowski has helped protect and ensure that health care is delivered by the 100 percent Native American-owned and controlled Alaska Native Tribal Health Consortium and a network of tribally operated hospitals and clinics in rural Alaska hubs and villages. She is the first Alaskan to receive the award.

Healthcare

Murkowski opposed President Barack Obama's health reform legislation; she voted against the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act in December 2009,

Matthew Shepard hate crimes bill

Murkowski was one of five Republican senators who voted with Democrats for the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd, Jr. Hate Crimes Prevention Act. Vdare. 17 July 2009

Energy and environment

Murkowski is currently the Ranking Member on the Energy and Natural Resources Committee. She has given her support to efforts to drill for oil in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR).
Murkowski believes that recent technological developments have made drilling safer and more economical.
Murkowski introduced a bill that would block the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) from limiting the amount of greenhouse gases that major industries can produce. In a statement, Murkowski said, "We cannot turn a blind eye to the EPA's efforts to impose back-door climate regulations with no input from Congress."
In the wake of the 2010 Deepwater Horizon oil spill, Murkowski opposed a bill that would have raised the liability cap for oil spills from $75 million to $10 billion. She said that such a large cap would jeopardize various businesses, and that exposing companies to greater risk would make it impossible for smaller companies to compete.

Don't ask don't tell

Murkowski supported the repeal of don't ask, don't tell after careful consideration of the Department of Defense report. "Our military leaders have made a compelling case that they can successfully implement a repeal of 'don't ask, don't tell'," she said. "It is infinitely preferable for Congress to repeal the law, and allow the service chiefs to develop and execute a new policy, than to invite a court-ordered reversal of the law with no allowance for a military-directed implementation. I've heard from Alaskans across the state who believe it's time to end this discriminatory policy, and I agree with them."

Same-sex marriage

In 2004, Senator Murkowski voted in favor of a federal constitutional amendment to ban same-sex marriage. According to her spokesman, she wanted to protect the definition of marriage as between a man and a woman that Alaskans added to their state constitution in 1998.
On March 27, 2013, Murkowski said that her opinion on same-sex marriage was "evolving".

Controversies

In July 2007, Murkowski stated she would sell back land she bought from Anchorage businessman Bob Penney, a day after a Washington watchdog group filed a Senate ethics complaint against her, alleging that Penney sold the property well below market value.
In 2008, Murkowski amended her Senate financial disclosures for 2004 through 2006, adding income of $60,000 per year from the sale of a property in 2003, and more than $40,000 a year from the sale of her "Alaska Pasta Company" in 2005.Kate Klonick, "Murkowski Reveals Two More Murky Deals in Financial Disclosure Amendments", TalkingPointsMemo, June 17, 2008Lisa Murkowski Exposed In Kenai River Land Scam, Alaska Report, July 20, 2007

Political campaigns

Murkowski, while a member of the state House, was appointed by her father, Governor Frank Murkowski, to his own unexpired Senate seat in December 2002, which he had vacated after being elected governor. The appointment caused a controversy in the state, and eventually resulted in a referendum that stripped the governor of his power to directly appoint replacement Senators.

2004

Murkowski was elected to a full six-year term against former Governor Tony Knowles in the 2004 election, after winning a primary challenge by a large margin. The two were in a dead heat in polls. The centrist Republican Main Street Partnership, which wanted to run TV ads for Murkowski, was told there was no air time left to buy.

2010

Murkowski faced the most difficult election of her career in the August 24, 2010, Republican Party primary election against Joe Miller, a former U.S. magistrate judge
Following the outcome of the primary election, the Murkowski campaign floated the idea of her running as a Libertarian in the general election.
On September 17, 2010, Murkowski said that she would mount a write-in campaign for the Senate seat.
On November 17, 2010, it was reported by the Associated Press that Murkowski became the first Senate candidate in more than 50 years to win a write-in campaign, thereby retaining her seat. however, Miller appealed the decision to the state Supreme Court, and the results were not certified.[ref]


Electoral history



Personal life

Murkowski is married to Verne Martell.








