[[Pyrethrin]]

CATEGORIES:  Plant toxin insecticides, Pyrethroids, Plant toxin insecticides, Biological pest control, Pest control, Insecticides

The pyrethrins are a pair of natural organic compounds normally derived from Chrysanthemum cinerariifolium that have potent insecticidal activity.  Pyrethrins are neurotoxins that attack the nervous systems of all insects. When present in amounts not fatal to insects, they still appear to have an insect repellent effect. Pyrethrins are gradually replacing organophosphates and organochlorides as the pesticide of first choice. They are non-persistent, being biodegradable, and break down on exposure to light or oxygen. The chemical structure of pyrethrins inspired the production of a variety of synthetic insecticides called pyrethroids such as bifenthrin, permethrin, and cypermethrin.

History and biosynthesis

The pyrethrins occur in the seed cases of the perennial plant pyrethrum (Chrysanthemum  cinerariaefolium), which has long been grown commercially to supply the insecticide. 
Well after their use as insecticides, their chemical structures were determined by Hermann Staudinger and Lavoslav Ružička in 1924.  Pyrethrin I is a derivative of (+)-trans-chrysanthemic acid.McGraw-Hill Ryerson Chemistry 12 p.99 Michael Townsend  Pyrethrin II is closely related but one methyl group is oxidized to a carboxymethyl group, the resulting core being called pyrethric acid.  Knowledge of their structures opened the way for the production of synthetic analogues, which are called  pyrethroids.   In terms of their biosynthesis, pyrethrins are classified as terpenoids, being derived from dimethylallyl pyrophosphate, which combine by the action of the enzyme chrysanthemyl diphosphate synthase. Rivera, Bradley D. Swedlund, Gretchen J. King, Russell N. Bell, Charles E. Hussey, Jr., Donna M. Shattuck-Eidens, Wislawa M. Wrobel, Galen D. Peiser, and C. Dale Poulter "Chrysanthemyl diphosphate synthase: Isolation of the gene and characterization of the recombinant non-head-to-tail monoterpene synthase from Chrysanthemum cinerariaefolium" Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2001, volume 98, p 4373-4378.  

Production

Most of the world's supply of pyrethrin and Chrysanthemum cinerariaefolium comes from Kenya, which produces the most potent flowers.  Other countries include Croatia (in Dalmatia) and Japan. The flower was first introduced into Kenya and the highlands of Eastern Africa during the late 1920s. Now, Kenya produces as much as 70% of the world's supply of pyrethrum.

As an insecticide

Pyrethrins are used in many varieties of insecticide, fogging products and in some pet products and have been used as an insecticide for over 100 years.  In the 1800s, it was known as "Persian Insect Powder," "Persian Pellitory", and "Zacherlin". They affect the flow of sodium out of the nerve cells in insects, resulting in repeated and extended firings of the nerves, causing the insects to die. Pyrethrin and the synergists are biodegradable and rapidly disintegrate in sunlight and air, thus assuring that there will be no excessive build-up of insecticides dispensed in the area being treated.

Toxicity

The United States Department of Agriculture, as of 1972, has stated that synergized pyrethrum is "probably the safest of all insecticides for use in a food plant" Abraham, George. How to Keep Your Bulbs Over Winter. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, 1972-11-30, p. 3.  and that " a pyrethrum formulation is approved for use around foodstuffs." 








