[[UC Berkeley College of Engineering]]

CATEGORIES: University of California, Berkeley, Engineering universities and colleges in California, Educational institutions established in 1931, Science and technology in the San Francisco Bay Area

The College of Engineering (CoE) is one of 14 schools and colleges at the University of California, Berkeley. The College of Engineering as a whole is ranked third in the nation, after MIT and Stanford, according to the 2014 U.S. News & World Report rankings. It houses one of the most highly regarded and prestigious engineering programs in the world. The college was established in 1931 from a merger of the Colleges of Mechanics and the College of Civil Engineering. The College of Mining was integrated into the college in 1942. The college is currently situated in 11 buildings on the northeast side of the central campus, and also operates at the 150 acre (61 ha) Richmond Field Station. There are over 57,000 living graduates of the College of Engineering, living in all 50 states and nearly 100 countries, with the majority living in California.

Departments

The College of Letters and Science also offers a Bachelor of Arts in computer science, which requires many of the same courses as the College of Engineering's Bachelor of Science in EECS, but has different admissions and graduation criteria. Berkeley's chemical engineering department is under the College of Chemistry.

Students

There are approximately 3,200 undergraduates in the College of Engineering, representing all departments. Undergraduate admissions to the College of Engineering is more competitive than the University as a whole. For the 2011-12 application cycle, over 12,000 students applied and 13.2% were accepted.
85% of undergraduates admitted to the college graduate from the college, and 91% graduate from some college at UC Berkeley. The college has a 4-year graduation policy, with extra semesters approved only in certain cases. Engineering Student Services provides academic advising, peer tutoring, and career services to engineering students. Various student organizations are run in conjunction with the college, including Pioneers in Engineering, Hackers @ Berkeley, Berkeley Engineers and Mentors, and the Open Computing Facility. Many students belong to the student chapters of their corresponding professional organizations (e.g. the American Nuclear Society, American Society of Civil Engineers, or Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers).
Graduate admissions in the College of Engineering is administered by department. In fall 2013, there were 379 master's and 1,425 doctorate students in the college.
The college's enrollment is approximately 22% women. The proportion of women has increased over time, however, issues of gender disparity in the college remain. According to a 2011 survey, female engineers reported a high number of instances of passive harassment, discrimination, and judgment. The Society of Women Engineers (SWE) is one of the student groups representing women in the college.

Research units

All research facilities are managed by one of five Organized Research Units (ORUs):

Major research centers and programs

Notable projects

Student Organizations








