[[Ilium (band)]]

CATEGORIES: Musical groups established in 1990, New South Wales musical groups, Australian power metal musical groups

Ilium is an Australian melodic power metal band formed in Newcastle in 1998 as Iliad. Founding mainstay is guitarist-songwriter, Jason Hodges. Upon Adam Smith (ex-Oracle) joining on guitar they changed their name and have released five studio albums, Sirens of the Styx (18 December 2003), Permian Dusk (25 November 2005), Vespertilion (17 April 2007), Ageless Decay (22 June 2009) and Genetic Memory (26 August 2011).

History

Founding and early years: 1998–2002

Ilium were founded in Newcastle by former members of local power metal band, Oracle, with guitarist-songwriter Jason Hodges and vocalist Mark Snedden initially as Iliad in 1998.
Late in 1998 with the introduction of Adam Smith, also ex-Oracle, on guitar the group changed its name to Ilium. In 2002 they recorded a four-track eponymous extended play with Dungeon's vocalist and guitarist Lord Tim (aka Tim Grose) producing and adding backing vocals. Noonan left during recording sessions and Smith completed the bass guitar work. The EP included a cover version of Fleetwood Mac's "The Green Manalishi (With the Two Prong Crown)" in the vogue of Judas Priest's 1979 version. The other tracks were "Half-Life", "Semblance" and "Antigone" – the first two were solely written by Hodges, while the latter was co-written with Smith and Sneddon. Note: User may be required to click on 'Search again' and then 'Enter a title' or add Ilium at 'Performer'. Yet another ex-Oracle, Matthew Woodland, joined Ilium shortly before its release. The EP gained the attention of several labels, including Sentinel Steel boss Denis Gulbey, with Italian record company Adrenaline's metal label Steelheart signing the band.

Sirens of the Styx: 2003–2004

On 18 December 2003 Ilium issued their debut album, Sirens of the Styx, with Lord Tim producing again and Steve Moore providing drums. After recording the album, Peter Gilchrist joined on bass guitar, while drummer David Walmsley joined shortly thereafter.
Snedden left in July due to family and financial restraints, Lord Tim was recruited in his place, originally to complete the recording sessions but soon became a full-time member. Gilchrist and Walmsley both left Ilium at the end of 2003, Gilchrist was recorded on the demo tracks but bass guitar on the album was provided by Smith, with Walmsley completing his drum duties on the album before exiting. Tim's vocal style which was in tune with Smith and Hodges' vision, which helped Ilium garner international praise, whilst the production duties were taken over largely by Hodges and Smith. Late in 2004, Gilchrist and Walmsley rejoined Ilium, and Gilchrist's 15-year-old son Corey joined on keyboards, with his vocals providing extra body to their live performances. Corey Gilchrist auditioned to appear on the TV talent show, Australian Idol, and twice reached the top 100 but did not progress.

Permian Dusk: 2005–2006

Ilium's second album, Permian Dusk, was released on 25 November 2005. Walmsley left again as the album was being mastered and was replaced on drums by Dungeon's Tim Yatras. In October Corey was hit by a train and his foot was amputated, which forced both he and his father out of the band. Corey recovered and later appeared on Australian Idol getting into the semi-finals.
Permian Dusk received a positive review from Rock Hard, which gave it a score of 9.5/10 and led their reviewer, Wolfram Küper, to declare it as the best power metal album of the year. In November 2006, it was announced that Swedish keyboardist Kaspar Dahlqvist, a former member of various bands including Dionysus, Stormwind, Treasureland and Circle II Circle, had joined the Ilium line-up, though personal issues have meant that he was unable to continue with the band.

Vespertilion: 2007–2008

Ilium issued their third album, Vespertilion, on 17 April 2007, which received positive reviews. It included the next two instalments of their Beowulf trilogy with part two, "Desinence: Beowulf and the Serpent", and part three, "Beowulf: The Peroration", both co-written by Hodges, Smith and Snedden. Note: User may be required to click on 'Search again' and then 'Enter a title' or add Ilium at 'Performer'.
Rock Hard
Despite many reviews crediting Dahlqvist as keyboardist, it was Smith who played keyboards along with guitar and bass guitar. In November that year Lord Tim announced his departure from Ilium.

Ageless Decay: 2009–2010

The release of Ageless Decay in June 2009 brought outstanding reviews from the metal music scene in Europe.  The album features vocals by New Yorks Mike DiMeo which takes this band's music to places they have never been before.  Surprisingly the band is largely unknown in its home country of Australia.
Significant changes for the album Ageless Decay are the artwork by Dimitar Nikolov and the mixing and mastering by Tommy Hansen. The team of Hodges and Smith continue to gain attention to their songwriting abilities. Ageless Decay is distributed by Escape Music.

Image:Jason_Hodges_Mt_Royal.jpg|Jason Hodges
Image:JasonHodgessailing.jpg|Jason Hodges

Genetic Memory: 2011–present

In July 2010 the band announced that they were working on their fifth album Genetic Memory, as well as writing for a separate project entitled 'Enviro-Metal' (which will feature international guest musicians in order to raise money for wildlife protection programmes). The Genetic Memory album was released in August 2011 by Escape Music. Many claiming this album a step forward for Ilium in most areas.
2012 a new song named Greenpeace Music Video dedicated to Greenpeace produced by FanVision & Vida Production in cooperation with Ilium band, and in acting, written and directed by Diego Vida and composed by Ilium band with Lyrics by Jason Hodges and music by Adam Smith and voice by Mike DiMeo will be available for free on the web for promoting the new Rainbow Warrior ship. News of the next Ilium album has surfaced & is title 'My Misanthropia' featuring Lance King on vocals. No date for release has been disclosed.

Discography






