[[Dennis Skinner]]

CATEGORIES: Alumni of Ruskin College, British republicans, Democratic socialists, Derbyshire MPs, English atheists, Labour Party (UK) MPs, Living people, Members of the United Kingdom Parliament for English constituencies, People from Clay Cross, UK MPs 1970–74, UK MPs 1974, UK MPs 1974–79, UK MPs 1979–83, UK MPs 1983–87, UK MPs 1987–92, UK MPs 1992–97, UK MPs 1997–2001, UK MPs 2001–05, UK MPs 2005–10, UK MPs 2010–, 1932 births

Dennis Edward Skinner (born 11 February 1932) is a British Labour Party politician (nicknamed "The Beast of Bolsover") who has been the Member of Parliament (MP) for Bolsover since 1970, the Chairman of the Labour Party from 1988 to 1989, and has sat on the National Executive Committee numerous times since 1978.
Born in Clay Cross, Derbyshire, Skinner is the third of nine children of coal miner Edward Skinner, who was sacked after the 1926 general strike. Skinner himself worked as a miner for over 20 years, during which he became an NUM leader and Clay Cross Labour Party councillor. He is known for his left-wing views, acid tongue and for never missing a Commons session.
He is a member of the Socialist Campaign Group of Labour MPs.

Early life

Skinner was educated at Tupton Hall Grammar School (now Tupton Hall School) after passing the Eleven-plus a year early. He worked in the mines from 1949 to 1970, at Parkhouse Colliery in Clay Cross until it closed in 1962, then at Glapwell Colliery near Chesterfield. He joined the Labour Party in 1956.

Union and political career

Skinner was a member of the Derbyshire County Council from 1964 to 1970, and a Clay Cross councillor from 1960 to 1970. He was leader of the Derbyshire area of the National Union of Mineworkers between 1966 and 1970. He attended Ruskin College in his 30s, after attending a preparatory course run by the NUM at the University of Sheffield.
Skinner was elected MP for the Labour safe-seat of Bolsover in the 1970 general election. He has held the seat ever since. On taking his seat, he undertook publicly to stand down from Parliament at the age of 65 (therefore in 1997), just as he would have retired as a miner. He said this was so he would not be 'taking another man's job'. Nevertheless he has since stood and been re-elected in four General Elections. He was a strong supporter of the National Union of Mineworkers and its then leader Arthur Scargill in the 1984-85 miners' strike. Skinner is a member of the Socialist Campaign Group.
Skinner takes a liberal stance regarding social issues. He voted in favour of equalisation of the age of consent, civil partnerships, adoption rights for same-sex couples, and to outlaw discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation.
He had previously used this filibuster technique on 7 June 1985, when preventing a bill by Enoch Powell, which would have banned stem cell research, from being debated. He held up proceedings by moving a writ for a by-election in Brecon and Radnor.
In 2003, he was one of a large number of Labour MPs who voted against the Iraq War; he later rebelled against the party line when he voted against government policy to allow terror suspects to be detained without trial for 90 days. In March 2007, Skinner and 88 other Labour MPs voted against the government's policy of renewing the Trident Nuclear Missile System.
He supported David Miliband in the 2010 Labour leadership election, which was later won by David's brother, Ed Miliband.

Suspensions

Skinner has been suspended from Parliament on at least ten occasions, usually for "unparliamentary language" when attacking opponents. Infractions have included:

Queen's Speech jokes

Known for his republican, anti-monarchist sentiments, Skinner has regularly cracked jokes, usually about the Royal Family, during the annual Queen's Speech ceremony. He does this upon the arrival of Black Rod (the symbol of royal authority in the House of Lords) to summon MPs to hear the Queen's speech in the Lords' chamber. The best known, according to the New Statesman and other sources, are listed as follows:

Commons attendance

He often tells of turning up for work at his colliery after he had been elected as an MP, refusing to see it as his new occupation. This is the reason Skinner gives for refusing to miss any sitting in the House of Commons, saying that "if you missed a shift at the pit, you would get the sack". He also refuses to adopt the pairing system in which he can agree a mutual abstention with a Conservative MP, saying he won't cover for them whilst they "go swanning off to Ascot or to their boardrooms". In the 2004–2005 sitting of the House he claimed the least expenses for an MP who served the full year. He has never been a member of an All-Party Parliamentary Group; does not eat alongside parliamentary colleagues in the Commons dining room; does not take trips or holidays 'paid for' by others; never drinks in the Commons Bar; and stays in the House of Commons during the Queen's Speech at the State Opening of Parliament, as he advocates outright abolition of the House of Lords.
He usually sits on the first seat of the front bench below the gangway in the Commons (known as the "Awkward Squad Bench" because it is where rebel Labour Party MPs have traditionally sat) in a distinctive tweed jacket (whilst most other MPs wear suits) and signature red tie. He gained the sobriquet "the Beast of Bolsover" for falling foul of the procedures of Parliament, many of which are in his view archaic and contemptible. He was once described by the "Bagehot" opinion column in The Economist as a "hard-left oddball".






