[[CBC News Network]]

CATEGORIES: CBC News Network, Television channels and stations established in 1989, CBC News, 24-hour television news channels in Canada, English-language television stations in Canada

CBC News Network (formerly CBC Newsworld)  is a Canadian English language Category C specialty news channel owned and operated by the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC).  It broadcasts into over 10 million homes in Canada. It is the world's third-oldest television service of this nature, after CNN in the United States and Sky News in the United Kingdom. 
CBC News Network's French-language counterpart is Ici RDI, also owned by the CBC.

History

With CNN already being widely available in Canada, during the 1980s both private and public Canadian broadcasters began to apply for a licence for a similar 24-hour news service in Canada. In 1987 the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) awarded a licence to the CBC, and on July 31, 1989, CBC News Network (then known as CBC Newsworld) began broadcasting.
CBC News Network originally broadcast from studios in Halifax, Toronto, Winnipeg and Calgary. However, budget cuts over the years eventually forced the network to centralize most of its operations in Toronto and Calgary.
It is funded by cable subscriber fees and commercial advertising. Unlike the CBC's main television network, the channel cannot directly receive operational funds from the corporation's public funding allotment — although it does benefit from synergies with other CBC services, such as the ability to share reporters and programs with the main network.Decision CRTC 2000-3, CBC News Network's most recent CRTC license renewal
While sometimes thought to be a mandatory basic cable channel, there are in fact a number of Persona cable systems that do not carry CBC News Network at all. The channel was dropped by these systems in 2000, due to a fee dispute between Persona (then known as Regional Cablesystems) and the CBC.

Newsworld International

Some of CBC News Network's programming also aired on the now-defunct Newsworld International, a former American cable news network co-owned by the CBC and the Power Corporation of Canada. CBC Newsworld (as it was then known) produced some programming for Newsworld International, and scheduled programming from other news networks like BBC World, which did not air on the Canadian channel. 
Newsworld International was sold to Vivendi Universal in 2000, and sold again to Al Gore and Joel Hyatt in 2004. Newsworld continued to provide the network's programming until Gore and Hyatt launched their own network, Current TV, on August 1, 2005. In 2013, the channel was sold again to Al Jazeera Media Network and ultimately became Al Jazeera America on August 20, 2013.

2009 re-launch

On October 21, 2009, it was announced that CBC Newsworld would be re-branded as CBC News Network on October 26 as part of a larger re-launch of the CBC News division. A new lineup of programs was introduced to the network, with a greater emphasis towards live news coverage. New programs included CBC News Now, the channel's rolling news coverage, Power & Politics, The Lang and O'Leary Exchange, a business news program hosted by Amanda Lang and investor of Dragons' Den fame Kevin O'Leary,  and Connect with Mark Kelley.

CBC News Network HD

right|140pxIn January 2009, the CBC launched an HD simulcast of CBC News Network (then known as CBC Newsworld) originally called CBC Newsworld HD. The channel was renamed CBC News Network HD on October 26, 2009 to coincide with the rebranding of CBC Newsworld to CBC News Network.
It is currently available through all major TV providers except for Shaw Direct and Shaw Cable.

Programming

CBC News Network originally aired a number of magazine-style programs, along with hourly news updates. In recent years, the network has moved from that style of programming to focusing solely on live news programs and documentary programs, including The Passionate Eye and Rough Cuts, both formerly hosted by Michaëlle Jean, and Politics, a political affairs program which was hosted by Don Newman and aired twice daily. The Hour with George Stroumboulopoulos was launched in 2005 in an attempt to attract younger viewers; similar news-oriented talk shows, such as Pamela Wallin Live, CounterSpin, Face Off and Benmergui Live, also aired on the network in the 1990s.
The network's daytime schedule consists of the rolling newscast CBC News Now, which airs from 6 a.m. to 5 p.m. on weekdays and 7 a.m. to 5 p.m. on weekends. Instead of producing a separate morning news or noon-hour program, most CBC Television stations simulcast CBC News Now from 6 to 7 a.m. and 12 to 1 p.m. local time. 
Power & Politics with Evan Solomon airs from 5 to 7 p.m., followed by a business news program The Lang and O'Leary Exchange, hosted by Amanda Lang and Kevin O'Leary, from 7 to 8 p.m. Connect with Mark Kelley airs from 8 to 9 p.m., and a simulcast of the Atlantic Canadian edition of The National airs from 9 to 10 p.m. As of late-2013, it is followed by an additional hour of CBC News Now anchored by Ian Hanomansing out of CBC's Vancouver studio, followed by additional re-airings of The National,  repeat airings of earlier programs, and other CBC news programming such as the fifth estate, until the following broadcast day begins.

Anchors

Current

Past






