[[Kroger]]

CATEGORIES: Kroger, 1883 establishments in Ohio, Companies based in Cincinnati, Ohio, Companies established in 1883, Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange, Publicly traded companies of the United States, Supermarkets of the United States

The Kroger Company is an American retailer founded by Bernard Kroger in 1883 in Cincinnati, Ohio. By revenue, it is the country's largest supermarket chain, second-largest general retailer (after Walmart), with store formats that include supermarkets, superstores, department stores, convenience stores, and mall jewelry stores. Kroger-branded grocery stores are located throughout the Midwestern and Southern United States. Kroger also is parent to several "banner" chains, such as Ralphs in California.
Kroger's employees are mostly represented by collective bargaining agreements. Seventy-five percent of Kroger employees are represented by the United Food and Commercial Workers (UFCW).

History

Beginning

In 1883 Bernard 'Barney' Kroger invested his life savings of $372 (roughly equal to $) to open a grocery store in the Mount Airy neighborhood of Cincinnati. Kroger, the son of a merchant, had simple dictum: Be particular. Never sell anything you would not want yourself. Kroger tried many ways to satisfy customers. He experimented with making his own products, such as bread, so that customers would not need to go to a separate bakery.
In 1929 there were rumors of a Safeway-Kroger merger.Wall Street Journal, October 1, 1929
In the 1930s Kroger became the first grocery-chain to monitor product quality and to test foods offered to customers, and also the first to have a store surrounded on all four sides by parking lots.

1950s-1960s

Beginning in 1955, Kroger begun acquiring supermarket chains again; as it expanded into new markets. In three months, it purchased three supermarket chains. On May 13, Kroger entered the Houston, Texas market by acquiring the Houston-based 26-store chain Henke & Pillot.  In June of that same year Kroger acquired 18-store Krambo Food Stores, Inc. of the Milwaukee, Wisconsin area, which around the same time was already building six more stores. In late July, it purchased Childs Food Stores, Inc. of Jacksonville, Texas. Childs also had a presence in Arkansas and Louisiana. In January 1956, the company bought out Big Chain Stores, Inc. a chain of seven stores based in Shreveport, Louisiana, later combining it with the Childs group. All of these chains were eventually converted to the Kroger banner in 1966. Kroger exited Milwaukee in the 1970s. Speculation occurred that it would return to Milwaukee in 2008, when Roundy's was rumored to be for sale, but it never happened.
Amidst all the acquisitions, in September 1957, Kroger sold off its Wichita, Kansas store division, then consisting of 16 stores, to J. S. Dillon and Sons Stores Company, then headed by Ray S. Dillon, son of the company founder.
In October 1963, the 56-store chain Market Basket was acquired by Kroger, providing them a foothold in the lucrative southern California market. Prior to this time, Kroger had no stores west of Kansas.
Kroger opened stores in Florida under the SupeRx and Florida Choice banners from the 1960s until 1986, when the chain decided to exit the state and sold all of its stores; Kash n' Karry bought the largest share. Recently, retail analysts have begun to speculate about whether Kroger may capitalize on the misfortunes of Albertsons and Food Lion and re-enter Florida again.

1970s

In the 1970s, Kroger became the first grocer in the United States to test an electronic scanner, and the first to formalize consumer research.
Although Kroger has long operated stores in the Huntsville-Decatur area of northern Alabama (as a southern extension of its Nashville, Tennessee, region), it has not operated in the state's largest market, Birmingham, since the early 1970s, when it exited as a result of intense competition from Winn-Dixie and local chains Bruno's Supermarkets and Western Supermarkets.
Kroger entered the Charlotte market in 1977 and expanded rapidly throughout the 1980s when it bought some stores from BI-LO. However, most stores were in less desirable neighborhoods and did not fit in with Kroger's upscale image. Less than three months after BI-LO pulled out, that company decided to re-enter the Charlotte market, and in 1988 Kroger announced it would leave the Charlotte market and put its stores up for sale. In an ironic twist, Ahold bought Kroger's remaining stores in the Charlotte area. 11-17-1988

1980s

Kroger opened a number of stores in the Western Pennsylvania region, encompassing Pittsburgh and surrounding areas until the early 1980s, when the U.S. began experiencing a severe economic recession. The recession had two significant and related effects on Kroger's operations in the region. First, the highly cyclical manufacturing-based economy of the region declined in greater proportion than the rest of the U.S., which undercut demand for the higher-end products and services offered by Kroger. The second effect of the economic recession was to worsen labor-management relations which led to a protracted labor strike in 1983 and 1984. During the strike, Kroger withdrew all of its stores from the Western Pennsylvania market, including some recently opened "superstores" and "greenhouses." The new superstores in Western Pennsylvania, which included at least the one at North Huntingdon Township (Irwin, Pa.) and another at Cranberry Township, were Kroger's state-of-the-art facilities. They were equipped with optical (bar-code) check-out scanners that were new to the industry, and especially to the region. In addition to the usual meat/dairy/produce departments, they contained a separate bakery, deli, cheese shop, and seafood counter, amenities that have come to define the modern suburban grocery store. In an innovation that did not define future trends, the new superstores also included extensive non-foods departments that sold among other things, televisions, and other electronics. Hence, the closure of these newly opened, trend-setting facilities represented an abrupt retreat in the region.
Kroger's exit ceded the market to lower-cost, locally owned rivals, most notably Giant Eagle and the SuperValu-supplied Shop 'n Save and FoodLand chains. (Ironically, Kroger bought Eagle Grocery company, whose founders went on to create Giant Eagle.) Kroger still maintains a presence in the nearby Morgantown, West Virginia, Wheeling, West Virginia, and Weirton, West Virginia/Steubenville, Ohio areas where Giant Eagle has a much smaller presence and the SuperValu-supplied stores are virtually nonexistent, though in all of these cases Walmart remains a major competitor and Aldi is the only other supermarket with any market overlap.
Kroger entered the competitive San Antonio, Texas market in 1980 but pulled out in mid-1993. On June 15, 1993, the company announced it would close its 15 area stores 60 days later.
The chain closed several stores around Flint, Michigan in 1981, which were converted by local businessman Al Kessel to a new chain called Kessel Food Markets.
In 1982, Kroger sold the 65-store Market Basket chain it had operated for several years in southern California. The stores were reverted to the Boys Markets branding, after acquiring the chain. Boys Markets was acquired by the Yucaipa Companies in 1989. When Yucaipa acquired Ralphs, the Boys brand disappeared.
In 1983, The Kroger Company acquired Dillon CompaniesDillon Companies, Inc., answers. David Dillon, a fourth-generation descendant of J.S. Dillon, the founder of Dillon Companies, is now the CEO of Kroger. In the 1990s, Kroger acquired Great Scott (Detroit), Pay Less Food Markets, Owen's Market, JayC Food Stores, and Hilander Foods.
In northeastern Ohio, Kroger had a plant in Solon, Ohio, which is a suburb of Cleveland, until the mid-1980s. When that plant shut down, Kroger closed its northeastern Ohio stores in the Cleveland, Akron and Youngstown areas. Some of those former Kroger stores were taken over by stores like Acme Fresh Markets, Giant Eagle and Heinens.
Kroger opened and had about 50 stores in St. Louis until it left the market in 1986, saying that its stores were unprofitable. Most of its stores were bought by National, Schnucks, and Shop 'n Save.
Safeway (excluding the Randalls chain) exited the Houston market in early 1988. It sold many of its own properties to Kroger, the market leader in the region, which is still followed by Randalls (now owned by Safeway) today.
Kroger also experienced a similar withdrawal from Chattanooga, Tennessee in 1989. Many of these stores were sold to the local grocery chain Red Food, which was in turn bought by BI-LO in 1994. Today, Chattanooga is the only metropolitan market in Tennessee in which Kroger does not operate.

1990s and beyond

In 1997, Kroger merged with the then fifth-largest grocery company Fred Meyer, along with its' subsidiaries, Ralphs, QFC, and Smith's.
In the late 1990s, it acquired many stores from Super Fresh as it exited many markets in the South.
Kroger also swapped all ten of its Greensboro, N.C.-area stores in 1999 to Matthews, N.C.-based Harris Teeter for 11 of that company's stores in central and western Virginia. Kroger still maintains a North Carolina presence in the Raleigh-Durham area. In the Raleigh-Durham area, Kroger closed its North Raleigh store in the Wakefield Commons shopping center on July 9, 2011 because the location failed to meet sales expectations. After the closure, Kroger will operate 16 stores in the Triangle. Kroger had a store in Greenville from the 1980s until 2010 when it sold it to Harris Teeter. A store in Wilson opened in 2002, but closed two years later.
Long the dominant grocer in western Virginia, Kroger entered the Richmond, Virginia market in 2000, where it competes against market leaders Martin's (including former Ukrop's stores) and Food Lion. Kroger entered the market by purchasing Hannaford stores that either already existed or were being built in Richmond. Hannaford purchases also included the competitive Hampton Roads market where it now competes with Farm Fresh, Harris Teeter, and Food Lion. Wal-Mart Supercenters are also major competitors in both markets, and the chain briefly competed against Winn-Dixie, which has now exited Virginia.
In 2001, Kroger acquired Baker's Supermarkets from Fleming Companies, Inc.
Albertsons exited the San Antonio and Houston markets in early 2002, selling many of the Houston stores to Kroger.
In 2004, Kroger bought most of the old Thriftway stores in Cincinnati, Ohio, when Winn-Dixie left the area. These stores were reopened as Kroger stores.
In 2007, Kroger acquired Scott's Food & Pharmacy from SuperValu Inc.
In 2008, Kroger began a partnership with Murray's Cheese of New York City.  Murray's Cheese counters within Kroger stores sell a variety of artisanal cheese from all parts of the world. 
In August 2010, Kroger and Publix were among potential bidders for the aforementioned BI-LO chain in the southeast. Neither of those chains, however, would give additional details.
In 2011, Kroger sold its Hilander Foods chain to Schnucks. Schnucks has since re-branded the chain.
On July 9, 2013, Kroger announced its acquisition of the 212 stores of Charlotte-based Harris Teeter in a deal valued at $2.5 billion and assume $100 million in the company's outstanding debt.  The Harris Teeter acquisition marks Kroger's return to the Charlotte market after a 25-year absence.
On September 20, 2013, It was announced that David Dillon would be retiring as CEO of the Kroger Co. effective January 1, 2014 to be succeeded as CEO by W. Rodney McMullen, current COO of the company, and that David Dillon would remain on as Chairman of the Board through the end of 2014.
In 2013, Kroger announced the spouses of company's unionized workers would no longer be covered by the company's insurance plan. The company cited the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act as a prime reason for the move. The benefit cut affects roughly 11,000 workers in Indiana.
In 2014, Kroger launched a new campaign called fresh and friendly, where every Kroger employee in retail should at least say hello in an attempt to gain a customer.

Chains

Combination Food & Drug Stores

Multi Department Stores

Price Impact Stores

Marketplace Stores

Jewelry Stores

Convenience Stores

Former chains

Kroger Marketplace

Kroger Marketplace is a chain of big-box stores. The brand was introduced in 2004 in the Columbus, Ohio area, which lost the Big Bear and Big Bear Plus chains in Penn Traffic's Chapter 11 bankruptcy. The Kroger Marketplace format is based on the Fry's Marketplace stores that the Arizona division of Kroger is currently operating.
