[[Director of National Intelligence]]

CATEGORIES: United States Directors of National Intelligence, United States intelligence agencies, Directors of intelligence agencies

The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) is the United States government official – subject to the authority, direction, and control of the President – required by the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 to:
Further, by Presidential policy directive signed in October 2012, the DNI was given overall responsibility for Intelligence Community whistleblowing and source protection through Presidential Policy Directive 19.
Under , either the Director or the Principal Deputy Director of National Intelligence should be an active-duty commissioned officer in the armed forces or have training or experience in military intelligence activities and requirements. Only one of the two positions can be held by a military officer at any given time. The statute does not specify what rank the commissioned officer will hold during his or her tenure in either position, but historically a four-star general or admiral has served. On July 20, 2010, President Obama nominated retired Lt. Gen. James R. Clapper for the position. Clapper was confirmed by the Senate on August 5, 2010, and replaced acting Director David C. Gompert. The prior DNI was retired Navy four-star admiral Dennis C. Blair, whose resignation became effective May 28, 2010. Dennis C. Blair to resign as director of national intelligence, Washington Post. Published May 21, 2010. Retrieved June 3, 2010. 
On July 30, 2008, President Bush issued Executive Order 13470,Executive Order 13470 amending Executive Order 12333 to strengthen the DNI's role."Bush Orders Intelligence Overhaul", by Associated Press, July 31, 2008

History

Founding

Before the DNI was formally established, the head of the Intelligence Community was the Director of Central Intelligence (DCI), who concurrently served as the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA).
The 9/11 Commission recommended to establish the DNI position in their 9/11 Commission Report not released until July 22, 2004, as they had identified major intelligence failures that called into question how well the Intelligence Community was able to protect U.S. interests against foreign terrorist attacks.
Senators Dianne Feinstein, Jay Rockefeller and Bob Graham introduced  S. 2645 on June 19, 2002 to create the Director of National Intelligence position. Other, similar, legislation soon followed. After considerable debate on the scope of the DNI's powers and authorities, the United States Congress passed the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 by votes of 336–75 in the House of Representatives, and 89–2 in the Senate. President George W. Bush signed the bill into law on December 17, 2004. Among other things, the law established the DNI position as the designated leader of the United States Intelligence Community and prohibited the DNI from serving as the CIA Director or the head of any other Intelligence Community element at the same time. In addition, the law required the CIA Director to "report" his agency's activities to the DNI.
Critics say compromises during the bill's crafting led to the establishment of a DNI whose powers are too weak to adequately lead, manage and improve the performance of the US Intelligence Community.  In particular, the law left the United States Department of Defense in charge of the National Security Agency (NSA), the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), and the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA). (The limited DNI role in leading the U.S. Intelligence Community is discussed on the Intelligence Community page.)

History (2005–2007)

On February 17, 2005, President George W. Bush named U.S. Ambassador to Iraq John Negroponte to the post, pending confirmation by the Senate. It was reported that President Bush's first choice for Director of National Intelligence was former Director of Central Intelligence Robert M. Gates, who was serving as president of Texas A&M University; however, Gates declined the offer.com (2005) Bush names Negroponte intelligence chief. Retrieved May 14, 2006. Negroponte was confirmed by a Senate vote of 98 to 2 in favor of his appointment on April 21, 2005, and was sworn in by President Bush on that day.
On February 13, 2007, John Michael McConnell became the 2nd Director of National Intelligence, as John Negroponte became Deputy Secretary of State.
Donald M. Kerr was confirmed by the U.S. Senate to be Principal Deputy Director of National Intelligence on October 4, 2007 and sworn in on October 9, 2007. Kerr, from Virginia, was most recently the Director of the National Reconnaissance Office, and previously the Deputy Director for Science and Technology at the U.S. CIA and earlier in his career the Assistant Director of the Justice Department's FBI.
Declan McCullagh at News.gov. This effectively made the DNI website invisible to all search engines and in turn, any search queries.  has been configured to allow access to all directories for any agent.
In September, 2007, the Office of the DNI released "Intelligence Community 100 Day & 500 Day Plans for Integration & Collaboration". These plans include a series of initiatives designed to build the foundation for increased cooperation and reform of the U.S. Intelligence Community.gov

Office of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI)

The Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 established the Office of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI) as an independent agency to assist the DNI.  The ODNI's goal is to effectively integrate foreign, military and domestic intelligence in defense of the homeland and of United States interests abroad.
On March 23, 2007, DNI Mike McConnell announced organizational changes, which include:
The ODNI continued to evolve under succeeding directors, culminating in a new organization focused on intelligence integration across the community.  The ODNI has six centers and 15 Offices that, together with the centers, support the Director of National Intelligence as the head of the Intelligence Community (IC) in overseeing and directing implementation of the NIP and acting as the principal advisor to the President, the National Security Council, and the Homeland Security Council for intelligence matters related to national security. The six ODNI centers include:  

ODNI Organization

The ODNI is divided into core, enabling, and oversight offices.  The Principle Deputy Director (PDDNI) to the DNI, in a role similar to that of a Chief Operating Officer, oversees operation of ODNI offices, manages Intelligence Community (IC) coordination and information sharing,  reinforces the DNI's intelligence-integration initiatives, and focuses on IC resource challenges.

=Core mission=

The core mission functions of the ODNI are organized under the Deputy DNI for Intelligence Integration (DDNI/II).  The DDNI/II facilitates information sharing and collaboration through the integration of analysis and collection, and leads execution of core mission functions.  These include:

=Mission enablers=

Mission enablers include policy, engagement, acquisition, resource, human capital, financial, and information offices.

=Oversight=

Oversight offices include the General Counsel, civil liberties, public affairs, Inspector General, Equal Employment Opportunity, and legislative affairs functions.

Directors of National Intelligence

Principal Deputy Directors of National Intelligence

Director of the Intelligence Staff/Chief Management Officer

Intelligence Community Inspector General

Deputy Directors of National Intelligence

Assistant Directors of National Intelligence

Assistant Deputy Directors of National Intelligence









Articles

