[[Minimal pair]]

CATEGORIES: Phonology

In phonology, minimal pairs are pairs of words or phrases in a particular language, which differ in only one phonological element, such as a phoneme, toneme or chroneme  and have distinct meanings. They are used to demonstrate that two phones constitute two separate phonemes in the language. 
Many phonologists in the middle part of the 20th century had a strong interest in developing techniques for discovering the phonemes of unknown languages, and in some cases setting up writing systems for these languages. The major work of Kenneth Pike on the subject has the title Phonemics: a technique for reducing languages to writing. Modern phonology is much less interested in such issues, and the minimal pair is consequently considered to be of  little theoretical importance.
As an example for English vowels, the pair "let" + "lit" can be used to demonstrate that the phones . An example for English consonants is the minimal pair of "pat" + "bat". The following table shows other pairs demonstrating the existence of various distinct phonemes in English. All the possible minimal pairs for any language may be set out in the same way.
Phonemic differentiation may vary between different dialects of a language, so that a particular minimal pair in one accent is a pair of homophones in another. This does not necessarily mean that one of the phonemes is absent in the homonym accent; merely that it is not contrastive in the same range of contexts.

Other types of minimal pair

In addition to the minimal pairs of vowels and consonants provided above, others may be found:
Many languages show contrasts between long and short vowels and consonants. A distinctive difference in length is attributed by some phonologists to a unit called a chroneme. Thus in Italian we find the following minimal pair based on long and short /l/:
However, in such a case it is not easy to decide whether a long vowel or consonant should be treated as having an added chroneme, or should simply be treated as a geminate sound, i.e. as two phonemes.
Classical Latin, German, some italian dialects, almost all Uralic languages, Thai, and many other languages have also distinctive length in vowels. Consider, for example, the cŭ/cū minimal pair in the dialect spoken near Palmi (Calabria, Italy):
Minimal pairs for tone contrasts in tone languages can be established; some writers refer to this as a contrast involving a toneme. For example, the Kono language distinguishes high tone and low tone on syllables: 
Languages in which stress may occur in different positions within the word often have contrasts that can be shown in minimal pairs. Thus in Greek:
English speakers are able to hear the difference between, for example, 'great ape' and 'grey tape', though phonemically the two phrases are identical: ) are phonetically identical.
In some languages, like Italian, word-initial consonants are geminated after certain vowel-final words in the same prosodic unit. Sometimes this phenomenon can create some syntactic-gemination-minimal-pairs:
In this case, the graphical accent on dà is just a diacritical mark which doesn't change the pronunciation of the word itself. However, in some specific areas, like Tuscany, both phrases are pronounced , so they can be distinguished only from their context.

Beyond minimal pairs

The principle of a simple binary opposition between the two members of a minimal pair may be extended to cover a minimal set where a number of words differ from each other in terms of one phone in a particular position in the word. For example, the vowels /a/, /e/, /i/, /o/, /u/ of Swahili are shown to be distinct by the following set of words:
pata 'hinge', peta 'bend', pita 'pass', pota 'twist', puta 'thrash'. this subject-matter lies beyond the domain of an article on minimal pairs.

Minimal pairs in language teaching

Minimal pairs were an important part of the theory of pronunciation teaching during its development in the period of Structuralist Linguistics, particularly in the 1940s and 1950s, and minimal pair drills were widely used to train students to discriminate among the phonemes of the target language. 
Some writers have claimed that learners are likely not to hear differences between phones if the difference is not a phonemic one.







Bibliography


