[[Kofi Awoonor]]

CATEGORIES: 1935 births, 2013 deaths, Ghanaian writers, Alumni of University College London, Academics of the University of Ghana, Academics of the University of Cape Coast, Ambassadors of Ghana to Brazil, Ambassadors of Ghana to Cuba, Permanent Representatives of Ghana to the United Nations, Ghanaian poets, Ghanaian novelists, Ghanaian non-fiction writers, People murdered in Kenya, Ghanaian people murdered abroad, Deaths by firearm in Kenya, Murdered writers, Ghanaian murder victims

Kofi Awoonor (13 March 1935 – 21 September 2013) was a Ghanaian poet and author whose work combined the poetic traditions of his native Ewe people and contemporary and religious symbolism to depict Africa during decolonization. He started writing under the name George Awoonor-Williams. Zell, Carol Bundy & Virginia Coulon (eds), A New Reader's Guide to African Literature, Heinemann Educational Books, 1983, p. 355. He taught African literature at the University of Ghana. Professor Awoonor was among those who were killed in the September 2013 attack at Westgate shopping mall in Nairobi, Kenya, where he was a participant at the Storymoja Hay Festival

Biography

Awoonor was born in Ghana when it was still called the Gold Coast. He was the eldest of 10 children in the family. He was educated at Achimota School and then proceeded to the University of Ghana. While at university he wrote his first poetry book, Rediscovery, published in 1964. Like the rest of his work, Rediscovery is rooted in African oral poetry. In Ghana, he managed the Ghana Film Corporation and founded the Ghana Play House. His early works were inspired by the singing and verse of his native Ewe people.
He then studied literature at University College London, and while in England he wrote several radio plays for the BBC. He spent the early 1970s in the United States, studying and teaching at Stony Brook University (then called SUNY at Stony Brook). Hampton, "Kofi Awoonor killed in Kenya mall attack, was Stony Brook professor", Long Island Newsday, September 22, 2013. While in the USA he wrote This Earth, My Brother, and My Blood. Awoonor returned to Ghana in 1975 as head of the English department at the University of Cape Coast. Within months he was arrested for helping a soldier accused of trying to overthrow the military government and was imprisoned without trial and was later released. The House by the Sea is about his time in jail. After imprisonment Awoonor became politically active. he continued to write  mostly nonfiction.

Death

On 21 September 2013, Awoonor was among those killed in an attack at the Westgate shopping mall in Nairobi. He was in Kenya as a participant in the Storymoja Hay Festival, a four-day celebration of writing, thinking and storytelling, at which he was due to perform on the evening of his death. His nephew Nii Parkes, who was attending the same literary festival, has written about meeting him for the first time that day. The Ghanaian government confirmed Awoonor's death the next day. His son Afetsi was also shot, but was later discharged from hospital.
Awoonor's remains were flown from Nairobi to Accra, Ghana, on 25 September 2013.
His body was cremated and buried at particular spot in his hometown at Weta in the Volta Region. Also there was no crying or mourning at his funeral all according to his will before death.

Works

Understanding and interpreting his works

It is said that Awoonor wrote a great number of his poems as if he was envisioning his own demise.
But he is a peculiar and unique writer, one who strives, almost too hard, to bring his ancestry and culture into his poems, sometimes even borrowing words from the local Ewe dialect.
Being such a strong and avid practitioner of the traditional religion meant that he was of a relict species. Especially for one so highly educated, it was an even rarer phenomenon.
That awareness, not only that he was a relict specimen as an individual, but that the entire culture was suffering entropy, may have come through his poems in a manner that would suggest at first that he was writing about his mortal end.
Besides the personal and cultural lament, Awoonor also shrewdly decried what he would have considered the decadent spectre of Western influences( religions, social organisation and economic philosophy) on the history and fortunes of African people in general. He would lambast the thoughtless exuberance with which Africans themselves embraced such things, and gradually engineered what he would have considered a self-degradation that went far beyond a loss of cultural identity. He would often construct his writings to look at these things through the lens of his own Ewe culture.

Further reading






