[[Tylos]]

CATEGORIES: History of Bahrain

Bahrain was referred to by the Greeks as Tylos, the centre of pearl trading, when Nearchus came to discover it serving under Alexander the Great. Larsen p. 50 From the 6th to 3rd century BC Bahrain was included in Persian Empire by the Achaemenids, an Iranian dynasty. The use of these is not confined to India, but extends to Arabia."Arnold Hermann Ludwig Heeren, Historical Researches Into the Politics, Intercourse, and Trade of the Principal Nations of Antiquity, Henry Bohn, 1854 p38 The Greek historian, Theophrastus, states that much of the islands were covered in these cotton trees and that Tylos was famous for exporting walking canes engraved with emblems that were customarily carried in Babylon.See Ares, Ares in the Arabian Peninsula section
It is not known whether Bahrain was part of the Seleucid Empire, although the archaeological site at Qalat Al Bahrain has been proposed as a Seleucid base in the Persian Gulf.Phillip Ward, Bahrain: A Travel Guide, Oleander Press p68 Tylos even became the site of Greek athletic contests.W. B. Fisher et al. The Cambridge History of Iran, Cambridge University Press 1968 p40
The name Tylos is thought to be a Hellenisation of the Semitic Tilmun (from Dilmun).Jean Francois Salles p132 Some place names in Bahrain go back to the Tylos era, for instance, the residential suburb of Arad in Muharraq, is believed to originate from "Arados", the ancient Greek name for Muharraq island. Larsen. Life and Land Use on the Bahrain Islands: The Geoarchaeology of an Ancient Society University Of Chicago Press, 1984 p13
The Greek historian Strabo believed that the Phoenicians originated from Bahrain.
Later classicist theories were proposed prior to modern archaeological excavations which revealed no disruption of Phoenician societies between 3200 BC and 1200 BC.
Herodotus's account (written c. 440 BC) refers to the Phoenicians originating from Bahrain. (History, I:1). 
With the waning of Seleucid Greek power, Tylos was incorporated into Characene or Mesenian, the state founded in what today is Kuwait by Hyspaosines in 127BC. A building inscriptions found in Bahrain indicate that Hyspoasines occupied the islands, (and it also mention his wife, Thalassia).
From the third century BC to arrival of Islam in the seventh AD, Bahrain was controlled by two other Iranian dynasties of Parthians and Sassanids.
By about 250 BC, Seleucids lost their territories to Parthians, an Iranian tribe from Central Asia. Parthian dynasty brought the Persian Gulf under their control and extended their influence as far as Oman. Because they needed to control the Persian Gulf trade route, the Parthians established garrisons in the southern coast of Persian Gulf.Bahrain By Federal Research Division, page 7
In the third century AD, the Sassanids succeeded the Parthians and held area until the rise of Islam four centuries later. Ardashir, the first ruler of Iranian Sassanians dynasty marched forward Oman and Bahrain and defeat Sanatruq Robert G. Hoyland, Arabia and the Arabs: From the Bronze Age to the Coming of Islam, Routledge 2001p28 (or Satiran), probably the Parthian governor of Bahrain... By Jamsheed K. Choksy, 1997, page 75 He appointed his son Shapur I as governor of Bahrain. Shapur constructed a new city there and named it Batan Ardashir after his father. At this time, Bahrain incorporated in the southern Sassanid province covering over the Persian Gulfs southern shore plus the archipelago of Bahrain. The southern province of Sasanids was subdivided into three districts of Haggar (Now al-Hafuf province, Saudi Arabia), Batan Ardashir( Now al-Qatif province, Saudi Arabia), and Mishmahig (Now Bahrain Island)  (In Middle Persian/Pahlavi means "ewe-fish". The name 'ewe-fish' would appear to suggest that the name /Tulos/ is related to Hebrew /ṭāleh/ 'lamb' (Strong's 2924).Strong's Hebrew and Aramaic Dictionary of Bible Words
By the fifth century Bahrain was a centre for Nestorian Christianity, with SamahijFrom Persian sa-mahij (سه ماهی) meaning Three Fish. the seat of bishops. In 410, according to the Oriental Syriac Church synodal records, a bishop named Batai was excommunicated from the church in Bahrain. It was also the site Bahrain of worship of a shark deity called Awal. Worshipers reputedly built a large statue to Awal in Muharraq, although it has now been lost, and for many centuries after Tylos, the islands of Bahrain were known as Awal.




