[[Pennsylvanian (train)]]

CATEGORIES: Amtrak routes, Passenger rail transportation in New York, Passenger rail transportation in New Jersey, Passenger rail transportation in Pennsylvania, Transportation in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania

The Pennsylvanian is a 444-mile (715 km) daytime Amtrak train running between New York and Pittsburgh via Philadelphia. The trains travel through Pennsylvania's capital, the Pennsylvania Dutch Country, suburban and central Philadelphia, and New Jersey en route to New York. Trains run once daily in each direction. The entire train ride takes about 9 hours total, with 1.5 hours between New York and Philadelphia, 2 hours between Philadelphia and Harrisburg, and 5.5 hours between Harrisburg and Pittsburgh.
The Pennsylvanian is a once a day replacement of the Keystone service between New York and Pittsburgh, offering Business Class seating as an upgrade to the coach-only seating on Keystone trains. Prior to Amtrak, the route was known as the Duquesne, named after Fort Duquesne in Pittsburgh, and operated by the Pennsylvania Railroad. The Pennsylvanian began on April 27, 1980, as a state-supported daylight train between Philadelphia and Pittsburgh, with connecting service to New York. Amtrak would later extend the train to serve New York directly. Between 1998–2005 Amtrak shifted the endpoints west to Chicago and Philadelphia, providing daylight service to Cleveland, Ohio. In 2005 the Pennsylvanian reverted to a Pittsburgh–New York schedule. On its inauguration the Pennsylvanian used Amfleet equipment and continues to be so equipped.

History

The Pennsylvanian is the replacement of the former Keystone service between New York and Pittsburgh. Prior to Amtrak, the route was known as the Duquesne, named after Fort Duquesne in Pittsburgh, and operated by the Pennsylvania Railroad. The Duquesne had a long history, finally becoming a daily New York—Pittsburgh train on October 25, 1959, numbered 16 eastbound and 25 westbound. With the start of Amtrak operations on May 1, 1971, the Duquesne was renamed the Keystone and renumbered 42 westbound and 43 eastbound with the first Amtrak timetable on November 14, 1971. The Keystone was discontinued on June 10, 1972.
The immediate impetus for the Pennsylvanian was the discontinuance of the National Limited, a New York–Kansas City train which had provided service over the corridor.
Between 1981 and 1983, Pennsylvanian equipment was turned every night to operate a second state-supported train, the Fort Pitt, which ran from Pittsburgh to Altoona.
After significant ridership gains in 1984, PennDOT proposed that a second train be added to the route. PennDOT and Amtrak would have split the costs evenly. Amtrak officials were favorable, but budget problems stalled the plan.
In the late 1980s passenger-rail groups urged Amtrak to extend the Pennsylvanian to Cleveland, Ohio. Proposals included new stations in Sewickley and Beaver Falls.
On November 7, 1998, Amtrak extended the Pennsylvanian through to Chicago along the route of the Capitol Limited via Toledo, finally bringing a daylight connection to Cleveland. The Three Rivers continued to run over a different schedule via Akron and Fostoria. As part of the change Amtrak truncated the eastern end to Philadelphia, enabling the train to complete the run within a single day.

On January 28, 2011, it was announced that Pennsylvania had received a $750,000 grant from the federal government to study expanding service westwards from Harrisburg to Pittsburgh along the route of the Pennsylvanian, including higher speeds and additional frequencies.
During fiscal year 2011, the Pennsylvanian carried over 200,000 passengers, a 2% increase over FY2010. The train had a total revenue of $8,856,539 during FY2011, up 4.8% from FY2010. In May 2013 the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania agreed to $3.8 million in funding to subsidize the service.
In November 2013, The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation announced that funding would be provided for the train to operate until October 1, 2014.  The change in subsidiary resulted from PRIIA laws passed in 2009 that requires states to subsidize Amtrak routes less than 750 miles in legnth 

Equipment

On its inauguration the Pennsylvanian ran with then-new Amfleet equipment: two coaches and a cafe. Today the Pennsylvanian continues to use an all-Amfleet consist of coaches and a half cafe/business class car, although the number of coaches has grown to four or greater. The coaches are a mixture of Amfleet I (short distance) and Amfleet II (long distance). Motive power is a GE P42DC west of Philadelphia and then either an EMD AEM-7 or Alstom/Bombardier HHP-8 between Philadelphia and New York. In recent times, the service between Pittsburgh, PA and Philadelphia, PA is provided by a General Electric Genesis or Dash 8-32BWH.

Route

The Pennsylvanian follows the Pennsylvania Railroad's Main Line over the following trackage:
