[[Sulfur hexafluoride]]

CATEGORIES: Sulfur fluorides, Dielectric gases, Greenhouse gases, Octahedral compounds, Hexafluorides, Industrial gases, Refrigerants

Sulfur hexafluoride (  has an octahedral geometry, consisting of six fluorine atoms attached to a central sulfur atom. It is a hypervalent molecule. Typical for a nonpolar gas, it is poorly soluble in water but soluble in nonpolar organic solvents. It is generally transported as a liquefied compressed gas. It has a density of 6.12 g/L at sea level conditions, which is considerably higher than the density of air (1.225 g/L).

Synthesis and reactions

.
There is virtually no reaction chemistry for  It does not react with molten sodium, but reacts exothermically with lithium.
For example, reactions of SF6 with water to produce sulfuric acid and hydrofluoric acid (a hydrolysis reaction, which would be thermodynamically favourable) does not occur as a result of steric hindrance:
SF6 + 4H2O(l) → no reaction

Applications

More than 10,000 tons of  Other main uses include an inert gas for the casting of magnesium, and as an inert filling for insulated glazing windows.

Dielectric medium

 was considered a potential chemical warfare agent in World War II because it does not produce lacrimation or skin irritation, thus providing little warning of exposure.
 is also commonly encountered as a high voltage dielectric in the high voltage supplies of particle accelerators, such as Van de Graaff generators and Pelletrons and high voltage transmission electron microscopes.

Medical use


 is used as a contrast agent for ultrasound imaging. Sulfur hexafluoride microbubbles are administered in solution through injection into a peripheral vein. These microbubbles enhance the visibility of blood vessels to ultrasound. This application has been used to examine the vascularity of tumours.[ref]
</ref>

Tracer compound

Sulfur hexafluoride was the tracer gas used in the first roadway air dispersion model calibration; this research program was sponsored by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and conducted in Sunnyvale, California on U.S. Highway 101..
Sulfur hexafluoride was used as a non-toxic test gas in an experiment at St John's Wood tube station in London, United Kingdom on 25 March 2007. The gas was released throughout the station, and monitored as it drifted around.  The purpose of the experiment, which had been announced earlier in March by the Secretary of State for Transport Douglas Alexander, was to investigate how toxic gas might spread throughout London Underground stations and buildings during a terrorist attack.
Sulfur hexafluoride is also routinely used as a tracer gas in laboratory fume hood containment testing.  The gas is used in the final stage of ASHRAE 110 fume hood qualification.  A plume of gas is generated inside of the fume hood and a battery of tests are performed while a gas analyzer arranged outside of the hood samples for SF6 to verify the containment properties of the fume hood.
It has been used successfully as a tracer in oceanography to study diapycnal mixing and air-sea gas exchange.

Other uses

Greenhouse gas

According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 
In Europe, 

Physiological effects and precautions

Like helium, sulfur hexafluoride is a non-toxic gas, yet by displacing oxygen in the lungs, it also carries the risk of asphyxia if too much is inhaled.
As with all gases, the density of 
Sulfur hexafluoride has an anesthetic potency slightly lower than nitrous oxide.

Other properties





Further reading




