[[Harry Reid]]

CATEGORIES: 1939 births, American Latter Day Saints, American people of English descent, Converts to Mormonism, Converts to Christianity from atheism or agnosticism, Democratic Party United States Senators, Gambling regulators, George Washington University Law School alumni, Lieutenant Governors of Nevada, Living people, Members of the Nevada Assembly, Members of the United States House of Representatives from Nevada, Nevada Democrats, Nevada lawyers, People from Searchlight, Nevada, Southern Utah University alumni, United States Capitol Police officers, United States Senators from Nevada, Utah State University alumni

Harry Mason Reid (born December 2, 1939) is the senior United States Senator from Nevada and a member of the Democratic Party serving since 1987. He has been the Senate Majority Leader since January 2007, having previously served as Minority Leader and Minority and Majority Whip.
Previously, Reid was a member of the U.S. House of Representatives, representing Nevada's 1st congressional district, and served in Nevada local and state government as city attorney of Henderson, a state legislator, the 25th Lieutenant Governor, and chairman of the Nevada Gaming Commission.
As Senate Majority Leader and a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Reid has achieved a more senior elected position in the United States government than any other Mormon in history. Also, if he completes a full term as Senate Majority Leader of the 113th United States Congress, he will be one of only three Senators to serve at least eight years as Majority Leader along with Alben W. Barkley and Mike Mansfield. Reid's current term ends in January 2017 and is seeking re-election in 2016.

Early life, education, and early career

Reid was born in Searchlight, Nevada, the third of four sons of Inez Orena (née Jaynes), a laundress, and Harry Vincent Reid, a miner who committed suicide with a gunshot to the head in 1972 at the age of 58 when Harry was 32 years old.  He then went to George Washington University Law School earning a J.D. while working for the United States Capitol Police.

Early political career

State politics

He returned to Nevada after law school and served as Henderson city attorney before being elected to the Nevada Assembly in 1968. In 1970, at age 30, Reid was chosen by O'Callaghan as his running mate for Lieutenant Governor of Nevada. Reid and his mentor O'Callaghan won the race and Reid served as lieutenant governor from 1971 until 1974, when he ran for the U.S. Senate seat being vacated by Alan Bible. He lost by fewer than 600 votes to former Governor Paul Laxalt. In 1975, Reid ran for mayor of Las Vegas and lost to Bill Briare.
Reid served as chairman of the Nevada Gaming Commission from 1977 to 1981. When Jack Gordon, La Toya Jackson's future agent and husband, offered Reid a $12,000 bribe to approve new games for casinos, Reid brought in the FBI to tape Gordon's bribery attempt and arrest him. After FBI agents interrupted the transaction, as prearranged, Reid lost his temper and began choking Gordon, saying "You son of a bitch, you tried to bribe me!" Gordon was convicted in 1979 and sentenced to six months in prison. In 1981, Reid's wife found a bomb attached to the family station wagon; Reid suspected it was placed by Gordon.

U.S. Representative

Prior to the 1980 Census, Nevada had only a single at-large member in the United States House of Representatives, but population growth in the  1970s resulted in the state picking up a second district. Reid won the Democratic nomination for the 1st district, based in Las Vegas, in 1982, and easily won the general election. He served two terms in the House, from 1983 to 1987.

U.S. Senate

Elections

In 1986, Reid won the Democratic nomination for the seat of retiring two-term incumbent Republican Senator Paul Laxalt. He defeated former at-large Congressman Jim Santini, a Democrat who had turned Republican, in the November election. He coasted to reelection in 1992. However, he barely defeated 1st District Congressman John Ensign in 1998 in the midst of a statewide Republican sweep. In 2004, Reid won reelection with 61 percent of the vote, gaining the endorsement of several Republicans. 
Ensign was elected to Nevada's other Senate seat in 2000. He and Reid have a very good relationship, despite their bruising contest in 1998. The two frequently worked together on Nevada issues until Ensign was forced to resign his Senate seat.
While Reid won the Democratic nomination with 75% of the vote in the June 8 primary, he faced a competitive general election for the 2010 Senate race in Nevada. Reid engaged in a $1 million media campaign to "reintroduce himself" to Nevada's voters. Politico. Retrieved on 2013-08-16. He defeated Republican challenger Sharron Angle in the general election despite losing 14 of Nevada's 17 counties.

Leadership

From 1999 to 2005, Reid served as Senate Democratic Whip, as minority whip from 1999 to 2001 and again from 2003 to 2005, then as majority whip from 2001 to 2003 (except for a brief period from January–May 2001). From 2001 to 2003, he served as chairman of the Senate Ethics Committee. Reid succeeded Tom Daschle as minority leader in 2005 and became majority leader after the 2006 elections. He was re-elected majority leader without opposition by the Democratic caucus on November 18, 2008, winning all 57 votes. 

Committee assignments

Political positions

Reid has scored a lifetime conservative rating of 19% from the American Conservative Union (ACU),
Reid has spearheaded several initiatives while in Congress. In 2006, Reid co-sponsored the "Prevention First Amendment" with Hillary Clinton, which would fund abortion prevention efforts, such as giving women broader access to contraception; however the bill faced Republican opposition and failed. In the 111th Congress, Reid shepherded the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) through the Senate.
Regarding specific issues, Reid believes that Roe vs. Wade should be overturned and in 1999, he voted against an amendment that explicitly expressed support for Roe v. Wade.
Regarding same-sex marriage, Reid had stated before 
In regard to local issues, Reid has firmly opposed the proposed Yucca Mountain federal nuclear waste repository in Nevada. Reid has opposed the legalization of online poker in the past, but has more recently changed his position, a move that some have argued was influenced by "the hundreds of thousands of dollars Las Vegas casinos contributed to his re-election campaign".com
Reid called immigration reform one of his top priorities for the 110th Congress. He supports the DREAM Act the (Development, Relief and Education for Alien Minors Act), which would allow certain U.S. high school grads who had arrived in the U.S. illegally as children, conditional legal status so they could attend college or enlist in the military. They could then obtain permanent legal residency after completing two years of military service or two years of college.
Reid has supported the use of force in the Middle East but in September 2007 he called for a drastic change in strategy.
Reid is a strong advocate for Armenian Genocide recognition.
Reid has advocated the outlawing of prostitution in NevadaBall, Molly (February 23, 2011) Harry Reid's prostitution lecture bombs, Politico On May 15, 2013, Reid revealed to reporters that his niece is a lesbian as he spoke about his hope that the Employment Non-Discrimination Act would be signed into law.

Criticism

Liberal critics have argued that Reid was not doing enough to end the American military presence in Iraq,
Reid has also been criticized for several potentially self-enriching tactics. In 2005, Reid earmarked a spending bill to provide for building a bridge between Nevada and Arizona that would make land he owned more valuable. Reid called funding for construction of a bridge over the Colorado River, among other projects, "incredibly good news for Nevada" in a news release after passage of the 2006 transportation bill. He owned 
A series of investigative reports in the Los Angeles Times
In 2006, the National Republican Senatorial Committee attempted to associate Reid with the Jack Abramoff Indian lobbying scandal by pointing out he had "received more than $50,000 from four tribes with gaming interests between 2001 and 2004 after they hired Abramoff". Reid denied any wrongdoing, and media reported that the Center for Responsive Politics, a non-partisan research group, had produced an analysis showing a general increase in the amount and number of contributions by Indian tribes since the late 1990s.
Reid apologized on January 9, 2010, for racially tinged comments he had made when Obama was campaigning for president. In private conversations, Reid had remarked that Obama could win the Presidency because the country was ready to embrace a black presidential candidate, especially one such as Obama—to whom he referred as being "light-skinned" and "with no Negro dialect, unless he wanted to have one". These comments had been recently revealed by journalists Mark Halperin and John Heilemann in Game Change, their book about the 2008 election. In addition to his public apology, Reid called Obama to apologize; Obama accepted his apology, stating that as far as he was concerned, the book was closed on the incident. "Majority Leader Reid apologizes to Obama for 2008 remarks". The Washington Post. "Harry Reid taking heat for Obama remarks". USA Today. "Reid apologizes for "no Negro dialect" comment about Barack Obama from 2008 election". Fox News. RNC Chairman Michael Steele and Senators John Cornyn and Jon Kyl called on Reid to resign his leadership position in the Senate, citing Majority Leader Trent Lott resigning because of a statement relating to race. However, multiple experts said there was virtually no chance of that. DNC Chairman Tim Kaine and Senators Dianne Feinstein and Jack Reed expressed support for Reid and confidence he would retain his leadership position, and another senior Democrat indicated Reid has "produced supportive statements from key African American leaders in the Congress and civil rights community".
In August 2010, Reid spoke in front of National Council of La Raza: "I don't know how anyone of Hispanic heritage could be a Republican, OK. Do I need to say more?"

Mitt Romney

During the summer of 2012, Reid said during an interview with The Huffington Post that he had received information from an unidentified investor in Bain Capital that presumptive Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney did not pay any taxes for 10 years. CBS reported that Romney had submitted 23 years of tax returns to the John McCain campaign in 2008, when he was being vetted for the vice presidential nomination. Although McCain did not review all the tax returns himself, he stated
"Nothing in these tax returns showed that he did not pay taxes."McCain: Reid is wrong about Romney's tax returns, CBS News, August 14, 2012, accessed August 17, 2012.

Cultural and political image

Part of Reid's confrontation with Frank Rosenthal while chair of the Nevada Gaming Commission is reenacted in the 1995 movie Casino. Reid had a role in the movie Traffic (2000), in which he played himself.Sand and Sorrow (2007); IMDb.
Reid was elected to the Gaming Hall of Fame in 2001. In 2013, adviser Jim Margolis said of Reid, "He is unique in this city. And you see it in so many different ways. Is he the best TV talking head? No. He'd be the first to tell you that. Should he smile more? Yes. Should he say goodbye on the phone when he's done talking to you? Probably. But those are things you'd assume are part and parcel of a polished figure in Washington. That is not Harry Reid."

Koch brothers

Reid has excoriated the Koch brothers, who contribute to Republican, conservative and/or libertarian political causes and candidates. On one occasion, Reid used the term "un American" to describe the brothers, prompting comparisons to McCarthyism. Conservatives, such as MSNBC talk show host Joe Scarborough, who compared Reid's comments to "McCarthyism", accessed April 9, 2014. and National Review editor Rich Lowry,"The Un-American Anti-Koch Campaign", March 12, 2014; accessed April 9, 2014. among others, condemned Reid's comments.
 It's too bad that they are trying to buy America. And it's time that the American people spoke out against this terrible dishonesty of these two brothers, who are about as un-American as anyone that I can imagine."Harry Reid's brain on Koch", reviewjournal.Comments by Reid regarding the Koch brothers in their entirety, reid.gov; March 4, 2014; accessed March 14, 2014. 
In 2012, Reid cited fellow U.S. Senator Bernie Sanders who claimed the Koch brothers were "funding think tanks spreading an enormous amount of disinformation about Social Security". Bernie Sanders: 'The Koch Brothers are funding think tanks spreading an enormous amount of disinformation about Social Security'" Two years later, in 2014, Reid accused the brothers of having Republicans stall aid to Ukraine by pushing for amendments like a delay of regulation by the IRS of non-profit political advocacy groups to be included in the aid package."Reid blames Koch brothers for stalling Ukraine aid", washingtontimes. Reid "credited his wife, Landra, for likening the Republicans' Ukrainian stance to a 'Koch addiction'"."Reid's contempt for Koch brothers is the real thing", lasvegassun.

Personal life

In 1959, Reid married his high school girlfriend, Landra Gould. They have five children: a daughter and four sons. Their eldest son, Rory, was an elected Commissioner for Clark County, Nevada, of which he became Chairman, and 2010 Democratic nominee in the election for Governor of Nevada. Another son  ran for municipal office in Cottonwood Heights, Utah.
Reid (who was raised agnostic) and his wife (who was born to Jewish immigrant parents and grew up in Henderson) converted to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints while he was a college student.
In September 2011, Reid's wife was diagnosed with stage 2 breast cancer.






