[[Harmodius and Aristogeiton]]

CATEGORIES: 514 BC deaths, Ancient Athenians, Ancient Greek society, Duos, Articles about multiple people in ancient Greece, Greek assassins, Assassins of heads of government, Greek historical hero cult, Archaic Athens, Rebels, Greek torture victims, Year of birth unknown

Harmodius (Ἁρμόδιος / Armódios) and Aristogeiton (Ἀριστογείτων / Aristogeíton; both  died 514 BC) were two men from  ancient Athens.  They became known as the Tyrannicides (τυραννοκτόνοι) after they killed the Peisistratid tyrant Hipparchus, and were the preeminent symbol of  democracy to ancient Athenians.

Background

The principal historical sources covering the two are Thucydides in his History of the Peloponnesian War (VI, 56-59) and The Constitution of the Athenians (XVIII) attributed to Aristotle or his school, but their story is documented by a great many other ancient writers, such as Herodotus and Plutarch.  Herodotus
Peisistratus seized power in 561 BC and established a dictatorial regime. Peisistratus is usually called a tyrant, but in archaic Greek the word tyrannos does not mean a cruel and despotic ruler, merely one who took power by force. Peisistratus was in fact a very popular ruler, who made Athens wealthy and powerful, although the old aristocratic families he had driven from power hated him. When Peisistratus died in 528/527 BC, his son Hippias, with the help of his younger brother Hipparchus, retained power. The two continued their father's policies, but their popularity declined after Hipparchus began to abuse the power of his position. 
Hipparchus invited Harmodius' young sister to be the kanephoros (to carry the ceremonial offering basket) at the Panathenaea festival, and then publicly chased her away on the pretext she was not a virgin, as required. This was an offense of such magnitude to Harmodius' family that he, together with Aristogeiton who was already fired by feelings of jealousy due to Hipparchus having made unrequited sexual advances toward Harmodius (possibly the motivation for Hipparchus's humiliation of Harmodius's sister), resolved to assassinate both Hippias and Hipparchus and thus to overthrow the tyranny.
According to Aristotle, it was Thessalos, the hot-headed son of Peisistratus´ Argive concubine and thus half-brother to Hipparchus, who was the one to court Harmodius and drive off his sister.

The assassination

The plot – to be carried out by means of daggers hidden in the ceremonial myrtle wreaths on the occasion of the Panathenaic Games – involved a number of other co-conspirators. Thucydides claims that "this was the only day on which it was possible for the citizens who formed the parade to assemble armed without arousing suspicion".
Seeing one of these greet Hippias in a friendly manner on the assigned day, the two thought themselves betrayed and rushed into action, ruining the carefully laid plans. They managed to kill Hipparchus, stabbing him to death as he was organizing the Panathenaean processions at the foot of the Acropolis. Herodotus expresses surprise at this event, asserting that Hipparchus had received a clear warning concerning his fate in a dream. Harmodius was killed on the spot by spearmen of Hipparchus´ guards, while Aristogeiton was arrested shortly thereafter. Upon being told of the event, Hippias, feigning calm, ordered the marching Greeks to lay down their ceremonial weapons and to gather at an indicated spot. All those with concealed weapons or under suspicion were arrested, gaining Hippias a respite from the uprising.
Thucydides' identification of Hippias as the two's purported main target, rather than Hipparchus who was Aristogeiton's rival erastes, has been suggested as a possible indication of bias on his part.

Aristogeiton's torture

Aristotle in the Constitution of Athens preserves a tradition that Aristogeiton died only after being tortured in the hope that he would reveal the names of the other conspirators. During his ordeal, personally overseen by Hippias, he feigned willingness to betray his co-conspirators, claiming only Hippias' handshake as guarantee of safety. Upon receiving the tyrant's hand he is reputed to have berated him for shaking the hand of his own brother's murderer, upon which the tyrant wheeled and struck him down on the spot.

Leæna

Likewise, there is a tradition that Aristogeiton (or Harmodius)[ref]Alciato, Emblemata; EMBLEMA XIII 
''Cecropia effictam quam cernis in arce Leaenam,  
''Harmodii (an nescis hospes?) amica fuit. 
''Sic animum placuit monstrare viraginis acrem 
''More ferae, nomen vel quia tale tulit. 
''Quòd fidibus contorta, suo non prodidit ullum 
''Indicio, elinguem reddidit Iphicrates. [/ref]
was in love with a courtesan (see hetaera) by the name of Leæna (Λέαινα - meaning lioness) who also was kept by Hippias under torture – in a vain attempt to force her to divulge the names of the other conspirators – until she died. One version holds that previous to being tortured she had bitten off her tongue, afraid that her resolve would break from the pain of the torture. Another is that the Athenians, unwilling to honour a courtesan, placed a statue of a lioness without a tongue in the vestibule of the Acropolis simply to honor her fortitude in maintaining silence.

Aftermath

His brother's murder led Hippias to establish an even stricter dictatorship, which proved very unpopular and was overthrown, with the help of an army from Sparta, in 508. This was followed by the reforms of Cleisthenes, who established a democracy in Athens.

Apotheosis

Subsequent history came to identify the figures of Harmodius and Aristogeiton as martyrs to the cause of Athenian freedom, possibly for political and class reasons, and they became known as "the Liberators" (eleutherioi) and "the Tyrannicides" (tyrannophonoi). 
A number of years after the event, it had become a received tradition among the Athenians to believe that Hipparchus was the elder of the brothers, and to fashion him as the tyrant.

Statues and artistic depictions

After the establishment of democracy, Cleisthenes commissioned the sculptor Antenor to produce a bronzeLucian refers to this "χαλκοῦς" (of copper) statue in Περὶ Παρασίτου, 48. statue group of Harmodius and Aristogeiton. It was the first commission of its kind, and the very first statue to be paid for out of public funds, as the two were the first Greeks considered by their countrymen worthy of having statues raised to them.
According to Pliny the Elder, it was erected in the Kerameikos in 509, There it stood alone as special laws prohibited the erection of any other statues in their vicinity. Upon its base was inscribed a verse by the poet Simonides: 

The statue was taken as war booty in 480 BC by Xerxes I during the early Greco-Persian Wars and installed by him at Susa. As soon as the Greeks vanquished the Persians at Salamis, a new statue was commissioned. It was sculpted this time by Kritios and Nesiotes, and set up in 477/476 BC. Par. Ep. 54.70; Pausanias, 1.8.5 
Several comments of the ancients regarding the statue have come down to us. When asked, in the presence of Dionysius, the tyrant of Syracuse, which type of bronze was the best, Antiphon the Sophist replied, 
 
Lycurgus, in his oration against Leocrates, asserts that,  
Other sculptors made statues of the heroes, such as Praxiteles, who made two, also of bronze.
The statue group has been seen, in modern times, as an invitation to identify erotically and politically with the figures, and to become oneself a tyrannicide. According to Andrew Stuart, the statue 
The configuration of the group is duplicated on a painted vase, a Panathenaic amphora from 400,British Museum: London B 605. Beazley, Attic Black-figure Vases, 411.4. and on a base-relief on the Elgin throne, dated to ca. 300.

Skolia

Another tribute to the two heroes was a hymn (skolion) praising them for restoring isonomia (equal distribution of justice) to the Athenians. The skolion may be referred to 500 BC or thereabouts,  
and is ascribed to Callistratus, an Athenian poet known only for this work. It is preserved by Athenaeus. 
When sung, the singer would hold a branch of myrtle in his hand.
 
 In myrtles veil'd will I the falchion wear,
For thus the patriot sword
Harmodius and Aristogiton bare,
When they the tyrant's bosom gored, 
And bade the men of Athens be 
Regenerate in equality.
Oh! beloved Harmodius! never 
Shall death be thine, who liv'st for ever. 
Thy shade, as men have told, inherits 
The islands of the blessed spirits,
Where deathless live the glorious dead,
Achilles fleet of foot, and Diomed.
In myrtles veil'd will I the falchion wear, 
For thus the patriot sword
Harmodius and Aristogiton bare,
When they the tyrant's bosom gored; 
When in Minerva's festal rite 
They closed Hipparchus' eyes in night.
Harmodius' praise, Aristogiton's name, 
Shall bloom on earth with undecaying fame; 
Who with the myrtle-wreathed sword 
The tyrant's bosom gored, 
And bade the men of Athens be 
Regenerate in equality.

Other skolia existed, of which a few have survived, such as the following:
 
 Harmodius, most beloved. Surely you are not at all dead,
But on the Isles of the Blessed you abide, they say,
The same place where swift-footed Achilles is,
Where roams worthy Diomedes, son of Tydeus, they say. Cites: Skolion 894P. D. I. Page, Poetae Melici Graeci; Oxford, 1962

Importance to the pederastic tradition

The story of Harmodius and Aristogeiton, and its treatment by later Greek writers, is illustrative of attitudes to pederasty in ancient Greece. Both Thucydides and Herodotus describe the two as lovers, without making any comment on this fact: clearly they assumed that their readers would be familiar with the institution and find nothing remarkable about it. Their love affair was styled as moderate (sophron) and legitimate (dikaios).27; 2001, Oxford University Press; ISBN 0198149026  Further confirming the status of the two as paragons of pederastic ethics, a domain forbidden to slaves, a law was passed prohibiting slaves from being named after the two heroes. Gel. 9.2.10; Lib. Decl. 1.1.71
The story continued to be cited as an admirable example of heroism and devotion for many years. In 346 BC, for example, the politician Timarchus was prosecuted (for political reasons) on the grounds that he had prostituted himself as a youth. The orator who defended him, Demosthenes, cited Harmodius and Aristogeiton, as well as Achilles and Patroclus, as examples of the beneficial effects of same-sex relationships.(cf.:Aeschines, trans. Charles Darwin Adams, (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd., 1919), 132 & 133) Aeschines offers them as an example of dikaios erōs, "just love", and as proof of the boons such love brings the lovers–who were both improved by love beyond all praise–as well as to the city. 5 The fact that the statues of the Liberators were still being copied in Roman times shows the durability of their legend.



Notes






