[[Liberty University]]

CATEGORIES: Evangelical universities and colleges, Educational institutions established in 1971, Liberty University, Baptist Christianity in Virginia, Education in Lynchburg, Virginia, Universities and colleges accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools, Universities and colleges affiliated with the Southern Baptist Convention, Universities and colleges in Virginia, Visitor attractions in Lynchburg, Virginia, Evangelicalism in Virginia

Liberty University is a private, Christian university located in Lynchburg, Virginia, United States. Liberty's annual enrollment includes 12,600 residential students and over 90,000 online students as of May 2013.
Liberty's athletic teams compete in Division I of the NCAA and are collectively known as the Liberty Flames. They compete in the Big South Conference.

History

The university was founded as Lynchburg Baptist College in 1971 by Jerry Falwell, who was also Senior Pastor of Thomas Road Baptist Church. The name was changed to Liberty Baptist College in 1976 before settling on its current name, Liberty University, in 1984, when it obtained university status.
Liberty University describes itself as a Christian academic community. Its stated mission and aims emphasize both the intellectual and spiritual development of the institution's students. Students are held to The Liberty Way, a code of behavioral conduct.

Campus

Main, East and North campuses

Liberty University's Campus East housing complex consists of 30 multi-story apartment style dormitories, the last six of which were completed in 2007. Rooms in these dormitories have their own kitchens, living room and private baths. A clubhouse offers a swimming pool, billiards room, and a private theater. A tunnel connecting the east and west ends of the campus was completed in 2004. A second tunnel was completed January 2012, and provides pedestrian passage under the Norfolk Southern Railway and access to nearby shopping opportunities. In addition, a campus bus/shuttle system was added in the fall of 2006, providing transportation both on and off campus until midnight most evenings.
The  mountain bike trail system, a motorcross facility, paintball fields, 3D archery range, intramural sports program and club sports, including lacrosse and ice hockey, which plays in an ice rink donated by Drs. Tim and Beverly LaHaye, and a new indoor soccer facility.
During the spring of 2007, a secondary practice facility for the Liberty volleyball program was opened as part of a new, on-campus training complex. The existing $750,000 facility on Campus East houses the volleyball coaches' offices and a team room, and serves as the team's practice facility whenever the Vines Center and Schilling Center are unavailable.
thumb|left|Top of the Snowflex synthetic ski slope overlooking Liberty Mountain Snowflex CentreConstruction was completed in August 2009 on the Liberty Mountain Snowflex Centre, a synthetic ski slope featuring Snowflex; the Centre was designed by England's Briton Engineering. It includes beginner, intermediate and advanced slopes, and is the first of its kind in the United States.
On September 24, 2010, Liberty opened the new Tower Theater, with seating for up to 640 people.  For the 2010-11 theater season, The Theater Department opened with Hairspray, and closed in Spring 2011 with The Phantom of the Opera. The theatre includes balcony seating, an orchestra pit, catwalks, a fly tower, a box office and 
In August 2011, Liberty announced a 120 million dollar campus expansion. The expansion includes more dorms, greener space, and more academic buildings allowing the campus to hold 20,000 resident students.
In January 2012, Liberty University's Department of Theatre Arts announced the formation of a professional theater company to occupy the Tower Theater. The Alluvion Stage Company will hire professional actors to perform alongside the students, and the sets and costumes will be meet professional standards. Department Chair Linda Nell Cooper said about the new company: "Alluvion, meaning overflow, will aim to enrich, educate and entertain the community by providing a superior theater experience in a wholesome family environment."
Liberty University is scheduled to open a new Observatory Center in the Spring of 2013 next to Liberty's Equestrian Center.  Lee Beaumont, Vice President of Auxiliary Services, says this dome will be a classroom that can fit up to 20 people.  It will house a 

Libraries & Museums

=Integrated Learning Resource Center=

The Integrated Learning Resource Center (ILRC) has three components:  the Curriculum Library, Computer Labs, and Media Services.  The library contains the following: around 250,000 paper volumes, over 150,000 e-books, more than 97,000 unique electronic and print periodical titles, and more than 200 electronic databases.
Liberty University students are provided academic counseling and support services through the Center for Academic Support and Advising Services (CASAS). CASAS contains new student orientation support, professional academic advising, continuing education counseling, tutoring and testing services, and career placement services.

=Jerry Falwell Library=

In January 2014, Liberty University opened the new Jerry Falwell Library. The four story, 170,00-square-foot building is located behind the Vines Center. The library features a robot-assisted storage and retrieval system for over 250,000 archived items, with room for another 170,000. The robot locates requested items within a large storage room and delivers the items to the front desk. There are also 150 public computers throughout the building for electronic archive research. The library features group study rooms, writable walls, balconies, terraces and a vegetative roof. The $50 million library is part of a larger $500 million building and expansion plan announced by Liberty University.

=National Civil War Chaplains Museum=

The National Civil War Chaplains Museum contains exhibits of clergy members and religious activity during the Civil War era.  It is the only museum in the nation devoted to this purpose.  The mission of the museum is to "educate the public about the role of chaplains, priests, and rabbis and religious organizations in the Civil War; to promote the continuing study of the many methods of dissemination of religious doctrine and moral teachings during the War; to preserve religious artifacts, and to present interpretive programs that show the influence of religion on the lives of political and military personnel." A 501(c)(3) organization, the museum rents space from Liberty University's DeMoss Center. It has 10,000 square feet, with a 50-seat video theatre, archive displays, a research library, and book store.
The museum features Catholic, Protestant, Jewish chaplains (including African American chaplains), publications, and artifacts from both the Union and Confederate militaries. There are several areas in the museum that are given special attention including:
Two new exhibits have been added to the museum as of 2012: "a "mourning room" with period furniture and decorations (including a cross formed from the woven hair of dead Confederate soldiers), and an exhibit on Civil War sharpshooters featuring Rev. Lorenzo Barbour, chaplain to the Confederate Berdan's Sharpshooters."
In September 2012, Liberty University hosted the 16th annual Civil War Seminar. Titled "1862-The Rise of Lee and Grant", the seminar featured presentations on many different Civil War issues, highlighted by lectures on Grant's Mississippi and Vicksburg Campaigns and Lee's Seven Days' Campaign. The event also featured an online simulation of the Battle of Antietam.

=Carter Glass Mansion=

The Carter Glass Mansion is a historic home originally built in 1923 by U.S. Senator Carter Glass a newspaper publisher, politician and U.S. Secretary of the Treasury under President Woodrow Wilson as well as Chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee and President Pro Tempore of the Senate during President Roosevelt's era.dhr.gov/registers/Cities/Lynchburg/118-0210_Montview_1987_Final_Nomination. The 1.7 acre estate consists of a 1 1/2 story main building flanked by slightly smaller ells. The 18 inch walls are constructed of quartz fieldstone quarried from the property and the mansion is covered with a grey gambrel roof. The estate was purchased by Liberty University in the late 1970s as the headquarters of the university administration, including the main office of university founder Jerry Falwell. One of the many reasons for the estate's continued fame is that Falwell died at his desk at the Carter Glass Mansion on May 15, 2007, and his office has been preserved in the same condition ever since. Falwell was buried on the lawn of the mansion and a memorial to Falwell was placed there, overlooking the rest of the campus. The estate now serves mostly as a tourist site for the historically restored mansion as well as the Falwell office, while the upstairs portion of the mansion has been converted to a bed and breakfast for Liberty University guests.

Academics

As of August 2011, Liberty offers 148 residential and online undergraduate programs and among those offered are  Aeronautics,

Liberty Baptist Theological Seminary

Likely the most notable of Liberty University's schools is the Liberty Baptist Theological Seminary (LBTS).  It was founded in 1973, and now offers various degrees for both academic and vocational endeavors.  The degrees available are the Master of Divinity (M.), Master of Religious Education (including Military Chaplaincy), Master of Theology (Th.M.), Master of Arts in Marketplace Chaplaincy, Master of Arts in Pastoral Counseling, Master of Arts in Religion (M.A.R.), Master of Arts in Theological Studies (M.A.T.S.), Master of Arts in Worship Studies, Doctor of Ministry (D.), Doctor of Philosophy in Theology and Apologetics(Ph.D.).  Some of the degrees are available to be completed online, others require residential study, while some are available in both formats.

=Center for Ministry Training=

The Center for Ministry Training is the practical experience requirement for LBTS students.  The requirements are much like internships for other programs with a religious aspect involved in the experience.  Specifically, the CMT includes Ministry Impact and Supervised Field Ministry Experience (SFME).  Ministry Impact asks a Ministry Specialist to speak on practical aspects of ministry in the world today.  Additionally, "the main requirement for completing SFME is completing a minimum of 40 hours of field ministry during each semester."

Zaki Gordon Cinematic Arts Center

Liberty University now offers a Bachelor of Science in Cinematic Arts Degree.  This program is offered in the new Zaki Gordon Cinematic Arts Center.
In the fall semester of 2012, 40 students will be accepted as the inaugural class to major in Cinematic Arts, eventually expanding the number of accepted students to 160.  "During the first year, students will produce and direct a short film and write a full-length screenplay. They also will learn how to produce films for non-conventional and emerging platforms, such as cell phones and YouTube." The executive director of the Zaki Gordon Cinematic Arts Center is Stephan Schultze, a Hollywood veteran who is known for movies such as Far and Away. "Chancellor Jerry Falwell, Jr. said the decision was spurred by the interest shown by current School of Communication students and is inline with Liberty's commitment to future expansion of academic offerings and academic facilities."
The second year culminates in a large-scale theatrical project and a film festival. Students also will be required to write a business and fundraising plan for producing their own screenplay.

College of Osteopathic Medicine

On October 3, 2011, a 12 million dollar grant was sanctioned by the Virginia Tobacco Commission to build a college of osteopathic medicine and expand the health sciences school.

School of Music

In September 2012, Liberty University announced that it will be combining the Department of Music and Humanities with the Department of Worship and Music Studies to form a new School of Music. The school of music will have 32 full-time and 24 adjunct faculty members separated into two distinct centers. The Center for Music and Performing Arts will focus on music education and performance technique, while the Center for Music and Worship will seek to train skilled musicians as worship leaders and specialists within the Christian music industry. The School of Music will be located in a new building being constructed across from the Arthur S. DeMoss Learning Center. The faculty from the School of Music are collaborating with the construction team to optimize the building to their needs. The building will include a new fine arts auditorium for university and community use, and is part of Liberty University's campus transformation initiative. 
In the Fall of 2014, Liberty University The School of Music will be adding several new degree programs, including Bachelor's degree concentrations in both Jazz Studies and Film Scoring (B.M.), and a 36 credit hour Master's degree in Music Education (M.A.). It has also been announced that the department is currently working on a new 45 credit hour Doctor of Worship Studies degree program (D.W.S.).

Accreditation

Liberty was founded in 1971 and received Southern Association of Colleges and Schools (SACS) accreditation in 1980, 
Liberty is also accredited by:
American Bar Association (ABA) 
Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET) 
National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education (NCATE) 
Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education (CCNE) 
Aviation Accreditation Board International (AABI) 
National Association of Schools of Music (NASM) 
Commission on Accreditation of Athletic Training Education (CAATE)  
Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs (CAAHEP),
Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET).

Enrollment Profile

The acceptance rate for new first-time, full-time students entering Liberty's resident program in 2012 was 24.6%.

Liberty University Online

Liberty University has an internet education component which is called LU Online, previously the Distance Learning Program (DLP). Prior to the launch of its online education component in 2009, Liberty University provided adult learning courses through the LU School of Lifelong Learning (LUSLLL) by way of its External Degree Program. The LUSLLL was Liberty University's fastest growing school at the time with Jerry Falwell forecasting in his 1997 autobiography an enrollment of 40,000 students in the early 21st Century with the expectation of an addition 10,000 students studying on campus at the same time. Both expectations have been surpassed by current enrollment figures. Liberty's online component currently provides degrees from Associates level to Doctorate. The online school runs unilaterally with the semester program offered at Liberty University's campus. One difference with LU Online is that students take 16-week (full semester) classes for a few of their cataloged courses while the remainder are taken in 8-week subterms which are titled B, C, and D. These subterms provide the student with scheduling flexibility through shorter, slightly overlapping sessions. There is a separation at the 600-level and above at which courses are only offered in the B and D terms.

Rankings

Liberty University is ranked by U.S. News & World Report in several categories for 2013:
Regional Universities (South) - 89th 
Best Colleges for Veterans - 23rd 
Best Online Bachelor's Programs - 141st 
Best Online Graduate Business Programs - 122nd 
Best Online Graduate Education Programs - 97th 
Best Online Graduate Nursing Programs - 75th 
Furthermore, Liberty has been ranked in the Top-10 most conservative colleges in the U.S. by Young America's Foundation.
In 2005, Barron's Profiles of American Colleges ranked LU as a "competitive" college, its fourth-highest of six ranks, indicating that it accepts students in the top 65% of their graduating class. This comprehensive guide provides an index of college majors, admissions requirements, tuition and financial, student-faculty ratios, extra-curricular activities and campus life for more than 1650 schools
In 2012 The U.S. News & World Report ranked Liberty University 65th Best Colleges of Regional Universities in the South.
In 2013, Forbes' list of America's Top Colleges ranked Liberty University 636 out of 650 rated Colleges.
Center of Worship has been ranked the best in the world for the 2nd time in a row by the Worship Leader Magazine.

Student Life

Convocation

thumb|right|Convocation at the Vines Center  Students who live on campus are required to attend convocation at the Vines Center three times per week.  At these convocations, they attend presentations by speakers from various professions, see performers and musicians, and participate in live praise and worship. Past convocation speakers have included Presidential candidate John McCain, President Ronald Reagan, President George H. W. Bush, Senator Ted Kennedy, Rev. Billy Graham, Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas,  Lt. Col. Oliver North, Steve Forbes, Leonard Davidson, former US Senator Jesse Helms, Sam Donaldson, John R. Rice, Rabbi Eric Yoffie, CEO William S. Simon, Elisabeth Elliot (wife of the late missionary Jim Elliot), Skip Erickson, Freddie Gage, Adrian Rogers, governor Tim Kaine, Sean Hannity, Neurosurgeon Ben Carson, Pastors; Mel White, Mark Driscoll, Josh Mcdowell, Miles McPherson, Rick Warren, Steven Furtick, John Piper, David Platt, John F. MacArthur and Francis Chan, Entertainers/Athletes in pro-wrestler Lex Luger and rapper Lecrae, Bobby Bowden, Lou Holtz, Carrie Prejean, Allan Houston, Tim Tebow and Candace Cameron Bure, Douglas Gresham, Gianna Jessen, Clint Hubbard and 2008 Presidential candidates Mike Huckabee and Ron Paul. Jerry Falwell regularly spoke at chapel, giving his "Never Give Up" speech in the first semester.

Athletics

In May 2012, Liberty University Chancellor and President Jerry Falwell Jr announced the school's intention to pursue NCAA Division I Football Bowl Subdivision (FBS) conference affiliation for all 20 varsity sports. This announcement followed several university developments supporting the push for conference re-alignment including a 6-month feasibility study, hiring Turner Gill as football coach (formerly head coach of the University of Kansas)
For now, the Liberty Flames are a member of the NCAA Division I Football Championships Subdivision (FCS) in football (formerly Division I-AA) and NCAA Division I sports level in other competition.  Liberty is a member of the Big South Conference for 18 sports. Women's Lacrosse competes in the National Lacrosse Conference, while Women's Swimming will join the Coastal Collegiate Swimming Association, bringing the university total of scholarship-eligible varsity sports to 20. The university regularly competes for the Sasser Cup which is the Big South's trophy for the university which has the best sports program among the member institutions. Liberty has won the Sasser Cup ten times, placing it first in cup titles in the Big South.libertyflames.cfm?PID=10869&NewsID=9058 In 2012 Liberty became the first Big South school to win 5 consecutive Sasser Cups.
Newly renovated Williams Stadium is home of the Liberty Flames football program. Started in 1973, the Liberty Flames Football team originally used Lynchburg's City Stadium as their home stadium until October 21, 1989, when the Flames played their first home game on-campus at Williams Stadium in front of 12,750 fans.
Liberty University is also notable for its basketball programs and its venue, the Vines Center, that can house up to 8,085 spectators for its games.
Liberty University supports men's and women's club hockey teams. Men's hockey started in 1985
Liberty University is also proud of its Quiz Bowl team. Called the "varsity sport of the mind," Liberty's Quiz Bowl team has won Big South Conference Championship six out of seven years (2006, 2007, 2008, 2010, 2011 & 2012). Liberty also placed 3rd in the National Academic Quiz Tournament's (NAQT) Regional Competition in 2012.

The Center for Global Engagement

The Center for Global Engagement (CGE) offers "academic programs, cross-cultural internships, short-term teams and a variety of other resources and mentorship opportunities" for students interested in service and learning opportunities abroad."The Center for Global Engagement Homepage", Liberty University. Retrieved on 22 October 2013. Internships arranged through the CGE may be tailored to a variety of skill sets so that the experience will fulfill internship requirements for any major."The Center for Global Engagement: Global Internships", Liberty University. Retrieved on 22 October 2013. "Global Teams" are short term service trips that offer cultural immersion and the possibility of academic credit."The Center for Global Engagement: Global Teams", Liberty University. Retrieved on 22 October 2013. For students with a Teaching English as a Second Language (TESL) certificate, the CGE has partnerships with several other countries to encourage post-graduation job placement."The Center for Global Engagement: Global Jobs", Liberty University. Retrieved on 22 October 2013.

Clubs and organizations

According to Liberty's website, Liberty University Clubs Webpage there are over 100 registered clubs on campus. This number includes a wide variety of clubs, each of which is led by students with the aid of a Faculty Advisor. After the university's revocation of the recognition of the College Democrats provoked controversy (see "Political clubs", below), the university removed official recognition from all political clubs on campus.

Debate

Liberty's Inter-Collegiate policy debate program, formerly led by Brett O'Donnell, was number one in the overall rankings Championships in the National Debate Tournament for 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, 2010, and 2011. (MS Word file)National Debate Tournament Spring 2006 Report National Debate Tournament, 2006. (MS Word file)National Debate Tournament Spring 2007 Report National Debate Tournament, 2007 (MS Word file)National Debate Tournament Spring 2009 Report National Debate Tournament, 2009. (MS Word file)National Debate Tournament Spring 2010 Report National Debate Tournament, 2010. (MS Word file)National Debate Tournament Spring 2011 Report National Debate Tournament, 2011. (MS Word file) The overall rankings include varsity, junior varsity, and novice results.  In varsity rankings, Liberty finished 20th in 2005, 17th in 2006, 24th in 2007, 12th in 2008, 9th in 2009, 4th in 2010 and 4th in 2011. Liberty also hosts the Virginia High School League's annual Debate State Championships every April.

Finances

In May 2012, Liberty University Chancellor and President Jerry Falwell Jr announced that the school's net assets are worth $1 billion, in part from the success of its online learning program and from accelerated facility expansion. This valuation is a 10-fold increase since 2006 and underscores the rapid expansion the university has recently experienced.
In December 2010, Liberty sold $120 million in facilities bonds, with the proceeds to be used to finance future expansion.
The students at Liberty University received approximately $445 million in federal financial aid money in 2010, the highest total of any school in Virginia and one of the highest in the country.

Controversy

1989 bond issue

In 1989, Liberty University applied for $60 million in low interest bonds through the Lynchburg Industrial Development Authority. After the required public hearing period the bond issue was voted upon by the IDA and approved. Shortly thereafter litigation was brought against the IDA and Liberty University by Americans United (AU) and a decision (Habel vs. Lynchburg Industrial Development Authority) was handed down in 1991 denying Liberty the bond issuance. It was ruled that Liberty was too pervasively religious and therefore was not eligible for the bonds.
This case dealt a severe financial blow to the university which was unable to fund its construction projects needed to sustain its rapid growth. A subsequent case a few years later involving Regent University was decided in a similar manner, but was later overturned. The Virginia Supreme Court reviewed the case and based its decision on a more recent US Supreme Court ruling concerning issues of Separation and Sectarianism. Since then, Regent has received approval for bond funding with the stipulation that it may not fund the Divinity School.

1994 debt buy-out

Sun Myung Moon, founder of the Unification Church and the Washington Times, and his wife Hak Ja Han helped to financially stabilize the university through two of his organizations: News World Communications (an international media firm which publishes the Washington Times and other news media), which provided a $400,000 loan to the university at 6% interest; and the Women's Federation for World Peace, which indirectly contributed $3.5 million toward the school's debt. "$3.5 MILLION GIFT: In November, the Los Angeles Times reported that the Women's Federation for World Peace (WFWP), which is headed by Moon's wife, contributed $3.5 million to Christian Heritage Foundation (CHF) of Virginia for "educational purposes" in 1995."

Biology

Liberty University teaches young Earth creationism as an explanation for the appearance of life on earth. The university works with young Earth creationist organizations including Answers in Genesis.
In the same month, prominent biologist Richard Dawkins was quoted saying the following about Liberty University: "If it's really true that the museum at Liberty University has dinosaur fossils which are labeled as being 3,000 years old, then that is an educational disgrace. It is debauching the whole idea of a university, and I would strongly encourage any members of Liberty University who may be here, to leave and go to a proper university."

Political clubs

On May 15, 2009, vice president of student affairs Mark Hine sent an e-mail to the president of LU's College Democrats, Brian Diaz, revoking the university's recognition of the club. "The Democratic Party platform is contrary to the mission of Liberty University and to Christian doctrine", Hine's e-mail stated, citing the party's positions on abortion and federal funding thereof, same-sex marriage, hate crimes, LGBT rights, and socialism as justification for the dissolution. While the club can still meet on campus, it cannot use the university's name or reserve university facilities.
At a meeting with administration officials, the group was asked to apologize publicly for statements they had made to the media about this controversy. Diaz said he was baffled by the administration's decision, saying, "I want to be able to share the love of Christ, but I guess I can't do that on campus because I'm a Democrat as well." McAuliffe Jumps Into Liberty U/Young Dems Battle, National Journal, Hotline OnCall, May 22, 2009
Chairman of the Democratic National Committee and Democratic ex-governor Tim Kaine and 2009 Democratic gubernatorial candidates Terry McAuliffe, Brian Moran and Creigh Deeds called on the college to rescind the ban.
Liberty University President and Chancellor Jerry Falwell, Jr.,
Liberty's decision led some to question the university's tax-exempt status, and Americans United for Separation of Church and State filed a complaint with the Internal Revenue Service, asking for a review of the university's tax status. Liberty University in turn filed a complaint with the IRS regarding the tax-exempt status of Americans United for Separation of Church and State.org/media/9980/attachments/ltr_au_%20irs_w_media_exhibits.pdf
In late June 2009, Liberty University announced a new policy dealing with all political clubs on campus. The new policy removed official recognition from all political clubs on campus, relegating them to unofficial status. President Falwell said the previously suspended College Democrats "wouldn't have to do anything" to be recognized under the new policy. Along with other stipulations, the policy allows unofficial clubs to use the university's name, but they will not receive any funding from the university.

Notable alumni and associates






