[[Ethan Allen Express]]

CATEGORIES: Amtrak routes, Passenger rail transportation in New York, Passenger rail transportation in Vermont

The Ethan Allen Express is a 241-mile (388 km) passenger train operated by Amtrak between New York City and Rutland, Vermont via Albany, New York. The scheduled total trip time is 5.5 hours. Operations are subsidized by the state of Vermont, and the train is popular among vacationers travelling to the ski resort area of Killington, Vermont. The Ethan Allen Express is named for the American Revolutionary War hero Ethan Allen.

History

When Amtrak's Vermonter began operating in the central and eastern portions of Vermont with state funds in 1995, the western side of the state pushed for train service to Rutland as well. Federal funds were secured to rebuild the Clarendon and Pittsford Railroad to permit speeds up to 
Until May 2002, the train included a baggage car for skis and unboxed bicycles as well as checked baggage.FW: Erosion of Amtrak bike access Posted June 11, 2002
In October 2008, the Vermont Agency of Transportation (VTrans) proposed eliminating the Ethan Allen Express and replacing it with a bus citing budgetary restrictions. The proposal was rejected by the appropriate legislative committee. . . Until January Posted Thursday, 18 December 2008 VTrans again proposed ending service in January 2009. Two hundred people rallied at Rutland station against the proposed cut.
On February 23, 2011, VTrans began an investigation into the Vermont Rail System's (VRS) handling of the Ethan Allen Express between Whitehall, New York and Rutland after Amtrak notified the state that track conditions meant the train was frequently delayed. Amtrak evaluated the line as the worst in the nation.

Proposed extension to Burlington

Plans have existed to extend the Ethan Allen to Burlington from at least 2000.
Advocates, led by Chambers of Commerce and the Vermont Rail Action Network renewed the push for an extension to Burlington.Vermont Rail Action Network: Extending the Ethan Allen To Burington April 6, 2008
The Vermont Agency of Transportation applied for American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 funds to rebuild the tracks to passenger standards (59 mph) which would enable the extension. and later a third, all of which were rejected.
In 2013, the extension received additional funding via a $9 million TIGER V (fifth round of Transportation Investment Generating Economic Recovery) grant.  The money will pay for the replacement of jointed rail with continuously welded rail.3

Route details

The Ethan Allen Express operates over trackage owned by the following railroads:
The Ethan Allen Express began with stops in Rutland, Fort Edward-Glens Falls, Saratoga Springs, Schenectady, Albany, Hudson, Rhinecliff-Kingston, Poughkeepsie, Croton-Harmon, Yonkers and New York City (Penn Station).

Station stops







