[[David Duke]]

CATEGORIES: 1950 births, Living people, American anti-communists, American anti–illegal immigration activists, American expatriates in Austria, American government officials convicted of crimes, American neo-Nazis, American politicians convicted of fraud, American people convicted of tax crimes, American self-help writers, American white nationalists, Antisemitism in the United States, Far-right politics in the United States, Holocaust deniers, Ku Klux Klan Grand Dragons, Louisiana Republicans, Louisiana State University alumni, Pseudonymous writers, Members of the Louisiana House of Representatives, People from New Orleans, Louisiana, People from Salzburg, People from Tulsa, Oklahoma, Politics and race, Populist Party (United States, 1984) politicians, Racism in the United States, United States presidential candidates, 1988, United States presidential candidates, 1992, Writers from Louisiana, Writers from Oklahoma, Critics of Judaism, 20th-century American writers, 21st-century American writers



David Ernest Duke (born July 1, 1950) is an American White nationalist, writer, right-wing politician, and a former Grand Wizard of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, and former Republican Louisiana State Representative. He was a candidate in the Democratic presidential primaries in 1988 and the Republican presidential primaries in 1992. Duke has unsuccessfully run for the Louisiana State Senate, U.S. Senate, U.S. House of Representatives, and Governor of Louisiana.
Duke describes himself as a "racial realist", asserting that "all people have a basic human right to preserve their own heritage."
The Southern Poverty Law Center describes Duke as "the most recognizable figure on the American radical right" and "a neo-Nazi".splcenter.Gerstenfeld, Phyllis B., Diana R. Grant, and Chau‐Pu Chiang. "Hate online: A content analysis of extremist Internet sites." Analyses of social issues and public policy 3.1 (2003): 29-44. "White supremacist networks on the Internet." Sociological focus 33.2 (2000): 215-235. Troubled Memory: Anne Levy, the Holocaust, and David Duke's Louisiana. Univ of North Carolina Press, 2000.

Youth and early adulthood

Duke was born in Tulsa, Oklahoma to David H. Duke and Alice Maxine Crick. As the son of an engineer for Shell Oil, Duke frequently moved with his family around the world. They lived a short time in the Netherlands, before settling in Louisiana. In the late 1960s, Duke met the leader of the white supremacist National Alliance, William Pierce, who would remain a lifelong influence. Duke joined the Ku Klux Klan in 1967. Santa Ana, Calif.: March 2, 1992. pg. a.04
Duke studied at Louisiana State University (LSU) in Baton Rouge, and in 1970, he formed a white student group called the White Youth Alliance; it was affiliated with the National Socialist White People's Party. The same year, to protest William Kunstler's appearance at Tulane University, Duke appeared at a demonstration in Nazi uniform. Picketing and holding parties on the anniversary of Adolf Hitler's birth, he became notorious on the LSU campus for wearing a Nazi uniform.
Duke claimed to have spent nine months in Laos, calling that a "normal tour of duty". He actually went there to join his father, who was working there and had asked him to visit during the summer of 1971. He also claimed to have gone behind enemy lines twenty times at night to drop rice to anti-Communist insurgents in planes flying ten feet off the ground, narrowly avoiding receiving a shrapnel wound. Two Air America pilots who were in Laos at that time said that flights were during the day and flew no less than 500 feet from the ground. One suggested that it might have been possible for Duke to have gone on a safe "milk run" once or twice but no more than that. Duke was also unable to recall the name of the airfield used.
He graduated from Louisiana State University in 1974 after enrolling in 1968. During this time he spent what would have been his senior year organizing the National Party.

Family and personal life

While working in the White Youth Alliance, Duke met Chloê Hardin, who became active in the group. They remained companions throughout college and married in 1974. Hardin is the mother of Duke's two daughters, Erika and Kristin. According to an article by Martin A. Lee in the Southern Poverty Law Center's Intelligence Report, in 1977 David Duke, then married with two children, pursued female sex partners so avidly and so openly that it embarrassed many of his closest colleagues. Tom Metzger, then Duke's state leader in southern California, became livid when Duke showed up for a Ku Klux Klan anti-immigrant "border watch" stunt and immediately started pursuing women. Duke also developed a lifelong weakness for gambling
As of 2009, it was confirmed that David Duke was living in Zell am See in Salzburg, Austria,

Political activities

Early campaigns

Duke first ran for the Louisiana State Senate as a Democrat from a Baton Rouge district in 1975. He received 11,079 votes, a third of those cast.

1988 Democratic presidential campaign

In 1988, Duke ran initially in the Democratic presidential primaries. His campaign failed to make much of an impact, with the one notable exception of winning the little-known New Hampshire Vice-Presidential primary. Duke, having failed to gain much traction as a Democrat, then successfully sought the Presidential nomination of the Populist Party.[ref]Our Campaigns – US President – Pop Convention Race, March 11, 1988]
[/ref] He appeared on the ballot for President in eleven states and was a write-in candidate in some other states, some with Trenton Stokes of Arkansas for Vice President, and on other state ballots with Floyd Parker for Vice President. He received just 47,047 votes, for 0.04 percent of the combined, national popular vote.D.C. Finegold-Sachs (2005). D.C.'s Political Report. 1988 Presidential Candidates; retrieved on 2009-04-04.

1989: Successful run in special election for Louisiana House seat

In December 1988, Duke changed his political affiliation from the Democratic Party to the Republican Party.
In 1988, Republican State Representative Charles Cusimano of Metairie resigned his District 89 seat to become a 24th Judicial District Court judge, and a special election was called early in 1989 to select a successor. Duke entered the race to succeed Cusimano and faced several opponents, including fellow Republicans, John Spier Treen, a brother of former Governor David C. Treen, Delton Charles, a school board member, and Roger F. Villere, Jr., who operates Villere's Florist in Metairie. Duke finished first in the primary with 3,995 votes (33.1%). As no one received a majority of the vote in the first round, a runoff election was required between Duke and Treen, who polled 2,277 votes (18.9%) in the first round of balloting. John Treen's candidacy was endorsed by U.S. President George H. W. Bush, former President Ronald Reagan, and other notable Republicans,"GOP Condemns Duke" Newsday. Long Island, N.Y.: February 25, 1989, pg. 9 as well as the Democrat Victor Bussie (president of the Louisiana AFL-CIO) and Edward J. Steimel (president of the Louisiana Association of Business and Industry and former director of the "good government" think tank, the Public Affairs Research Council). Duke, however, hammered Treen on a statement the latter had made indicating a willingness to entertain higher property taxes, anathema in that suburban district. Rose, The Emergence of David Duke and the Politics of Race (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1992), p. iii (ISBN 0807843814,
ISBN 978-0-8078-4381-9); see also Michael Zatarain, David Duke: Evolution of a Klansman (Gretna, LA: Pelican, 1990), ISBN 0-88289-817-5, ISBN 978-0-88289-817-9.[/ref] Duke with 8,459 votes (50.7%) defeated Treen, who polled 8,232 votes (49.3%).
Freshman legislator Odon Bacqué of Lafayette, a No Party member of the House, stood alone in 1989, when he attempted to deny seating to Duke on the grounds that the incoming representative had resided outside his district at the time of his election. When John Treen failed in a court challenge in regard to Duke's residency, Duke was seated. Lawmakers who opposed Duke said that they had to defer to his constituents who narrowly chose Duke as representative. 157-164; ISBN 0-9700156-0-7
Duke took his seat on the same day as Jerry Luke LeBlanc of Lafayette Parish, who won another special election held on the same day as the Duke-Treen runoff to choose a successor to Kathleen Blanco, the future governor who was elected to the Louisiana Public Service Commission. Duke and LeBlanc were sworn in separately.
As a short-term legislator, Duke was, in the words of a colleague, Ron Gomez of Lafayette "so single minded, he never really became involved in the nuts and bolts of House rules and parliamentary procedure. It was just that shortcoming that led to the demise of most of his attempts at lawmaking."Gomez, ''My Name Is Ron And I'm a Recovering Legislator, pg. 230
One legislative issue pushed by Duke was the requirement that welfare recipients be tested for the use of narcotics. The recipients had to show themselves to be drug-free to receive state and federal benefits under his proposal."Duke welfare bill wins panel favor," Minden Press-Herald, May 9, 1989, pg. 1
Gomez recalls having met and interviewed Duke in the middle 1970s when Duke was a state senate candidate: "He was still in his mid-20s and very non-descript. Tall and slimly built, he had a very prominent nose, flat cheek bones, a slightly receding chin and straight dark brown hair. The interview turned out to be quite innocuous, and I hadn't thought about it again until Duke came to my legislative desk, and we shook hands. Who was this guy? Tall and well-built with a perfect nose, a model's cheek bones, prominent chin, blue eyes and freshly coiffed blond hair, he looked like a movie star. He obviously didn't remember from the radio encounter, and I was content to leave it at that."Gomez, Recovering Legislator, pg. 228. Gomez has implied that Duke had a facelift by the time he entered the legislature.
Consistent with Gomez's observation, Duke in the latter 1980s reportedly had his nose thinned and chin augmented. Following his election to the Louisiana House of Representatives, he shaved his mustache.
Gomez continued: "He once presented a bill on the floor, one of the few which he had managed to get out of committee. He finished his opening presentation and strolled with great self-satisfaction back up the aisle to his seat. In his mind, he had spoken, made his presentation and that was that. Before he had even reached his desk and re-focused on the proceedings, another first-term member had been recognized for the floor and immediately moved to table the bill. The House voted for the motions effectively killing the bill. That and similar procedures were used against him many times."Ron Gomez, p. 230 Gomez said that he recalls Duke obtaining the passage of only a single bill, legislation which prohibited movie producers or book publishers from compensating jurors for accounts of their court experiences. 231-2
Gomez added that Duke's "tenure in the House was short and uninspired. Never has anyone parlayed an election by such a narrow margin to such a minor position to such international prominence. He has run for numerous other positions without success but has always had some effect, usually negative, on the outcome."Gomez, Recovering Legislator, pg. 231
Gomez continued: Duke's "new message was that he had left the Klan, shed the Nazi uniform he had proudly worn in many previous appearances, and only wanted to serve the people. He eliminated his high-octane anti-Semitic rhetoric. He was particularly concerned with the plight of 'European-Americans.' He never blatantly spoke of race as a factor but referred to the 'growing underclass.' He used the tried and true demagoguery of class envy to sell his message: excessive taxpayers' money spent on welfare, school busing practices, affirmative action... and set-aside programs. He also embraced a subject near and dear to every Jefferson Parish voter, protection of the homestead exemption."Gomez, Recovering Legislator, pg. 222
Duke launched unsuccessful campaigns for the U.S. Senate in 1990 and governor in 1991. Villere did not again seek office but instead concentrated his political activity within the Republican organization.

1990 campaign for U.S. Senate

Duke has often criticized federal policies which he believes discriminate against white people in favor of racial minorities. To that end he formed the controversial group, the "National Association for the Advancement of White People"."Duke undecided on Senate race", Minden Press-Herald, November 6, 1989, p. 1
Though Duke had first hesitated about entering the Senate race, he made his announcement of candidacy for the nonpartisan blanket primary held on October 6, 1990. As it turned out, Duke was the only Republican in competition against three Democrats including incumbent U.S. Senator J. Bennett Johnston, Jr., of Shreveport, whom Duke derided as "J. Benedict Johnston"."Can Johnston be beaten?", Minden Press-Herald, November 19, 1989, p. 1
Former Governor David Treen, whose brother, John Treen, Duke had defeated for state representative in 1989, called Duke's senatorial platform "garbage. ... I  think he is bad for our party because of his espousal of Nazism and racial superiority.""Treen: Renounce David Duke's 'garbage'", Minden Press-Herald, December 22, 1989, p. 7A
The Republican Party officially endorsed state Senator Ben Bagert of New Orleans in a state convention held on January 13, 1990, but national GOP officials in October, just days before the primary election, concluded that Bagert could not win. To avoid a runoff between Duke and Johnston, the GOP decided to surrender the primary to Johnston. Funding for Bagert's campaign was halted, and though at first under protest Bagert dropped out two days before the election. With such a late withdrawal, Bagert's name remained on the ballot, but his votes, most presumably cast as absentee ballots, were not counted. Duke received 43.51 percent (607,391 votes) of the primary vote to Johnston's 53.93 percent (752,902 votes).
Duke's views prompted some of his critics (including Republicans, such as the journalist Quin Hillyer) to form the Louisiana Coalition Against Racism and Nazism, which directed media attention to Duke's statements of hostility to blacks and Jews.
In a 2006 editorial, Gideon Rachman (The Economist, the Financial Times) recalled interviewing Duke's campaign manager (from his 1990 campaign) who said, "The Jews just aren't a big issue in Louisiana. We keep telling David, stick to attacking the blacks. There's no point in going after the Jews, you just piss them off and nobody here cares about them anyway."

1991 campaign for Governor of Louisiana

Despite repudiation by the Republican Party, Duke ran for governor of Louisiana in 1991. In the primary, Duke finished second to former governor Edwin W. Edwards in votes; thus, he faced Edwards in a runoff. In the initial round, Duke received 32 percent of the vote. Incumbent Governor Buddy Roemer, who had switched from the Democratic to Republican parties during his term, came in third with 27 percent of the vote. Duke effectively killed Roemer's bid for re-election. While Duke had a sizable core constituency of devoted supporters, many voted for him as a "protest vote" to register dissatisfaction with Louisiana's establishment politicians. During the campaign, Duke said he was the spokesman for the "white majority""David Duke Going for U.S. Senate seat" Sheila Grissett East Jefferson bureau. The Times-Picayune New Orleans, La.: February 23, 1996. pg. B1 and, according to the New York Times, "equated the extermination of Jews in Nazi Germany with affirmative action programs in the United States."Suro, Roberto (November 7, 1991). "THE 1991 ELECTION: Louisiana; Bush Denounces Duke As Racist and Charlatan." The New York Times
The Christian Coalition of America, which exerted considerable impact on the Republican State Central Committee, was led in Louisiana by its national direcor and vice president, Billy McCormack, then the pastor of University Worship Center in Shreveport. The coalition was accused of having failed to investigate Duke in the early part of his political resurgence. By the time of the 1991 gubernatorial election, however, its leadership had withdrawn support from Duke. Despite Duke's status as the only Republican in the runoff, sitting Republican President George H.W. Bush opposed his candidacy and denounced him as charlatan and a racist. White House Chief of Staff John Sununu stated that "The President is absolutely opposed to the kind of racist statements that have come out of David Duke now and in the past."West, Paul. (October 21, 1991). "Winners set stage for racially charged La. runoff." The Baltimore Sun.''
The interest group, the Louisiana Coalition against Racism and Nazism, rallied against the election of Duke as governor. Beth Rickey, a moderate member of the Louisiana Republican State Central Committee and a PhD student at Tulane University, began to follow Duke to record his speeches and expose what she saw as instances of racist and neo-Nazi remarks. For a time, Duke took Rickey to lunch, introduced her to his daughters, telephoned her late at night, and tried to convince her that he was a mainstream conservative in the Reagan mold.Patricia Sullivan, "Beth Rickey dies with an immune disorder and Crohn's disease," Washington Post, September 16, 2009
Between the primary and the runoff, called the "general election" under Louisiana election rules (in which all candidates run on one ballot, regardless of party), white supremacist organizations from around the country contributed to his campaign fund.
Duke's success garnered national media attention. While Duke gained the backing of the quixotic former Alexandria Mayor John K. Snyder, he won few serious endorsements in Louisiana. Celebrities and organizations donated thousands to Edwards' campaign. Referencing Edwards' long-standing problem with accusations of corruption, popular bumper stickers read: "Vote for the Crook. It's Important",Photo of bumper sticker, New Orleans, The Times-Picayune and "Vote for the Lizard, not the Wizard." When a reporter asked Edwards what he needed to do to triumph over Duke, Edwards replied with a smile: "Stay alive."
Edwards received 1,057,031 votes (61.2%). Duke's 671,009 votes represented 38.8% of the total. Duke claimed victory, saying: "I won my constituency. I won 55% of the white vote." Exit polls confirmed that he had.

1992 Republican Party presidential candidate

In 1992 Duke ran for the nomination. Republican Party officials tried to block his participation.
In 1992 a film was released that investigated Duke's appeal among some white voters. Backlash: Race and the American Dream explored the demagogic issues of Duke's platform, examining his use of black crime, welfare, affirmative action and white supremacy and tied Duke to a legacy of other white backlash politicians, such as Lester G. Maddox and George C. Wallace, Jr., and the use in the 1988 Presidential campaign of Pres. George H.W. Bush of these same racially themed hot buttons.

Late 1990s campaigns

When Johnston announced his retirement in 1996, Duke ran again for the U.S. Senate. He polled 141,489 votes (11.5%). Former Republican state representative Woody Jenkins of Baton Rouge and Democrat Mary Landrieu of New Orleans, the former state treasurer, went into the general election contest. Duke was fourth in the nine-person, jungle primary race.David Duke Heads North to Raise Money for House Race" By Michael Janofsky, The New York Times, January 3, 1999
Because of the sudden resignation of powerful Republican incumbent Bob Livingston in 1999, a special election was held in Louisiana's First Congressional District. Duke sought the seat as a Republican and received 19% of the vote. He finished a close third, thus failing to make the runoff. His candidacy was repudiated by the Republicans. Republican Party chairman Jim Nicholson remarked: "There is no room in the party of Lincoln for a Klansman like David Duke." Republican state representative David Vitter (now a U.S. Senator) went on to defeat Republican ex-Governor David C. Treen. Also in the race was the New Orleans Republican leader Rob Couhig.
In 1999 Duke ran for Louisiana's First Congressional District. Duke finished third in the May 1, 1999 election with 28,059 votes (19.15%).
In 2004, Duke's bodyguard, roommate, and longtime associate Roy Armstrong made a bid for the United States House of Representatives, running as a Democrat, to serve Louisiana's First Congressional District. In the open primary Armstrong finished second in the six candidate field with 6.69% of the vote, but Republican Bobby Jindal received 78.40% winning the seat.

Affiliations

Knights of the Ku Klux Klan

In 1974, David Duke founded the Louisiana-based Knights of the Ku Klux Klan (KKKK), a Louisiana Ku Klux Klan organization, shortly after graduating from LSU. The Emergence of David Duke and the Politics of Race University of North Carolina Press. 1992 He became Grand Wizard of the KKKK. A follower of Duke, Thomas Robb, changed the title of Grand Wizard to National Director, and replaced the Klan's white robes with business suits."The Hatemongers Get a New Tailor." The Journal of Blacks in Higher Education. Winter 1996/1997. Duke first received broad public attention during this time, as he endeavored to market himself in the mid-1970s as a new brand of Klansman: well-groomed, engaged, and professional. Duke also reformed the organization, promoting nonviolence and legality, and, for the first time in the Klan's history, women were accepted as equal members and Catholics were encouraged to apply for membership. Duke would repeatedly insist that the Klan was "not anti-black", but rather "pro-white" and "pro-Christian."

NAAWP

In 1980, Duke left the Klan and formed the National Association for the Advancement of White People (NAAWP).

Ernst Zündel and the Zundelsite

Duke has expressed his support for Holocaust denier Ernst Zündel, a German who lived in Canada. Duke made a number of statements in support of Zündel and his Holocaust denial campaign. Duke referred to him as a  "political prisoner".

Interregional Academy of Personnel Management

In September 2005, Duke received a Kandidat Nauk degree in History from the Ukrainian Interregional Academy of Personnel Management (MAUP).
His doctoral thesis was titled "Zionism as a Form of Ethnic Supremacism."

Stormfront

In 1995, Don Black and Chloê Hardin, Duke's ex-wife, began a small bulletin board system (BBS) called Stormfront. Today, Stormfront has become a prominent online forum for white nationalism, Neo-Nazism, hate speech and racism."RedState, White Supremacy, and Responsibility", Daily Kos, December 5, 2005Bill O'Reilly, "Circling the Wagons in Georgia", Fox News Channel, May 8, 2003 Duke has an account on Stormfront which he uses to post articles from his own website, www.com, as well as polling forum members for opinions and questions, in particular during his internet broadcasts. Duke has worked with Don Black on numerous projects including Operation Red Dog in 1980. manana.ca

New Orleans Protocol

Shortly after his release from prison for tax fraud in 2004, Duke organized a weekend gathering of "European Nationalists", in the vein of white nationalism, in Kenner, Louisiana. In an attempt to overcome the splintering and division that had followed the death of William Pierce in 2002, he presented a unity proposal for peace within the movement and a better image amongst outsiders. His proposal was accepted and is now known as the New Orleans Protocol (NOP). It pledges adherents to a pan-European outlook, recognizing national and ethnic allegiance, but stressing the value of all European peoples. Signed by and sponsored by a number of white supremacist leaders and organisations, it has three provisions:
Those who signed the pact on May 29, 2004 include Duke, Paul Fromm, Don Black, Willis Carto (whose holocaust-denying Barnes Review helped sponsor the event), Kevin Alfred Strom, and John Tyndall (signing as an individual, not on behalf of his British National Party). It was also adopted by the white supremacist Canadian Heritage Alliance.
The SPLC noted that the 'high tone' contrasted with statements at the event where the pact was signed such as Paul Fromm's calling a Muslim woman "a hag in a bag" and Sam Dickson (from the Council of Conservative Citizens, another sponsor) speaking "about the "very, very destructive" effect of opposing the Nazis in World War II – opposition that caused people to view Hitler's "normal, healthy racial values" as evil. They described the Protocol as a "smokescreen", saying that "most of conference participants' ire was directed at what they consider to be a worldwide Jewish conspiracy to destroy the white race through immigration and miscegenation".archive.splcenter.jsp?aid=83

Publications

Finders-Keepers

Duke wrote a self-help book for women to raise money under the pseudonym Dorothy Vanderbilt and James Konrad, titled Finders-Keepers – Finding and Keeping the Man You Want which contains sexual, diet, fashion, cosmetic and relationship advice, published by Arlington Place Books in 1976. Professor Lawrence N. Powell, who read a rare copy of the book given to him by Patsy Sims, wrote that it includes advice on vaginal exercises, fellatio, and anal sex. who compiled the information from women's self-help magazines.

My Awakening

Duke published his autobiography My Awakening: A Path to Racial Understanding in 1998. The book details Duke's social philosophies, especially his reasoning behind racial separation. In the book, Duke says:
 We (Whites) desire to live in our own neighborhoods, go to our own schools, work in our own cities and towns, and ultimately live as one extended family in our own nation. We shall end the racial genocide of integration. We shall work for the eventual establishment of a separate homeland for African Americans, so each race will be free to pursue its own destiny without racial conflicts and ill will. 
The Anti-Defamation League (ADL) book review refers to it as containing racist, antisemitic, sexist and homophobic views.
To raise the money to re-publish a new, updated edition of My Awakening, Duke instigated a 21-day fundraising drive on November 26, 2007 where he had to raise "$25,344 by a December 17 deadline for the printers."The Official Website of Representative David Duke, PhD » Day 1 of the 21 Day Fundraising Drive for the New, Updated Edition of My Awakening Duke states this drive is necessary because the work "has become the most important book in the entire world in the effort to awaken our people for our heritage and freedom."

Jewish Supremacism

In 2002, Duke traveled to Eastern Europe to promote his book, Jewish Supremacism: My Awakening on the Jewish Question in Russia in 2003. The book purports to "examine and document elements of ethnic supremacism that have existed in the Jewish community from historical to modern times." The book is dedicated to Israel Shahak, a critical author of what Shahak saw as supremacist religious teachings in Jewish culture. Former Boris Yeltsin administration official and politician Boris Mironov wrote an introduction for the Russian edition, called The Jewish Question Through the Eyes of an American.
The ADL office in Moscow urged the Moscow prosecutor to open an investigation of Mironov. The ADL office initiated a letter from a prominent Duma member to Russia's Prosecutor General Vladimir Ustinov, urging a criminal case be opened against the author and the Russian publisher of Duke's book. The letter by Aleksandr Fedulov described the book as antisemitic and as violating Russian anti-hate crime laws. Anti-Defamation League.] Around December 2001 Prosecutor's office closed the investigation of Boris Mironov and Jewish Supremacism. In a public letter, Yury Biryukov, First Deputy of the Prosecutor General of the Russian Federation, stated that a socially-psychological examination, which was conducted as a part of the investigation, concluded that the book and the actions of Boris Mironov did not break Russian hate-crime laws."Закрыто дело Миронова", Русский вестник, 2001-12-19. (Russian)]
Duke says his views had been "vindicated" with the publication of The Israel Lobby and U.S. Foreign Policy by professors John Mearsheimer and Stephen Walt, and said he was "surprised how excellent paper is". Duke dedicated several radio webcasts to the book and the authors comparing it to his work Jewish Supremacism,Duke, David. Mearsheimer and Free Speech Issues MP3, October 11, 2006[ref]Duke, David. Duke Responds to Walt and Mearsheimer! MP3,
October 10, 2006[/ref]Duke, David. Duke's views reprehensible, and I am sorry he sees this article as consistent with his view of the world". "David Duke Claims to Be Vindicated By a Harvard Dean", The New York Sun, March 20, 2006. Accessed March 28, 2006.
Duke says that his books "have become two of the two most influential and important books in the world." The ADL refer to the book as antisemitic, though Duke had denied the book is motivated by antisemitism.Jewish Supremacism: Author's Preface At one time, the book was sold in the main lobby of the building of Russian State Duma (lower house of parliament). The first printing of 5,000 copies sold out in several weeks.
In 2004, the book was published in the United States. Originally published in English and Russian, the book has subsequently been translated internationally into Swedish, Ukrainian, Persian, Hungarian, SpanishThe Official Website of Representative David Duke which Duke purports to be a "fine quality hardback edition with full color dust jacket and it has a new index and a number of timely additions".
His website has hosted articles by various authors claiming that Jewish loan-sharks own the Federal Reserve Bank

Internet commentary

On February 5, 2002, Duke said, on his Internet radio show, that Ariel Sharon was "the world's worst terrorist" and that Mossad was involved in the September 11 attacks. The broadcast said that Zionists were behind the attacks in order to reduce sympathy for Muslim nations in the West, and that the number of Israelis killed in the attack was lower than it would be under normal circumstances, citing early assessments by The Jerusalem Post and "the legendary involvement of Israeli nationals in businesses at the World Trade Center". According to Duke, this indicated that Israeli security services had prior knowledge of the attack.Ariel Sharon: The terrorist behind the 9-11 Attack! by David Duke
On February 4, 2009, Duke repeatedly called MSNBC pundit Keith Olbermann "untermensch" on his radio show in response to being labeled "Worst Person in the World" on Countdown with Keith Olbermann.stormfront.mp3

Public appearances

Public address in Syria

On November 24, 2005, Duke visited Damascus, Syria, addressing a rally which was broadcast on Syrian television, and later giving an interview. During the rally, he referred to Israel as a "war-mongering country" and stated that Zionists "occupy most of the American media and now control much of the American government…It is not just the West Bank of Palestine, it is not just the Golan Heights that are occupied by the Zionists, but Washington D.C. and New York and London and many other capitals of the world." He concluded by stating: "Your fight for freedom is the same as our fight for freedom." After speaking at the rally, Duke gave an interview where he said that Israel "makes the Nazi state look very, very moderate." Syrian parliament member Muhammad Habash later stated that Duke's visit gave Syrians a "new and very positive view of the average American."David Duke in Syria: Zionists Occupy Washington, NY and London by Ezra HaLevi, IsraelNationalNews.Screenshot whoknew.us

Comments in the media

Since 2005, Duke has appeared three times on Current Issues, a Lafayette, Louisiana–based television show hosted and produced by Palestinian-American Hesham Tillawi, which has recently been picked up by Bridges TV. Show host Tillawi gave Duke the opportunity to discourse at length about his beliefs about Jewish supremacism. On a show in October 2005, Duke claimed that Jewish extremists are responsible for undermining the morality of America and are attempting to "wash the world in blood."Interview with David Duke broadcast on "Bridges TV" network
After John Mearsheimer and Stephen Walt's paper on the Israel Lobby appeared in March 2006, Duke praised the paper in a number of articles on his website, on his March 18 Live Web Radio Broadcast, and on MSNBC's March 21 Scarborough Country program.'Scarborough Country' for March 21, show transcript, MSNBC, March 21, 2006. According to The New York Sun, Duke said in an email, "It is quite satisfying to see a body in the premier American university essentially come out and validate every major point I have been making since even before the war even started." Duke added that "the task before us is to wrest control of America's foreign policy and critical junctures of media from the Jewish extremist Neocons that seek to lead us into what they expectantly call World War IV."

Conferences

Duke organized a gathering of European Nationalists who signed the New Orleans Protocol on May 29, 2004. The signatories agreed to avoid infighting among far-right racialists.
On June 3, 2005, Duke co-chaired a conference named "Zionism As the Biggest Threat to Modern Civilization" in Ukraine, sponsored by the Interregional Academy of Personnel Management. The conference was attended by several notable Ukrainian public figures and politicians, and writer Israel Shamir.
Duke claims that Swedish police thwarted an attempted assassination against him, in August 2005, while Duke was speaking in Sweden.Assassination Attempt Against David Duke Fails by David Duke
On the weekend of June 8–10, 2006, Duke attended as a speaker at the international "White World's Future" conference in Moscow, which was coordinated and hosted by Pavel Tulaev.com From December 11–13, he Duke attended the International Conference to Review the Global Vision of the Holocaust in Tehran, Iran, opened by Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, stating "The Holocaust is the device used as the pillar of Zionist imperialism, Zionist aggression, Zionist terror and Zionist murder.""Iranian leader says Israel will be 'wiped out': Ahmadinejad renews heated rhetoric at meeting of Holocaust deniers", Associated Press, December 12, 2006
Duke attended the conference, along with Gazi Hussein (Syria); Dr Rahmandost (conference chair, Society for Supporting People of Palestine); Jan Bernhoff, a Swedish computer science teacher who maintains that 300,000 Jews died during the Holocaust;"Swedish teacher at Holocaust denial conference", The Local, December 14, 2006 and Fredrick Töben, director of the Adelaide Institute, Australia.

Criticism and legal difficulties

Plastic surgery claims

In 1990 syndicated columnist Jack Anderson argued Duke has done "everything to make himself look better to the voters, including plastic surgery".google.google.com/newspapers?nid=1347&dat=19911115&id=StMSAAAAIBAJ&sjid=FvwDAAAAIBAJ&pg=1232,1725352
Duke explained in My Awakening that he had had reconstructive surgery on his nose, which had been broken many times.

Critical publications

In Troubled Memory: Anne Levy, the Holocaust and David Duke's Louisiana by Professor Lawrence N. Powell, who teaches at Tulane University history department and was a founding member of Louisiana Coalition Against Racism and Nazism, "connects the prewar and wartime experiences of Jewish survivors to the lives they built in the United States" and depicts the "story of Anne Skorecki Levy, a Holocaust survivor who transformed the horrors of her childhood into a passionate mission to defeat the political menace of reputed neo-Nazi and Ku Klux Klan leader David Duke." The book won three awards.Troubled Memory: Anne Levy, the Holocaust and David Duke's Louisiana Info from Book Cover by Publisher

Tax fraud conviction

David Duke pleaded guilty to the felony charge of filing a false tax return under  in December 2002.David Duke pleads to mail fraud, tax charges USA Today
Four months later, Duke was sentenced to 15 months in prison, and he served the time in Big Spring, Texas. He was also fined US$10,000, ordered to cooperate with the Internal Revenue Service, and to pay money still owed for his 1998 taxes. Following his release in May 2004, he stated that his decision to take the plea bargain was motivated by the bias that he perceived in the United States federal court system and not his guilt. He said he felt the charges were contrived to derail his political career and discredit him to his followers, and that he took the safe route by pleading guilty and receiving a mitigated sentence, rather than pleading not guilty and potentially receiving the full sentence.
Duke pleaded guilty to what prosecutors described as a six-year scheme to dupe thousands of his followers by asking for donations. Through postal mail, Duke later appealed to his supporters that he was about to lose his house and his life savings. Prosecutors claimed that Duke raised hundreds of thousands of dollars in this campaign. Prosecutors also claimed he sold his home at a hefty profit, had multiple investment accounts, and spent much of his money gambling at casinos.comEx-Klan Leader David Duke Indicted CBSNews.com
The entire file of court documents related to this case can be found at The Smoking GunDavid Duke Pleads To Federal Charges Bill of Information for Mail Fraud and False Statements on an Income Tax Return website, including details on the December 12, 2002 guilty plea to federal charges that he filed a false tax return and committed mail fraud.
Don Black claims that Duke was targeted by the government to discredit him.

Arrest in the Czech Republic and dropping of the charges

On April 24, 2009, Duke, who had arrived in the Czech Republic on invitation by a Czech neo-Nazi Group known as Národní Odpor ("National Resistance")Edelweiß für den Grand Wizard, Jungle World, Nr. 22, 28. May 2009 to deliver three lectures in Prague and Brno to promote the translation of his book My Awakening into the Czech language. He was arrested on suspicion of "denying or approving of the Nazi genocide and other Nazi crimes" and "promotion of movements seeking suppression of human rights," which are crimes in the Czech Republic punishable by up to three years' imprisonment. At the time of his arrest, Duke was reportedly guarded by members of the Národní Odpor.Ex-Louisiana KKK chief arrested in Prague: Police, Agence France-Presse (reprinted by Canada.
The Czech police accused Duke of promoting movements suppressing human rights.Former KKK leader ordered to leave Czech Republic, Associated Press (reprinted by the Kansas City Star), April 24, 2009.
Duke's first lecture had been scheduled at Charles University in Prague, but it was canceled after university officials learned that neo-Nazis were planning to attend. Some Czech politicians, including Interior Minister Ivan Langer and Human Rights and Minorities Minister Michael Kocáb, had previously expressed opposition to Duke's being allowed into the country.
In September 2009, the office of the District Prosecutor for Prague dropped all charges, explaining that there was no evidence that David Duke had committed any crime.

Expulsion from Italy, 2013

An Italian court ruled to expel Duke from Italy, reported Reuters in December 2013.  The 63-year-old Duke was living in a mountain village in Italy. Although Duke had been issued a visa to live in Malta and write, Italian police later found that Switzerland had issued a residence ban against Duke throughout a group of 26 countries including Italy. Duke's attorney said he had not decided, as of December 5, 2013 whether or not to appeal the decision.

Election history

Proposed 2012 presidential campaign

Duke claimed that thousands of Tea Party movement activists had urged him to run for president in 2012
In 2013, the Louisiana secretary of state does not list Duke as a registered voter in Louisiana on its "Voter Portal" website.

Works

Notes



Further reading

| publisher = Cambridge University Press
| isbn = 0-521-81673-4
| last = Swain
| first = Carol M.
| coauthors = Russ Nieli
| title = Contemporary Voices of White Nationalism in America
| date = March 24, 2003
}}



Filmography

Interviews


