[[Divine retribution]]

CATEGORIES: Theology, Christian terms, Attributes of God in Christian theology

Divine retribution is supernatural punishment of a person, a group of people, or everyone by a deity in response to some action. Many cultures have a story about how a deity exacted punishment on previous inhabitants of their land, causing their doom.
An example of divine retribution is the story found in many cultures about a great flood destroying all of humanity, as described in the Epic of Gilgamesh, the Hindu Vedas, or Book of Genesis (6:9-8:22), leaving one principal 'chosen' survivor.  In the first example it is Utnapishtim, and in the last example Noah.  References in the Qur'an to a man named Nuh who was commanded by God to build an ark also suggest that one man and his followers were saved in a great flood.
Other examples in Hebrew religious literature include the dispersion of the builders of the Tower of Babel (Genesis 11:1-9), the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah (Genesis 18:20-21, 19:23-28), and the Ten Plagues visited upon the ancient Egyptians for persecuting the children of Israel (Exodus, Chapters 7-12). Similarly, in Greek mythology, the goddess Hera often became enraged when her husband, Zeus, would impregnate mortal women, and would exact divine retribution on the children born of such affairs. In some versions of the myth, Medusa was turned into her monstrous form as divine retribution for her vanity; in others it was as punishment for being raped by Poseidon.
In most cases, the Bible refers to be divine retribution as being delayed or "treasured up" to a future time.For we are saved by hope: but hope that is seen is not hope...(Romans 8:24)
Divine retribution is aligned with divine vengeance. (Romans 12:19)  Almighty God alone is a just judge.2 Timothy 4:8  Delayed judgment will eventually become eternally displayed.Revelation 14:11
The wrath of God is aligned with God's nature where He loves righteousness and hates wickedness. The wrath of God is commonly contrasted with the love of God.
Some religions have no concept of divine retribution, or of a god being capable of expressing such low human sentiments as jealousy, vengeance, or wrath. For example, in Deism and Pandeism, the Creator has no need to intervene in our Universe at all, and so exhibits no such behavior. In Pantheism (as reflected in Pandeism as well), God is the Universe and encompasses everything within it, and so has no need for retribution, as all things against which retribution might be taken are simply within God. This view is reflected in some pantheistic or pandeistic forms of Hinduism, as well.
The concept of divine retribution is resolutely denied in Buddhism. Gautama Buddha did not endorse belief in a creator deity, to the notion of an omnipotent creator deity or a prime mover is seen by many as a key distinction between Buddhism and other religions.
But Buddhists do accept the existence of beings in higher realms (see Buddhist cosmology), known as devas, but they, like humans, are said to be suffering in samsara, Despite this there are believed to be enlightened devas.himalayanart.html But since there may also be unenlightened devas, there also may be godlike beings who engage in retributive acts, but if they do so, then they do so out of their own ignorance of a greater truth.
Despite this nontheism, Buddhism nevertheless fully accepts the theory of karma, which posts punishment-like effects, such as rebirths in realms of torment, as a consequence of wrongful actions. Unlike in most Abrahamic monotheistic religions, these effects are not eternal, though they can last for a very long time. Due to nontheism, these are not punishment as in something imposed by an authority from above, rather they are regarded as a natural consequence of wrongful action.

"Wrath of God"

"The wrath of God", an anthropomorphic expression for the attitude which some believe God has towards sin,Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church (Oxford University Press 2005 ISBN 978-0-19-280290-3), article wrath of God, the is mentioned many times in the Christian Bible. Leaving aside the references to it in the Old Testament, where it is used of God not only when punishing the wicked but also when sending trials to the just, as in , it is mentioned in at least twenty verses of the New Testament.  Examples are:
The New Testament associates the wrath of God particularly with imagery of the Last Day, described allegorically in  as the "day of wrath", and the Book of Revelation.

Divine Retribution in the Pentateuch

Divine retribution is easily seen in the Pentateuch or first five books of the Bible which set a hermeneutical foundation of the other Bible books. Major examples of divine retribution in the Pentateuch include:

Other notable biblical retributions

The Bible being full of cases of divine retribution, some instances are particularly notable for heralding in new eras, while others were meant to serve as abject lessons in dealing with God and keeping faithful to his commands.

Culture

Divine retribution is the driving force of Shakespeare's War of the Roses tetralogy, comprising the plays 1 Henry VI, 2 Henry VI, 3 Henry VI and Richard III, in which the House of York and Lancaster are made to atone for the sin of deposing Richard II.








