[[Colligative properties]]

CATEGORIES: Solutions, Physical chemistry, Amount of substance

In chemistry, colligative properties are properties of solutions that depend upon the ratio of the number of solute particles to the number of solvent molecules in a solution, and not on the type of chemical species present. Colligative properties of Solutions" General Chemistry Mill Valley: Library of Congress, 2011. This number ratio can be related to the various units for concentration of solutions. Here we shall only consider those properties which result because of the dissolution of nonvolatile solute in a volatile liquid solvent. The word colligative is derived from the Latin colligatus meaning bound together.K.J. Laidler and J.L. Meiser, Physical Chemistry'' (Benjamin/Cummings 1982), p.196
Colligative properties include: 
Measurement of colligative properties for a dilute solution of a non-ionized solute such as urea or glucose in water or another solvent can lead to determinations of relative molar masses, both for small molecules and for polymers which cannot be studied by other means. Alternatively, measurements for ionized solutes can lead to an estimation of the percentage of ionization taking place.
Colligative properties are mostly studied for dilute solutions, whose behavior may often be approximated as that of an ideal solution.

Vapor pressure lowering

The vapor pressure of a liquid is the pressure of a vapor in equilibrium with the liquid phase. The vapor pressure of a solvent is lowered by addition of a non-volatile solute to form a solution.
For an ideal solution, the equilibrium vapor pressure is given by Raoult's law as
which is proportional to the mole fraction of solute.

Boiling point and freezing point

Addition of solute to form a solution stabilizes the solvent in the liquid phase, and lowers the solvent chemical potential so that solvent molecules have less tendency to move to the gas or solid phases. As a result, liquid solutions slightly above the solvent boiling point at a given pressure become stable, which means that the boiling point increases. Similarly, liquid solutions slightly below the solvent freezing point become stable meaning that the freezing point decreases. Both the boiling point elevation and the freezing point depression are proportional to the lowering of vapor pressure in a dilute solution.
These properties are colligative in systems where the solute is essentially confined to the liquid phase. Boiling point elevation (like vapor pressure lowering) is colligative for non-volatile solutes where the solute presence in the gas phase is negligible. Freezing point depression is colligative for most solutes since very few solutes dissolve appreciably in solid solvents.

Boiling point elevation (ebullioscopy)

The boiling point of a pure solvent is increased by the addition of a non-volatile solute, and the elevation can be measured by ebullioscopy. It is found that 
Here i is the van 't Hoff factor as above, Kb is the ebullioscopic constant of the solvent (equal to 0.512°C kg/mol for water), and m is the molality of the solution.
The boiling point is the temperature at which there is equilibrium between liquid and gas phases.  At the boiling point, the number of gas molecules condensing to liquid equals the number of liquid molecules evaporating to gas. Adding a solute dilutes the concentration of the liquid molecules and reduces the rate of evaporation. To compensate for this and re-attain equilibrium, the boiling point occurs at a higher temperature.
If the solution is assumed to be an ideal solution, Kb can be evaluated from the thermodynamic condition for liquid-vapor equilibrium. At the boiling point the chemical potential μA of the solvent in the solution phase equals the chemical potential in the pure vapor phase above the solution.

Freezing point depression (cryoscopy)

Here Kf is the cryoscopic constant, equal to 1.86°C kg/mol for the freezing point of water. Again "i" is the van 't Hoff factor and m the molality.
In the liquid solution, the solvent is diluted by the addition of a solute, so that fewer molecules are available to freeze. Re-establishment of equilibrium is achieved at a lower temperature at which the rate of freezing becomes equal to the rate of liquefying. At the lower freezing point, the vapor pressure of the liquid is equal to the vapor pressure of the corresponding solid, and the chemical potentials of the two phases are equal as well. The equality of chemical potentials permits the evaluation of the cryoscopic constant as 

Osmotic pressure

The osmotic pressure of a solution is the difference in pressure between the solution and the pure liquid solvent when the two are in equilibrium across a semipermeable membrane, which allows the passage of solvent molecules but not of solute particles. If the two phases are at the same initial pressure, there is a net transfer of solvent across the membrane into the solution known as osmosis. The process stops and equilibrium is attained when the pressure difference equals the osmotic pressure.
Two laws governing the osmotic pressure of a dilute solution were discovered by the German botanist W. F. P. Pfeffer and the Dutch chemist J. H. van't Hoff:
The osmotic pressure is proportional to the concentration of solute particles ci and  is therefore a colligative property.
As with the other colligative properties, this equation is a consequence of the equality of solvent chemical potentials of the two phases in equilibrium. In this case the phases are the pure solvent at pressure P and the solution at total pressure P + π.207

History

The word colligative (German: kolligativ) was introduced in 1891 by Wilhelm Ostwald. Ostwald classified solute properties in three categories:W.B. Jensen, J. Chem. Educ. 75, 679 (1998) Logic, History, and the Chemistry Textbook  I. Does Chemistry Have a Logical Structure?H.W. Smith, Circulation 21, 808 (1960) THEORY OF SOLUTIONS : A Knowledge of the Laws of Solutions ... 




