[[Broken Sword]]

CATEGORIES: Adventure games, Broken Sword, Humble Bundle games, Point-and-click adventure games

Broken Sword is a franchise centered on a series of adventure games. The first game in the series, Broken Sword: The Shadow of the Templars, was released in 1996 by video game company Revolution Software. The first sequel, Broken Sword II: The Smoking Mirror, was released a year later, and was followed by three more sequels: Broken Sword: The Sleeping Dragon in 2003, Broken Sword: The Angel of Death in 2006, and Broken Sword 5: The Serpent's Curse in 2013. A remake of the first game in the series, known as Broken Sword: Shadow of the Templars – The Director's Cut, was released in 2009, and a remake of the second game in the series, Broken Sword: The Smoking Mirror – Remastered.
The main protagonists of the series are George Stobbart, an American patent lawyer, and Nicole "Nico" Collard, a French freelance journalist, although Nico does not appear as a playable character in the original game The Shadow of the Templars.
The Broken Sword series was originally conceived in 1994 by Charles Cecil, Noirin Carmody and Sean Brennan, while talking about the mythology of the Knights Templar. The first three games in the series were all developed by Revolution Software, while the fourth game was co-developed by Revolution and Sumo Digital. The Shadow of the Templars and The Smoking Mirror were critical and commercial successes selling millions, while The Sleeping Dragon and The Angel of Death received mixed reviews and were not as popular as the first two games mainly due to the switch to 3D graphics and that the third game left the "point and click" interface to a more action oriented gameplay. The series appeared on several top adventure game lists. A comic book was produced for each remake of the first two Broken Sword games.
In 2007, it was revealed that a Broken Sword film was in the works and would be produced by CastleBright studios, although there has been no sign of development for many years which may indicate that the project has been abandoned.

Games

Story overview

In The Shadow of the Templars, American George Stobbart, who is touring Europe, is a witness and victim of a bomb attack on a Parisian café "La Chandelle Verte", caused by a clown, later revealed to be a serial killer named Khan, who steals an old man's briefcase and then sets off a bomb inside the café. The Serpent's Curse will follow a storyline related to the Gnostic Gospels.

Development

The Shadow of the Templars and The Smoking Mirror

Video game designer, writer and director Charles Cecil began working on the scenario for Broken Sword, Revolution Software's third game following Lure of the Temptress (1992) and Beneath a Steel Sky (1994), in 1992, which would be set in Paris with a Knights Templar storyline.
One of Cecil's goals was to depart from the humour-based adventure games more popular at the time by creating a game with good pacing and a complex storyline, a reason he thought the Knights Templar would be an ideal subject. Broken Sword offered a unique "conversation icon" system which would not reveal to the player what the protagonist was about to say; Cecil's intention was to make the game more cinematic. Although aiming at designing a game with a cinematic feel, Cecil felt the game should not resemble interactive movies of that time, which he felt were "mimicking movies". He wanted to create two protagonists who would exchange ideas, helping drive the game along. He made George American and Nico French to appeal to US and European markets. Revolution believed they needed to utilise the best of other creative industries.
Hand drawn artwork was animated by artists including Don Bluth Studios' Eoghan Cahill and Neil Breen and Red Rover Studio's Mike Burgess, resulting in graphics animated in a style resembling classic animated films. The game's final cost was one million pounds.
Broken Sword II: The Smoking Mirror was conceived in 1997, by Cecil and Revolution's crew. The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved March 12, 2012. The artwork for Broken Sword 2 was developed through a number of stages. Initially pencil drawings were made of characters which were then digitally coloured in, before being cleaned up. The background layouts were produced in a similar way, also starting out as pencil designs. They were all drawn by Eoghan Cahill and Neil Breen, who both previously worked on the original Broken Sword game, while they were now working together with Amy Berenz and Lee Taylor. The music in the game was again composed by Barrington Pheloung, with Bob Sekar adding the closing score. While Rolf Saxon returns to voice actor of George, Jennifer Caron Hall a bilingual actress and daughter of French actress Leslie Caron, was cast as Nico. Theatre director Edward Hall (director) rehearsed the assembled actors and took no more than a week to record the entire game, according to an interview given by Rolf Saxon in 2011 Alternative Magazine The game was first released for Windows on October 31, 1997.

The Sleeping Dragon and The Angel of Death

Revolution first discussed the idea of a third Broken Sword in 2000. At first, The Sleeping Dragon was planned to have similar cartoon-quality visuals to the first two Broken Sword games; however, Revolution decided not to use the "flat" look, claiming it lacked visual depth. The team wanted the game to look believable, but not necessarily realistic, similar to Japanese animated films.
Revolution Software and THQ announced Broken Sword: The Angel of Death on August 17, 2005.

The Shadow of the Templars – Director's Cut and The Smoking Mirror – Remastered

On March 21, 2009, Ubisoft released a special edition of The Shadow of the Templars for the Wii and Nintendo DS. According to Cecil, the Director's Cut came about thanks to a group of Broken Sword fans, who started an online petition begging him to bring the series to the Wii and DS. A version of the Director's Cut for iPhone and iPod Touch was released on January 20, 2010. In May 2010, a version with higher resolution and a digital comic was released on the iPad. A PC version was released on August 27, 2010 on various digital distribution services.
When considering the project, Cecil played the game again and noticed many issues, including that backgrounds were pixilated, the movies and audio were of poor quality, and he also felt some dialogue was out of place. He thought all these elements could be addressed and improved in a remastered edition, in which they could add a diary, hint system, and new artwork from Dave Gibbons, which they could offer as an interactive digital comic. On December 9, 2010, Revolution Software announced the release of Broken Sword: The Smoking Mirror – Remastered on Apple iOS devices,

''The Serpent's Curse

On August 23, 2012, Revolution announced a fifth title in the series, Broken Sword 5: The Serpent's Curse, has been in development for six months and is to return to the series' 2D graphical style with an early 2013 release targeted. Cecil also announced that, despite interest from the "industry's biggest third party publisher,""Biggest thirdparty publisher" wanted Broken Sword 5. Edge. Retrieved on 2012-08-23. funding for the game's remaining development is to be sought via Kickstarter with a target of $400,000. It received its funding of $771,561 on September 22, 2012. Edge. Retrieved on 2012-08-23. Eurogamer. Retrieved on 2012-08-23.

Characters and voice actors

Reception and legacy

Sales and critical reception

The Broken Sword franchise is Europe's most successful adventure series, selling six million units; The Shadow of the Templars and The Smoking Mirror are Revolution's best-selling titles, each selling a million copies. With the decline of the adventure genre at the beginning of the 2000s, sales of the Broken Sword series decreased as well, with The Sleeping Dragon and The Angel of Death selling a few hundred thousand copies. During the so-called "adventure renaissance", the two Broken Sword remakes were met with success; in 2011, the Director's Cut and The Smoking Mirror: Remastered sold 500 thousand copies on the iOS alone.
The series' installments have received positive reviews, with The Shadow of the Templars often being cited as a classic in the adventure genre, ranking high on various "top" lists. The remakes were met with acclaim, most notably the iOS versions, often called one of the best games on the platform.

Other media

On May 21, 2007, it was announced that Charles Cecil had begun the work of bringing the game franchise to the silver screen.
Dave Gibbons produced comics for each remake of the first two Broken Sword games; Broken Sword: The Shadow of the Templars – Director's Cut, and Broken Sword: The Smoking Mirror – Remastered.
On September 28, 2008, mindFactory released a fan-made freeware Broken Sword game, called Broken Sword 2.5: The Return of the Templars.

Awards and nominations

Game listings

Broken Sword: The Shadow of the Templars
Broken Sword II: The Smoking Mirror
Broken Sword: The Shadow of the Templars – Director's Cut
Broken Sword: The Smoking Mirror – Remastered
Broken Sword 5: The Serpent's Curse

Game element listings

The Goat Puzzle
Barrington Pheloung's "Intro" opening theme
Nicole Collard
Khan






