[[Kryptos]]

CATEGORIES: History of cryptography, Outdoor sculptures in Virginia, Central Intelligence Agency, Riddles, Uncracked codes and ciphers, 1990 sculptures, McLean, Virginia, Sculptures by Jim Sanborn, Buildings and structures in Fairfax County, Virginia, Copper sculptures

Kryptos is an encrypted sculpture by American artist Jim Sanborn located on the grounds of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) in Langley, Virginia. Since its dedication on November 3, 1990, there has been much speculation about the meaning of the encrypted messages it bears. Of the four messages, three have been solved, with the fourth remaining one of the most famous unsolved codes in the world.  The sculpture continues to provide a diversion for cryptanalysts, both amateur and professional, who are attempting to decrypt the final section.

Description

The main sculpture is located in the northwest corner of the New Headquarters Building courtyard, outside of the Agency cafeteria. The sculpture comprises four large copper plates with other elements made of red and green granite, white quartz, and petrified wood.
The name Kryptos comes from the Greek word for "hidden", and the theme of the sculpture is "intelligence gathering." The most prominent feature is a large vertical S-shaped copper screen resembling a scroll, or piece of paper emerging from a computer printer, covered with characters constituting encrypted text. The characters consist of the 26 letters of the standard Latin alphabet and question marks cut out of the copper. The main sculpture contains four separate enigmatic messages, three of which have been solved.
At the same time as the main sculpture was installed, sculptor Jim Sanborn also placed several other pieces around CIA grounds, such as several large granite slabs with sandwiched copper sheets outside the entrance to the New Headquarters Building. Several morse code messages are engraved in the copper, and one of the slabs has an engraved compass rose and a lodestone. Other elements of Sanborn's installation include a landscaped area, a duck pond, a reflecting pool, and several other seemingly unmarked slabs.
The cost of the sculpture was $250,000.

Encrypted messages

The ciphertext on one half of the main sculpture contains 869 characters in total—865 letters and 4 question marks. In April 2006, however, Sanborn released information stating that a letter was omitted on the main half of Kryptos "for aesthetic reasons, to keep the sculpture visually balanced."Zetter, Kim. "Typo Confounds Kryptos Sleuths" Wired April 20, 2006  There are also a few incorrect letters in the ciphertext which Sanborn has said were intentional, and a few letters near the beginning of the bottom half have been displaced from their normal positions, apparently intentionally. The other half of the sculpture comprises a keyed Vigenère encryption tableau, consisting of 867 letters. One of the lines of the tableau is one character too long, which Sanborn has indicated was accidental.
Sanborn worked with a retiring CIA employee named Ed Scheidt, Chairman of the CIA Cryptographic Center, to come up with the cryptographic systems used on the sculpture. Sanborn has revealed that the sculpture contains a riddle within a riddle, which will be solvable only after the four encrypted passages have been decrypted. He has given conflicting information about the sculpture's answer, saying at one time that he gave the complete solution to then-CIA director William H. Webster during the dedication ceremony; but later, he also said that he had not given Webster the entire solution. He did, however, confirm that where in part two it says "Who knows the exact location? Only WW," "WW" was intended to refer to William Webster. Sanborn also confirmed that should he die before the entire sculpture becomes deciphered, there will be someone able to confirm the solution. "Questions for Kryptos' Creator," Wired (January 20, 2005).

Solvers

The first person to publicly announce solving the first three sections, in 1999, was Jim Gillogly, a computer scientist from southern California.  Later, in 2006, Sanborn announced that he had made an error in part 2, which confirmed that the last part of the plaintext was WESTXLAYERTWO, and not WESTIDBYROWS.

Solutions

The following are the solutions of parts 1–3 of the sculpture. Misspellings present in the code are included as-is. Kryptos K1 and K2 ciphers are polyalphabetic substitution, using a Vigenère tableau similar to the tableau on the other half of the sculpture. K3 is a transposition cipher, and K4 is still unsolved.

Solution of passage 1

Keywords: Kryptos, Palimpsest

Solution of passage 2

Keywords: Kryptos, Abscissa
On April 19, 2006, Sanborn contacted the Kryptos Group (an online community dedicated to the Kryptos puzzle) to inform them that the accepted solution to part 2 was wrong. He said that he made an error in the sculpture by omitting an "X" used to indicate a break for aesthetic reasons, and that the decrypted text which ended ".....
Note: The coordinates mentioned in the plaintext: ; on Google Maps; analysis of the cited location. The point is about 150 feet southeast of the sculpture itself.

Solution of passage 3

This is a paraphrased quotation from Howard Carter's account of the opening of the tomb of Tutankhamun on November 26, 1922, as described in his 1923 book The Tomb of Tutankhamun. The question with which it ends is that posed by Lord Carnarvon, to which Carter (in the book) famously replied "wonderful things". In the actual November 26, 1922 field notes, his reply was, "Yes, it is wonderful."Tutankhamun: Anatomy of an Excavation

Solution of passage 4

Part 4 remains unsolved, though there is an active Yahoo! Group (formed in 2003) that coordinates the work of over 2000 members toward decryption of the code.
When commenting in 2006 about his error in section 2, Sanborn said that the answers to the first sections contain clues to the last section.

Analysis of solutions

Related sculptures

Kryptos is the first cryptographic sculpture made by Sanborn. After Kryptos he went on to make several other sculptures with codes and other types of writing, including one called Antipodes which is at the Hirshhorn Museum in Washington, D.C., an "Untitled Kryptos Piece" which was sold to a private collector, and a Cyrillic Projector with encrypted Russian Cyrillic text, which included an extract from a classified KGB document.  The cipher on one side of Antipodes repeats the text from CIA's Kryptos. Much of the cipher on its Russian side is duplicated on the Cyrillic Projector. The Russian portion of the cipher on the Cyrillic Projector and Antipodes was solved in 2003 after Elonka Dunin "led the charge", with the ciphertext independently decrypted by Frank Corr and Mike Bales, and plaintext translation from Russian provided by Dunin. 2003, page 224
Some additional sculptures by Sanborn include Native American Texts: Rippowam.ctmuseumquest.  Indian Run Park is located next to the US Federal Courthouse in Beltsville, MD was designed by Sanborn and contains a bronze cylinder perforated with the text of the Iroquois Book of the Great Law.  This document includes the indigenous peoples' contribution to the United States legal system. The text itself is written in Onondaga and was transcribed from the ancient oral tradition of five Iroquois nations.com/kryptos/sanborn/IndianRunPark.html
A Comma, A appeared at the Plaza in front of the new library at the University of Houston, in Houston, TX in 2004.  And Radiance was installed at the Department of Energy, Coast, and Environment, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA in 2008.

Pop culture references

The dust jacket of the US version of Dan Brown's novel The Da Vinci Code contains two references to Kryptos: One on the back cover (coordinates printed light red on dark red, vertically next to the blurbs) is a reference to the coordinates mentioned in the plaintext of part 2 (see above), except the degrees digit is off by one. When Brown and his publisher were asked about this, they both gave the same reply: "The discrepancy is intentional"; the coordinates were part of the first clue of the second Da Vinci Code WebQuest, the first answer being Kryptos. The other reference is hidden in the brown "tear" artwork—upside-down words which say "Only WW knows" which is another reference to Kryptos Part 2.
Kryptos is one of the themes in Dan Brown's 2009 novel, The Lost Symbol.319–326
A small version of Kryptos appears in the season 5 episode of Alias, "S.O.S.". In it, Marshall Flinkman, in a small moment of comic relief, says he has cracked the code just by looking at it during a tour visit to the CIA office. The solution he describes sounds like the solution to the first two parts.
A picture of Kryptos appears in the season 2 episode of The King of Queens, "Meet By-Product". A framed pictured of Kryptos hangs on the wall by the door.  Much of the dialog is centered around it.
The musical group Between the Buried and Me has a reference to Kryptos in their song "Obfuscation" from the 2009 album, The Great Misdirect.
A very similar sculpture is seen during a scene in the season 2 episode of Homeland, "New Car Smell". In it, Carrie Mathison and Nicholas Brody run into each other in front of the CIA office and various shots place the sculpture between them as they converse.

Notes



Books

Articles



Aerial photos of Kryptos location


