[[Gayatri Mantra]]

CATEGORIES: Hindu mantras

The Gāyatrī Mantra is a highly revered mantra of the Vedic tradition. Just like all the Vedic Mantras Gayatri Mantra is considered not to have an author and like all other mantras is believed to have been revealed to a Brahmarshi, in this case Brahmarshi Vishvamitra. This is a Vedic Sanskrit verse from a hymn of the Rigveda (3.62.10). The most interesting aspect of the mantra is that the mantra is considered to be not different from the divine entity that forms the content of the mantra. Thus name of the divine entity contained in the mantra is also called Gayatri. In other words, Gayatri mantra is not just a means of worship but is an object of worship by itself. The word 'Gayatri' is used in reference to the Gayatri mantra as an object of worship apart from being used as a reference to the divine entity described in the mantra. It is in this sense of Gayatri Mantra as an object of worship that the Mantra is personified into a goddess.
As the verse can be interpreted to invoke the deva Savitr, it is often called Sāvitrī mantra."Designated as sāvitrī, or gāyatrī, throughout Vedic and Sanskrit literature". M. Bloomfield, A Vedic Concordance, Harvard Oriental Series Vol. 10, Cambridge Mass. 1906, p.392b. Depending on how Savitri is interpreted, this mantra can be seen as connected to Sun Worship, Yoga, Tantra and Mother Goddess.
Its recitation is traditionally preceded by  ("great (mystical) utterance"). It is made up of three (mystical) utterances: Bhooh, Bhuvah and Svah. The three utterances are taken as the names of three worlds:- Bhooh: the terrestrial, Svah: celestial and Bhuvah: the world connecting terrestrial to celestial. These are the names of the first three of the seven vyāhṛti or higher worlds of Hindu cosmology. From a meditational point of view, Bhooh, Bhuvah, Svah are mystically interpreted as the three degrees/levels of depths of meditation: Conscious, Semi-conscious and the Unconscious.
The Gayatri Mantra is repeated and cited very widely in vedic literature,The Bloomfield concordance lists over 30 cross-references to other vedic texts. Bloomfield(1906), p.392b. and praised in several well-known classical Hindu texts such as Manusmṛti,Manusmṛti states that "there is nothing greater than the Savitri (Gayatri) Mantra." (Manu II, 83). 

The Mantra

Text

Recitation of the Gayatri Mantra is preceded by  
Following the  is then the mantra proper, the verse RV 3.62.10:

=In Devanagari=

=In IAST=

Whereas in principle the gāyatrī metre specifies three pādas of eight syllables each, the text of the verse as preserved in the Rigveda Samhita is one syllable short, the first pāda counting seven instead of eight. Metrical restoration would emend the attested tri-syllabic .B. van Nooten and G. Holland, Rig Veda. A metrically restored text. Cambridge: Harvard Oriental Series (1994).utexas.html#3.062.10a

Meaning

Meaning of key words

=tat=

The word tat = that is part of the compound 'tatsavitur'. As a result, in its split form, 'tat' is taken in its genitive form 'tasya' since the genitive case of the whole compound applies to each of its constituent words.

Savitur

The word Savitur is the genitive case of savitr̥.

savitr̥ etymologically means 'that which gives birth' (ṣuñ = prāṇiprasavē)

Connotatively it is taken as 'the power inside the Sun' or the Sun itself.

It is interpreted as the life-generating ability of the Sun or the source inside organisms that generates/inspires/drives various physical, intellectual and spiritual activities of the organism.

=VareN(I)yam=

varēṇiyaṁ(varēṇyaṁ) is derived from the verb root 'vr̥' =to choose, to select; varēṇiyaṁ(varēṇyaṁ) means the most choosable, the best.

=bhargah=

bhargah is derived from the root bhrāj = to be luminous. Thus bhargah means the self-luminous one. The word is in its nominative case, but is taken to be in accusative case.

=devasya=

devasya is the genitive case form of the word deva which is derived from div = luminous/ radiant but connotatively means the divine. This genitive case is taken to be in agreement with the genitive case of the compound 'tatsavitur' and individually with the genitive case of the word 'savitur'. 'tatsavitur devasya' is taken as a single phrase meaning 'of that divine entity called savitr'.

=dheeemahi=

dhīmahi comes from the transitive verb root 'dhī' = to think about (something/somebody), to meditate upon (something/somebody). Thus dhīmahi means we meditate upon (something/somebody).

=dhiyah=

dhiyah comes from the nominal root 'dhī' = intellect, a faculty of the spirit inside the body, life activity etc. dhiyah is the plural of dhī. The word is in its nominative case, but is taken to be in accusative case.

=yo=

Yo is a form of the word Yat/Yah = which. This word is the main cue to take the mantra as a single sentence and is syntactically taken as connected to 'tat' the first word of the mantra.

=nah=

Significance of 'nah' is that it is typically a Vedic Sanskrit word which in ordinary Sanskrit is equivalent of 'asmākaṁ'= our

=prachodayat=

pracōdayāt comes from the causative form 'cōd' of the transitive verb 'cud' = to move in a specific direction. cōd =to cause to move (something/somebody) in a specific direction. pra- is the prefix. pra- = well, intensely. pracud->pracōd = to cause intensely to move (something/somebody) in a specific direction. pracōdayāt = we wish/ it is wished 'may it intensely cause to move (something/somebody) in a specific direction'.

Traditional Interpretation

The traditional interpretation of the Mantra is by Sayana. It is :
Line1: tát(tasya) = of that; savitúr(savituh) = of Savita (the all-inspiring, all-creating one); váreṇ(i)yaṃ = the most meditation-worthy, the most knowable and hence the most relishable;
Line2: bhárgo(bhargah) = self-luminous radiance, devásya = of the divine; dhīmahi = We meditate upon;
Line3:dhíyo(dhiyah) = activities, properties and intellect; yó(yah) = which; naḥ = our; pracodáyāt = inspires; 
He sets the word order of the Mantra into the following form: 

yó(yah), naḥ, dhíyo(dhiyah), pracodáyāt, tát(tasya), devásya, savitúr(savituh), váreṇ(i)yaṃ, bhárgo(bhargah), dhīmahi.

This forms a 'which....
yó(yah) = which; naḥ = our; dhíyo(dhiyah) = activities, properties and intellect; pracodáyāt = inspires; tát=tasya = of that; devásya = of the divine; savitúr(savituh) = of Savita (the all-inspiring, all-creating one); váreṇ(i)yaṃ = the most meditation-worthy, the most knowable and hence the most relishable; bhárgo(bhargah) = self-luminous radiance; bhárgo(bhargah) = self-luminous radiance; dhīmahi = We meditate upon;
This can be put into English as " We meditate upon that most meditation-worthy, the most knowable and hence the most relishable self-luminous radiance (in the form of Parabrahman) of the divine entity called Savita (the all-inspiring, all-creating one), which inspires our activities, properties and intellect".

Modern Translations

A translation of the Gayatri verse by Ralph T. H. Griffith is as follows:
 "May we attain that excellent glory of Savitar the god:

 So may he stimulate our prayers."
[Using "Monier - Williams", analysis of the constituent words supporting the above translation can be provided as follows:see M. Monier-Williams, A Sanskrit-English Dictionary, also available online
It may be noted that Griffith does not take the Mantra as a complex sentence with a relative clause as is done by Sayana. Griffith takes the Mantra as made up of two different sentences.

Paraphrases

The following is a list of English paraphrases or free translations.

Role in Vedic and Vedantic literature

The Savitri mantra is cited widely in Vedic texts.

Usage

Main usage

Main usage of the Gayatri Mantra is for Gayatri Japa which is, among others, the core part of Sandhyavandanam-ritual stipulated by the Hindu Scriptures as an inescapable duty of a Dvija. Sandhyavandanam literally means salutation to Sandhya. Sandhya literally means transition moments of the day namely the two twilights : dawn and dusk and the solar noon. Thus Sandhyavandanam means salutation to twilight or solar noon. All the components of Sandhyavandanam ritual are centered around Sun God worship. Gayatri japa fits in the whole structure and is considered to be the core part of the ritual mainly because of the Sun God oriented meaning of the Gayatri Mantra.
Imparting the Sāvitrī mantra to young Hindu males is an important part of the traditional upanayanam ceremony, which marks the beginning of study of the Vedas.   However, traditionally, the stanza RV.3.62.10 is the Sāvitrī  imparted only to Brahmin boys. Other Sāvitrī verses are used in the upanayanam ceremony for non-Brahmins: RV.1.35.2, in the Trishtubh meter, for a Kshatriya; and, either RV.1.35.9 or RV.4.40.5, in the Jagati meter, for a Vaishya.5.4-7 and 2.7.10.  J. Gonda, "The Indian mantra", Oriens, Vol. 16, (Dec. 31, 1963), p. 285

Other usages

In addition to the Sandhyavandanam-use,  Gayatri japa is used as a method of prāyaścitta, spiritual evil effect buster, instrument of Tantric practice, instrument of occult practices believed to be effective in acquiring supernatural powers etc.
It is believed by practitioners that reciting the mantra bestows wisdom and enlightenment, through the vehicle of the Sun (Savitr), who represents the source and inspiration of the universe.

Modern reception outside of the Brahmin caste

Brahmoism

In 1827 Ram Mohun Roy published a dissertation on the Gayatri MantraTitle of the text was Prescript for offering supreme worship by means of the Gayutree, the most sacred of the Veds.  From 1830, the Gayatri Mantra was used for private devotion of Brahmos. In 1843, the First Covenant of Brahmo Samaj required Gayatri Mantra for Divine Worship. From 1848-1850 with the rejection of Vedas, the Adi Dharm Brahmins use Gayatri Mantra in their private devotions. publ. Sadharan Brahmo Samaj, 211 Cornwallis St. Calcutta

Hindu revivalism

In the later 19th century, Hindu reform movements extended the chanting of the Gayatri Mantra beyond caste and gender limitations. In 1898, Swami Vivekananda began initiating non-Brahmins with the sacred thread ceremony and the Gayatri Mantra. He based this on the interpretations of the Vedas and Bhagavad Gita that Brahmin status is earned and not hereditary.

Popular culture

A new age version of the Gayatri Mantra is featured in the opening theme song of the TV series Battlestar Galactica (2004).Battlestar Galactica's Cylon Dream Kit

Notes




