[[Murray Rothbard]]

CATEGORIES: 1926 births, 1995 deaths, American anarchists, American anti-communists, American anti–Vietnam War activists, American atheists, American book editors, American economics writers, American economists, American essayists, American foreign policy writers, American journalists, American political philosophers, American political theorists, Anarchism theorists, Anarchist academics, Anarchist historians, Anarcho-capitalists, Austrian School economists, Cardiovascular disease deaths in New York, Columbia University alumni, Critics of Objectivism, Deaths from myocardial infarction, Historians of the United States, Historians of economic thought, Jewish American historians, Jewish American social scientists, Jewish anarchists, Jewish atheists, Libertarian historians, Members of the Libertarian Party (United States), Old Right (United States), Paleolibertarianism, University of Nevada, Las Vegas faculty

Murray Newton Rothbard ([ref]The following sources identify Rothbard as an economist, philosopher, political theorist, Austrian economist, and movement-builder, among other things:
A heterodox economist,Powell, Benjamin and Stringham, Peter (September 13, 2010). "Economics in Defense of Liberty: The Contribution of Murray Rothbard." Social Science Research Network. Authors describe Rothbard as a "heterodox political economist" far out of the mainstream, who nonetheless was a charismatic figure who caught the attention and provoked responses from the mainstream.d.). "Austrian Method, Praxeology I." Mises. Professor Hoppe notes that Rothbard approached economics from a Misesian perspective which, per Hoppe, is regarded as "dogmatic and unscientific" (i.e. heterodox) by all other economists. Rothbard refused to publish in academic journals. According to economist Jeff Herbener, who calls Rothbard his friend and "intellectual mentor", Rothbard received "only ostracism" from mainstream academia. (1995). L. Rockwell (Ed.), Murray Rothbard, In Memoriam. Auburn, AL: Ludwig von Mises Institute. p.87 Rothbard rejected mainstream economic methodologies and instead embraced praxeology. To promote his economic and political ideas, Rothbard joined Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr. and Burton Blumert in 1982 to establish the Ludwig von Mises Institute in Alabama.

Life and work

Education

Murray Rothbard's parents were David and Rae Rothbard, Jewish immigrants who had immigrated to the U.S. from Poland and Russia respectively. David Rothbard was a chemist.
Rothbard wrote of having grown up as a "right-winger" (adherent of the "Old Right") among friends and neighbors who were "communists or fellow-travelers."  Rothbard characterized his immigrant father as an individualist who embraced the American values of minimal government, free enterprise, private property, and "a determination to rise by one's own merits". To Rothbard "all socialism seemed to me monstrously coercive and abhorrent."
He attended Columbia University, where he received a Bachelor of Arts degree in mathematics in 1945 and, eleven years later, his PhD in economics in 1956. The delay in receiving his PhD was due in part to conflict with his advisor, Joseph Dorfman, and in part to Arthur Burns rejecting his doctoral dissertation. Burns was a longtime friend of the Rothbard family and their neighbor at their Manhattan apartment building. It was only after Burns went on leave the Columbia faculty to head President Eisenhower's Council of Economic Advisors that Rothbard's thesis was accepted and he received his doctorate.
During the 1940s Rothbard became acquainted with Frank Chodorov and read widely in libertarian-orented works by Albert Jay Nock, Garet Garrett, Isabel Paterson, H. L. Mencken and others, as well as Austrian economist Ludwig von Mises

Marriage, employment and activism

In 1953, in New York City, he married JoAnn Schumacher (1928–1999), whom he called Joey. JoAnn was his editor and a close adviser, as well as hostess of his "Rothbard Salon".  They enjoyed a loving marriage, and Rothbard often called her "the indispensable framework" behind his life and achievements.  According to Joey, patronage from the Volker Fund allowed Rothbard to work from home as a freelance theorist and pundit for the first fifteen years of their marriage. He was offered a part-time position teaching economics to the engineering students of Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute in 1966, at age 40. This institution had no economics department or economics majors, and Rothbard derided its social science department as "Marxist." However, Justin Raimondo writes that Rothbard liked his role with Brooklyn Polytechnic because working only two days a week gave him freedom to contribute to developments in libertarian politics.
Rothbard continued in this role for twenty years, until 1986. Klein, Editor, F. A. Hayek, The Fortunes of Liberalism: Essays on Austrian Economics and the Ideal of Freedom, University of Chicago Press, 2012, p. 54, ISBN 0226321169 Then 60 years old, Rothbard left Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute for the Butt Business School at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas, where he held the title of S.J. Hall Distinguished Professor of Economics, an endowed chair paid for by a libertarian businessman. "Three National Treasures." Mises.org
After Rothbard's death, Joey reflected on Rothbard's happiness and bright spirit. "... This was important to him." She recalled how Rothbard would begin every day with a phone conversation with his colleague Llewellyn Rockwell. "Gales of laughter would shake the house or apartment, as they checked in with each other. Murray thought it was the best possible way to start a day." The New York Times obituary called Rothbard "an economist and social philosopher who fiercely defended individual freedom against government intervention."David Stout, Obituary: Murray N. Rothbard, Economist And Free-Market Exponent, 68, The New York Times, January 11, 1995.

Conflict with Ayn Rand

In 1954, Rothbard, along with several other attendees of Mises' seminar, joined the circle of novelist Ayn Rand, the founder of Objectivism. He soon parted from her, writing, among other things, that her ideas were not as original as she proclaimed but similar to those of Aristotle, Thomas Aquinas and Herbert Spencer.com. "The Sociology of the Ayn Rand Cult."
"Mozart Was a Red" was Rothbard's unpublished one-act play written as a farce.[ref]Chris Matthew Sciabarra,
