[[Red-shouldered Hawk]]

CATEGORIES: Buteo, Birds of prey, Birds of the United States, Birds of Mexico, Birds of Canada

The Red-shouldered Hawk (Buteo lineatus) is a medium-sized hawk. Its breeding range spans eastern North America and along the coast of California and northern to northeastern-central Mexico. Red-shouldered Hawks are permanent residents throughout most of their range, though northern birds do migrate, mostly to central Mexico. The main conservation threat to the widespread species is deforestation.

Description

Males are . Houghton Mifflin (2001), ISBN 0-618-12762-3 Adults have brownish heads, reddish chests, and pale bellies with reddish bars. Their tails, which are quite long by Buteo standards, are marked with narrow white bars. Red "shoulders" are visible when the birds are perched. These hawks' upper parts are dark with pale spots and they have long yellow legs. Western birds may appear more red, while Florida birds are generally paler. The wings of adults are more heavily barred on the upper side. Juvenile Red-shouldered Hawks are most likely to be confused with juvenile Broad-winged Hawks, but can be distinguished by their long tails, crescent-like wing markings, and a more flapping, Accipiter-like flight style. In direct comparison, it is typically larger and longer proportioned than the Broad-wing, though is slightly smaller and more slender than most other common North American Buteos. This bird is sometimes also confused with the widespread Red-tailed Hawk. That species is larger and bulkier, with more even-sized, broad wings and is paler underneath, with a reddish tail often apparent. The Red-tail is also more likely to soar steadily, with wings in a slight dihedral.

Taxonomy

The Red-shouldered Hawk is a member of the genus Buteo, a group of medium-sized raptors with robust bodies and broad wings. Members of this genus are known as buzzards in Europe, but hawks in North America.[ref]
[/ref]
There are five recognized subspecies of Buteo lineatus, which vary in range and in coloration:

Distribution and Habitat

An eastern population ranges west through s. Canada from s. New Brunswick and w. Ontario to eastern edge of U.S. Great Plains, south to Florida, Gulf Coast, and e. Mexico. Only northernmost populations are migratory. A western population breeds west of Sierra Nevada from n. California to n. Baja California, and has recently expanded into Oregon and Arizona, and east of the Sierra Mountains in California.
Eastern population winters from s. Wisconsin, Oklahoma, Ohio and s. New England south to Gulf Coast; occasionally throughout breeding range. In winter, reported south to Jalisco, state of México, and Veracruz, Mexico. Western population largely non-migratory. Throughout its winter range, this species avoids higher elevations.
Eastern birds occasionally wander west (e.g., Colorado, Kansas, w. Texas, Manitoba, North Dakota) in migration; Western birds have strayed east to Arizona, Nevada, Idaho, and Utah, and north to Washington.birds.edu/bna/species/107/articles/distribution. The Birds of North America Online. Retrieved 2014-02-25.
In the East, individuals from the northern half of the species' range are migratory. In the West, most populations are sedentary. Red-shouldered Hawks are short- to moderate-distance migrants, with most individuals traveling distances between 300 km and 1,500 km each way. The species follows leading lines, migrating along inland ridges and coastlines. Larger numbers of Red-shouldered Hawks are counted at coastal watchsites than at inland sites. Juveniles often precede adults on migration in autumn, whereas adults precede juveniles in the spring. Red-shouldered Hawks typically migrate alone, although they sometimes form small flocks of three or more birds. The species usually avoids crossing large bodies of water. While migrating, Red-shouldered Hawks are observed in soaring, gliding, and flapping flight Red-shouldered Hawk(Buteo lineatus- Hawk Mountain Hawk Mountain. Retrieved 2104-02-27.
Red-shouldered Hawks are forest raptors. In the East, they live in bottomland hardwood stands, flooded deciduous swamps, and upland mixed deciduous–conifer forests. They tend to live in stands with an open subcanopy, which makes it easier for them to hunt. They are not exclusively birds of deep forest, though; you'll find Red-shouldered Hawks in some suburban areas where houses or other buildings are mixed into woodlands. In the West, they live in riparian and oak woodlands, and also in eucalyptus groves and some residential areas. Allaboutbirds. Retrieved on 2014-02-25.

Behavior

Diet

Red-shouldered hawks search for prey while perched on a treetop or soaring over woodlands. When they sight prey, they kill it by dropping directly onto it from the air. They may cache food near their nest for later consumption.ummz.edu/accounts/Buteo_lineatus/ Animal Diversity Web. Retrieved 2014-02-25. When in clearings, they sometimes fly low to surprise prey. Red-shouldered Hawks, like most raptors, have very sharp vision and reasonably good hearing, with talons capable of killing animals at least equal to their own size. Small mammals are typically the most important prey, especially rodents. Voles, gophers, mice, moles and chipmunks may locally be favored based on abundance. Slightly larger mammals, such as rabbits and tree squirrels, are also occasionally predated. Other prey can include amphibians, reptiles (especially small snakes), small birds, and large insects. They will attack birds as large as pigeons. Blue jays, a potential prey species, sometimes habitually imitate the call of the Red-shouldered Hawk and are known to be difficult to distinguish on voice alone. Birds.edu. Retrieved on 2012-12-19. During winters, Red-shouldered Hawks sometimes habituate to preying on birds commonly found at bird feeders. In some areas where they are common, crayfish can be important prey for this species. Unusual food items recorded for the species have included turnal animals such as Eastern Screech Owls and flying squirrels and road-killed deer.

Reproduction

The breeding habitats of the Red-shouldered Hawk are deciduous and mixed wooded areas, often near water. They have been known to nest near residential areas and open water but this is much less common., Dykstra, C., Hays, J., Simon M. (2001). CORRELATION OF RED-SHOULDERED HAWK ABUNDANCE AND MACROHABITAT CHARACTERISTICS IN SOUTHERN OHIO. The Condor 103(3), 652-656.
[/ref] Red-shouldered hawks select sites with greater tree species richness for nesting., King, J., Woodford J. (2011). Distribution and nest site selection of red-shouldered hawks (Buteo lineatus) in forests of northeastern Wisconsin (USA). Forest Ecology and Management 261(1), 169–177. Like almost all raptors, the Red-shouldered Hawk is monogamous and territorial. While courting or defending territories, the distinctive, screaming kee-aah call (usually repeated three to four times) of this bird is heard. Courtship displays occur on the breeding grounds, and involve soaring together in broad circles while calling, or soaring and diving toward one another. Males may also perform the "sky-dance" by soaring high in the air, and then making a series of steep dives, each followed by a wide spiral and rapid ascent. These courtship flights usually occur in late morning and early afternoon.
Red-shouldered Hawks' mating season is between April and July, with activity usually peaking between April and mid-June. The breeding pair builds a stick nest (also sometimes including shredded bark, leaves and green sprigs) in a major fork of a large tree. They often use the same nest year after year, refurbishing it annually with sticks in the spring. The clutch size is typically three to four eggs. The blotchy-marked eggs, often brown to lavender in color, measure on average  at first, are brooded almost constantly by the female for up to 40 days. Pairs that nest earlier in the breeding season tend to lay greater numbers of eggs and have higher productivity from those eggs., McMILLIAN, M., COHEN, J., CATLIN, D. (2008). ENVIRONMENTAL CORRELATES OF NESTING SUCCESS IN RED-SHOULDERED HAWKS. The Condor 109(3), 648-657. The male more often captures food but will also incubate and brood occasionally. The young leave the nest at about six weeks of age, but remain dependent on the parents until they are 17 to 19 weeks old. They may continue to roost near the nest site until the following breeding season. Breeding maturity is usually attained at 1 or 2 years of age.
Although they have lived as long as within a month of 20 years old, few live half that long and only around half survive their first year. Each year overall nesting success can be lower than 30 percent.,Eloranta, C., Rinaldi A. (2008). Nest Density, Productivity, and Habitat Selection of Red-Shouldered Hawks in a Contiguous Forest. Journal of Raptor Research 42(2), 79-86.
[/ref] Early mortality can be due to natural causes, relating to harsh weather conditions, or more often starvation. Young hawks are often parasitized by species such as Trichomonas gallinae, Protocalliphora avium, and blood parasites., Dubay, S., Huspeni, T., VanLanen, A., Gerhold R. (2010). Parasite Infections in Nestling Red-Shouldered Hawks (Buteo lineatus) in Northeast Wisconsin. Journal of Parasitology 96(3), 535-540. Humans, unintentionally or intentionally are a threat to Red-shouldered Hawks, including hunting, collision with electric wires, road accidents and logging. A further common cause of mortality is natural predation. Raccoons, martens, fishers and large arboreal snakes can predate eggs, hatchlings, fledgings and occasionally incubating and brooding adults. Non-nesting adults, being a fairly large and powerful predator, have fewer natural predators, but (both during and after the breeding season) they may be predated by Great Horned Owls, Red-tailed Hawks, Barred Owls, other Red-shouldered Hawks, Northern Goshawks, Eurasian Eagle-Owls, Peregrine Falcons, Prairie Falcons, and Bald and Golden Eagles. Many of the same predators sometimes compete over territory and food with this species. In Florida, Red-shouldered Hawks sometimes collaborate and peaceably coexist with American Crows (usually an enemy to all other birds because of their egg-hunting habits) so they cooperatively mob mutual predators, mainly Great Horned Owls and Red-tailed Hawks.

Status

Prior to 1900, the Red-shouldered Hawk was one of the most common North American raptors. Population densities have decreased precipitously due to the clearing of mature forests (principally the wet hardwood forest they prefer) since that time. The changing of habitats has led to a general population increase of the Red-tailed Hawk, an occasional predator of its cousin. Additionally affecting the Red-shouldered Hawk was the greater availability of firearms in the early 1900s, leading to unchecked hunting of this and all other raptor species until conservation laws took effect in the latter half of the 20th century. Local forest regrowth and the ban of hunting has allowed Red-shouldered Hawk populations to become more stable again and the species is not currently considered conservation dependent. In Florida, the Red-shouldered Hawk is perhaps the most commonly seen and heard raptor species. Naplesnews. Retrieved on 2012-12-19. However, human activity, including logging, poisoning from insecticides and industrial pollutants, continue to loom as threats to the species. The DDT would cause their eggs to have thin, breakable shells, reducing their ability to reproduce. Accidental encounters with power lines and automobiles also take a toll on hawks. In spite of these dangers, habitat loss remains the biggest threat to red-shouldered hawks.tpwd.tx. Retrieved 2014-02-25.

In art

John James Audubon illustrates the Red-shouldered Hawk in his book

Gallery

File:Red_shouldered_hawk_closeup.jpg|Perched, taken in Northern Virginia
File:Red-shouldered Hawk Molting.jpg|In Lighthouse Beach Park, Sanibel, Florida
File:Red Shouldered Hawk portrait.jpg
File:Redshoulderedhawk.jpg|In Carrboro, NC, 2007 
File:Red-shouldered hawk with kill in GGP.jpg|With a kill
File:Red-shouldered hawk in Dunwoody.jpg|Red-shouldered Hawk taken in Dunwoody, GA, 2008
File:Red-shouldered-hawk 1.jpg|Cloisters City Park in Morro Bay, CA
File:Kanapaha-2008 04 09-IMG 0128.JPG|Kanapaha Botanical Gardens, Gainesville, FL, 2008
File:Rkinch red-shouldered hawk.jpg|Red-shouldered hawk in Palm Beach County, Florida USA, 2012
File:Red-Shouldered Hawk at Everglades National Park with Feathers Fluffed.jpg|With feathers fluffed up
File:Red Shouldered Hawk on Blue Sky.JPG|Red Shouldered Hawk at the Avian Reconditioning Center, Florida






