[[Mycoplasma genitalium]]

CATEGORIES: Mollicutes, Model organisms

Mycoplasma genitalium is a small parasitic bacterium that lives on the ciliated epithelial cells of the primate genital and respiratory tracts. M. genitalium is the smallest known genome that can constitute a cell, and the second-smallest bacterium after the endosymbiont Carsonella ruddii. Until the discovery of Nanoarchaeum in 2002, M. genitalium was also considered to be the organism with the smallest genome. There is a difference between smallest parasitic bacteria and smallest free living bacteria. The smallest known free living bacterium is Pelagibacter ubique with 1.3 Mb.

Origin and Isolation

Mycoplasma genitalium was originally isolated in 1980 from urethral specimens of two male humans with non-gonococcal urethritis.  Infection by M. genitalium seems fairly common, can be transmitted between partners during unprotected sexual intercourse, and can be treated with antibiotics; however, the organism's role in genital diseases is still unclear.

Genome

The genome of M. genitalium consists of 525 genes   It was the second complete bacterial genome ever sequenced, after Haemophilus influenzae. The small genome of M. genitalium made it the organism of choice in The Minimal Genome Project, a study to find the smallest set of genetic material necessary to sustain life.

Symptoms of infection

Various symptoms of infection: An infected person may have some or all symptoms, or may be asymptomatic.
This infection is associated with bacterial vaginosis.  In the long term, this infection is suspected to cause pelvic inflammatory disease.

Treatment

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in the United States recommend using (reference no longer exists) one of these treatments, in this order of preference (the first is known to be the most effective, the others are alternative treatments)
Studies have demonstrated that a 5 day course of Azithromycin has a superior cure rate than a single dose. Further, a single dose of Azithromycin can lead to the bacteria becoming resistant to Azithromycin.ncbi.nih. Doxycycline is also still used but Moxifloxacin is seen as an alternative treatment.Mycoplasma Genitalium Treatment Choices

Synthetic life

In October 2007, a team of scientists headed by DNA researcher Craig Venter and Nobel laureate Hamilton Smith announced that they plan to create the first artificial life form in history by creating a synthetic chromosome, which they plan to inject into the M. genitalium bacterium, with potential to result in an artificial species dubbed Mycoplasma laboratorium or Mycoplasma JCVI-1.0 after the research centre in which it was created, the J. Craig Venter Institute in the United States.
On 24 January 2008, the same team reported to have synthesized the complete 582,970-base pair genome of M. genitalium (a key gene that enables the wild organism to cause disease was knocked out). The final stage of synthesis was completed inside a M capricolum, which had its DNA removed, with the help of yeast cells (which were used to create the necessary DNA).
On 20 July 2012, Stanford University and the J. Craig Venter Institute announced successful simulation of the complete life cycle of a Mycoplasma genitalium cell, in the journal Cell.  The entire organism is modeled in terms of its molecular components, integrating all cellular processes into a single model. 
Using object oriented programming to model the interactions of 28 categories of molecules including DNA, RNA, proteins, and metabolites, and running on 128-core Linux cluster, the simulation takes 10 hours for a single M. genitalium cell to divide once — about the same time the actual cell takes — and generates half a gigabyte of data.








