[[Tom Campbell (California politician)]]

CATEGORIES: 1952 births, Living people, California Republicans, California State Senators, Chapman University School of Law faculty, Harvard Law School alumni, Law clerks of the Supreme Court of the United States, Members of the United States House of Representatives from California, San Francisco Bay Area politicians, People from Santa Clara County, California, Reagan Administration personnel, Recipients of the Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana, 1st Class, Stanford Law School faculty, State cabinet secretaries of California, St. Ignatius College Prep alumni, University of California, Berkeley faculty, University of Chicago alumni, White House Fellows

Thomas John "Tom" Campbell (born August 14, 1952) is the Dean of Chapman University School of Law, a former five-term Republican United States Congressman from California's 12th and 15th districts, a former professor at Stanford Law School, a former dean of the Haas School of Business, and a former professor of business administration at the University of California, Berkeley.  He served as the Director of Finance for the State of California. In 2000 he retired from his House seat to run for the U.S Senate but lost decisively to incumbent Dianne Feinstein in 2004 and 2005, and previously served a term in the California State Senate. On June 8, 2010, he lost his third bid for the United States Senate seat held by Democrat Barbara Boxer, having been defeated in the Republican primary by Carly Fiorina.

Early life

Born in Chicago, Campbell was the valedictorian of Chicago's St. Ignatius College Prep, Class of 1969. He went on to obtain his B.A. and M.A. degrees from the University of Chicago (1973), a J.D. from Harvard Law School (1976) and then a subsequent Ph.D. in economics from the University of Chicago (1980). He served as a clerk to U.S. Supreme Court Justice Byron White from 1977 to 1978 and, the year before that, for U.S. Court of Appeals Judge George E. MacKinnon. His mentor was Milton Friedman. Tom Campbell's father was the late Hon. William Joseph Campbell, a former  Chief Judge of the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois. While Tom Campbell was raised in a Democratic family, he became a Republican during college.
Campbell was admitted to the Illinois bar in 1976 and went into private practice in Chicago. He was a White House Fellow in the offices of the Chief of Staff and Counsel (1980–1981). He then served in the Reagan Administration as Director of the Bureau of Competition, Federal Trade Commission (1981–1983).

Law professor

Campbell became a law professor at Stanford Law School in 1983, receiving tenure as a full professor in 1987.

Congressional and State Senate career

Campbell took a leave of absence in 1988 to run for the Republican nomination in California's 12th Congressional District, which included his home in Campbell and Stanford University.  The 12th had traditionally been a moderate Republican bastion, but had grown increasingly friendly to Democrats over the years.  Campbell soundly defeated first-term incumbent Ernie Konnyu in the Republican primary and narrowly defeated his Democratic opponent, San Mateo County Supervisor Anna Eshoo.  He served two terms before making an unsuccessful bid for the Republican nomination for the Senate seat being vacated by Alan Cranston. He lost the Republican primary to a considerably more conservative Republican, Bruce Herschensohn, who in turn was defeated by Democratic Congresswoman Barbara Boxer. His political career would have probably been in jeopardy in any case; his district had been renumbered as the 14th District and had been made considerably more Democratic than its predecessor. (It was won by Eshoo, who still holds the seat.)
In 1993, California State Senator Becky Morgan stepped down mid-term, and Campbell won a special election to replace her. In the California state Senate, Campbell was Chairman of the Housing Committee, Vice Chairman of the Education Committee, and served on the Budget Committee. California Journal rated him the Best Problem Solver in the State Senate, the Most Ethical State Senator, and the overall Best State Senator.
In 1995, 15th District Democratic Congressman Norman Mineta, later the Secretary of Commerce under president Bill Clinton and Secretary of Transportation under George W. Bush, unexpectedly resigned. Campbell's home had been redrawn into this San Jose-based district, and he ran in the special election. Mineta had held the seat since 1975, and it was widely considered a safe Democratic district.  Despite the considerable disadvantage in voter registration and Democratic attempts to tie him to Speaker Newt Gingrich, Campbell won the December special election easily. He won a full term almost as easily in 1996 and was handily re-elected in 1998.
During his two stints in Congress, Campbell was reckoned as one of the more moderate House Republicans.  He was very liberal on social issues (for instance, he was a strong supporter of abortion and gay rights) while conservative on fiscal matters.  This was not surprising, as Bay Area Republicans tend to be somewhat more moderate on social and environmental matters than their counterparts in the rest of California. He has a decided libertarian streak, and remains popular with libertarian-leaning Republicans.  As a fiscal conservative, he was the only Republican in the House to vote against the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997.
Campbell led a group of 17 bipartisan members of Congress who filed a lawsuit against President Bill Clinton in 1999 over his conduct of the war in Kosovo. In the filing, they accused Clinton of not reporting to Congress within 48 hours on the status of the action as required by the 1973 War Powers Resolution and not first obtaining a declaration of war from Congress as required in the Constitution. Congress had voted 427 to 2 against a declaration of war with Yugoslavia and had voted to deny support for the air campaign. A federal judge dismissed the lawsuit, ruling that since Congress had voted for funding after the U.S. was actively engaged in the war with Kosovo, legislators had sent a confusing message about whether they approved of the war. Campbell said afterwards that this was a sidestepping of the law, and lawmakers who disagree with a war should not be forced to cut off funding for troops who are in the midst of it in order to get a judge to order an end to it.
In 2000, Campbell won the Republican nomination to take on Democratic Senator Dianne Feinstein. Despite touting his service as a Republican representing a strongly Democratic district, he was underfunded and a decided underdog against the popular, heavily financed Feinstein. Campbell was badly defeated, losing by over 19 points.  He even lost his own district by almost 15 points.  State Assemblyman Mike Honda, a Mineta protege, won Campbell's old seat by 12 points; the Republicans have only put up nominal challengers in that district since then.
In 2008, Campbell wrote in Reason that he would be voting no on Proposition 8 per his Republican beliefs that "government should be limited. Government has no business making distinctions between people based on their personal lives."Ending Marriage Discrimination in California: Why Republicans should vote no on Prop 8 Tom Campbell, October 24, 2008

Return to legal scholarship

In 2000, Campbell returned to Stanford.  He remained there until his appointment at the Haas School of Business at UC Berkeley in 2002. In the intervening years, he began to assemble the material, out of his professional political experiences, for his book The Separation of Powers in Practice 
As Dean of the Haas School, Campbell stressed the study of corporate social responsibility and business ethics amid an era of corporate scandals. A full-fledged Center for Responsible Business was established. In September 2004, Campbell was named by California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger to his newly formed Council of Economic Advisors.  From 2004 to 2005 Campbell took a leave of absence from his Berkeley post to serve as director of the California Department of Finance in the Schwarzenegger administration.
On August 27, 2007, Campbell announced that he would step down from his position at Haas in the summer of 2008.Ex-congressman Campbell plans to step down as Haas School dean
In mid-2008, Campbell joined the Palo Alto office of Los Angeles-based Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher LLP.Chapman University – Faculty – Visiting – Honorable Tom Campbell  In February 2011, Chapman announced that Campbell would be its new Dean. before going on to seek the 2010 Republican nomination for U.S. Senator from California; neither Eastman and Campbell won the Republican nomination in their respective races).

Return to politics

In July 2008, Tom Campbell filed the necessary paperwork in order to establish a committee with the intent to raise funds for a prospective race for the Republican nomination to be Governor of California in 2010.
On January 13, 2010, the Wall Street Journal reported that Campbell would run for the United States Senate, instead of for Governor of California.
Campbell's Web Site confirmed it.

Al-Arian controversy

In February 2010, a dispute was triggered by his 2002 letter in defense of Sami Al-Arian.  On March 2, 2006, Al-Arian entered a guilty plea to a charge of conspiracy to help the Palestinian Islamic Jihad, a "specially designated terrorist" organization; he was sentenced to 57 months in prison, and ordered deported following his prison term. Petersberg Times, April 23, 2006.
Campbell said he had not been aware of the charges against Al-Arian when he wrote his January 21, 2002, letter to USF's president, asking USF not to discipline Al-Arian.  Campbell said:   I did not hear, I did not read, I was not aware of statements Sami Al-Arian had made relative to Israel.  And I would not have written the letter had I known about those. ... To say 'Death to Israel' is abhorrent, it's horrible. 
Campbell said he should have done more research before writing the letter in Al-Arian's defense. While he was not aware of Al-Arian's statements, he said he "should have" been aware of them. "I should not have done so. I regret it."  At the same time, however, in the letter itself, Campbell had written:  "I read a transcript of the O'Reilly Factor interview".Campbell, Tom, "Letter to President Genshaft", January 21, 2002, accessed March 17, 2010
GOP consultant Ken Khachigian described the matter as "a political misstep".sacbee.html

Electoral history

Books





Online political profiles


