[[Logar Province]]

CATEGORIES: Provinces of Afghanistan, Logar Province

Logar () is one of the 34 provinces of Afghanistan.
The word of Logar is a combination of two Pashto words: Loy (لوى "great") and Ghar (غر "mountain"). The population is mostly Pashtuns and Tajiks. It is located in the eastern zone, southeast of Kabul, and the geography of the province centers on the large Logar River which enters the province through the west and leaves to the north. Its capital is Pul-i-Alam.

Soviet occupation

Logar was known among Afghans as د جهاد ور )  باب الجهاد ) 'Bab al-Jihad', or 'the Gates of Jihad' because it became a fierce theatre of war between Mujahideen groups and the Soviet army and it was the main supply route of Mujahideen coming from south and Pakistan and going towards Northern and Central Afghanistan. According to Mohammad Hassan Kakar, a historian and personal survivor of the war, the region was the site of the largest attacks by the Soviets throughout the war; he further states that the military caused extensive casualties and denuded, looted, and vandalized the area.  Swedish journalist Borge Almqvist, who visited the province in 1982, wrote,  "Everywhere in the Logar province the most common sight except for ruins are graves". Soviet operations included using bombing, the use of flammable liquids to burn alive people in hiding, poisoning of drinking water, and destruction of crops and farmland. According to Kakar, the Soviet actions in this province amounted to genocide.

Geography

Logar can be generally described as a relatively flat river valley in the north and central regions, surrounded by rugged mountains to the east, south, and southwest. The district of Azra, in the east, consists almost entirely of mountains, while travel to the Paktia Province to the south is limited to the Tera Pass, a 2896 m high road that was recently completed as part of the international reconstruction effort in Afghanistan. The Kabul-Gardez Highway runs north-south through Logar Province, from the Mohammed Agha District south to the Paktiya Province border.
Although the government of Afghanistan recognizes the Azra district as being in Logar, many widely accepted maps include it in the Paktia province to the south.

Capital

Logar's capital is the city of Pul-i-Alam, located in the district of the same name. It sits on the main road running from Kabul south to Gardez and Khowst province, which borders Pakistan.
Pul-i-Alam has seen a significant amount of reconstruction since the fall of the Taliban. The main road to Kabul was completed in 2006, significantly reducing travel time to the national capital. Additional projects include numerous schools, radio stations, government facilities, and a major Afghan National Police base situated just south of the city.
Like most Afghan cities, there is little municipal planning or services. Electricity is provided by diesel generators, and wells are the primary source of drinking water.

Education

The overall literacy rate in Logar province is 21%, however, while nearly one-third (31%) of men are literate this is true for just under one-tenth (9%) of women. There are around 168 primary and secondary schools in the province catering for 81,538 students. There are nearly 2,082 teachers working in schools in the Logar province. There are several girls schools in the province, mostly located in Koshi and Pul-e-alam. Due to the large Taliban presence in Chark and Baraki Barak, the freedom of women in Logar does not always allow for an education. As of 2007, the province had a literacy rate of 17%.

Demographics

The largest ethnic group in Logar are Pashtuns and small Tajik minority.

Districts

Until 2005 the district was administratively subdivided into five districts. In that year the province gained Azra District from neighbouring Paktia Province; also part of Charkh District was split off into the new district of Kharwar.

Sport

Cricket is the most popular sport in the province. Logar has been a major supplier of players for the Afghan national team. Former players include Dawlat Ahmadzai, Ahmad Shah Pakteen and former national team captain Raees Ahmadzai. 
Among the active national players hailing from Logar are: Mohammad Nabi Isakhel Ahmadzai(captain of the national team)Shahpoor Zadran, Hashmatullah Shahidi, Nasir Jamal Ahmadzai and Gulbadin Naib Ahmadzai.  Football is the second most popular sport in the province. De Abasin Sapih (English "Weaves of Abasin". Abasin means "the father of the rivers" in Pashto language. Abasin is the name of the Indus River) a team representing the provinces of Paktia, Logar, Paktika  and Khyber Pakhtoonkhwa plays at Afghanistan premier league.






