[[Laura Tyson]]

CATEGORIES: 1947 births, Academics of the London Business School, American people of Italian descent, Center for American Progress people, Clinton Administration personnel, Directors of Morgan Stanley, Female economists, Haas School of Business faculty, Living people, Massachusetts Institute of Technology alumni, Princeton University faculty, Smith College alumni, United States Council of Economic Advisers

Laura D'Andrea Tyson (born June 28, 1947) is an American economist and former Chair of the US President's Council of Economic Advisers during the Clinton Administration. She also served as Director of the National Economic Council. She is currently a professor at the Haas School of Business of the University of California, Berkeley.

Early life and education

Tyson was born Laura D'Andrea in New Jersey. She joined the faculty of the economics department at Princeton University in 1974 and remained in the position until 1977 when she became a professor of economics at the University of California, Berkeley. She was appointed a professor of business administration in 1990. She is married to writer Erik S. Tarloff and has one son, Elliot S. Tarloff. Her brother is Alan D'Andrea, an American cancer researcher and the Alvan T. and Viola D. Fuller American Cancer Society Professor of Radiation Oncology at Harvard Medical School.  Her sister is Susan D'Andrea Lee, retired supervising examiner for the Federal Reserve Bank of New York currently a policy advisor at the Office of Financial Research, US Department of the Treasury, Washington DC.

Career

From 2002 to 2006, Tyson was the first female Dean of London Business School. From 1998 to 2001, she was Dean of the Haas School of Business. She served in the Clinton Administration as Chairman of the President's Council of Economic Advisers from 1993 to 1995. She was a spokesperson in favour of GATT, arguing with Sir James Goldsmith on Charlie Rose that American jobs will be increased by the trade agreement.  Tyson was Director of the National Economic Council from 1995 to 1996. Tyson has been a member of the Council on Foreign Relations since 1987, a board director of Morgan Stanley since 1997, a board director of AT&T Inc. since 1999, a board director of Eastman Kodak and is a member of the Committee on Capital Markets Regulation. In December, 2009 it was announced that Tyson will join CB Richard Ellis Board of Directors on March 4, 2010. Tyson also sits on the QFINANCE Strategic Advisory Board.
Tyson has published a number of books and articles on industrial competitiveness, trade, and also on the economies of Central Europe and their transitions to market systems.
An Economic Viewpoint columnist for BusinessWeek magazine, Tyson writes regularly about domestic and international economic policy matters in The Washington Post, The New York Times and other nationally and internationally syndicated newspapers and magazines.
In addition to her professorship at UC Berkeley, Tyson is also a member of the Board of Trustees at UC Berkeley's Blum Center for Developing Economies.berkeley.blumcenter.edu
Tyson joined Berkeley Research Group, LLC, an expert services advisory firm co-founded by David Teece, as a special advisor in 2010. Tyson had consulted for LECG, another expert advisory firm founded by Teece, from 1997 to 2001.haas.edu/faculty/pdf/tyson.pdf
In November, 2013, Tyson founded the Institute for Business and Social Impact at the University of California, Berkeley, Haas School of Business.





|-
|-
|-


