[[Mitre Corporation]]

CATEGORIES: Think tanks based in the United States, United States Department of Defense, Federally Funded Research and Development Centers, Non-profit organizations based in Massachusetts, Non-profit organizations based in Virginia, Bedford, Massachusetts

The MITRE Corporation (stylized as MITRE) is an American not-for-profit organization based in Bedford, Massachusetts and McLean, Virginia. It manages Federally Funded Research and Development Centers (FFRDCs) supporting the Department of Defense (DOD), the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts on behalf of the Federal Judiciary, and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS).

History

Under the leadership of C. W. Halligan, MITRE was formed in 1958 to provide overall direction to the companies and workers involved in the US Air Force SAGE project.  Most of the early employees were transferred to MITRE from the Lincoln Laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), where SAGE was being developed.  In April 1959, a site was purchased in Bedford, Massachusetts near Hanscom Air Force Base, to develop a new MITRE laboratory, which MITRE occupied in September 1959.
After the SAGE project ended in the early 1960s, the FAA selected MITRE to develop a similar system to provide automated air traffic control.  The result of the project formed the National Airspace System (NAS), that is still in use today.  To support the NAS project and continual operations with the US Department of Defense at the Pentagon, MITRE opened a second "main office" in McLean, Virginia.
Through the 1960s, MITRE developed and supported military Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence (C3I) projects, including the Airborne Warning and Control System (AWACS).  MITRE also worked on a number of projects with ARPA, including precursors to the Advanced Research Projects Agency Network ARPANET.  Since the 1960s, MITRE has developed or supported most DoD early warning and communications projects, including the Joint Tactical Information Distribution System JTIDS and the Joint Surveillance and Target Attack Radar System JSTARS.
During the 1980s, the German hacker Markus Hess used an un-secured MITRE Tymnet connection as an entry point for intrusions into US Department of Defense, Department of Energy, and NASA computer networks.
On July 10, 1985, mitre.org domain name registered, and it remains in use by the company today.
On October 1, 1990, the FAA selected MITRE to operate its FFRDC, the Center for Advanced Aviation System Development (CAASD).
On January 29, 1996, MITRE divided into two entities: The MITRE Corporation to focus on its FFRDCs for DoD and FAA, and a new company, named Mitretek Systems (now called Noblis) to assume non-FFRDC work for other US Government agencies.
In July 1998, the Internal Revenue Service selected MITRE to manage its FFRDC, the Center for Enterprise Modernization (CEM).
In 2005, a team from MITRE competed in the 2005 DARPA Grand Challenge, and qualified in 23rd place for the final race.
On March 6, 2009, the Department of Homeland Security selected MITRE to operate the Homeland Security Systems Engineering and Development Institute (HS SEDI).
On December 2, 2010, the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts selected MITRE to operate the Judiciary Engineering and Modernization Center (JEMC) FFRDC.
The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services selected MITRE to operate an FFRDC in October 2012.

Organization

FFRDCs and research program

MITRE is organized as follows:

Locations

MITRE operates branch offices around the world, many co-located with military installations.

Corporate governance

Chief executive officers

Board of Trustees

Awards, honors, and accomplishments

Over the years, MITRE has received awards for corporate achievements as well as for achievements of its scientists, researchers, and engineers. A sampling includes
MITRE employees have created more than 30 technologies available for licensing, generated more than 60 packages of downloadable software, and been granted more than 110 US patents.






