[[Alton Brown]]

CATEGORIES: 1962 births, American chefs, American television chefs, American bloggers, American food writers, American cookbook writers, American cinematographers, American male voice actors, Male actors from Los Angeles, California, Male actors from Georgia (U.S. state), Food Network chefs, Living people, Writers from Los Angeles, California, People from Marietta, Georgia, American Christians, Writers from Georgia (U.S. state)

Alton Crawford Brown (born July 30, 1962) is an American television personality, celebrity chef, author, actor, and cinematographer. He is the creator and host of the Food Network television show Good Eats, the mini-series Feasting on Asphalt and Feasting on Waves, and host and main commentator on Iron Chef America and Cutthroat Kitchen. Brown is also the author of several books on cookery.
He brings a knowledge and enthusiasm for the science of cooking and food and a humorous approach to his shows.npr.php?storyId=113624708 Bon Appétit magazine named him "Cooking Teacher of the Year" in 2004. He was named "Best Food Guru" by Atlanta magazine in 2005.
In October 2013, Alton launched "Alton Brown Live: The Edible Inevitable Tour," his first national tour visiting 45 cities through March 2014. The show includes stand-up comedy, talk show antics, a multimedia lecture, live music and "extreme" food experimentation Debbi Snook (September 18, 2013). "Food Network star Alton Brown coming to Akron for first national tour", The Plain Dealer, Retrieved October 22, 2013.

Early life

Brown was born in Los Angeles, California  An activist who published lurid photos of the area's environmental problems, Brown's father was found dead in his home in 1974. The younger Brown received a degree in drama from the University of Georgia and began his career in cinematography and film production.
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, he was the cinematographer for several music videos, including "The One I Love" by R.E.M..

Career

Brown notes that he was dissatisfied with the quality of cooking shows airing on American television, so he set out to produce his own show. In preparation, he enrolled in the New England Culinary Institute, graduating in 1997.

TV series

=Good Eats=

The pilot for Good Eats first aired in July 1998 on the PBS member TV station WTTW in Chicago, Illinois. Food Network picked up the show in July 1999. In May 2011, Alton Brown announced an end to Good Eats after 14 seasons. The final episode, "Turn on the Dark", aired February 10, 2012.
Many of the Good Eats episodes feature Brown building makeshift cooking devices in order to point out that many of the devices sold at conventional "cooking" stores are simply fancified hardware store items.
Good Eats was nominated for the Best T.V. Food Journalism Award by the James Beard Foundation in 2000. The show was also awarded a 2006 Peabody Award.

=Iron Chef America=

In 2004 Brown appeared on Iron Chef America: Battle of the Masters, the second attempt to adapt the Japanese cooking show Iron Chef to American television, after UPN's Iron Chef USA, which featured William Shatner and was not well received. Brown served as the expert commentator, a modified version of the role played by Dr. Yukio Hattori in the original show. When the show became a series, Brown began serving as the play-by-play announcer, with Kevin Brauch as kitchen reporter. Brown also served as the host for all four seasons of the spin-off The Next Iron Chef.

=Feasting on Asphalt=

Brown's third series, Feasting on Asphalt, explores the history of eating on the move. Brown and his crew crossed the United States via motorcycle in a four-part miniseries about the history of road food. Brown samples food all along his travel route. He includes a "history of food" segment documenting famous road trips and interviews many of the foodies he meets en route.
The series premiered on Food Network on July 29, 2006. The mini-series was picked up for a second run, entitled Feasting on Asphalt 2: The River Run, in 2007. Six episodes were filmed during April and May 2007. The episodes trace the majority of the length of the Mississippi River through Brown's travels. The second run of episodes began airing on Food Network on August 4, 2007.
The third season uses the title Feasting on Waves and has Brown traveling the Caribbean Sea by boat in search of local cuisine. Brown also expressed trying a Feasting on Rails, as he is a train enthusiast.

=Cutthroat Kitchen=

In 2013, Brown hosted Cutthroat Kitchen, a new competition series pitting four chefs against each other in a 'no-holds-barred' cook-off. Each chef is given $25,000 with which to bid on certain conditions that will be upheld during the competition (such as exclusive use of an ingredient or preventing a competitor from using certain cooking tools). The winner keeps whatever is left of their funds as their prize. The series premiered on August 11, 2013."No-Mercy Culinary Antics to Take Over Alton Brown's Cutthroat Kitchen" Blog entry on FoodNetwork.com

Other appearances

Brown served as a mentor on Season 8 of The Next Food Network Star alongside Bobby Flay and Giada De Laurentiis. During season 8, each mentor selected and mentored a team of five finalists. Team Alton's finalist Justin Warner was the season 8 winner; however, Brown will not be producing Warner's show.thebraiser.com/alton-brown-pulls-out-of-justin-warner-show/
He returned, along with Flay and De Laurentiis, as a mentor and judge for season 9.  Due to a format change, season 9 did not feature teams.
In 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013, Brown hosted Thanksgiving Live! for The Food Network, a show featuring other Food Network personalities preparing various Thanksgiving dishes and answering viewers' questions.
On November 11, 2007, Brown was the guest programmer on Turner Classic Movies as part of their guest programmer month. The films he selected were What's Up, Tiger Lily?, Closely Watched Trains, Point Blank, and Blowup.
In 2008 he guest starred on Nickelodeon's TV series SpongeBob SquarePants in the show's sixth season episode, "House Fancy", where he voiced the host of a home show, Nicholas Winters.
Brown also appeared in the Secrets of the Furious Five DVD feature "Mr. Ping's Noodle House".
Brown appeared on the November 18, 2012 episode of MythBusters, assisting in the testing of two myths involving pressure-cooked popcorn and using a car's hot engine compartment to cook a holiday meal. A third segment testing a dishwasher to cook lasagna was posted on the show's website.
Brown appeared on the Travel Channel show The Layover with Anthony Bourdain which focused on the city of Atlanta in 2013. In the episode Bourdain takes Brown to the Clermont Lounge.
Brown guest starred as the "Guest Bailiff" and "Expert Witness" in John Hodgman's comedy/court show podcast Judge John Hodgman.
Brown has toured the United States to deliver performances that present a combination of humorous musings about food, explanations of the scientific principles behind cooking, and displays of unorthodox food preparation techniques with help from audience volunteers.  These last have included "Jet Cream" (using a carbon dioxide fire extinguisher to instantly freeze ice cream) and the "Mega Bake" (a gigantic version of the Easy-Bake Oven that uses 54,000 watts of high-intensity stage lights to cook a pizza in under four minutes).

Commercials

Brown has done commercial work for General Electric (GE) products, The infomercials are produced in the Good Eats style, employing the use of unusual camera angles, informational text, props, visual aids, scientific explanations, and the same method of delivery. These informercials are distributed to wholesale distributors of appliances/plumbing devices.
Brown has also aided GE in developing a new type of oven. He was initially called by GE to help their engineers learn more about the effects of heat on food; that grew into an active cooperation to develop GE's Trivection oven.
Brown has also done promotion for Dannon yogurt, Welch's, Shun knives, and for Heifer International.
In 2010, he endorsed salt use in a campaign for Cargill. "The Hard Sell on Salt", The New York Times, May 29, 2010.

Twitter

In 2012, Brown gained popularity by pioneering the use of humorous "Analog Tweets," wherein he posts pictures of hand-drawn Twitter responses on Post-it notes which he has stuck to his computer monitor.

The Alton Browncast

On June 28, 2013, Alton Brown joined the Nerdist Podcast Network with his podcast The Alton Browncast. In this podcast, Brown reviews recent food news, takes calls and questions from listeners, and interviews celebrities and other guests. Food is often a focal point of the podcast, but several episodes have branched off into other areas of Brown's interest, including men's syle, production and recording of music, and various aspects of acting and cinematography. So far, it has featured chats with food luminaries such as Justin Warner, Hugh Acheson, Alex Guarnaschelli, Bobby Flay, and Keith Schroder.  Guests have also included men's style maven Sid Mashburn and clothing manufacturing team Adam Schoenberg and Cory Rosenberg; producer Jim Milan and soundman Patrick Beldin from "The Edible Inevitable Tour" and actor Bart Hansard, who played multiple characters on Good Eats.  

Personal life

Brown lives in Marietta, Georgia, with his wife, his daughter Zoey (born in 1999), two Cardigan corgis, and used to have a green iguana named Spike. Brown also portrays his frequently arrested evil twin brother "B.A." On the DVD release of the episode "American Pickle", Brown notes that many viewers ask him what his brother does for a living, suggesting that they are unaware that B.A. is simply the result of clever editing.
Brown is a motorcycling enthusiast, owning a BMW R1150RT.
Brown changed his eating habits in 2009 in order to lose weight and become healthier, losing  His first list, which he eats from daily, includes fruits, whole grains, leafy greens, nuts, carrots, and green tea. His second list, which he eats from at least three times per week, includes oily fish, yogurt, broccoli, sweet potato, and avocado. His third list, which he eats from no more than once per week, includes red meat, pasta, dessert, and alcohol. His fourth list includes foods he avoids: fast food, soda (except for club soda, which is okay), processed meals (such as TV dinners), canned soups (salt), and anything labeled "diet," because "this was not a diet."
Brown is a Christian. Brown says, "I'm not a spooky snake handler because I live in Georgia and I'm Christian, that I believe in the Bible, that I travel with the Bible, that I read the Bible every day. I'm still me. I'm still a guy doing a job. I find, actually, that people ask me a lot about it. I don't hit people over the head with the Bible ... I still feel a funny little tinge in my stomach when I'm out to dinner with my wife and daughter in New York. We'll go to dinner and we'll be sitting around the table and we'll say Grace. You know what? People are going to stare at you. I used to feel really self-conscious. But I've gotten to a point where I think, nah, I'm not going to feel bad about that. I'm not going to apologize about that."

Bibliography

Brown was also a contributor to the 2005 cookbook Food Network Favorites: Recipes from Our All-Star Chefs (ISBN 0696230216). He selected the nonprofit world hunger organization Heifer International to receive a portion of the royalties.








