[[Parwan Province]]

CATEGORIES: Hazarajat, Provinces of Afghanistan, Parwan Province

Parwan (Persian/Pashto: پروان), also spelled Parvān, is one of the thirty-four provinces of Afghanistan. It has a population of about 631,600, which is multi-ethnic and mostly a rural society. Charikar serves as the provincial capital. Located north of Kabul Province and south of Baghlan Province, it was once the name of an ancient town in the Hindu Kush mountains. "Farwan (also Parwan)". Encyclopaedia of Islam CD-ROM Edition v. 1.0. Leiden, The Netherlands: Koninklijke Brill NV. The Panjshir Province was part of Parwan until separated by the government in 2005.
Parwan is one of the secured provinces of Afghanistan. However, occasional militant attacks are reported but they are usually minor. Security incidents in Parwan mostly involve grenade attacks on the residences of government officials or roadside bombs. Bagram Air Base, which is one of the largest U.S.-military bases in Afghanistan, is located in Parwan. 

History

In 329 BC, Alexander the Great founded the settlement of Parwan as his Alexandria of the Caucasus. It was conquered by Arab Muslims in 792 AD. In 1221, the province was the site of the battle between the invading Mongols and the Khwarezmian Empire led by Jalal ad-Din Mingburnu, where the Mongols were defeated. "Farwan (also Parwan)". Encyclopaedia of Islam CD-ROM Edition v. 1.0. Leiden, The Netherlands: Koninklijke Brill NV. The famous Moroccan traveler and scholar, Ibn Battuta, visiting the area in 1333 writes:
The area was subsequently ruled by the Timurids and Mughals until Ahmad Shah Durrani made it part of the Durrani Empire in 1747. In 1840, Parwan was the site of a major battle in the First Anglo-Afghan War where the invading British were defeated. Parwan's modern history began with the construction of a new textile factory in the town of Jabal Saraj in 1937. Parwan was involved in the Soviet war in Afghanistan as some of the fiercest fighting took place in the area. In the 1990s it was the site of heavy resistance against the Taliban.

Recent history

Since the removal of the Taliban in late 2001, the United States Armed Forces took control of Bagram Air Base and began using it as one of their main bases in Afghanistan. There is a Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) led by South Korea helping the locals with development activities in the province. 
A plan to build a power plant in the province is under consideration. A large portion of Parwan's economy relies on remittances from the Afghan diaspora living abroad.
In July 2012, the Taliban executed a married woman in front of a large crowd after she was found guilty of adultery.msnbc.com/id/48105731/ns/world_news-south_and_central_asia/ It was reported that the woman had a secret affair with a married military commander of the Afghan National Army.

Politics and governance

The current governor of the province is Abdul Basir Salangi. The city of Charikar is the capital of the province. All law enforcement activities throughout the province are handled by the Afghan National Police (ANP). The provincial police chief represents the Ministry of the Interior in Kabul. The ANP is backed by other Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF), including the NATO-led forces.

Demographics and geography

The total population of the province is about 631,600, which is multi-ethnic and mostly a rural society. The primary occupations are agriculture and livestock production. Many are also involved with small enterprises and industries. Around three quarters (73%) of the population of Parwan lives in rural districts, while one quarter (27%) lives in urban areas. Around 50% of the population is male and 50% is female. Dari (Persian) is the main language spoken in the province followed by Pashto. Many Afghans are generally multilingual.

Districts

Notable towns and villages

Gallery

File:Road in Parwan-11.
File:Near Sayed Bridge in Parwan-4.jpg|Fields near the Sayed Bridge
File:Flickr - boellstiftung - Parwan.jpg|School girls in a rural area of Parwan
File:Afghan boys and police in 2010.S. military for the winter months.
File:Afghan women in Parwan province.jpg|Afghan women working inside a factory in Parwan








