[[Mark Burnett]]

CATEGORIES: 1960 births, American Christians, American reality television producers, American television producers, British Army personnel of the Falklands War, British Christians, British emigrants to the United States, British Parachute Regiment soldiers, Businesspeople from California, Businesspeople from London, Emmy Award winners, Living people, People from Dagenham, People from Malibu, California, Survivor (TV series), The Apprentice (TV series)

Mark Burnett (born 17 July 1960) is a British-American television producer, based in Los Angeles. Burnett is currently the executive producer of five network television series with seven hours of network programming. He has produced over 2,400 hours of television which regularly airs in over 70 countries. His current series are Survivor, The Apprentice, The Voice, Shark Tank, The Sing Off and People's Choice Awards. In 2013, TV Guide Magazine named Burnett "Producer of the Year." Also, Burnett was named one of the world's most influential people by TIME Magazine. He has won five Emmy Awards, one PGA Award and five People's Choice Awards as of November 2013, and his projects have garnered a total of 98 Emmy nominations.Emmy Awards website In 2014, The Hollywood Reporter named Burnett number one on the Top 25 Reality Players of 2014 
Burnett has worked with Jeffrey Katzenberg, Steven Spielberg, Tom Cruise, Oprah Winfrey, Dr. Phil, Christina Aguilera, Usher, Shakira, Adam Levine, Blake Shelton, Cee Lo Green, Martha Stewart, Sarah Palin, Jeff Foxworthy, Samuel L. Jackson, and Donald Trump, among others.Mark Burnett profile at IMDb

Early life

Mark Burnett was born on 17 July 1960 in London, the only child of Archie and Jean Burnett, both Scottish Ford Motors factory workers,

Early career

In October 1982, Burnett decided to immigrate to the United States, where he met up with a friend, Nick Hill, who had emigrated from the UK several years earlier and was working as a nanny and chauffeur. Hill knew of an open position for a live-in nanny position with the Jaeger family in affluent Beverly Hills, the interview for which was that night. Despite having no experience, Burnett took the opportunity. The Jaegers, realizing the advantage of having a nanny and security at the same time, hired him. After a year of working for the Jaegers, he moved on to another family in Malibu, taking care of two boys for $250 a week. He was eventually given a position in the insurance office owned by Burt, the father of the two boys. Two years later, he decided to rent a portion of a fence at Venice Beach and sell T-shirts for $18 each during weekends. Realizing he made more money selling t-shirts, he left his insurance job. 16-25. Copyright © 2005 by Mark Burnett, Ballantine Books, Random House, Inc., New York; ISBN 0-345-48098-8 In 1991, Burnett, along with four others, joined a French adventure competition called the Raid Gauloises. After competing, Burnett saw a business opportunity in holding similar competitions. He purchased the format rights and brought a similar competition, Eco-Challenge, to America. Eco-Challenge launched Burnett's career as a television producer.

Productions

Burnett is best known for producing the hit reality show Survivor, which premiered in the summer of 2000 and was the most watched summer series since Sonny and Cher. Survivor was named the Number 1 reality series of all time by Entertainment Weekly in 2009.20 Best Reality-TV Shows Ever EW.com
Burnett has produced several other television franchises including: The Apprentice, Are You Smarter Than a 5th Grader?, Shark Tank, and The Voice."Country Singer Blake Shelton Rounds Out 'The Voice' Team Of Coaches", Deadline. He has maintained a strong presence in award show franchises, having produced the MTV Movie Awards (2007–2011), the annual People's Choice Awards (2010–present), the Video Game Awards and the 2011 Primetime Emmy Awards. 
Burnett has produced over 1,200 hours of television programming which regularly airs in over 70 countries worldwide.A+E Networks – Life is Entertaining. Aenetworks. Retrieved on 2013-10-23.  Past shows include Bully Beatdown, Combat Missions, The Contender, The Contender Asia, Expedition Africa, Expedition Impossible, How'd You Get So Rich?, Martha Stewart, My Dad Is Better Than Your Dad, On the Lot (a collaboration with Steven Spielberg), The Restaurant, Rock Star, Sarah Palin's Alaska, Stars Earn Stripes, Starmaker, Toughest Cowboy, and Wedding Day.
As well as his ongoing productions, Burnett and his wife, actress Roma Downey, produced The Bible, a 10 hour History Channel drama based upon stories of the Bible. According to 20th Century Fox, The Bible ranks as the fastest-selling TV title released on home video in the last five years, and ranks as the top miniseries title ever during its first week of release". (2013-04-08) 'The Bible' sets DVD record: Fastest-selling miniseries ever | Inside TV | EW. Insidetv.ew. Retrieved on 2013-10-23.
In October 2013, NBC announced that it has reached a deal with Burnett and Richard Branson's Virgin Galactic to produce a television series on which contestants will compete to win a spaceflight aboard SpaceShipTwo. The series will be titled Space Race, although it is currently undeterminable when the show will begin airing.

Personal life

In January 2004, Mark began dating actress Roma Downey. In November 2006, while the two were vacationing with their children in Zihuatanejo, Mexico, he proposed to her. "Mark Burnett and Roma Downey Engaged", People. The ceremony was officiated by Downey's former costar, Della Reese. "Mark Burnett, Roma Downey Marry in Malibu", People.com, 29 April 2007
Burnett's first marriage was to Dianne J. Burnett (née Valentine); they have two sons, James and Cameron.

Awards, honours and affiliations

Time called Burnett one of the Most Influential People in the World Today. He has won both Brandweek's "Marketer of the Year Award", the prestigious Rose d'Or Frapa Format Award, the Brandon Tartikoff Legacy Award and the Norman Lear Award from the Producers Guild of America.
Burnett served for two years on the Board of Directors for the British Film and Television Academy.com In 2013, The Voice won the Critics Choice and Shark Tank won the Television Critics Award. Tvcritics. Retrieved on 2013-10-23. The Voice, Shark Tank and The Bible are all nominated for Prime Time Emmy Awards. In total, Burnett's shows received 15 nominations in various categories in 2013. 
In November 2007, Mark Burnett was elected into the Broadcast and Cable Hall of Fame and in 2008, it was announced that he would be honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. On 8 July 2009 Burnett received a star at 6664 Hollywood Blvd. He is an ambassador for Operation Smile. In 2013, the ten-hour mini series The Bible received the Parents Television Council 2013 Seal of Approval. Shark Tank, The Voice, and Survivor were all nominated for Critics Choice Awards, at which the Voice won for Best Reality Series - Competition. TVLine (2013-06-10). Retrieved on 2013-10-23. The three shows were nominated for the Television Critics Association Awards, at which Shark Tank won for Outstanding Achievement in Reality Programming.

Awards

Burnett has won five Emmy Awards, including:
Mark has won four Peoples Choice Awards, including: 
Special Awards: 

Project recognition





Three Days in June, The definitive account of the battle that Mark Burnett took part in as a member of The 3rd Battalion The Parachute Regiment during the Falklands war. 







