[[Yusuf al-Qaradawi]]

CATEGORIES: 1926 births, Living people, Egyptian Sunni ulama, Egyptian imams, Egyptian Sunni Muslims, Egyptian Islamists, Islamic democracy activists, Egyptian television personalities, Sunni imams, 21st-century imams, Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood members, Muslim Brotherhood philosophers, Muslim theologians, People of the Egyptian Revolution of 2011, Naturalised citizens of Qatar, Egyptian emigrants to Qatar, Al-Azhar University alumni, Qatar University faculty

Yusuf al-Qaradawi (
Al-Qaradawi has published more than 120 books, including The Lawful and the Prohibited in Islam and Islam: The Future Civilization. He has also received eight international prizes for his contributions to Islamic scholarship,"Qaradawi Wins Hijra Award" ION, 15 December 2009 and is considered one of the most influential such scholars living today.
Some of al-Qaradawi's views have been controversial in the West:Controversial preacher with 'star status' BBC article, by agdi Abdelhadi on 7 July 2004 he was refused an entry visa to the United Kingdom in 2008, and barred from entering France in 2012.
As of 2004, al-Qaradawi was a trustee of the Oxford Centre for Islamic Studies.Omar Series Part 1, Credits

Biography

Al-Qaradawi was born in 1926 in Safat Turab village in the Nile Delta, Egypt, in a poor family of devout Muslim peasants. He became an orphan at the age of two, when he lost his father. Following his father's death, he was raised by his uncle. He read and memorized the entire Qur'an by the time he was nine years old.
He then joined the Institute of Religious Studies at Tanta, and graduated after nine years of study. He moved on to study Islamic Theology at the Al-Azhar University in Cairo, from which he graduated in 1953.
He earned a diploma in Arabic Language and Literature in 1958 at the Advanced Arabic Studies Institute.
He enrolled in the graduate program in the Department of Qur'an and Sunnah Sciences of the Faculty of Religion's Fundamentals (Usul al-Din), and graduated with a Masters degree in Quranic Studies in 1960. He completed his PhD thesis titled Zakah and its effect on solving social problems in 1973 with First Merit, and was awarded his PhD degree from Al Azhar.
In 1977, he laid the foundation for the Faculty of Shari'ah and Islamic Studies in the University of Qatar and became the faculty's dean. In the same year he founded the Centre of Seerah and Sunna Research. His next appointment was in Algeria as Chairman of the Scientific Council of Islamic University and Higher Institutions in 1990–91. He returned to Qatar once more as Director of the Seerah and Sunnah Center at Qatar University, a post he still occupies today.
Al-Qaradawi is the head of the European Council for Fatwa and Research,an Islamic scholarly entity based in Ireland.IUMS About us
He was imprisoned under King Farouq in 1949, then three times during the reign of former President Gamal Abdul Nasser, until he left Egypt for Qatar in 1961. He returned to Egypt in 2011 in the wake of the 2011 Egyptian Revolution.
Al-Qaradawi is a principal shareholder and former Sharia adviser to Bank Al-Taqwa, a member bank of the Lugano-Switzerland Al-Taqwa group, a bank that the U.S. states finances terrorism and that the UN Security Council had listed as associated with Al Qaeda.10 Taliban taken off UN terror listThe UN -The Consolidated List September 2009
Al-Qaradawi finished 3rd in a 2008 poll on who was the world's leading public intellectual. The poll, Top 100 Public Intellectuals, was of the readers of Prospect Magazine (UK) and Foreign Policy (United States).

2011 return to Egypt

After the 2011 Egyptian Revolution Qaradawi made his first public appearance in Egypt after 1981. He was reported to have said, "Egyptian people are like the genie who came out of the lamp and who have been in prison for 30 years." He also demanded the release of political prisoners in Egyptian prisons, praised the Copts for protecting Muslims in their Friday prayer, and called for the new military rulers to quickly restore civilian rule.Egypt revolution unfinished, Qaradawi tells Tahrir masses
On 21 February 2011, he talked about the protests in Libya and issued a fatwa permitting the killing of Muammar Gaddafi:For a complete English translation, see: The fatwa of Shaykh Yûsuf al-Qaradâwî against Gaddafi. Translation by Yahya M. Michot with the collaboration of Samy Metwally, on 
He also called on Libyan ambassadors around the world to distance themselves from Gaddafi's regime.Sunni cleric says Gaddafi should die, IOL News, 21 February 2011Egyptian cleric: Kill Gaddafi, PressTV, 22 February 2011
In the Jerusalem Post, Barry Rubin drew a parallel between Qaradawi's sermon and the Ayatollah Khomeini returning to Iran. He also said that Qaradawi was encouraging the Muslim Brotherhood to suppress opposition when he made reference to hypocrites in his sermon.Egypt revolution unfinished, Qaradawi tells Tahrir masses In the Eurasia Review, Princeton University student Aaron Rock dismisses claims that Qaradawi is the Khomeini of Egypt, but he does see his influence as a sign that Islam will play a significant role in the shaping of Egypt's politics. He writes, "Neither Qaradawi's popularity nor his rhetoric should distract from the fact that Egyptian revolution's grievances were based on a desire for political liberty and economic opportunity. That said, Islam remains an important framework for public debate and a reservoir of political symbolism."

Views and statements

Religious and sectarian views

=Muslims sects=

Al-Qaradawi has written on the danger of extremist groups of Islam, in his dissertation on the subject Islamic Awakening between Rejection and Extremism. In it he warns of the dangers of blind obedience, bigotry and intolerance; rigidity—which deprives people of clarity of vision and the opportunity for dialogue with others; commitment to excessiveness, including the excessive application of minor or controversial Islamic issues to people in non-Muslim countries or to people who have only recently converted to Islam; harshness in the treatment of people, roughness in the manner of approach, and crudeness in calling people to Islam, all which are contrary to the teachings of the Qur'an and Sunnah.
On the other hand Al-Qaradawi himself has been accused of extremism for denouncing Jews for their "corruption" and describing Adolf Hitler as having put Jews "in their place".
Al-Qaradawi has been an avid caller to what he calls "Islamic Sufism", praising those who practice it as pious.
Al-Qaradawi has described Shi'ites as heretics ("mubtadi'oun").
In connection with the Syrian Civil War, he has denounced the Alawite sect, which many describe as an offshoot of Shia Islam and of which President Bashir al-Assad is a member, as "more infidel than Christians and Jews". He has called on Muslims "everywhere" to help insurgents in Syria "be victorious ... Everyone who has the ability and has training to kill ... is required to go" to Syria. "We cannot ask our brothers to be killed while we watch."
Fellow member of International union of Muslim Scholars, Mohammad Salim Al-Awa criticized Qaradawi for promoting divisions among Muslims. In response, the Iranian Press Agency has described Qaradawi as "a spokesman for international Freemasonry and rabbis".Try to be nice about each other, A Sunni preacher upsets the Shias 25 September 2008, CAIRO, The Economist

=Non-Muslims=

Al-Qaradawi has called for dialogue with Non-Muslims. He also puts emphasis on conversations with the West, including Jews, Christians, and secularists. He writes that this effort should differentiate itself from a debate, for the latter does not often result in mutual cooperation. Regarding the rights and citizenship of non-Muslim minorities, Qaradawi has said, "those people who live under the protection of an Islamic government enjoy special privileges. They are referred to as 'the Protected People' (dhimmi) ... In modern terminology, dhimmies are 'citizens' of the Islamic state. From the earliest period of Islam to the present day, Muslims are in unanimous agreement that they enjoy the same rights and carry the same responsibilities as Muslims themselves, while being free to practice their own faiths."
In his book titled The Lawful and Prohibited in Islam, al-Qaradawi wrote, "Islam does not prohibit Muslims to be kind and generous to peoples of other religions, even if they are idolaters and polytheists, ... it looks upon the People of the Book, that is, Jews and Christians, with special regard, whether they reside in a Muslim society or outside it. The Qur'an never addresses them without saying, 'O People of the Book' or 'O You who have been given the Book', indicating that they were originally people of a revealed religion."

==Jews==

In May 2008, al-Qaradawi told visiting Rabbis from the Haredi, Anti-Zionist Neturei Karta sect, "there is no enmity between Muslims and Jews.... Jews who believe in the authentic Torah are very close to Muslims." He has also expressed his belief that relations between Muslims and Jews became strained with the emergence of Zionism and the establishment of Israel. "Muslims are against the expansionist, oppressive Zionist movement, not the Jews." He also said that Muslims and Jews were subjected to the same persecution following the fall of Islamic rule in Andalusia, now Spain.
However, al-Qaradawi has also made statements that some critics charge are anti-Semitic.
In a 9 January 2009, sermon during the Gaza War, shown on Al-Jazeera, Qaradawi prayed (as translated by MEMRI):
In August 2005, The Wall Street Journal reported that the Dublin-based European Council for Fatwa and Research, of which al-Qaradhawi is president, had used the antisemitic Protocols of the Elders of Zion in its theological deliberations. 24 Al-Qaradawi's remarks were sharply criticized by the Anti-Defamation League (ADL), which accused him of inciting violence against Jews.Muslim Brotherhood Ideologue Incites Violence Against Jews and Israel, Anti-Defamation League (ADL), 2 February 2009.com, 31 October 2009.
In a sermon broadcast on Qatar TV on 26 April 2013 (as translated by MEMRI), Qaradawi announced that he would not participate in an inter-faith dialogue if Jews were present, stating, "If you invite the Jews, I will not participate. I will participate in a Muslim-Christian meeting, but with the Jews there should be no debate." Qaradawi stated that there can be "no debate whatsoever with those who have committed injustice" and "Those Jews have committed clear injustice against us. They have shed our blood, killed our children, displaced our people, seized our lands, and usurped our rights." Later in his sermon, Qaradawi restated: "I cannot be a part of a conference in which wrongdoing Jews participate. They have committed great injustice, and I cannot possibly shake hands with them. Their hands are soiled with blood. They have murderous, violent, and oppressive hands. I cannot soil my hands by shaking theirs."Leading Sunni Scholar Yousuf Al-Qaradawi Refuses to Participate in Interfaith Dialogue with Jews, MEMRITV, Clip No. 3825 (transcript), 26 April 2013. (Video clip available here).

==Views on Adolf Hitler and the Holocaust==

In a statement that aired on Al-Jazeera TV on 28 January 2009 during the Gaza war, al-Qaradawi said the following regarding Adolf Hitler and the Holocaust (as translated by MEMRI):– Sheik Yousuf Al-Qaradhawi: Allah Imposed Hitler upon the Jews to Punish Them – "Allah Willing, the Next Time Will Be at the Hand of the Believers", MEMRITV, Clip no. 2005, Al-Jazeera TV (Qatar) – 28–30 January 2009.Intellectual Double Standards on Islamists by Steve Emerson, Jewish World Review, 6 May 2010/22 Iyar 5770.Militant Islamism, Islamism, Islam by Clifford D. May, National Review, 19 January 2012.Ken Livingstone's favourite Islamist spreads Jew-hatred in Gaza by Alan Johnson, The Daily Telegraph, 13 May 2013. Smith II, Fox News, 24 August 2012.F.C. Barcelona's New Shirt Sponsor Linked to Controversial Muslim Cleric by Jim Edwards, CBS News, 16 December 2010.

=Apostasy=

Al-Qaradawi says that apostasy – Muslims leaving Islam – is a grave danger to the Muslim community and that it is the duty of all Muslims "is to combat apostasy in all its forms and wherefrom it comes, giving it no chance to pervade in the Muslim world".
With regards to the punishment of apostasy, al-Qaradawi supports the classical Islamic tradition on some points but differs on others. He considers execution as a penalty in principle, but the only apostates that are to be executed are those that combine other crimes with apostasy (e.g., "inciting a war against Islam"). He also advocates that the apostates to be executed should be given a chance to repent. Finally, he believes that "hidden apostasy" (where the apostate does not "proclaim" his conversion) may be left to the judgement of God in the Hereafter.
While al-Qaradawi believes that the Muslim community is not allowed to punish "intellectual apostasy", where the apostates do not "swagger" about their conversion, he still strongly condemns it. He says "These people are not noticed when they invade or begin to disseminate their falsehood, but they are mostly felt when they affect the minds. They do not use guns in their attacks, however, their attacks are fierce and cunning." Nevertheless, he concedes, "Erudite scholars and well versed jurists ... can not take an action in face of such professional criminals who have firmly established themselves and have not left a chance for law to be enforced on them."
In February 2013, on an episode of Shariah and Life show, which broadcast on Al-Jazeera, Qaradawi stated since the 15th century, the application of the death penalty for those who leave Islam is a necessity, stating, "If they had gotten rid of the apostasy punishment Islam wouldn't exist today." Qaradwai also cited several speeches and writings by Muhammad and his followers, such as Surah Al-Ma'idah 5:33, which Qaradawi quoted as "The punishment of those who wage war against Allah and His apostle is that they should be murdered or crucified." Qaradawi further explained, "... many hadiths, not only one or two, but many, narrated by a number of Muhammad's companions state that any apostate should be killed. Ibn 'Abbas's hadith: 'Kill whomever changes his faith Islam.'"Gore, Current silent as cleric affirms death penalty for leaving Islam on Al-Jazeera by Nicole Lafond, Daily Caller, 12 February 2013.

Political views

=Freedom and democracy=

Al-Qaradawi has spoken in favor of democracy in the Muslim world, speaking of a need for reform of political climates in the Middle East specifically. Al Jazeera EnglishMuslim world needs democracy, says Qaradawi – The Muslim News – 8 July 2006 On 22 February 2011, he held an exclusive interview with OnIslam. We are not a state for mullahs."Govt pressure bans Qaradawi, 22 February 2011

=Terrorism=

After the September 11 attacks, al-Qaradawi urged Muslims to donate blood for the victims and said:
He denies that Palestinian suicide bombing attacks constitute terrorism, claiming, "when Palestinians face such unjust aggression, they tend to stem bloodletting and destruction and not to claim the lives of innocent civilians," but qualifies that with "I do agree with those who do not allow such martyr operations to be carried out outside the Palestinian territories."
Al-Qaradawi has suggested the legitimate use of (defensive) suicide bombings against enemy combatants in modern times if the defending combatants has no other means of self-defense. The Oxford-based Malaysian Islamic Scholar, Dr. Afifi al-Akiti, rules that there is no Islamic legal for this view and that female soldiers can only be killed in direct combat. With regards to suicide bombings he says that they are "breaching the scholarly consensus ... because to endanger one's life is one thing and to commit suicide during the attack is obviously another".
Western governments have met al-Qaradawi to request release of European civilians kidnapped in Iraq and have thanked him officially, praising his cooperation. The French Foreign Minister Michel Barnier wrote to al-Qaradawi: "With such a clear condemnation of the abduction of the French hostages you have sent a clear-cut message demonstrating respect for the tenets of Islam."

=Israeli-Palestinian conflict=

Al-Qaradawi condones Palestinian attacks on Israelis. A resolution issued by The Islamic Fiqh Council affiliated to the Muslim World League in its 14th session, held in Doha (Qatar) on 11–16 January 2003 has upheld his views on the matter. Defending bombings against Israeli civilians, al-Qaradawi told BBC Newsnight in 2005 that:
He supports suicide attacks on all Israelis, including women
At the press conference held by the organizations sponsoring his visit to London, al-Qaradawi reiterated his view that suicide attacks are a justified form of resistance to Israeli occupation of the rightfully Palestinian Territories. He has also justified his views by stating that all Israeli civilians are potential soldiers, since Israel is a "militarized society". Because of these views, al-Qaradawi has been accused by Western countries and Israel of supporting terrorism.
Al-Qaradawi is opposed to attacks outside of the Palestinian Territories and Israel, and against non-Israeli targets. For example, on 20 March 2005, he condemned a car bombing that had occurred in Doha, Qatar the previous day. One Briton, Jon Adams was killed. Al-Qaradawi issued a statement that said
According to IslamOnline, Qaradawi released a fatwa on 14 April 2004 stating boycott of American and Israeli products was an obligation for all who are able. The fatwa reads in part :
On 8 May 2013, Qaradawi visited Gaza and gave a speech in support of Hamas. He asked all of the Palestinian people to work with other Arab people and Muslims around the world to destroy Israel, saying inflammatory things such as "Our wish should be that we carry out Jihad to death" and "We should seek to liberate Palestine, all of Palestine, inch by inch."

=Iraq war=

In an address aired on Qatar TV on 5 January 2007, al-Qaradawi questioned the trial of Saddam Hussein under American supervision in Iraq, but agreed to it if it were conducted by the Iraqi people "after liberating Iraq from American colonialism". He also suggested that the trial was "an act of vengeance by the Americans" for his missile attacks on Israel. He strongly criticized the way Saddam was hanged:

=Hizb Allah (Party of God)=

In 2006, in response to Muslim scholar Abdullah Ibn Jibreen's fatwa declaring that it was forbidden for Muslims to support or pray for Hezbollah because they are Shia, al-Qaradawi said that supporting Hezbollah is a religious duty for all Muslims and that resistance, whether in Palestine or Lebanon, is the most noble act. He added "Shias agree with the Sunnis in the main principles of Islam while the differences are only over the branches" and also called upon the Sunnis and Shia of Iraq to end the civil war. Gulf Times
Seven years later, during the Syrian Civil War, Qaradawi urged all Sunnis to wage jihad against Hezbollah, attacking Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah and Iran: "The leader of the Party of Satan comes to fight the Sunnis.... Now we know what the Iranians want.... They want continued massacres to kill Sunnis."Syria conflict: Cleric Qaradawi urges Sunnis to join rebels BBC News, 1 June 2013 Qaradawi also stated that he now regretted having advocated rapprochement between Sunnis and Shias and his 2006 defense of Hezbollah.

=Arab Spring=

Qaradawi declared his support for the rebels led by the National Transitional Council in the 2011 Libyan civil war, urging Arab nations to recognize them and "to confront the tyranny of the regime in Tripoli". He suggested weapons be sent to the rebels to assist the, and said "Our Islamic nation should stand against injustice and corruption and I urge the Egyptian government to extend a helping hand to Libyan people and not to Gaddafi."
In response to the 2011 Bahrain protests, Qaradawi was reluctant to give support: "The protests in Bahrain are sectarian in nature. The Shias are revolting against the Sunnis." He claimed that Shia protesters attack Sunnis and occupied their mosques. He acknowledged that the Shia majority had legitimate concerns in regards to fairness with the Sunnis: "I want them to be real citizens of their country."
Qaradawi said that all Arabs should back up the protesters in the 2011 Syrian uprising, saying "Today the train of revolution has reached a station that it had to reach: The Syria station," and "It is not possible for Syria to be separated from the history of the Arab community."

Women and gender issues

Commenting on the role women played in social active issues:  Although over sixty years have passed since the Movement emerged into existence, no women leaders have appeared that can confront secular and Marxist trends single-handedly and efficiently. This has come about as a result of men's unrelenting attempts to control women's movement, as men have never allowed women a real chance to express themselves and show special leadership talents and abilities that demonstrate their capability of taking command of their work without men's dominance.
 I believe that women's Islamic work will succeed and prove itself in the arena of the Islamic Movement only when it gives birth to female Islamic leaders in the fields of Call, thought, science, literature and education.
Accordingly, women as well as men can dedicate themselves to Allah, and play a role in jihad. Yusuf al-Qaradawi on women's participation in martyrdom operations
I do not think that this is impossible or even difficult. There are genius women just as there are genius men. Ingenuity is not a monopoly for men. It is not in vain that the Holy Quran tells us the story of a woman who led men wisely and bravely and made her people fare the best end: it is the Queen of Sheba, whose story with Solomon is told in Surat Al­ Naml. I have observed in the University of Qatar that girls make better students than boys.

=Rape=

In 2004 The Daily Telegraph reported that IslamOnline was asked the following question "Are raped women punished in Islam?", and a panel headed by Qaradawi replied: "To be absolved from guilt, the raped woman must have shown some sort of good conduct.... Islam addresses women to maintain their modesty, as not to open the door for evil.... The Koran calls upon Muslim women in general to preserve their dignity and modesty, just to save themselves from any harassment.... So for a rape victim to be absolved from guilt, she must not be the one that opens ... her dignity for deflowering"
Officials from IslamOnline. They demanded that The Telegraph issue a full apology as well as the resignation of the two writers of the article.UK Group To Sue Telegraph Over "False" Qaradawi Story by Mustafa Abdel-Halim, IOL Correspondent, 14 July 2004

=Wife beating=

Al-Qaradawi told The Guardian that wife beating was neither "obligatory nor desirable" but that he "accepts it as a method of last resort – though only lightly". The Lawful and the Prohibited in Islam, Chapter 3:The Halal and the Haram in Marriage And Family Life -> Divorce -> Rebelliousness and Strife

=Female circumcision=

While stating that female circumcision is "not required" in his book, Modern Fatwas, he wrote, "whoever finds it serving the interest of his daughters should do it, and I personally support this under the current circumstances in the modern world."
However, he believes that it is prohibited when it harms females physically or psychologically.Qaradawi Calls On Ending Female Circumcision, Considers It Banned In Islamic Law

=Homosexuality=

On 5 June 2006, on the Al Jazeera program Sharia and Life, al-Qaradawi (a regular on the program) reiterated orthodox views on homosexuality. The punishment for fornication is lashing.
In an interview with Der Spiegel, Qaradawi said that his attitude towards homosexuality is the same as that found in Christianity. In the interview he stated, "One year ago, there was a demonstration against me in London because I spoke out against homosexuality. People seem to have forgotten that it wasn't me who came up with this mindset. It's part of God's order spoken of by Moses and even mentioned by Jesus."

Other views

On the subject of the Western Wall, Qaradawi said:
In April 2008, at a conference in Qatar titled "Mecca: the Center of the Earth, Theory and Practice", al-Qaradawi advocated the implementation of Mecca Time to replace the Greenwich Meridian as the basis of the world time zone system.
Al-Qaradawi called for a "Day of Anger" over the cartoons, but condemned violent actions in response to them.
Al-Qaradawi is one of the Ulama signatories of the Amman Message, which gives a broad foundation for defining Muslim orthodoxy.Al-Qaradawi's official reply to Amman Message 12 June 2005
Al-Qaradawi said, "Rushdie disgraced the honor of the Prophet and his family and defiled the values of Islam," but he never backed the fatwa calling for his death.
Al-Qaradawi was a follower of Hasan al-Banna during his youth and a longtime member of the Muslim Brotherhood. He has twice turned down offers to be its leader.

Reception in the Muslim world

In 2004, 2,500 Muslim academics from 23 countries condemned Qaradawi, and accused him of giving "Islam a bad name and fostering hatred among civilizations" and "providing a religious cover for terrorism". In 2012, Qardawi traded barbs with fellow Muslim cleric Abu Abd al-Rahman Ibn Aqil al-Zahiri due to what Ibn Aqil perceived as hypocritical positions of Qardawi during the Arab Spring,Khalid al-Saif, "This is what Ibn Aqil said about Qardawi!" 6 October 2012. a charge he denied.
Pakistani scholar, Muhammad Taqi Usmani stated, "There is no doubt that I—as the lowest student of Islamic Fiqh—with my benefitting from the books of the outstanding Dr al-Qaradāwī to a very large extent, and my supreme wonderment at the majority of works, have found myself, in some particular issues, not in agreement with him in the results the he has arrived at, but these sorts of differences (ikhtilāf) in views based on juristic judgement (ijtihādī) are natural, and cannot be the sole basis for judging author so long as the people of knowledge do not deem bearers of such opinions to be weak intellectually, or in religion, and any case the importance of these books and their value in scholarship and da'wa are not affected by this to even the slightest, most insignificant degree."
In addition, he refers to some modern scholars by writing, "What we see today, very unfortunately, is that the one who brings forward elevated ideas in his writings and lofty theories in his speech and his sermons often does not rise above the level of the layman" but exempts Qardawi by saying, "As for the outstanding, erudite scholar, Dr Yūsuf al-Qaradāwī, may God (Most High) preserve him, God (Most High) has indeed made me fortunate enough to accompany him in travels and in residence, and sit with him and closely associate with him in long and repeated meetings. this I found him manifest in his personality exemplary Islamic qualities, for he is a human being before he is a Muslim, and a devoted Muslim before he is a caller to Islam (dā'i), and a caller to Islam before he is a scholar and jurist."

Controversy

On Syria and Russia

Qaradawi called Russia an "enemy of Islam" due to the country's friendly relations with Syria and its government.
His remarks drew strong criticism from Muslims in Russia. According to Chechen President Razman Kadyrov, "Qaradawi's statements had given rise to amazement among the Muslims of Russia." Kadyrov asserted that Qaradawi's statements are mainly "directed against the Muslims of Russia, who are citizens of this country, were born here and live here, and who care about their country".
Kadyrov pointed out that contrary to Qaradawi's claims, "It is not Russia that is supplying weapons and money for the thousands of mercenaries from all over the world who have flooded Syria and are committing daily terrorist attacks, in which the blood of women, old people and children is shed,"

Disagreement with Muhammad Sayyid Tantawy

"But, the Sheikh Tantawy entered, or was pushed to enter, the area of Fiqh Islamic jurisprudence. He did not prepare himself for the task. He did not study, practise, or write in Fiqh. He did not train himself in navigating through the deep waters of Fiqh. Therefore, he was not successful in many of his hard-hitting opinions. This was the reason of my disagreement with him despite the old friendship between us."

Entry into western countries

Al-Qaradawi has been banned from entering the United States since 1999 and the United Kingdom since 2008, France announced in March 2012 it will not let him enter.France election: Sarkozy vows ban on militant preachers, BBC, 26 March 2012

Fatwa controversy with MEMRI

The Middle East Media Research Institute (MEMRI) (citing Asharq Al-Awsat), alleges that al-Qaradawi issued a Fatwa following the Iraqi insurgency, saying,
 
 All of the Americans in Iraq are combatants, there is no difference between civilians and soldiers, and one should fight them, since the American civilians came to Iraq in order to serve the occupation. The abduction and killing of Americans in Iraq is a religious obligation so as to cause them to leave Iraq immediately. The mutilation of corpses however is forbidden in Islam.
Al-Qaradawi, however, denies this allegation:
 I have not published a Fatwa on this issue. At the Egyptian Journalists' Union a few days ago I was asked about the permissibility of fighting against the occupation in Iraq, and I answered that it is permitted. Afterwards I was asked concerning the American civilians in Iraq and I merely responded with the question – are there American civilians in Iraq? It is a matter of common knowledge that in Fatwas such as these I do not use the word "killing" but rather I say "struggle", which is a more comprehensive word than the word "killing" and whose meaning is not necessarily to kill. In addition, I have condemned the taking of hostages on a number of occasions in the past and have demanded that they be released and that their lives not be threatened.MEMRI as above, citing Al Hayat 
Shaker Al-Nabulsi, a former Muslim who writes for the liberal site Ethal, called for the creation of a petition to the UN calling to put Qaradawi and his like on trial for incitement and support of terrorism.

Alcohol fatwa controversy

Al-Qaradawi issued a fatwa in 2008 stating that the consumption of tiny amounts of alcohol (
Personal life

Al-Qaradawi has three sons and four daughters, His son, Abdurrahman Yusuf al-Qaradawi, is a poet and a political activist in Egypt.Abdurrahman Yusuf al-Qaradawi: new branches of National Association for Change Will open soon in Europe and the United States

Awards and recognition

Al-Qaradawi has been awarded by various countries and institutions for his contributions to Islamic society. Among them are
The Qatar Faculty of Islamic Studies, part of the Qatar Foundation for Education, Science and Community Development, instituted the "Sheikh Yusuf Al Qaradawi Scholarships" in 2009, awarding them to five students each year for post-graduate studies.
He is a trustee of the Oxford University Center for Islamic Studies and has been named as the technical consultant for a multi-million dollar English-language film about Mohammed, produced by Barrie Osborne. A 2008 Foreign Policy online poll put him at No.3 in the list of the Top 20 Public Intellectuals worldwide.

Books

Fiqh az Zakat

Al -Qaradawi has authored more than 80 books and his academic style and objective thought are considered to be some of the main characteristics of his works. His most famous work is The Lawful and Prohibited in Islam. Professor Mustafa al-Zarqa declared that owning a copy of it was "the duty of every Muslim family". His book Fiqh al-Zakat is considered by some as the most comprehensive work in the area of zakat. Abul Ala Maududi commented on it as "the book of this century in Islamic jurisprudence (fiqh)"
The prominent Deobandi Islamic scholar Muhammad Taqi Usmani, said this about the work:Yūsuf al-Qaradāwī, as I Have Known Him
 The first book that read in its entirety of his works is his valuable book Fiqh al-Zakat, and I benefitted much from this great, encyclopedic, rewarding work through which the author did a great service to the second of the pillars of Islam, in a way that the umma needs today, when it comes to the application of zakat at the level of the individual and the group. Indeed this work manifested the genius of its author, and his inventive methodology, not only in the clarification of issues pertaining to zakat and their compilation, but in stimulating research in contemporary topics that no one before him had touched upon, and basing them upon the principles fiqh and its jurisprudential theory. 
Quotes from Fiqh al Zakat, Volume II Zakah Distribution:

Fiqh al Jihad

His book Fiqh al-Jihad has been widely commented on. The Guardian writes:Yusuf Qaradawi's jihad
This book has also been analyzed by University of Michigan professor Sherman Jackson and Tunisian reformer Rachid Ghannouchi.Rethinking Jihad: Ideas, Politics and Conflict in the Arab World and Beyond Conference Report
His views on jihad have attracted criticism from some hard line groups:

Major works

Some of al-Qaradawi's major works are:
He has also published some excerpts of his poetry in the book Nafahat wa Lafahat.
Al-Qaradawi has also been the subject of the book The Global Mufti: The Phenomenon of Yusuf al-Qaradawi published by Columbia University Press.



Notes




