[[Mutagen]]

CATEGORIES: Mutagens, Mutation, Radiation health effects, Radioactivity

In genetics, a mutagen is a physical or chemical agent that changes the genetic material, usually DNA, of an organism and thus increases the frequency of mutations above the natural background level. As many mutations cause cancer, mutagens are therefore also likely to be carcinogens. Not all mutations are caused by mutagens: so-called "spontaneous mutations" occur due to spontaneous hydrolysis, errors in DNA replication, repair and recombination.

Discovery of mutagens

The first mutagens to be identified were carcinogens, substances that were shown to be linked to cancer. Tumors were described more than 2,000 years before the discovery of chromosomes and DNA; in 500 B.C., the Greek physician Hippocrates named tumors resembling a crab karkinos (from which the word "cancer" is derived via Latin), meaning crab. Polyaromatic hydrocarbons are also present in soot, which was suggested to be a causative agent of cancer over 150 years earlier.  
The mutagenic property of mutagens was first demonstrated in 1927, when Hermann Muller discovered that x-rays can cause genetic mutations in fruit flies, producing phenotypic mutants as well as observable changes to the chromosomes. 
Chemical mutagens were not demonstrated to cause mutation until the 1940s, when Charlotte Auerbach and J. M. Robson found that mustard gas can cause mutations in fruit flies.  Mutagens are not necessarily carcinogens, and vice versa.  Sodium Azide for example may be mutagenic (and highly toxic), but it has not been shown to be carcinogenic.Toxicology And Carcinogenesis Studies Of Sodium Azide

Effects of mutagens

Mutagens cause changes to the DNA that can affect the transcription and replication of the DNA, which in severe cases can lead to cell death.  The mutagen produces mutations in the DNA, and deleterious mutation can result in aberrant, impaired or loss of function for a particular gene, and accumulation of mutations may lead to cancer. 
Different mutagens act on the DNA differently.  Powerful mutagens may result in chromosomal instability, causing chromosomal breakages and rearrangement of the chromosomes such as translocation, deletion, and inversion.  Such mutagens are called clastogens.  
Mutagens may also modify the DNA sequence; the changes in nucleic acid sequences by mutations include substitution of nucleotide base-pairs and insertions and deletions of one or more nucleotides in DNA sequences. Although some of these mutations are lethal or cause serious disease, many have minor effects as they do not result in residue changes that have significant effect on the structure and function of the proteins.  Many mutations are silent mutations, causing no visible effects at all, either because they occur in non-coding or non-functional sequences, or they do not change the amino-acid sequence due to the redundancy of codons. 
Some mutagens can cause aneuploidy and change the number of chromosomes in the cell. 
In Ames test, where the varying concentrations of the chemical are used in the test, the dose response curve obtained is nearly always linear, suggesting that there is no threshold for mutagenesis.  Similar results are also obtained in studies with radiations, indicating that there may be no safe threshold for mutagens.  However, some proposed that low level of some mutagens may stimulate the DNA repair processes and therefore may not necessarily be harmful.

Types of mutagens

Mutagens may be of physical, chemical or biological origin.  They may act directly on the DNA, causing  direct damage to the DNA, and most often result in replication error.  Some however may act on the replication mechanism and chromosomal partition.  Many mutagens are not mutagenic by themselves, but can form mutagenic metabolites through cellular processes.  Such mutagens are called promutagens.

Physical mutagens

DNA reactive chemicals

A large number of chemicals may interact directly with DNA.  However, many such as PAHs, aromatic amines, benzene are not necessarily mutagenic by themselves, but through metabolic processes in cells they produce mutagenic compounds.

Base analogs

Intercalating agents

Metals

Many metals, such as arsenic, cadmium, chromium, nickel and their compounds may be mutagenic, they may however act via a number of different mechanisms.

Biological agents

Protection against mutagens

Antioxidants are an important group of anticarcinogenic compounds that may help remove ROS or potentially harmful chemicals.  These may be found naturally in fruits and vegetables.
Other chemicals may reduce mutagenesis or prevent cancer via other mechanisms, although for some the precise mechanism for their protective property may not be certain.  Selenium, which is present as a micronutrient in vegetables, is a component of important antioxidant enzymes such as gluthathione peroxidase.  Many phytonutrients may counter the effect of mutagens; for example, sulforaphane in vegetables such as broccoli has been shown to be protective against prostate cancer.
An effective precautionary measure an individual can undertake to protect themselves is by limiting exposure to mutagens such as UV radiations and tobacco smoke.  In Australia, where people with pale skin are often exposed to strong sunlight, melanoma is the most common cancer diagnosed in people aged 15–44 years.Skin-tone gene could predict cancer risk
In 1981, human epidemiological analysis by Richard Doll and Richard Peto indicated that smoking caused 30% of cancers in the US. 
For certain mutagens, such as dangerous chemicals and radiations, as well as infectious agents known to cause cancer, government legislations and regulatory bodies are necessary for their control.

Mutagen test systems

Many different systems for detecting mutagen have been developed.  Animal systems may more accurately reflect the metabolism of human, however, they are expensive and time-consuming (may take around three years to complete), they are therefore not used as a first screen for mutagenicity or carcinogenicity.

Bacterial systems

Yeast

Systems similar to Ames test have been developed in yeast. Saccharomyces cerevisiae is generally used.  These systems can check for forward and reverse mutations, as well as recombinant events.

Drosophila

Sex-Linked Recessive Lethal Test – Males from a strain with yellow bodies are used in this test. The gene for the yellow body lies on the X-chromosome.  The fruit flies are fed on a diet of test chemical, and progenies are separated by sex.  The surviving males are crossed with the females of the same generation, and if no males with yellow bodies are detected in the second generation, it would indicate a lethal mutation on the X-chromosome has occurred.

Plant Assays

Plants such as Zea mays, Arabidopsis thaliana and Tradescantia have been used in various test assays for mutagenecity of chemicals.

Cell culture assay

Mammalian cell lines such as Chinese hamster V79 cells, Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells or mouse lymphoma cells may be used to test for mutagenesis.  Such systems include the HPRT assay for resistance to 8-azaguanine or 6-thioguanine, and ouabain-resistance (OUA) assay.
Rat primary hepatocytes may also be used to measure DNA repair following DNA damage.  Mutagens may stimulate unscheduled DNA synthesis that results in more stained nuclear material in cells following exposure to mutagens.

Chromosome check systems

These systems check for large scale changes to the chromosomes and may be used with cell culture or in animal test.  The chromosomes are stained and observed for any changes.  Sister chromatid exchange is a symmetrical exchange of chromosome material between sister chromatids and may be correlated to the mutagenic or carcinogenic potential of a chemical.  In micronucleus Test, cells are examined for micronuclei, which are fragments or chromosomes left behind at anaphase, and is therefore a test for clastogenic agents that cause chromosome breakages.  Other tests may check for various chromosomal aberrations such as chromatid and chromosomal gaps and deletions, translocations, and ploidy.

Animal test systems

Rodents are usually used in animal test.  The chemicals under
test are usually  administered in the food and in the drinking water, but sometimes by dermal application, by gavage, or by inhalation, and carried out over the major part of the life span for rodents.  In tests that check for carcinogens, maximum tolerated dosage is first determined, then a range of doses are given to around 50 animals throughout the notional lifespan of the animal of two years.  After death the animals are examined for sign of tumours.    Differences in metabolism between rat and human however means that human may not respond in exactly the same way to mutagen, and dosages that produce tumours on the animal test may also be unreasonably high for a human, i.e. the equivalent amount required to produce tumours in human may far exceed what a person might encounter in real life.
Mice with recessive mutations for a visible phenotype may also be used to check for mutagens.  Females with recessive mutation crossed with wild-type males would yield the same phenotype as the wild-type, and any observable change to the phenotype would indicate that a mutation induced by the mutagen has occurred.
Mice may also be used for dominant lethal assays where early embryonic deaths are monitored.  Male mice are treated with chemicals under test, mated with females, and the females are then sacrificed before parturition and early fetal deaths are counted in the uterine horns.
Transgenic Mouse Assay using a mouse strain infected with a viral shuttle vector is another method for testing mutagens.  Animals are first treated with suspected mutagen, the mouse DNA is then isolated and the phage segment recovered and used to infect E. coli.  Using similar method as the blue-white screen, the plaque formed with DNA containing mutation are white, while those without are blue.

Use of mutagen in anti-cancer therapy

Many mutagens are highly toxic to proliferating cells, and they are often used to destroy cancer cells.  Alkylating agents such as cyclophosphamide and cisplatin, as well as intercalating agent such as daunorubicin and doxorubicin may be used in chemotherapy. Ionizing radiations are used in radiation therapy.

Mutagens in fiction

In science fiction, mutagens are often represented as substances that are capable of completely changing the form of the recipient. This is seen in the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles franchise, comic books such as Marvel Comics's Inhumans, television series, computer and video games, like the Cyberia, The Witcher, Metroid Prime: Trilogy, Resistance: Fall of Man, Resident Evil, Infamous, Command & Conquer, Gears of War 3, and Fallout.






