[[MATLAB]]

CATEGORIES: Array programming languages, High-level programming languages, Dynamically typed programming languages, Numerical programming languages, Numerical software, Numerical analysis software for Windows, Numerical analysis software for OS X, Numerical analysis software for Linux, Science software, Data analysis software, Data-centric programming languages, Data mining and machine learning software, Numerical linear algebra, Plotting software, Data visualization software, Computer vision software, Mathematical software, Mathematical optimization software, Computer algebra systems, Computer algebra system software for Linux, Computer algebra system software for Windows, Computer algebra system software for OS X, Statistical software, Statistical programming languages, Time series software, Regression and curve fitting software, Econometrics software, C software, Cross-platform software, Proprietary cross-platform software, IRIX software, Parallel computing, Software modeling tools, Software modeling language, Proprietary commercial software for Linux

MATLAB (matrix laboratory) is a multi-paradigm numerical computing environment and fourth-generation programming language. Developed by MathWorks, MATLAB allows matrix manipulations, plotting of functions and data, implementation of algorithms, creation of user interfaces, and interfacing with programs written in other languages, including C, C++, Java, and Fortran.
Although MATLAB is intended primarily for numerical computing, an optional toolbox uses the MuPAD symbolic engine, allowing access to symbolic computing capabilities. An additional package, Simulink, adds graphical multi-domain simulation and Model-Based Design for dynamic and embedded systems.
In 2004, MATLAB had around one million users across industry and academia. MATLAB is widely used in academic and research institutions as well as industrial enterprises.

History

Cleve Moler, the chairman of the computer science department at the University of New Mexico, started developing MATLAB in the late 1970s.
MATLAB was first adopted by researchers and practitioners in control engineering, Little's specialty, but quickly spread to many other domains. It is now also used in education, in particular the teaching of linear algebra and numerical analysis, and is popular amongst scientists involved in image processing.

Syntax

The MATLAB application is built around the MATLAB language, and most use of MATLAB involves typing MATLAB code into the Command Window (as an interactive mathematical shell), or executing text files containing MATLAB code, including scripts and/or functions.

Variables

Variables are defined using the assignment operator, =. MATLAB is a weakly typed programming language because types are implicitly converted. and that their type can change. Values can come from constants, from computation involving values of other variables, or from the output of a function. For example:

Vectors/matrices

A simple array is defined using the colon syntax: init:increment:terminator. For instance:
defines a variable named array (or assigns a new value to an existing variable with the name array) which is an array consisting of the values 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9. That is, the array starts at 1 (the init value), increments with each step from the previous value by 2 (the increment value), and stops once it reaches (or to avoid exceeding) 9 (the terminator value).
the increment value can actually be left out of this syntax (along with one of the colons), to use a default value of 1.
assigns to the variable named ari an array with the values 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, since the default value of 1 is used as the incrementer.
Indexing is one-based, which is the usual convention for matrices in mathematics, although not for some programming languages such as C, C++, and Java.
Matrices can be defined by separating the elements of a row with blank space or comma and using a semicolon to terminate each row. The list of elements should be surrounded by square brackets: . Parentheses: () are used to access elements and subarrays (they are also used to denote a function argument list).
Sets of indices can be specified by expressions such as "2:4", which evaluates to 3, 4.  For example, a submatrix taken from rows 2 through 4 and columns 3 through 4 can be written as:
A square identity matrix of size n can be generated using the function eye, and matrices of any size with zeros or ones can be generated with the functions zeros and ones, respectively.
Most MATLAB functions can accept matrices and will apply themselves to each element. For example, mod(2*J,n) will multiply every element in "J" by 2, and then reduce each element modulo "n". MATLAB does include standard "for" and "while" loops, but (as in other similar applications such as R), using the vectorized notation often produces code that is faster to execute. This code, excerpted from the function magic.m, creates a magic square M for odd values of n (MATLAB function meshgrid is used here to generate square matrices I and J containing 1:n).

Structures

MATLAB has structure data types.

Function handles

MATLAB supports elements of lambda calculus by introducing function handles,

Classes

Although MATLAB has classes, the syntax and calling conventions are significantly different from other languages.
MATLAB has value classes and reference classes, depending on whether the class has handle as a super-class (for reference classes) or not (for value classes).
Method call behavior is different between value and reference classes. For example, a call to a method
can alter any member of object only if object is an instance of a reference class.

Graphics and graphical user interface programming

MATLAB supports developing applications with graphical user interface features. MATLAB includes GUIDE
It also has tightly integrated graph-plotting features. For example the function plot can be used to produce a graph from two vectors x and y. The code:
produces the following figure of the sine function:
A MATLAB program can produce three-dimensional graphics using the functions surf, plot3 or mesh.
In MATLAB, graphical user interfaces can be programmed with the GUI design environment (GUIDE) tool.

Object-oriented programming

MATLAB's support for object-oriented programming includes classes, inheritance, virtual dispatch, packages, pass-by-value semantics, and pass-by-reference semantics.
When put into a file named hello.m, this can be executed with the following commands:

Interfacing with other languages

MATLAB can call functions and subroutines written in the C programming language or Fortran.
Libraries written in Perl, Java, ActiveX or .
As alternatives to the MuPAD based Symbolic Math Toolbox available from MathWorks, MATLAB can be connected to Maple or Mathematica.
Libraries also exist to import and export MathML.

License

MATLAB is a proprietary product of MathWorks, so users are subject to vendor lock-in. application building environment, future development will still be tied to the MATLAB language.
Each toolbox is purchased separately. If an evaluation license is requested, the MathWorks sales department requires detailed information about the project for which MATLAB is to be evaluated. Overall the process of acquiring a license is expensive in terms of money and time. If granted (which it often is), the evaluation license is valid for two to four weeks. A student version of MATLAB is also available.
It has been reported that EU competition regulators are investigating whether MathWorks refused to sell licenses to a competitor.

Alternatives

MATLAB has a number of competitors. Commercial competitors include Mathematica, Maple, and IDL. There are also free open source alternatives to MATLAB, in particular GNU Octave, Scilab, FreeMat, Julia, and Sage which are intended to be mostly compatible with the MATLAB language. Among other languages that treat arrays as basic entities (array programming languages) are APL, Fortran 90 and higher, S-Lang, as well as the statistical languages R and S. There are also libraries to add similar functionality to existing languages, such as IT++ for C++, Perl Data Language for Perl, ILNumerics for .js for JavaScript.
GNU Octave stands out as it treats incompatibility with MATLAB as a bug (see GNU Octave#Matlab), therefore it aims to provide a software clone.

Release history

The number (or Release number) is the version reported by Concurrent License Manager program FLEXlm.
For a complete list of changes of both MATLAB and official toolboxes, consult the MATLAB release notes.

File extensions

MATLAB

Simulink

Simscape

MuPAD

Third-party

Easter eggs

Several easter eggs exist in MATLAB. and random inside jokes. For example, typing in "spy" will generate a picture of the spies from Spy vs Spy.  "Spy" was changed to an image of a dog in recent releases (R2011B). Typing in "why" randomly outputs a philosophical answer. Other commands include "penny", "toilet", "image", and "life".  Not every Easter egg appears in every version of MATLAB – some appear and some disappear.



Notes






