[[Balkh Province]]

CATEGORIES: Balkh Province, Provinces of Afghanistan, Khorasan

Balkh (Persian / Pashto: بلخ) is one of the thirty-four provinces of Afghanistan, located in the north of the country. Its name derives from the ancient city of Balkh, near the modern town. It has a population of about 1,245,100, which is multi-ethnic. The city of Mazar-i-Sharif serves as the capital of the province.


Geography

Balkh Province is situated in the northern part of Afghanistan, bordering Uzbekistan in the north, Tajikistan in the north-east, Kunduz Province in the east, Samangan Province in the south-east, Sar-e Pol Province in the south-west and Jowzjan Province in the west. The province covers an area of 16,840 km2. Nearly half of the province is mountainous or semi-mountainous terrain (48.7%) while half of the area (50.2%) is made up of flat land.

History

Bactria-Margiana Archaeological Complex (BMAC)

The Bactria-Margiana Archaeological Complex (BMAC, also known as the "Oxus civilization") is the modern archaeological designation for a Bronze Age culture of Central Asia, dated to ca. 2200–1700 BCE, located in present day Turkmenistan, northern Afghanistan, southern Uzbekistan and western Tajikistan, centered on the upper Amu Darya (Oxus), in area covering ancient Bactria. Its sites were discovered and named by the Soviet archaeologist Viktor Sarianidi (1976). Bactria was the Greek name for the area of Bactra (modern Balkh), in what is now northern Afghanistan, and Margiana was the Greek name for the Persian satrapy of Margu, the capital of which was Merv, in today's Turkmenistan.
The early Greek historian Ctesias c. 400 BCE (followed by Diodorus Siculus) alleged that the legendary Assyrian king Ninus had defeated a Bactrian king named Oxyartes in ca. 2140 BC, or some 1000 years before the Trojan War. Ever since the discovery of cuneiform enabled actual Assyrian records to be deciphered in the 19th century, however, historians have ascribed little value to the Greek account.
According to some writers, Bactria was the homeland of Indo-European tribes who moved south-west into Iran and into North-Western India around 2500–2000 BCE. Later, it became the north province of the Persian Empire in Central Asia. 59) It was in these regions, where the fertile soil of the mountainous country is surrounded by the Turanian desert, that the prophet Zoroaster (Zarathushtra) was said to have been born and gained his first adherents. Avestan, the language of the oldest portions of the Zoroastrian Avesta, was one of the old Iranian languages, and is the oldest attested member of the Eastern Iranian branch of the Iranian language family.

Achaemenid Empire

Bactria has belonged to Iranian empires since a very early stage, in fact it is suggested by E. Herzfeld that Bactria belonged to the Median empire. And it was annexed to the Persian Empire by Cyrus the Great in 6th century BCE and together with Margiana it formed the twelfth satrapy of Persians.P. Leriche, "Bactria, Pre-Islamic period." Encyclopaedia Iranica, Vol. 3, 1998. After Darius III of Persia had been defeated by Alexander the Great and killed in the ensuing chaos, his murderer Bessus, the satrap of Bactria, tried to organize a national resistance based on his satrapie but was captured by other warlords and delivered to Alexander. He was then tortured and killed. 41-43.

Alexander the Great and the Seleucid Empire

Alexander conquered Sogdiana and Iran. However, in the south, beyond the Oxus, he met strong resistance. After two years of war Bactria was occupied by the Macedonian empire, but Alexander never successfully subdued the people. After Alexander's death, the Macedonian empire was eventually divided up between generals in Alexander's army. Bactria became a part of the Seleucid Empire, named after its founder, Seleucus I.
The Macedonians (and especially Seleucus I, and his son Antiochus I), established the Seleucid Empire, and founded a great many Greek towns in eastern Iran, and the Greek language became dominant for some time there.
The paradox that Greek presence was more prominent in Bactria than in areas far closer to Greece can possibly be explained by the supposed policy of Persian kings to deport unreliable Greeks to this the most remote province of their huge empire.

Greco-Bactrian Kingdom

  "The famed Bactrian Empire of a thousand cities, wallowing in wealth (opulentissimum illud mille urbium Bactrianum imperium)"Justinus XLI 1.8.  
The many difficulties against which the Seleucid kings had to fight and the attacks of Ptolemy II of Egypt gave Diodotus, satrap of Bactria, the opportunity to declare independence (about 255 BCE) and conquer Sogdiana. He was the founder of the Greco-Bactrian Kingdom. Diodotus and his successors were able to maintain themselves against the attacks of the Seleucids—particularly from Antiochus III the Great, who was ultimately defeated by the Romans (190 BCE).
The Greco-Bactrians were so powerful that they were able to expand their territory as far as India:
The Greco-Bactrians used Greek language for administrative purposes, and the local Bactrian language was also Hellenized, as suggested by its adoption of the Greek alphabet and Greek loanwords. In turn, some of these words were also borrowed by modern Pashto, the language of Afghanistan.UCLA Language Project, Pashto, Link

Sakas, Yuezhis and Sassanids

The weakness of the Greco-Bactrian empire was shown by its sudden and complete overthrow, first by the Sakas, and then by the Yuezhi (who later became known as Kushans), who had conquered Bactria by the time of the visit of the Chinese envoy Zhang Qian (circa 127 BCE), who had been sent by the Han emperor to investigate lands to the west of China. Michael Hogan, the Megalithic Portal, ed. Andy Burnham
Kujula Kadphises, the Guishuang xihou (or prince) of the Da Yuezhi, united the region in the early 1st century and laid the foundations for the powerful, but short-lived, Kushan Empire (1st to 3rd century CE), which was then overcome by the Sassanians from Persia.

Contacts with China

The name Daxia appears in Chinese from the 3rd century BCE to designate a mythical kingdom to the West, possibly a consequence of the first contacts with the expansion of the Greco-Bactrian Kingdom, and then is used by the explorer Zhang Qian in 126 BCE to designate Bactria.
The reports of Zhang Qian were put in writing in the Shiji ("Records of the Grand Historian") by Sima Qian in the 1st century BCE. They describe an important urban civilization of about one million people, living in walled cities under small city kings or magistrates. Daxia was an affluent country with rich markets, trading in an incredible variety of objects, coming as far as Southern China. By the time Zhang Qian visited Daxia, there was no longer a major king, and the Bactrian were suzerains to the nomadic Yuezhi, who were settled to the north of their territory beyond the Oxus (Amu Darya). Overall Zhang Qian depicted a rather sophisticated but demoralized people who were afraid of war.
Following these reports, the Chinese emperor Wu Di was informed of the level of sophistication of the urban civilizations of Ferghana, Bactria and Parthia, and became interested in developing commercial relationship with them:
These contacts immediately led to the dispatch of multiple embassies from the Chinese, which helped to develop the Silk Road.

Governance

The current governor of Balkh is Atta Muhammad Nur. The city of Mazar-i-Sharif is the capital of the province. All law enforcement activities throughout the province are controlled by the Afghan National Police (ANP). Balkh's border with Uzbekistan is under the control of the Afghan Border Police (ABP). The provincial police chief represents the Ministry of the Interior in Kabul. The ANP is backed by other Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF), including the National Directorate of Security (NDS) and NATO-led forces.

Administrative divisions

The province is divided into 15 districts.

Demographics

The total population of the province is about 1,245,100, which is multi-ethnic.
According to the Naval Postgraduate School, "Balkh is ethnically diverse, including substantial Tajik, Hazara, Pashtuns, Arab, Uzbek, Turkomen, and Sunni Hazara (Kawshi) communities. The current governor, Ustad Atta Noor Mohammad, is a Tajik with a concentrated political power-base in Balkh and served as the provincial head since 2004. Although largely secure, recent insurgent incursions into Balkh are increasing, and Taliban affiliated insurgent fronts are gaining momentum in the northeast (Baghlan-Kunduz corridor) and the northwest (Badghis-Faryab corridor)."
According to the World Food Program, "Around 66% of the population of Balkh lives in rural districts while 34% lives in urban areas. Around 51 % of the population is male and 49% is female. The major ethnic groups living in Balkh province are Tajiks and Pashtoons followed by Uzbek, Hazaras, Turkman, Arab and Baluch. Dari is spoken by about 50% of the population and 58% of the villages. The second most frequent language is Pashtu, spoken by the majorities in 266 villages representing 27% of the population, followed by Turkmani (11.9%) and Uzbeki (10.7%). Balkh province also has a population of Kuchis or nomads whose numbers vary in different seasons. In winter 52,929 individuals, or 2.2% of the overall Kuchi population, stay in Balkh living in 80 communities. Half of these are short-range partially migratory, another third are long-range partially migratory, and 18% are settled. Overall, for long and short range migratory categories, less than half of the community migrates. In the winter both groups stay mostly in one area and don't move around during the season. In the summer season, some 120 long range migratory Kuchi households come from Saripul province to Balkh province. The Kuchi population in the summer is 59,776 individuals."

Sport

The locals of Balkh take great pride in their sporting history and culture. Every Nowruz (Persian New Year), Balkh is the site of many sporting events. Buzkashi is a traditional horse riding sport of the region and is very popular in this province. Pehlwani is also a popular sport in the province. However, the most popular presently and for the last 50 years has been Soccer, this was evident in the Balkh team Simorgh Alborz F.C. finishing runners up in the inaugural Afghan Premier League and in their contributions to the National Team.








