[[Paktia Province]]

CATEGORIES: Paktia Province, Provinces of Afghanistan

Paktia ( - Paktyā), is one of the thirty-four Provinces of Afghanistan, in the east of the country.  Its capital is Gardēz. The population is predominantly Pashtun.

History

Paktia is basically Pashtia (پښتیا). Some Pashtun scholars are claiming that the word Pashtu has been stemmed from Pashtia (پښتو = پښتیا). Paktia used to be a unified province with Khost and Paktika, these three provinces are now referred to as Loya Paktia, meaning "Greater Paktia". Paktia came to prominence during the 1980s, when a significant portion of Afghanistan's leadership originated from the province. Some of the more notable leaders include: Najibullah Ahmadzai, a former President of Afghanistan, Mohammad Aslam Watanjar, Shahnawaz Tanai, and Sayed Muhammad Gulabzoi. 
More recently, Paktia was the site of heavy fighting between Taliban and NATO forces following the 2001 invasion of Afghanistan. Paktia was one of the last redoubts of organized Taliban resistance; much of Operation Anaconda took place in Zurmat, one of Paktia's larger districts.

Governance

The uncertain security situation and remoteness of the province has led to many provincial Governors being appointed in the short time since the fall of the Taliban.  After the assassination of Hakim Taniwal in September 2006, Rahmatullah Rahmat was appointed as provincial Governor. Rahmat was replaced by Juma Khan Hamdard in January 2008.
Despite the many problems facing the province, it is one of the more stable in the southeast of the country and there has been a concerted effort to improve the civic infrastructure, giving Paktia a reasonable rate of reconstruction.  The first American Provincial Reconstruction Team base was established in Gardez to supply security and reconstruction, and has funded several successful projects.

Security situation

In September 2006, Governor Hakim Taniwal was killed by a Taliban suicide bomber as he left his office in Gardez."Nato kills 94 'Taleban fighters'". BBC News (10 September 2006).  At the time, Taniwal was the highest-ranking post-Taliban official to be killed by insurgent forces in the country.
Paktia is one of the most politically complicated provinces in the country.  Militia commanders are a strong presence in the province, and their shifting allegiances and violent tendencies make governance of the region problematic.  The province also has the difficult mountainous and cavernous terrain typical of the Hindu Kush range, providing armed groups ample cover from which to conduct guerilla operations.
Immediately after the fall of the Taliban, Paktia was one of the most chaotic regions in the country, as a small civil war broke out between rival militia commanders for control of the province, and Taliban and Al-Qaeda fighters gave occupying U.S. troops some of their heaviest losses in the cave complexes south of Gardez."Pacha Khan Zadran". GlobalSecurity.
The security situation in Paktia has improved significantly in recent years, though isolated fighting by Taliban militants and persistent tribal conflicts in the eastern part of the province continue to challenge the government. The provincial capital, Gardez, is among the most secure in the southeastern part of the country, owing in part to a large presence by coalition and Afghan security forces.
Parts of Paktia are also believed to be a safe haven for militants from the Haqqani network, an anti-government combat organisation involved in the Taliban insurgency."More than 20 Insurgents Killed in Haqqani Clearing Operation""Afghan, Coalition Forces Keep Pressure on Insurgents"
On February 12, 2010, five civilians including two pregnant women and a teenage girl were killed during a botched night raid by U.S. special forces who were later accused of attempting to cover up the incident, though the investigation was inconclusive due to lack of evidence.timesonline.co.eceNato 'covered up' botched night raid in Afghanistan that killed five « RAWA News. Rawa. Retrieved on 2013-07-12. Reuters. Retrieved on 2013-07-12.

Geography

Paktia borders the Pakistani-ruled tribal areas of North Waziristan, Bannu  and Kurram Agency.  Like most of the traditional Pashtun areas of Afghanistan, the Durand Line that marks the border with Pakistan is "drawn on water", and residents move freely between the two countries. Within Afghanistan, it borders Logar Province, Ghazni Province, Paktika Province, and Khost Province, in counterclockwise order.
Paktia is a largely mountainous province, with most of the population living in the central valley stretching from Ahmad Khel in the east down through Zormat and into neighboring Paktika province. The eastern part of the province, particularly Chamkani and Dand wa Patan, is a second valley leading into Pakistan.
Jaji and Jani Khel districts are largely mountainous with much smaller inhabited valleys.
The Khost-Gardez Pass area, to the south of Gardez, is mountainous with settlements limited to the main pass and smaller valleys.
As of 2005, Azra district is no longer a part of Paktya. It has been attached to Logar Province to the north, to which it is much more closely connected by roadways and people.

Demographics

The population is 90% Pashtun, who are the majority in the province, and around 10% people are Tajiks.nps.pdf

Tribes

The main Pashtun groups are:Cultural and Conflict Studies, Paktya Province
,

Districts

Paktia is made up of 14 districts
Gerda Serai, Lazha Ahmadkhel and Mirzaka are unofficial districts.

Important geographical features








