[[Margaret River, Western Australia]]

CATEGORIES: Towns in Western Australia, Wine regions of Western Australia, South West (Western Australia), Margaret River, Western Australia, Surfing locations in South West Western Australia

Margaret River is a town in the South West of Western Australia, located in the valley of the eponymous Margaret River,  south of Perth, the state capital. Its Local Government Area is the Shire of Augusta-Margaret River.
Margaret River's coast to the west of the town is a renowned surfing location, with world wide notoriety for its surf breaks. Colloquially, the area is referred to as Margs 
The surrounding area is the Margaret River Wine Region and is known for its wine production and tourism, attracting an estimated 500,000 visitors annually. In earlier days the area was better known for hardwood timber and agricultural production.

History

The town is named after the river, which is presumed to be named after Margaret Whicher, cousin of John Garrett Bussell (founder of Busselton) in 1831. The name is first shown on a map of the region published in 1839.  European migrants lived in the area as early as 1850, with timber logging commencing in around 1870. By 1910, the town had a hotel which also operated as a post office.
After World War I, an attempt by the Government of Western Australia to attract migrants to Western Australia (known as the Group Settlement Scheme) and establish farms in the region attracted new settlers to the town. In 1922 over 100 settlers moved into the district.
In the early 1920s the Busselton to Margaret River Railway was built and in 1925 the Margaret River to Flinders Bay line opened.

Geography and climate

 

Margaret River is located  inland from the Indian Ocean at a point about halfway between Cape Naturaliste and Cape Leeuwin in Western Australia's South West region.
The climate is humid Mediterranean, with an average annual rainfall of around . On occasions, as in August 1955, the town has had measurable rain on every day of a month in this period. During the summer, the weather is very warm, though there are usually sea breezes, and frequently sunny. The hot dry summers, coupled with strong winds, creates an environment where there is always a high risk of bush fires.

Wine Region

Margaret River is the foremost Geographical Indication wine region in the South West Australia Zone, with nearly Campbell Mattinson, "Why the French hate us", Hardie Grant Books 2007  The region produces just three percent of total Australian grape production, but commands over 20 percent of the Australian premium wine market.
Stretching some  wide in parts, the region is bounded to the east by the Leeuwin-Naturaliste Ridge, between Cape Naturaliste and Cape Leeuwin, and to the west by the Indian Ocean. A Mediterranean-style climate, lacking extreme summer and winter temperatures, provides ideal growing conditions.  The climate is described as similar to that of Bordeaux in a dry vintage.
Humidity levels are ideal during the growing period and the combination of climate, soil and viticulture practices leads to consistently high quality fruit of intense flavour. Consequently, annual vintage results continue to exceed expectations and reinforce Margaret River's reputation as one of the premium wine-producing regions of the world.
The principal grape varieties in the region are fairly evenly split between red and white; Cabernet Sauvignon, Chardonnay, Sauvignon blanc, Shiraz, Merlot, Chenin blanc and Verdelho.Oz Clarke, 'Oz Clarke's Pocket Wine Guides', Harcourt 1 November 2002

Caves

Several hundred caves are located near Margaret River, all of them within Leeuwin-Naturaliste National Park. Six of these are open to the public.M. Bright, 1001 Natural Wonders You Must See Before You Die, Quintet Publishing, London 2005
The most famous of these is the multi-chambered Mammoth Cave, which lies 
The other five caves open to the public in the area are Jewel Cave, Lake Cave, Ngilgi Cave, Calgardup Cave and Giants Cave.  Many other caves can be accessed with a permit by experienced cavers.

In the media

Arte-TV produced an episode of Nouveaux paradis about Margaret River. The 2008 documentary shows interviews with (amongst others) tourist officials, surfers, and dolphin watchers.
 Les Nouveaux paradis, L'Australie, de la mer à la vigne on IMDB.
Margaret River was also visited in the 1966 documentary film The Endless Summer. On 25 April 2009, on Sky television's Soccer AM, Hugh Jackman called Margaret River the best place he's ever been to, citing the surf, the beaches, the food, the wine, the people and the air as his reasons for thinking so.

Surfing breaks

The Margaret River area has acquired a range of synonyms for the collection of surf breaks nearby Blair, Larry and Horan, Cheyne Wave Finder Australia (3rd edition) ISBN 0-9581726-6-8  give the name Margarets Area to the Cape Naturaliste to Boranup Sandpatch area and identify over 30 named breaks Usually significant surfing competitions concentrate their locale to Margarets Main Break (aka Surfers Point) which breaks in the vicinity of Prevelly at the mouth of Margaret River.margaretriver.com/pages/surf-spots/
The actual range of surf breaks range from the eastern side of Cape Naturaliste down to just south of Cape Hamelin, and despite web sites and online sources calling the whole Cape Naturaliste to Cape Leeuwin region the Margaret River surfing area, conditions and break types vary along the coast.





Notes

Bibliography




