[[Eurocorps]]

CATEGORIES: Military of the European Union, Strasbourg, Multinational units and formations, 1992 in the European Economic Community, 1992 establishments in France, Government agencies established in 1992

Eurocorps (also as European Corps, Corps of European Union) is an intergovernmental, army corps headquarters (HQ) based in Strasbourg, France. The HQ was created in May 1992, activated in October 1993 and declared operational in 1995.
The Eurocorps HQ comprises approximately 1,000 soldiers stationed in the headquarters in Strasbourg.  It is known variously by EUROKORPS, El EUROCUERPO and Le Corps Européen.
The nucleus of the force is the Franco-German Brigade established in 1987.

Participating countries

Five countries participate as Eurocorps Framework Nations.
Framework nations:
Associated nations:
Former associated nations:

Organization

The Eurocorps is not subordinate to any other military organization. the Chief of Defense, and the Political Director of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. This committee considers requests for support from multinational organizations such as the UN, NATO, OSCE or EU. The Corps can also be deployed at the request of the framework nations.

Command structure

The Eurocorps HQ is based in Strasbourg near the Franco-German border, the seat of several European institutions. The headquarters contains the following units:p. 894, Kleine, Maxim, Integrated Bi- and Multinational Military Units in Europe, in: Georg Nolte (Editor), European Military Law Systems, Walter de Gruyter, 2003.
German and French were the official languages at the Eurocorps till August 2002. English is now the working language. 2 pour le Général commandant le Corps européen from 14 November 1994: Langues au Corps européen.

Subordinate units

=Operational Command=

The Franco-German Brigade, with 5000 troops is the only military formation permanently under operational command of Eurocoprs, is stationed at Müllheim, Donaueschingen, Immendingen, Sigmaringen, Meßstetten, Stetten am kalten Markt, Villingen-Schwenningen in Germany and Illkirch-Grafenstaden in France. Additional affiliated formations could be placed under command of Eurocorps HQ for specific operations, for example in support of EU or NATO rapid-response missions.info-france-usa. 
The five framework countries have earmarked the following units and formations to the Eurocorps:

=Affiliated units and formations=

In addition to the Franco-German Brigade a number of nations have earmarked units or formations that they have affiliated to the Eurocorps HQ. These do not come under the permanent command of Eurocorps but rather can be provided to the corps for specific operations. For example,
Except for the Franco-German Brigade and the staff of the Multinational Command Support Brigade (MNCS Bde) that are permanently under operational command of HQ Eurocorps, these national contributions remain under national command in peacetime. They become fully subordinated after Transfer of Authority has been decided by member states.
The size and type of Eurocorps units required in operations will depend on the nature and scope of assigned missions, likely employment, and the expected operational outcome. In the case that all earmarked national contributions are committed, the corps would theoretically comprise approximately 60,000.

Deployments

The Eurocorps participated in peacekeeping missions in Bosnia and led KFOR III in Kosovo from 18 April 2000 to October 2000 and led the ISAF6 Force in Afghanistan from 9 August 2004 to 11 February 2005. From 1 July 2006, to 10 January 2007, HQ Eurocorps was the land component stand by element of the NATO Response Force 7. From 1 July 2010 to 10 January 2011, HQ Eurocorps was the land component stand by element of the NATO Response Force 15 (NRF 15). In 2012, HQ Eurocorps has deployed to ISAF in Afghanistan.





Notes


