[[Alyson Stoner]]

CATEGORIES: 1993 births, 21st-century American actresses, American child actresses, American child singers, American female dancers, American film actresses, American television actresses, American video game actresses, American voice actresses, Living people, Actresses from Toledo, Ohio

Alyson Rae Stoner (born August 11, 1993) is an American actress, dancer and singer. Stoner is known for her roles as Max in The Suite Life of Zack & Cody, Sarah Baker in Cheaper by the Dozen and Cheaper by the Dozen 2, Camille Cage in Step Up, Step Up 3D and Step Up All In and Caitlyn Gellar in Camp Rock and Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam. She has been a background dancer for several artists, such as Missy Elliott, Eminem, Outkast and Will Smith. Stoner is also known as Sally from Mike's Super Short Show that ran from 2002–2007, and the voice of Isabella Garcia-Shapiro in Phineas and Ferb.

Early life

Stoner was born in Toledo, Ohio, the daughter of LuAnne Hodges (née Adams), a former executive secretary at Owens-Illinois, and Charlie Stoner. While growing up in Toledo, Stoner attended Maumee Valley Country Day School and studied ballet, tap dance, and jazz dance at the O'Connell's Dance Studio. She also modeled and trained at the Margaret O'Brien Modeling Studio. She won Best Model of the Year at the International Modeling and Talent Association (IMTA) Convention in New York City with Ms. O'Brien's studio in 2000, and she won many awards in acting and dance.

Dancing

After choreography training in Los Angeles, Stoner appeared as a background dancer in several music videos, notably Missy Elliott's "Work It", "Gossip Folks", "I'm Really Hot", Eminem's "Just Lose It", and "No Tengo Dinero" by the Kumbia Kings. She has also been a back-up dancer for OutKast at the 2004 Kids' Choice Awards and for Will Smith at the 2005 show. She also recently appeared in Debby Ryan's "We Got the Beat" for Disney Channel's Radio Rebel music video. Stoner danced with a dancing group called the JammXKids between 2003 and 2006. She quit the group in early 2006 due to scheduling conflicts, but continues to work with the individual kids in different jobs. She was also one of the dancers in the special features for the Shark Tale DVD. Stoner teaches hip hop currently at the Millennium Dance Complex, and is credited as the youngest person to teach a master class there.

Television and films

In 2002, Stoner became the co-host of the Disney Channel Mike's Super Short Show along with Michael Alan Johnson, an infomercial segment regarding forthcoming Disney releases. In 2003 and 2005, she appeared as Sarah, one of the twelve Baker children, in the successful comedies Cheaper by the Dozen and Cheaper by the Dozen 2. She has also appeared in several television shows aimed at the preteen market, including The Suite Life of Zack & Cody, That's So Raven and Drake & Josh.
In 2006, she had a small film role in Step Up as Camille, Channing Tatum's younger sister. She currently provides the voice of Isabella Garcia-Shapiro and Jenny (until Season 4) in the Disney Channel animated series Phineas and Ferb and personally came up with Isabella's catchphrase "Whatcha doin'?". In 2008, she starred in the Disney Channel Original movie Camp Rock as Caitlyn Gellar, an aspiring music producer."   Her reception in Camp Rock was particularly strong, with various media outlets suggesting it was about time she played a main character role having backed up for other big names such as Will Smith and Eminem.
Stoner starred as Alice McKinley in the movie Alice Upside Down, based loosely on the Alice series, particularly The Agony of Alice by Phyllis Reynolds Naylor. This was her second starring role and, according to an interview that appears on the direct-to-DVD release, she states that this was the first time she has had to appear in every scene in a movie.
In 2008, Alyson appeared as a junior celebrity spokesperson in a series of television commercials for the Zaxby's fastfood chain.
In 2010, Stoner appeared in the third Step Up film Step-Up 3-D opposite Adam Sevani where she reprised the role. Stoner uploaded a video onto her official YouTube page of her final dance rehearsal which introduced other cast members.[ref]
[/ref]
In 2010, Stoner guest-starred in the TV series House as a skater.
In 2013, Stoner recently announced on her website that she would be voicing the character Opal for The Legend of Korra.

Music

In 2008, she sang two songs ("Lost and Found" and "Free Spirit") from the soundtrack of the movie Alice Upside Down, in which she plays the lead role. She has also recorded a cover version of the song Dancing in the Moonlight for the 2009 Disney DVD/Blu-ray movie, Space Buddies.Space Buddies | Now On Blu-ray, DVD & Digital | Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment
Stoner is working with record producers, songwriters and a vocal coach in order to focus on transitioning her style of voice, from "kiddie-pop" into a more soulful pop vibe with a little alternative edge, so she can start working on her first studio album.
Stoner released her debut EP called Beat the System, in which all the songs are written by Stoner.
Track listing:

Publishing

Stoner is the "dance editor" for KEWL Magazine. She also recently hosted a global fan summit on Amazon. Stoner appeared in the Disney Channel Original Movie Camp Rock, along with the Jonas Brothers and Demi Lovato. In February 2009, Stoner released the Alyson Stoner Project described as "a dance video hybrid - melding many styles of entertainment into one package".
In the summer of 2008, she appeared in the Disney Channel Games as a member of the Blue Lightning Team along with Kiely Williams, Demi Lovato, Roshon Fegan, her Camp Rock castmates, Shin Koyamada, Cole Sprouse and several overseas Disney Channel actors. Stoner has also appeared in Wii Fit related videos on the Nintendo Channel on the Wii video game console demonstrating how to do balance exercises. She also replaced Hayden Panettiere as the voice of Kairi in Kingdom Hearts Re:Chain of Memories and Xion in Kingdom Hearts 358/2 Days.

Filmography

Film

Television

Video games

Music

Albums

Awards






