[[Momentum]]

CATEGORIES: Natural philosophy, Physical quantities, Mechanics, Concepts in physics, Conservation laws, Continuum mechanics, Mass, Velocity

In classical mechanics, linear momentum or translational momentum (pl. momenta; SI unit kg m/s, or equivalently, N s) is the product of the mass and velocity of an object. For example, a heavy truck moving quickly has a large momentum—it takes a large and prolonged force to get the truck up to this speed, and it takes a large and prolonged force to bring it to a stop afterwards. If the truck were lighter, or moving more slowly, then it would have less momentum.
Like velocity, linear momentum is a vector quantity, possessing a direction as well as a magnitude
Linear momentum is also a conserved quantity, meaning that if a closed system is not affected by external forces, its total linear momentum cannot change. In classical mechanics, conservation of linear momentum  is implied by Newton's laws; but it also holds in special relativity (with a modified formula) and, with appropriate definitions, a (generalized) linear momentum conservation law holds in electrodynamics, quantum mechanics, quantum field theory, and general relativity.

Newtonian mechanics

Momentum has a direction as well as magnitude. Quantities that have both a magnitude and a direction are known as vector quantities. Because momentum has a direction, it can be used to predict the resulting direction of objects after they collide, as well as their speeds. Below, the basic properties of momentum are described in one dimension. The vector equations are almost identical to the scalar equations (see multiple dimensions).

Single particle

The momentum of a particle is traditionally represented by the letter 
The units of momentum are the product of the units of mass and velocity. In SI units, if the mass is in kilograms and the velocity in meters per second, then the momentum is in kilograms meters/second (kg m/s). Being a vector, momentum has magnitude and direction. For example, a model airplane of 1 kg, traveling due north at 1 m/s in straight and level flight, has a momentum of 1 kg m/s due north measured from the ground.

Many particles

The momentum of a system of particles is the sum of their momenta. If two particles have masses , the total momentum is
The momenta of more than two particles can be added in the same way.
A system of particles has a center of mass, a point determined by the weighted sum of their positions:
If all the particles are moving, the center of mass will generally be moving as well. If the center of mass is moving at velocity , the momentum is:
This is known as Euler's first law.

Relation to force

If a force , the momentum of the particle changes by an amount
In differential form, this gives Newton's second law: the rate of change of the momentum of a particle is equal to the force  acting on it:
If the force depends on time, the change in momentum (or impulse) between times   is
The second law only applies to a particle that does not exchange matter with its surroundings, "We may conclude emphasizing that Newton's second law is valid for constant mass only. When the mass varies due to accretion or ablation, alternate equation explicitly accounting for the changing mass should be used." and so it is equivalent to write
so the force is equal to mass times acceleration.
Example: a model airplane of 1 kg accelerates from rest to a velocity of 6 m/s due north in 2 s. The thrust required to produce this acceleration is 3 newton. The change in momentum is 6 kg m/s. The rate of change of momentum is 3 (kg m/s)/s = 3 N.

Conservation

In a closed system (one that does not exchange any matter with the outside and is not acted on by outside forces) the total momentum is constant. This fact, known as the law of conservation of momentum, is implied by Newton's laws of motion.. Therefore
or
If the velocities of the particles are , then
This law holds no matter how complicated the force is between particles. Similarly, if there are several particles, the momentum exchanged between each pair of particles adds up to zero, so the total change in momentum is zero. This conservation law applies to all interactions, including collisions and separations caused by explosive forces. It can also be generalized to situations where Newton's laws do not hold, for example in the theory of relativity and in electrodynamics.

Dependence on reference frame

Momentum is a measurable quantity, and the measurement depends on the motion of the observer. For example, if an apple is sitting in a glass elevator that is descending, an outside observer looking into the elevator sees the apple moving, so to that observer the apple has a nonzero momentum. To someone inside the elevator, the apple does not move, so it has zero momentum. The two observers each have a frame of reference in which they observe motions, and if the elevator is descending steadily they will see behavior that is consistent with the same physical laws.
Suppose a particle has position , the position (represented by a primed coordinate) changes with time as
This is called a Galilean transformation. If the particle is moving at speed  in the first frame of reference, in the second it is moving at speed
Since  does not change, the accelerations are the same:
Thus, momentum is conserved in both reference frames. Moreover, as long as the force has the same form in both frames, Newton's second law is unchanged. Forces such as Newtonian gravity, which depend only on the scalar distance between objects, satisfy this criterion. This independence of reference frame is called Newtonian relativity or Galilean invariance.
A change of reference frame can often simplify calculations of motion. For example, in a collision of two particles a reference frame can be chosen where one particle begins at rest. Another commonly used reference frame is the center of mass frame, one that is moving with the center of mass. In this frame, the total momentum is zero.

Application to collisions

By itself, the law of conservation of momentum is not enough to determine the motion of particles after a collision. Another property of the motion, kinetic energy, must be known. This is not necessarily conserved. If it is conserved, the collision is called an elastic collision; if not, it is an inelastic collision.

=Elastic collisions=

An elastic collision is one in which no kinetic energy is lost. Perfectly elastic "collisions" can occur when the objects do not touch each other, as for example in atomic or nuclear scattering where electric repulsion keeps them apart. A slingshot maneuver of a satellite around a planet can also be viewed as a perfectly elastic collision from a distance. A collision between two pool balls is a good example of an almost totally elastic collision, due to their high rigidity; but when bodies come in contact there is always some dissipation.
A head-on elastic collision between two bodies can be represented by velocities in one dimension, along a line passing through the bodies. If the velocities are  after, the equations expressing conservation of momentum and kinetic energy are:
A change of reference frame can often simplify the analysis of a collision. For example, suppose there are two bodies of equal mass . The bodies have exchanged their velocities. Regardless of the velocities of the bodies, a switch to the center of mass frame leads us to the same conclusion. Therefore, the final velocities are given by
In general, when the initial velocities are known, the final velocities are given by
If one body has much greater mass than the other, its velocity will be little affected by a collision while the other body will experience a large change.

=Inelastic collisions=

In an inelastic collision, some of the kinetic energy of the colliding bodies is converted into other forms of energy such as heat or sound. Examples include traffic collisions, and particle accelerators in which the kinetic energy is converted into mass in the form of new particles.
In a perfectly inelastic collision (such as a bug hitting a windshield), both bodies have the same motion afterwards. If one body is motionless to begin with, the equation for conservation of momentum is
so
In a frame of reference moving at the speed , the objects are brought to rest by the collision and 100% of the kinetic energy is converted.
One measure of the inelasticity of the collision is the coefficient of restitution 
The momentum and energy equations also apply to the motions of objects that begin together and then move apart. For example, an explosion is the result of a chain reaction that transforms potential energy stored in chemical, mechanical, or nuclear form into kinetic energy, acoustic energy, and electromagnetic radiation. Rockets also make use of conservation of momentum: propellant is thrust outward,  gaining momentum, and an equal and opposite momentum is imparted to the rocket.

Multiple dimensions

Real motion has both direction and magnitude and must be represented by a vector. In a coordinate system with 
Similarly, the momentum is a vector quantity and is represented by a boldface symbol:
The equations in the previous sections work in vector form if the scalars . Each vector equation represents three scalar equations. For example,
represents three equations:
The kinetic energy equations are exceptions to the above replacement rule. The equations are still one-dimensional, but each scalar represents the magnitude of the vector, for example,
Each vector equation represents three scalar equations. Often coordinates can be chosen so that only two components are needed, as in the figure. Each component can be obtained separately and the results combined to produce a vector result.
A simple construction involving the center of mass frame can be used to show that if a stationary elastic sphere is struck by a moving sphere, the two will head off at right angles after the collision (as in the figure).

Objects of variable mass

The concept of momentum plays a fundamental role in explaining the behavior of variable-mass objects such as a rocket ejecting fuel or a star accreting gas. In analyzing such an object, one treats the object's mass as a function that varies with time: 
This equation does not correctly describe the motion of variable-mass objects. The correct equation is
where , which is the velocity of the object itself as seen in an inertial frame.
This equation is derived by keeping track of both the momentum of the object as well as the momentum of the ejected/accreted mass. When considered together, the object and the mass constitute a closed system in which total momentum is conserved.

Generalized coordinates

Newton's laws can be difficult to apply to many kinds of motion because the motion is limited by constraints. For example, a bead on an abacus is constrained to move along its wire and a pendulum bob is constrained to swing at a fixed distance from the pivot. Many such constraints can be incorporated by changing the normal Cartesian coordinates to a set of generalized coordinates that may be fewer in number. The two main methods are described below.

Lagrangian mechanics

In Lagrangian mechanics, a Lagrangian is defined as the difference between the kinetic energy :
If the generalized coordinates are represented as a vector 
If a coordinate 
In this mathematical framework, a generalized momentum is associated with the generalized coordinates. Its components are defined as
Each component .
Now if a given coordinate  does not appear in the Lagrangian (although its time derivative might appear), then
This is the generalization of the conservation of momentum.
Even if the generalized coordinates are just the ordinary spatial coordinates, the conjugate momenta are not necessarily the ordinary momentum coordinates. An example is found in the section on electromagnetism.

Hamiltonian mechanics

In Hamiltonian mechanics, the Lagrangian (a function of generalized coordinates and their derivatives) is replaced by a Hamiltonian that is a function of generalized coordinates and momentum. The Hamiltonian is defined as
where the momentum is obtained by differentiating the Lagrangian as above. The Hamiltonian equations of motion are
As in Lagrangian mechanics, if a generalized coordinate does not appear in the Hamiltonian, its conjugate momentum component is conserved.

Symmetry and conservation

Conservation of momentum is a mathematical consequence of the homogeneity (shift symmetry) of space (position in space is the canonical conjugate quantity to momentum). That is, conservation of momentum is a consequence of the fact that the laws of physics do not depend on position; this is a special case of Noether's theorem.

Relativistic mechanics

Lorentz invariance

Newtonian physics assumes that absolute time and space exist outside of any observer; this gives rise to the Galilean invariance described earlier. It also results in a prediction that the speed of light can vary from one reference frame to another. This is contrary to observation. In the special theory of relativity, Einstein keeps the postulate that the equations of motion do not depend on the reference frame, but assumes that the speed of light 
Consider, for example, a reference frame moving relative to another at velocity  direction. The Galilean transformation gives the coordinates of the moving frame as
while the Lorentz transformation gives
where  is the Lorentz factor:
Newton's second law, with mass fixed, is not invariant under a Lorentz transformation. However, it can be made invariant by making the inertial mass  of an object a function of velocity:

The modified momentum,
obeys Newton's second law:
Within the domain of classical mechanics, relativistic momentum closely approximates Newtonian momentum: at low velocity, , the Newtonian expression for momentum.

Four-vector formulation

In the theory of relativity, physical quantities are expressed in terms of four-vectors that include time as a fourth coordinate along with the three space coordinates. These vectors are generally represented by capital letters, for example 
is invariant under Lorentz transformations (in this expression and in what follows the  is defined as
In all the coordinate systems, the (contravariant) relativistic four-velocity is defined by
and the (contravariant) four-momentum is
where  (in Minkowski space), thenHere the time coordinate comes first. Several sources put the time coordinate at the end of the vector.
Using Einstein's mass-energy equivalence, , this can be rewritten as
Thus, conservation of four-momentum is Lorentz-invariant and implies conservation of both mass and energy.
The magnitude of the momentum four-vector is equal to :
and is invariant across all reference frames.
The relativistic energy–momentum relationship holds even for massless particles such as photons; by setting  it follows that
In a game of relativistic "billiards", if a stationary particle is hit by a moving particle in an elastic collision, the paths formed by the two afterwards will form an acute angle. This is unlike the non-relativistic case where they travel at right angles.

Classical electromagnetism

In Newtonian mechanics, the law of conservation of momentum can be derived from the law of action and reaction, which states that the forces between two particles are equal and opposite. Electromagnetic forces violate this law. Under some circumstances one moving charged particle can exert a force on another without any return force. Moreover, Maxwell's equations, the foundation of classical electrodynamics, are Lorentz-invariant. However, momentum is still conserved.

Vacuum

In Maxwell's equations, the forces between particles are mediated by electric and magnetic fields. The electromagnetic force (Lorentz force) on a particle with charge ) is
This force imparts a momentum to the particle, so by Newton's second law the particle must impart a momentum to the electromagnetic fields.
In a vacuum, the momentum per unit volume is
where 
If momentum is to be conserved in a volume , and the particles are treated as a continuum, then Newton's second law gives
The electromagnetic momentum is
and the equation for conservation of each component  of the momentum is
The term on the right is an integral over the surface  is called the Maxwell stress tensor, defined as

Media

The above results are for the microscopic Maxwell equations, applicable to electromagnetic forces in a vacuum (or on a very small scale in media). It is more difficult to define momentum density in media because the division into electromagnetic and mechanical is arbitrary. The definition of electromagnetic momentum density is modified to
where the H-field  by
The electromagnetic stress tensor depends on the properties of the media.

Particle in field

If a charged particle  is not conserved. However, it has a canonical momentum that is conserved.

=Lagrangian and Hamiltonian formulation=

The kinetic momentum p is different from the canonical momentum P (synonymous with the generalized momentum) conjugate to the ordinary position coordinates r, because P includes a contribution from the electric potential φ(r, t) and vector potential A(r, t):
|-
! 
! Classical mechanics
! Relativistic mechanics
|-
! Lagrangian
|-
! Canonical momentum
|-
! Kinetic momentum
|-
! Hamiltonian 
|}
where ṙ = v is the velocity (see time derivative) and e is the electric charge of the particle. See also Electromagnetism (momentum). If neither φ nor A depends on position, P is conserved.
These Lagrangian and Hamiltonian expressons can derive the Lorentz force.

=Canonical commutation relations=

The kinetic momentum (p above) satisfies the commutation relation:
where: j, k,  is the Levi-Civita symbol, here in 3-dimensions.

Quantum mechanics

In quantum mechanics, momentum is defined as an operator on the wave function. The Heisenberg uncertainty principle defines limits on how accurately the momentum and position of a single observable system can be known at once. In quantum mechanics, position and momentum are conjugate variables.
For a single particle described in the position basis the momentum operator can be written as
where ∇ is the gradient operator, ħ is the reduced Planck constant, and i is the imaginary unit. This is a commonly encountered form of the momentum operator, though the momentum operator in other bases can take other forms. For example, in momentum space the momentum operator is represented as
where the operator p acting on a wave function ψ(p) yields that wave function multiplied by the value p, in an analogous fashion to the way that the position operator acting on a wave function ψ(x) yields that wave function multiplied by the value x.
For both massive and massless objects, relativistic momentum is related to the de Broglie wavelength  by
Electromagnetic radiation (including visible light, ultraviolet light, and radio waves) is carried by photons. Even though photons (the particle aspect of light) have no mass, they still carry momentum. This leads to applications such as the solar sail. The calculation of the momentum of light within dielectric media is somewhat controversial (see Abraham–Minkowski controversy).

Deformable bodies and fluids

Conservation in a continuum

In fields such as fluid dynamics and solid mechanics, it is not feasible to follow the motion of individual atoms or molecules. Instead, the materials must be approximated by a continuum in which there is a particle or fluid parcel at each point that is assigned the average of the properties of atoms in a small region nearby. In particular, it has a density 
Consider a column of water in hydrostatic equilibrium. All the forces on the water are in balance and the water is motionless. On any given drop of water, two forces are balanced. The first is gravity, which acts directly on each atom and molecule inside. The gravitational force per unit volume is 
If the forces are not balanced, the droplet accelerates. This acceleration is not simply the partial derivative 
Applied to any physical quantity, the material derivative includes the rate of change at a point and the changes dues to advection as fluid is carried past the point. Per unit volume, the rate of change in momentum is equal to . This is equal to the net force on the droplet.
Forces that can change the momentum of a droplet include the gradient of the pressure and gravity, as above. In addition, surface forces can deform the droplet. In the simplest case, a shear stress  direction is
where 
Including the effect of viscosity, the momentum balance equations for the incompressible flow of a Newtonian fluid are
These are known as the Navier–Stokes equations.
The momentum balance equations can be extended to more general materials, including solids. For each surface with normal in direction , which includes both pressure and shear. The local conservation of momentum is expressed by the Cauchy momentum equation:
where  is the body force.[ref]
</ref>
The Cauchy momentum equation is broadly applicable to deformations of solids and liquids. The relationship between the stresses and the strain rate depends on the properties of the material (see Types of viscosity).

Acoustic waves

A disturbance in a medium gives rise to oscillations, or waves, that propagate away from their source. In a fluid, small changes in pressure  can often be described by the acoustic wave equation:
where 
The flux, or transport per unit area, of a momentum component 

History of the concept

In about 530 A.D., working in Alexandria, Byzantine philosopher John Philoponus developed a concept of momentum in his commentary to Aristotle's Physics.
Aristotle claimed that everything that is moving must be kept moving by something. For example, a thrown ball must be kept moving by motions of the air.  Most writers continued to accept Aristotle's theory until the time of Galileo, but a few were skeptical. Philoponus pointed out the absurdity in Aristotle's claim that motion of an object is promoted by the same air that is resisting its passage. He proposed instead that an impetus was imparted to the object in the act of throwing it. 
The work of Philoponus, and possibly that of Ibn Sīnā, was read and refined by the European philosophers Peter Olivi and Jean Buridan. Buridan, who in about 1350 was made rector of the University of Paris, referred to impetus being proportional to the weight times the speed. Moreover, Buridan's theory was different from his predecessor's in that he did not consider impetus to be self-dissipating, asserting that a body would be arrested by the forces of air resistance and gravity which might be opposing its impetus.
René Descartes believed that the total "quantity of motion" in the universe is conserved, where the quantity of motion is understood as the product of size and speed. This should not be read as a statement of the modern law of momentum, since he had no concept of mass as distinct from weight and size, and more importantly he believed that it is speed rather than velocity that is conserved. So for Descartes if a moving object were to bounce off a surface, changing its direction but not its speed, there would be no change in its quantity of motion.  Galileo, later, in his Two New Sciences, used the Italian word impeto.
Leibniz, in his "Discourse on Metaphysics", gave an argument against Descartes' construction of the conservation of the "quantity of motion" using an example of dropping blocks of different sizes different distances.  He points out that force is conserved but quantity of motion, construed as the product of size and speed of an object, is not conserved.
The first correct statement of the law of conservation of momentum was by English mathematician John Wallis in his 1670 work, Mechanica sive De Motu, Tractatus Geometricus: "the initial state of the body, either of rest or of motion, will persist" and "If the force is greater than the resistance, motion will result".



Notes



Further reading




