[[Cyberchase]]

CATEGORIES: 2000s American animated television series, 2002 American television series debuts, 2010s American animated television series, 2010 American television series endings, 2013 American television series debuts, American children's television series, 2000s Canadian animated television series, 2002 Canadian television series debuts, 2010s Canadian animated television series, 2010 Canadian television series endings, 2013 Canadian television series debuts, Canadian children's television series, Mathematics education television series, PBS network shows, Television series by WNET, Television programs featuring anthropomorphic characters, Television series by Nelvana, Daytime Emmy Award winners, Size change in fiction, Flash television shows, Flash cartoons

Cyberchase is an American animated television series that premiered on January 21, 2002 on PBS Kids. The series focus around three earth kids, Matt, Jackie, and Inez, who are brought into Cyberspace, a digital universe, to protect it from the evil, Hacker. Using Math in application with problem-solving skills, environment, weather they are able to prevent Hacker from causing any more harm. In Cyberspace, they meet Digit, a funny, loveable cybird that help the kids on their mission to save Cyberspace.pbs. On July 2010, after the Season 8 finale, PBS Kids but Cyberchase on hiatus for unknown reasons, but on their official Facebook page, Cyberchase announced the return of the show with a new season that premiered on November 4, 2013 A movie was annonced as well, and premiered April 15, 2014.facebook.php?fbid=10151596048161979&set=pb.125460916978.-2207520000.1376845521.&type=3&theater

Premise

When three average Earth kids, Jackie, Matt, and Inez accidentally allow The Hacker access to Motherboard, the supreme ruler of Cyberspace, she get severely weakened by a virus. The kids are brought into Cyberspace in an effort to protect Cyberspace from The Hacker and his clumsy assistants Buzz and Del until a cure is found. They join forces with Digit, and later many more Cybercitizens that turn out to be great friends and willing to fight for Motherboard.

Characters

Main Characters: Cybersquad

Note: The Cybersquad is also known as "Earthlies" by Digit, excluding him and as "Earthbrats" by Hacker.org/cyberchase/cybersquad/

Main Characters: Antagonists

"Cyberchase For Real"

Recurring Characters: Team Motherboard

Minor Characters/Guest Stars

Cyberchase has had many guest stars over the years, including Tony Hawk. These guest stars appear as citizens of Cybersites, villains, friends, or even rulers of the site.

Episodes

For Real

Each Cyberchase episode is followed by "Cyberchase For Real", a live-action educational supplement linking concepts learned in the show to real life experiences. The actors Bianca DeGroat and Harry Matthew A. Wilson are in their thirties, but amusingly act in a manner similar to the age of the target audience. "For Real" is produced by WNET in and around New York City after production is completed on the animated segments. These "For Real" segments are broadcast exclusively on PBS in the United States where the program runs longer and fill the time gap where there might be breaks for commercials. Some "For Real" segments can also be viewed online. The "For Real" segment has returned in season 9, but only with Harry. He is now working for a student camp that teaches kids about the environment, he has student leaders, and works with his cousin Harley.

The Cyberchase Movie

The Cyberchase Movie is the series' first one hour special that aired in two parts as part of Season 9. It is also dubbed episode 100 and has the Cyberchase 100 Best Moments countdown. The episode is hosted by Harry and was given a preview screening before the episode aired. On some stations it aired as a whole, on others it aired separately . It is available on The Cyberchase Website.

Cyberchase Online 

Cyberchase Online is the name for the Cyberchase series' website. It houses all the episodes of Cyberchase, which have also been released on Netflix. The site has six sections: Home, Find it!, Games, Videos, Activities, and Cybersquad.

Cyberchase Campaigns

Many Cyberchase campaigns have been started, they are all now removed from the site, but a few of the were: Weather Watchers, Around Town with Cyberchase, Starlight Night, Super Cyberchase Science, Cyberchase My Big Idea, and Cyberchase Know Your Dough.

History and Education Philosophy

According to the Website, Motherboard (sometimes referred to as "Mother B.") is the "Brain of the giant computer system that oversees all of Cyberspace. Her technician computer scientist, Dr. Marbles, keeps her functioning properly. Dr. Marbles creates The Hacker as an assistant, but Hacker turns against Motherboard. Digit is the assistant to The Hacker and watches as Hacker steals the Encryptor Chip. He eventually escapes Hacker, after Dr. Marbles drains Hacker's battery and banishes him to the Northern Frontier. Unfortunately, Hacker is able to find a way to recharge himself, build Buzz and Delete, and formulate a plan to launch a virus that attacks Motherboard. When the kids Matt, Jackie, and Inez, meet by merely a random chance, and interact with a library map, this opens up  a door for Hacker to infect Motherboard with the virus.
Cyberchase aims to show kids that math is everywhere and everyone can be good at it. The series encourages viewers to see, think, and do mathematics in their world. The show and supporting activities have been designed to support math education and reflect the curriculum standards of the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

Cybersites

Cyberspace consists of plane-like bodies called Cybersites which are based on locations such as Ancient Egypt, the American Old West, mythological Greece, and Carnival. The Cybersquad travels to many of these locations in order to protect Cyberspace from The Hacker. Each Cybersite has their own type of Cybercitizen if it is inhabited. They are meant to represent the diversity of websites in the internet, and reflect the many ecosystems and neighborhoods of today's world. For example, Gollywood is a Cyberspace representation of Hollywood, and Pefectamundo represent the 100% sustainable ecosystem of tomorrow.

Apps

There are two apps the Cyberchase has released to date:

Broadcast & Production

Development

Origninally, THIRTEEN in partnership with Nelvana, produced the show for PBSKids. It aired on PBSKids from 2002-2004 and from 2013-present, on V-me, PBS, and on PBS Kids Go! from 2004-2013. Cyberchase is animated (after season 5) by Pip Animation Services Inc. Right Path Pictures does Post Production, and Curious Pictures did the original character design. Twelfth Root Music produces the sound track for Cyberchase.  Thirteen/WNET New York and Nelvana produced the first five seasons, while Thirteen, in association with Title Entertainment, Inc. and WNET.
Executive Producers

Animation Style

Addition Production Facilities

Funding

Reception

Critical response

The series has had a generally positive response.
On the site common sense media, the show was for ages 5 and up and rated 4/5 stars. The reviewer, Joly Herman, commented that "the adventures aren't scary, violent, or sexually inappropriate" but "require fortitude and brain power". Proposed discussion points sprouting from the series include "Can your child take the skills learned in each episode and figure out how to apply it to everyday life?" Herman noted that the only downside was that the adventures did not take place in the "real world" but added that the "For Real" segments solved this problem. The show was given a rating of 3/5 smiley faces under the "The Good Stuff" section.
Carey Bryson of About. Bryson noted that the series' explanations of "simple mathematical ideas" are "usually explained well and woven throughout the story in a fun and interesting way". The review commended the series for its accessibility: "Children can easily learn from the example in the cartoon story" and praised the "Cyberchase For Real segment that follows each episode". Citing an example from the series using codes, Bryson explained how the show could be used to expand upon the curriculum: "Not only did five-year-old learn about codes, but she also got in a ton of spelling practice". Bryson commended the series: "Educationally, Cyberchase delivers".

Awards

Cyberchase has been nominated for five Daytime Emmys and won in 2007 in the Outstanding Broadband Program category.
: Frances Nankin, Sandra Sheppard, Ellen Doherty, Jill Peters, Bob Morris, Suzanne Rose, Michelle Chen, Elizabeth Hummer, Arash Hoda, Anthony Chapman, David Hirmes, Bianca DeGroat, Matthew A. Wilson, George Arthur Bloom 

: Sandra Sheppard, Frances Nankin, Ellen Doherty, Jill Peters, David Hirmes, Kelly Lafferty, Michelle Chen, Tanner Vea, Bob Morris, Matthew A. WilsonAwards for "Cyberchase". The Internet Movie Database. Accessed September 24, 2012.

 








