[[Sar-e Pol Province]]

CATEGORIES: Provinces of Afghanistan, Sar-e Pol Province, 1988 establishments in Afghanistan, Hazarajat

Sar-e Pol, also spelled Sari Pul ( and its capital is the city of Sar-e Pol.

History

Between the early 16th century and the mid-18th century, the territory was ruled by the Khanate of Bukhara. It was given to Ahmad Shah Durrani by Murad Beg of Bukhara after a treaty was signed in or about 1750, and became part of the Durrani Empire. It was ruled by the Durranis followed by the Barakzai dynasty. The area was untouched by the British during the three Anglo-Afghan wars that were fought in the 19th and 20th centuries. It remained peaceful for about one hundred years until the 1980s Soviet war in Afghanistan.

Recent history

During the Afghan Civil War, the area was controlled by forces loyal to Abdul Rashid Dostum. It was captured by the Taliban in 1998. Aminullah Amin, the first senior member of the Taliban to be captured, was the former governor of the province.[ref]

 [/ref]
Swedish-led Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT), which has been based in Mazar-e Sharif since about 2005 and responsible for four provinces including Sar-e Pol, established an office and some troops in the province. The Afghan National Security Forces (ANFS) began expanding in the last decade and slowly took over security from International Security Assistance Force (ISAF). The Afghanistan-Turkmenistan border is maintained by the Afghan Border Police (ABP) while law and order for the rest of the province is provided by the NATO-trained Afghan National Police (ANP).
In 2009, the provincial Police Chief stated that weapons had been collected from many people and three districts, namely, Sangcharak, Gosfandi, and Sozama Qala areas termed as the peaceful districts of the province. In operations against militants, the police chief said they had arrested a prominent Taliban commander Mullah Nader along with 11 other people during the recent operations. He said scores of kilograms of hashish and opium had also been seized from people during the operations.Zabeehullah Ihsas, "Armed groups a challenge in Sar-i-Pul", Pajhwok Afghan News, March 28, 2010
The biggest threat to travelers in Sar-i-Pul remains highway bandits and thieves, corrupt militiamen and police, and road hazards. The Taliban have small cadres operating throughout the province but rely on larger support networks in neighboring provinces.

Politics and governance

The current governor of Sar-e Pol is Abdul Jabbar Haqbin. Also Sayed Anwar Rahmati, Aziza Jalis, Sayed Anwar Sadat, Mohammad Hossein Fahimi, Sayed Mohammad Hossein Sharifi Balkhabi, Haji Khair Mohammad Imaq are the current Wolesi Jirga member of Sar-e Pol Province.Independent Election Commission of Afghanistan, Afghanistan 2010 Wolesi Jirga Election Final Certified Results
The following political parties have support in the province:

Geography and demography

Sar-e Pol is a mountainous province especially in its southern part. It covers an area of 16,360 km. Three quarters (75%) of the province is mountainous or semi mountainous terrain while one-seventh (14%) of the area is made up of flat land.
The province is divided into 7 districts, containing 896 of villages. Sar-e Pol has a total population of 532,000. The provincial capital is also named Sar-e Pol, which has a population of about 115,463 inhabitants.
Ethnic groups in the province include: Tajik, Uzbek, Pashtun, Hazara, Arab and others. The languages spoken in and around the province are Dari, Uzbeki, Pashto, and Hazaragi. All the inhabitants practice Islam, majority of which are Sunnis while the Shi'as make up the minority.

Districts

Economy

Mining and agriculture are the main industries of the province. The Government of Afghanistan signed a deal with China National Petroleum Corporation (CNPC) for the development of oil blocks in the Amu Darya basin, a project expected to earn billions of dollars over two decades; the deal covers drilling and a refinery in the northern provinces of Sar-e Pol and Faryab and is the first international oil production agreement entered into by the Afghan government for several decades. Production of the Afghan oil began in October 2012, which is expected to increase to 1 million barrels per year in 2013. October 21, 2012.
Communications in and around the province are provided by Afghan Wireless, Roshan, Etisalat, and MTN Group.

Gallery

File:Saripul Provincial Council, 2009.jpg|Provincial councilors of Afghanistan






