[[South Street Seaport]]

CATEGORIES: 1967 establishments in New York, Landmarks in Manhattan, Shopping malls in New York City, Historic districts in Manhattan, National Register of Historic Places in Manhattan, Historic American Engineering Record in New York, Redeveloped ports and waterfronts in the United States, General Growth Properties, Ports and harbors of New York, Pedestrian malls in the United States, South Street Seaport Museum, Museums established in 1967, Financial District, Manhattan

The South Street Seaport is a historic area in the New York City borough of Manhattan, located where Fulton Street meets the East River, and adjacent to the Financial District. The Seaport is a designated historic district, distinct from the neighboring Financial District. It features some of the oldest architecture in downtown Manhattan, and includes the largest concentration of restored early 19th-century commercial buildings in the city. This includes renovated original mercantile buildings, renovated sailing ships, the former Fulton Fish Market, and modern tourist malls featuring food, shopping and nightlife, with a view of the Brooklyn Bridge. At the entrance to the Seaport is the Titanic Memorial lighthouse.

History

By the late-1950s, the old Ward Line docks (Pier 15, 16, and part of 17) were mostly vacant. South Street Seaport Museum was founded in 1967 by Peter and Norma Stanford. When originally opened as a museum, the focus of the Seaport Museum conservation was to be an educational historic site, with shops mostly operating as reproductions of working environments found during the Seaport's heyday, 1820 to 1860.
Designated by Congress in 1998 as one of several museums, which together make up "America's National Maritime Museum", South Street Seaport Museum sits in a 12 square-block historic district that is the site of the original port of New York City.net. Accessed September 18, 2007. The Museum has over  of exhibition space and educational facilities. It houses exhibition galleries, a working 19th-century print shop, an archeology museum, a maritime library, a craft center, a marine life conservation lab, and the largest privately owned fleet of historic ships in the country. Included in this fleet are:
The original intent of the Seaport development was the preservation of the block of buildings known as Schermerhorn Row on the southwest side of Fulton Street, which were threatened with neglect or future development, at a time when the history of New York City's sailing ship industry was not valued, except by some antiquarians. Early historic preservation efforts focused on these buildings and the acquisition of several sailing ships. 
Almost all buildings and the entire Seaport neighborhood are meant to transport the visitor back in time to New York's mid-19th century, to demonstrate what life in the commercial maritime trade was like. Docked at the Seaport are a few historical sailing vessels, including the Flying P-Liner, Peking and museum ships. A section of nearby Fulton Street is preserved as cobblestone and lined with shops, bars, and restaurants.
The Bridge Cafe, which claims to be "The Oldest Drinking Establishment in New York" is in a building that formerly housed a brothel.
The Seaport was heavily damaged in 2012 in Hurricane Sandy as tidal floods (seven feet deep in places) inundated much of the Seaport.  Many of the businesses closed and the remaining businesses suffered from a severe drop in business after it.  The South Street Seaport Museum re-opened in December 2012.  The Howard Hughes Corporation announced they will tear down the Seaport's most prominent shopping area – Pier 17 – starting in the Fall of 2013.  They will replace it with a new structure by 2015.com New York

Concept

In 1982, redevelopment began to turn the museum into a greater tourist attraction via development of modern shopping areas. The project was undertaken by the prominent developer James Rouse and modeled on the concept of a "festival marketplace," a leading revitalization strategy throughout the 1970s.  Pier 17's old platforms were demolished and a new glass shopping pavilion raised in its place, which opened in August 1983.
The Seaport itself now operates primarily as a mall and tourism center, built on Pier 17 on the East River. Visitors may choose from among many shops and a food court. Decks outside allow views of the East River, Brooklyn Bridge and Brooklyn Heights. The Seaport is currently owned and managed by The Howard Hughes Corporation, and formerly by General Growth Properties, who acquired the Seaport's longtime owner The Rouse Company in 2004. In 2010, while exiting bankruptcy, General Growth spun off some of its properties, including the Seaport, to form a new company called The Howard Hughes Corporation.

Transportation

South Street Seaport is currently served by the M15 New York City Bus route. New York Water Taxi directly serves South Street Seaport on Fridays, weekends, and holidays during the summer, while other New York Water Taxi, NY Waterway, and SeaStreak ferries serve the nearby ferry slip at Wall Street daily. The Fulton Street station complex (

In popular culture

Gallery

Image:South Street Seaport 002.JPG|Corner of Front and Beekman Street
File:USA-NYC-South Street Seaport.jpg|Close up view
File:Peking ship combined.jpg|The Peking was built in 1911 in Hamburg
File:South Street Seaport Boat.JPG|tall ship Wavertree
File:South Street Lighthouse.JPG|Titanic memorial
File:USA-NYC-Pier 17a.jpg|Pier 17





Notes

Further reading

| publisher = New York
| isbn = 9781479822577
| last = Lindgren
| first = James Michael
| title = Preserving South Street Seaport: the dream and reality of a New York urban renewal district
| location = New York University Press
| date = 2014
}}




