[[Tampa Stadium]]

CATEGORIES: Sports venues demolished in 1999, Defunct college football venues, Defunct National Football League venues, Soccer venues in Florida, Sports venues in Tampa, Florida, American football venues in Florida, Tampa Bay Buccaneers stadiums, Tampa Bay Mutiny, Defunct NCAA bowl game venues, Outback Bowl, Defunct Major League Soccer stadiums, United States Football League venues, Demolished sports venues in Florida, Defunct soccer venues in the United States, South Florida Bulls football venues, Tampa Spartans football, History of Tampa, Florida, 1967 establishments in Florida, 1998 disestablishments in Florida, North American Soccer League (1968–84) stadiums

Tampa Stadium (officially known as Houlihan's Stadium from 1996 to 1999, and nicknamed "The Big Sombrero" due to its shape) was a sports venue located at 4201 North Dale Mabry Highway in Tampa, Florida, USA. The stadium is most closely associated with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers National Football League franchise, which played all of their home games in the stadium from 1976 through 1997. It was demolished in 1999 following the construction of Raymond James Stadium, which is sometimes referred to as "The New Sombrero" in memory of its predecessor in spite of its unsombrero-like design 

Origin and design

Pre-history and construction

The land on which Tampa Stadium was situated had been the perimeter of Drew Field, a World War II-era airfield which was the precursor to Tampa International Airport. In 1949, the city of Tampa bought a 720 acre grassy parcel between the airport and West Tampa from the federal government with the idea of eventually building a community sports complex.com"Big Deeds Need Big Plans" - St. Pete Times, June 9, 1949 Al Lopez Field was the first phase of the project, opening in 1955.
By the early 1960s, Tampa's civic leaders were interested in attracting a National Football League team to the area. Several well-attended NFL exhibition games were held at Phillips Field near downtown, but the venue was too small to support a professional football franchise. So with the encouragement of NFL officials, the city decided to build a larger facility which could be used by the University of Tampa's football team in the short term and could be expanded for use by a theoretical pro team in the future."Tampa football all began at Phillips Field" - The Tampa Tribune
Construction of Tampa Stadium began in the fall of 1966Tampa Sports Authority directly adjacent to Al Lopez Field, which was by then the home of the Tampa Tarpons of the Florida State League and the spring training home of the Cincinnati Reds. Even though it contained separate football and baseball venues plus the Reds' training grounds, the lot purchased in 1949 was still large enough to allow for ample parking in the open land surrounding both facilities.

Original design

When it opened in 1967, Tampa Stadium consisted of a matching pair of large arch-shaped concrete grandstands built along the sides of a natural grass playing surface. The seating area was accessed via short tunnels built from the rear concourses through the grandstands at ground level and about halfway up the stadium. Long, backless aluminum benches were arranged on a single tier so that every seat had a direct and unobstructed view of the action. Capacity was 46,481.

Expansions and renovations

Tampa Stadium underwent an extensive expansion project in 1974-1975 after the city was awarded an NFL expansion team. Over 27,000 seats were added by completely enclosing the open endzones, making the venue one of the largest in the NFL with a capacity of 71,908. The resulting arena was not in the shape of a simple bowl. It was highest at the center of the two sideline grandstands and gently sloped downward to a rounded corner where it met the new sections, which were about half as tall. Much later, the stadium was dubbed "The Big Sombrero" by ESPN's Chris Berman for the unique undulating hat / wave shape created along the top of the stadium by the 1975 additions.
The last major renovation took place in the early 1980s when, in preparation for its first Super Bowl in January 1984, the press box atop the west grandstand was updated and a large suite of luxury boxes was added atop the east grandstand. This configuration gave the facility its maximum seating capacity of 74,301.
For the 1990 season, large flagpoles were mounted on the upper rim of the stadium as part of a stadium update that included the addition of a JumboTron screen in the south end zone and smaller scoreboards above the field-level tunnels in two corners of the stadium. The poles were used to fly large flags for each of the NFL's teams until 1997, when the Buccaneers adopted a uniform redesign featuring a red flag on their helmets. Large versions of the flag were hoisted on the stadium's flagpoles when the Buccaneers penetrated their opponents' 20-yard line. The franchise continued this practice when it moved to Raymond James Stadium next door a year later.

Heat

Tampa Stadium was built almost exclusively of concrete. Throughout its existence, exterior walls were painted light tan or white or left as bare concrete, as were the flooring surfaces. Seating consisted of long aluminum benches, and there was no roof or overhang of any kind over the field or seating areas.
This minimalist design in Tampa's subtropical climate created a very warm venue for spectators and participants alike, especially after the stadium was bowled-in for the Bucs' 1976 inaugural season."Florida Heat is Tampa Bay's Real Home Field Advantage" - St. Pete Times, Aug. 25, 1976 While fans could retreat under the grandstands to the shade of the wide concourses where concessions and restrooms were located, players and personnel on the field had no such recourse. Cooling equipment was usually placed near the sideline benches, and the Buccaneers usually wore white jerseys for home games, forcing their opponents to wear darker (and hotter) colors. During the summer and early autumn, events in the stadium were often scheduled in the evening hours to avoid the afternoon heat and humidity. In another nod to local weather, the natural grass playing surface was highly crowned to provide rapid drainage during Tampa's intense thunderstorms, with the sidelines almost 18 inches lower than the center of the field.

Sporting history

First tenants

=University of Tampa Spartans=

On November 4, 1967, the just-finished stadium hosted its first sporting event when the University of Tampa Spartans hosted the #3 University of Tennessee Volunteers."D-Day Arrives for Tampa" - St. Pete Times, Nov. 4, 1967 While the Spartans lost that game 38-0, they would enjoy later success in their new home, moving up to Division I football in 1971 and sending several players to the NFL, including Freddie Solomon and John Matuszak. However, attendance at the games did not meet expectations and university president B.D. Owens said the school would face bankruptcy if it continued to subsidize the sport. At the end of the 1974 season, "Tampa U" shut down its football program.edu

=Tampa Bay Rowdies=

The Tampa Bay Rowdies were the stadium's first professional tenant, starting play in 1975 and winning their only (outdoor) championship in their inaugural season. (The team also won several indoor soccer championships playing at the Bayfront Center across Tampa Bay in St. Petersburg.)
The Rowdies played their home games in Tampa Stadium every summer until the original North American Soccer League disbanded in 1984. Subsequently the Rowdies continued on, first as an independent team, then in other leagues (ASL, APSL) and used the stadium every year through 1990. In 1991 and 1992 they moved across town to the smaller USF Soccer Stadium, before returning to Tampa Stadium in 1993 for their final season of play in the APSL.

NFL expansion

=Exhibition games=

Looking to showcase the city's new facility for the NFL, community leaders arranged for several exhibition games in Tampa Stadium in the late 1960s and early 1970s. The first such game between the Atlanta Falcons and Washington Redskins was played in August 1968 and drew a near-sellout crowd. Eleven more games were held in the following seasons with similarly enthusiastic crowds, including three featuring the Baltimore Colts in 1972.
These preseason games gave NFL owners and officials ample opportunity to assess the Tampa Bay area and the stadium, and on April 24, 1974, Tampa was awarded an NFL expansion team to begin play in the 1976 season.

=Tampa Bay Buccaneers=

The Buccaneers' first regular season home game was held on September 19, 1976, when the Bucs lost to the San Diego Chargers 23-0. That would become a trend, as the team began their existence with an NFL-record 26-game losing streak. They would not win a game on their home field until defeating the St. Louis Cardinals on the last game of the following season, December 18, 1977. Jubilant fans swarmed the Tampa Stadium turf and tore down the goal posts. "At last! A Tampa Stadium victory celebration". St. Petersburg Times. 19 Dec 1977
The Buccaneers had improved enough by the 1979 season to host the NFC Championship game, which they lost 9-0 to the Los Angeles Rams. The Bucs played 18 additional seasons in the facility but struggled through most of them. They would only host one more playoff game on their original home turf: a NFC Wild Card matchup with the Detroit Lions on December 28, 1997, which they won 20-10. This would be the last game the team ever played in Tampa Stadium, as they moved next door to Raymond James Stadium in 1998.

=Krewe of Honor=

In 1991, the organization initiated the "Krewe of Honor," which featured a mural of the first class of three members. Quarterback Doug Williams was inducted September 6, 1992 and owner Hugh Culverhouse on September 5, 1993. No additional members were added before Tampa Stadium was closed and demolished.

=="Houlihan's Stadium"==

Malcolm Glazer also acquired naming rights to Tampa Stadium when he purchased the Buccaneers in 1995. In October of that year, he had the Houlihan's restaurant chain, another business in his portfolio, pay the Bucs $10 million for those rights. This resulted in the official name of the facility being changed to "Houlihan's Stadium" in 1996 and in Glazer being sued by Houlihan's stockholders, who were not happy about purchasing stadium naming rights in an area in which the chain had no restaurants."Stockholder sue Glazer" - St. Pete Times, Dec. 2, 1995"Is Zapata the Glazers' Toy?" - Bloomberg BusinessWeek, Oct. 7, 1996

Other tenants and events

Tampa Stadium was the home field for several additional teams and hosted a wide variety of events during its lifetime.

=Home teams=

=Sporting events=

=Concerts=

The stadium hosted concerts by many famous artists, including The Who, Jethro Tull, Paul McCartney, David Bowie, U2, The Rolling Stones, Jimmy Buffett, The Eagles, Whitney Houston, Jonathan Butler, Kenny G, George Michael, Pink Floyd, the Grateful Dead, and several big acts at the same time during the 1988 Monsters of Rock Tour, among others.
Two particularly memorable concerts were held there by the English rock band Led Zeppelin. On May 5, 1973, the band attracted 56,800 people, which at the time represented the largest audience for a single artist performance in history, breaking the record set by The Beatles at Shea Stadium in 1965. An audience riot followed, with police ultimately using tear gas to disperse the crowd. Local authorities banned concerts in Tampa Stadium for over a year and changed security rules before allowing shows to resume."Tampa Stadium to allow concerts again" - The Evening Independent, June 18, 1979

=Special events=

In March 1979, evangelist Billy Graham held a "Florida West Coast Crusade" at Tampa Stadium, drawing a combined crowd of about 175,000 over five consecutive days."Attention of thousands focuses on Graham crusade" - The St. Pete Times, Mar. 24, 1979

Demolition

Upon buying the Buccaneers in 1995, new owner Malcolm Glazer declared that Tampa Stadium was inadequate and threatened to move the franchise to another city unless a new stadium was built at taxpayer's expense.Tampa Sports Authority - Raymond James Stadium
Demolition of Tampa Stadium proceeded soon after the Tampa Bay Mutiny's final home game on September 13, 1998. Wrecking balls and long reach excavators were used for much of the process. The last portion of the stadium (the east side luxury boxes built for the stadium's first Super Bowl), was imploded on April 11, 1999. The land was then cleared and converted into a parking lot. Part of that demolition was featured in a 1999 Modern Marvels episode entitled "Demolition".

Tampa Stadium in video games

Tampa Stadium featured in a number of video games, including Madden NFL 2000 and Madden NFL 2001.

List of tenants & major events






