[[Serial comma]]

CATEGORIES: American and British English differences, Punctuation, Terminology of the University of Oxford, Harvard University

In English punctuation, a serial comma or series comma (also called Oxford comma and Harvard comma) is a comma placed immediately before the coordinating conjunction (usually and, or, or nor) in a series of three or more terms. For example, a list of three countries might be punctuated either as "France, Italy,and Spain" (without the serial comma).Sometimes, the term also denotes the comma that might come before etc. at the end of a list (see the Australian Government Publishing Service's Style Manual for Authors, Editors, and Printers, below). Such an extension is reasonable, since etc. is the abbreviation of the Latin phrase et cetera (lit. and other things). Herein, the term is used only as defined above.
Opinions among writers and editors differ on whether to use the serial comma. In American English, a majority of style guides mandate  use of the serial comma, including The MLA Style Manual, The Chicago Manual of Style, Strunk and White's Elements of Style, and the U.S. Government Printing Office Style Manual. The Associated Press Stylebook and the Stylebook published by The Canadian Press for journalistic writing advise against it. According to the Canadian Oxford Dictionary  It is used less often in British English, but some British style guides require it, including the Oxford University Press style manual... has become the subject of much spirited debate. For a century it has been part of OUP style ..., to the extent that the convention has come to be called the 'Oxford comma'. But it is commonly used by many other publishers here and abroad, and forms a routine part of style in US and Canadian English" (p. 121).  Some, including Fowler's Modern English Usage, use it only where necessary to avoid ambiguity.

Arguments for and against

Common arguments for consistent use of the serial comma:
Common arguments against consistent use of the serial comma:
Many sources are against both systematic use and systematic avoidance of the serial comma, making recommendations in a more nuanced way (see Usage and subsequent sections).

Ambiguity

Resolving ambiguity

The style that always uses the serial comma may be less likely to result in ambiguity. Consider the apocryphal book dedication quoted by Teresa Nielsen Hayden:
There is ambiguity about the writer's parentage, because Ayn Rand and God can be read as in apposition to my parents, leading the reader to believe that the writer claims Ayn Rand and God are the parents. A comma before and removes the ambiguity:
But lists can also be written in other ways that eliminate the ambiguity without introducing the serial comma, such as using other punctuation, or none, to introduce or delimit them. For example, in the following manner:
An example collected by Nielsen Hayden was found in a newspaper account of a documentary about Merle Haggard:
which may be taken to mean that Kris Kristofferson and Robert Duvall were Haggard's ex-wives. A serial comma would preclude this reading:
Consider also:
It is uncertain whether bacon and eggs, or eggs and toast, should be grouped together. Adding a serial comma removes this ambiguity. With a comma after eggs, the foods are:
With a comma after bacon:
Writers who normally avoid the serial comma often use one in these circumstances, though sometimes re-ordering the elements of such a list can help as well.

Creating ambiguity

In some circumstances the serial-comma convention can introduce ambiguity. An example would be a dedication reading:
The serial comma after Ayn Rand creates ambiguity about the writer's mother because it uses punctuation identical to that used for an appositive phrase, leaving it unclear whether this is a list of three entities (1, my mother; 2, Ayn Rand; and 3, God) or of only two entities (1, my mother, who is Ayn Rand; and 2, God).  Without a serial comma, the above dedication would read: To my mother, Ayn Rand and God, a phrase ambiguous only if the reader accepts the interpretation my mother, who is both Ayn Rand and God. Other ways of eliminating the ambiguity are possible; for instance, additional prepositions could be used (To my mother, to Ayn Rand, and to God) or the order could be reversed (To my mother, God, and Ayn Rand).

Unresolved ambiguity

The Times once published an unintentionally humorous description of a Peter Ustinov documentary, noting that "highlights of his global tour include encounters with Nelson Mandela, an 800-year-old demigod and a dildo collector.""Planet Ustinov", Nov 22, 1998 This would still be ambiguous if a serial comma were added, as Mandela could then be mistaken for a demigod, although he would be precluded from being a dildo collector.
Or consider
This is ambiguous because it is unclear whether "a maid" is an appositive describing Betty, or the second in a list of three people. On the other hand, removing the final comma:
leaves the possibility that Betty is both a maid and a cook (with "a maid and a cook" read as a unit, in apposition to Betty). So in this case neither the serial-comma style nor the no-serial-comma style resolves the ambiguity. A writer who intends a list of three distinct people (Betty, maid, cook) may create an ambiguous sentence, regardless of whether the serial comma is adopted. Furthermore, if the reader is unaware of which convention is being used, both versions are always ambiguous.
These forms (among others) would remove the ambiguity:

In general

Usage

In her popularized style guide Eats, Shoots & Leaves, Lynne Truss writes: "There are people who embrace the Oxford comma, and people who don't, and I'll just say this: never get between these people when drink has been taken."
Journalists typically do not use the serial comma, possibly for economy of space.
Journalistic style guides (such as those published by The New York Times, The Los Angeles Times, the Associated Press, The Times newspaper in the United Kingdom, and the Canadian Press) recommend against its use (see below).
The Chicago Manual of Style, Strunk and White's Elements of Style, the United States Government Printing Office, most authorities on American English and Canadian English require the use of the serial comma. In British English  although some authorities (for example, Oxford University Press and Fowler's Modern English Usage) do recommend it.
In Australia, Canada, South Africa, and the United Kingdom, the serial comma tends not to be used in non-academic publications unless its absence produces ambiguity. 
The Australian Government Publishing Service's Style Manual for Authors, Editors and Printers (6th edition, 2002) recommends against it, except "to ensure clarity" (p. 102).

Recommendations by style guides

Mainly American style guides supporting mandatory use

The following style guides support mandatory use of the serial comma:

Mainly British style guides supporting mandatory use

{{quote|In an enumeration of three or more items, the practice in MHRA journals is to insert commas after all but the last item, to give equal weight to each enumerated element:
The conjunctions and and or without a preceding comma are understood as linking the parts of a single enumerated element:

Mainly British style guides opposing mandatory use

Mainly American style guides opposing mandatory use

In the United States, the choice is between journalistic style (no serial comma) and "literary" style (with serial comma); consistent use of the serial comma is usually recommended for college writing.

Australian style guides opposing mandatory use

Other languages

In the following languages, the serial comma is not the norm and may go against punctuation rules:




