[[Tony Isabella]]

CATEGORIES: 1951 births, American bloggers, American columnists, American comics writers, Living people, People from Cleveland, Ohio

Tony Isabella (born December 22, 1951 is an American comic book writer, editor, artist and critic, known as the creator and writer of Marvel Comics' Black Goliath; DC Comics' first major African-American superhero, Black Lightning; and as a columnist and critic for the Comics Buyer's Guide. 

Biography

Early life and influences

Isabella discovered comics at the age of four, when his mother began bringing him I. W. Publications titles she bought at Woolworth. Early influences from the comic book world included Stan Lee, Jack Kirby, Roy Thomas, Robert Kanigher, and Len Wein; Isabella was also influenced by writers like William Shakespeare, Harlan Ellison, Ed McBain, Neil Simon, Mel Brooks, Lester Dent, Dave Barry, Max Allan Collins, Don Pendleton, and Studs Terkel.
As a teenager, Isabella had many letters published in comic book letter columns, primarily in the pages of Marvel titles. He was active in comics fandom as well, a member of CAPA-alpha, and a regular contributor to comics fanzines.

Marvel Comics

Isabella's work in comics fandom attracted the attention of Marvel editor Roy Thomas (whose professional career began in similar fashion), and in 1972 Thomas hired Isabella as an editorial assistant at Marvel. With Marvel's establishment of Marvel UK that year, Isabella was assigned the task of overseeing the reprints used in Marvel UK's nascent comics line. He also served for a time as an editor for Marvel's black-and-white magazine line. 
As a writer, Isabella scripted Ghost Rider; "It, the Living Colossus" in Astonishing Tales; Luke Cage in Hero for Hire and Power Man; Tigra in Marvel Chillers; Daredevil,

=Controversy=

During his mid-1970s run on Ghost Rider, Isabella wrote a two-year story arc in which Johnny Blaze occasionally encountered an unnamed character referred to as "the Friend" who helped Blaze stay protected from Satan, who had granted Blaze supernatural power and created the Ghost Rider. Isabella said in 2007,

Isabella later said the assistant editor referenced was Jim Shooter.

DC Comics

For DC Comics, Isabella worked as a writer and story editor but is mainly known for his creation of Black Lightning, writing both the character's short-lived 1970s and 1990s series. "1990s" in Dolan, p. 269: "Writer Tony Isabella returned to his prized character, Black Lightning, in an ongoing series with artist Eddy Newell."
Isabella and artist Richard Howell produced the Shadow War of Hawkman mini-series in 1985, involving the characters of Hawkman and Hawkwoman. 215: "May 1985 saw the return of the Winged Wonder in a four-issue miniseries entitled The Shadow War of Hawkman by writer Tony Isabella and penciller Richard Howell." An ongoing series was launched the following year.

Justice Machine

In 1987, Isabella began writing the Justice Machine series for Comico, co-plotting with series creator and penciller Mike Gustovich. The new series picked up from the end of the Bill Willingham/Gustovich written limited series Justice Machine featuring the Elementals, which re-booted the series' continuity from the older Noble Comics/Texas Comics-published original series. The on-going book became one of Comico's best-selling series, selling upwards of 70,000 copies of each issue at its peak. Isabella wrote the first 11 issues of the Comico series before moving on to other projects.
In 1990, Isabella returned to the characters to write the series for Innovation Comics, with Gustovich pencilling once more.

"Tony's Tips"

Isabella wrote the Comics Buyer's Guide column "Tony's Tips" for over a decade. The last column was June 22, 2010.

Other work

During the 1980s, Isabella operated Cosmic Comics, a comic book shop in the Colonial Arcade in downtown Cleveland, Ohio,
Isabella is the co-author with his fellow Comics Buyer's Guide columnist Bob Ingersoll of the short story "If Wishes Were Horses..." which was published in The Ultimate Super-Villains: New Stories Featuring Marvel's Deadliest Villains,
He has also worked on translating foreign-language Disney comics and revising the wording for the U.S. market.

Personal life

Isabella's wife is named Barbara; they have two children, son Eddie (born c. 1989) and daughter Kelly (born c. 1992).






