[[Ms. Pac-Man]]

CATEGORIES: 1981 video games, 1982 video games, Atari 2600 games, Atari 5200 games, Atari 7800 games, Atari 8-bit family games, Atari Lynx games, Commodore 64 games, Game Boy games, Game Boy Color games, Sega Game Gear games, Ghost video games, IOS games, Maze games, Midway Games, Now Production games, Mobile games, Nintendo Entertainment System games, Original Xbox Live Arcade games, Pac-Man arcade games, Second party video game sequels, Sega Genesis games, Sega Master System games, Super Nintendo Entertainment System games, Tengen (company) games, Tiger handheld games, Vertically oriented video games, Video games developed in the United States, Video games featuring female protagonists, Windows Mobile Professional games, Xbox 360 Live Arcade games, ZX Spectrum games



Gameplay

The gameplay of Ms. Pac-Man is largely identical to that of the original Pac-Man. The player earns points by eating pellets and avoiding ghosts (contact with one causes Ms. Pac-Man to lose a life). Eating an energizer (or "power pellet") causes the ghosts to turn blue, allowing them to be eaten for extra points. Bonus fruits can be eaten for increasing point values, twice per round. As the rounds increase, the speed increases, and energizers generally lessen the extent of the ghosts' vulnerability, eventually stopping altogether.
There are also some differences from the original Pac-Man:

History

Ms. Pac-Man was originally conceived as an enhancement kit for Pac-Man called Crazy Otto, created by programmers employed at the General Computer Corporation (GCC).Ms. Pac-Man Videogame by Midway (1981) - The International Arcade Museum and the KLOV While  Crazy Otto was under development, GCC settled a lawsuit with Atari over their Missile Command conversion kit Super Missile Attack. Part of the settlement terms barred GCC from selling future conversion kits without consent from the original game manufacturer.
Rather than scrapping Crazy Otto entirely, the programmers decided to show it to Midway, Namco's American distributor of Pac-Man. Midway had become impatient in waiting for Namco to release its next Pac-Man game (which would be Super Pac-Man), and were enthusiastic that such a game had come to their attention. They bought the rights to Crazy Otto, changed the sprites to fit the Pac-Man universe, renamed the game Ms. Pac-Man, and released it into arcades.Doug Macrae from GCC speaks at California Extreme 2010
Shortly before release, Stan Jarocki of Midway stated that Ms. Pac-Man was conceived in response to the original Pac-Man being "the first commercial videogame to involve large numbers of women as players" and that it is "our way of thanking all those lady arcaders who have played and enjoyed Pac-Man." The game was later awarded the Certificate of Merit as runner-up for Coin-Op Game of the Year at the 1982 Arcade Awards held in January 1983.
After the game became wildly popular, Midway and GCC undertook a brief legal battle concerning royalties. The Killer List of Videogames notes that the game was accomplished without Namco's consent, causing both companies to eventually turn over the rights to Namco. Ms. Pac-Man was reportedly the first in a series of unauthorized sequels that eventually led to the termination of the licensing agreement between Namco and Midway. GCC co-founder Doug Macrae has disputed stories that the game was manufactured without Namco's blessing, claiming that then-Namco president Masaya Nakamura had even provided feedback over character artwork during the game's development.
Ms. Pac-Man was later released on the third Namco Museum game; however, there is no mention of it in Namco's official archives (including the archives on all of the Namco Museum releases).
In 2001, Namco released an arcade board featuring both Ms. Pac-Man and Galaga in honor of the 20th anniversary of both games with the subtitle "20 Year Reunion / Class of 1981". It also features Pac-Man as a hidden bonus game. The later 25th Anniversary Edition allows all three games to be selected at the main menu. 

Ports

Like many other games of its era, Ms. Pac-Man has been ported to many platforms.

Reception and legacy

In 2009, Game Informer put Ms. Pac-Man 10th on their list of "The Top 200 Games of All Time", saying that it "trumped original Pac-Man in nearly every way".






