[[Bachelor of Technology]]

CATEGORIES: Bachelor's degrees

The bachelor of technology (commonly abbreviated as B. or B. (Hons) or BT) is an undergraduate academic degree conferred after completion of a three or four-year program of studies at an accredited university or accredited university-level institution. The degree is conferred in the Commonwealth of Nations, the United States and elsewhere.
In general, the degree is awarded to those who have undertaken a degree program which is additionally supplemented by either occupational placements (e.g. supervised practice or internships), practice-based classroom courses, or associate degrees. Due to these requirements, the degree normally takes at least four years.
In some countries, the degree is awarded following completion of a curriculum which is career oriented, emphasizing practice as opposed to theory.

Australia

In Australia, the Bachelor of Technology programs are three to four years in duration. Honors awarded to graduates who successfully complete a four-year program.

Canada

In Canada, the Bachelor of Technology designation is used inconsistently. Both universities and community colleges award the degree after completion of four-year programs but have different entrance requirements.
Care should be taken not to confuse the B. degree offered by university-level institutions with the Bachelor of Applied Technology (B.A.) or BAT offered by some community colleges in Canada. Community colleges are represented by the Association of Canadian Community Colleges (ACCC) and university-level institutions by the Association of Universities and Colleges of Canada (AUCC), the national accrediting body of universities in Canada. However, some community college engineering programs have recently been accredited by Engineers Canada following a thorough review by the Canadian Engineering Accreditation Board (CEAB), i.e., Conestoga College."Non-Universities receive engineering accreditation from the CEAB:" CEAB accreditation allows licensing as a "Professional Engineer (P.)" and ensures that graduates of these programs can continue with graduate engineering studies at traditional universities.
Care should be taken not to confuse the B. degree with the P. (Engineering) in Alberta designation used in Canada by the engineering technologists and technicians associations. P. (Engineering) allow engineering practice independently same as professional engineer, which is attained by after completion of a 2-3 year Engineering Technology diploma program.

India

In India, the Bachelor of Technology degree (under the faculty of engineering & technology) is a professional degree awarded after completion of a 4-year program (eight semesters of classroom study which include seminar, practicals and projects). This course is usually offered by an institute of science and technology or a deemed university (University of High performance U/S 3 of the UGC Act).

Israel

In Israel, the B. degree is awarded only by academic colleges in fields of engineering. The minimum duration of the B. degree is eight semesters and 160 credit hours. It is also awarded to those who have upgraded from a Practical Engineering certificate to a B. degree by taking supplemental studies of minimum five semesters and 100 credit hours. The importance of this course can be judged from the fact that GDS is pursuing it.
There is also an honorary degree in Bachelor of Technology (B.Tech Hons degree.
Today in Israel, a B.Sc. degree and demand for it is subsiding. This is due to the lower requirements for a B.Sc. degree.

Kenya

In Kenya, the B. The fields offered by the university are Chemical engineering, Civil engineering, Computer engineering, Electrical engineering, Textile Engineering and Production Engineering

Nigeria

In Nigeria, The B. degree is awarded by Universities of Technology or Science and Technology which can be Federal, State or Privately owned. The duration of study is usually five years of ten semesters. Nine of these semesters is spent in the university while one (usually the second semester of the fourth year) is spent on compulsory Industrial Training (IT) ranging from three to six months although it can extend for a whole session (usually the whole fourth year) for students of Agriculture related courses. At inception most of the universities offered core Science courses, but have now expanded their course offerings to include Social Sciences and even Medicine. There are five Federal universities of Technology in Nigeria located in Minna, Akure, Owerri, Yola and Bauchi with some state and privately owned ones around the country.

Pakistan

In Pakistan: Bachelor of Technology (Honors) degree is a four-year undergraduate university level degree, including Engineering and Applied Science courses,supervised industrial Practical training and projects. The prerequisite for this program is a three-year Diploma of Associate Engineering in specific fields e.g. Chemical Engineering, Electronics Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering and Civil Engineering etc. or two-year Fsc pre engineering. B. of Pakistan). Public universities Such as IIUI, MUET, NED, UETs of all provinces offer admission in B-Tech degree Program. According to notifications the B.Tech Engineers there conflict remain unsolved with BSc engineers(White Collar Engineers).Tech Engineers but PEC opposing it since 35 years and influencing on govt departments.Tech Hons degree may be treated at par and compatible with BSc engineering degree.

South Africa

In South Africa, the B. As an example, the BTech (Eng) is the qualification required for practising as an engineering technologist, as opposed to practising as an engineer with a B.  Relatedly, it is often offered in areas in which there is no corresponding  B.Sc. or BComm (e.g. B.forestry.co.pdf  B.unisa.ac.pdf). The degree is obtained after four years of study, and is usually offered as a one year programme, following completion of a relevant three-year National Diploma.  The degree (often) carries the same points as other Bachelor's degrees in terms of South Africa's National Qualifications Framework. At the same time, however, due to its orientation, it does not always grant admission to the corresponding M.Sc. or MComm program, and students instead pursue the Master of Technology (M.) and Doctor of Technology (D.) degrees; it does grant admission to MBA programmes (see List of business schools in South Africa). In some cases, however, admission may be granted, once demonstrated that the student meets the necessary academic level to complete the requirements of the M.

Sri Lanka

In Sri Lanka, The Open University of Sri Lanka (since 1980 under University Grants Commission) is the pioneer in offering the BTech which has a duration of minimum five years. Undergraduates can be specialised in Civil Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Electronics and communication Engineering, Computer Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Automobile Engineering, Manufacturing Engineering, Mechatronics Engineering and Textile and Apparel Technology.
B. This is known to be a specialized degree where they are subjected to specialize in three fields, Food Engineering & Bioprocess Technology, Material science & technology and Mechatronics.
The B-Tech is offered in Sri Lanka by the University of Vocational Technology in following fields of Information Communication Technology, Building Services Technology, Manufacturing Technology, and Mechatronics Technology.

United Kingdom

The degree of level 3 is 2 to 4 years more of technical programme an academic award in the Kingdom and Scotland. Those who take such programs are more commonly awarded a Bachelor of Science (B.Sc.) degree. B. degree with the United Kingdom's Business and Technology Education Council BTEC designation compared to Degree, which is a university degree.

United States

In USA, The Bachelor of Technology degree is awarded after completion of a 2-4 year academic program. Many of the colleges and universities offering this degree are located in the states of Alaska (INDS), Florida, New York (New York City College of Technology, State University College at Buffalo, SUNY Morrisville, SUNY Cobleskill), Illinois (Chicago), Mississippi (Mississippi University for Women), Missouri (Northwest Missouri State University), Nevada, South Carolina (Charleston Southern University), Oklahoma (Rogers State University, Northeastern State University), Virginia and Georgia (Southern Polytechnic State University). For example World College located in Virginia offers Bachelor of Technology degrees.




