[[Maeshowe]]

CATEGORIES: 3rd-millennium BC architecture in Scotland, Megalithic monuments in Scotland, Archaeological sites in Orkney, Archaeoastronomy, Viking Age sites in Scotland, Prehistoric Orkney, Runic inscriptions, Scheduled Ancient Monuments in Scotland, World Heritage Sites in Scotland, Historic Scotland properties in Orkney, Museums in Orkney, Archaeological museums in Scotland, Neolithic Scotland

Maeshowe (or Maes Howe; Norse: Orkhaugr) is a Neolithic chambered cairn and passage grave situated on Mainland, Orkney, Scotland. It was probably built in around . It gives its name to the Maeshowe type of chambered cairn, which is limited to Orkney. Maeshowe is a significant example of Neolithic craftsmanship and is, in the words of the archaeologist Stuart Piggott, "a superlative monument that by its originality of execution is lifted out of its class into a unique position."Pigott 1954 The monuments around Maeshowe, including Skara Brae, were designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1999.

Design and construction

Maeshowe is one of the largest tombs in Orkney; the mound encasing the tomb is  wide. The grass mound hides a complex of passages and chambers built of carefully crafted slabs of flagstone weighing up to 30 tons. Ronald Hutton, Archeologists Erika Guttmann and Martin Carruthers It is aligned so that the rear wall of its central chamber held up by a bracketed wall,Dargie 2007, p. 12. is illuminated on the winter solstice. 160 A similar display occurs in Newgrange.
This entrance passage is , the wall's construction changes from the use of flat to overlapping slabs creating a beehive-shaped vault. 176-177 
Estimates of the amount of effort required to build Maeshowe vary; a commonly suggested number is 39,000 man-hours,Hedges 1984, p. 113Castleden 1987, p. 212 although Colin Renfrew calculated that at least 100,000 hours would be required. 212-214 Dating of the construction of Maeshowe is difficult but dates derived from burials in similar tombs cluster around .

Siting

Maeshowe appears as a grassy mound rising from a flat plain near the south-east end of the Loch of Harray. The land around Maeshowe at its construction probably looked much as it does today- treeless with grasses representative of Pollen Assemblage Zone MNH-I reflecting "mixed agricultural practices, probably with a pastoral bias – there is a substantial amount of ribwort pollen, but also that of cereals."Davidson & Jones 1985, pp. 27
A Neolithic "low road" connects Maeshowe with the magnificently preserved village of Skara Brae, passing near the Standing Stones of Stenness and the Ring of Brodgar. 117 Low roads connect Neolithic ceremonial sites throughout Britain. Some archeologists believe that Maeshowe was originally surrounded by a large stone circle. Ronald Hutton, Archeologists Erika Guttmann and Martin Carruthers The complex including Maeshowe, the Ring of Brodgar, the Standing Stones of Stenness, Skara Brae, as well as other tombs and standing stones represents a concentration of Neolithic sites that is rivalled in Britain only by the complexes associated with Stonehenge and Avebury. 93

Style

The tomb gives its name to the Maeshowe type of chambered cairn, which is limited to Orkney. 22 Maeshowe is very similar to the famous Newgrange tomb in Ireland, suggesting a linkage between the two cultures. 42 Chambered tombs of the Maeshowe "type" are characterized by a long, low entrance passageway leading to a square or rectangular chamber from which there is access to a number of side cells. Although there are disagreements as to the attribution of tombs to tomb types, there are only seven definitely known Maeshowe type tombs. 80 On Mainland, there are, in addition to Maeshowe; the tombs of Cuween Hill, Wideford Hill, and Quanterness. The tomb of Quoyness is found on Sanday, while Vinquoy Hill is located on Eday. Finally, there is an unnamed tomb on the Holm of Papa Westray. Anna Ritchie reports that there are three more Maeshowe type tombs in Orkney but she doesn't name or locate them. 47

Excavation

The "modern" opening of the tomb was by James Farrer, an antiquarian and the Member of Parliament for South Durham, in July 1861. 9 Farrer, like many antiquarians of the day, was not noted for his careful excavation of sites. John Hedges describes him as possessing "a rapacious appetite for excavation matched only by his crude techniques, lack of inspiration, and general inability to publish."Hedges 1984, p. 22 Farrer and his workmen broke through the roof of the entrance passage and found it filled with debris. He then turned his attention to the top of the mound, broke through and, over a period of a few days, emptied the main chamber of material that had filled it completely. He and his workmen discovered the famous runic inscriptions carved on the walls, proof that Norsemen had broken into the tomb at least six centuries earlier. 10
As described in the Orkneyinga Saga, Maeshowe was looted by the famous Vikings Earl Harald Maddadarson and Ragnvald, Earl of Møre"Maeshowe's runes - Viking graffiti" Orkneyjar. Retrieved 30 October 2008. in about the 12th century. The more than thirty runic inscriptions on the walls of the chamber represent the largest single collection of such carvings in the world.

Toponymy

The origin of the name Maeshowe is uncertain.  While the second element is certainly from the Old Norse haugr usually meaning a mound, there have been several different theories postulated for the first element, maes.
These include:

World Heritage status

"The Heart of Neolithic Orkney" was inscribed as a World Heritage site in December 1999. In addition to Maeshowe, the site includes Skara Brae, the Standing Stones of Stenness, the Ring of Brodgar and other nearby sites. It is managed by Historic Scotland, whose "Statement of Significance" for the site begins:
 
 The monuments at the heart of Neolithic Orkney and Skara Brae proclaim the triumphs of the human spirit in early ages and isolated places. They were approximately contemporary with the mastabas of the archaic period of Egypt (first and second dynasties), the brick temples of Sumeria, and the first cities of the Harappa culture in India, and a century or two earlier than the Golden Age of China. Unusually fine for their early date, and with a remarkably rich survival of evidence, these sites stand as a visible symbol of the achievements of early peoples away from the traditional centres of civilisation ... Maes Howe is a masterpiece of Neolithic peoples. It is an exceptionally early architectural accomplishment. With its almost classical strength and simplicity it is a unique survival from 5000 years ago. It is an expression of genius within a group of people whose other tombs were claustrophobic chambers in smaller mounds."The Heart of Neolithic Orkney". Historic Scotland. Retrieved on 5 September 2007



Footnotes






