[[Ralph Lauren]]

CATEGORIES: 1939 births, Living people, American fashion designers, American billionaires, Businesspeople from New York City, Businesspeople in fashion, Cancer survivors, Car collectors, Baruch College alumni, DeWitt Clinton High School alumni, American Jews, Ashkenazi Jews, United States Army soldiers, Jewish fashion designers, Chevaliers of the Légion d'honneur, American people of Belarusian-Jewish descent, American people of Polish-Jewish descent

Ralph Lauren (born Ralph Lifshitz October 14, 1939 in New York City) is an American fashion designer and business executive, best known for his Polo Ralph Lauren clothing brand, and a global multi-billion-dollar enterprise. He has become well known for his collection of rare automobiles, some of which have been displayed in museum exhibits. In 2010, Lauren was declared Chevalier de la Legion d'honneur by French President Nicolas Sarkozy. As of September 2012, Forbes estimates his wealth at $7.5 billion dollars, which makes Ralph Lauren the 162nd richest person in the world. 

Early life and education

Ralph Lauren was born  Ralph Lifshitz in the Bronx, New York, Fraydl (née Kotlar) and Frank Lifshitz, a house painter. 28
Lauren attended the Baruch College followed by MTA (now known as the Marsha Stern Talmudical Academy), before eventually graduating from DeWitt Clinton High School in 1957."Selling a Dream of Elegance and the Good Life", Time (magazine), September 1, 1986. Retrieved September 15, 2009. "At DeWitt Clinton High School in the Bronx, Lauren attended business classes but paid little attention to studies. His adolescent idols were British and American style setters: the Duke of Windsor, for example, and Katharine Hepburn." his Clinton yearbook, in which it stated under his picture that he wanted to be a millionaire. 38
Born Ralph Lifshitz, he changed his surname to Lauren when he was 16 years old.

Career

He went to Baruch College where he studied business, although he dropped out after two years. From 1962 to 1964 he served in the United States Army and left to work briefly for Brooks Brothers as a sales assistant before leaving to become a salesman for a tie company. In 1966, when he was 26, he was inspired to design a wide, European-style necktie he had seen Douglas Fairbanks Jr wearing, but the idea was rejected by the company he worked for as not being commercially viable. He left to establish his own company working out of a drawer in the Empire State Building, taking rags and turning them into ties. He sold the ties to small shops in New York, with a major turning point when he was approached by Neiman Marcus, who bought 100 dozen.
In 1967, with the financial backing of Manhattan clothing manufacturer Norman Hilton, Lauren opened a necktie store where he also sold ties of his own design, under the label "Polo." He later received the rights to use the trademark Polo from Brooks Brothers, however Brooks Brothers managed to retain its rights to the iconic "original polo button-down collar" shirt (still produced today), in spite of Lauren's Polo trademark. In 1971, he expanded his line and opened a Polo boutique on Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills. Oct. 2002:  Oprah. Web. 12 Dec. 2012. Oprah Interviews Ralph Lauren
In 1970, Ralph Lauren won the COTY Award for his menswear line.  Around that same time he released a line of women's suits that were tailored in a classic men's style, which was when the first Polo emblem was seen. It was on the cuff of the women's suit. Ralph Lauren released Polo's famous short sleeve pique shirt with the Polo logo in 1972 and unveiled his first Ralph Lauren collection for women. "Ralph Lauren." 1980. N.p.: n.p., n.d. N. pag. EBSCOhost. Web.  12 Dec. 2012. . It came out in 24 colors and soon became a classic. He also gained recognition for his design after he was contracted to provide clothing styles for the movie The Great Gatsby
In 1984, he transformed the Rhinelander Mansion, former home of the photographer Edgar de Evia and Robert Denning, into the flagship store for Polo Ralph Lauren. This same year de Evia photographed the cover feature story for House & Garden on the Lauren home Round Hill in Jamaica,House & Garden, October, 1984 which had formerly been the home of Babe and Bill Paley.
By 2007 Ralph Lauren had over 35 boutiques in the United States; 23 locations carried the Ralph Lauren Purple Label, including Atlanta, Beverly Hills, Boston, Charlotte, Washington DC, Chicago, Costa Mesa, Dallas, Denver, Honolulu, Houston, Las Vegas, Manhasset, New York, Palm Beach, Palo Alto, Philadelphia, Phoenix, San Diego, Short Hills, Montreal and Troy.  The Financial Times reported in January 2010 that the firm had revenues of $5 billion for fiscal year 2009.

Awards and honors

In 2010, Lauren was declared Chevalier de la Legion d'honneur by French President Nicolas Sarkozy in Paris.
In 2014, Lauren was awarded the James Smithson Bicentennial Medal.

Automobile collection

Ralph Lauren is also well known as a collector of automobiles,Wired magazine, Ralph Lauren collection some of which are extremely rare. A large portion of his over 70 automobiles are held in his estate in Katonah, New York.  He owns a 1962 Ferrari 250 GTO, two
Ferrari 250 Testa Rossas, three 1996 McLaren F1s (one of them an ultra-rare F1 LM), a Mercedes 300SL Gullwing, a 1929 Blower Bentley, one Bugatti Type 57SC Atlantic, a Porsche 997 GT3 RS, a Bugatti Veyron, a 1930 Mercedes-Benz CountTrossi SSK (aka "The Black Prince") a 1938 Alfa Romeo 8C 2900B Mille Miglia.,

Personal life

On December 20, 1964, he married Ricky Anne Loew-Beer in New York City. Ricky is the daughter of an Austrian Catholic mother, Margaret Vytouch, and a Jewish father, Rudolph Loew-Beer."Genuine Authentic: The Real Life of Ralph Lauren" By Michael Gross p 92-93 The two met six months earlier, in an eye doctor's office where Ricky was working as a receptionist. 91–93 Ralph kept it a secret from his parents that his new bride was only half Jewish and that her mother was a gentile. They have three children:
In early 1987, Ralph Lauren was diagnosed with a benign brain tumor. In April 1987 he underwent surgery to remove the tumor and made a full recovery.





Further reading




