[[Littoral combat ship]]

CATEGORIES: Ship types, Weapon development, Littoral combat ships of the United States Navy

The littoral combat ship (LCS) is a class of relatively small surface vessels intended for operations in the littoral zone (close to shore) by the United States Navy.
The  are the first two variants of LCS by the U.S. Navy.  LCS designs are slightly smaller than the U.S. Navy's guided missile frigates, and have been likened to corvettes of other navies. However, the LCS designs add the capabilities of a small assault transport with a flight deck and hangar large enough to base two SH-60B/F or MH-60R/S Seahawk helicopters, the capability to recover and launch small boats from a stern ramp, and enough cargo volume and payload to deliver a small assault force with fighting vehicles to a roll-on/roll-off port facility. The standard armament for the LCS are Mk 110 57 mm guns and Rolling Airframe Missiles. It will also be able to launch autonomous air, surface, and underwater vehicles. Although the LCS designs offer less air defense and surface-to-surface capabilities than comparable destroyers, the LCS concept emphasizes speed, flexible mission module space and a shallow draft.
The first littoral combat ship, , of similar design to the USS Freedom, was commissioned 22 September 2012 in Galveston, Texas.
In 2012, CNO Jonathan W. Greenert said some of the LCS would be deployed to Africa in place of destroyers and cruisers."LCS Couldn't Survive War With China, But It Could Help Prevent It: CNO." Then in 2013, the LCS requirement was cut from 55 to 52 ships, because U.S. Africa Command reduced the presence requirement."Navy cuts fleet goal to 306 ships." On 6 January 2014, the office of the secretary of defense (OSD) directed the Navy to reduce overall buys of the LCS from 52 to 32, in favor of a "more capable surface combatant."  Navy leaders have asserted that budgets and acquisition changes have not been completed yet.com, 15 January 2014 By January 17, Navy leaders had managed to momentarily forego a final decision about changing LCS numbers.com, 19 January 2014 The final budget called for capping the LCS fleet at 32 ships in favor of a more capable frigate, that could engage in high intensity combat." Sources: Hagel FY 2015 Budget Preview."

Design features

The concept behind the littoral combat ship, as described by former Secretary of the Navy Gordon R. England, is to "create a small, fast, maneuverable and relatively inexpensive member of the DD(X) family of ships."  The ship is easy to reconfigure for different roles, including anti-submarine warfare, mine countermeasures, anti-surface warfare, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance, homeland defense, maritime intercept, special operations, and logistics.  Due to its modular design, the LCS will be able to replace slower, more specialized ships such as minesweepers and larger assault ships.
Most of the functions of the mission modules will be performed by carried vehicles such as the helicopters or unmanned vehicles such as the Spartan Scout, AN/WLD-1 RMS Remote Minehunting System and MQ-8B Fire Scout.  By performing functions such as sonar sweeps for mines or submarines or torpedo launches against hostile submarines at some distance from the ship's hull, the crew is placed at less risk.  This is part of the Navy's goal to "unman the front lines."
Also by placing sensors on remote vehicles, the LCS will be able to exploit concepts such as bistatic sonar.
A report by the Pentagon's director of Operational Test and Evaluation found that neither design was expected to "be survivable in a hostile combat environment" and that neither ship could withstand the Navy's full ship shock trials. The Navy has responded that the LCS is being built to a Level 1+ survivability standard and that the ships will rely on warnings from networks and the speed of the ship to avoid being hit, or if hit be able to limp to safety. "A Response to the Navy's 'Vigorous Defense' of the Littoral Combat Ship." POGO, 1 May 2012.O'Rourke, Ronald. "CRS-RL33741 Navy Littoral Combat Ship (LCS) Program: Background, Issues, and Options for Congress." Congressional Research Service, 6 April 2012.
The combat abilities of the LCS were said to be "very modest" even before the cancellation of the XM501 Non-Line-of-Sight Launch System. The Independence variant is said to have better helicopter facilities and more internal space while the Freedom variant is said to be better able to launch and recover boats in high seas.  Admiral Gary Roughead has said that a mix of both types would be "operationally advantageous". "LCS plan attacked, but gains support." Navy Times, 15 December
Some of the LCS will rotate through Singapore. "New weapons for 'robust' US role in Asia: Gates." AFP, 3 June 2011. These two or four ships will not be based in Singapore and their crews will live aboard ship during their rotational deployments. "Agreement Calls for 4 U.S. Littoral Combat Ships to Rotate Through Singapore." Defense News, 2 June 2012. The ships will be managed from, rather than based in, Singapore for a six to ten-month deployment that includes port calls to other countries in the area. "Dempsey Details Plan for 'Singapore-managed' Ships." American Forces Press Service, 3 June 2012.
In April 2012, Chief of Naval Operations Greenert said "You won't send it into an anti-access area."Freedberg Jr., Sydney J. "LCS Couldn't Survive War With China, But It Could Help Prevent It: CNO." Aol Defense. 12 April 2012. But Navy Secretary Ray Mabus clarified that the ship could operate in combat areas, as long as it remained under the protection of real warships. Jr. "LCS Is Too A Real Warship, Insists SecNav." 17 April 2012.
The ships are planned to have a 3:2:1 manning concept. That is three ship crews, and two hulls for each ship that is on station at any time. The other ship and other two crews who are not on deployment will either be preparing for deployment or in rotation in or out of theater. The result is a 50% reduction in ships and a 25% reduction in crews (and smaller crew sizes) than traditional deployment practices.
The ships were predicted to fall short in manning. "A Littoral Combat Ship Manpower Analysis Using the Fleet Response Training Plan." Naval Postgraduate School, 2007. And the Navy has deployed the ships with berthing modules in the mission bays in order to carry the crew required for operations. "SAS12: LCS modules may never be 'final'." DoD Buzz, 16 April 2012.O'Rourke, Ronald. "Navy Littoral Combat Ship (LCS) Program: Background, Issues, and Options for Congress." CRS, 20 March 2012."House panel raises doubts over manning LCSs." Navy Times, 15 May 2012. However the ships are designed with sufficient headroom to change from 2-high bunking to 3-high bunking, which would allow crew sizes of 100 if needed."Navy Undersecretary Discusses Future of the Surface Combat Fleet."
The ships will be unable to defend themselves effectively against anti-ship cruise missiles, which are commonly employed in the littorals. "LCS: Quick Swap Concept Dead." Defense News, 14 July 2012.
The LCS is the first USN surface combatant class in a generation to not use the Aegis Combat System, though Aegis-equipped variants of the LCS hulls have been offered to foreign customers."A heavy duty LCS for foreign navies. Maybe." The LCS classes have suffered from problems in their communications and radars and will require refits in these areas."Redeeming Freedom – Changes for the U.S. Navy's Littoral Combat Ship."

Mission modules

The LCS is reconfigured for various roles by changing mission packages. Each mission package includes mission module equipment (weapon systems, sensors, etc.), carried craft and mission crews.  Projected modules include Anti-submarine warfare (ASW), mine hunter (MCM), surface warfare (SUW), and special warfare missions."Navy Littoral Combat Ship (LCS) Program: Background, Issues, and Options for Congress." Congressional Research Service, 18 March 2011. The MCM and SUW modules are planned to reach initial operating capability in Fiscal year 2014, and the ASW module in FY2016. "US Navy gears up for more at-sea tests of LCS mission modules." Janes, 5 November 2012.

=Mission module changes=

Module changes were envisioned to allow a single LCS to change roles in a matter of hours at any commercial port allowing a group of LCS' to optimize their effectiveness against a developing threat very rapidly.  A report from the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations (OPNAV) based on the results of a January 2012 sustainment wargame is reported to state that, possibly for logistics reasons, the mission module changes may take as long as weeks, and that in the future the navy plans to use LCS ships with a single module, with module changes being a rare occurrence.

=Surface warfare=

The surface warfare mission module is intended to deal only with small boats and is called "best swarm killer in the surface fleet". "Return Fire on the Navy's Littoral Combat Ship." Time Magazine, 12 October 2012. It includes two 30mm gun mission modules manufactured by Teledyne Brown Engineering, Inc."Teledyne Wins $9 Million Littoral Combat Ship Mission Modules Manufacturing Contract." Teledyne Technologies, 10 May 2011.
In January 2011, the U.S. Navy recommended that Raytheon's Griffin missile system be selected as the replacement for the NLOS-LS missile., and the Navy is interested in developing a longer-range follow-on version.com, 9 April 2014 The selection of the Hellfire is an interim decision to increase lethality, with a longer-range missile to be developed in the future.org, 9 April 2014
In November 2013, the USS Fort Worth (LCS-3) conducted live-fire tests of its 57 mm and 30 mm canons against small boat targets conducting swarm attacks.  The Fort Worth was moving fast through the water and assisted by an MH-60R helicopter.  The ship's fire control system locked on to and fired on the small maneuvering boats in day and night situations with optical sights.  The helicopter provided radar targeting which was passed on to the ship's fire control system.  Test firing were successful, with additional evaluations of the complete surface warfare module scheduled for early 2014.org, 12 November 2013

=Anti-submarine module=

The anti-submarine module will have its focus changed from stationary systems to en-stride systems (while the ship is moving) that are useful in the open ocean as well as in coastal areas. One of the items to be added is a "torpedo detection capability" so that the ship can know when it is under attack. "What Price Freedom? LCS-1 Leaves Dry Dock Amid Questions About Worthiness." Aviation Week, 9 May 2012. Thales has sold one CAPTAS 4 low-frequency active sonar to the U.S. Navy to be towed behind the LCS, with a potential order of 25 units.
A wargame held by the Naval War College demonstrated the possibility of using the LCS in open water operations to assist carrier battle groups and guided missile destroyers.  It tested the ability of the LCS to use its ASW package's sensing and protective technologies to support carrier operations and free up destroyers normally used for those roles to support the strike group; the towed array and hull-mounted sonar on a missile destroyer is complemented by the VDS mounted on the LCS.com, 2 April 2014

=Mine countermeasures module=

The Mine Counter-Measure (MCM) module is designed to provide minesweeping, where mines are detected remotely and bypassed, as well as minehunting, where mines are detected and then disabled.gao.pdf  Presently the MCM module is envisioned to perform "influence" minehunting, which employs acoustic and magnetic signatures, but not contact, or mechanical minehunting.  The MCM module includes the Airborne Laser Mine Detection system, the Airborne mine neutralization system, the AN/AQS-20A underwater towed sonar, the remote minehunting system that will tow the AN/AQS-20A, the Coastal Battlefield Reconnaissance and Analysis system, the unmanned surface vehicle with unmanned surface sweep system, and the Knifefish, the Surface mine counter-measure unmanned undersea vehicle.  Additionally before they were canceled, the MCM module was also to include the Organic Airborne and Surface Influence Sweep System, and the Rapid Airborne Mine Clearance System.  The full "threshold" performance MCM module is scheduled to be completed by 2019.  The AN/AQS-20A, and the Airborne Laser Mine Detection System have been found to be unable to meet performance requirements in a single pass, requiring them to use multiple passes, degrading performance.  The Remote Multi-Mission Vehicle's mean time before failure is 7.9 hours compared to the required 75 hours.  The Airborne Mine Neutralization System cannot track mines because of software problems, and there are problems with the loading and unloading system.  While the Navy plans to release the final increment IV MCM module in 2019, this planned system will not have contact minehunting capability, or an EOD team, which the Avenger Mine Countermeasure ship had to deal with contact mines, and give valuable intelligence data the EOD teams are trained to collect.  It will also not have an in-stride capability, the ability to neutralize mines as they're found, the neutralization phase is preceded by post-mission analysis with the proposed system. , fielding of the first increment of the MCM module is planned for 2015, and the second in 2019.

=Irregular warfare and amphibious modules=

The Navy has included an irregular warfare package in its 2012 budget request to Congress. The Spearhead-class Joint High Speed Vessels have also been weighed as possible platforms for Special operations support."NavWeek: Pivotal Needs."
Under Secretary of the Navy Robert O. Work has said that Marines will deploy from littoral combat ships.  Congressman Duncan D. Hunter (R-CA), himself a Marine Corps Reserve field artillery officer with combat experience in Iraq and Afghanistan, has written that the 55 LCS buy was made at the cost of 10 fewer amphibious vessels needed to support the USMC. "Does Fleet Size Matter? A Navy Point of Contention." Roll Call, 25 November 2012.  Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps, General Joseph Dunford has said that the LCS is one of the platforms under consideration to help close the gap in amphibious shipping. "Marines Clamor To Close Gaps In Amphib Fleet." AOL Defense, 7 December 2011. The Navy is currently working on the requirements for a module to support these sorts of operations."Marines, SOCOM Pile Onboard LCS."

Developmental history

Proposal

The United States Navy launched its first experimental littoral combat ship, Sea Fighter, in 2003. Sea Fighter used a SWATH-type hull and was designated as fast sea frame or FSF-1. Given that the Oliver Hazard Perry, Osprey, and the Avenger classes are all reaching end of life, the U.S. Navy released a requirement for the LCS class ships. In 2004, Lockheed Martin, General Dynamics and Raytheon submitted designs to the Navy of their proposed littoral combat ships.  It was decided to produce two vessels each (Flight 0) of the Lockheed Martin design (LCS-1 and LCS-3) and of the General Dynamics design (LCS-2 and LCS-4).  After these are brought into service, and experience has been gathered on the usability and efficiency of the designs, the future design for the class were to be chosen (Flight I).  The ultimate decision was to fund both designs as two variants of the class.  The Navy currently plans to build 32 of these ships.
On 9 May 2005, Secretary of the Navy Gordon R. England announced that the first LCS would be named , was laid at the Austal USA shipyards in Mobile, Alabama.  LCS-2 was launched 30 April 2008.

Budget overruns and deployments

The U.S. Navy canceled contracts to build LCS-3 of Lockheed Martin and LCS-4 of General Dynamics and Austal USA in April and November 2007, respectively, citing failure to control cost overruns of both designs.
In March 2009, then-Secretary of the Navy Donald C. Winter announced that LCS-3 would be named 
The Navy pressed forward with its Littoral Combat Ship acquisition process, despite calls from former Secretary of the Navy John Lehman to adapt a fixed-price contracts.
The Congress also asked the Navy to study improvement programs on existing ships in place of the LCS program. But in June 2009, Vice Admiral Barry McCullough, USN testified in a Senate Armed Services Committee meeting that the Oliver Hazard Perry class frigates and minesweepers were too worn out to continue in service to cover the gap if the LCS development process suffered further delays. A Huntington-Ingalls study found that the NSC would be a better match for the listed mission set, except that it did not have the mission modules that the LCS carried to perform many of these missions. "Industry view: Why the Navy needs a 'Patrol Frigate'." DoD Buzz. 28 March 2012.
In support of the LCS program, Northrop Grumman Aerospace Systems, the contractor of unmanned aerial vehicle UAV that would be carried on Littoral Combat Ships, released a study that showed seven LCS can more efficiently perform anti-piracy patrols in the Western Indian Ocean than a fleet of 20 conventional ships for a quarter of the cost.
To help reduce cost of each ships, Navy Acquisition Chief Sean Stackley and Vice Admiral Barry McCullough in September 2009 indicate that only one of the contractors would be offered a fixed price contract in 2010 for up to ten ships,[ Associated Press
FY2010 budget documents revealed that the total costs of the two lead ships had risen to $637 million for Freedom and $704 million for Independence.
On 16 January 2010, the Independence was commissioned in Mobile, Alabama.
On 4 March 2010, Austal USA split from Bath Iron Works and announced that it would bid on future LCS contacts by itself.  Austal could, for example, win the 2010 contract and Bath could win the following contract in 2012.
On 23 August 2010, the US Navy announced a delay in awarding the contract for 10 ships until sometime near the end of the year. A meeting of the Defense Acquisition Board scheduled for 29 October 2010 has been delayed and the Navy has indicated that no decision on the contract can be made until this meeting is held.
The GAO found that deploying the first two ships will delay the overall program because these two ships were not available for testing and development so changes may have to be made in the second pair of ships during their construction instead of being planned for before construction started.
In 2013, Work explained that part of the cost overruns were due to the shipbuilders bidding to American Bureau of Shipping commercial standards, but the Navy changing this to Level I survivability standards to give the crew a better chance of survival, even though the ships were not expected to continue operating after being hit."Navy's No. 2 Civilian Chronicles Missteps in Littoral Combat Ship." The Navy acknowledged that their failure to communicate clearly that the experimental and developmental nature of the first two ships caused a perception that the overall LCS program was in worse shape."Upgraded LCS Starts Certification Trials."

Building both designs

Instead of declaring a winner out of the two competing designs, the U.S. Navy in November 2010 asked the Congress to allow for the order of ten of each design. "Navy asks Congress to buy both LCS designs" Navy Times, 4 November 2010 US Senator Carl Levin (D-MI) said that the change was made because both bids were under the Congressional price cap.DREW, CHRISTOPHER. "To Capitalize on Low Bids, Navy Hopes to Name 2 Winners for Ship Contract." "New York Times", 5 November 2010
The Government Accountability Office identified some problems with the designs other than shipbuilding. These included, in GAO's views, extremely long crew training time, unrealistic maintenance plans, and the lack of comprehensive risk assessment. "Kerry pushes a late deal on ships." Boston Globe, 13 December 2010.
On 13 December 2010, both production teams extended their contract offers until 30 December in order to give more time for the Navy to push through the plan. The Navy would be forced to award the contract to only one team if it failed to secure Congressional approval. The Navy budgeted $490 million for each ship while the Congressional Budget Office projected a cost of $591 million for each ship. "Lockheed, Austal Extend Prices on Littoral Ship Bids." Bloomberg News, 13 December 2010. Elmendorf CBO letter to McCain Congressional Budget Office, 10 December 2010. Navy acquisition chief Sean Stackley testified to a Senate panel that the actual price range was $440 to $460 million. "U.S. Navy urges Senate to approve LCS warship plan." Reuters, 14 December 2010.
One day before the contract offers were set to expire, both Lockheed Martin and Austal USA received contracts from the Navy to build an additional ten ships of their designs. Two ships of each design would be built on every year between 2011 and 2015. LCS-5 of the Lockheed Martin design had the contractual price of $437 million. Austal USA's contractual price for LCS-6 was $432 million. Department of Navy Undersecretary Sean Stackley noted in a conversation with reporters on 29 December 2010, that the LCS program was now well within the Congressional cost cap of $480 million per ship. The average per-ship target price for Lockheed ships is $362 million, Stackley said, with a goal of $352 million for each Austal USA ships. Government-furnished equipment (GFE), such as weapons, add about $25 million to each ship. Another $20 million is figured in for change orders, and "management reserve" is also included. All told, Stackley said, the average cost to buy an LCS should be between $430 million and $440 million.
In the fiscal year 2011, the unit cost $1.8 billion and the program cost $3.7 billion.
Work has said that the two different designs may each be best suited for a different theater, in that the LCS-1 design would be better suited for the enclosed waters of the Middle East, while the LCS-2 design would be better suited for the open waters of the Pacific Ocean. However, in order to increase commonality between the two designs, the Navy will force both types to use the same electronics for their combat systems., Sydney J. "Navy Needs Both LCS Types For War With China, Iran." AoL Defense, 21 May 2012.
On 10 February 2012, Secretary of the Navy Ray Mabus broke with the previously established naming convention for the LCS class and named LCS-10, the 
The handoff from General Dynamics to Austal of management for the Independence class lead to a 13-month schedule slip as the company struggled with building the JHSV ships at the same facilities."Littoral combat ships see new delivery delays, Navy says."
In May 2013, the GAO called for a pause in the ship constructions until issues with the sea frames and modules were resolved."Congressional Watchdog Advises Slowing Spending on Ship." However the USN already plans to reduce the procurement rate in 2016."LCS Kerfuffle: Navy, GAO May Be In 'Violent Agreement' After All."

Operational issues

A 2012 report by Rear Admiral Samuel Perez, USN, found that the ships lacked the manpower and firepower to complete the missions required by the regional combatant commanders. The report found that the Littoral Combat Ship is "ill-suited for combat operations against anything but" small, fast boats not armed with anti-ship missiles.  It also found that the excessive beam of the trimaran Independence class ships may pose a "navigational challenge in narrow waterways and tight harbors"."Navy Ship Can't Meet Mission, Internal U.S. Report Finds." The report also found that the contractor-based maintenance scheme for the ships has performed poorly, with the poorly supervised and unaccountable contractors leaving problems for the crews. In addition these contract workers must by law be Americans, which will then need to be flown out to the foreign ports the LCS must return to for supplies and maintenance. "How could the Navy begin to remake LCS?" DoD Buzz, 24 July 2012. A special panel was appointed to investigate "challenges identified" by the report. "Navy Appoints Panel to Address Warship's Problems." POGO, 24 August 2012.
In 2013, Captain Kenneth Coleman, the U.S. Navy's requirements officer for the program, identified tactical aircraft, such as strike fighters and maritime patrol aircraft equipped with standoff anti-ship missiles, as a system the LCS would be especially vulnerable to."Littoral Combat Ship Sets Sail on First Deployment." Vice Admiral Thomas H. Copeman III is reported to be considering an upsized "Super" LCS,"Report: Navy 3-star wants to reevaluate littoral ships." that would have space to install needed firepower, because he noted that the 57mm main gun was more suitable to a patrol boat than a frigate."Littoral Combat Ships lack firepower, Navy commander warns.""Navy Plans Re-designing Troubled Littoral Combat Ship." Austal's vice president for sales, Craig Hooper, suggested that the ships should instead be used for UAV operations."Austal USA executive defends Littoral Combat Ship against firepower critics."  Ellen Mitchell, Alabama Media Group, April 10, 2013. Navy Secretary Ray Mabus has called the lack of suitable missions for the LCS "one of its greatest strengths"." Navy Secretary Defends Littoral Combat Ship."
The various modules all use the same Internet Protocol formats, and the ships are reportedly vulnerable to Cyber-Attacks."LCS Forges Common IT Backbone.""Littoral Combat Ship Network Can Be Hacked, Navy Finds."
At a hearing on 25 July 2013, the House Armed Services Committee's seapower subcommittee argued with Vice Admiral Richard Hunt on how the LCS would be employed if tensions with North Korea or China led to a confrontation in the Western Pacific.  Hunt said the ships are designed in accordance with the Navy's survivability standards, and that the LCS would be used during the initial phase in the theatre and sense the environment before hostilities occur.  Republican Congressman Duncan Hunter countered saying the LCS was not survivable enough for long-range threats that China possesses.  LCS class ships are built to the Navy's survivability category Level I+, higher than Level I patrol craft and mine warfare ships, but lower than the Level II Oliver Hazard Perry-class frigate they are replacing.  The Navy has said the LCS was designed to pull out of combat upon sustaining damage.com, 29 July 2013
The deployment of USS Freedom is seen by the Navy as an opportunity to test the ship and its operational concepts real-world environments.  Congressman Hunter replied that all that the Freedom had done so far was dock in harbors that other ships couldn't (demonstrating its shallow draft) and do "donuts" (move in fast circles in the water).  Admiral Hunt told Hunter that the Navy was about to conclude a war game at the Naval War College to examine ways of exploiting LCS capabilities in a Western Pacific scenario, among others.  Hunt added that the anti-submarine warfare (ASW) mission package would play an important role in protecting aircraft carriers and amphibious ships.  The mine countermeasures (MCMs) mission package would also provide necessary port security and waterway patrol capability in a region following major combat operations.  The MCM mission package is expected to reach initial operational capability (IOC) in 2014, and the ASW mission package is expected to reach IOC in 2016.
A Government Accountability Office report in April 2014 found that several U.S. 7th Fleet officials thought the LCS was more useful in the Persian Gulf, but not suitable in the Pacific theater.  The report found that the ships lack the speed, range, and electronic warfare capabilities to operate in the sheer geographic expanse of the Pacific.  The first two vessels from each maker were found to be overweight and not meeting performance requirements for endurance or sprinting over 40 knots.  Navy leaders contend that the LCS' shallow draft is well suited for Pacific operations because of the many shallow-water ports in parts of Asia that are difficult for larger destroyers and cruisers to access.  The GAO report recommended the Navy consider buying fewer ships of the type if its limitations prevent effective use in the Pacific operations theater.S. Navy - Bloomberg.com, 11 April 2014

New ship search

On 24 February 2014, Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel directed the Navy to submit alternative proposals for a new surface combatant comparable to a frigate that can operate in all regions under any conflict conditions.  In response to Pentagon direction to halt buys of the LCS at 32 ships, the Navy is re-examining the role of the vessels and working on alternate proposals for review.  The Navy requires the class' roles of counter-mine, anti-submarine, and surface warfare provided by modules, but engineers and shipbuilders are conducting research and creating design proposals that may better fulfill those needs than the LCS.  Proposals may include a modified LCS or an entirely new platform and are due in early 2015.  There will be an examination of whether the LCS has enough protection and firepower to operate and survive against advanced adversaries.  Supporters of the LCS in the Navy point out that the ships were never designed to function like destroyers or similar warships but to perform littoral tasks like high-speed patrols and counter-piracy missions.  The ships can move at 40 knots and their ability to operate in shallow water lets them go into areas where other ships cannot.com, 26 February 2014
Secretary Hagel's underlying concern with the plan to buy 52 Littoral Combat Ships was that they would make up one-sixth of the Navy's 300-ship force.  Given fiscal constraints and the ships' inability to operate in the face of emerging threats, LCS buys were capped at 32 and the Navy was directed to submit proposals of more capable and lethal small surface combatants.  The 2013 Director, Operational Test and Evaluation (DOT&E) report on the two LCS ships questioned their survivability because their design requirements did not include features to conduct sustained combat operations in major conflict zones as the Navy's other surface combatants had.  A new ship class would need built-in anti-submarine and surface warfare mission features, unlike current LCS ships with mission modules that must be swapped out depending on the mission; a counter-mine capability for the ship is currently unknown.  The search for a new LCS design runs along with early work to start construction on replacements for the Navy's cruisers and destroyers beginning in 2028.USNI.org, 25 February 2014
Several domestic and international frigate designs have been identified as potential LCS contenders.  Lockheed Martin has a variant of its Freedom-class LCS that it has been pitching for international customers.  There are three versions of the Multi-Mission Combatant ranging from a 1,650-ton corvette to a 3,500-ton frigate.  The largest can accommodate a vertical launch system (VLS) and AN/SPY-1F radar, while the smaller would field a CEAFAR active phased array air search radar.  Because they are based on the Freedom-class they would retain some measure of modularity.  General Dynamics had previously touted a version of their Independence-class LCS with Aegis radar and air search capability.  Huntington Ingalls Industries has been pitching a gray hull variant of the Legend-class National Security Cutter dubbed Patrol Frigate 4921.  The proposed ship would weigh 5,070 tons and have a combined diesel and gas turbine propulsion system for a top speed of 28 knots, an  range, and a 60-day endurance.  It would include a 12-cell vertical launch system with an active phased array air search radar, X-band and S-band surface search radars, and torpedo tubes with hull mounted and towed array sonars for ASW operations.  The Spanish Álvaro de Bazán class frigate (F-100) weighs 4,555 tons and has 48 VLS cells for 32 SM 2 Block IIIA/B air defense missiles and Evolved Sea Sparrow Missiles paired with an AN/SPY-1D air search radar.  It can conduct ASW with a hull mounted sonar and a towed array.
Marine Corps Systems Command executive director John Burrow will lead the search for the new design, which will compare the existing LCS designs against the Oliver Hazard Perry-class frigates. 
On 27 March 2014, Chief of Naval Operations Admiral Jonathan W. Greenert and Secretary of the Navy Ray Mabus defended the LCS' survivability in front of the Senate Armed Services Committee.  They defended the need for 52 small surface combatants and elaborated on the elements of ship survivability.  There are three elements of survivability: susceptibility, the ability for a ship to defend itself; vulnerability, the effects of an initial casualty on a ship; and recoverability, the ability for a ship to conduct damage control.  Greenert explained that the LCS meets or exceeds survivability and recoverability standards, was as survivable as a frigate, and was more survivable than mine countermeasures and patrol craft; susceptibility has to be improved upon.  Although the Admiral was supportive of the LCS' speed, volume, and capacity and reiterated the need for 52 ships, he was open to modifications to increase survivability and flexibility.mil, 28 March 2014
Italian defense company Finmeccanica is proposing their OTO Melara 76 mm gun be added to the improved LCS to replace its current 57 mm cannon.  The gun is used on current Navy frigate, so it would upgrade its firepower to meet requirements that the new or upgraded LCS be modeled after a frigate.  The OTO Melara 76 mm has a range of .  It also has a water cooling system to enable the cannon to fire during sustained engagements and uses proximity fused ammunition.com, 7 April 2014
Norwegian company Kongsberg Defense & Aerospace is proposing equipping both classes of LCS with their Naval Strike Missile.  The company has presented scale models of the Freedom-class with 12 NSMs and the Independence-class with 18 NSMs.  The Naval Strike Missile is a fifth-generation long-range precision strike missile already in service with the Royal Norwegian Navy and Polish Navy coastal artillery units.com, 8 April 2014
On 30 April 2014, the Navy issued two Requests for Information (RFI) to industry to give the LCS task force follow-on designs to current Flight 0 ship models.  One RFI is for design concepts and information on cost and lethality, and the other is for specific systems and technologies including "weapon systems, sensors, command and control systems, communication systems, network and data links, mission module concepts and designs, off-board vehicles, and innovative power and cooling systems."  Responses are due by May 22, after which Secretary Hagel will issue a report to the Navy leadership on "capability concepts" that break down ship and system options into different combinations of capability.  Mission areas consisting of anti-air, surface warfare, anti-submarine warfare, and mine countermeasure missions will offer a range of mission and capability options based on the threat environment that will drive design work and costs.  Current options for the proposed small surface combatant are a modified version of the LCS, an existing alternate ship design, or an entirely new design.USNI.org, 30 April 2014

Foreign sales

Saudi Arabia and Israel have both expressed an interest in a modified version of the Freedom variant, the LCS-I, but Defense News has reported that Israel has dropped out of this project in favor of a new frigate design to be built in Israel.
The Republic of China Navy (Taiwan) has also shown interest in procuring U.S. littoral combat ships, to replace aging 
The Royal Malaysian Navy intends to purchase much smaller ships that they call littoral combat ships, but their use of the term has been disputed. "Call naval patrol ships by actual term, Pua tells Putrajaya." The Malaysian Insider, 21 January 2012.
The Indonesian Navy was reportedly interested in either purchase or construction of littoral combat ships to protect Indonesia's wide ocean territory. Early images indicate a trimaran design much like the Independence variant ships (LCS-2).
Japan will design its own version of the Independence class.

List of LCS ships








