[[Wedding dress]]

CATEGORIES: Wedding dresses, Wedding clothing, Ceremonial clothing, Formalwear, Dresses, History of clothing (Western fashion), History of fashion

A wedding dress or wedding gown is the clothing worn by a bride during a wedding ceremony. Color, style and ceremonial importance of the gown can depend on the religion and culture of the wedding participants.  In Western cultures, brides often choose a white wedding dress, which was made popular by Queen Victoria in the 19th century. In eastern cultures, brides often choose red to symbolize auspiciousness.

Western culture

Weddings performed during and immediately following the Middle Ages were often more than just a union between two people. They could be a union between two families, two businesses or even two countries. Many weddings were more a matter of politics than love, particularly among the nobility and the higher social classes. Brides were therefore expected to dress in a manner that cast their families in the most favorable light and befitted their social status, for they were not representing only themselves during the ceremony. Brides from wealthy families often wore rich colors and exclusive fabrics. It was common to see them wearing bold colors and layers of furs, velvet and silk.  Brides dressed in the height of current fashion, with the richest materials money could buy. The poorest of brides wore their best church dress on their wedding day.  The amount and the price of material a wedding dress contained was a reflection of the bride's social standing and indicated the extent of the family's wealth to wedding guests.
The first documented instance of a princess who wore a white wedding gown for a royal wedding ceremony is that of Philippa of England, who wore a tunic with a cloak in white silk bordered with grey squirrel and ermine) in 1406.;The History of Matrimony Mary, Queen of Scots, wore a white wedding gown in 1559 when she married her first husband, Francis Dauphin of France because it was her favorite color, although white was then the color of mourning for French Queens. 
This was not a widespread trend, however: prior to the Victorian era, a bride was married in any color, black being especially popular in Scandinavia."Old Marriage Customs in Finland" Old Marriage Customs in Finland
White became a popular option in 1840, after the marriage of Queen Victoria to Albert of Saxe-Coburg, where Victoria wore a white gown  to incorporate some lace she prized. The official wedding portrait photograph was widely published, and many brides opted for white in accordance with the Queen's choice."Royal Weddings 1840 - 1947: From Queen Victoria to Queen Elizabeth II" History of the Wedding Dress
Even after that, for a period, wedding dresses were adapted to the styles of the day. For example, in the 1920s, they were typically short in the front with a longer train in the back and were worn with cloche-style wedding veils. This tendency to follow current fashions continued until the late 1960s, when it became popular to revert to long, full-skirted designs reminiscent of the Victorian era.
Today, Western wedding dresses are usually whitePRINT Magazine, The Bride Wore Chartreuse: Why (Most) Wedding Dresses are White by Jude Stewart though "wedding white" includes shades such as eggshell, ecru and ivory.
Later, many people assumed that the color white was intended to symbolize virginity, though this was not the original intention: it was the color blue that was connected to purity, piety, faithfulness, and the Virgin Mary.

Current fashion

About 75 percent of wedding dresses on the market are strapless dresses or sleeveless, in part because such dresses require less skill from the designers and are easier to alter to fit correctly. However, the sleeved wedding gown as well as wedding gowns with straps have both become more popular in recent years.

Eastern culture

Many wedding dresses in China, India (wedding sari), Pakistan and Vietnam (in the traditional form of the Ao dai) are red, the traditional colour of good luck and auspiciousness. Nowadays, many women choose other colours besides red. In modern mainland Chinese weddings, the bride may opt for Western dresses of any colour, and later don a traditional costume for the official tea ceremony.  
In modern Taiwanese weddings, the bride generally picks red (following Chinese tradition) or white (more Western) silk for the wedding gown material, but most will wear the red traditional garment for their formal wedding banquets. Traditionally, the father of the bride is responsible for the wedding banquet hosted on the bride's side and the alcohol (specifically called "xi-jiu," confusingly the same as what the wedding banquet itself is called) consumed during both banquets. While the wedding itself is often based on the couple's choices, the wedding banquets are a symbolic gesture of "thanks" and appreciation, to those that have raised the bride and groom (such as grandparents and uncles) and those who will continue to be there to help the bride and groom in the future. Thus out of respect for the elders, wedding banquets are usually done formally and traditionally. 
Red wedding saris are the traditional garment choice for brides in Indian culture. Sari fabric is also traditionally silk. Over time, colour options and fabric choices for Indian brides have expanded. Today fabrics like crepe, Georgette, charmeuse, and satin are used, and colors have been expanded to include gold, pink, orange, maroon, brown, and yellow as well.).
At Japanese weddings, brides will often wear three or more dresses throughout the ceremony and subsequent celebrations with a traditional kimono, white and colour dress combination being popular. White is used, because in Japan it symbolises death—in this case, the bride becomes dead to her family.  The bride will eventually remove her white kimono to reveal another colored one—usually red—to symbolize her rebirth into her husband's family.
The Javanese people of Indonesia wear a kebaya, a traditional kind of blouse, along with batik.
In the Philippines, variations of the Baro't saya adapted to the white wedding tradition are considered to be wedding attire for women, along with the Barong Tagalog for men. Various tribes and Muslim Filipinos don other forms of traditional dress during their respective ceremonies.

Native American culture

The indigenous peoples of the Americas have varying traditions related to weddings and thus wedding dresses.  A Hopi bride traditionally had her garments woven by the groom and any men in the village who wished to participate. The garments consisted of a large belt, two all-white wedding robes, a white wedding robe with red stripes at top and bottom, white buckskin leggings and moccasins, a string for tying the hair, and a reed mat in which to wrap the outfit. This outfit also served as a shroud, since these garments would be necessary for the trip through the underworld.
A Pueblo bride wore a cotton garment tied above the right shoulder, secured with a belt around the waist.
In the traditions of the Delaware, a bride wore a knee-length skirt of deerskin and a band of wampum beads around her forehead. Except for fine beads or shell necklaces, the body was bare from the waist up. If it were a winter wedding, she wore deerskin leggings and moccasins and a robe of turkey feathers. Her face was painted with white, red and yellow clay.
The tribes of Northern California (which include the Klamath, the Modoc and the Yurok) had a traditional bridal dress woven in symbolic colors: white for the east, blue for the south, yellow (orange) for the west; and black for the north. Turquoise and silver jewelry were worn by both the bride and the groom in addition to a silver concho belt. Jewelry was considered a shield against evils including hunger, poverty and bad luck.

Gallery

Historic wedding dresses

Image:Bologna marriage women.
Image:Peter Paul Rubens 088.
Image:Napoleon Marie Louise Marriage1.  France, 1810.

Wedding dresses from different areas of the world

Image:Crown Prince & Princess & Emperor Showa & Empress Kojun wedding 1959-4.jpg|Imperial wedding in Japan in 1959
Image:Edward S. Curtis Collection People 032.jpg|Wishram (North American Indian) bride around 1911
Image:Bauernhochzeit Jomala 1.jpg|Traditional Finnish farmer wedding dress in Jomala
Image:Giovanni Battista Tiepolo 032.jpg|Marriage of the Holy Roman Emperor Barbarossa in Bavaria
File:BrudkronaBoStefan-3.jpg|A Swedish bridal crown of the most formal type and four brides who wore it (1938-1978)
Image:SB - Kazakh woman on horse.jpg|Traditional Kazakh wedding dress
Image:Kosiv Dress.jpg|Hutsul wedding dress

Middle Eastern dresses

Image:Jewish Yemenite bride.jpg|Jewish Yemenite bride in Israel, 1950's
File:ModernEgypt, Khedive Tawfiq, DHP13401-1-1 01.jpg|Tawfiq Pasha of Egypt with his wife Princess Amina Elhami after their wedding; the wedding took place in January 1873 

East Asian dresses

Image:Traditional chinese wedding.jpg|Chinese couple wearing traditional wedding hanfu
Image:Korea-Seoul-Royal wedding ceremony 1365-06.JPG|Reenactment of the royal wedding ceremony of King Gojong and Queen Myeongseong
Image:Whitechapel dresses 1.jpg|Wedding dresses and other Asian couture in London

South Asian dresses

Image:Rajput bride.jpg|Rajput bride wearing a pink lehenga
File:Bride_in_Assam.jpg|West Bengali bride
File:Indian_bride_in_white.jpg|Indian bride in white Sari
File:Wedding of Bangladesh.jpg|Bangladeshi bride in formal matrimonial Sari
Image:Bride at Nikah.jpg|Bride at a Nikah ceremony wearing typical South Asian red head covering and jewellery
File:Nepali Bride.jpg|A Nepali bride in wedding dress
File:Newar bride 1941.jpg|Nepali bride of Kathmandu, 1941

Modern Western-style dresses

Image:BrideMiniskirt1968.jpg|A bride in 1968, wearing a dress reflecting the styles of the time
Image:Western wedding dress in Taiwan.jpg|Taiwanese couple dressed Western-style for keepsake photos in the park, 1989
Image:Shah Reza with Shahbanu Soraya, 1951.jpg|Opulent wedding dress of Soraya Esfandiary, created by Christian Dior
Image:Nixon with daughter Tricia marriage 1971.jpg|Patricia Nixon Cox with her father Richard Nixon, 1971
Image:John_and_Gail_at_St.jpg|American bride marrying a Scotsman wearing a kilt, 1996
Image:The bride - New Orleans.jpg|New Orleans bride wearing a strapless, sleeveless gown, 2006



Notes




