[[Aylesbury Grammar School]]

CATEGORIES: People educated at Aylesbury Grammar School, Boys' schools in Buckinghamshire, Aylesbury, Grammar schools in Buckinghamshire, 1598 establishments in England, Educational institutions established in the 1590s, Academies in Buckinghamshire

Aylesbury Grammar School is a single-sex male grammar school in Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire, England, which educates approximately 1,250 pupils.ags.sch.uk/node/4

Admissions

As a selective state school, its entry requirements are dictated by the Eleven plus. The school's catchment area inflates house prices,Telegraph 2003 although the school also takes pupils from outside the catchment area and even out of county locations such as Thame and Milton Keynes, based on eleven plus performances. 
The school educates boys from the age of 11, in year 7, through to the age of 18, in year 13 (Upper VI). The school has its largest intakes at Year 7 followed by Year 12 (Lower VI). On completing GCSEs, most pupils stay on to complete their A-levels at the school's sixth-form.ags.sch.uk/node/19
It is situated east of the town centre on the southern side of the A41, between Walton (to the west) and Victoria Park (to the east). This site was built and opened in 1907, replacing an earlier building at St. Mary's in the town centre, which now forms part of the Buckinghamshire Museum.ags.sch.uk/node/30

Specialist status

In September 1997 the school was awarded specialist school status in Technology, which it kept until Summer 2007, when it was decided that a more academic specialist subject would be more appropriate for AGS and the school successfully gained Science College status as its primary specialism. In April 2006 AGS gained a second college status as a Language College and then gained a second secondary college status in Maths and Computing in January 2008.ags.sch.uk/node/18

Academy status

In July 2011 the school became an Academy.

History

Founded, 1598 in Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire by Sir Henry Lee, Aylesbury Grammar School celebrated 100 years on the current site in Walton Road in 2007. It is commonly referred to by its students,staff and others in the local area by the abbreviation 'AGS''.Website is called AGS
Aylesbury Grammar School was founded in 1598 by Sir Henry Lee, the Champion of Queen Elizabeth I.  It developed as a Grammar School in the centre of Aylesbury until 1907, when it moved to its present site. For many years the school was independent and its intake was co-educational.  In 1952 it became voluntary controlled and in 1959 the girls moved to a separate site to become Aylesbury High School. Links with the girls' school are retained through joint activities such as school plays, orchestral concerts, dances and theatre visits.  The school now has some 1260 boys, of whom 350 are in the Sixth Form.ags.sch.uk/node/4

Single sex school

The school was previously a mixed sex school but then parted in 1959 after a fire which destroyed part of the old school buildings.  The girls' school became Aylesbury High School and is across the road from Aylesbury Grammar School.  The current headmaster is Stephen Lehec who took over from Steve Harvey at the start of the 2008-9 academic year.ags.sch.

Timetable

The table below shows the current timetable of Aylesbury Grammar School. The timetable has been like this since the 2009/10 school year, before which the timetable was split into eight rather than five periods, each alternating 35 or 40 minutes long, with breaks after periods four and six.

Current Senior Teaching Staff

There are currently five members of the school's Senior Leadership Team:
There are currently seven Heads of Year at the school, one for each Year Group:

Houses

Each pupil is placed into one of six houses upon starting at the school. The six houses are:

House trophy competitions

Each year, the school houses compete for the Brodie Trophy for sports and the Watson Trophy for all other activities (including art, music and public speaking). The awards are named after former pupils who have made a great contribution to the school's life. The competitions have been taking place for over 300 years, when the 'houses' were groups of boarders living in one building. There is also a defunct trophy called 'Merit Marks', which was abolished due to imbalances in the willingness of various teachers to distribute them.
Boys are encouraged throughout the year to take part in house events, as well as some individual events. Most of the encouragement comes from their heads of house, who are in charge of 210 pupils on average (or 7 tutor groups, each consisting of 30 pupils).7 times 30 equals 210, 1 tutor group per year
At the end of each event the houses gain points for their placements in these events; and at the end of the year, these points are totaled up and a winner is declared for each trophy.

Prefects

There are various levels of prefects at AGS.

Head Boys

The school appoints three members of the Upper Sixth to the positions of Head Boy and two Deputy Head Boys. The boy's are picked for these roles by staff and members of the senior leadership team based on maturity, behaviour, attitude, academic achievements and contribution to school and house events. They are identified by maroon stripes around the cuffs of the blazer.

Teaching system

In the first three years of the school, pupils are almost exclusively taught in their houses, or 'tutor groups' (with the exceptions of Maths, in which pupils are streamed by ability in year 8-9, and by their second Foreign Language choice in year 8-9; until the 2008/9 academic year, where year 7s are now assigned two languages - French and either German or Spanish according to the house (Denson, Hampden and Lee do German; Paterson, Phillips and Ridley do Spanish) and then start learning Latin in year 8). Tutor groups are also split up into groups of 20 for Design Technology lessons, and for Art and Ceramics in Years 8-9 as well as Latin in year 9 where they are also streamed by ability.
In Year 10 and above, the year group is reshuffled into different classes for each subject depending on their GCSE options these different GCSE choices mean they may not see others from either tutor group or form. From this point onwards, the houses play a lesser role in the day to day life of students but continue to organise teams for the Watson or Brodie trophies as well as taking house assemblies and supporting a particular house charity. Additionally heads of house prepare their sixth formers for university and write all UCAS references.
The teaching staff at Aylesbury Grammar School includes Dr. Carol Blyth, who has received a 'Teacher of the Decade' award as well as Dr Kevin Bond, author and Chairman of Examiners for Computing.  Dr Bond retired from AGS in December 2009, followed by Dr Blyth in December 2011. Kevin Bond's Books

Academic performance

In 2009, the school received the best A-level results in Buckinghamshire LEA, and some distance better than the girls' school, which also receives good results. Buckinghamshire LEA (the county council) is based in Aylesbury.

Notable former pupils

Photos of the school

Image:AylesburyOldGrammarSchool.jpg|The old school site in Aylesbury town centre that hosted the school from 1598 to 1907
Image:AGS_Main_Hall.jpg|The main school hall, used for Upper School Assembly and drama productions, among others, was constructed in the 1950s
Image:AGS_Language_Block.jpg|The Languages block (known as the Tower block until 2003, and still called that informally by students) hosts Modern Foreign Language lessons, as well as the Classics Department
Image:AGS_Sports_Hall. The building includes a large viewing balcony.





News items


