[[Flag of Senegal]]

CATEGORIES: National symbols of Senegal, Flags of Africa

The Flag of Senegal ( Adopted in 1960 to replace the flag of the Mali Federation, it has been the flag of the Republic of Senegal since the country gained independence that year. The present and previous flags were inspired by French Tricolour, which flew over Senegal until 1960.

History

Under French colonial rule over Senegal, the authorities forbade the colony from using its own distinctive colonial flag because they were worried that this could increase nationalistic sentiment and lead to calls for independence.  The federation attained independence from France on June 20, 1960.
The federation between the two former colonies did not last long and ended two months after independence.
In April 2004, the flag and its design were hoist into the public colloquium when Moustapha Niasse, then-leader of the Alliance of the Forces of Progress, hosted a press conference regarding the "modification of the election code and the set up of an independent commission to check the lawfulness of the next legislative and presidential elections." At the conference's coda, Niasse explored what he felt was "defense of the symbols of the Republic against the division threat and the offence against national unity", and produced "a visible replacement, on certain official documents, of the green star of the central yellow stripe of the national flag by a golden baobab", alongside what he described as "the non-performance of the national anthem during official ceremonies".allafrica.html Niasse Press Conference The newspaper WalFadjri reported on the same press conference with an emphasis on the alleged transmutation of the national symbology, even going so far as to entitle the feature "President Wade creates a new flag". Niasse again produced what he flaunted as an ''official document signed by the head of state..." Niasse himself stated ""Only the Senegalese people is sovereign to decide any modification of the symbols of our Republic".

Design

Symbolism

Much symbolism and many connotations are beholden to the stripes and singular star of the Senegalese flag. From a national perspective, green is highly symbolic within all of the country's primary religions. In Islam, the country's majority religion at 94% percent of the population, Historically, the three colours represent the three political parties which merged to form Union Progressiste Sénégalaisé (Senegalese Progressist Union, now Socialist Party of Senegal, Leopold Senghor|Leopold Senghor's]] party): green for Bloc Démocratique Sénégalais (Senegalese Democratic Bloc), yellow for Mouvement Populaire Sénégalais (Senegalese Popular Movement) and red for Parti Sénégalais d'Action Sociale (Senegalese Party of Socialist Action). Finally, in regards to chromatic analysis, Green, yellow and red are the colours of the Pan-Africanist movement. That pattern was replicated on Senegal's flag as a sign of unity among African countries. The quinary points of the star are said to "recall the human ideogram which was displayed in the middle of the flag of the former Mali Federation", the flag seen below in the gallery.

Similarities

The Pan-Africanist colours of Senegal's flag is shared by several other countries in the region, including Benin, Cameroon, Ghana, Guinea and Mali and Ethiopia. Guinea's flag has the colour scheme, but reversed without the green star, Rwanda's former flag also has the same color scheme, but it too was reversed, and also had a black "R" in the center, while Mali's flag is identical, just without the star.

Historical flags




