[[Version 2.0]]

CATEGORIES: Garbage (band) albums, 1998 albums, Albums produced by Butch Vig

Version 2.0 is the second album by alternative rock group Garbage. It was released worldwide in May 1998 by Mushroom Records UK and in North America by Almo Sounds. Version 2.0 was the follow-up to the band's multi-platinum debut album Garbage. Despite a slow start, Version 2.0 went on to equal its predecessor, becoming platinum-certified in many territories."beautifulgarbage press release" (Retrieved - 2007-12-10) Like their first record, Garbage promoted Version 2.0 with a year-long tour, and by releasing a string of hit singles backed with boundary-pushing music videos.
In 1999, Version 2.0 was nominated for Grammy Awards for Album of the Year and Best Rock Album.

Recording

Garbage began writing their second album, which would go under the working title of Sad Alcoholic Clowns, in March 1997 in the band's label-head Jerry Moss' Friday Harbor, Washington, vacation house. The group demoed and made rough outlines for new songs. When they felt they had made a good start, Garbage took the work they made in Washington back to their Madison, Wisconsin base at Smart Studios and begin fleshing out the ideas and rough sketches over the following year. The group recorded all of their work for the second album through a 48-track digital system digitally, direct to hard drives utilizing a 24bit Pro Tools rig.
Much of the percussion was recorded in a disused candy factory located in Madison; Butch Vig, Marker and sound engineer Billy Bush set up a drum kit within the factory and recorded various fills, utilising the acoustics of the dilapidated building. Forced to stop after local police officers responded to complaints about the noise, some of the percussion was later incorporated into "Temptation Waits", "I Think I'm Paranoid" and "Hammering in My Head".0", by Greg Rule, published August 1999 issue.
Garbage completed recording, producing and mixing of their second album in mid-February 1998, and the album was given the title Version 2.0.

Composition

Building on framework sound and style Garbage established on their debut set, Version 2.0 featured musical references to the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s, songs featuring live strings, over 100 recorded tracks and interpolations of both the Beach Boys and The Pretenders."Version 2.0 press release" (Retrieved - 2007-12-10) The band claimed that the goal of Version 2.0 was to create a rapprochement between the "high-tech and low-down, the now sound and of golden memories". Manson declared that "we didn't want to totally embrace the world of electronica", so Version 2.0 was a juxtaposition of "the super-hi-fi with the super-organic", echoing bands they like "and that means not just Björk and Portishead and Radiohead but the Beatles and Beach Boys and Frank Sinatra".
The lyrics, according to Manson, "tried to let the darker undercurrents come through to offset some of the pop melodies", adding that "like human people, songs shouldn't be one-dimensional". The singer declared that the introspective nature of Version 2.0 served to "reassure myself while I'm going crazy" due to her experiences during production, as she was "living by myself in a hotel, and I had no one to really talk to" and every day coming back by herself really late after working on the studio.Garbage New System Upgrade, CMJ New Music Monthly

Promotion

The entire visual campaign for Version 2.0 was tailored to play off the album cover artwork, the icons designed to represent each single release, provided point-of-sale and the band's videogenic sensibility. Garbage spent three weeks in Europe providing interviews with music journalists from a multitude of territories, while Manson continued on her own to Australia and Asia.
Version 2.0 was released in Japan on May 4, a week ahead of the international street date, to counteract parallel imports. The album was released in two editions, a standard album with a bonus remix of "Push It" by Boom Boom Satellites and a limited edition run of 20,000 copies featuring two international b-sides, "Lick the Pavement" and a cover version of Big Star's "Thirteen".  Version 2.0 debuted at #4 in the Japanese international album chart.
On May 11, Version 2.0 was released worldwide, with the North American street date a day later. Mushroom Records released the album in the United Kingdom on CD, LP and cassette. Version 2.0 debuted at #1 on the UK Albums Chart, selling 31,476 copies. In Canada, where the album is licensed by Almo to Universal Music, the album debuted at #2.

Version 2.0 world tour

Preempting the start of their world tour, Garbage played three shows in the Midwest under the alias 'Stupid Girl'. Garbage then travelled to Europe to play a number of rock festivals beginning June 1 at Netherland's Pinkpop and finishing up at Scotland's T in the Park on July 12. In between the festivals, Garbage performed some headlining shows in France and the United Kingdom, with support coming from The Crystal Method. In August, the band travelled to Japan to perform on the bill at the Fuji Rock Festival, and then back to Scotland to perform at two "warm up" shows at Glasgow's Barrowland Ballroom and then headlining the last night of the Reading Festival.
Garbage returned to North America on September 17, to start a three-month tour. Support came from Girls Against Boys. The itinerary took the band from Denver, Colorado up the West Coast as north as Vancouver, BC before routing towards the Southern States. Following these dates, the tour moved up the Eastern Seaboard and into Quebec and Ontario, before finishing up in the Midwest on November 28 in Green Bay, Wisconsin. During December, Garbage performed at radio shows on both coasts, including KROQ-FM's Almost Acoustic Christmas, and made a visit to Mexico City before wrapping up on December 20 in Detroit, Michigan.
Continuing their touring commitment into 1999, Garbage launched a European arena tour on January 14 at Dublin's Point Theatre. Local acts such as Laurent Garnier and Rasmus support continental dates; Moloko support Irish and UK shows. Concerts in Paris and St. Petersburg are filmed to be broadcast by MTV Europe and MTV Russia respectively. A show in Tallinn is cancelled on the day when the band's equipment is held up by customs officials at the Estonian border.
Garbage revisited Europe to play a second summer of rock festivals, beginning with Vienna's Libro on May 19. The shows included visits to Israel and Iceland, although four concerts in the Baltic States and Russia are cancelled on the advice of the American Embassy due to the USA's involvement in Kosovo. Garbage headlined a special show to mark the opening of the Scottish Parliament in Edinburgh on July 1. The European dates conclude in Duisburg on July 25. Garbage then travelled to South Africa to play four shows with Placebo.
The final legs of the Version 2.0 tour see Garbage moving on to New Zealand and Australia to co-headline with Alanis Morissette, beginning in Auckland for sixteen days from October 1, and ending in Newcastle. During this time the band also performed at the Livid Festival. Garbage returned to North America to wind down the tour by headlining a series of shows organised by MTV on university campuses.

Accolades and nominations

 and further been certified gold in Australia, Denmark, France, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, Spain, Sweden and the United States.
On January 5, 1999, Version 2.0 is nominated for Grammy Awards for Album of the Year and Best Rock Album. and double platinum the UK. On the week of March 8, Version 2.0 was officially awarded the European Platinum Award by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry for 1 million sales across Europe. "Push It" was nominated for Best Alternative Record at Winter Music Conference. Garbage perform "You Look So Fine" for Gala Ragazza in Madrid on June 3 as Version 2.0 is certified platinum in Spain. On June 20, Version 2.0 claims the fifth longest chart run on the Spanish Album Charts, and an airplay-only single, "Temptation Waits" is released to Spanish radio."Temptation Waits" press release (Retrieved - 2007-11-07)
On September 9, 1999, the video for "Special" won 'Best Special Effects' at the MTV Video Music Awards. "Special" received Grammy nominations for Best Rock Song and for Best Rock Performance by a Duo or Group. Version 2.0's sales continued into 2000, and was certified platinum in the UK for the second time on February 11, 2000, before re-charting in the UK for the final time week-ending July 15, 2000.

Critical reception

Version 2.0 has received overwhelmingly positive reviews from critics.0 ends 1998 named Daily Mail's Album of the Year, and is in end-of-year lists in The Guardian, Q, Kerrang!, Melody Maker, NME, Select, Spin and Gear. Canada's largest modern rock station, The Edge 102 named Version 2.0 #1 Album, while three tracks make Australia's Triple J Hottest 100: "I Think I'm Paranoid" (at #57), "Push It" (#87) and "Special" (#89).

Track listing

 

Release history

Credits and Personnel

Charts and certifications

Charts
Year-end charts
Certifications
#1 successions






