[[Flag of Sudan]]

CATEGORIES: 1970 introductions, National symbols of Sudan, Flags of Africa

The flag of Sudan () was adopted on May 20, 1970, and consists of a horizontal red-white-black tricolor, with a green triangle at the hoist. The flag is based on the Arab Liberation Flag shared by Egypt, Iraq, Syria, and Yemen, that uses a subset of the Pan-Arab colors in which green is less significant. Prior to the 1969 military coup of Gaafar Nimeiry, a blue-yellow-green tricolor design was used.
According to World Flags 101:


Historical flags

Mahdist Revolt

In 1881, at the beginning of the Mahdist Revolt, the Mahdi Muhammad Ahmad appointed Abdallahi ibn Muhammad as one of his four caliphs (Khalifa) and handed him a black flag.

Anglo-Egyptian Sudan

Between 1899 and 1956, Anglo-Egyptian Sudan was administered jointly as a condominium by Egypt and the United Kingdom. The condominium did not have its own flag; instead the flag of Egypt and the flag of the United Kingdom were always flown together, with the British flag taking precedence.net/flags/sd-hist.html#cond
A flag did exist as a rank flag for the British Governor General of the Sudan. In common with the rank flags of governors and commissioners of other British overseas territories, it consisted of a Union Flag defaced with a white disk bearing the territory's badge or coat of arms, surrounded by a wreath of laurel. As no badge or coat of arms existed for Anglo-Egyptian Sudan, the disk instead contained the words "GOVERNOR GENERAL OF THE SUDAN.

1956-1970 flag

Upon independence from Egypt and the United Kingdom on 1 January 1956, Sudan adopted a blue-yellow-green tricolor as its national flag. This flag remained in use until 1970, when the current flag was adopted.net/flags/sd-hist. They were chosen as they were neutral between ethnic groups and political parties.rbvex.html

Gallery

Current flags

File:Standard of the President of Sudan.svg|Standard of the President of Sudan
File:Standard of the President of Sudan (variant).svg|Standard of the President of Sudan (variant)

Historical flags

File:Flag of Anglo-Egyptian Sudan.svg|Flags used in Anglo-Egyptian Sudan
File:Flag of the Governor-General of the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan.svg|Flag of the British Governor General
File:Flag of Sudan (1956-1970).svg|Former flag of Sudan (1956–1970)
File:Naval ensign of Sudan (1956–1970).svg|Naval ensign of Sudan (1956–1970) 
File:Standard of the President of the Democratic Republic of the Sudan.svg|Standard of the President of Democratic Republic of the Sudan (1970–1985)
File:Standard of the President of the Democratic Republic of the Sudan (variant).svg|Standard of the President of the Democratic Republic of the Sudan (variant)

Provincial flags

File:Flag of Northern Kordofan.jpg|Flag of North Kurdufan







 

