[[Clymene dolphin]]

CATEGORIES: Oceanic dolphins, Fauna of the Atlantic Ocean

The Clymene dolphin (Stenella clymene), in older texts known as the short-snouted spinner dolphin, is a dolphin endemic to the Atlantic Ocean. It is the only confirmed case of hybrid speciation in marine mammals, descending from the spinner dolphin and the striped dolphin. 

Taxonomy

The Clymene dolphin was first formally described by John Edward Gray in 1846, although, unusually, he did not assign it its current name until four years later, in 1850. From then on, until a reassessment in 1981, the Clymene dolphin was regarded as a subspecies of the spinner dolphin (Stenella longirostris). 
The common and scientific names are probably derived from the Greek oceanid Clymene, although it has also been argued that it may instead come from the Greek word for "notorious".

Physical description

The Clymene dolphin looks very similar to the spinner dolphin and at sea. At close quarters, it is possible to observe that the beak of the Clymene is slightly shorter that its relative. The dorsal fin is also less erect and triangular.
The basic color of the Clymene dolphin is "cetacean neapolitan" - it occurs in three shaded layers — the underside being white. Next, a strip of light grey runs from just above the beak, round either side of the eye all the way back to the tail stock, where the band thickens. The top layer, from the forehead, along the back to the dorsal fin and down to the top of the tail stock, is a dark grey. The beak, lips, and flippers are also dark grey in color. 

Behavior and biology

Clymene dolphins spend most of their lives in waters over 
Clymenes are fairly active dolphins. They do spin longitudinally when jumping clear of the water, but not with as much regularity and complexity as the spinner dolphin. They will also approach boats and ride bow waves. Group sizes vary from just four up to around 150 individuals, although about forty is typical. Many of these groups appear to be single-sex, and also to be segregated by the approximate age of the individuals. Clymene dolphins are also highly vocal, making short whistles in a range of 6-19 kHz.
No figures are available for the size of animals at birth. Gestation, lactation, and maturation periods are all unknown, but are unlikely to vary greatly from others in the Stenella genus. Their longevity is also unknown, although at least one sixteen-year old individual has been reported from a stranding.

Population and distribution

The Clymene dolphin is endemic to the Atlantic Ocean. Its full range is still poorly understood, particularly at its southern end. The species certainly prefers temperate and tropical waters. The northern end of the range runs roughly from New Jersey east-southeast to southern Morocco. The southern tip runs from somewhere around Angola to Rio de Janeiro. They appear to prefer deep water. Numerous sightings have been recorded in the Gulf of Mexico. The species has not been sighted, however, in the Mediterranean Sea.
Total population is unknown. The only population estimate available is for the north part of the Gulf of Mexico, where a count of 6,500 individuals was reported. The species may be naturally rare in comparison with others in the Stenella genus.

Human interaction

Some individuals have been killed from directed fisheries in the Caribbean and others may have been caught in nets off West Africa.

Conservation

The West African population of the Clymene dolphin is listed on Appendix II"Appendix II" of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS). As amended by the Conference of the Parties in 1985, 1988, 1991, 1994, 1997, 1999, 2002, 2005 and 2008. Effective: 5th March 2009. of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS), since  it has an unfavourable conservation status or would benefit significantly from international co-operation organised by tailored agreements.
The Clymene dolphin is covered by the Memorandum of Understanding Concerning the Conservation of the Manatee and Small Cetaceans of Western Africa and Macaronesia.Memorandum of Understanding Concerning the Conservation of the Manatee and Small Cetaceans of Western Africa and Macaronesia, Convention on Migratory Species page on the Clymene dolphin





Bibliography


