[[San Pedro, Laguna]]

CATEGORIES: San Pedro, Laguna, Cities in Laguna (province), Populated places established in 1725, 1725 establishments in the Philippines, Cities in Luzon, Populated places on Laguna de Bay

San Pedro is a first class city in the province of Laguna, Philippines. It is named after its patron saint Saint Peter. Despite being the third smallest in the entire province, with a total land surface area of only 24.05 km2, San Pedro has the highest population density in the province.
Aside from being a primarily suburban community, San Pedro also hosts a large number of factories. Among them include PDM, Alaska Milk Corporation and General Milling Corporation.
San Pedro is Laguna's gateway to Metro Manila, sharing its boundary with Muntinlupa City, Metro Manila's southernmost city. This position makes San Pedro a popular suburban residential community, where many residents commute daily for work to Metro Manila. Support groups from the local government and non-government organizations are striving to incorporate San Pedro into Metro Manila by the year 2015.

Barangays

San Pedro is politically subdivided into 20 barangays.San Pedro, Laguna Official Website - Barangays

History

San Pedro became a town on January 18, 1725, when King Charles II of Spain decreed that the town formerly known as "Tabuko" be a separate town from "Kabullaw" (now known as the city of Cabuyao).
By virtue of the last will of Philip V of Spain, Rodriguez de Figueroa or "Don Esteban", a group of Augustinian Fathers gained the ownership of the Tunasán Estate. Later on, San Pedro became an hacienda of Colegio de San José, a group of Jesuits friars who took over the property which now is known as "San Pedro Tunasán". "Tunasán" literally means "a place where there is Tunás" (Opuntia tuna), a medicinal plant abundant on shoreline area.
During that period, agriculture, fishing, duck raising, fruit trees, sampaguita were the main source of income of its residents. This period was highlighted by the growing tenant/landlord dispute. The tenants of Hacienda San Pedro Tunasán fought for their birthrights over their ancestral lands. This struggle took almost 423 years of unsuccessful resistance to Colegio de San José, and in 1938, the government bought the homesites of the San Pedro Tunasán Hacienda from the Colegio for re-sale to its tenants. This event laid to rest the tenants/landlord problem in the town.
From the Spanish time until after the Japanese occupation of the Philippines, the scenario did change a bit, when on August 30, 1954, beginning to the Philippine Commonwealth forces against the Japanese, President Ramón Magsaysay signed at the historic town plaza the Land Tenancy Act. By virtue of this law, farm lots of the hacienda were bought by the Philippine Government to be sold at cost to the tenants or occupants of the farm lots in Bayan-Bayanan under the Narra Settlement Project of the Magsaysay Administration.

Cityhood

On March 27, 2013, President Benigno Aquino signed the 64-page Republic Act No. 10420 converting the municipality into a new component city of the province of Laguna.  The cityhood of San Pedro would be ratified through a plebiscite to be scheduled by the Commission on Elections. The tentative date for the ratification is on December 28, 2013 after the National Barangay Elections. Once ratified, it will be the  sixth city of Laguna after the cities of Biñan, Cabuyao, Calamba, San Pablo and Santa Rosa, and also the third to be a city in the 1st congressional district of Laguna - making it the first city district in the province.
On December 29, 2013, the Commission on Elections (Comelec) officially proclaimed the first-class municipality of San Pedro as a component city of Laguna. Juanito Icarro, regional director of Comelec 4-A and 4-B, and Marianne Marfori, provincial election supervisor, made the proclamation at the town hall after San Pedro residents voted for the cityhood in a plebiscite held on December 28, 2013. "Yes" votes for cityhood totaled 16,996, and "No" votes, only 869, in 501 clustered precincts in San Pedro. Icarro said only 11 percent of 165,777 registered voters in San Pedro's 20 barangays took part in the plebiscite.
Local officials led by Mayor Lourdes Cataquiz and her husband, former mayor Calixto Cataquiz, were elated by the plebiscite results and thanked President Aquino, Speaker Feliciano Belmonte Jr. and Sen. Ferdinand Marcos Jr. for supporting the cityhood campaign.
"Now our dream came true after 20 years of waiting. The residents are the ones who will benefit from this important event. This is our legacy," the former mayor said.
Superintendent Sergio Manacop, San Pedro police chief, said the plebiscite was peaceful and orderly.

Demographics

Education

San Pedro hosts a number of institutions of education such as:

Religions

The majority of the people are Roman Catholics. Other religious groups include are the  United Church of Christ in the Philippines (UCCP),Jesus Is Lord Church (JIL),Iglesia Ni Cristo/Church Of Christ (INC), The United Methodist Church, Presbyterian Churches, Christian Bible Baptist Church, other Baptist and Bible Fundamental churches. Islam is also practiced within the community. 
Here Is The List Of Catholic Churches In The City Of San Pedro.

Location of Christian Bible Baptist Church: St. Francis Homes 2, Bgy Landayan, City of San Pedro, Laguna (beside Shopwise and San Pedro Doctors Hospital)

Sampaguita Festival

A week long festival which includes various activities ranging from cultural to sports, trade fairs, amateur singing contest, parades, historical exhibits, social & religious gatherings, tribal dance & sports exhibitions. The highlight of the festival is the Coronation Night of the "Hiyas ng San Pedro". The festival aims to promote tourism in San Pedro and to revitalize Sampaguita industry in the locality.
San Pedro holds the record of laying the longest sampaguita (flower lei) line spanning , from Biñan City-San Pedro boundary to San Pedro-Muntinlupa City boundary on the National Highway, making them listed in the Guinness World Records in 2009.

Notable people






