[[September Six]]

CATEGORIES: 1993 in religion, 1993 in the United States, Articles about multiple people, Criticism of Mormonism, Historians of the Latter Day Saint movement, Latter Day Saint terms, Mormonism-related controversies, Quantified human groups, People excommunicated by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1993 controversies

The September Six were six members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints who were excommunicated or disfellowshipped by the LDS Church (whose members are known as the Mormons) in September 1993, allegedly for publishing scholarly work against Mormon doctrine or criticizing Church doctrine or leadership. The term "September Six" was coined by The Salt Lake Tribune and the term was used in the media and subsequent discussion. The LDS Church's action was referred to by some as evidence of an anti-intellectual posture on the part of LDS leadership.417-419

Church measures against the September Six

Except for Lynne Kanavel Whitesides, all of the September Six were excommunicated;  Whitesides was disfellowshipped, a lesser sanction that does not formally expel one from church membership. To date, three of the September Six have retained or regained church membership:  Avraham GileadiFidel, Steve. "Scholar Rebaptized Into LDS Church." Salt Lake City and Utah Breaking News. Deseret News, 8 Mar. 1996. Web. 09 Nov. 2012. and Maxine Hanks,Stack, Peggy Fletcher. "Excommunicated Mormon to Tell How She Came Back to the Faith." Utah Local News - Salt Lake City News, Sports, Archive. The Salt Lake Tribune, 26 July 2012. Web. 09 Nov. 2012. who were rebaptized, and Lynne Whitesides, who is still disfellowshipped.
While the LDS Church sometimes announces when a prominent member has been excommunicated, LDS leaders' policy is to refuse to publicly discuss details about the reasons for any excommunication, even if details of the proceedings are made public by that person. Such disciplinary proceedings are typically undertaken locally, initiated by leaders at the ward or stake level, but at least one of the September Six has suggested his excommunication was orchestrated by higher-ranking LDS Church leaders.  Procedures pertaining to the organization of these disciplinary councils is found in the sacred LDS text Doctrine and Covenants, Section 102, as well as in the Church's administrative Handbook of Instructions; when a member is brought into these councils they are notified beforehand by the local leaders of the Church in that area.
Other than the summons sent to each of the six (specifying them as "contrary to the laws and order of the church"), the LDS Church's point of view is missing as to why each of the September Six was excommunicated. Based on their own comments and other sources, the following brief bios offer some perspective regarding the six individuals' discipline and their current relationship to Mormonism.

Short biographies of the six individuals

Lynne Kanavel Whitesides

Lynne Kanavel Whitesides is a feminist noted for speaking on the Mother in Heaven. Whitesides was the first of the group to experience church discipline. She was disfellowshipped September 14, 1993. Though technically still a member, Whitesides claims that she "burst" out of the Church and her marriage in 1993, and now considers herself a practitioner of Native American philosophies. "Spiritual Paths After September 1993." Sunstone Symposium, 2003.

Avraham Gileadi

Avraham Gileadi is a Hebrew scholar and literary analyst who is considered theologically conservative. He authored two books, one about Isaiah and one about the last days,  which were published by LDS-owned Deseret Book. The second book, which took a more limited interpretation of its subject than Mormon theology generally accepts, was later pulled from the shelves. He has since written works on Isaiah, including The Literary Message of Isaiah (2002) and Isaiah Decoded: Ascending the Ladder to Heaven (2002).

Paul Toscano

Paul ToscanoSee, www.com is a Salt Lake City attorney who co-authored with Margaret Merrill Toscano a controversial book, Strangers in Paradox: Explorations in Mormon Theology (1990), and, in 1992, co-founded The Mormon Alliance; he later wrote the book  The Sanctity of Dissent (1994) and its sequel  The Sacrament of Doubt (2007).
He was excommunicated from The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints on September 19, 1993; the reasons for his excommunication, as reportedly given by church leaders, were apostasy and false teaching. According to Toscano, the actual reason was insubordination in refusing to curb his sharp criticism of LDS Church leaders' preference for legalism, ecclesiastical tyranny, white-washed Mormon history, and hierarchical authoritarianism that privilege the image of the corporate LDS Church above its commitment to its members, to the teachings and revelations of Joseph Smith its founding Prophet, and to the gospel of Jesus Christ.
In 2007, Toscano wrote that he lost his faith "like losing your eyesight after an accident" and that he regrets that LDS Church leaders have disregarded his criticisms of what he considers the Church's growing anti-intellectualism, homophobia, misogyny, and elitism.
His wife MargaretSee, www.com faced her own ecclesiastical tribunal for her doctrinal and feminist views and was excommunicated on the 30th of November 2000.  Technically, she was part of the September Six (or "seven") summoned in 1993, but ecclesiastical focus shifted to her husband so Margaret's discipline was delayed until 2000.''Tidying Up Loose Ends?: The November 2000 Excommunication of Margaret Toscano, 2001 Salt Lake Sunstone Symposium, Sunstone Magazine.

Maxine Hanks

Maxine Hanks is a feminist theologian who compiled and edited the book Women and Authority: Re-emerging Mormon Feminism (1992). She was excommunicated September 19, 1993 (along with fellow contributor D. Michael Quinn). In February 2012, Hanks was re-baptized as a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.Excommunicated Mormon to tell how she came back to the faith

Lavina Fielding Anderson

Lavina Fielding Anderson is a feminist writer who edited the books Sisters in Spirit: Mormon Women in Historical and Cultural Perspective (1992), and  Lucy's Book, the definitive edition of the Lucy Mack narrative.  She is a former editor for the Ensign and served as editor for the Journal of Mormon History from 1991 until May 2009. She was excommunicated September 23.
Anderson attends LDS church services as a non-member. She writes on Mormon issues, including editing the multi-volume Case Reports of the Mormon Alliance, an ongoing collection of interviews with Mormons who believe they were unfairly disciplined by the Church.

D. Michael Quinn

D. Michael Quinn is a Mormon historian.  Among other studies, he documented LDS Church-sanctioned polygamy from 1890 until 1904, after the 1890 Manifesto when the church officially abandoned the practice."LDS Church Authority and New Plural Marriages, 1890-1904," Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought 18 (Spring 1985) 9-105 He also authored the 1987 book, Early Mormonism and the Magic World View, which argues that early Mormon leaders were greatly influenced by folk magic and superstitious beliefs including stone looking, charms, and divining rods. He was excommunicated September 26.
Quinn has since published several critical studies of Mormon hierarchy, including his two-volume work that starts with his dissertation The Mormon Hierarchy: Origins of Power and a companion volume  The Mormon Hierarchy: Extensions of Power. He also authored the 1996 book Same-Sex Dynamics Among Nineteenth-Century Americans: A Mormon Example, which argues that homosexuality was not uncommon among early Mormons, and was not seen as a serious sin or transgression.
Despite his excommunication and critical writings, Quinn, who is openly gay, still considers himself to be a Latter-day Saint. "DNA Mormon: D. Michael Quinn," in Mormon Mavericks: Essays on Dissenters, edited by John Sillitoe and Susan Staker, Salt Lake City: Signature Books, 2002, pp. 329-363.



Notes

Bibliography

|url=
|title=The Case of the Mormon Historian: What happened when Michael Quinn challenged the history of the church he loved
|first=David
|last=Haglund
|publisher=Slate
|date=November 1, 2012}}




