[[Flag of Zimbabwe]]

CATEGORIES: Flags of Zimbabwe, National symbols of Zimbabwe

The national flag of Zimbabwe consists of seven even horizontal stripes of green, gold, red and black with a white triangle containing a red 5 point star with a Zimbabwe Bird. The present design was adopted on 18 April 1980, when Zimbabwe was granted independence by the United Kingdom. The soapstone bird featured on the flag represents a statuette of a bird found at the ruins of Great Zimbabwe. The bird symbolizes the history of Zimbabwe; the red star beneath it symbolizes Marxism, and the revolutionary struggle for freedom and peace. It is similar to the flag of Zimbabwe's ruling party, Zimbabwe African National Union – Patriotic Front.

History

The country now known as Zimbabwe was formally known as Southern Rhodesia from 1895 to 1980—the name Rhodesia was locally used from 1964 to June 1979, and Zimbabwe Rhodesia was thereafter in use until December 1979. Southern Rhodesia achieved responsible government in 1923, and thereby became a self-governing colony of Britain following three decades of rule by the British South Africa Company. It concurrently adopted its first flag: following standard British colonial practice, it was a Blue Ensign, defaced with part of the Southern Rhodesian coat of arms. This basic design remained until 1968; the shade of blue was lightened in 1964. In 1968, three years after the mostly white government unilaterally declared independence from Britain, a completely new national flag was adopted: a green-white-green horizontal triband, charged centrally with the national coat of arms. This was the first national flag to contain the Zimbabwe Bird, which had been present in the coat of arms since 1924.
In 1979, when the country reconstituted itself as Zimbabwe Rhodesia following the Internal Settlement between the government and moderate black nationalists, a new flag was adopted to mark the transition. The flag of Zimbabwe Rhodesia was designed by Flight Lieutenant Cedric Herbert of the Rhodesian Air Force and a member of the Rhodesian Heraldry and Genealogy Society. The design incorporated the pan-African colours of yellow, black, green and red; the black stripe symbolised the achievement of majority rule in the country. The red stood for the struggle for independence. The yellow represented the nation's mineral wealth. The green symbolised the agricultural and natural resources of the country. Lastly, the vertical white stripe represented the white community while the central horizontal white stripe represented peace.
This flag was superseded in December 1979, when Britain took interim control of the country following the Lancaster House Agreement, which ended the Rhodesian Bush War. The British Union Jack was used as the official flag of the country while fresh elections were held in early 1980, and at midnight between 17 and 18 April 1980, the country was granted independence by Britain under the name Zimbabwe. A new flag was concurrently adopted, The Zimbabwe Bird, used on every flag since 1968, is based on an actual bird statue discovered from piles of waste in Great Zimbabwe.Great Zimbabwe (11th–15th century) | Thematic Essay | Timeline of Art History | The Metropolitan Museum of Art

Display and use

Flag etiquette

There are certain guidelines for the use, display and disposal of the national flag of Zimbabwe. The flag should never be allowed to come into contact with the ground. Should the flag reach a stage where it is no longer deemed worthy of the public eye, such as when it is torn and tattered, it should be "destroyed in a dignified way" with "all due care and respect". After which, the disposed flag should have a new one in its place. According to Patrick Chinamasa, Zimbabwean Minister of Justice and Legal Affairs, any company in Zimbabwe can manufacture the national flag, so long as it does not "imprint on it anything that should not be on the national flag", and the flag can be displayed anywhere deemed fit by the people.

Display on uniforms

Some police officers in Zimbabwe have the national flag displayed on their uniforms' sleeve tops.

Design

Colours and symbolism

The national flag of Zimbabwe is made up of five different colours: Green, yellow, red, black and white.
The white triangle is a symbol for peace. The golden bird, The red star represents the nation's hopes and aspirations for the future.

Specifications

The Great Zimbabwe Bird should be forty units both high and low. The red star is not regular. The black bar is three units wide. The white triangle is isosceles, with a base and height of some 84 units.

Similarities

The colors used on the flag of Zimbabwe are closely shared with that of the Zimbabwe African National Union – Patriotic Front's.

In popular culture

On August 7, 1980, Samora Machel once made a prominent speech involving the national flag of Zimbabwe, in which he said while holding the flag, "This flag covers everyone. There are no blacks in Zimbabwe, there are no whites, there are no mulattos and Indians, today there are just Zimbabweans."
In Harare, Zimbabwe, every other car has one to many miniature national flags plastered onto it. Sales of the national flag are sky-high in the country and this helps to curb inflation rates.
It is a breach of Zimbabwean law to sell products bearing the colours of the national flag of the country.

Gallery

File:Flag of Southern Rhodesia.svg|Flag of Southern Rhodesia 1923–1964
File:Flag of Rhodesia (1964).svg|Flag of Rhodesia 1964–1968
File:Flag of Rhodesia.svg|Flag of Rhodesia 1968–1979
File:Flag of Zimbabwe Rhodesia.svg|Flag of Zimbabwe Rhodesia 1979







 

