[[Calamba, Laguna]]

CATEGORIES: Calamba, Laguna, Cities in Laguna (province), Populated places established in 1742, 1742 establishments in the Philippines, Populated places on Laguna de Bay

Calamba (NSCB: 043405000) is a component city of Laguna, Philippines. It is the regional center of the CALABARZON region. It is situated  south of Manila, the city is known as the Resort Capital of the Philippines because of its numerous hot spring resorts, most of which are located in Barangay Pansol, Bucal and Bagong Kalsada.
According to the 2010 census, the city has a population of 389,377, making it the most populous local government unit in Laguna. It is also the 5th densest city in the province with more than 2,600 people per square kilometer after San Pedro, Biñan, Cabuyao and Santa Rosa.
Calamba City is the hometown of the Philippine national hero, Jose Rizal.

Etymology

The name of the city comes from a legend that during the early time of the Spanish period in the country, two "guardias civil" or soldiers were lost and passing through what is now Calamba. The soldiers met a young lady who came from a river carrying a jar of water and a wooden stove.  The soldiers unwittingly in Spanish language and in authoritative tone, to conceal the fact that they were lost, asked the local maiden the name of the place they were in. The lady, who speaks only her native language, naturally thought she was being interrogated about what she was carrying and nervously uttered "kalan-banga", meaning "clay stove" (kalan) and "water jar" (banga). This same jar is also found in the city's seal. The plaza was proposed by Dr. Agapito Alzona, then the town councilor to utilize the waste area where the old town market relocated from. The resolution was approved by the then town mayor Roman Lazaro and added additional P5,000 for the fence to the original P15,000 construction cost. It was completed in 1939.

History

The oldest part of Calamba is believed to be Barangay Sucol where its first settlers remained. With the arrival of Spaniards, the whole area was converted into a hacienda, then a part of Tabuco (now known as Cabuyao City). Calamba became an independent pueblo on August 28, 1742, and formed into the town of Calamba in 1770. In 1813, Calamba was placed in the hands of "encargados" by the Dominican Brothers, who divided into portions and sold the haciendas to the natives during the American regime.
During the Japanese occupation in World War II, the city was the theater of a massacre during which the Imperial Japanese Army killed at least 2,000 civilians.238, citing the Barangay Real Memorial. The St. John the Baptist Church, established in 1859, was burned by the Japanese during World War II. It was reconstructed by Fr. Eliseo Dimaculangan. It was the christening site of José Rizal. The original baptismal font has been preserved and refurbished.

Cityhood

After a process of more than seven years, Calamba became the second component city of the Laguna by virtue of Republic Act No. 9024, "An Act Converting the Municipality of Calamba, Province of Laguna into a Component City to be known as the City of Calamba." R.A. 9024 was signed into law by President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo on March 5, 2001, at the Malacañan Palace. The Commission on Elections (COMELEC) then set the plebiscite for Calamba's cityhood on April 21, 2001 where 15,056 residents participated. 3,413 or 22.67% voted "No" while the remaining 77.33% voted "Yes" to Calamba's conversion into a component city.

=Events leading to Cityhood=

As early as 1994, the town's Sangguniang Bayan approved Resolution No. 60, Series of 1994 requesting the Senate of the Philippines thru its president and the House of the Representatives thru its speaker to co-sponsor a bill for Calamba's conversion into a city. It was only after two years that another resolution, Resolution No. 115 was passed requesting then Honorable Congressman Joaquin M. Chipeco Jr, to co-sponsor a bill for Calamba's cityhood and requesting the Sangguniang Panlalawigan for their comments and recommendations regarding the matter. Another two years passed before House Bill No. 986 and Senate bill Nos. 1630 and 1791 were filed in the House of Representatives by Congressman Chipeco and Senate of the Philippines by Senators Franklin M. Drilon and Sergio Osmeña, III, respectively.
It was only in the year 2000 that the motion for Calamba's cityhood was fast tracked. Then Mayor Severino J. Lajara requested favorable endorsement of House Bill No. 986 from the Sangguniang Panlalawigan on January 3, 2000. The Sangguniang Bayan also endorsed House Bill No. 986 and Senate Bill Nos. 1630 and 1791 and also requested favorable endorsement from the Sangguniang Panlalawigan on the same month. A month passed and Mayor Lajara sent a follow-up letter to then Vice-Governor Teresita "Ningning" Lazaro on updates regarding the matter.
On March 8, the House Committee on Local Government approved House Bill No. 986 on 2nd reading at a hearing held at Hotel Rembrandt, Quezon City. The same House Committee conducted a public hearing on House Bill No. 986 at the Calamba Elementary School (Central II) gymnasium on March 23, approving the House Bill in principle. House Bill 986 was deliberated in April by the House of Representatives in plenary session and approved as House Bill No. 10661, which was then filed with the Senate of the Philippines in June.
The year 2001 came and brought about approval on 2nd reading of Senate Bill Nos. 1630 and 1791 and House Bill No. 10661 in a hearing held on February 5 at the Ambrocio Padilla Hall, Senate of the Philippines. Three days later, February 8, Senate Bill Nos. 1630 and 1791 and House Bill No. 10661 was deliberated in Plenary Session and was approved as Republic Act No. 9024.calambacity.ph/About-the-City/Cityhood-of-Calamba/

CALABARZON Regional Government Center

Calamba City was declared the regional center of the CALABARZON region by former President Gloria Arroyo by virtue of Executive Order No. 246, dated October 28, 2003.

Geography

Calamba lies on the northern slopes of Mount Makiling, a dormant volcano. The southern terminus of the South Luzon Expressway is in Calamba and this geographic position makes the city a gateway to the southern provinces of Luzon. The highway at the end of the South Luzon Expressway leads east to the other towns of Laguna and south towards the provinces of Batangas and Quezon.
Calamba City is bordered by Cabuyao City to the north, Los Baños to the east, by the province of Batangas to the south, specifically the municipalities of Santo Tomas, Tanauan City and Talisay, and by the province of Cavite to the west, with Tagaytay City and Silang. Laguna de Bay the country's largest lake, forms the city's northwest border. The provincial capital,  Santa Cruz, is located  by road to the east.
Calamba covers a total land area of , making it is the 2nd largest city in Laguna province in terms of land area after San Pablo City.

Land Uses

Barangays

Calamba City is politically subdivided into 54 barangays, the smallest administrative unit in the city.

=Canlubang=

Barangay Canlubang is the biggest barangay in population and by land area in the city. It is composed of several sitios, some of the sitios that can be found are: Happy Valley, Asia I, Asia II, Buntog,Matang-Tubig,Balagbag-Araw,Bangyas, Mangumit, Ceris I, Manfil, Palao, MCDC, Kapayapaan, Locomotive etc. It is part of Canlubang, an area of western Laguna which spans also of Biñan City, Santa Rosa City, and Cabuyao City where industrialization is taking its toll. It is the only barangay in Laguna that hosts a patron saint for itself, St. Joseph the Worker, while the neighboring barangays are under the jurisdiction of Mary Help of Christians parish located at Brgy. Mayapa. Canlubang is also the site of many industrial parks, notably the Carmelray Industrial Parks I and Silangan Industrial Park.

Demographics

According to the 2010 census, Calamba has a population of 389,377 inhabitants, making it the most populated town in Laguna province, followed by San Pedro City, Santa Rosa City, Biñan City, San Pablo City and Cabuyao City. Calamba City is the 24th most populated city in the Philippines.

Religions

Calamba is predominantly Roman Catholic (89.72%), followed by Protestants (3.43%), Iglesia Ni Cristo (3.14%), and Islam (0.26%).

Economy

Calamba City is known today as the "Second Richest City in CALABARZON", after Batangas City (according to the 2012 Commission on Audit  Annual Audit Report), as it registered a total income of P2,023,350,771."COA 2012 AAR" Calamba is also considered as one of the "Next Wave Cities" for outsourcing firms."List of Next Wave Cities for Outsourcing Firms"
The major income sources comes from manufacturing and economic plants, tourism, agriculture and services. There are many manufacturing and economic plants located in upland barangays like Canlubang, Real, Lamesa, Milagrosa, Makiling, Punta, Barandal, Batino and Prinza.

Income

Banking

As of December 31, 2013, there are 83 banking offices operating in the city that offers banking services to businesses and residents according to Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation. Calamba is the top city in CALABARZON with total deposits amounting to  29,632,884 in thousand pesos from 374,122 accounts.pdic.ph/files/BSDStats/DDD_PBS_ProvinceMunicipality.htm

Industries and Manufacturing

The city is a haven for industries. Considered as the heart of CALABARZON due to the number of  companies housed in its area,  Calamba City is one of the premiere industrial hubs outside of Metro Manila. Some of the industrial parks located in the city are:
Food processing plants in Calamba like Zenith Foods Corp. (central  commissary of Jollibee Foods Corporation), where its sauces and food products (i.e. burger, pies, fries, etc.) are first made before distributing to Jollibee outlets is currently the most advanced food processing plant in the Philippines and one of the best in Asia. Other food and beverage processing plants in Calamba are Rebisco, RC Cola, Monde-M.Y. San Corporation and Zest-O Corporation.
Some of the semiconductor companies are also located in Calamba. To name a few, they are Samsung Electronics Philippines, Continental Temic Electronics Philippines, Toshiba Storage Device Philippines Inc., ST Microelectronics (formerly Philips Electronics), Fuji Electric Philippines, NEC Tokin Electronics, NEC Toppan Circuit Solutions and Austriamicrosystems Phils.
Automobile manufacturer that have plants located in Calamba City are Asian Transmission Corporation and Suzuki Philippines Inc.
Avon, the leading global beauty company has a manufacturing plant (Avon Products Manufacturing) located at Calamba Premiere International Park.

Information Technology

Calamba City is also considered as one of the "Next Wave Cities" for outsourcing firms and call centers, among them are Accenture and SPi Technologies.

Commerce and Trade

Aside from the Crossing area in Barangay Uno, Barangays Real and Parian are also bustling with business structures, including SM City Calamba, Walter Mart Calamba and Liana's Discount Center Calamba.
Notable shopping centers in Calamba also include  Walter Mart Makiling, SM Savemore Parian, Puregold Halang, Puregold Calamba Crossing and iMall Canlubang among others.

Utilities and Communication

Communication concerns are managed by different agencies found in the city: postal affairs rests on the Philippine Postal Corp. with three operating offices located in Barangays. Canlubang, Mayapa and the main office located at the back of City Hall. Telecommunications as well as internet connections are under the three major telecom companies such as PLDT, Globe Telecom, Smart Communications and Sun Cellular for Digitel.  Aside from these, print and radio services are also present, with Calambalita and DZJV– a local radio station catering to the whole Calabarzon area.
A major part of the city is currently served by MERALCO, with two substations of the company located in Brgys Mayapa and Brgy 1 facilitate the flow of power throughout the entire city. All the 54 barangays are equipped with electricity, with only a few barangays such as part of Canlubang, Pansol, Bucal and Lecheria under NAPOCOR.
A big part of the City is served by the Calamba Water District, providing water to 23,655 households, 1,238 commercial establishments and 53 public buildings.  Most of the city's water supply comes from the faucet community water system.

Tourism and places of interest

Here are some of Calamba City's tourist destinations:
Rizal Shrine
This is located at Calamba City Proper. Beside the St. John the Baptist Church, it is where José Rizal, the Philippines' national hero, lived before he was executed in Rizal Park.
Calamba Rizal Park/The Plaza
This public park in Barangay Real commemorates Jose Rizal. Erected on a  tall, with the number symbolizing the 22 languages and dialects used by Rizal. It sits on top of a 15-step podium, symbolizing one decade since Rizal was born. It is the tallest Jose Rizal Monument in the World.
Banga/Pot of Calamba
Banga is a large pot that symbolizes the name of Calamba City. The name of Calamba City derived from the two words, "kalan" and "banga". The barangays in Calamba was inscripted around the pot. This pot is also known as Calambanga.
St. John the Baptist Church
Established in 1859, it was burned by the Japanese during World War II. It was reconstructed by Fr. Eliseo Dimaculangan. It was the christening site of José Rizal. The original baptismal font has been preserved and refurbished.
Nuvali Republic Wakepark
The newest and most innovative wakepark in the world. Located at Nuvali, Canlubang, Calamba City.
Wonder Island Resort
Situated on a two-hectare island in the middle of Laguna de Bay, Wonder Island Resort is surrounded by the wide expanse of the largest freshwater lake in the country. About 50 kilometers south of Manila, the island can be reached via Calamba in Laguna, with a seven-minute ride aboard the sleek, safe and ultra-comfortable air-conditioned ferryboat.
Hot Spring Resorts
Most resorts in Calamba are located in Barangays Pansol, Bucal and Bagong Kalsada.

City government

The 2013 local elections in Calamba City, held on May 13, 2013, replaced some members of the city government, including the mayor, vice mayor and other members of the city council.
Elected officials for the 2013–2016 term are:

Official Seal of Calamba City

The seal of the City of Calamba has evolved and has been modified throughout the years. From being a municipality to a component city, a new seal was necessary to symbolize the new thrust of Calamba. In a city-wide seal-making contest, Reyjon de Guzman emerged as winner, for his work best symbolized the ideals, pride and achievements of the city. Each color, shape, number and object has its own meaning relative to what is Calamba in the past, present and future.
Shield Shape – The shield shape in the center, with a slight circular bottom, flat top and curved edges at the top corners project solidity and congruence.
Banga shaped twined with Dr. Jose Rizal's image – The historical ambience is depicted in this twin image. The abstract represents the influence of Dr. Jose Rizal and the Banga in the history of the City of Calamba.
Numbers – the engraved "1742"  mentions the year when Calamba was founded and seceded from the town of Cabuyao, while "2001" was identified as the year of Calamba's cityhood.
Objects – the mountain in the background and the water current at the bottom part relate to land and water resources of the city pertain to the vast natural resources of Mount Makiling and the aquatic benefits of Laguna de Bay. The water beneath Mt. Makiling shows that Calamba City touches a body of water notably Laguna de Bay, the largest lake in the country, and that's why Calamba City is also known as the "City by the Lake". The silhouette image of rice field on the left and the industrial buildings on the right symbolizing Calamba City's rapid modernization, urbanization, and industrialization. With both signs located beside each other, it shows everyone that nature and progress can efficiently coexist in Calamba City.
Colors - Except for silver grey and metallic gold, all others are similar with the national seal. However, additional meanings are attached to each.
Metallic Gold – This represents the radiating image of Dr. Jose Rizal and Banga that reflects in the minds and deeds of Calambeños.
Red – This symbolizes the burning patriotism of residents as exemplified by Rizal.
Blue – As land and water represent wealth and prosperity, the color blue signifies productivity and tranquility of the constituents.
Silver Grey – This represents the transformation of development from an agricultural pueblo in the 1700s to an agro-industrial town in 1900s and finally to an industrial city.
White – This projects purity, transparency, efficiency and prudence pertaining to governance.
Calamba City has a golden edge etched at the upper half with the words Lungsod ng Calamba depicting Calamba City as a Philippine component city. Laguna at the bottom part means that Calamba City is still part of Laguna province.calambacity.ph/About-the-City/The-Official-Seal/

List of mayors of Calamba

The former mayors and political leaders of Calamba are:

Infrastructure

Transportation

Tricycles, buses, jeepneys, and boats are popular modes of transportation in Calamba. There is also a PNR station in the city, namely as the Calamba railway station that will serve as a terminal for commuters going to Manila. The railway station will be re-opened to public on 2014.

=Road Systems=

==Existing==

==Proposed==

Health care

There are 9 private and 1 government-run hospitals in Calamba. Some of the health centers in the city are the Calamba Medical Center, Calamba Doctors Hospital, Pamana Golden Care Hospital, St. John the Baptist Hospital, San Jose Hospital and Trauma Center, St. Marks Hospital and Medical Cente, Holy Angel General Hospital, CH Garcia Medical and Diagnostic Center, Dr. Jose Rizal Memorial Hospital, and Jose Yulo Foundation Canlubang Industrial Hospital.

Education

Calamba has a literacy rate of 98.9%. As of 2007, there are 120 elementary schools, 51 of which are public and 69 private. There are 50 secondary schools, 16 public and 34 private. Post-secondary education include 17 universities and colleges, and 9 technical and vocational schools.
The city has four NCAA affiliate schools/branches, namely as the Colegio de San Juan de Letran, Lyceum of the Philippines University, San Sebastian College – Recoletos and University of Perpetual Help System DALTA. Some schools located in Calamba are City College of Calamba, Calamba Institute, Laguna College of Business and Arts and Saint John Colleges.
In Nuvali Calamba, there are two other schools that are under construction, namely as the Miriam College and Xavier School.

Notable people

International relations

Twin towns — Sister cities






