[[Muhammad Rafiq Tarar]]

CATEGORIES: 1929 births, Living people, Pakistan Movement activists, Pakistani democracy activists, Pakistani judges, Pakistani jurists, Pakistani legal scholars, Pakistani Muslims, Pakistani politicians, Presidents of Pakistan, Punjabi people, People from Gujranwala

Muhammad Rafiq Tarar English IPA:rəfɪ̈kʰ ʔɑr(ə)ɹ (), is a retired associate judge of the Supreme Court of Pakistan and senior jurist who served as the ninth President of PakistanTarar sworn in as Pakistani president, BBC, January 1998 from January 1, 1998 until voluntarily resigning from the presidency in the favor of General Pervez Musharraf on June 20, 2001.
A professional legislator and jurist, Tarar was a prominent activist for the Pakistan Movement, performing voluntary duty as a relief worker in camps set up by Liaquat Ali Khan for refugees, migrating from India to Pakistan.
President Tarar was merely a constitutional and ceremonial figure, while the executive powers laid under the control of Prime minister.

Life

Muhammad Rafiq Tarar was born in Gujranwala, British Punjab Province of the British Indian Empire on 2 November 1929. Tarar comes from the village of Pirkot, within the Gujranwala district. Tarar attended the Atta Muhammad High School and completed his matriculation there. In 1945, Tarar enrolled in Islamia College Gujaranwala where he gained his BA in 1949. The same year, Tarar entered Punjab Law College, where he secured his LLB in 1951. After graduation, he enrolled as a Pleader in Lahore High Court.

Family

He has three sons and a daughter. He also has nine grand children.

Professional career

In 1951, he enrolled as a Pleader. He also enrolled as an Advocate in the Lahore High Court during October 1955.

President of Pakistan

He was brought out of retirement by President Nawaz Sharif and afterwards elected as member of the Senate in 1997 on the PML(N) Party ticket.
During his presidency, Tarar was mostly a figurehead. The Presidency of Pakistan's powers had been slowly removed over the years, culminating in the 1997 Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution of Pakistan which removed virtually all remaining reserve powers, making the office almost entirely symbolic in nature as per the true spirit of the Pakistani constitution.

Retirement

Tarar was not removed from office when Pervez Musharraf seized control of the Pakistani government in 1999. While Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif was deposed, Tarar chose to remain in office until 2001, at which point Musharraf assumed the presidency.





|-


