[[The Beacon Street Collection]]

CATEGORIES: 1995 albums, No Doubt albums, Interscope Records albums, Self-released albums, English-language albums

The Beacon Street Collection is the second studio album by American rock band No Doubt, released in March 1995. It was released independently by the band under their own record label, Beacon Street Records. It was produced by No Doubt themselves and recorded in a homemade recording studio in the garage of their house on Beacon Street in Anaheim, California, from which the album takes its name additional recording and mixing were done at Clear Lake Audio in North Hollywood, California with engineer Colin "Dog" Mitchell.
The album was released during a time in which the band were receiving little attention from their record label, Interscope Records, and were not getting a chance to record a second album. Interscope were disillusioned with the band after the commercial failure of their first album, No Doubt. No Doubt had written large numbers of songs and knew that they would not make it onto any Interscope album, so they built their own studio and recorded the album there. Two singles were released from it: "Squeal" and "Doghouse" on 7-inch vinyl.
The album sold over 100,000 copies in 1995, over three times as many as their first album sold. This success ensured that Interscope financed the band's third album, Tragic Kingdom, which was a massive success, selling 16 million copies worldwide and attracting extensive interest in the band. The Beacon Street Collection was re-released in 1997 as part of the band's back catalog.

Background

No Doubt released their self-titled debut album in 1992, a year after being signed to Interscope. The group's blend of upbeat brass-dominated songs and funk-style bass riffs came at a time when most of the United States was in the thrall of grunge music, a genre whose angst-ridden lyrics and dirty sound could not have contrasted more with the atmosphere of most of the songs on No Doubt's pop-oriented album. Not surprisingly, the band lost out to the now-ubiquitous grunge music and the album was a commercial failure, with only 30,000 copies sold. "Tunes and 'Toons". OC Weekly. February 26, 1998. Retrieved August 31, 2008. In the words of the program director of KROQ, a Los Angeles radio station on which it was one of the band's driving ambitions to be played: "It would take an act of God for this band to get on the radio."Tyrangiel, Josh. "Two-Hit Wonders". Time. April 2, 2000. Retrieved May 3, 2007.
The band started to work on its second album in 1993 but Interscope, having lost faith in the band, rejected most of its material and so it was paired with producer Matthew Wilder. Eric Stefani did not like to relinquish creative control to someone outside the band and eventually stopped recording or rehearsing. He left No Doubt in 1994 to pursue an animation career on the cartoon TV series The Simpsons."No Doubt". Behind the Music. VH1. April 9, 2000. Kanal then ended his seven-year relationship with Gwen, saying that he needed "space". MuchMusic programming. Original airdate: March 2006. Retrieved November 13, 2006.

Music

A large number of songs on The Beacon Street Collection were written by Eric Stefani, who left the group before their third album was recorded. This gave the album a similar sound to their first album, No Doubt, in which Eric Stefani had collaborated in the writing of all the songs. Because the lyrics in Tragic Kingdom were written mainly by Gwen Stefani about her experiences in life, the style of music changed from what No Doubt had previously produced. Tom Dumont explained the change in sound in an interview for Backstage Online:

Production

No Doubt became frustrated at the lack of progress they were making with Interscope, who were proving unreliable in their support of the band. Retrieved August 26, 2008. 

Singles

In 1994, before recording of the album had even begun, No Doubt released two seven-inch singles for their fans. The first was "Squeal", a song written by Eric Stefani, detailing a criminal's reaction to her partner's betrayal to the police. They had agreed to be "in this together" but, after he "squeals", she resolves to "kill the narc who wrote it and said it she was guilty of a crime". The single's B-side was "My Room Is Still Clean", written by Tony Kanal and recorded live at the Icehouse in Fullerton, California on February 13, 1993.
The second single was "Doghouse", written by Eric Stefani. It is about a man who is bullied and dominated by his girlfriend and is unwilling to force the situation to change. The song uses the metaphor of a dog and its master to illustrate the nature of the relationship, saying that she had got him "by the reins" and he has been "conditioned" by her. The single's B-side was "You Can't Teach an Ol' Dog New Tricks", written by Eric Stefani.

Reception

Significance

On its original release in March 1995, The Beacon Street Collection was only available in local record stores in Orange County, California and at No Doubt's shows. Its rawer sound proved popular with the band's fans and the band's first batch of one thousand copies sold out within only a few months after its release. Interscope realized the band's potential and allowed them to record their third album, Tragic Kingdom in various Los Angeles studios, "wherever they could get a deal on a studio". During a recording session, the band was introduced to Paul Palmer, who was interested in mixing the new album. He owned his own record label Trauma Records, which was associated with Interscope. Interscope willingly sublicensed the project to Trauma Records in 1995 and Tragic Kingdom got the personal focus that comes from a small company. "Interscope facing Trauma in $100 million lawsuit". Variety. May 28, 1997. Retrieved December 30, 2006.
By the end of the year, 100,000 copies of The Beacon Street Collection had been sold, over three times as many as their first album, No Doubt. These sales were mostly due to the release of Tragic Kingdom, which was released seven months after The Beacon Street Collection in October 1995. Tragic Kingdom was a massive commercial success, reaching sales of over 10 million in the USA and 16 million worldwide,Van Meter, Jonathan. "The First Lady of Rock". Vogue (April 2004). Retrieved from Style. peaking at number one on several charts and being certified "diamond"(10,000,000 units=Diamond album) in the USTragic Kingdom at RIAA. and CanadaTragic Kingdom at CRIA. and "platinum" in the UKTragic Kingdom at BPI. and Australia. This success created an extensive interest in the band's back catalog so, in October 1997, The Beacon Street Collection was re-released on Interscope.
In an interview with Axcess Magazine in April 1996, Gwen Stefani described the release of The Beacon Street Collection as "one of the best things they ever did because they were able to take some songs that would have probably gotten lost and document them".

Critical

Allmusic called the album "finer than the band's debut", and described it as containing more of a "raw sound inspired ... by punk" than the style of No Doubt's first album, which was heavily "synth and new wave". Entertainment Weekly, in 1997, called it "more focused than Tragic Kingdom" with "reggae frat-house grooves and perky horns", and complimented "Gwen's feisty Kewpie-doll wail" and the "swaying ballads", attributing it to "the band's willing spirit". Rock on the Net retrospectively called the album "a raw expression of their sound" and describing it as "80s punk with 90s grunge.

Track listing

Credits

Personnel

Additional personnel

Production

Release history

All information is from the Allmusic page and No Doubt's official website discography.






