[[Low-carbohydrate diet]]

CATEGORIES: Diets, Low-carb diets

Low-carbohydrate diets or low-carb diets are dietary programs that restrict carbohydrate consumption, often for the treatment of obesity. Foods high in easily digestible carbohydrates (e.g., sugar, bread, pasta) are limited or replaced with foods containing a higher percentage of  fats and moderate protein (e.g., meat, poultry, fish, shellfish, eggs, cheese, nuts, and seeds) and other foods low in carbohydrates (e.g., most salad vegetables), although other vegetables and fruits (especially berries) are often allowed. The amount of carbohydrate not allowed varies with different low-carbohydrate diets.
Such diets are sometimes ketogenic (i.e., they restrict carbohydrate intake sufficiently to cause ketosis). The Induction phase of the Atkins dietStefanov, Sebastien: Do Low-Carb Diets Work?, AskMen.
The term "low-carbohydrate diet" is generally applied to diets that restrict carbohydrates to less than 20% of caloric intake, but can also refer to diets that simply restrict or limit carbohydrates.com: Low Carb Diets, retrieved 11 March 2008
Low-carbohydrate diets are used to treat or prevent some chronic diseases and conditions including: cardiovascular disease, metabolic syndrome, high blood pressure and  diabetes,Low Carb Diet Diabetes.co.S. News and World Report, 28 December 2007

History

Prehistory

As with the paleolithic diet, several advocates of low-carbohydrate diets have argued that these diets are closer to the ancestral diet of humans before the origin of agriculture, and therefore that humans are genetically adapted to diets low in carbohydrate.
A more detailed picture of early human diets before the origin of agriculture may be obtained by analogy to contemporary hunter-gatherers. According to one survey of these societies, a relatively low carbohydrate (22–40% of total energy), animal food-centered diet is preferred "whenever and wherever it is ecologically possible", and where plant foods do predominate, carbohydrate consumption remains low because wild plants are much lower in carbohydrate and higher in fiber than modern domesticated crops.
The origin of agriculture brought about a rise in carbohydrate levels in human diets. The industrial age has seen a particularly steep rise in refined carbohydrate levels in Western societies, as well as urban societies in Asian countries like India, China and Japan, with resulting increases in obesity rates.

Early dietary science

In 1797, John Rollo reported on the results of treating two diabetic Army officers with a low-carbohydrate diet and medications. A very low-carbohydrate, ketogenic diet was the standard treatment for diabetes throughout the 19th century.
In 1863, William Banting, a formerly obese English undertaker and coffin maker, published "Letter on Corpulence Addressed to the Public", in which he described a diet for weight control giving up bread, butter, milk, sugar, beer and potatoes.
In 1888, James Salisbury introduced the Salisbury steak as part of his high-meat diet, which limited vegetables, fruit, starches, and fats to one-third of the diet.

Modern low-carbohydrate diets

In 1958, Richard Mackarness M.D. published Eat Fat and Grow Slim, a low carbohydrate diet with much of the same advice and based on the same theories as the Atkins Diet.  Mackarness also challenged the "calorie theory" and referenced primitive diets such as the Inuit as examples of healthy diets with a low carbohydrate and high fat composition.
In 1967, Irwin Stillman published The Doctor's Quick Weight Loss Diet. The "Stillman Diet" is a high-protein, low-carbohydrate and low-fat diet. It is regarded as one of the first low-carbohydrate diets to become popular in the United States.1967: the Stillman diet – History Of Diets, Part 12 – protein diet Men's Fitness. June 2003 Other low-carbohydrate diets in the 1960s included the Air Force DietAir Force Diet. Toronto, Canada, Air Force Diet Publishers, 1960. and the Drinking Man's Diet. San Francisco: Cameron. (2004) Revised Ed. ISBN 978-0-918684-65-3. See also Alan Farnham (2004) "The Drinking Man's Diet", Forbes. Austrian physician Wolfgang Lutz published his book Leben Ohne Brot (Life Without Bread) in 1967.B. Life Without Bread. McGraw-Hill; 2000. ISBN 978-0-658-00170-3. English language, 1st Ed. However, it was not well known in the English-speaking world.
In 1972, Robert Atkins published Dr. Atkins Diet Revolution, which advocated a low-carbohydrate diet that he had successfully used in treating patients in the 1960s (having developed the diet from a 1963 article published in JAMA).
The concept of the glycemic index was developed in 1981 by David Jenkins to account for variances in speed of digestion of different types of carbohydrates. This concept classifies foods according to the rapidity of their effect on blood sugar levels The concept has been extended to include the amount of carbohydrate actually absorbed as well, as a tablespoonful of cooked carrots is less significant overall than a large baked potato (effectively pure starch, which is efficiently absorbed as glucose), despite differences in glycemic index.

1990s – present

In the 1990s, Atkins published Dr. Atkins New Diet Revolution, and other doctors began to publish books based on the same principles. This has been said to be the beginning of what the mass media call the "low carb craze" in the United States.BBC (19 January 2004) Atkins diet boss: 'Eat less fat'. BBC News. Retrieved on 12 September 2007.The Atkins Essentials: A Two-Week Program to Jump-start Your Low Carb Lifestyle, ISBN 978-0-06-059838-9, page 23
Many of the diet guides and their proponents that appeared at this time intentionally distanced themselves from Atkins and the term low carb (because of the controversies), even though their recommendations were based on largely the same principles (e.g., the Zone diet). The 1990s and 2000s also saw the publication of an increased number of clinical studies regarding the effectiveness and safety (pro and con) of low-carbohydrate diets (see low-carbohydrate diet medical research).
In the United States, the popularity of the low-carb diet trend waned somewhat in the late 2000s.  Other popular low-carb diets focus on the removal of certain foods from the diet, such as sugar and grain.

Practices and theories

Today, the term "low-carbohydrate diet" is most strongly associated with the Atkins Diet and other diets that share similar principles. The American Academy of Family Physicians defines low-carbohydrate diets as diets that restrict carbohydrate intake to 20 to 60 grams per day, typically less than 20 percent of caloric intake. Some low-carbohydrate diets may exceed one or more of these definitions, notably the maintenance phase of the Atkins Diet. There is no consensus definition of what precisely constitutes a low-carbohydrate diet. Medical researchers and diet advocates may define different levels of carbohydrate intake when specifying low-carbohydrate diets. For the purposes of this discussion, this article focuses on diets that reduce (nutritive) carbohydrate intake sufficiently to significantly reduce insulin production and to encourage ketosis (production of ketones to be used as energy in place of glucose).
The body of research underpinning low-carbohydrate diets has grown significantly in the decades of the 1990s and 2000s.; Eades, Mary Dan: Protein Power, Chapter 1, Bantam Books, 1999, ISBN 0-553-38078-8 Most of this research centers on the relationship between carbohydrate intake and blood sugar levels (i.e., blood glucose), as well as some related hormone levels. Some evidence suggests blood sugar levels in the human body should be maintained in a fairly narrow range to maintain good health. The two primary hormones that regulate blood sugar levels are insulin, which lowers blood sugar levels, and glucagon, which raises blood sugar levels.com, retrieved 12 March 2008 These are both produced in the pancreas: insulin from beta cells and glucagon from alpha cells.
In western diets (and many others),
Low-carbohydrate diet advocates in general recommend reducing nutritive carbohydrates (commonly referred to as "net carbs," i.e., grams of total carbohydrates reduced by the non-nutritive carbohydrates)Dolson, Laura: What Are Net Carbs?, About. Geneva: World Health Organization. Pages 55–56.  ISBN 92-4-120916-X
Low-carbohydrate diets often differ in the specific amount of carbohydrate intake allowed, whether certain types of foods are preferred, whether occasional exceptions are allowed, etc. Generally they all agree that processed sugar should be eliminated, or at the very least greatly reduced, and similarly generally discourage heavily processed grains (white bread, etc.). Low-carbohydrate diets vary greatly in their recommendations as to the amount of fat allowed in the diet. The Atkins Diet does not limit fat. Others recommend a moderate fat intake.
Although low-carbohydrate diets are most commonly discussed as a weight-loss approach, some experts have proposed using low-carbohydrate diets to mitigate or prevent diseases including diabetes, metabolic disease and epilepsy. Freeman, Eric H. Kossoff, Jennifer B. Freeman, Millicent T. Kelly: The Ketogenic Diet: A Treatment for Children and Others with Epilepsy, 4th edition, Demos Medical Publishing, 4 October 2006, ISBN 978-1-932603-18-7 Some low-carbohydrate proponents and others argue that the rise in carbohydrate consumption, especially refined carbohydrates, caused the epidemic levels of many diseases in modern society, including metabolic disease and type 2 diabetes. Eades
, Mary Dan Eades, The Protein Power Lifeplan, Warner Books, 2000, ISBN 0-446-52576-6[/ref]Lick the Sugar Habit: How to Break Your Sugar Addiction Naturally, second edition, Avery, 1 February 1988, ISBN 978-0-89529-768-6Cancer Loves Sugar, Wellness Directory of Minnesota, retrieved 22 July 2008
There is also a category of diets known as low-glycemic-index diets (low-GI diets) or low-glycemic-load diets (low-GL diets), in particular the Low GI Diet by Brand-Miller et al. (2005). The Low GI Diet Revolution: The Definitive Science-based Weight Loss Plan. Marlowe & Company. New York, NY In reality, low-carbohydrate diets can also be low-GL diets (and vice versa) depending on the carbohydrates in a particular diet. In practice, though, "low-GI"/"low-GL" diets differ from "low-carb" diets in the following ways. First, low-carbohydrate diets treat all nutritive carbohydrates as having the same effect on metabolism, and generally assume that their effect is predictable. Low-GI/low-GL diets are based on the measured change in blood glucose levels in various carbohydrates – these vary markedly in laboratory studies. The differences are due to poorly understood digestive differences between foods. However, as foods influence digestion in complex ways (e.g., both protein and fat delay absorption of glucose from carbohydrates eaten at the same time) it is difficult to even approximate the glycemic effect (e.g., over time or even in total in some cases) of a particular meal.
Another related diet type, the low-insulin-index diet, is similar except that it is based on measurements of direct insulemic responses (i.e., the amount of insulin in the bloodstream) to food rather than glycemic response (the amount of glucose in the bloodstream). Although such diet recommendations mostly involve lowering nutritive carbohydrates, there are some low-carbohydrate foods that are discouraged as well (e.g., beef). Insulin secretion is stimulated (though less strongly) by other dietary intake. Like glycemic index diets, there is difficulty predicting the insulin secretion from any particular meal, due to assorted digestive interactions and so differing effects on insulin release.

Ketosis and insulin synthesis: what is normal?

At the heart of the debate about most low carbohydrate diets are fundamental questions about what is a normal diet and how the human body is supposed to operate. These questions can be outlined as follows:
The diets of most people in modern Western nations, especially the United States, contain large amounts of starches and often substantial amounts of sugars, including fructose. Most westerners seldom exhaust stored glycogen supplies and hence rarely go into ketosis. This has been regarded by the majority of the medical community in the last century as normal for humans.
People who eschew low carbohydrate diets cite hypoglycemia and ketoacidosis as a risk factor. While mild acidosis may be a side effect when beginning a ketogenic diet, it is benign and should not be confused with diabetic ketoacidosis, which can be life threatening.
A diet very low in starches and sugars induces several adaptive responses. Low blood glucose causes the pancreas to produce glucagon,Carr, Timothy P.: Discovering Nutrition, Chapter 7, Blackwell Publishing, October 2002, ISBN 978-0-632-04564-8 which stimulates the liver to convert stored glycogen into glucose and release it into the blood. When liver glycogen stores are exhausted, the body starts utilizing fatty acids instead of glucose. The brain cannot use fatty acids for energy, and instead uses ketones produced from fatty acids by the liver. By using fatty acids and ketones as energy sources, supplemented by conversion of proteins to glucose (gluconeogenesis), the body can maintain normal levels of blood glucose without dietary carbohydrates.
Most advocates of low-carbohydrate diets, such as the Atkins Diet, argue that the human body is adapted to function primarily in ketosis. They argue that high insulin levels can cause many health problems, most significantly fat storage and weight gain. They argue that the purported dangers of ketosis are unsubstantiated (some of the arguments against ketosis result from confusion between ketosis and ketoacidosis which is a mostly diabetic condition unrelated to dieting or low-carbohydrate intake).com: Low Carb Diets, retrieved 13 March 2008 They also argue that fat in the diet only contributes to heart disease in the presence of high insulin levels and that if the diet is instead adjusted to induce ketosis, fat and cholesterol in the diet are beneficial. Most low carb diet plans discourage consumption of trans fat.
On a high-carbohydrate diet, glucose is used by cells in the body for the energy needed for their basic functions, and about 2/3 of body cells require insulin in order to use glucose. Excessive amounts of blood glucose are thought to be a primary cause of the complications of diabetes, when glucose reacts with body proteins (resulting in glycosolated proteins) and change their behavior. Perhaps for this reason, the amount of glucose tightly maintained in the blood is quite low. Unless a meal is very low in starches and sugars, blood glucose will rise for a period of an hour or two after a meal. When this occurs, beta cells in the pancreas release insulin to cause uptake of glucose into cells. In liver and muscle cells, more glucose is taken in than is needed and stored as glycogen (once called 'animal starch').: The Endocrine Pancreas, Colorado State University: Hypertexts for Biomedical Sciences, 8 December 2002 Diets with a high starch/sugar content, therefore, cause release of more insulin and so more cell absorption. In diabetics, glucose levels vary in time with meals and vary a little more as a result of high carbohydrate content meals. In non-diabetics, blood sugar levels are restored to normal levels within an hour or two, regardless of the content of a meal.
While there are essential fatty acids (EFA) and essential amino acids (EAA) and while a diet devoid of EFA or EAA will result in eventual death, a diet completely without carbohydrates can be maintained indefinitely because fatty acids include a carbohydrate backbone (glycerol). There are essential fatty acids and amino acids for structural building blocks, not energy. EFA and EAA will be converted into intermediates for the carbohydrate metabolism, even if it depletes their essential stocks. However, a very low carbohydrate diet (less than 20g per day) may negatively affect certain biomarkersArizona State University (17 December 2007). Researchers Nix Low-carb Diet. ScienceDaily. Retrieved 15 April 2011, from  The opposite is also true – for instance, clinical experience suggests very low carbohydrate diet for patients with metabolic syndrome.drjosephhickey.pdf

Studies on health effects

Because of the substantial controversy regarding low-carbohydrate diets and even disagreements in interpreting the results of specific studies, it is difficult to objectively summarize the research in a way that reflects scientific consensus.Taubes, Gary: What if It's All Been a Big Fat Lie?, New York Times, Friday, 15 February 2008 Although there has been some research done throughout the twentieth century,

Weight loss

A 2003 meta-analysis that included randomized controlled trials found that "low-carbohydrate, non-energy-restricted diets appear to be at least as effective as low-fat, energy-restricted diets in inducing weight loss for up to 1-year." A 2007 JAMA study comparing the effectiveness of the Atkins low-carb diet to several other popular diets concluded "In this study, premenopausal overweight and obese women assigned to follow the Atkins diet, which had the lowest carbohydrate intake, lost more weight and experienced more favorable overall metabolic effects at 12 months than women assigned to follow the Zone, Ornish, or LEARN diets."
A July 2009 study of existing dietary habits associated a low carbohydrate diet with obesity, although the study drew no explicit conclusion regarding the cause: whether the diet resulted in the obesity or the obesity motivated people to adopt the diet.
In Oct. 2013, after reviewing 16,000 studies, Sweden's Council on Health Technology Assessment concluded that low-carbohydrate diets are more effective as a means to reduce weight than low fat diet, over a short period of time (6 months or less). However, the agency also concluded that over a longer span (12–24 months), there are no differences in effects on weight between strict or moderate low carb diets, low fat diets, diets high in protein, Mediterranean diet or diets aiming at low glycemic index.
One theory is that one of the reasons people lose weight on low carbohydrate diet is related to the phenomenon of spontaneous reduction in food intake.

Blood lipids

Potential favorable changes in triglyceride and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol values should be weighed against potential unfavorable changes in low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and total cholesterol values when low-carbohydrate diets to induce weight loss are considered.

Mortality

A study of more than 100,000 people over more than 20 years within the Nurses' Health Study observationally concluded that a low-carbohydrate diet high in vegetables, with a large proportion of proteins and oils coming from plant sources, decreases mortality with a hazard ratio of 0.8. In contrast, a low-carbohydrate diet with largely animal sources of protein and fat increases mortality, with a hazard ratio of 1.1.
This study, however, has been met with criticism, due to the unreliability of the self-administered food frequency questionnaire, as compared to food journaling,

Opinions from major governmental and medical organizations

Although opinions regarding low-carbohydrate diets vary greatly throughout the medical and nutritional science communities, major government bodies as well as major medical and nutritional associations have generally opposed this nutritional regimen. In recent years, however, some The following are official statements from some of these organizations.
The AAFP released a discussion paper on the Atkins Diet specifically in 2006. Although the paper expresses reservations about the Atkins plan, it acknowledges it as a legitimate weight-loss approach. | title=Low-Carbohydrate Dieting | journal=American Family Physician | date=1 June 2006 | volume=73 | issue=11  | pages=1896–1901 | publisher=American Academy of Family Physicians | url= | accessdate=12 February 2014 | quote=The paper states
The ADA revised its Nutrition Recommendations and Interventions for Diabetes in 2008 to acknowledge low-carbohydrate diets as a legitimate weight-loss plan.
The recommendations fall short of endorsing low-carbohydrate diets as a long-term health plan, nor do they give any preference to these diets. Nevertheless, this is perhaps the first statement of support—albeit for the short-term—by one of the foremost medical organizations."Diabetes Group Backs Low-Carb Diets". U.S. News & World Report. 28 December 2007Patrick Totty, "ADA Now Supports Low-Carb Diets". Diabetes Health. 9 January 2008 In its 2009 publication of Clinical Practice Recommendations, the ADA again reaffirmed its acceptance of carbohydrate-controlled diets as an effective treatment for short-term (up to one year) weight loss among obese people suffering from type two diabetes.
As of 2003 in commenting on a study in the Journal of the American Medical Association, a spokesperson for the American Dietetic Association reiterated the association's belief that "there is no magic bullet to safe and healthful weight loss."American Dietetic Association Says New Studies of Low-Carb Diets "Confirm What We Already Know – There Is No Magic Bullet to Safe and Healthful Weight Loss' The Association specifically endorses the high-carbohydrate diet recommended by the National Academy of Sciences. They have stated "Calories cause weight gain. Excess calories from carbohydrates are not any more fattening than calories from other sources. Despite the claims of low-carb diets, a high-carbohydrate diet does not promote fat storage by enhancing insulin resistance."Question of the Day - Do Carbohydrates Cause Weight Gain?
The official statement from the AHA regarding these diets states categorically that the association "doesn't recommend high-protein diets."[ref] It states
A science advisory from the association further states the association's belief that these diets "may be associated with increased risk for coronary heart disease." The AHA has been one of the most adamant opponents of low-carbohydrate diets.  Dr. Robert Eckel, past president, noted that a low-carbohydrate diet could potentially meet AHA guidelines if it conformed to the AHA guidelines for low-fat content. "Study: Low-carb diet best for weight, cholesterol."  The Seattle Times.  17 July 2008
The position statement by the Heart Foundation regarding low-carbohydrate diets states that "the Heart Foundation does not support the adoption of VLCARB diets for weight loss."[ref]Position Statement on Very Low Carbohydrate Diets, Heart Foundation, retrieved 19 July 2008. It states
[/ref]
Although the statement recommends against use of low-carbohydrate diets it explains that their major concern is saturated fats as opposed to carbohydrate restriction and protein. Moreover, other statements suggest that their position might be re-evaluated in the event of more evidence from longer-term studies.
The consumer advice statements of the NHS regarding low-carbohydrate diets state that "eating a high-fat diet could increase your risk of heart disease" and "try to ensure starchy foods make up about a third of your diet"[ref]Starchy foods, National Health Service, retrieved 5 December 2013. It states
The official position statement of the Heart & Stroke Foundation states "Do not follow a low carbohydrate diet for purposes of weight loss."[ref] It states
In 2008, the Socialstyrelsen in Sweden altered its standing regarding low-carbohydrate diets.Må bättre med lågkolhydratkost, e-Health.
In recommendation for diets suitable for diabetes patients published in 2011 a moderate low-carb option (30–40%) is suggested.
The HHS issues consumer guidelines for maintaining heart health which state regarding low-carbohydrate diets that "they're not the route to healthy, long-term weight management."[ref]Your Guide to a Healthy Heart, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, December 2005. It states

Criticism and controversies

Water-related weight loss

In the first week or two of a low-carbohydrate diet a great deal of the weight loss comes from eliminating water retained in the body. Retrieved on 15 August 2013. Many doctors say that the presence of high levels of insulin in the blood causes unnecessary water retention in the body.

Exercise

John McDougall, a physician, diet book author, and advisory board member of the Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine, contends that low-carbohydrate diets can inherently cause weakness or fatigue  However, studies also indicate that while a low carbohydrate diet will not reduce endurance performance after adapting, they will probably deteriorate anaerobic performance such as strength training or sprint running because these processes rely on glycogen for fuel.
A living example that a ketogenic diet can indeed be combined with outstanding achievements in physical exercise is the Olympic biathlon gold medalist Björn Ferry, who won his gold medal after about 6 months on a low-carbohydrate high-fat diet.Dagens Nyheter: Ferry's gold recipe, (in Swedish)
A ketogenic diet has not been found to impair physical performance of athletes.

Vegetables and fruits

Many critics  Most vegetables are low- or moderate-carbohydrate foods (note that in the context of these diets fiber is excluded because it is not a nutritive carbohydrate). Some vegetables like potatoes and carrots have high concentrations of starch as do corn and rice. Most low-carbohydrate diet plans accommodate vegetables such as broccoli, spinach, cauliflower, and peppers.com: Low Carb Diets, 3 March 2008 The Atkins Diet recommends that most dietary carbs come from vegetables. Nevertheless debate remains as to whether restricting even just high-carbohydrate fruits, vegetables, and grains is truly healthy. Cites 2004 study in The Archives of Internal Medicine showing that fiber from cereals and fruits is more beneficial than fiber from vegetable sources.
Contrary to the recommendations of most low-carbohydrate diet guides, some individuals may choose to avoid vegetables altogether in order to minimize carbohydrate intake. Low-carbohydrate vegetarianism is also practiced. 
Raw fruits and vegetables are packed with an array of other protective chemicals like vitamins, flavonoids and sugar alcohols. Some of those molecules help safeguard against the over-absorption of sugars in the human digestive system.[ref]CHANGES IN FATTY ACID PROFILES AND OMEGA FATTY ACID
CONTENTS OF SELECTED VEGETABLE OILS DURING REFINING
PROCESS 

Micronutrients and vitamins

The major low-carbohydrate diet guides generally recommend multi-vitamin and mineral supplements as part of the diet regimen which may lead some to believe that these diets are nutritionally deficient. The primary reason for this recommendation is that if the switch from a high-carbohydrate to a low-carbohydrate, ketogenic diet is rapid, the body can temporarily go through a period of adjustment during which it may require extra vitamins and minerals (the reasons have to do with the body's releasing excess fluids that were stored during high-carbohydrate eating). While it is true that many foods that are rich in carbohydrates are also rich in vitamins and minerals, there are many low-carbohydrate foods that are similarly rich in vitamins and minerals.Cordain, Loren: The Paleo Diet, pages 106–107, Wiley, 2002, 272 pages, ISBN 0-471-41390-9

Glucose availability

A common argument in favor of high-carbohydrate diets is that most carbohydrates break down readily into glucose in the bloodstream and, therefore, the body does not have to work as hard to get its energy in a high-carbohydrate diet as a low-carbohydrate diet. This argument, by itself, is incomplete. Although many dietary carbohydrates do break down into glucose, most of that glucose does not remain in the bloodstream for long. Its presence stimulates the beta cells in the pancreas to release insulin which has the effect of causing about 2/3 of body cells to take in glucose, and to cause fat cells to take in fatty acids and store them. As the blood glucose level falls, the amount of insulin released is reduced; the entire process is completed in non-diabetics in an hour or two after eating.Craig Freudenrich, PhD: How Fat Cells Work, How Stuff Works, retrieved 25 July 2008  High-carbohydrate diets require more insulin production and release than low-carbohydrate diets
In addition, this claim neglects the nature of the carbohydrates ingested. Some are indigestible in humans (e.g., cellulose), some are poorly digested in humans (e.g., the amylose starch variant), and some require considerable processing to be converted to absorbable forms. In general, uncooked or unprocessed (e.g., milling, crushing, etc.) foods are harder (typically much harder) to absorb and so do not raise glucose levels as much as might be expected from the proportion of carbohydrate present. Cooking (especially moist cooking above the temperature necessary to expand starch granules), and mechanical processing, both considerably raise the amount of absorbable carbohydrate and reduce the digestive effort required. Analyses which neglect these factors are misleading and will not result in a working diet, or at least one which works as intended. (See Catching Fire, Richard Wrangham)
In fact, there is some evidence that the human brain – the largest consumer of glucose in the body – can operate more efficiently on ketones.

Other controversies

In 2004, the Canadian government ruled that foods sold in Canada could not be marketed with reduced or eliminated carbohydrate content as a selling point because reduced carbohydrate content was not determined to be a health benefit, and that existing "low carb" and "no carb" packaging would have to be phased out by 2006.
Some variants of low carbohydrate diets involve substantially lowered intake of dietary fiber which can result in constipation if not supplemented. For example, this has been a criticism of the Induction phase of the Atkins diet (the Atkins diet is now clearer about recommending a fiber supplement during Induction). Most advocates today argue that fiber is a "good" carbohydrate and encourage a high-fiber diet.
It has been hypothesized that a diet-related change in blood acidity can lead to bone loss through a process called ketoacidosis, as mentioned earlier in this article. However ketoacidosis, which is often confused with ketosis, is an acute medical condition caused by extreme fasting or as a symptom of untreated diabetes, and is not likely to be induced by an otherwise adequate low-carbohydrate diet.
One of the occasional side effects of a ketogenic diet is a noticeable smell of ketones in the urine, perspiration, and breath. This is caused by the presence of larger than usual amounts of the three ketone bodies normally produced during fat metabolism. One of the ketone bodies, acetone, is released via the lungs and has a characteristic smell of overripe fruit or nail polish remover. In most cases, periodic ketosis (as occurs between widely separated meals) does not cause a noticeable odor.





Further reading


