[[Magnesium diboride]]

CATEGORIES: Borides, Magnesium compounds, Superconductors, Non-stoichiometric compounds, Ceramic materials

Magnesium diboride (MgB2) is a simple ionic binary compound that has proven to be an inexpensive and useful superconducting material.

Superconductivity

Its superconductivity was discovered by the group of Akimitsu in 2001.
Though generally believed to be a conventional (phonon-mediated) superconductor, it is a rather unusual one. Its electronic structure is such that there exist two types of electrons at the Fermi level with widely differing behaviours, one of them (sigma-bonding) being much more strongly superconducting than the other (pi-bonding). This is at odds with usual theories of phonon-mediated superconductivity which assume that all electrons behave in the same manner. Theoretical understanding of the properties of MgB2 has almost been achieved with two energy gaps. In 2001 it was regarded as behaving more like a metallic than a cuprate superconductor.

Synthesis

Magnesium diboride can be synthesized by several routes. The simplest is by high temperature reaction between boron and magnesium powders. Formation begins at 650 °C; however, since magnesium metal melts at 652 °C, the reaction mechanism is considered to be moderated by magnesium vapor diffusion across boron grain boundaries. At conventional reaction temperatures, sintering is minimal, although enough grain recrystallization occurs to permit Josephson quantum tunnelling between grains.
Superconducting magnesium diboride wire can be produced through the powder-in-tube (PIT) process. In the in situ variant, a mixture of boron and magnesium is poured into a metal tube, which is reduced in diameter by conventional wire drawing. The wire is then heated to the reaction temperature to form MgB2 inside. In the ex situ variant, the tube is filled with MgB2 powder, reduced in diameter, and sintered at 800 to 1000 °C. In both cases, later hot isostatic pressing at approximately 950 °C further improves the properties.
In 2003, a new and easy in situ technique for the synthesis of MgB2 was presented by Giunchi et al. (Edison S.p.A.). This new technique
employs reactive liquid infiltration of magnesium inside a granular preform of boron powders and was called Mg-RLI technique. The method allowed to manufacture both high density (more than 90% of the theoretical density for MgB2) bulk materials and special hollow fibers. This method is an exact of similar melt growth based methods such as the Infiltration and Growth Processing method used to fabricate bulk YBCO superconductors where the non-superconducting Y2Ba1Cu1O5 is used as granular preform inside which YBCO based liquid phases are infiltrated to make superconductive YBCO bulk. This method has been copied and adapted for MgB2 superconductor and rebranded as reactive Mg Liquid Infiltration. The process of Reactive Mg Liquid Infiltration in a boron preform to obtain MgB2 has been a subject of patent applications by Edison S.p.A. (Italy).
Hybrid physical-chemical vapor deposition (HPCVD) has been the most effective technique for depositing magnesium diboride (MgB2) thin films. The surfaces of MgB2 films deposited by other technologies are usually rough and non-stoichiometric. In contrast, the HPCVD system can grow high-quality in situ pure MgB2 films with smooth surfaces, which are required to make reproducible uniform Josephson junctions, the fundamental element of superconducting circuits.

Electromagnetic properties

Properties depend greatly on composition and fabrication process. Many properties are anisotropic due to the layered structure. 'Dirty' samples, e.g., with oxides at the crystal boundaries, are different from 'clean' samples.

Semi-Meissner state

Using the BCS theory and the known energy gaps of the pi and sigma bands of electrons, which are 2.2 and 7.1 meV, the pi and sigma bands of electrons have been found to have two different coherence lengths, 51 nm and 13 nm. The corresponding London penetration depths are 33.6 nm and 47.8 nm. This implies that the Ginzburg-Landau constants are 0.66±0.02 and 3.68 respectively. The first is less than 1/√2 and the second is greater, therefore the first seems to indicate marginal type I superconductivity and the second type II superconductivity.
It has been predicted that when two different bands of electrons yield two quasiparticles, one of which has a coherence length that would indicate type I superconductivity and one of which would indicate type II, then in certain cases, vortices attract at long distances and repel at short distances. In particular, the potential energy between vortices is minimized at a critical distance. As a consequence there is a conjectured new phase called the semi-Meissner state, in which vortices are separated by the critical distance. When the applied flux is too small for the entire superconductor to be filled with a lattice of vortices separated by the critical distance, then there are large regions of type I superconductivity, a Meissner state, separating these domains.
Experimental confirmation for this conjecture has arrived recently in MgB2 experiments at 4.2 kelvin. The authors found that there are indeed regimes with a much greater density of vortices. Whereas the typical variation in the spacing between Abrikosov vortices in a type II superconductor is of order 1%, they found a variation of order 50%, in line with the idea that vortices assemble into domains where they may be separated by the critical distance. The term type-1.5 superconductivity was coined for this state.

Improvement by doping

Various means of doping MgB2 with carbon (e.g. using 10% malic acid) can improve the upper critical field and the maximum current density
(also with polyvinyl acetate).
5% doping with carbon can raise Hc2 from 16 T to 36 T whilst lowering Tc only from 39 K to 34 K. The maximum critical current (Jc) is reduced, but doping with TiB2 can reduce the decrease., Issue date: Oct 11, 2005)
The maximum critical current (Jc) in magnetic field is enhanced greatly (approx double at 4.2 K) by doping with ZrB2.
Even small amounts of doping lead both bands into the type II regime and so no semi-Meissner state may be expected.

Thermal conductivity

MgB2 is a multi-band superconductor, that is each Fermi surface has different superconducting energy gap. For MgB2, sigma bond of boron is strong, and it induces large s-wave superconducting gap, and pi bond is weak and induces small s-wave gap. 
The quasiparticle states of the vortices of large gap are highly confined to the vortex core.
On the other hand, the quasiparticle states of small gap are loosely bound to the vortex core. Thus they can be delocalized and overlap easily between adjacent vortices. Such delocalization can strongly contribute to the thermal conductivity, which shows abrupt increase above Hc1.

Possible applications

Superconductors

Superconducting properties and cheapness make magnesium diboride attractive for a variety of applications. For those applications, MgB2 powder is compressed with silver metal (or 316 stainless steel) into wire and sometimes tape via the PIT process.

File:MgB2powder2.jpg
File:pit_process.gif
File:MgB2tape.jpg

In 2006 a 0.5 tesla open MRI superconducting magnet system was built using 18 km of MgB2 wires. This MRI used a closed-loop cryocooler, without requiring externally supplied cryogenic liquids for cooling.
"... ...
Besides the magnet applications MgB2 conductors have potential uses in superconducting transformers, rotors and transmission cables at temperatures of around 25 K, at fields of 1 T."
Thin coatings can be used in superconducting radio frequency cavities to minimize energy loss and reduce the inefficiency of liquid helium cooled niobium cavities.
Because of the low cost of its constituent elements, MgB2 has promise for use in superconducting low to medium field magnets, electric motors and generators, fault current limiters and current leads.

Propellants, explosives, pyrotechnics

Unlike elemental boron whose combustion is incomplete through the glassy oxide layered impeding oxygen diffusion, magnesium diboride burns completely when ignited in oxygen or in mixtures with oxidizers.-C.; Weiser, V. and Roth, E. (2011), Combustion behaviour of Binary Pyrolants based on Mg, MgH2, MgB2, Mg3N2, Mg2Si and Polytetrafluoroethylene, EUROPYRO 2011, Reims, France Thus magnesium boride has been proposed as fuel in ram jets,. R. "MgH2 and Sr(NO3)2 pyrotechnic composition" 






