[[Ida Lupino]]

CATEGORIES: 1918 births, 1995 deaths, 20th-century American actresses, 20th-century English actresses, Alumni of the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, American film actresses, American film directors, American memoirists, American television actresses, American women film directors, American people of Italian descent, American television directors, Burials at Forest Lawn Memorial Park (Glendale), Deaths from stroke, English-language film directors, English emigrants to the United States, English film actresses, English film directors, English television actresses, English people of Italian descent, English television directors, Women television directors, People from Camberwell, People educated at Brighton and Hove High School, Warner Bros. contract players

Ida Lupino (4 February 1918Recorded in Births Mar 1918 Camberwell Vol. 1d, p. 1019 (Free BMD). Transcribed as "Lupine" in the official births index – 3 August 1995) was an English-American film actress and director, and a pioneer among women filmmakers. In her forty-eight year career, she appeared in fifty-nine films and directed seven others, mostly in the United States, where she became a citizen in 1948. She co-wrote and co-produced some of her own films as well. She appeared in serial television programmes fifty-eight times and directed fifty other episodes. Additionally, she contributed as a writer to five films and four TV episodes.

Early life and family

Lupino was born in Camberwell, London, to actress Connie O'Shea (a.k.a. Lupino's birth year is 1918 and not 1914 as some biographies have claimed. 75; ISBN 0-8264-0499-5
Her sister, Rita (born 1920), became an actress and dancer. During World War II she served as a Lieutenant in the Women's Ambulance and Defense Corps.

Career

Acting

Lupino trained at Royal Academy of Dramatic Art for two terms and made her first film appearance in The Love Race (1931), the next year making Her First Affaire, a film her mother originally tested for. She played leading roles in five British films in 1933 at Warner Bros.' Teddington studios and for Julius Hagen at Twickenham, including in The Ghost Camera with John Mills and I Lived with You with Ivor Novello. She moved to Hollywood at the end of that year for the opportunity to play the lead role in Alice in Wonderland (1933). Accessed 4 July 2011.
Lupino starred in over a dozen films in the mid-1930s including The Search for Beauty. This was an international film in which Paramount Studios conceived the idea of a competition amongst the English speaking countries to select the most attractive male and female winners of those countries and a number of USA states. There was, for example a Mr and a Miss Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, England, Scotland etc. who travelled to Hollywood to have a part in the film. The version released in New Zealand, for example, would have the New Zealand winners in it, the Australian version would have the Australian winners and so on. She worked with Columbia in a two film deal, one of which being The Light That Failed (1939), a role she had acquired after running into the director's office unannounced and demanding an audition.  After this performance, she began to be taken seriously as a dramatic actress.  As a result, her parts improved during the 1940s, and she described herself as "the poor man's Bette Davis"
Mark Hellinger, associate producer at Warner Bros., was particularly impressed by this performance, and hired her for a role in They Drive by Night (1940), which led to a Warner Bros. contract, which she negotiated to include some free-lance rights. She starred opposite Humphrey Bogart in this film and High Sierra (1941). Warner Bros. received a great amount of defiance from Lupino, who refused roles that she felt were "beneath her dignity as an actress." As a result, she spent a great deal of her time at Warner Bros. suspended. For her performance in The Hard Way (1943), she won the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress. She starred in Pillow to Post (1945), which would be her only comedic leading role in her film history. She worked regularly and was in demand throughout the 1940s without becoming a major star until later. In 1947, Lupino left Warner Bros. after refusing to renew her contract. She then moved to Columbia Pictures, where she appeared in films such as Road House and On Dangerous Ground before developing a directing career. Lupino often incurred the ire of studio boss Jack Warner by objecting to her casting or making script revisions deemed unacceptable. In 1942, she also rejected an offer to star opposite Ronald Reagan in Kings Row and was immediately put on suspension at the studio. Eventually, a tentative rapprochement was brokered, but their relationship remained strained, and after the drama Deep Valley (1947) finished shooting, neither party moved to renew her contract.

Directing

In the mid-1940s, while on suspension for turning down a role,Rickey, Carrie, "Lupino Noir," Village Voice, October 29 - November 4, 1980, p. 43 Lupino became interested in directing. Her time on suspension allowed her to spend her time observing the filming and editing processes, which would aid her in her directorial endeavors.  She described herself as being bored on set while "someone else seemed to be doing all the interesting work." She co-wrote and co-produced some of her own films as well. She and her husband Collier Young formed an independent company, The Filmakers 
Lupino claims she "…did not set out to be a director," but it was a reality she had to face when her first directing job came unexpectedly in 1949 when Elmer Clifton suffered a mild heart attack and could not finish Not Wanted, a film she co-produced and co-wrote.  Lupino stepped in to finish the film but did not take directorial credit out of respect for Clifton. Although the subject of the film was controversial, it received a vast amount of publicity, and she was invited to discuss the film with Eleanor Roosevelt on a national radio programme.
She went on to direct her own projects, becoming the first actress to produce, direct and write her own films. 75"Never Fear" (1949) would be the first film she would receive directorial credit for.  Lupino once called herself a "bulldozer" in order to secure financing for her production company, and she referred to herself as "mother"—the quintessence of creation— while on set.
In an article for the Village Voice, Carrie Rickey wrote that Lupino was a model of modern feminist filmmaking:
 Not only did Lupino take control of production, direction and screenplay, but each of her movies addresses the brutal repercussions of sexuality, independence and dependence. 43, as quoted in Reel Women by Acker, p. 76 
After four "woman's" films about social issues – including Outrage (1950), a film about rape – Lupino directed her first hard-paced, fast-moving film, The Hitch-Hiker (1953), making her the first woman to direct a film noir. Writer Richard Koszarski noted: Her films display the obsessions and consistencies of a true auteur... In her films The Bigamist and The Hitch-Hiker Lupino was able to reduce the male to the same sort of dangerous, irrational force that women represented in most male-directed examples of Hollywood film noir.Koszarski, Richard, Hollywood Directors, New York: Oxford University Press, 1976 ISBN 0-19-502085-5 (0-19-502085-5) 
Lupino often joked that if she had been the "poor man's Bette Davis" as an actress, then she had become the "poor man's Don Siegel" as a director. In 1952, Lupino was invited to become the "fourth star" in Four Star Productions by Dick Powell, David Niven and Charles Boyer, after Joel McCrea and Rosalind Russell had dropped out of the company.
Because she was a female director, her studio emphasized her femininity, often at the urging of Lupino herself. As one professor puts it "…Lupino's cinematic tenure can be understood as a varied and complex attempt to control both image and image reception." She even credited her refusal to renew her contract with Warner Bros. under the pretences of her domesticity, claiming "I had decided that nothing lay ahead of me but the life of the neurotic star with no family and no home." She wanted to seem unthreatening in a male dominated environment, which is made clear by a statement she made in which she says, "That's where being a man makes a great deal of difference. I don't suppose the men particularly care about leaving their wives and children. During the vacation period the wife can always fly over and be with him. It's difficult for a wife to say to her husband, come sit on the set and watch," in regards to the benefit of being a male director.  
Although directing became Lupino's passion, the drive for money kept her on camera, so that she could acquire the appropriate funds to make her own productions.

Television

Lupino continued acting throughout the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s. Her directing efforts during these years were almost exclusively television productions such as Alfred Hitchcock Presents, Thriller, The Twilight Zone, Have Gun – Will Travel, Honey West, The Donna Reed Show, Gilligan's Island, 77 Sunset Strip, The Rifleman, The Virginian, Sam Benedict, The Untouchables, Hong Kong, The Fugitive and Bewitched.
Lupino appeared in nineteen episodes of Four Star Playhouse from 1952 to 1956. From January , Lupino starred with her then husband, Howard Duff, in the CBS sitcom Mr. Adams and Eve, in which the duo played husband and wife film stars named Howard Adams and Eve Drake, living in Beverly Hills, California. Duff and Lupino also co-starred as themselves in 1959 in one of the thirteen one-hour installments of The Lucy–Desi Comedy Hour. Lupino guest-starred on numerous television programmes, including The Ford Television Theatre (1954), Bonanza (1959), Burke's Law (1963–64), The Virginian (1963–65), Batman (1968), The Mod Squad (1969), Family Affair (1969–70), The Wild, Wild West (1969), Columbo: Short Fuse (1972), Columbo: Swan Song (1974), Barnaby Jones (1974), The Streets of San Francisco, Ellery Queen (1975), Police Woman (1975) and Charlie's Angels (1977), to name a few.
She is also noted as having two distinctions with The Twilight Zone.  She is the only woman to have directed an episode ("The Masks") and the only person to have served as both a director and an on-screen performer (in "The Sixteen-Millimeter Shrine").  She made her final film appearance in 1978 and retired at the age of 60.

Personal life

In June 1948, Lupino became an American citizen.

Marriages

Lupino was married and divorced three times. She married actor Louis Hayward in November 1938. They separated in May 1944 and divorced in May 1945.
In 1983, Lupino petitioned a California court to appoint her business manager, Mary Ann Anderson, as her conservator due to poor business dealings from her prior business management company and her long separation from Howard Duff.

Death

Lupino died from a stroke while undergoing treatment for colon cancer in Los Angeles on 3 August 1995, at the age of 77.

Awards

Lupino has two stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for her contributions to the fields of television and film. They are located at 1724 Vine Street and 6821 Hollywood Boulevard. She won the inaugural Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actress for The Devil's Rain.

Filmography

Notes




