[[Republic of Texas (group)]]

CATEGORIES: Anti-Federalism, Politics of Texas, Secessionist organizations in the United States, Independence movements, United States private paramilitary groups

The Republic of Texas is a general term for several organizations, some of which have been called militia groups,
The movement for independence was started by Richard Lance (Rick) McLaren. McLaren concluded that, in 1861, Texans voted four-to-one to leave the Union. According to McLaren, Texas met the qualifications, under international law, of a captive nation of war, since the end of the American Civil War in 1865.
The movement split into three factions in 1996, one led by McLaren, one by David Johnson and Jesse Enloe, and the third by Archie Lowe and Daniel Miller. In 1997, McLaren and his followers kidnapped Joe and Margaret Ann Rowe, held them hostage at the Fort Davis Resort, and demanded the release of a movement member in exchange for the release of the Rowes.
In 2003, what remained of the movement consolidated into one dominant group recognizing an "interim" government (which replaced the "provisional" government), headed by Daniel Miller. This interim government claimed authority from the original proclamations of 1995 and set up a headquarters in the town of Overton. The movement split again over legal arguments, resulting in the current state of affairs. Most of the original personalities of the movement have disappeared from public view. The organization's finances have come from donations and the sale of some items such as a Republic of Texas Passport. The Republic of Texas headquarters in Overton, Texas burned down on August 31, 2005; one person was moderately injured.Headquarters fire Associated Press, November 1, 2005, Retrieved 2011-07-20
In January 2004, a man in jail in Aspen, Colorado claimed that the state of Colorado had no jurisdiction to extradite him to California on a probation warrant, on the grounds that he was a citizen of the Republic of Texas.  He claimed that the sliver of land which contains Aspen was a part of the original Republic of Texas and, as such, he was not a citizen of the United States. His claim was rejected by the courts. Weird News. The Anchorage Press, Vol. 13, Ed. 2
In a case involving Richard McLaren and his wife Evelyn as plaintiffs, the United States District Court for the District of Columbia ruled, on April 30, 1998: "Despite plaintiffs' argument ..... in 1845, Texas became the 28th state of the United States of America. The Republic of Texas no longer exists". United States Incorporated, 2 F. Supp. 2d 48 (D.D.C. 1998), at 







Texas independence movement websites


