[[Shiiba, Miyazaki]]

CATEGORIES: Villages in Miyazaki Prefecture

 is a village located in Higashiusuki District, Miyazaki Prefecture, Japan.
Shiiba is a small, mountainous village situated in the central area of the island of Kyushu in the northwest of Miyazaki prefecture. The main area of Shiiba village (known as Kami-Shiiba) itself is quite small, however, several small hamlets surround the village to make up the area/region known as Shiiba.
As there are no train stations and a very limited bus service, it is predominately accessible only via driving; the village is around 3 hours drive from both Miyazaki City and Kumamoto City. It can accessed via the area of Gokase (~50 minute drive), which touches on the Miyazaki-Kumamoto border if travelling from the North, or via the road network emanating from the seaside city of Hyuga (~90-110 minute drive) if travelling from the east.
As of 2012, the village has an estimated population of 2,950 and a density of 5.61 persons per km². The total area of Shiiba is 536.20 km².

Environment and Wildlife

Shiiba is a very mountainous region covered with many forests, cliffs and waterfalls. The are also has a few dams located in the area,  the main one being the Shiba Dam which can be found in close proximity to Shiiba Secondary School. As the area is filled with rivers, waterfalls and forests, the air always has a very clean and very fresh feel to it.
Due to the remote, natural, cool environment of Shiiba, it is home to many kinds of wildlife.
Although many of the native animals are rarely seen during the day, they can often be seen very early in the morning or at night, especially when driving.
Shiiba is home to a large number of raccoon dogs that live in the nearby forests and often come out at night to look for food.
There are also a great number of wild boar in the area and they also come out at night and sometimes during the day to look for food.
A large population of deer also live in the Shiiba area. These fantastic animals are seldom seen, however, when they are spotted they always run off and disappear into the forest. This usually occurs during the early morning, dusk or at night time. Sometimes during the late evening after it has become dark, the cries from these animals can be heard all over Shiiba. Despite their beauty and elegance, they have been known to jump in front of cars when startled in the more remote, more mountainous areas of Shiiba, and have in the past caused a few accidents. This is however, an extremely rare occurrence.
Both wild boar meat and deer meat is a local delicacy that is often sold during the Heike festival (see below) and is sometimes served during special events and parties in the village.
The region is also host to a large number of insect groups. Although their numbers dwindle in the colder times of the year and are rarely seen, many are present during the summer months. A large number of Mantis can be seen during this period all over the village usually lying in wait to capture smaller insects for food. The summer also brings in a large number of butterflies, including large, almost hand-sized ones, that can be seen all over the place usually flying near plants and flowers. These can be seen in abundance around the local schools as many Japanese schools grow and keep flowers on their premises. 
During the summer months a variety of beetles can be found including rhinoceros beetles and the Japanese rhinoceros beetle. These large insects usually live underground and in cool, damp areas, hence they are not always easily seen. Many children in Japan, catch or buy these to breed or study them. Much like butterflies, they can be encountered around schools. 
Cockroaches can occasionally be seen during the humid periods of the summer months, however, they are not as common as they are in other parts of Japan. Cicadas can seldom be seen but can always be heard in the summer. 
As Shiiba has a number of rivers, waterfalls and reservoirs, a number of frogs and toads can be seen around the town during the summer months. Drivers can usually see these jumping on and off the roads near the watery areas. As with cicadas they can often be heard more than seen.

Climate

The winters can be very cold, especially in the Okawachi area, with heavy snowfall and subzero temperatures.
Although it changes slightly every year, it annually snows from the period starting from mid to late December until February.
During this time most of the locals have to change their car tires to ones equipped with stronger treading (snow tires). This will reduce the chances of slipping on the roads and makes it easier to drive up the more hilly and steep roads in the region.
During summer time it can be very humid and regularly rains as a direct result of the typhoon season.  Despite receiving extremely poor weather conditions during this time frame, due to its location within Kyushu, and that it is shielded by the surrounding mountains, it is relatively safe and is unaffected by typhoons or other weather related problems. During this time however, the dams are constantly open as to drain out the increased level of water of the reservoirs in Shiiba, causing a massive flow of water through the region which only adds to the humidity.
During the other periods of the year, Shiiba is relatively a cool area when compared to other parts of Miyazaki and Kyushu. This is directly due to its location in Kyushu, the slightly higher altitude, and the surrounding mountains and forests which keep it shielded.

Education

Education in Shiiba is regulated by the Shiiba Village Board of Education (教育委員会 - kyouikuiinkai').
As a result of the declining population, a few of the local schools have been closed over the years.
At present there are 6 primary schools and 2 secondary schools:
Primary Schools - Shiiba Primary School (椎葉小学校), Kozaki Primary School (小崎小学校), Fudono Primary School (不土野小学校), Omukai Primary School (尾向小学校), Okawauchi Primary School (大河内小学校) and Matsuo Primary School (松尾小学校).
Secondary Schools - Shiiba Secondary School (椎葉中学校), Matsuo Secondary School (松尾中学校) (Closing in spring 2013).
As there are no high schools in Shiiba, students are required to study at high schools in other parts of Miyzaki prefecture upon graduation of secondary school.
Students from Matsuo Elementary School initially went straight to Matsuo Junior High School upon graduation. However, due to the upcoming closure of the school in the spring of 2013, all graduating students will be sent to Shiiba Junior high school (This is to become the main and only secondary school in Shiiba).
Despite being a remote village in the mountains of Japan does not mean that the schools (or the village) are secluded from the rest of the world.
Both secondary schools have shared a long friendship and partnership with a school in Singapore.
The final year secondary school students and a few of their teachers travel to Singapore each year, during the summer (August) as part of an international cultural exchange programme. They usually home-stay with the families of students at the school in Singapore for a few days and participate in a variety of activities and events with them. The favour is then returned in the winter (November–December) for a few days when the Singapore students travel to Shiiba as part of their international cultural exchange programme. They are shown around the town and the local museum as well as participating in a home-stay.
As Shiiba is such a small town, it in part, becomes a whole town event. Almost everyone in Shiiba knows of the exchange programme and every year looks forward to hosting their Singaporean guests.
It is a fantastic programme that not only gives the students of both countries the chance to forge strong friendship with people of their own age in a different country but also, encourages inter-cultural exchange and communication. It is an event in their school lives that almost all Shiiba students look forward to one day participating in.

Heike Festival

The village, despite being small, has a long and deep history. Every year, during early to mid November, the locals are joined by hundreds of people from other parts of the country to celebrate the Shiiba Heike Matsuri.
This festival celebrates a legendary tragic love affair that took place between two members of rival samurai families in the area over 800 years ago. This celebration is of a secret love between the Heike clan's Princess, Tsurutomi, and Daihachiro Nasu, a member of the Genji Clan who had been given orders to destroy the Heike clan.
It takes place over 3 days (Friday evening and the following Saturday and Sunday) and includes a number of special events and performances accompanied with food and souvenir stalls with the main attraction being the Heike Parade. Over 300 people participate in the parade with many local men and boys dressing up in Genji clan style Samurai armour walking in line with Daihachiro Nasu, and the local women and girls dressing up as Heike maidens surrounding and following the Princess Tsurutomi. 
The roles for Princess Tsurutomi and Daihchiro Nasu are selected in the months before the parade by the village office. Many of the local school students and teachers, village officials and residents participate in the parade making it the starring attraction.
The Heike Parade has been preceded in recent years by the talented, Kyushu famous, orchestra from Miyazaki Gakuen.
The town's cute, cartoon style mascot, Otsuru-chan (おつるちゃん), is based on Princess Tsurutomi.




