[[Diving cylinder]]

CATEGORIES: Underwater breathing apparatus, Pressure vessels, Breathing gases

A diving cylinder, scuba tank or diving tank is a gas cylinder used to store and transport high pressure breathing gas as a component of a scuba set. It provides gas to the scuba diver through the demand valve of a diving regulator.
Diving cylinders typically have an internal volume of between  of gas at atmospheric pressure is compressed into a 3-litre cylinder when it is filled to 200 bar. Cylinders also come in smaller sizes, such as 0.2, 1.5 and 2 litres, however these are not generally used for breathing, instead being used for purposes such as Surface Marker Buoy, drysuit and buoyancy compensator inflation.
Divers use gas cylinders above water for many purposes including storage of gases for oxygen first aid treatment of diving disorders and as part of storage "banks" for diving air compressor stations. They are also used for many purposes not connected to diving. For these applications they are not diving cylinders.
The term "diving cylinder" tends to be used by gas equipment engineers, manufacturers, support professionals, and divers speaking British English. "Scuba tank" or "diving tank" is more often used colloquially by non-professionals and native speakers of American English. The term "oxygen tank" is commonly used by non-divers when referring to diving cylinders; however, this is a misnomer. These cylinders typically contain (atmospheric) breathing air, or an oxygen-enriched air mix. They rarely contain pure oxygen, except when used for rebreather diving, shallow decompression stops in technical diving or for in-water oxygen recompression therapy. Breathing oxygen at depths greater than (equivalent to a partial pressure of oxygen of 1.6 ATA) can result in oxygen toxicity, a highly dangerous condition that can trigger seizures and thus lead to drowning.

Parts of a cylinder

The diving cylinder consists of several parts:

The pressure vessel

The pressure vessel is normally made of cold-extruded aluminium or forged steel. An especially common cylinder available at tropical dive resorts is an "aluminium-80" which is an aluminium cylinder with an internal volume of . Aluminium cylinders are also often used where divers carry many cylinders, such as in technical diving in warm water where the dive suit does not provide much buoyancy, because the greater buoyancy of aluminium cylinders reduces the amount of extra buoyancy the diver would need to achieve neutral buoyancy. They are also preferred when carried as "sidemount" or "sling" cylinders as the near neutral buoyancy allows them to hang comfortably along the sides of the diver's body, without disturbing trim, and can be handed off to another diver with a minimal effect on buoyancy. In cold water diving, where a diver wearing a highly buoyant thermally insulating dive suit has a large excess of buoyancy, steel cylinders are often used because they are denser than aluminium cylinders. Kevlar wrapped  composite cylinders are used in fire fighting breathing apparatus and oxygen first aid equipment, but are rarely used for diving, due to their high positive buoyancy.
The aluminium alloys used for diving cylinders are 6061 and 6351. 6351 alloy is subject to sustained stress cracking and cylinders manufactured of this alloy should be periodically eddy current tested according to national legislation and manufacturer's recommendations.luxfercylinders.hawaii.pdf
The neck of the cylinder is internally threaded to fit a cylinder valve. There are several standards for neck threads, these include:
Parallel threads are made to several standards:
The 3/4"NGS and 3/4"BSP are very similar, having the same pitch and a pitch diameter that only differs by about , but they are not compatible, as the thread forms are different.
All taper thread valves are sealed using an O-ring at top of the neck thread which seals in a chamfer or step in the cylinder neck and against the flange of the valve.
The shoulder of the cylinder carries stamp markings providing required information about the cylinder. First edition 2002

File:Permanent cylinder markings 2.ft. 3000 psi cylinder
File:Permanent cylinder markings 3.ft. 3000 psi cylinder
File:Permanent cylinder markings 4.2 l 232 bar cylinder
File:Permanent cylinder markings 5.gif|Stamp markings on an Italian manufacture steel 7 l 300 bar cylinder

The cylinder valve

=Types of cylinder valve=

Cylinder valves are classified by three basic aspects: The connection with the cylinder, the connection to the regulator, and other distinguishing features.

==Cylinder thread variations==

Cylinder threads are in two basic configurations: Taper thread and parallel thread. The thread specification must match the neck thread of the cylinder.

File:Draeger 300 bar taper thread DIN cylinder valve P5070178.JPG|Draeger 300 bar taper thread DIN cylinder valve
File:Pillar valve DIN 232.jpg|A 232 bar DIN connection cylinder valve with parallel thread cylinder connection

==Connection to the regulator==

There are three types of cylinder valve in general use for Scuba cylinders containing air:

===Pressure rating===

DIN valves are produced in 200 bar and 300 bar pressure ratings. The number of threads and the detail configuration of the connections is designed to prevent incompatible combinations of filler attachment or regulator attachment with the cylinder valve.
Yoke valves are rated between 200 and 240 bar, and there does not appear to be any mechanical design detail preventing connection between any yoke fittings, though some older yoke clamps will not fit over the popular 232/240 bar combination DIN/yoke cylinder valve as the yoke is too narrow.
Adaptors are available to allow connection of DIN regulators to yoke cylinder valves (A-clamp or yoke adaptor), and to connect yoke regulators to DIN cylinder valves. (plug adaptors and block adaptors) Plug adaptors are rated for 232/240 bar. Block adaptors are generally rated for 200 bar.
There are also cylinder valves for Scuba cylinders containing gases other than air:

File:Adaptor (yoke to DIN).jpg|A yoke (A-clamp) to DIN adaptor allows connection of a DIN regulator to a Yoke cylinder valve
File:Diving cyinder valve DIN insert 1 P5180281.JPG|Din plug adaptor
File:Parallel thread cylinder valve with DIN thread attachment point and plug adaptor P5190307.JPG|DIN valve with plug adaptor for yoke attachment fitted

==Other distinguishing features==

===Plain valves===

===Reserve valves===

File:"J" Valve on Diving Cylinder from 1960s.1960
File:Draeger taper thread reserve cylinder valve P5070173.JPG|Draeger taper thread cylinder valve with reserve lever
File:Robinet double DIN.jpg|"H"-valve with DIN connections
File:Draeger 200 bar cylinder valves with manifold and reserve lever P5070175.JPG|Draeger 200 bar cylinder valves with manifold and reserve lever
File:Draeger 200 bar cylinder manifold P5070179.JPG|Draeger 200 bar cylinder manifold
File:Left side cylinder valve for barrel seal manifold with blanking plug PB128179.jpg|Left side cylinder valve for barrel seal manifold with blanking plug and DIN connection

Accessories

Additional components for convenience, protection or other functions, not directly required for the function as a pressure vessel.

=Manifolds=

A cylinder manifold is a tube which connects two cylinders together so that the contents of both can be supplied to one or more regulators.
There are three commonly used configurations of manifold:
A relatively uncommon manifold system is a connection which screws directly into the neck threads of both cylinders, and has a single valve to release gas to a connector for a regulator. These manifolds can include a reserve valve, either in the main valve or at one cylinder. This system is mainly of historical interest.

=Cylinder bands=

Cylinder bands are straps, usually of stainless steel, which are used to clamp two cylinders together as a twin set.  The cylinders may be manifolded or independent. It is usual to use a cylinder band near the top of the cylinder, just below the shoulders, and one lower down. The standard distance between centrelines for bolting to a backplate is 

=Cylinder boot=

A cylinder boot is a hard rubber or plastic cover which fits over the base of a diving cylinder to protect the paint from abrasion and impact, to protect the surface the cylinder stands on from impact with the cylinder, and in the case of round bottomed cylinders, to allow the cylinder to stand upright on its base.

=Cylinder net=

A cylinder net is a tubular net which is stretched over a cylinder and tied on at top and bottom. The function is to protect the paintwork from scratching, and on booted cylinders it also helps drain the surface between the boot and cylinder, which reduces corrosion problems under the boot. Mesh size is usually about . Some divers will not use boots or nets as they can snag more easily than a bare cylinder and constitute an entrapment hazard in some environments such as caves and the interior of wrecks.

=Cylinder handle=

A cylinder handle may be fitted, usually clamped to the neck, to conveniently carry the cylinder. This can also increase the risk of snagging in an enclosed environment.

File:Diving cylinder a clamp.jpg|A 15 litre, 232 bar cylinder with "Yoke" valve and cylinder handle
File:Diving cylinder din. The colour-coding is the old UK standard for air prior to 2006
File:Face sealed isolation manifold on twin 12l steel cylinders PB128181. The plastic discs are records of the latest internal inspection
File:Twin cylinders with tank band and bootsPB128184.jpg|Twinned cylinders showing cylinder boots and lower band

Cylinder pressure rating

Scuba cylinders are technically all high pressure gas containers, but within the industry in the US there are three pressure ratings in common use;
low pressure (2400 to 2640 psi — 165 to 182 bar), standard (3000 psi —  207 bar), and high pressure (3300 to 3500 psi — 227 to 241 bar)Staff, Dive Gear Express: How to select a SCUBA tank.   The thickness of the cylinder walls is directly related to the working pressure, and this affects the buoyancy characteristics of the cylinder. A low pressure cylinder will be more buoyant than a high pressure cylinder with similar size and proportions of length to diameter and in the same alloy.
US made aluminum cylinders usually have a standard working pressure of .
Other parts of the world using the metric system usually refer to the cylinder pressure directly in bar but would generally use "high pressure" to refer to a  working pressure cylinder, which can not be used with a yoke connector on the regulator.

Cylinder capacity

There are two commonly used conventions for describing the capacity of a diving cylinder. One is based on the internal volume of the cylinder. The other is based on nominal volume of gas stored.

Internal volume

The internal volume is commonly quoted in most countries. It can be measured easily by filling the cylinder with fresh water. This has resulted in the term 'water capacity' (WC) which is often marked on the cylinder shoulder. It's almost always expressed as a volume but sometimes as weight of the water. Fresh water has a density close to one kilogram per litre so the numerical values will be similar.
The usual units are:

=Standard sizes by internal volume=

These are representative examples, for a larger range, the on-line catalogues of the manufacturers such as Faber, Pressed Steel, Luxfer, and Catalina may be consulted. The applications are typical, but not exclusive.

Nominal volume of gas stored

The nominal volume of gas stored is commonly quoted as the cylinder capacity in the USA. It's a measure of the volume of gas that can be released from the full cylinder at atmospheric pressure. Terms used for the capacity include 'free gas volume' or 'free gas equivalent'. It depends on the internal volume and the working pressure of a cylinder. If the working pressure is higher, the cylinder will store more gas for the same volume.
The working pressure is not necessarily the same as the actual pressure used. Some cylinders are permitted to exceed the nominal working pressure by 10% and this is indicated by a '+' symbol. This extra pressure allowance is dependent on the cylinder passing the appropriate periodical hydrostatic test and is not generally valid for US cylinders exported to countries with differing standards.
For example, common Al80 cylinder is an aluminum cylinder which has a nominal 'free gas' capacity of .

=Standard sizes by volume of gas stored=

Applications and configurations of diving cylinders

Divers may carry one cylinder or multiples, depending on the requirements of the dive. Where diving takes place in low risk areas, where the diver may safely make a free ascent, or where a buddy is available to provide an alternative air supply in an emergency, recreational divers usually carry only one cylinder. An example of this type is coral reef diving where it is possible to do an interesting dive without going deep or needing decompression. Where diving risks are higher, for example where the visibility is low or when recreational divers do deeper or decompression diving, divers routinely carry more than one gas source. An example of this type is north European diving where the temperature is often less than  and many interesting dive sites are shipwrecks in deeper water on the sea bed.
Diving cylinders may serve different purposes. One or two cylinders may be used as a primary breathing source which is intended to be breathed from for most of the dive. A smaller cylinder carried in addition to a larger cylinder is called a "pony bottle". A cylinder to be used purely as an independent safety reserve is called a "bailout bottle". A pony bottle is commonly used as a bailout bottle, but this would depend on the time required to surface.
Divers doing technical diving often carry different gases, each in a separate cylinder, for each phase of the dive:
Rebreathers may use internal cylinders:
Rebreathers may also  be supplied from "off-board" cylinders, which are not permanently plumbed into the rebreather, but connected to it by a flexible hose and coupling and usually carried side slung. Rebreather divers also often carry a bailout cylinder if the internal diluent cylinder is too small for safe use for bailout.
For safety, divers sometimes carry an additional independent scuba cylinder with its own regulator to mitigate out-of-air emergencies should the primary breathing gas supply fail. For much common recreational diving where a controlled emergency swimming ascent is acceptably safe, this extra equipment is not needed or used. This extra cylinder is known as a bail-out cylinder, and may be carried in several ways, and can be any size that can hold enough gas to get the diver safely back to the surface.

Open-circuit

For open-circuit divers, there are several options for the combined cylinder and regulator system:

Closed-circuit

Diving cylinders are used in closed-circuit diving in two roles:

File:Aluminium cylinder rigged as a sling mount PB128186.2 litre aluminium cylinder rigged for sling mounting
File:Aqua lung.jpg|15 litre, 232 bar, A clamp single cylinder open circuit breathing set
File:Diving cylinder twin 7s. The left cylinder shows manufacturer markings. The right cylinder shows test stamps
File:Manifolded twinset.JPG|Manifolded twin 12 litre, 232 bar breathing set with two A-clamp pillar valves and two regulators
File:Inspiration back.

Gas calculations

Breathing gas endurance

A commonly asked question is 'what is the underwater duration of a particular cylinder?'
There are two parts to this problem:

=The cylinder's capacity to store gas=

Two features of the cylinder determine its gas carrying capacity:
To calculate the quantity of gas:
 Volume of gas at atmospheric pressure = (cylinder volume) x (cylinder pressure) / (atmospheric pressure) 
So a 12 litre cylinder at 232 bar would hold almost  of air at atmospheric pressure.
In the US and in many diving resorts you might find aluminum cylinders with an internal capacity of ; Taking air pressure as 14.7 psi, this gives 0.39 x 3000 / 14.7 = 80 ft³ These cylinders would be described by US convention as "80 cubic foot cylinders", (the common "aluminum-80") as the US normally refers to cylinder capacity as free-air equivalent at its working pressure, rather than the internal volume of the cylinder, which is the measure commonly used in metric countries.
Up to 200 bar the ideal gas law remains valid and the relationship between the pressure, size of the cylinder and gas contained in the cylinder is linear; at higher pressures there is proportionally less gas in the cylinder. A 3 litre, 300 bar cylinder can only carry up to  of atmospheric pressure gas and not the 900 litres expected from the ideal gas law.

=Diver gas consumption=

There are three factors at work here:
To calculate the quantity of gas consumed:
 gas consumed = breathing rate × time × ambient pressure 
Thus, a diver with a breathing rate of 20 L/min will consume at 30 meters (4 bar) the equivalent of 80 L/min at 1 bar (e.g. at the surface). If this diver only had a 10 litre 200 bar cylinder to breathe from, the gas in the cylinder would be exhausted after 2000/80 = 25 minutes.
Keeping this in mind, it is not hard to see why technical divers who do long deep dives require multiple cylinders or rebreathers.

Breathing time

For metric users:
Absolute maximum breathing time (BT) can be calculated as
which, using the ideal gas law, is
This may be written as
with
AP is deducted from CP, as the quantity of air represented by AP can in practice not be used for breathing by the diver as she needs it to overcome the pressure of the water (AP) when inhaling.
However, in normal diving usage, a reserve is always factored in. The reserve is a proportion of the cylinder pressure which a diver will not expect to use other than in case of emergency. The reserve may be a quarter or a third of the cylinder pressure or it may be a fixed pressure, common examples are 50 bar and 500 psi. The formula above is then modified to give the usable breathing time as
where RP is the reserve pressure.
Ambient pressure (AP) is the surrounding water pressure at a given depth and is made up of the sum of the water pressure and the air pressure at the surface. It is calculated as
with
In practical terms, this formula can be approximated by
For example (using the first formula (1) for absolute maximum breathing time), a diver at a depth of 15 meters in water with an average density of 1020 kg / m³ (typical salt water), who breathes at a rate of 20 liters per minute, using a dive cylinder of 18 liters pressurized at 200 bars, can breathe for a period of 72 minutes before the cylinder and supply line pressure has fallen so low as to prevent her from inhaling. In most open circuit scuba systems this happens quite suddenly, from a normal breath to the next abnormal breath, a breath which typically cannot be fully drawn. (There is never any difficulty exhaling). In such circumstances there remains air under pressure in the cylinder, but the diver is unable to breathe it. Some of it can be breathed if the diver ascends, and even without ascent, in some systems a bit of air from the cylinder is available to inflate BCD devices even after it no longer has pressure enough to actuate the mouthpiece valve.
Using the same conditions and a reserve of 50 bar, the formula (2) for usable breathing time is worked thus:
This would give a dive time of 54 min at 15 m before reaching the reserve of 50 bar.

Reserves

It is strongly recommended that a portion of the usable gas of the cylinder be held aside as a safety reserve. The reserve is designed to provide gas for longer than planned decompression stops or to provide time to resolve underwater emergencies.
The size of the reserve depends upon the risks involved during the dive. A deep or decompression dive warrants a greater reserve than a shallow or a no stop dive. In recreational diving for example, it is recommended that the diver plans to surface with a reserve remaining in the cylinder of 500 psi, 50 bar or 25% of the initial capacity, depending of the teaching of the diver training organisation. This is because recreational divers practicing within "no-decompression" limits can normally make a direct ascent in an emergency. On technical dives where a direct ascent is either impossible (due to overhead obstructions) or dangerous (due to the requirement to make decompression stops), divers plan larger margins of safety using the rule of thirds: one third of the gas supply is planned for the outward journey, one third is for the return journey and one third is a safety reserve.
Some training agencies teach the concept of minimum gas and provide a simple calculation that allows a diver to work out an acceptable reserve to get two divers in an emergency to the surface. See DIR diving for more information.

Weight of gas consumed

The loss of the weight of the gas taken from the cylinder makes the cylinder and diver more buoyant. This can be a problem if the diver is unable to remain neutrally buoyant towards the end of the dive because most of the gas has been breathed from the cylinder.
Table showing the buoyancy of diving cylinders in water when empty and full of air.
Assumes 1 litre of air at atmospheric pressure and 10°C weighs 1.25g.gasdiving.co.htm Gas Diving

Filling cylinders

Diving cylinders should only be filled with air from diving air compressors or with other breathing gases using gas blending techniques. Both these services should be provided by reliable suppliers such as dive shops. Breathing industrial compressed gases can be lethal because the high pressure increases the effect of any impurities in them.
Special precautions need to be taken with gases other than air:
Contaminated air at depth can be fatal. Common contaminants are: carbon monoxide a by-product of combustion, carbon dioxide a product of metabolism, oil and lubricants from the compressor.
Keeping the cylinder slightly pressurized at all times reduces the possibility of contaminating the inside of the cylinder with corrosive agents, such as sea water, or toxic material, such as oils, poisonous gases, fungi or bacteria.
The blast caused by a sudden release of the gas pressure inside a diving cylinder makes them very dangerous if mismanaged. The greatest risk of explosion exists at filling time and comes from thinning of the walls of the pressure vessel due to corrosion. Another cause of failure is damage or corrosion of the threads and neck of the cylinder where the pillar valve is screwed in. Aluminium cylinders have been observed occasionally to fail explosively, fragmenting the cylinder wall. Steel cylinders usually remain mostly intact, and tend to fail at the neck.

Inspection and testing

Most countries require diving cylinders to be checked on a regular basis, see gas cylinder. This usually consists of an internal visual inspection and a hydrostatic test. The inspection and testing requirements for scuba cylinders may be very different from the requirements for other compressed gas containers due to the more corrosive environment.
A hydrostatic test involves pressurising the cylinder to its test pressure (often 5/3 or 3/2 of the working pressure) and measuring its volume before and after the test. A permanent increase in volume above the tolerated level means the cylinder fails the test and is permanently removed from service.
An inspection includes external and internal inspection for damage, corrosion, and correct colour and markings. The failure criteria vary according to the published standards of the relevant authority, but may include inspection for bulges, overheating, dents, gouges, electrical arc scars, pitting, line corrosion, general corrosion, cracks, thread damage, defacing of permanent markings, and colour coding.
When a cylinder is manufactured, its specification, including manufacturer, working pressure, test pressure, date of manufacture, capacity and weight are stamped on the cylinder.2002-07-01 Gas cylinders - Stamp marking
After a cylinder passes the test, the test date, (or the test expiry date in some countries such as Germany), is punched into the shoulder of the cylinder for easy verification at fill time. Note: this is a European requirement. There is an international standard for the stamp format
Most compressor operators check these details before filling the cylinder and may refuse to fill non-standard or out-of-test cylinders. Note: this is a European requirement, a requirement of the USA DOT, and a South African requirement.

Safety

Before any cylinder is filled, verification of testing dates and a visual examination for external damage and corrosion are required by law in some jurisdictions,South African National Standard SANS 10019:2008 and are prudent even if not legally required at other places. In the United States, scuba tanks must be hydro-tested every five years and visually inspected every year. Test dates can be checked by looking at the visual inspection sticker and the hydro-test date is stamped on top of the cylinder.
Before use the user should verify the contents of the cylinder and check the function of the cylinder valve. Pressure and gas mixture are critical information for the diver, and the valve should open freely without sticking or leaks from the spindle seals. Sniffing air bled from a cylinder may also reveal unpleasant surprises better left on land than discovered in the water.
Cylinders should not be left standing unattended unless secured so that they can not fall in reasonable foreseeable circumstances as an impact could damage the cylinder valve mechanism, and cocievably fracture the valve at the neck threads. This is more likely with taper thread valves, and when it happens the energy of the compressed gas is released within a second, and can accelerate the cylinder to speeds which can causes severe injury or damage to the surroundings.
A neatly assembled setup, with regulators, gauges, and delicate computers butterflied inside the BCD, or clipped where they will not be walked on, and stowed under the boat bench or secured to a rack, is the practice of a competent diver.
As the scuba set is a life support system, one should not touch a fellow diver's gear, even to move it, without their knowledge and approval.
Full cylinders should not be exposed to temperatures above 65°C and cylinders should not be filled to pressures greater than the developed pressure appropriate to the certified working pressure of the cylinder except by a test station performing a hydrostatic test.
Cylinders should be clearly labelled with their current contents. A generic "Nitrox" or "Trimix" label will alert the user that the contents may not be air, and must be analysed before use. In some parts of the world a label is required specifically indicating that the contents are air, and in other places a colour code without additional labels indicates by default that the contents are air.
Cases of lateral epicondylitis are also reported from the handling of diving cylinders.

Long term storage

Breathing quality gases do not deteriorate during storage in steel or aluminium cylinders. Provided there is insufficient water content to promote internal corrosion, the stored gas will remain unchanged for years if stored at temperatures within the allowed working range for the cylinder, usually below 65°C. If there is any doubt, a check of oxygen fraction will indicate whether the gas has changed (the other components are inert). Any unusual smells would be an indication that the cylinder or gas was contaminated at the time of filling.

Gas cylinder colour-coding and labeling

European Union

In the European Union gas cylinders may be colour-coded according to EN 1098-3. The "shoulder" is the domed top of the cylinder between the parallel section and the pillar valve. For mixed gases, the colours can be either bands or "quarters".
Note: As of the end of 2006, the quartered specification is obsolete, and new cylinders are supplied with bands, and the old system is repainted.
In the European Union breathing gas cylinders must be labeled with their contents. The label should state the type of breathing gas contained by the cylinder

South Africa

Scuba cylinders are required to comply with the colours and markings specified in SANS 10019:2006.

Worldwide

In many recreational diving settings where air and nitrox are the widely used gases, nitrox cylinders are colour-coded with a green stripe on yellow bottom. The normal colour of aluminium diving cylinders is their natural silver. Steel diving cylinders are often painted, to reduce corrosion, mainly yellow or white to increase visibility. In some industrial cylinder identification colour tables, yellow shoulders means chlorine and more generally within Europe it refers to cylinders with toxic and/or corrosive contents; but this is of no significance in scuba since gas fittings would not be compatible.
Cylinders that are subject to gas blending with pure oxygen may also be required to display an "oxygen service certificate" label indicating they have been prepared for use with high partial pressures  and gas fractions of oxygen.








