[[Jesse James (customizer)]]

CATEGORIES: 1969 births, American television personalities, Living people, Motorcycle builders, People from Lynwood, California, The Apprentice (U.S. TV series) contestants

Jesse Gregory James (born April 19, 1969) is an American television personality and CEO of Austin, Texas-based West Coast Choppers, a manufacturer of custom-made motorcycles. James was the host of the reality TV shows Jesse James is a Dead Man on Spike TV and Monster Garage, on the Discovery Channel, and the focus of the documentary Motorcycle Mania, also on Discovery. Jesse James also appeared in the Tony Hawk's Underground 2 video game.
James's latest venture is chronicling his custom builds at his Austin Speed Shop in his new TV series, Jesse James Outlaw Garage which premiered on April 9, 2012 on the Discovery Channel.

Career

Custom motorcycles and cars

After several years working as a bodyguard for Danzig, Slayer, and occasionally for other bands such as Soundgarden, James opened West Coast Choppers in his mother's garage in 1992. The company grew quickly and soon moved to a larger facility for select customers and companies. About 200 bikes have been built at West Coast Choppers. West Coast Choppers is also sponsoring race teams in Top Fuel Drags and Super Late Model NASCAR. Jesse James has also built and is racing an off-road Trophy Truck and a Figure-8 race car.

Other business ventures

He was the owner of the Cisco Burger restaurant, which opened on April 28, 2006, just down the street from West Coast Choppers. The 1950s style hamburger stand—named after his beloved pit bull who is now deceased—featured Angus beef burgers, low-fat burritos, organic vegetables, and biodegradable wrappings. It has officially closed. James also had partial ownership in Austin Speed Shop in Austin, Texas which he left in 2013 to focus on the re-opening of West Coast Choppers in Austin. 
Other business ventures include the Chopperdogs fan club and the Jesse's Girl clothing line. Since 2006, James has nationally published Garage magazine. In November 2013 Jesse James Firearms Unlimited unveiled its first two firearms, a 1911 pistol and AR-15 rifle.

Television

In 2000, the Discovery Channel made the documentary Motorcycle Mania, which chronicled James's everyday life. Following the success of the documentary, the Discovery Channel approached James with an offer to host a new show called Monster Garage where James and a crew of mechanics modified vehicles under a short deadline. James later established Payupsucker Productions, under which he produced shows like History of the Chopper, Iraq Confidential with Jesse James and Green Scream, in which James plans to break the land speed record with an eco-friendly hydrogen car. 
Through James's show "History Of The Chopper" there are also glimpses of his involvement with the Hells Angels and other 1% outlaw motorcycle clubs.
He also had an appearance on Discovery Channel's Sons of Guns. He appeared on the second season of Celebrity Apprentice. Each celebrity played to raise money for a favorite charity; James selected to play for the Long Beach Education Foundation. Due to his poor performance in raising funds, James was eliminated by Donald Trump on the second-to-last show (ultimately placing 3rd) which aired May 3, 2009. Trump repeatedly cited James's stoic refusal to contact then-wife Bullock to raise funds for the show's challenges, though other celebrities had no problem tapping high-rolling contacts for cash.
His show Jesse James is a Dead Man premiered on Spike TV on May 31, 2009. The show features James doing death defying stunts. The first episode set a ratings record for Spike, drawing the largest audience ever for an unscripted series on the network, with 2 million viewers. The show is produced by Spike TV, BASE Productions and James's company, PayupSucker Productions."Jesse James Is A Dead Man" at MyFoxLA.
James has appeared on an episode of Street Customs where he had his pickup truck customized by West Coast Customs.
He appeared in an advert for T-Mobile's Google mobile phone with Whoopi Goldberg and Phil Jackson.T-Mobile Gets Phil Jackson, Whoopi Goldberg To Help Sell New Google Phone (This source misspells his given name as "Jessie".) Jesse James appeared on Sons of Guns on March 28, 2012. He asked the Red Jacket Firearms team to build a customized BAR for him, and even assisted in the build himself.
Jesse appeared in special "Biker Build-Off" episodes of American Chopper in 2011 and 2012 for bike build-off competitions with Paul Teutul Jr. (representing Paul Jr. Designs), and Paul Teutul Sr. (representing Orange County Choppers), with Gas Monkey Garage (featured on the Discovery series Fast N' Loud) entering the competition in 2012.

Personal life

Family and relationships

James' Discovery Channel website states that his great-great-grandfather was the notorious outlaw's cousin.
However, Eric James, president of the James Preservation Trust, which tracks claims of being a relative of the outlaw, says it cannot find a record of him in the family tree, and has asked him to provide a family genealogy and DNA sample for the Trust to review; he has not provided the requested information.
James has three children: a daughter and a son with his first wife, Karla James, to whom he was married from 1991 to 2002; and a daughter with his second wife, stripper/porn star/producer Janine Lindemulder, to whom he was married from 2002 to 2004.
On July 16, 2005, James married his third wife, actress Sandra Bullock. They met when she arranged for her 10-year-old godson, a fan, to tour the set of Monster Garage.
In October 2009, James's ex-wife Lindemulder, who had been in federal prison for six months for tax evasion, sought to regain custody of her then five-year-old daughter with James, Sunny, after James had been granted sole guardianship of her. James sought to retain full guardianship, citing fear of the environment in which his daughter would be placed if returned to Lindemulder."Sandra Bullock Battles Porn Star Janine Lindemulder for Child Custody" CBS News; October 29, 2009
In March 2010, a media scandal arose when several women claimed to have had affairs with James during his marriage to Bullock. Bullock cancelled European promotional appearances for The Blind Side citing "unforeseen personal reasons".
In August 2010, tattoo artist Kat Von D confirmed reports that she and James were dating."'LA Ink' Star Sets the Record Straight About Her Relationship with Steve-O", BuddyTV.com, August 16, 2007
In late 2012, James became engaged to professional drag racer Alexis DeJoria. They married on March 24, 2013 at the estate of the bride's father, entrepreneur John Paul DeJoria.

Legal troubles

In 2007, James was fined $271,250 by the California Air Resources Board (CARB) after state officials determined that he had sold motorcycles in violation of California's clean-air laws. According to police, James's customized bikes were emitting 10 times the legal limits of hydrocarbons. Investigators also found that the motorcycles did not have state-certified emissions equipment on their fuel systems. The bikes were sold between 1998 and 2005. James said the CARB refused his offer to recall and modify the uncompliant choppers.  Since 2005 West Coast Choppers has built emissions-compliant choppers.
In July 2008, James faced a $422,680 breach of contract lawsuit from Michael Jones, a customer who hired James to build him a custom car, who contended that after paying $270,000 over two years, the car was not completed, and that James informed him that it would cost between $600,000 and $700,000."Dude, Jesse James Took Me For a Ride!" TMZ; July 16, 2008 That September, James faced another lawsuit from his former lawyer for $327,533 in unpaid fees."Bang Bang -- Jesse James Sued" TMZ; September 5, 2008






