[[Freedom Tower (Miami)]]

CATEGORIES: Buildings and structures completed in 1925, Mediterranean Revival architecture in Florida, National Historic Landmarks in Florida, National Register of Historic Places in Miami, Florida, Skyscrapers in Miami, Florida, Visitor attractions in Miami, Florida, Museums in Miami, Florida, Art museums in Florida, University museums in Florida

The Freedom Tower is a building in Miami, Florida, designed by Schultze and Weaver. It is currently used as a contemporary art museum and a central office to different disciplines in the arts associated with Miami Dade College. It is located at 600 Biscayne Boulevard on the Wolfson Campus of Miami Dade College. On September 10, 1979, it was added to the U.S. National Register of Historic Places. It was designated a U.S. National Historic Landmark on October 6, 2008.
The Freedom Tower is directly served by the Miami Metrorail at the Government Center Station and the Historic Overtown/Lyric Theatre Station, as well as by the Metromover at the Freedom Tower Station on the Omni Loop.

History

Originally completed in 1925 as the headquarters and printing facility for the newspaper The Miami News, the Freedom Tower is an example of a Mediterranean Revival styled structure with design elements borrowed from the Giralda in Seville, Spain. Its cupola on a 255 foot (78 m) tower contained a decorative beacon.
The Miami News vacated the building in 1957 to relocate to a new facility on the Miami River. As refugees from Cuba fleeing Fidel Castro's communist regime arrived in Miami during the 1960s, the federal government used the facility to process, document and provide medical and dental services for the newcomers. After the major era of refugees ended in 1972, the federal government sold the building to private buyers in 1974. In 1979, the building was listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
The New World Mural, painted in 1988 by The Miami Artisans, Wade S. Foy, John Conroy, William Mark Coulthard, Phylis Shaw, Gerome Villa Bergsen and Ana Bikic, is still intact and on view in the building; however, it has limited access by the public.
In 1997, the building was purchased for US$4.1 million by Jorge Mas Canosa, founder of  MasTec and initiator of the Cuban American National Foundation. Canosa then restored the tower and converted it into a monument for the refugees who fled to the United States from communist Cuba. It housed a museum, library, meeting hall, and the offices of the Cuban American National Foundation. Salsa legend Celia Cruz was memorialized at the Freedom Tower upon her death in 2003, with more than 200,000 turning out to show their respects. 
In 2004, the Freedom Tower was purchased by developer Pedro Martin and his company, Terra Group, who proposed a new building (possibly condominiums) on an adjacent part of the property. Preservationists opposed the plan; thus, in 2005, the developers donated the Freedom Tower to Miami Dade College. Today, it is used as a museum, a cultural center, and an educational center.

The building has a heavy history and is reinventing itself once again as it lends itself to a new purpose. The building is gaining a significant amount of local recognition for its major exhibitions and growth as an institution of art, serving the community as a non profit organization. 
The MDC Museum of Art + Design is on the second floor of the building and offers a wide range of exhibits, which are free and open to the public.
Miami Dade College has hosted several major exhibitions, including showcases of the works of masters Dalí, Goya and Da Vinci.

Gallery

File:Miami freedom tower for wikipedia by tom schaefer miamitom 0001.jpg|Miami Freedom Tower's cupola
File:Miami Freedom Tower by Tom Schaefer 5.jpg|Westside - Backside
File:Miami freedom tower for wikipedia by tom schaefer miamitom 0004.JPG|April 2007 From the Port Bridge Looking West, notice Miami Arena in background before demolition
File:Miami Freedom Tower by Tom Schaefer.jpg|09-05-2010 From the Port Bridge Looking West
File:Miami Freedom Tower by Tom Schaefer 2.jpg|09-05-2010 Closeup view, front
File:Miami Freedom Tower by Tom Schaefer 3.jpg|09-05-2010 Front of building from Biscayne Blvd
File:Miami freedom tower night.jpg|02-04-2011 Miami Freedom Tower at Night with Rich Purple Lighting
File:Freedom Tower, Miami, restoration-maintenance.JPG|03-02-2011 Maintenance on the Freedom Tower in 2010/2011, viewed from the west
File:Freedom Tower (Miami) restoration.JPG|Preservation/maintenance work being done on the tower (March 2011)






