[[Little Birdy]]

CATEGORIES: Australian indie rock groups, Musical groups established in 2002, Western Australian musical groups, Australian alternative rock groups, Musical groups from Perth, Western Australia, 2002 establishments in Australia

Little Birdy are an Australian indie rock band formed in Perth, Western Australia in 2002 by singer and guitarist Katy Steele, drummer Matt Chequer, guitarist and keyboardist Simon Leach, and bass guitarist Scott O'Donoghue. They gained public attention when their single "Relapse" gained popularity on alternative radio stations such as Triple J, leading them to be signed with the record label Eleven: A Music Company. To date, they have released three studio albums (all three of which entered the top ten in the ARIA charts), two EPs, and ten singles.

Early history

Katy Steele's father Rick Steele is a local blues musician in various cover bands, and her brothers Jesse and Luke were both members of The Sleepy Jackson. Jesse left the band in 2000. Steele was the singer-songwriter and guitarist in her band, The Plastik Scene. A friend of Luke's, Simon Leach, heard Steele singing at her brother's 21st birthday party. "Katy was always there... She was around 15 when I saw her sing. Three years later, Katy and I were playing together". Steele left her band and, with Leach as drummer, they performed several gigs as a duo. Scott ('Barney') O'Donoghue later offered to play bass guitar. Leach became tired of percussion and began playing guitar when Matt Chequer joined on drums. In 2002 Little Birdy was formed, named after the Ween song of the same name.
A demo, leaked to radio, was played on alternative stations. while local Perth radio station Nova 93.7 aired a demo of "Baby Blue". As a result of independent media coverage and radio playing demos, Australian labels sought to sign the band. Little Birdy opted for the independent Eleven label with distribution through Virgin Records-EMI. Steele, along with Leach, who was a graphic designer, quit their jobs and became full-time musicians after the signing.

Recording career

Little Birdy released their self-titled debut EP Little Birdy in October 2003, which peaked at No. 27 on the ARIA Singles Chart. "Relapse" reached No. 16 on the Triple J Hottest 100 and "Baby Blue" attained No. 25. In September, Steele, in an interview on Whammo.au, described the band's progress: "I think we've already written a lot of the first album already. A lot of songs we play live would be awesome if they were recorded". The band played gigs in London and New York later that year, with interest from international record companies.
Their second EP, This Is a Love Song, was issued in March 2004 and debuted at No. 22. Also in that month, Steele won the inaugural Jessica Michalik Contemporary Music Award, presented by The Big Day Out.
In October, the band released their debut album, BigBigLove, which was produced and engineered by Paul McKercher (The Cruel Sea, Spiderbait, Augie March) and peaked at No. 5 on the ARIA Albums Chart.
In 2005, at the WAMi Awards, Steele won 'Best Female Vocalist' and "Beautiful to Me" won 'Most Popular Music Video'. Additional nominations were, Leach for 'Best Guitarist', the band for 'Best Popular Act', 'Most Popular Commercial Pop Act' and 'Best Indie/Pop Act', and BigBigLove as 'Most Popular Album'. At the ARIA Music Awards of 2005, BigBigLove was nominated in four categories: 'Breakthrough Artist - Album', 'Best Rock Album', 'Producer of the Year" (McKercher), and 'Engineer of the Year' (McKercher). Also that year, Little Birdy's version of "Six Months in a Leaky Boat" from the tribute album, She Will Have Her Way, of Neil and Tim Finn songs performed by female Australian and New Zealand musicians, reached No. 96 on Triple J's Hottest 100 of 2005.
During 2006, the band recorded tracks for their second album, Hollywood, which peaked at No. 9 in October. The first single was "Come on Come on", in September, which reached No. 18 – the group's highest charting single to date. It was placed 11th on the Triple J Hottest 100, 2006.
In 2008, the band relocated to Melbourne and started recording a third album, Confetti, which they released in May 2009 and peaked at No. 6.
Confetti's first official single, "Summarize", was released in April, it was followed by "Hairdo" and "Stay Wild". In February 2010, Chequer announced on the band's website that Steele moved to New York and expected to work on her debut solo album, Leach was working on solo material, O'Donoghue was working with other bands, and Chequer himself was doing production work. Steel trialled some solo material at four Australian concerts in May.

Touring

Little Birdy undertook their own concerts throughout Australia in 2004 and 2005. They supported R.E.M. during the Australian leg of their world tour in 2005.
Little Birdy appeared at Sound Relief at the Sydney Cricket Ground in March 2009, which was a benefit concert for victims of Victorian bush fires and Queensland floods.

Members

Discography






