[[Moonie (nickname)]]

CATEGORIES: Ethnic and religious slurs, Unificationists, Unification Church, Unification Church neologisms, Reclaimed words, Religious identity

Moonie is a pejorative term sometimes used to refer to members of the Unification Church. This is derived from the name of the church's founder Sun Myung Moon, and was first used in 1974 by the American media.  Church members have used the word "Moonie", including: Moon himself, President of the Unification Theological Seminary David Kim, and Moon's aide and president of The Little Angels Children's Folk Ballet of Korea Bo Hi Pak. In his 2000 book Mystics and Messiahs, Philip Jenkins discussed the term's usage, and likened it to "smear words" associated with other religions; giving examples of Shaker, Methodist, and Mormon. Journalistic authorities, including the New York Times and Reuters, now discourage its use in news reporting.

Definition

The word "Moonie" is derived from the name of Sun Myung Moon, the founder and leader of the Unification Church.  and "A person who shows exceptional enthusiasm for a cause or organization, a zealot." Moonie, Wikionary, access date 2014-4-6
The word "Moonie" is also a family name in the United Kingdom. The town of Moonie, Queensland in Australia was founded in 1840.smh.au/travel/travel-factsheet/moonie--culture-and-history-20081125-6gzh.Bergan, G. and Lambert, J., 2011, Geektionary: From Anime to Zettabyte, an A to Z Guide to All Things Geek, Adams Media, P 92 See also: Moonie (disambiguation).

History

Early use

The word "Moonie" was first used by the American news media in the 1970s when Sun Myung Moon moved to the United States and came into public notice through a series of public speeches he gave, including at Madison Square Garden in New York City in 1974 and Yankee Stadium and the grounds of the Washington Monument in 1976.
The word "Moonie" used within the Unification Church itself and by church members in public
During the United States v. Sun Myung Moon in 1982, federal prosecutors argued that the word "Moonie" be banned during the jury selection process because they said it was considered "a negative term,"

Reaction by church members

In 1984, The Washington Post noted: "Members of the Unification Church resent references to them as 'Moonies'", and quoted one church member who said "Even in quotation marks, it's derogatory".
The Unification Church hired civil rights activist Ralph Abernathy to equate the word "Moonie" with the word "nigger".
Unification Church official Michael Jenkins (who later became president of the Unification Church of the United States

Recent use

In a 1996 article for The Independent about a talk former Prime Minister Edward Heath gave at a Unification Church sponsored conference, Andrew Brown commented: "The term 'Moonie' has entered the language as meaning a brainwashed, bright-eyed zombie." Brown also quoted William Shaw, a broadcaster who was presenting the Cult Fiction series on BBC Radio Five Live: "Most Moonies embrace a morality which would make them acceptable in the most genteel Anglican social circle."
In a 2004 interview with The New York Times, playwright Tony Kushner used the term "Moonies" to refer to religious converts who lacked "spiritual liveliness or freedom of thought".
In 2009 The Daily Telegraph suggested that the Manchester City football club be nicknamed "The Blue Moonies" for their "evangelical zeal."Manchester City's Blue Moonies have their faith rewarded, The Daily Telegraph, August 15, 2009. "From boardroom to terrace via the dug-out, such an evangelical zeal suffuses Manchester City's new mission that they should really be renamed the Blue Moonies."  In 2010 National Public Radio reported that young members of the Unification Church "bristle at the term 'Moonie'",

Commentary

British sociologist Eileen Barker titled her 1984 book, which was based on seven years of first-person study of members of the Unification Church in the United States and Great Britain and has been influential in the field of the sociology of religion, The Making of a Moonie: Choice or Brainwashing?.
A 1992 study by Jeffrey E. Pfeifer of the University of Virginia on "The Psychological Framing of Cults" found that 75.51% (74 of 98) of participating individuals were familiar with the word "Moonies".  Dr Pfeifer sums up his findings by saying:
Rosalind Millam's 2002 book Anti-Discriminatory Practice notes that "Its followers are better known as Moonies"; the entry on the Unification Church in the book is titled: "Unification Church (Moonies)". Reuters, in its handbook for journalists, says: "'Moonie' is a pejorative term for members of the Unification Church. We should not use it in copy and avoid it when possible in direct quotations."Handbook of Journalism, Reuters, accessed September 28, 2011








