[[Renoise]]

CATEGORIES: Audio trackers, Digital audio workstation software, Audio editing software for Linux, Lua-scriptable software, OS X audio editors, Windows multimedia software, Proprietary commercial software for Linux

Renoise is a digital audio workstation (DAW) based upon the heritage and development of tracker software. Its primary use is the composition of music using sound samples, soft synths, and effects plug-ins. It is also able to interface with MIDI and OSC equipment. The main difference between Renoise and other music software is the characteristic vertical timeline sequencer used by tracking software.

History

Renoise was originally written from the code of another tracker called NoiseTrekker, made by Juan Antonio Arguelles Rius (Arguru). The then unnamed Renoise project was initiated by Eduard Müller (Taktik) and Zvonko Tesic (Phazze) during December 2000. The development team planned to take tracking software into a new standard of quality, enabling tracking scene composers to make audio of the same quality as other existing professional packages, while still keeping the proven layout that originated with Soundtracker in 1987.

Features

Renoise currently runs under recent versions of Windows (DirectSound or ASIO), Mac OS X (Core Audio) and Linux (ALSA or JACK).
Renoise has a long list of features, including full MIDI and MIDI sync support, VST 2.0 plugin support, ASIO multi I/O cards support, integrated sampler and sample editor, internal real-time DSP effects with  unlimited number of effects per track, master and send tracks, full automation of all commands, Hi-Fi wav/aiff rendering (up to 32-bit, 96 kHz), Rewire support, etc.
Supported sample formats
Supported effects standards
Renoise also features a Signal Follower and cross-track routing. The Signal Follower analyses the audio output of a track and automates user-specificed parameters based on the values it generates. Cross-track routing sends the automation of any Meta Device to any track. Computer Music magazine considered the combination of these two features to "open up some incredibly powerful control possibilities", and demonstrated how the signal triggered by a drum loop could control the filter cutoff frequency on a bass sound.
Renoise includes many features such as an arranging tool called the "pattern matrix", full cross-track modulation routing, built-in effects including a signal-follower metadevice that allows sidechain functionality, automatic softsynth-to-sample instrument rendering, and improved MIDI mapping.

Versions

Renoise is available as either a demo or a commercial version.  The demo version excludes rendering to . Also, the demo version has nag screens. The commercial version includes high quality WAV rendering (up to 32 bit 96 kHz) and ASIO support. The commercial version is notably cheaper than competitive digital audio workstations (DAWs) such as Ableton Live and Propellerheads Reason while meeting many of the same needs.

Development

The Renoise development team works with the Renoise user community online to pool ideas for new features. By registering, a user is permitted to download beta versions of the software and can contribute to the bug testing and feature improvement phase before the final release. 
With the introduction of Lua scripting in version 2.6, users can expand Renoise. They are encouraged to share their work on the centralized  Renoise Tools page.
On 2013 December 22nd, Renoise 3 has entered beta stage and the final version was released on 2014 April, 11th.

XRNS file format

The XRNS file format is native to Renoise. It is based on the XML standard, and is readable in a normal text editor. This open XML-based file format also makes it possible for anyone to develop 3rd party applications and other systems in order to manipulate file content.

3rd party tools

A project for creating PHP scripts utilities for needed advanced edit tasks has been set at SourceForge: XRNS-PHP project
In August 2007, a functional XRNS2MIDI script was published in version 0.11 by Renoise team member Bantai. It enables Renoise users, via an external frontend, to convert native songs into regular MIDI files (.
Since version 2.6, it is possible to extend Renoise capabilities by writing plugins in the Lua programming language. A specific tools site has been created to showcase these. Almost any aspect of the program, except realtime audio data mangling, can be scripted using the native Renoise Lua API.






