[[Mozzarella]]

CATEGORIES: Italian cheeses, Cow's-milk cheeses, Water buffalo's-milk cheeses, Brined cheese, Smoked cheeses

Mozzarella () is a cheese, originally from southern Italy, traditionally made from Italian buffaloby the pasta filata method.
If cow's milk is used the name is  "Fior di latte" . The term is wrongly used for several kinds of Italian cheeses that are made using spinning and then cutting (hence the name, as the Italian verb  means "to cut"):
Fresh mozzarella is generally white, but may vary seasonally to slightly yellow depending on the animal's diet..

Types

—it holds the status of a protected designation of origin (PDO 1996) under the European Union.
In 1996 mozzarella was recognised as a Specialità Tradizionale Garantita (STG). 2527/98 della commissione del 25 novembre 1998 registrando una denominazione - Mozzarella - nell'albo delle attestazioni di specificità. Gazzetta ufficiale delle Comunità europee L 317/14 del 26/11/1998.
 (written also as one word) designates mozzarella made from cow (and not water buffalo) milk, which greatly lowers its cost. Outside Italy "mozzarella" not clearly labeled as deriving from water buffalo can be presumed to derive from cow milk.
Mozzarella is available fresh or partly dried. Fresh it is usually rolled into a ball of  diameter, and soaked in salt water (brine) or whey, sometimes with citric acid added. Partly dried (desiccated) its structure is more compact, and in this form it is often used to prepare dishes cooked in the oven, such as lasagna and pizza.
When twisted to form a plait mozzarella is called ).
Several variants have been specifically formulated and prepared for use on pizza, such as low-moisture Mozzarella cheese.
Low-moisture part-skim mozzarella has a low galactose content, per some consumers' preference for cheese on pizza to have low or moderate browning.  Others can be made through the direct acidification of milk.

Production

Mozzarella di bufala is traditionally produced solely from the milk of the domestic Buffalo.  A whey starter is added from the previous batch that contains thermophilic bacteria, and the milk is left to ripen so the bacteria can multiply. Then, rennet is added to coagulate the milk. After coagulation, the curd is cut into large, 1"–2" pieces, and left to sit so the curds firm up in a process known as healing.
After the curd heals, it is further cut into 3/8"–1/2" large pieces. The curds are stirred and heated to separate the curds from the whey. The whey is then drained from the curds and the curds are placed in a hoop to form a solid mass. The curd mass is left until the pH is at around 5.2–5.5, which is the point when the cheese can be stretched.
The cheese is then stretched and kneaded to produce a delicate consistency—this process is generally known as pasta filata. According to the Mozzarella di Bufala trade association, "The cheese-maker kneads it with his hands, like a baker making bread, until he obtains a smooth, shiny paste, a strand of which he pulls out and lops off, forming the individual mozzarella." It is then typically formed into cylinder shapes or in plait. In Italy, a "rubbery" consistency is generally considered not satisfactory; the cheese is expected to be softer.

Etymology

Mozzarella—which is derived from the Neapolitan dialect spoken in Campania—is the diminutive form of 
The term mozzarella is first found definitively mentioned in 1570, cited in a cookbook by Bartolomeo Scappi, reading "milk cream, fresh butter, ricotta cheese, fresh mozzarella and milk".

Bocconcini

Bocconcini (translated as "small mouthfuls", Italian pronunciation: ˌbok:ɔnˈtʃiːni) (singular Bocconcino, ˌbok:ɔnˈtʃiːno) are small, fresh mozzarella cheesesThe Essential Fingerfood Cookbook. p. 40. about the size of an egg. Like other mozzarellas, they are semi-soft, white and rindless unripened mild cheeses which originated in Naples and were once made only from milk of water buffaloes. Nowadays they are usually made from a combination of water buffalo and cow's milk. Bocconcini are packaged in whey or water, have a spongy texture and absorb flavours.
This cheese is described by its Italian name which means "small mouthfuls"... - Mary Ann Esposito. p. 35. It is made in the pasta filata manner by dipping curds into hot whey, and kneading, pulling and stretching. Each cheese is about the size, shape and colour of a hardboiled egg: indeed an alternative name used is Uova di bufala, or "Buffalo eggs". Baby ("bambini") bocconcini can also be purchased; these are a smaller version about the size of large grapes.
Bocconcini of water buffalo's milk are still produced in the provinces of Naples, Caserta and Salerno, as bocconcini alla panna di bufala, in a process which involves mixing freshly made Mozzarella di Bufala Campana DOP with fresh cream. A Bocconcino di Bufala Campana DOP is also made, which is simply Mozzarella di Bufala Campana DOP, produced in the egg-sized format.
Bocconcini of whole cow's milk are also manufactured, where the higher liquid content, in comparison to standard mozzarella, lends them the soft consistency of fior di latte.
Bocconcini can be bought at most Italian supermarkets and is often used in tomato, red onion and basil salads to accompany pasta.

Ovolini

Ovolini are smaller-sized bocconcini, and are sometimes referred to as cherry bocconcini.



Notes






