[[Turtles all the way down]]

CATEGORIES: Mythological cosmologies, Flat Earth theory, Metaphors referring to animals, Turtles

"Turtles all the way down" is a jocular expression of the infinite regress problem in cosmology posed by the "unmoved mover" paradox. The metaphor in the anecdote represents a popular notion of the myth that Earth is actually flat and is supported on the back of a World Turtle, which itself is propped up by a chain of larger and larger turtles. Questioning what the final turtle might be standing on, the anecdote humorously concludes that it is "turtles all the way down".
The phrase was used by Stephen Hawking in 1988, but has been commonly known since at least the early 20th century. A comparable metaphor describing the circular cause and consequence for the same problem is the "chicken and egg problem". The same problem in epistemology is known as the Münchhausen trilemma.

Origin

The origins of the turtle story are uncertain. The most widely known version appears in Stephen Hawking's 1988 book A Brief History of Time, which starts:

Robert Anton Wilson's book Prometheus Rising (1983) opens with the William James version of "turtles all the way down".
In John R. Ross's 1967 linguistics dissertation Constraints on Variables in Syntax, the scientist is identified as the Harvard psychologist and philosopher William James. Of the story's provenance, Ross writes:John R. Ross (1967). Constraints on variables in syntax. (Doctoral dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology). Available at MIT Theses ( See page iv of the ms., page 4 of the electronic file.
In 1905, Oliver Corwin Sabin, Bishop of the Evangelical Christian Science Church, wrote:
The earliest version of the story in its "turtle" form appeared in 1854, attributed by bible skeptic Joseph Barker to preacher Joseph Frederick Berg:

Many 20th-century attributions point to William James as the source. Prometheus Rising. Phoenix, AZ: New Falcon Publishers. p. 25. ISBN 1-56184-056-4 James referred to the fable of the elephant and tortoise several times, but told the infinite regress story with "rocks all the way down" in his 1882 essay, "Rationality, Activity and Faith":

In the form of "rocks all the way down", the story predates James to at least 1838, when it was printed in an unsigned anecdote about a schoolboy and an old woman living in the woods:

There is an allusion to the story in David Hume's Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion (published in 1779):

Claimed Hindu myths

Hawking's suggested connection to Russell may be due to Russell's 1927 lecture Why I Am Not a Christian. In it, while discounting the First Cause argument intended to be a proof of God's existence, Russell comments:
Henry David Thoreau, in his journal entry of 4 May 1852,The Picket Line — Excerpts from H.D. Thoreau's journals writes:
Philosophical allusion to the story goes back at least as far as John Locke. In his 1689 tract An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, Locke compares one who would say that properties inherent in "substance" to the Indian who said the world was on an elephant which was on a tortoise "but being again pressed to know what gave support to the broad-backed tortoise, replied — something, he knew not what."Locke, John (1689). An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, Book II, Chapter XXIII, section 2
Despite these accounts, Hindu myths do not actually contain the myth in the form described. Locke appears to have taken the idea from Samuel Purchas. Why can deity in the form of a tortoise, who possesses an inconceivable potency, not hold the Earth in the sky for a kalpa of years?"Toke L. Knudsen, Indology mailing list.

Other accounts

The story can also be found in Bernard Nietschmann's "When the Turtle Collapses, the World Ends", Natural History, 83(6):34 (June–July 1974).
A version of the story also appears in Clifford Geertz's, "Thick Description: Towards an Interpretive Theory of Culture", in his 1973 book The Interpretation of Culture, with the scientist and old woman replaced by an Englishman and an Indian respectively.[ref]
</ref>
Carl Sagan recited a version of the story as an apocryphal anecdote in his 1979 book Broca's Brain: Reflections on the Romance of Science, as an exchange between a "Western traveler" and an "Oriental philosopher".
Justice Antonin Scalia of the U.S. Supreme Court discussed his "favored version" of the tale in a footnote to his plurality opinion in Rapanos v. United States (decided June 19, 2006):

The anecdote has achieved the status of an urban legend on the Internet, as there are numerous versions in which the name of the scientist varies (e.g., Arthur Stanley Eddington, Thomas Huxley, Linus Pauling, or Carl Sagan) although the rest is the same.

Allusions in popular culture



Footnotes


