[[EMC Corporation]]

CATEGORIES: Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange, Companies established in 1979, Companies based in Massachusetts, Software companies based in Massachusetts, Computer companies of the United States, EMC Corporation, Computer storage companies, Storage Area Network companies

EMC Corporation (stylized as EMC²) is an American multinational corporation headquartered in Hopkinton, Massachusetts, United States.
EMC has 60,000 employees and is considered the world's largest provider of data storage systems,
Joe Tucci has been EMC's chief executive since January 2001 and chairman of the board of directors since January 2006; he joined the company in 2000 as president and chief operating officer.
In 2012 and 2013, EMC was included on a number of award lists, including the World's Most Admired Computer Companies,

History

thumb|left|Richard Egan, co-founder of EMC Corporation EMC, founded in 1979 by Richard Egan and Roger Marino (the E and M in EMC),"What does EMC stand for?" and continued with the development of memory boards for other computer types. In the mid-1980s the company expanded beyond memory to other computer data storage types and networked storage platforms. EMC began shipping its flagship product, the Symmetrix, in 1990. Symmetrix was the main reason for EMC's rapid growth in the 1990s, both in size and value, from a company valued in the hundreds of millions of dollars to a multi-billion company.
Michael Ruettgers joined EMC in 1988 and served as CEO from 1992 until January 2001.  Ruettgers was named one of BusinessWeek's "World's Top 25 Executives;" one of the "Best Chief Executive Officers in America" by Worth Magazine; and one of Network World's "25 Most Powerful People in Networking."
In 2001, Joe Tucci was named Chief Executive Officer of EMC.
In 2009, EMC and Cisco, with investments from VMware and Intel, formed a joint venture called VCE to develop products and services for the converged infrastructure and cloud computing markets.
EMC announced its 450,000 square foot Center of Excellence (COE) in Durham, North Carolina in 2011. The COE houses a virtualized data center and includes 130,000 square feet of global research and development labs. The company also has COEs in India, China, Egypt, Israel, Ireland, and Russia, which perform engineering, research and development, customer, and translation services for EMC business units.
In 2013, EMC launched a new company named Pivotal. Led by Paul Maritz, the organization combines technologies from VMware and EMC and is focused on delivering Platform-as-a-Service offerings.

Products and services

In addition to those of the majority-owned VMware and Pivotal companies, EMC offers products and services designed to allow IT departments to move to a cloud computing model and to analyze Big Data.

Major acquisitions

The following table includes the listing and timeline of EMC Corporation's major acquisitions of other companies since 1996.

Big Data projects

In 2012, EMC sponsored The Human Face of Big Data,
EMC sponsors The Digital Universe, a study by IDC "measuring and characterizing all the digital data created, replicated, and consumed worldwide in a single year." The Digital Universe 2012 report anticipates that
  "during the next eight years, the amount of digital data produced will exceed 40 zettabytes, which is the equivalent of 5,200 GB of data for every man, woman and child on Earth. To hit that figure, all data is expected to double every two years through 2020."  

Recognition and awards

In 2012, EMC was ranked no. 2 on Fortune's list of the World's Most Admired Computer Companies for the second consecutive year. EMC was included on the 2012 Thompson Reuters Top 100 Global Innovators list. In 2013, four EMC and RSA channel executives were named CRN's 2013 Channel Chiefs for "trying to make sure their company's partners succeed."
EMC has ranked on several global best places to work lists. EMC was ranked the 19th Best Multinational Workplace in Europe by Great Places to Work in 2012. EMC was included on Crain's 2012 Best Places to Work in New York City, and received a score of 100 on the Human Rights Campaign 2013 Corporate Equality Index 

Corporate responsibility and sustainability

EMC supports a variety of corporate responsibility initiatives around the world, and in 2012 EMC ranked 47th on Corporate Responsibility Magazine's 100 Best Corporate Citizens List.

Collaboration with colleges and universities

EMC's Academic Alliance program, a collaboration with colleges and universities worldwide, offers curriculum-based education on technology topics such as virtualization, cloud computing, big data analytics, and information storage and management.






