[[Michael]]

CATEGORIES: Masculine given names, Hebrew-language names, English masculine given names

Michael ), derived from the question מי כאל mī kāʼēl) meaning "Who is like God?" (literally, "Who is like El?). In English, it is sometimes shortened to Mike, Mikey, Mickey, or Mick.->
Female forms of Michael include Michèle, Michelle, Michaela, Mechelle, Micheline, and Michaelle, although Michael is occasionally seen as a female name, with women named Michael including Princess Michael of Kent and the actresses Michael Learned and Michael Michele. Another form is Mychal, which can either be a male or female name.
Surnames that come from Michael include Carmichael, Dimichele, MacMichael, McMichael, Micallef, Michaelson, Mikkelsen, Mikhaylov, Mykhaylenko, Michaels, Michels, and Mitchell.

Christianity

The name first appears in the Bible, Numbers ), is considered a saint by the Roman Catholic Church and Eastern Orthodox Church. For the Roman Catholic Church, twenty-nine September is the feast day of the three archangels: Michael, Gabriel and Raphael. For the Eastern Orthodox Church, eight November is the day of the two archangels, Michael and Gabriel, and of the rest of the Angels.

Popularity

Michael is a popular given name in the United States, and has been in the top three most popular names given to male babies in the U.S. for each year since 1953, only falling out of the top 5 in 2011 for the first time since 1949.

Forms across languages

"Mike", "Mick", "Mikiel", "Mikey", "Mikael", "Mic", "Misha" (common in Russia) and "Mickey" are short forms of, or nicknames for, Michael as a given name. "Mick" is commonly associated with Irish people.
The Irish language version of the name Michael is usually spelt Mícheál but is also sometimes spelt Micheál or simply Micheal. Meik and Maik are German short forms of Michael. The German pronunciation of both variants is identical to the English pronunciation of "Mike", since both are directly derived from their English counterparts. Similarly, the Welsh versions "Meical" and "Meic" are pronounced similar to their corresponding English analogues. Another Welsh version of the name is "Mihangel", which is a contracted combination of the name Michael and the word angel. Michiel  In Swedish, "Micke" is a nickname for "Mikael" (also spelt "Michael").
In Greek "Μιχάλης" ("Michalis" or "Mihalis"; pronounced  is Polish; Miko is Slavic. Mëhill or Mhill is the Albanian for Michael. The first belongs to the southern (Tosk) dialect, the second to the northern (Gheg) dialect.
In Hebrew, "מיכה" (Mikha) 
Miquel (or Quelo in its shortened version) is the Catalan form of Michael.
Miguel ) and Mickaël.






