[[Megadeth]]

CATEGORIES: Megadeth, 1983 establishments in the United States, Capitol Records artists, American thrash metal musical groups, Heavy metal musical groups from California, Musical groups established in 1983, Musical groups from Los Angeles, California, Musical quartets, Roadrunner Records artists, Speed metal musical groups, Thrash metal musical groups from California

{{Infobox musical artist
| name = Megadeth
| image = Megadeth Sonisphere 2010.jpg
| caption = Megadeth, Sonisphere 2010. From left to right: David Ellefson, Dave Mustaine, Chris Broderick and Shawn Drover.
| alt = Megadeth standing onstage and clapping
| landscape = yes
| image_size = 250
| background = group_or_band
| origin = Los Angeles, California, United States
| genre = {{Flatlist|
| years_active = –2002, 2004–present
| label = {{Flatlist|
| associated_acts = {{Flatlist|
| website = 
| current_members = 

Megadeth is an American thrash metal band from Los Angeles, California, formed in 1983 by guitarist Dave Mustaine and bassist David Ellefson, shortly after Mustaine's dismissal from Metallica. In 1985, the group released its debut album through Combat Records, an independent record label. The album's moderate commercial success caught the attention of bigger record labels, and they soon signed to Capitol Records. Their first major label album, Peace Sells... but Who's Buying?, was released in October 1986, and is considered highly influential in the underground metal scene. Despite the album being prominent to thrash metal, frequent disputes between the band members and issues with drug abuse earned the band negative publicity during this period.
After stabilizing their lineup, Megadeth released a number of platinum-selling albums, including Countdown to Extinction, certified double platinum. This album, along with touring worldwide, aided in bringing Megadeth to public recognition. In 2002, Megadeth temporarily disbanded when Mustaine suffered an arm injury; the band re-established in 2004, performing without bassist David Ellefson as he had taken legal action against Mustaine. Ellefson rejoined the group in 2010, and has been featured on all recordings since. In the summer of 2005, Megadeth launched its own music festival, Gigantour, which has been hosted several times over the years.
Megadeth is known for its distinctive, technical instrumental style that often features fast rhythm sections and complex arrangements; their lyrics convey gloomy themes including death, war, politics, and religion. The group has experienced controversy over its musical approach and lyricism, including canceled concerts and album bans. MTV has refused to play two of the band's videos the network considered to condone suicide. The band's mascot, Vic Rattlehead, has regularly appeared on the album artworks, and from 2010, at the band's live shows as well.
A pioneer of the American thrash metal scene, the band is credited as one of the genre's "big four" along with Anthrax, Metallica and Slayer, who were responsible for thrash metal's creation, development, and popularization. As of 2014, Megadeth has released fourteen studio albums, six of them certified platinum in the United States. To date, Megadeth has sold 50 million records worldwide and received eleven Grammy nominations, and ranks as one of the most successful American heavy metal bands.

History

Early days (1983–84)

Dave Mustaine was the original lead guitarist for Metallica when they formed in 1981. He was member of the band for nearly a year and participated in composing their early songs. However, before the start of the recording sessions of Metallica's debut album, Mustaine was dismissed from the band because of his substance abuse and personal conflicts with members James Hetfield and Lars Ulrich.
According to Mustaine, the name Megadeth represents the annihilation of power,
Despite his enthusiasm, Mustaine had trouble finding additional members for the band's initial lineup. Upon starting the band, he and Ellefson had examined about 15 drummers, hoping to find one who comprehended the meter changes in music. In the meantime, Kerry King from Slayer took duties on lead guitar.
In 1984, Megadeth recorded a three-song demo tape, featuring Mustaine, Ellefson and Rausch. The demo contained early versions of "Last Rites/Loved to Death", "Skull Beneath the Skin", and "Mechanix", all of which eventually appeared on their debut studio album. The band performed in concert a few times in 1984, before replacing Rausch with jazz fusion drummer Gar Samuelson. They added guitarist Chris Poland as a full-time member in December that year. After looking at a few labels, frontman Dave Mustaine decided to sign with New York-based independent label Combat Records because they offered him the highest budget for recording their album and starting a promotional tour.

Killing Is My Business... and Business Is Good! (1985)

In 1985, the band was given $8,000 by Combat Records to record and produce its debut album. After spending half of the album's budget on drugs, alcohol, and food, the band was forced to fire their original producer and finish the recording duties themselves.
The album features "Mechanix", a song Mustaine had written during his tenure with Metallica. After he was dismissed from the band, Mustaine told them not to use the music he had written. Despite this, Metallica recorded a different version of the song entitled "The Four Horsemen", with a slower tempo and a melodic middle section.

Peace Sells... but Who's Buying? (1986–87)

The songs on Megadeth's second studio album were written and developed before the band began recording. Dave Mustaine had composed the music, while the other members helped with some ideas on the arrangements.
Megadeth's second studio album was produced using a small recording budget provided by Combat Records. Not satisfied with the financial limitations of their current label, Megadeth soon left Combat and signed with Capitol Records. Capitol bought the rights to their upcoming album and hired producer Paul Lani to remix the earlier recordings. Peace Sells... but Who's Buying? was recorded with a budget of $25,000 and released in the fall of 1986.
In February 1987, Megadeth was added as the opening band on Alice Cooper's Constrictor tour. Mustaine claimed that Samuelson had become too much to handle when intoxicated. Drummer Chuck Behler traveled with the band for the last dates of the tour because the other members were afraid that Samuelson would not be able to continue touring.
Meanwhile, guitarist Chris Poland had occasional quarrels with Mustaine, because he was accused of selling the band's equipment to buy heroin.

So Far, So Good... So What! (1988–89)

With a major label recording budget, the recording of the Paul Lani-produced So Far, So Good... So What! took over five months. It was notorious for the various problems that occurred during the production, partially due to Mustaine's ongoing struggle with addiction. Mustaine later said, "The production of So Far, So Good... So What! was horrible, mostly due to substances and the priorities we had or didn't have at the time." Mustaine also clashed with Lani on several occasions, beginning with Lani's insistence that the drums be recorded separately from the cymbals, an unheard-of process for rock drummers.
So Far, So Good... So What! was released in January 1988 and was well received by fans and critics.
Shortly after their Monsters of Rock appearance, Mustaine fired both Behler and guitarist Young and canceled their scheduled 1988 Australian tour. "On the road, things escalated from a small border skirmish into a full-on raging war", Mustaine later recalled, "I think a lot of us were inconsistent the 1988 tour because of the guy we were waiting for after the show."
Young's dismissal resulted from Mustaine's suspicions that he was having an affair with Mustaine's girlfriend at the time, an allegation denied by Young.
In June 1988, Megadeth appeared in Spheeris' documentary film The Decline of Western Civilization Part II: The Metal Years.

Rust in Peace (1990–91)

After Mustaine found sobriety, Megadeth continued their search for a new lead guitarist. Among those who auditioned were Lee Altus of Heathen and Eric Meyer of Dark Angel. Meyer had been invited to join the band following Chris Poland's departure, but declined in order to remain in Dark Angel.
Marty Friedman filled the empty guitarist position in Megadeth. Friedman was recommended by Ron Laffitte, a member of Capitol management. Laffitte had heard Dragon's Kiss, a solo recording by Friedman during his tenure in Cacophony. Mustaine and Ellefson were satisfied with Marty's playing style and thought he understood the nature of Megadeth's music.
Released worldwide on September 24, 1990, Rust in Peace was critically acclaimed, debuting at number 23 in the United States and number 8 in the United Kingdom.
Early in 1990, Slayer had an idea to do a major tour featuring American thrash metal bands. Megadeth accepted, and in October 1990, they joined Slayer, Testament and Suicidal Tendencies for the European Clash of the Titans tour.

Countdown to Extinction (1992–93)

The recording sessions for Megadeth's fifth studio album started in January 1992 at Enterprise Studios in Burbank, California. Max Norman was chosen to produce the album, as the band was pleased with his mixing of Rust in Peace.
Released on July 6, 1992, Countdown to Extinction entered the Billboard 200 chart at number two, and was eventually certified double platinum for shipping two million copies in the United States.

A world tour in support of the album was launched in December 1992 with Pantera and White Zombie as the supporting acts.
During the summer of 1993, Megadeth performed at a number of shows with Metallica at European venues. The first show was at Milton Keynes Bowl in England, which also included Diamond Head.

Youthanasia (1994–95)

Early in 1994, Megadeth reunited with producer Max Norman to begin work on the follow-up to Countdown to Extinction. With three members of the band now residing in Arizona, initial work began at Phase Four Studios in Phoenix.
Following eight months in the studio, Youthanasia was released on November 1, 1994; it debuted at number 4 on the Billboard 200, and charted in several European countries as well.
Live support for Youthanasia began in South America in November 1994 and spanned eleven months, becoming Megadeth's most extensive tour to date. Throughout 1995, the band visited Europe and North America, joined by a number of opening acts, including Corrosion of Conformity, Korn, and Fear Factory.

Cryptic Writings (1996–98)

Following an expansive world tour in support of Youthanasia, Megadeth took time off late in 1995. Mustaine began work on MD.45, a side project with vocalist Lee Ving of Fear; the duo hired drummer Jimmy DeGrasso, who had been playing in Alice Cooper's band for the South American Monsters of Rock tour earlier that year. Additionally, Marty Friedman constructed a studio in his new home in Phoenix and started working on a solo project, resulting in his fourth studio album, which was released in April 1996.
In September 1996, Megadeth went to London to work on songs for their next album, tentatively titled Needles and Pins. The writing was closely supervised by their new manager, Bud Prager, who also contributed musical ideas and lyrics to the songs; many lyrics and song titles were changed at his request. Regarding Prager's writing influence, Mustaine later wrote, "I figured maybe this guy Prager could help me get that intangible number one record I so badly wanted." Due to a problem with the album's original artwork, the album cover was replaced with a voodoo symbol and the album was renamed Cryptic Writings.
Cryptic Writings was released in June 1997 through Capitol Records. The album peaked at number 10 on the Billboard 200, and was Megadeth's sixth consecutive studio album to be certified platinum in the United States. Its lead single, "Trust", became Megadeth's highest charting song on the Mainstream Rock Tracks, reaching number five.
After more than a year since their last concert, Megadeth returned as a live act in June 1997, beginning a world tour with the Misfits and later touring in the United States with Life of Agony and Coal Chamber. In July, Megadeth participated in Ozzfest '98 but, halfway through the tour, drummer Nick Menza reportedly discovered a tumor on his knee and was forced to leave for surgery. Though he was initially meant to be a temporary replacement, DeGrasso joined the band permanently after the conclusion of the tour. Mustaine later said that he dismissed Menza from the band because he had lied about having cancer.

Risk (1999–2000)

Following the band's success on mainstream radio with Cryptic Writings, Megadeth opted to work again with country pop producer Dann Huff in Nashville, Tennessee on its eighth studio album. In January 1999, the band began writing a new album, which was also to be supervised by manager Bud Prager, who was credited with co-writing five of the album's twelve songs.
Risk, released on August 31, 1999, was both a critical and commercial failure and led to backlash from many longtime fans. Although its two predecessors had incorporated rock elements alongside a more traditional heavy metal sound, Risk was virtually devoid of metal.
On July 22, 1999, former drummer Gar Samuelson died at the age of 41 in Orange City, Florida, of liver failure. Three days later, during Megadeth's performance at Woodstock 1999, Mustaine dedicated the song "Peace Sells" in Samuelson's memory.
In April, Megadeth returned to the studio to start working on their ninth studio release. However, one month into production, the band was given the opportunity to join the Maximum Rock tour alongside Anthrax and Mötley Crüe. Megadeth put recording on hold and toured North America throughout the second quarter of 2000. Early into the tour, Anthrax was removed from the bill, allowing Megadeth to play an extended co-headlining set.

The World Needs a Hero (2000–01)

After working together for 15 years, Megadeth left Capitol Records in July 2000. According to Dave Mustaine, their departure was about to happen because of the ongoing tensions between the band and Capitol management.
The World Needs a Hero was released on May 15, 2001, and debuted at number 16 on the Billboard 200; however, the album was banned in Malaysia after the national government determined that the album's artwork was "unsuitable for the nation's youth". As a result, Megadeth cancelled its planned concert on August 2 in the country's capital, Kuala Lumpur. Mustaine compared the album to the first major turn of a huge ship at sea, trying to right itself and get back on course. The album's lead single, "Moto Psycho", reached number 22 on the Billboard Mainstream Rock chart.
Touring in support of The World Needs a Hero began in the summer of 2001 in Europe alongside AC/DC, followed by an American tour with Iced Earth and Endo in September. Mustaine decided to let the fans choose the setlist in each American city they visited. The tour, however, was cut short following the September 11 attacks; consequently, the band was forced to cancel all scheduled dates, including a DVD shoot in Argentina. Instead, the band played two shows in Arizona on November 16 and 17, which were filmed and later released as Rude Awakening, Megadeth's first official live release.

Breakup (2002–03)

In January 2002, Mustaine was admitted to the hospital for the removal of a kidney stone. While undergoing treatment, he was administered pain medication that triggered a relapse of his addiction. Following his stay at the hospital, Mustaine immediately checked himself into a treatment center in Texas. While at the treatment center, Mustaine suffered a peculiar injury causing severe nerve damage to his left arm. The injury, induced by falling asleep with his left arm over the back of a chair, caused compression of the radial nerve. He was diagnosed with radial neuropathy, also known as Saturday night palsy, which left him unable to grasp or even make a fist with his left hand.
On April 3, 2002, Mustaine announced in a press release that he was disbanding Megadeth, officially due to his arm injury which made him unable to play guitar.
Following nearly a year of recovery, including physical and electric shock therapy, Mustaine began work on what was to be his first solo album. The new material was recorded with session musicians Vinnie Colaiuta and Jimmy Sloas in October 2003, but the project was put on hold when Mustaine agreed to remix and remaster Megadeth's eight-album back catalog with Capitol Records.

The System Has Failed (2004)

In May 2004, Mustaine returned to his newest recordings, intended as a solo effort. However, due to outstanding contractual obligations with the band's European label, EMI, he was forced to release it as a Megadeth album instead.
Regarding longtime bassist Ellefson's departure, Mustaine claimed that Ellefson slandered him, said that his arm injury was fake, and lied about him to the press. Although Mustaine did make him an offer, Ellefson declined.
On September 14, 2004, Megadeth released The System Has Failed on Sanctuary Records in the United States and EMI in Europe. It was heralded as a return to form by critics; Revolver gave the album a favorable review, calling it "Megadeth's most vengeful, poignant and musically complex offering since 1992's Countdown to Extinction".
Megadeth began the Blackmail the Universe world tour in October 2004, enlisting touring bassist James MacDonough of Iced Earth and guitarist Glen Drover of Eidolon and King Diamond. While rehearsing for the tour, drummer Nick Menza left the band, unable to prepare for the physical demands of a full US tour. He was replaced by Shawn Drover just five days before the first show;

Gigantour (2005–06)

In the middle of 2005, Mustaine organized an annual heavy metal festival tour, dubbed Gigantour. Megadeth headlined the inaugural run with Dream Theater, Nevermore, Anthrax, and Fear Factory among others. Performances from the Montreal and Vancouver shows were filmed and recorded for a live DVD and CD, both of which were released in the second quarter of 2006.
In February 2006, bassist James MacDonough left the band for what he called "personal differences".
On March 21, 2006, Capitol Records released a two-disc DVD titled Arsenal of Megadeth, which included archive footage, interviews, live shows, and many of the band's music videos. Due to licensing issues, movie soundtrack videos and videos not released by Capitol Records were not included on the DVD.

United Abominations (2007–08)

In May 2006, Megadeth announced that their eleventh studio album, United Abominations, was near completion. Although its release was originally scheduled for October 2006, Mustaine later revealed that the band was "putting the finishing touches on it", and postponed the release to May of the following year.
United Abominations was released on May 15, 2007 and debuted at number 8 on the Billboard 200, with 54,000 copies sold in the first week.
In January 2008, Glen Drover quit Megadeth to focus on his family, confessing that he was tired of the frequent touring and wanted to spend more time at home. He also cited personal issues with other band members as reason for leaving Megadeth.
The new lineup made its live debut in Finland on February 4, 2008. The 2008 edition of Gigantour was launched shortly after, with 29 scheduled dates through North America.

Endgame (2009–10)

In February 2009, Megadeth, along with Testament, was scheduled on the "Priest Feast" European tour with Judas Priest as headliners.
In May 2009, Megadeth finished recording their twelfth album, and the following month the album's title was revealed to be Endgame.
In March 2010, Megadeth embarked on their Rust in Peace 20th Anniversary Tour, which took place in North America and had support from Testament and Exodus. During the tour, Megadeth played Rust in Peace in its entirety, commemorating the 20th anniversary of its release.

Thirteen (2010–12)

Megadeth, along with Metallica, Slayer, and Anthrax, collectively known as "the big four" of thrash metal, agreed to perform on the same bill during the summer of 2010. These performances were part of the Sonisphere Festival and were held in a number of European countries.
In July 2010, after the conclusion of the European "Big Four" shows, Megadeth and Slayer commenced the first leg of the American Carnage Tour, where Megadeth played Rust in Peace in its entirety, while Slayer performed their album Seasons in the Abyss, both of which were released in 1990.
In September 2010, the band released their DVD album Rust in Peace Live, recorded at the Hollywood Palladium in Los Angeles.
In an October 2010 interview for Crypt Magazine, drummer Shawn Drover stated plans for a thirteenth Megadeth album.
Shortly after the album was released, Dave Mustaine stated that, after four years of absence, there would be a new Gigantour tour in early 2012.

Super Collider (2012–present)

In September 2012, it was announced that the band would re-release Countdown to Extinction in honor of the album's 20th anniversary. To mark the occasion, Megadeth launched a 2012 fall tour in which the band performed the album live in its entirety.
In August 2012, the band stated that they would be returning to the studio with producer Johnny K to record their fourteenth album.
Shortly after the release of Super Collider, Mustaine stated that he had already started thinking about a fifteenth Megadeth album. According to Mustaine, this was spurred by the then-recent death of Slayer guitarist Jeff Hanneman, which gave him a sense of mortality.

Controversy

Megadeth's founder Dave Mustaine is notorious for making inflammatory statements in the press,
During Megadeth's live performance of "Anarchy in the UK" at a 1988 show in Antrim, Northern Ireland, Mustaine drunkenly (and, as he later acknowledged, confusedly) dedicated the song to the "cause" of "giving Ireland back to the Irish!" Before the final song, Mustaine said, "This one's for the cause!"
Controversial and misinterpreted lyrics have also been the foundation of complications for the band. For instance, the music video for "In My Darkest Hour" was banned from MTV in 1988 when the music channel deemed the song to encourage suicide.
During Megadeth's world tour in 2001, the Malaysian government canceled their show in the nation's capital because the authorities there had a negative perception of the group's image and music. Dave Mustaine responded to this: "I recognize what the Malaysian government is trying to do, and it is admirable of them trying to protect the young people in the country. But it just shows the degree of ignorance and apathy that the government has toward the problem."
In July 2004, former bassist Dave Ellefson sued Mustaine for $18.5 million in Manhattan Federal Court. Ellefson alleged that Mustaine short-changed him on profits and backed out of a deal to turn Megadeth over to him when they disbanded in 2002.
In 2003, after healing an arm injury that threatened to end his career, Mustaine became a born-again Christian.

Artistry

Influences and style

Traditional heavy metal bands (Black Sabbath), members of the New Wave of British Heavy Metal (Motörhead, Iron Maiden, Diamond Head), and punk rock bands (Sex Pistols and Ramones) all played a significant role in shaping Megadeth's sound.
Mustaine serves as the band's primary songwriter, composing songs which are developed from a certain riff. With further modifications, that riff becomes the central part of the song.
Megadeth's music is characterized by its distinctive instrumental performance, featuring fast rhythm sections and complex arrangements.
During their early days, Dave Mustaine was the rhythm guitarist, while Chris Poland served as the lead guitarist. Although Poland performed only on Megadeth's first two albums, music journalists Pete Prown and Harvey P. Newquist credited him with making the music more colorful because of his jazz influences.
Lyrically, Megadeth's songs often convey gloomy themes focusing on death, war, politics and religion. Later albums contained lyrics in a similar vein.

Legacy

Having sold over 50 million records worldwide,
Aside from gaining critical acclaim, Megadeth is considered as one of the most musically influential groups that originated in the 1980s. As part of the early American thrash metal movement, their music was directly responsible for the birth of death metal.

Awards

Genesis Awards:
Loudwire Music Awards:
Metal Hammer Golden Gods Awards:
Revolver Golden Gods Awards:

Members

Discography



Footnotes

Bibliography

Further reading




