[[Kelvinside Academy]]

CATEGORIES: School buildings completed in 1878, Category A listed buildings in Glasgow, Educational institutions established in 1878, Schools with Combined Cadet Forces in Scotland, Member schools of the Headmasters' and Headmistresses' Conference, Independent schools in Glasgow, James Sellars buildings, People educated at Kelvinside Academy

Kelvinside Academy is a private school in the City of Glasgow, Scotland, founded in 1878. It has a capacity of 640 pupils and spans two years of Nursery, six years of Junior School (primary school), and seven years of Senior School (secondary school), comprising fifteen years in all. It also offers a transitionary year of Senior Preparatory, which helps bridge the gap between Primary and Secondary Education. The school was originally grant-aided, but became fully independent in 1985. The school was formerly boys-only, and became fully co-educational in 1998.  The school is nominally non-denominational.  School uniform is mandatory for all years and consists of shirt, blue and silver tie, black or grey trousers or a blue/white plaid skirt, black shoes and the school blazer. A blue and white striped scarf and a grey jersey are optional as are shorts for the lower school. Kelvinside Academy welcomed Robert Karling as the school Rector on 9 January 2012.

The school

Kelvinside Academy is located in the Kelvinside area of the north of Glasgow, near the Glasgow Botanic Gardens. It has a large main building, which is category A listed and was designed by James Sellars, with a number of more modern additions.  The original building was opened on 2 September 1878 and cost £21,698 11s, this included the construction of both roads and sewers.  The school crest shows Minerva with the motto ΑΙΕΝ ΑΡΙΣΤΕΥΕΙΝ (ever to be the best).  Minerva appears prominently in carved stone above the main entrance, and in a bronze medallion set in the perimeter wall. Unlike many of the surrounding buildings, the school retains much of its original cast iron fences despite the metal shortages during the Second World War.
There is a well established house system, which divides all the pupils into four different Houses, each represented by a colour; red for Stewart House, yellow for Buchanan House, green for Macgregor House and blue for Colquhoun. The school has a Combined Cadet Force, and runs a civilian rifle club, with a membership of around 40 pupils and a small number of adult FP's, held in the on-site shooting range. 
Kelvinside Academy is a war-memorial school, and it is for this reason that it practices the CCF. Two walls in the original school building are dominated by bronze plaques that list pupils and academicals who gave their lives in The Great War and World War II. In the case of the 1st World War, proportionally, the school lost the highest number of Academicals - for further reading see the publication by Brodie.
The School opened a new state of the art nursery at their Balgray Campus in August 2013. The nursery offers exceptional pre-school education for children from age 3yrs. The location at Balgray creates a stunning backdrop to life at Nursery, flooding the open plan environment with natural light and surrounding it with green open spaces.

Extra-Curricular activities

The school supports a wide range of sporting activities including rugby union, hockey, football, athletics, cricket, target rifle shooting, curling, squash, aerobics, tennis, and golf.  The school owns the Balgray Playing Fields, a short distance from the main site.  An all weather playing facility has been created at Balgray and was formally opened on 2 September 2006 - the school's 128th Anniversary.  A Pavilion and refurbished stand was completed in 2010.
The school also encourages a wide range of non-sporting activities, such as drama, music, public speaking, debating and many others. The Gilchrist Theatre, named after a former pupil, has played host to a number of school productions. These include, the musicals Grease and Guys and Dolls, Don Quixote, The Glass Menagerie, Anything Goes, Blood Brothers and many musical concerts, of both school performers and other musicians including the Glasgow Gospel Choir.
There is also a CCF contingent. The three sections Army, Navy and RAF meet on a Thursday after school in the school grounds.

Kelvinside Academicals

Upon leaving Kelvinside Academy, a pupil is automatically granted membership to the Kelvinside Academicals Club, a vibrant of the Academical club year is without a doubt the Academical's Rugby Match, whereby Former Pupils take on the current School First XV.

Notable alumni

Related Publications





Sources


