[[Mattel]]

CATEGORIES: Companies established in 1945, Toy companies of the United States, Companies based in Los Angeles County, California, Mattel, Multinational companies, Toy brands, Barbie, Card game publishing companies, Doll manufacturing companies, Companies in the NASDAQ-100 Index, Companies listed on NASDAQ, Companies formerly listed on the New York Stock Exchange

Mattel, Inc.  The products and brands it produces include Fisher-Price, Barbie dolls, Monster High dolls, Hot Wheels and Matchbox toys, Masters of the Universe, American Girl dolls, board games, WWE Toys, and early-1980s video game systems.
The company's name is derived from Harold "Matt" Matson and Elliot Handler, who founded the company in 1945.

History

The company was founded in 1945 by Harold "Matt" Matson and Elliot Handler. Handler's wife, Ruth Handler, later became president, and she is credited with establishing the Barbie product line for the company in 1959.
In 1971, Mattel purchased the Ringling Bros. Barnum & Bailey Circus for $40 million from Irvin Feld. The Feld family bought the circus back in 1982.
In 1986, Mattel acquired Hong Kong based Arco Toys, a maker of action figures.
In the late 1980s, Mattel was the PAL manufacturer chosen by Nintendo to make and market the Nintendo Entertainment System. This had followed a failed attempt by Nintendo to enter a similar worldwide deal with Atari. After not securing an agreement with Atari, even later entering into various lawsuits with that company, Nintendo decided instead to take a risk and bring their console to North America on their own, while cutting PAL manufacturing and marketing costs by entering into a deal with Mattel. Mattel had previously made the Intellivision in 1979, and had some experience in the Video Games industry at that time. Nintendo had, in a previous incarnation, also been a toy manufacturer and the two companies believed they had much in common.
After the success of the system in America, this deal was later considered a mistake, in hindsight, by Nintendo, as the Mattel version of the console was outsold in the PAL regions by the main rival, the Sega Master System. Nintendo had misjudged Mattels enthusiasm for the console, which they had not considered a core product.
In May 1999, at the height of the dot-com bubble, Mattel acquired The Learning Company for $3.5 billion in stock
In December 2000, Mattel sued the band Aqua, saying their song "Barbie Girl" violated the Barbie trademark and turned Barbie into a sex object, referring to her as a "blonde bimbo." The lawsuit was rejected in 2002.
In 2002, Mattel closed its last factory in the United States, originally part of the Fisher-Price division, outsourcing production to China which began a chain of events that led to a scandal involving lead contamination.
On August 14, 2007, Mattel recalled over 18 million products. Many of the products had exceeded the US limits set on surface coatings that contain lead. Surface coatings cannot exceed .06% lead by weight.
Mattel was named by Fortune magazine as one of the top 100 companies to work for in 2013, noting that only 1,292 positions were newly filled out of 164,045 job applications during the previous year, as well as the fact that more than 1,000 employees have been with the company longer than 15 years.
On February 28, 2014, Mattel acquired Mega Brands.

Mattel Electronics

History

In 1971, a Mattel subsidiary Optigan Corporation released an electronic keyboard instrument based on pre-recorded optical soundtracks - Optigan.
In the early 1980s, Mattel – through its M Network division – released game cartridges for Atari 2600 consoles. In the mid-1980s, Mattel Electronics decided to make its own video game console, the Intellivision. After this failed, the company formed a deal with Nintendo in order to bring the Nintendo Entertainment System to the PAL regions. This was later believed to have been a mistake on Nintendo's part, as their North American success with the console (and its Japanese counterpart, the Famicom) was not replicated in the PAL regions, and they were outsold in these regions by the Sega Master System. This resulted in Nintendo being unhappy with the arrangement with Mattel, and cutting ties with the company. Nintendo released the Gameboy without Mattel's involvement and as a result, it was far more successful than the NES was.

Critics

2012, China Labor Watch (CLW) investigated labor conditions and informed the CEO, and responsible for corporate responsibility about the issues. 2013, CLW reminded the Mattel responsibles that Mattels own global manufacturing principles are not respected, and criticized that Kathleen A. Shaver and Bryan Stockton are denying the existence of problems instead of trying to correct them.





14. Kettelkamp, Sean; Chatty Cathy and Her Talking Friends, Schiffer Publishing (1998)




