[[But to bring a sword]]

CATEGORIES: Sayings of Jesus, Gospel episodes, Christianity-related controversies, New Testament words and phrases, Gospel of Matthew, Christianity and violence, Biblical phrases

"I came not to bring peace, but to bring a sword" is one of Jesus' most controversial statements, "Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword." More meaning is gleaned from greater context.
Important context includes other of Jesus' quotes (discussed below):

Controversy

The controversy is that Jesus seems to advocate physical violence by sword—a view that is rejected by the traditional, pacifist branches of Christianity.  In the Christian faith, Jesus is the "Prince of Peace" mentioned in  to 
"If possible, so far as it depends on you, be at peace with all men." But
 cements the controversy providing ample evidence that it is a physical sword:

Yet the sword can be a metaphor for a Christian-kindled "ideological division":

The following "division" means interpersonal, ideological conflict, not physical conflict. The disciple is commissioned to either "let your peace come" to the house of the host, or "let your peace return" to the disciple themself:

 uses "two-edged sword" and "division" in a metaphorical and ideological way: "For the word of God is quick, and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart."  In John chapter one Jesus himself is metaphorically "the Word" of God.  On the other hand Korzybski famously said "The map is not the territory", meaning that "the word is not the thing indeed, that it refers to.
After the sword of verse 34, there occurs a metaphorical sword in verses 35–7, pertaining to the ideological division of a family:

In the Douay-Rheims Bible, Gen. 22:6 says
"And Abraham took the wood for the holocaust, and laid it upon Isaac his son: and he himself carried in his hands fire and a sword."  That sword was not metaphorical, rather it was for slaying a family member (although it wasn't used), eerily akin to verses 35–7.
The disciples had two swords. An unnamed disciple cuts off an ear of a Roman who is arresting Jesus in the Garden of Gethsemane.  That was not a metaphorical sword either.  (Jesus ordered Peter to withdraw and healed the ear.) Jesus' earlier statements, that the swords were only for show, not for use, was obviously not yet fully understood by the disciples.

The Little Commission

Matthew 10 is the "Little Commission", out of which the controversial verse 34 arises. Jesus sends his original disciples out on the first mission to minister to "the lost sheep of the house of Israel". Starting in verse 13, Jesus then goes on to inform his disciples that they will not always be warmly received and instructs them to depart from homes and cities that will not receive them. He then adds in verse 15, "Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, than for that city."
Jesus then warns his disciples that they will encounter violent resistance on their ministry. In verse 16 he is quoted as saying, "Behold, I send you out as sheep in the midst of wolves; so be wise as serpents and innocent as doves." He then instructs his followers to flee to a different city when they are persecuted.
He then exhorts his disciples not to fear. He assures them that faithful proclamation of his message will have its rewards. "Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before my Father which is in heaven. But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in heaven." () Immediately thereafter Jesus makes the comment in question, verse 34, saying that he came not to bring peace, but the sword, followed by a direct quote of Micah 7:6 in verse 35–36.
In the Great Commission the situation is echoed again concerning 

General remarks

The greatest context, and hence more possible meanings, comes from the most general, sweeping views.  Here we consider Christian scholars, and a non-theistic take.








