[[Bubba Sparxxx]]

CATEGORIES: 1977 births, Living people, Dungeon Family, Interscope Records artists, People from LaGrange, Georgia, American people of French descent, People from Tampa, Florida, Rappers from Atlanta, Georgia, Rappers from Florida, Swing Mob artists, Virgin Records artists, Rappers from Georgia (U.S. state), Country rap musicians, Southern hip hop musicians, American male rappers

Warren Anderson Mathis (born March 6, 1977), better known by his stage name, Bubba Sparxxx, is an American hip hop recording artist from Troup County, Georgia. He is perhaps best known for his singles "Deliverance", "Ugly", and "Ms. New Booty", the latter of which features the Ying Yang Twins and peaked at number seven on the US Billboard Hot 100.

Early life and education

Mathis was born on March 6, 1977 and grew up in a rural area north of LaGrange, Georgia, a town 65 miles southwest of Atlanta. His father was a school bus driver, and his mother was a grocery store cashier.

Career

After high school Sparxxx moved to Athens, Georgia in 1996. In Athens, he met industry veteran (and now manager and business partner) Bobby Stamps. Stamps noticed Sparxxx rapping after a University of Georgia football game. Stamps arranged for Sparxxx to work with many artists in Athens and Atlanta to complete his first CD.  His first commercial CD release saw some success in Georgia, and the album Dark Days, Bright Nights caught the attention of Jimmy Iovine of Interscope Records. Sparxxx signed to Interscope Records and began working with record producers Timbaland and Organized Noize. The major-label reissue of Dark Days, Bright Nights, released via Timbaland's Beat Club Records imprint, which now included five collaborations with Timbaland and two with Organized Noise, debuted at #3 on the Billboard 200. In 2002, he had a minor hit being featured on Archie Eversole's "We Ready", which became popular for being played at sport events, such as football and basketball games.  In late 2003, he returned with his second album, Deliverance, which was critically acclaimed but sold poorly.
Sparxxx signed a recording contract with Virgin Records in 2004; under Virgin, Sparxxx released The Charm with singles "Ms. New Booty" and "Heat It Up". He left Virgin to establish his own label, New South Entertainment, which is distributed by E1 Records. In 2007, he released a mixtape with DJ Burn One titled Survive Till Ya Thrive. He stated in an interview that he planned on releasing an album to be called Miracle on Gamble Road, in 2012.  He is supposed to appear on Lil Wyte's album Still Doubted. In 2012, he signed to Backroad Records, a subsidiary of the independent label Average Joe's Entertainment, and recorded the song "Country Boy Coolin'" which was featured on Mud Digger Vol. 3, a compilation album released by Average Joe's on June 12, 2012.
In January 2013, Sparxxx released the video "Splinter" which featured Crucifix. In July 2013, a video for his new single "Country Folks"  which features Danny Boone of the band Rehab and Colt Ford, was released. The album Pain Management was released on October 15, 2013.

Personal life

Sparxxx has also appeared in the video games Def Jam: Fight for NY and Madden NFL 2004. His song "Back in the Mud" was used by ESPN's "College Gameday" as the 2003 and 2004 theme song. He has participated in a number of television productions and collaborated with the popular "Girls Gone Wild" brand to shoot two DVDs detailing life as a rap star. Sparxxx has featured on MTV's My Super Sweet Sixteen (Kristy Landers episode) and was a mentor in MTV's Celebrity Rap Superstar. He has been a guest on each major late-night show, including Saturday Night Live, Late Show with David Letterman and The Tonight Show with Jay Leno. In 2003, Sparxxx donated his time to travel to Kuwait and Iraq to perform for U.S. troops along with Blink-182, Wayne Newton, and Kid Rock, amongst others.

Discography

Studio albums

Singles

Guest singles

Guest appearances






