[[Maribor]]

CATEGORIES: Maribor, Cities and towns in Styria (Slovenia), Populated places in the City Municipality of Maribor, Historic Jewish communities

Maribor () is the second-largest city in Slovenia with about 114,487 inhabitants in 2013. Maribor is also the largest city of the traditional region of Lower Styria and the seat of the City Municipality of Maribor. 
In 2000, Maribor was given the Alpine Town of the Year award. Association football club NK Maribor is based in the city.
In addition to its Slovene and German names, the city is also known as .

Early years

In 1164, a castle known as the Marchburch (Middle High German or "March Castle") was documented in the March of Styria.

Jewish community

Jewish people living in Maribor were first mentioned in 1277. However, it is suggested that at that time there was already a Jewish quarter in the city. Notwithstanding, the first reliable source for Jews citizens appeared in 1317. The Jewish ghetto was located in the southeastern part of the city and it comprised, at its peak, several main streets in the city centre including part of the main city square. The ghetto boasted a synagogue, a Jewish cemetery and also a Talmud school. The  Talmud scholar and Halakhist Israel Isserlein was the chief Rabbi of Carinthia, Styria, and Carniola, and spent most of his life as a resident of the city. The Jewish community of Maribor was numerically at its apex around 1410. After 1450 the circumstances changed dramatically: increasing competition that coincided with an economic crisis dealt a severe blow to the economic activities that were crucial to their economic success. According to a decree issued by Emperor Maximilian I in 1496, Jews were forced to leave the city of Maribor. Restrictions on settlement and business for Jews remained in power until 1861.Jewish community of Slovenia 
In April 1941, Nazi Germany invaded Yugoslavia, and Lower Styria was annexed by the Third Reich. The Jews of Maribor were deported to concentration camps from late spring 1941 onward.
Maribor synagogue is one of the oldest existing synagogues of Europe, and one of only two left in Slovenia.Maribor Synagogue 

Early 20th century

In 1900 the city had a population that was 82.3% Austrian Germans and 17.3% Slovenes (based on the language spoken at home);Leksikon občin kraljestev in dežel zastopanih v državnem zboru, vol. 4: Štajersko. 1904. Vienna: C. Kr. Dvorna in Državna Tiskarna, p. 4. . According to the last Austro-Hungarian census in 1910, the city of Maribor and the suburbs Studenci (Brunndorf), Pobrežje (Pobersch), Tezno (Thesen), Radvanje (Rothwein), Krčevina (Kartschowin), and Košaki (Leitersberg) was inhabited by 31,995 Austrian Germans (including German-speaking Jews) and only 6,151 ethnic Slovenes. The surrounding area however was populated almost entirely by Slovenes, although many Austrian Germans lived in smaller towns like Ptuj.
During World War I many Slovenes in the Carinthia and Styria were detained on suspicion of being enemies of the Austrian Empire. This led to distrust between Austrian Germans and Slovenes. After the collapse of the Austrian-Hungarian Empire in 1918, Maribor was claimed by both the State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs and German Austria. On 1 November 1918, a meeting was held by Colonel Anton Holik in the Melje barracks, where it was decided that the German-speaking city should be part of German Austria. Ethnic Slovene Major Rudolf Maister, who was present at the meeting, denounced the decision and organised Slovenian military units that were able to seize control of the city. All Austrian officers and soldiers were disarmed and demobilised to the new German Austria state. The city council then held a secret meeting, where it was decided to do whatever possible to regain Maribor for German Austria. They organised a military unit called the Green Guard (Schutzwehr), and approximately 400 well-armed soldiers of this unit opposed the pro-Slovenian and pro-Yugoslav Major Maister. Slovenian troops surprised and disarmed the Green Guard early in the morning of 23 November. Thereafter, there was no threat to the authority of Rudolf Maister in the city.
On 27 January 1919 Austrian Germans gathered to await the United States peace delegation at the city's marketplace were fired upon by Slovenian troops, who apparently feared the thousands of ethnic German citizens. Nine citizens were killed and some eighteen were seriously wounded; The German-language media called the incident Marburg's Bloody Sunday.
As Maribor was now firmly in the hands of the Slovenian forces and surrounded completely by Slovenian territory; the city had been recognised as part of the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes without a plebiscite in the Treaty of Saint-Germain of 10 September 1919 between the victors and German Austria.
After 1918 most of Maribor's Austrian Germans left the Kingdom of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs for Austria. These included the German-speaking officials who had not been from the region. Austrian German schools, clubs, and organizations were ordered closed by the new state of Yugoslavia, even though ethnic Germans still made up more than 25% of the city's total population as late as the 1930s. A policy of cultural assimilation was pursued in Yugoslavia against the Austrian German minority similar to the Germanization policy followed by Austria against its Slovene minority in Carinthia. However, in the late 1930s the policy was abandoned and the Austrian German minority's position improved significantly in an attempt to gain better diplomatic relations with Nazi Germany.

World War II and aftermath

In 1941 Lower Styria, the predominantly Yugoslav part of Styria, was annexed by Nazi Germany. German troops marched into the town at 9 pm on 8 April 1941.
On 26 April Adolf Hitler, who encouraged his followers to "make this land German again",. Maribor was the site of a German prisoner-of-war camp from 1941 to 1945 for many British, Australian, and New Zealand troops who had been captured in Crete in 1941.
The city, a major industrial centre with an extensive armament industry, was systematically bombed by the Allies in the closing years of World War II. A total of 29 bombing raids devastated some 47% of the city area, killing 483 civilians and leaving over 4,200 people homeless.
By the end of the war Maribor was the most war-damaged major town of Yugoslavia. The remaining German-speaking population, except those who had actively supported the resistance during the war, was summarily expelled at the end of the war in May 1945. At the same time mass killings took place of (alleged) Croatian Home Guard members and their relatives, who tried to escape from Yugoslavia and were executed by the Yugoslav Army, mass graves were discovered in 1999 and 2002.

Postwar period

After the liberation Maribor made good use of its proximity to Austria and its workforce, and developed into a major transit- and cultural centre of northern Slovenia, which had been enabled by Tito's decision not to build an Iron Curtain at the borders with Austria and Italy and to provide passports to all Yugoslav citizens.
When Slovenia seceded from Yugoslavia in 1991, the loss of the Yugoslav market severely strained the city's economy, which was based on heavy industry. The city saw a record unemployment rate of nearly 25%. After Slovenia entered the European Union in 2004, introduced the Euro currency in 2007, and joined the Schengen treaty, all of the border controls between Slovenia and Austria ceased on 25 December 2007. The economic situation of Maribor after the mid-1990s crisis worsened again with the onset of global economic crisis combined with the European sovereign-debt crisis.
In 2012, Maribor saw the beginning of 2012–13 Maribor protests which spread into 2012–2013 Slovenian protests. During the year 2012 Maribor was one of two European Capitals of Culture.  The following year Maribor was the European Youth Capital.

Roman Catholics

Maribor, previously in the Catholic Diocese of Graz-Seckau, became part of the Diocese of Lavant on 1 June 1859, and the seat of its Prince-Bishop. The name of the diocese (after a river in Carinthia) was later changed to the Diocese of Maribor on 5 March 1962. It was elevated to an archdiocese by Pope Benedict XVI on 7 April 2006.

Contemporary culture

The city hosts the University of Maribor, established in 1975,University of Maribor site. and many other schools. Maribor is also home to the oldest grapevine in the world, called Žametovka, which is more than 400 years old.
Maribor is the hometown of NK Maribor, a Slovenian football team. This club participated in the UEFA Champions League in the 1999–2000 season, and in the UEFA Europa League in the 2011–12, 2012–13 and 2013–14 seasons.
Every January the skiing resort of Mariborsko Pohorje, (named after the waterfront district called Lent) is held, with hundreds of musical, theatrical and other events.
The most listened radio stations transmitting from Maribor are the commercial radio stations Radio City and Radio Center (Slovenia). They are followed by the national non-commercial Radio Maribor.

Sport

In November 2012 Maribor hosted the World Youth Chess Championship,  with Garry Kasparov as the guest-of-honour. It was presumed that Maribor would host the XXVI 2013 Winter Universiade, but the Government of Slovenia refused any financial support for this project in February 2012 due to major financial problems.
Association football club NK Maribor, playing in the Slovenian PrvaLiga, plays its home matches at the Ljudski vrt stadium in Maribor. Maribor's handball club is RK Maribor Branik. Maribor Branik competes in the Slovenian First League of Handball and play their matches at the Tabor Hall. HDK Maribor, an ice hockey team, and KK Maribor (basketball) are also competing on a professional level in the top domestic leagues.

City districts


The city of Maribor has 11 districts (). The Municipality of Maribor also includes Kamnica, Pekre, Limbuš, Razvanje, Melje, Malečnik-Ruperče and Brestrenica-Gaj.
The river Drava separates the districts Center, Koroška Vrata, Melje and Ivan Cankar from the other districts of the city. The various city districts are connected by four traffic bridges, a rail bridge and a pedestrian bridge.

Transport

Architecture

Many medieval structures still stand in Maribor. Of the remains of city walls, the most prominent are the Judgement Tower, the Water Tower, and the Jewish Tower.  The Maribor Cathedral was built in the Gothic style in the 13th century. The Town Hall was constructed in the Renaissance style.
Piramida Hill dominates the northern border of the city. Ruins of the first Maribor castle from the 11th century and a chapel from the 19th century are also situated here. The hill offers an easy-to-reach view of Maribor and its southern Hinterland with the Drava River.
At the start of the new century plans were made for a new modern business, residential and entertainment district, called the Drava Doors ( tall skyscraper that would be the tallest building in Slovenia. Due to lack of finances, the project is currently postponed.
In 2008 the Studenci Footbridge (Studenška brv) was renovated according to the design of the Ponting company. Also in 2008, during the 3rd International Footbridge Conference in Porto, this design was awarded the prestigious Footbridge Award.
Maribor organised in 2010 an international architectural competition ECC Maribor 2012 – Drava 2012 to gather proposals for design and reconstruction of the Drava banks, construction of a new art gallery, and for a new footbridge. Its jury received about 400 proposals for the three different projects. The footbridge and the river embankments will be built in the near future, but the art gallery was replaced with a cultural center MAKS, which currently is under construction.
Construction started in 2011 near the Drava river of a new modern Faculty of Medicine. It has been designed by architect Boris Podrecca and it is expected to be completed in 2013.
There are plans to renovate the Maribor Public Library and the Town Hall Square () in the Drava river is being planned.

Tourist attractions

Maribor has many tourist areas, attractions, and interesting events:

File:Maribor Grad 20070107.jpg|Maribor Castle
File:Sodni stolp - Maribor.jpg|Judgement Tower
File:FranciscanChurch Maribor.jpg|Franciscan Church
File:Vodnistolp.jpg|Water Tower
File:Kužno znamenje Maribor.jpg|Plague Column
File:SLO-Betnava2.JPG|Betnava Castle
File:Maribor Stara trta 1.jpg|The Old Vine: considered the oldest vine tree in the world
File:Maribor Stolnica 20070107.jpg|Maribor Cathedral

Climate

Maribor features a humid continental climate with hot summers and cold winters. of precipitation annually, and it's one of the sunniest Slovene cities with an average of 266 sunny days throughout the course of the year.

Notable natives and residents

List of notable individuals who were born or lived in Maribor:

International relations

Twin towns — sister cities

Maribor is twinned with:






