[[Kirby's Dream Land]]

CATEGORIES: 1992 video games, Game Boy games, HAL Laboratory games, Kirby platform games, Platform games, Virtual Console games, Game Boy platform games

, is a 1992 third party developed platforming video game developed by HAL Laboratory and published by Nintendo for the Game Boy handheld video game console. It was first released in Japan, and was later released in North America. It is both the first video game in the Kirby series and the debut of the Kirby character. Kirby's Dream Land was designed by Masahiro Sakurai, at HAL Laboratory who intended for Kirby's Dream Land to be a simple game that could be played by beginning gamers. As the inaugural Kirby title, Kirby's Dream Land created many conventions that would appear in later games in the series, including Kirby's basic moves. However, Kirby's trademark "copy" ability would not appear until Kirby's Adventure, released less than one year later. Kirby's Dream Land was re-released for the 3DS's Virtual Console service in 2011. It is also one of the games included in Kirby's Dream Collection, which was released to celebrate Kirby's 20th anniversary.

Gameplay

The gluttonous King Dedede has stolen all of the food from the inhabitants of Dream Land for a midnight feast, so Kirby, a resident of Dream Land, goes to retrieve the food and stop Dedede. Kirby's Dream Land plays like other platformers of the 8-bit and 16-bit era of video games: Kirby must use various natural abilities and occasionally external abilities or items while heading toward the goal at the end of each level. Like many 1980s-era platformers, the player can accumulate points, with an extra life granted when the player has enough points. However, because Kirby lacks a save function, scores are not recorded. Also, there are no save files, so the player has to start over again when the Game Boy is turned off, if the player chooses to return to the title screen after a Game Over, or if the player resets the game. All levels are played on a two-dimensional plane, letting Kirby move only left, right, up, and down. Kirby can walk, jump, and fly.  Kirby can also inhale objects and enemies, swallowing them or spitting them out as projectiles.

Development

Kirby's Dream Land was developed by Masahiro Sakurai of HAL Laboratory. Kirby was a dummy character that the developers used until they could define a more sophisticated image. The designers grew to like Kirby so much that they decided to keep him instead of using a more advanced character. He was originally named 
The visuals are presented in two dimensions using pixelated sprites and environments. They are in black and white, like all Game Boy video games. The grey-scale visuals caused confusion with the North American box art, resulting in Nintendo of America presenting Kirby as being white. The music was composed by Jun Ishikawa. He was the only composer for this game,

Reception and legacy

Kirby's Dream Land has received generally mixed to positive reception. It holds an aggregate score of 64.83% on Game Rankings with six reviews, making it the 13th best Game Boy game and the 7,279th best video game. Critics said: Kirby's Dream Land is a great game, but it would have been much better if it had a couple of more stages.
In an article detailing various Kirby series video games, IGN stated that it was a decent platformer, but also very basic compared to later titles.
Kirby's Dream Land has since spawned dozens of sequels across more than a half-dozen video game consoles. The first direct sequel was Kirby's Adventure, which was released on the Nintendo Entertainment System console. It introduced the ability to steal powers from enemies, an ability which has been used in the majority of games following it.








