[[Local government in Northern Ireland]]

CATEGORIES: Subdivisions of Northern Ireland, Government of Northern Ireland, Politics of Northern Ireland, Local government in the United Kingdom, Local government in Northern Ireland

Northern Ireland is divided into 26 districts for local government purposes.  In Northern Ireland local councils do not carry out the same range of functions as those in the rest of the United Kingdom, for example they have no responsibility for education, road building or housing (though they do nominate members to the advisory Northern Ireland Housing Council). Their functions include waste and recycling services, leisure and community services, building control and local economic and cultural development.  They are not planning authorities, but are consulted on some planning applications. The collection of rates is handled by the Land and Property Services agency.  The 26 districts are variously styled districts, boroughs, cities, or city and district (in one case).

Districts and councils

There are 26 districts, each with a district council, which may be styled borough or city council if it has borough or city status.

History

The current pattern of local government in Northern Ireland, with 26 councils, was established in 1973 by the Local Government (Boundaries) Act (Northern Ireland) 1971 and the Local Government Act (Northern Ireland) 1972 to replace the previous system established by the Local Government (Ireland) Act 1898.  The system is based on the recommendations of the Macrory Report, of June 1970, which presupposed the continued existence of the Government of Northern Ireland to act as a regional-level authority.
From 1921 to 1973, Northern Ireland was divided into six administrative counties (subdivided into urban and rural districts) and two county boroughs. The counties and county boroughs continue to exist for the purposes of lieutenancy and shrievalty.I. 1975 No.156) This system, with the abolition of rural districts, remains the model for local government in the Republic of Ireland.  See: List of rural and urban districts in Northern Ireland for more details.

Elections

Councillors are elected for a four-year term of office under the single transferable vote (STV) system. Elections were last held in May 2011 and are due again in May 2015. To qualify for election, a councillor candidate must be:
In addition, he or she must either:
The results of the last election, held on 5 May 2011, are summarised below.

Combinations

The districts are combined for various purposes.

Education and Library Boards

There are currently five education and library boards (ELBs) in Northern Ireland.
As part of the Review of Public Administration process, the library functions of the ELBs were taken over by a new body, the Northern Ireland Library Authority (branded Libraries NI) in April 2009.org. Ni-libraries. Retrieved on 23 July 2013.
The education and skills functions were to have been centralised into a single Education and Skills Authority in January 2010, but this has been postponed.09 December 2008 – Assembly Supports New Education Authority | Northern Ireland Executive. Northernireland.uk (9 December 2008). Retrieved on 23 July 2013. As of June 2013, legislation was still pending but under active development.deni.uk/index/about-the-department/8-admin-of-education-pg/education-and-skills-authority/latest-developments.htm
The boards are as follows:

Eurostat NUTS level 3

In the Eurostat Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics (NUTS), Northern Ireland is divided into five parts at level 3

Former Health and Social Services Boards

There were four health and social services boards which were replaced by a single Health and Social Care Board in April 2009.Health and Social Care Board
The former health and social services boards were as follows:

Reform

In June 2002, the Northern Ireland Executive established a Review of Public Administration to review the arrangements for the accountability, development, administration and delivery of public services. Among its recommendations were a reduction in the number of districts.








