[[Chinatown, Chicago]]

CATEGORIES: Asian-American culture in Chicago, Illinois, Chinese-American culture in Illinois, Neighborhoods in Chicago, Illinois, Chinatowns in the United States, Visitor attractions in Chicago, Illinois, Populated places established in 1912, 1912 establishments in Illinois, Chinatowns

The Chinatown neighborhood in Chicago, Illinois, is on the South Side (located in the Armour Square community area), centered on Cermak and Wentworth Avenues, and is an example of an American Chinatown, or ethnic-Chinese neighborhood. By the 2000 Census, Chicago Primary Metropolitan Statistical Areas has 68,021 Chinese.  Chicago is the second oldest settlement of Chinese in America after the Chinese fled persecution in California.
Chinatown should not be confused with an area on the city's North Side sometimes referred to as "New Chinatown", which is centered around Argyle Street and is somewhat of a misnomer given that it is largely represented by people of Southeast Asian heritage.

History

Looking to escape the anti-Chinese violence that had broken out on the west coast, the first Chinese arrived in Chicago after 1869 when the First Transcontinental Railroad was completed. 9. By the late 1800s, 25% of Chicago's approximately 600 Chinese residents settled along Clark Street between Van Buren and Harrison Avenues in Chicago's Loop.
In the 1920s, Chinese community leaders secured approximately 50 ten-year leases on properties in the newly developing Chinatown. and the Moy Shee D.K Association Building, the former receiving a two-story addition in 1932. 372.
During the late 1980s, a group of Chinatown business leaders bought   Perhaps the most outstanding feature of the new addition was the creation of Ping Tom Memorial Park in 1999; located on the bank of the Chicago River, the park features a Chinese-style pavilion that many consider to be the most beautiful in the Midwest.Bronson, Chiu & Ho 2011, p 51

Commerce

Chicago's Chinatown is home to a number of banks, Chinese restaurants, gift shops, grocery stores, Chinese medicine stores, as well as a number of services that cater to people interested in Chinese culture, including those speaking Chinese, especially the Cantonese dialect. It is a community hub for Chinese people in the Chicago metropolitan area, a business center for Chinese in the Midwest, as well as a popular destination for tourists and locals alike.

Landmarks and attractions

Government and infrastructure

The United States Postal Service operates the Chinatown Post Office at 2345 South Wentworth Avenue."Post Office Location - CHINATOWN." United States Postal Service.

Education

Primary and secondary schools

Residents are zoned to schools in the Chicago Public Schools including John C. Haines School and Phillips Academy High School."Near North West Central Elementary Schools." Chicago Public Schools."West/Central/South High Schools." Chicago Public Schools.
The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Chicago supports the St. Therese Chinese Catholic School, a K-8 private Catholic school."St. Therese Chinese Catholic School." St. Therese Chinese Catholic Mission.
The Pui Tak Christian School, a private pre-kindergarten to 6th grade school."Pui Tak Christian School."

Public libraries

The Chicago Public Library operates the Chinatown Library at 2353 South Wentworth Avenue."Chinatown Library." Chicago Public Library.

Transportation

The Dan Ryan Expressway and the Stevenson Expressway intersect over the southside of Chinatown. The Stevenson's exit 293A (northbound exit and southbound entrances) gives Chinatown commuters immediate access to the expressways via Cermak Road, only one block east of Wentworth Avenue. There is metered street parking throughout the area, as well as two pay parking lots located on Wentworth Avenue.
Several forms of public transportation are also available in Chinatown. The Chicago Transit Authority operates both an elevated train and four bus routes that service the area. The north–south-running Red Line, the CTA's busiest transit route, stops 24/7 at the Cermak–Chinatown station located in the heart of Chinatown near the corner of Cermak Road and Wentworth Avenue.

Annual events





Further reading




