[[Cliff Clavin]]

CATEGORIES: Fictional characters introduced in 1982, Cheers characters, Fictional postal workers, Mail carriers

Clifford C. Clavin, Jr. (born 1950), also known as Cliff Clavin, is a fictional character on the American television show Cheers co-created (and played) by John Ratzenberger. A postal worker, he is the bar's know-it-all and was a contestant on the  game show Jeopardy! Cliff was not originally scripted in the series' pilot episode, "Give Me a Ring Sometime", but the producers decided to add a know-it-all character and Ratzenberger helped flesh it out. The actor made guest appearances as Cliff on Wings and Frasier.

Development

Creation

The original script for the 1982 pilot, "Give Me a Ring Sometime", did not include Norm Peterson (contrary to the belief that Norm is an original character) or Cliff Clavin. George Wendt and John Ratzenberger originally auditioned for a minor character, George, and Wendt was hired for that role. 112. 113–114. John Ratzenberger auditioned for the role George, as well. George was Diane Chambers' first customer, had one line (consisting of the order, "Beer!") and was intended for only one episode.
Since Wendt was cast as George (who evolved into Norm Peterson), Ratzenberger suggested to the producers that a know-it-all character should be added; this led to the creation of Cliff Clavin. Ratzenberger based his role on a police officer in his hometown of Bridgeport, Connecticut. Cliff was originally a security guard, but two days before the pilot's filming he was changed to a postman; the producers thought a postman would be more knowledgeable than a guard. Ratzenberger agreed to seven episodes of the first season, but his role expanded.
Stephen Tobolowsky told SplitSider.

Other appearances

Ratzenberger appeared as Cliff in a series of New Zealand Post advertisements during the 1990s, each featuring a different aspect of the postal service.
On the Cheers 200th-episode special, host John McLaughlin asked Ratzenberger about Cliff Clavin. The actor replied that Cliff would describe himself as the "wingnut that holds Western civilization together"; however, Ratzenberger said he would describe Cliff simply as "a wingnut". When McLaughlin asked Ratzenberger if there was any part of him in Cliff, the actor replied that although he was interested in fascinating facts  the only part of Cliff in him was that they both wear white socks.
Cliff appeared in 273 episodes of Cheers between 1982–1993. He also made guest appearances as an animated character (voiced by Ratzenberger) in The Simpsons episode "Fear of Flying", in the Wings episode "The Story of Joe" and the Frasier episode "Cheerful Goodbyes".
In 2014, Cliff emerged in an advertisement for RadioShack that aired during Super Bowl XLVIII in which he and other icons from the 1980s such as Hulk Hogan, Mary Lou Retton and ALF rid the store of outdated items, a nod to the perception that RadioShack is a relic.

Character

Cliff is a postal worker, and Norm Peterson's best friend. He lives with his mother, Esther Clavin (Frances Sternhagen)—first in his childhood two-story house (which was bulldozed in 1987's "The Last Angry Mailman" after Esther sold it to a convenience-store builder), and then in a condominium (which first appears in the season 6 episode "My Fair Clavin") with a sofabed. In "The Barstoolie" (1985) Cliff meets his father, Cliff Clavin Sr. (Dick O'Neill), who left Cliff and his mother years earlier. Cliff later realizes that his father is a fraudster and a fugitive from justice, and will run off again without saying goodbye to Esther. Cliff does not want to turn his father in; Cliff Sr. disappears, leaving his son disappointed.
Cliff is unlucky in love. In "Cliffie's Big Score" (1986), he and Diane (Shelley Long) are dancing partners for a one-night contest; Carla (who was supposed to be his partner) learns that Diane was Cliff's first choice, and tells him that Diane finds him attractive. He makes a pass at Diane in his car; she orders him out and drives off, leaving him stranded in the woods.
Cliff has relationships—some short-lived—with several women, including Sally (Karen Akers) in "My Fair Clavin" (who becomes more attractive with the help of his makeup magazines and advice from Rebecca). He has a relationship with fellow postal worker Margaret O'Keefe (Annie Golden), which begins during Cheers seventh season (1988–89). When Margaret becomes pregnant with another man's child in 1993's "Do Not Forsake Me O My Postman", Cliff stays by her side as the baby's stepfather before Margaret returns to the child's biological father.
Cliff is ridiculed by friends and enemies alike, including Carla (Rhea Perlman) and Norm, for his know-it-all attitude. He appears on Jeopardy! in the season-eight episode, "What Is... Cliff Clavin?" (1990). The postman wins $22,000, but loses it all with a wrong answer in Final Jeopardy (launching into a tirade which frightens off host Alex Trebek).
In the 1993 series finale, Cliff finally receives a promotion. In "The Show Where Sam Shows Up" (1995), an episode of the Cheers spinoff Frasier, Sam (Ted Danson) tells Frasier that Cliff has not left home since he read an article about flesh-eating bacteria; however, Sam then discovers that Cliff is one of two other men with whom Sam's fiance Sheila (Téa Leoni) had had sex. In "Cheerful Goodbyes" (another Frasier episode), Cliff has his retirement party at the airport bar; he had planned to move to Florida, but decides to stay in Boston (to Carla's dismay).

Reception

Steve Craig of the University of North Texas called Cliff Clavin a buffoon "to be ridiculed and pitied for failing the standards of hegemonic masculinity". 17. On the NBC News website, Wendall Wittler  called Cliff a "classic" character; however, Wittler found his friendship with Norm Peterson "superficial" and unworthy of comparison with the relationship between Ralph Kramden (Jackie Gleason) and Ed Norton (Art Carney) on The Honeymooners.
According to an April 1–4, 1993 telephone survey of 1,011 people by the Times Mirror Center for the People and the Press (now the Pew Research Center), Norm Peterson was voted 10 percent for a spinoff. The source mentions only Sam Malone, Woody Boyd (Woody Harrelson), and Norm. Choosing a character for a spinoff, 15 percent voted for Sam Malone, 29 percent opposed a character spinoff, and less than 10 percent voted for Cliff."Mixed Reaction to Post-Seinfeld Era." Pew Research Center for the People & the Press. Pew Research Center May 10, 1998. Web. Feb 10, 2012 
Cliff's appearance on Jeopardy! in "What Is... Cliff Clavin?" received several reviews. In his book Hope, Andrew Razeghi described Cliff as a poster child for psychologist J. P. Guilford for a response to the Final Jeopardy! clue which Razeghi considered neither right nor wrong. 34. Jeffrey Robinson of DVD Talk found the Jeopardy! category topics during Cliff's appearance (including "post office" and "beer") a "riot". "Cheers – The Complete Eighth Season." DVD Talk June 18, 2006. Web. May 11, 2012. In the Jeopardy! fan community Cliff's losing $22,000 (won in two rounds) in Final Jeopardy! inspired "Clavin's rule", discouraging future contestants from attempting the same."J! Archive Help: Clavin's Rule." J! Archive, 2012. Web. May 11, 2012. The Hot Springs Village Voice considered his know-it-all nature the cause of his mishap on the game show."Cheers star John Ratzenberger to be marshal at St. Patrick's Day parade." Hot Springs Village Voice December 3, 2008. Web. May 11, 2012.

Lawsuit

In 1993, Ratzenberger and Wendt sued Host International for copyright infringement, trademark infringement and violating the actors' personality rights. The company had manufactured two robotic toys (one heavyset and the other a postal worker) who, the actors argued, resembled Cliff Clavin and Norm Peterson. The case was twice rejected by "a federal judge in California". At one hearing, the judge ruled that the defendant did not violate copyright because Paramount Pictures had already granted it a license to produce Cheers-based themes and decor for (primarily) airport bars. At another, the judge ruled that the toys did not resemble the characters.
In 1997, however, "the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals twice reinstated" the case (Wendt v. Host International, Inc.).



Notes

References


