[[Collyer brothers]]

CATEGORIES: 1881 births, 1885 births, 1947 deaths, American Episcopalians, American hermits, American people of Dutch descent, American people of Scottish descent, Burials at Cypress Hills National Cemetery, Cardiovascular disease deaths in New York, Columbia University alumni, Compulsive hoarding, Deaths by starvation, Deaths from asphyxiation, History of New York City, Livingston family, New York University alumni, People from Harlem, People from Manhattan, People from New York City, Sibling duos

Homer Lusk Collyer (November 6, 1881 – March 21, 1947) and Langley Wakeman Collyer (October 3, 1885 – c. March 9, 1947), known as the Collyer brothers, were two American brothers who became famous because of their bizarre natures and compulsive hoarding. For decades, neighborhood rumors swirled around the rarely seen men and their home at 2078 Fifth Avenue (at the corner of 128th Street), in Manhattan, where they obsessively collected books, furniture, musical instruments, and many other items, with booby traps set up in corridors and doorways to ensnare intruders.
Both were eventually found dead in the Harlem brownstone where they had lived, surrounded by over 140 tons of collected items that they had amassed over several decades.

Family and education

The Collyer brothers were sons of Herman Livingston Collyer (1857–1923), a Manhattan gynecologist who worked at Bellevue Hospital, and Susie Gage Frost (1856–1929), a former opera singer. Their parents were first cousins. (2007), "The Curious Legal Career Of Homer L. Collyer". Journal of Maritime Law & Commerce. 38 (4):571-582  The brothers would later claim that their ancestors had traveled to America from England on the Speedwell, the ship that arrived in Massachusetts a week after the Mayflower in 1620. The following year, on November 6, 1881, they had their first son, Homer Lusk, and in 1885 Langley was born.  They were living in a tenement while Herman interned at Bellevue. As a child, Homer attended PS (Public School) 69. At the age of fourteen, he was accepted to the College of the City of New York as a "sub-freshman", earning his bachelor's degree six years later.
Both Homer and Langley attended Columbia University, which had just relocated to its present-day Morningside Heights campus. Homer obtained a degree in admiralty law, while Langley studied engineering and chemistry.
In 1909, Dr. Herman Collyer moved the family into a four-story brownstone in Harlem at 2078 Fifth Avenue. Dr. Collyer was known to be eccentric himself, and was said to frequently paddle down the East River in a canoe to the City Hospital on Blackwell's Island, where he occasionally worked, and then to carry the canoe back to his home in Harlem after he came ashore on Manhattan Island. Around 1919, Dr. Collyer and Susie Collyer separated. Dr. Collyer moved to a new home at 153 West 77th Street while Susie Collyer stayed in the Harlem brownstone. Homer and Langley, who had never married or lived on their own, chose to remain with their mother. Dr. Collyer died in 1923 and left his sons all of his possessions, including items from his medical practice, which they brought to their home in Harlem. Susie Collyer died in 1929 leaving the brothers all her possession and the Harlem brownstone.

Seclusion and hoarding

After their parents' deaths, the Collyer brothers continued to live together in the Harlem brownstone they inherited from their mother. During this time, they socialized normally and left their home on a regular basis. Homer continued to practice law while Langley worked as a piano dealer. In 1933, Homer lost his eyesight due to hemorrhages in the back of his eyes. Langley quit his job to care for his brother and the two began to 
withdraw from society. As time progressed, the brothers became fearful due to demographic changes in the neighborhood; the largely white, upper class neighborhood went into decline during the Great Depression. Crime and poverty rates increased and more African Americans moved into the once empty apartment houses that were built near a projected subway route. The house soon became a maze of boxes, complicated tunnel systems rigged with trip wires and various amounts of junk and garbage. Homer and Langley Collyer lived among the items in "nests" created amongst the debris that was piled to the ceiling.
Langley spent the majority of his time tinkering with various inventions, such as a device to vacuum the insides of pianos and a Model T Ford adapted to generate electricity. He also cared for his brother Homer. Langley later told a reporter that he fed and bathed his brother, read him classic literature as he could no longer see and played piano sonatas for him. He also tended to Homer's health and was determined to cure his brother's physical ailments through "diet and rest". Langley concocted a diet consisting of one hundred oranges a week, black bread and peanut butter that he claimed was curing Homer's blindness.96 After Homer became paralyzed due to inflammatory rheumatism, he refused to seek professional medical treatment because both brothers mistrusted doctors. Langley stated that if Homer sought medical attention, doctors would cut his optic nerve which would leave him permanently blind and they would give Homer drugs that would certainly hasten his death. Langley Collyer later told a reporter, "You must remember that we are the sons of a doctor. We have a medical library of 15,000 books in the house. We decided we would not call in any doctors. You see, we knew too much about medicine."
Langley began venturing out of the house only after midnight and would walk miles all over the city to get food, sometimes going as far as Williamsburg, Brooklyn to buy as little as a loaf of bread. He would also pick food out of the garbage and collect food that was going to be thrown out by grocers and butchers to bring back to his brother Homer. He also collected countless pieces of abandoned items and trash that aroused his interest.
By the early 1930s, the Collyer brothers' brownstone had fallen into disrepair. Their telephone was disconnected in 1917 and never reconnected as the brothers said they had no one to talk to. Because the brothers failed to pay their bills, the electricity, water, and gas were turned off in 1928.  The brothers took to warming the large house using only a small kerosene heater. For a while, Langley attempted to generate his own energy by means of a car engine. Langley would fetch their water from a pump in nearby parks. Their only link to the outside world was via a crystal radio that Langley made.
Neighbors and shopkeepers in the area described Langley Collyer as a generally polite and rational man but added that he was "crazy". A reporter who interviewed Langley in 1942 described him as a "soft spoken old gentleman with a liking for privacy" who spoke in a "low, polite and cultivated voice." His appearance was disheveled; he sported a droopy mustache, wore a 1910 boating cap and his tattered clothes were held together by pins. While Langley Collyer ventured out of the home and occasionally interacted with other people, Homer had not been seen or heard from since he went blind in 1933 and retreated from the world. Langley was fiercely protective of Homer and would not allow anyone to see him. When he caught neighbors attempting to peek into their windows from a neighboring home, Langley bought the property for $7,500 cash. When a small fire broke out in the home in 1941, Langley refused to let fireman see or speak to his brother.

Public scrutiny

In 1932, shortly before Homer Collyer went blind, he purchased the property across the street from their house at 2077 Fifth Avenue, with the intent of developing it by putting up an apartment building. But after the onset of his blindness, any plans of profit from the real estate venture fell through.27 Since the Collyer brothers never paid any of their bills and stopped paying income taxes in 1931, the property was repossessed by the City of New York in 1943 to pay the $1,900 in back income taxes that the Collyers owed the city.
While rumors and legends abounded in Harlem about the brothers, Neither rumor was true; the brothers were certainly not broke, although eventually they would have been, since neither of them had worked for decades.
After The New York Times story ran, Helen Worden, a reporter from New York World-Telegram, became interested in the brothers and interviewed Langley Collyer (Worden would release a book about the brothers in 1954). Langley told Worden that he stopped playing piano professionally after performing at Carnegie Hall because, "Paderewski followed me. He got better notices than I. What was the use of going on?" Langley explained that he dressed in shabby clothing because, "They would rob me if I didn't."
The Collyer brothers made the news again when, in 1939, workers from Consolidated Edison forced their way into the house to remove two gas meters that had been shut off in 1928. The incident reportedly drew a crowd of 1,000 curious onlookers. They drew media attention again in 1942 when they got in trouble with the bank after refusing to pay the mortgage on their house. That same year, the New York Herald Tribune interviewed Langley. In response to a query about the bundles of newspapers that were kept in the brothers' home, Langley replied, "I am saving newspapers for Homer, so that when he regains his sight he can catch up on the news."
When the Bowery Savings Bank began eviction procedures, they sent over a cleanup crew. Langley began yelling at the workers prompting the neighbors to summon the police. When the police attempted to force their way in to the home by smashing down the front door, they were stymied by a sheer wall of junk piled from floor to ceiling. They found Langley Collyer in a clearing he made in the middles of the debris. Without comment, Langley made out a check for $6,700 ($ He then ordered everyone off the premises, and withdrew from outside scrutiny once more, emerging only at night and when he wanted to file criminal complaints against intruders, get food or collect items that piqued his interest.

Homer Collyer's death

On March 21, 1947, an anonymous tipster who identified himself only as "Charles Smith" phoned the 122nd Police Precinct and insisted there was a dead body in the house. The caller claimed that the smell of decomposition was emanating from the house. As the police were used to calls from neighbors about the Collyer brothers' home, a patrol officer was dispatched. The responding officer initially had a difficult time getting into the house. There was no doorbell nor telephone and the doors were locked; and though the basement windows were broken, they were protected by iron grillwork. An emergency squad of seven men eventually had no choice but to begin pulling out all the junk that was blocking their way and throwing it out onto the street below. The brownstone's foyer was packed solid by a wall of old newspapers, folding beds and chairs, half a sewing machine, boxes, parts of a wine press, and numerous other pieces of junk. A patrolman finally broke in through a window into a second-story bedroom. Behind this window lay, among other things, more packages and newspaper bundles, empty cardboard boxes lashed together with rope, the frame of a baby carriage, a rake, and old umbrellas tied together. After five hours of digging, Homer Collyer's body was found in an alcove surrounded by filled boxes and newspapers that were piled to the ceiling. Homer was wearing a tattered blue-and-white bathrobe, his matted, grey hair reached his shoulders, and his head was resting on his knees.12
The medical examiner confirmed Homer's identity and said that the elder brother had been dead for approximately ten hours. According to the medical examiner, Homer died from starvation and heart disease.

Discovery of Langley Collyer

On March 30, false rumors circulated that Langley had been seen aboard a bus heading for Atlantic City. A manhunt along the New Jersey shore turned up nothing. Reports of Langley sightings led police to a total of nine states. (January 10, 1948), "The Thundering Herd of Wall Street". Saturday Evening Post. 220 (28):20  The police continued searching the house two days later, removing 3,000 books, several outdated phone books, a horse's jawbone, a Steinway piano, an early X-ray machine, and more bundles of newspapers. More than nineteen tons of junk was removed from the ground floor of the brownstone. The police continued to clear away the brothers' stockpile for another week, removing another eighty-four tons of rubbish from the house. Although a good deal of the junk came from their father's medical practice, a considerable portion was discarded items collected by Langley over the years. Approximately 2,000 people stood outside the home to watch the clean up effort.
On April 8, 1947, a workman found the body of Langley Collyer ten feet from where Homer had died. His cause of death was attributed to asphyxiation.
Both brothers were buried next to their parents in unmarked graves at Cypress Hills Cemetery, Brooklyn.

House contents

Police and workmen removed approximately 120 tons of garbage from the Collyer brownstone. Items were removed from the house such as baby carriages, a doll carriage, rusted bicycles, old food, potato peelers, a collection of guns, glass chandeliers, bowling balls, camera equipment, the folding top of a horse-drawn carriage, a sawhorse, three dressmaking dummies, painted portraits, photos of pinup girls from the early 1900s, plaster busts, Mrs. Collyer's hope chests, rusty bed springs, the kerosene stove, a child's chair (the brothers were lifelong bachelors and childless), more than 25,000 books (including thousands about medicine and engineering and more than 2,500 on law), human organs pickled in jars, eight live cats, the chassis of the old Model T with which Langley had been tinkering, tapestries, hundreds of yards of unused silks and other fabrics, clocks, fourteen pianos (both grand and upright), a clavichord, two organs, banjos, violins, bugles, accordions, a gramophone and records, and countless bundles of newspapers and magazines, some of them decades old, and thousands of bottles and tin cans and a great deal of garbage.13
Some of the more unusual items found in the home were exhibited at Hubert's Dime Museum, where they were featured alongside Human Marvels and sideshow performers. The centerpiece of this display was the chair in which Homer Collyer had died. The Collyer chair passed into the hands of private collectors upon being removed from public exhibit in 1956.
The house itself, having long gone without maintenance, was decaying: the roof leaked and some walls had caved in, showering bricks and mortar on the rooms below. The house was deemed "unsafe and a fire hazard" in July 1947 and was razed later that month.
Most of the items found in the Collyer brothers' house were deemed worthless and were disposed of. The salvageable items fetched less than $2,000 at auction;Steketee 2010 p.8 the cumulative estate of the Collyer brothers was valued at $91,000 (about $ In October 1952, the New York County court decided that 23 of the claimants were to split the estate equally.

Legacy

Since the 1960s, the site of the former Collyer house has been a pocket park, named for the brothers.
A Collyer's Mansion (also Collyer Mansion or just Collyer) is a modern firefighting term for a dwelling of hoarders that is so filled with trash and debris it becomes a serious danger to the occupants and emergency responders.

In popular culture

The Collyer brothers' story was first directly fictionalized by Marcia Davenport in her novel, My Brother's Keeper (Scribners, 1954), reprinted as a Popular Library paperback.
The 1995 movie Unstrung Heroes features two uncles whose lifestyle and apartment are a direct homage to the Collyer brothers. The film was based on a 1991 memoir by Franz Lidz, whose 2003 urban historical Ghosty Men: The Strange but True Story of the Collyer Brothers, New York's Greatest Hoarders: An Urban Historical (published by Bloomsbury USA) is the definitive history of the Collyers. Ghosty Men also chronicles the parallel life of Arthur Lidz, the hermit uncle featured in Unstrung Heroes. Uncle Arthur grew up near the Collyer mansion and was inspired by the brothers.
In Season 6, Episode 17 of the sitcom Frasier, Martin likened the cloistered togetherness of Frasier and Niles to that of the Collyer brothers.
In September 2009, Random House published E. L. Doctorow's Homer & Langley, a work of historical fiction that speculates on the brothers' inner lives.
In 2003, Australian writer-director David Willing and writer-producer Jessica Birnbaum made a 19-minute short film titled Collyer Brothers Syndrome. It screened twice on the Australian Broadcast Network SBS and at several film festivals.



Other recluses

Footnotes



Further reading




