[[Laura Pausini]]

CATEGORIES: 1974 births, Laura Pausini, Living people, Italian pop singers, Italian singer-songwriters, Italian mezzo-sopranos, Italian record producers, Spanish-language singers of Italy, English-language singers of Italy, French-language singers of Italy, Portuguese-language singers, People from the Province of Ravenna, Atlantic Records artists, Grammy Award-winning artists, Latin Grammy Award winners, World Music Awards winners, Latin pop singers, Italian Roman Catholics, Sanremo Music Festival winners of the newcomers section

{{Infobox person
| honorific_prefix          = 
| name                      = Laura Pausini
| honorific_suffix          = OMRI
| native_name               = 
| native_name_lang          = 
| image                     = Laura Pausini 2009.04.30 001.jpg
| image_size                = 200px
| alt                       = 
| caption                   = Laura Pausini performing during her World Tour 2009 in Barcelona
| birth_name                = 
| birth_date                = 
| baptism_date              = 
| birth_place               = Solarolo, Emilia–Romagna, Italy
| disappeared_date          = 
| disappeared_place         = 
| disappeared_status        = 
| death_date                = 
| death_place               = 
| death_cause               = 
| body_discovered           = 
| resting_place             = 
| resting_place_coordinates = 
| monuments                 = 
| residence                 = Solarolo, Province of Ravenna, Emilia–Romagna, Italy
| nationality               = Italian
| other_names               = 
| ethnicity                 = 
| citizenship               = 
| education                 = 
| alma_mater                = 
| occupation                =  

Laura Pausini, 
Its follow-up, Laura, was released in 1994 and confirmed her international success, selling three million copies worldwide.
As of today, she has released ten studio albums, an international greatest hits album and two compilation albums for the Hispanic and Anglophone market only, respectively. She mostly performs in Italian and Spanish, but she has also recorded songs in English, French and Portuguese.
All of her albums earned the top-five on the Italian Albums Chart, and six of them reached the first position in Italy. Pausini has also released 14 top-ten singles in Italy, including five number-ones. In 2004, Allmusic's Jason Birchmeier considered Pausini's sales "an impressive feat for someone who'd never really broken into the lucrative English–language market". As of 2011, according to Warner Music Italy, Pausini had sold more than 70 million records, while according national Italian radio and television Rai she has sold about 45 million albums, compilations, singles and DVDs worldwide.ilpiugrande.it/dl/portali/site/page/Page-261e4b3c-67ba-4939-b4a1-01955ebacee7.html
During her career, she has won numerous music awards, including three Latin Grammy Awards, a Billboard Latin Music Award and four World Music Awards. In 2006 she also became the first Italian female artist to win a Grammy Award, She has been honoured as a Commander Order of Merit of the Italian Republic by President Carlo Azeglio Ciampi.

Biography

Childhood and early beginnings

The elder of two daughters, Laura Pausini was born in Solarolo, in the Province of Ravenna, Italy,A
Her father is a former pianist
Her first live performance was on 16 May 1985, when she sang together with her father in a restaurant in Bologna.
Since then, her father started giving her singing lessons
In 1987 she recorded her first demo album, produced by her father and released to promote her live shows. Despite being declared joint winner with another contestant, Pausini was not allowed to compete in the Sanremo Music Festival 1992.

1993: Career breakthrough

Thanks to her performances in local singing competitions, Pausini was noted by Italian producer and songwriter Angelo Valsiglio, who introduced her the manager Marco Marati. Valsiglio proposed her "La solitudine", a song he wrote with Pietro Cremonesi and Federico Cavalli. Pausini's rendition convinced Valsiglio and Marati, who wanted Pausini to audition for some major labels. During one of the auditions, she met Fabrizio Giannini of Warner Music Italy's Compagnia Generale del Disco. After impressing him with a performance of an unreleased Mia Martini song, Pausini obtained her first recording contract, becoming one of the first artists being discovered by Giannini, who later launched the careers of several Italian acts, including Luciano Ligabue and Irene Grandi.
"La solitudine" was selected as one of the entries of the newcomer artists' section of the 43rd Sanremo Music Festival. Pausini performed it for the first time on 23 February 1993, during the first semifinal of the contest.
The song also became a commercial success in Italy, peaking at number one on the Italian Musica e Dischi singles chart in March 1993 and maintaining the top spot for three consecutive weeks, and it is still one of Pausini's best-known hits.
Following the success obtained with her debut single, Pausini started working on her first professional album, Laura Pausini.
The album was recorded while Pausini was still a high school student at the "Gaetano Ballardini" Institute of Ceramics in Faenza, Italy,
Released by CGD Records in May 1993, it reached the sixth position on the Italian Musica e Dischi albums chart,
The album was also promoted through an Italian outdoor tour during the summer of 1993. In September 1993, Pausini received a Telegatto for Revelation of the Year.
In late 1993, the album was released in the rest of Europe, peaking at number three on the Dutch Albums Chart
Worldwide sales of Pausini's debut studio album exceed two million units.
Moreover, "La solitudine" became a radio hit in Belgium and the Netherlands, it peaked at number five on the French Singles Chart and it reached the top spot of the Dutch Top 40 and of the Flemish Ultratop 50.
The album also spawned the singles "Non c'è" and "Perché non torna più".

1994–1995: Spanish-language debut and international success

In February 1994, Pausini participated for the second time in the Sanremo Music Festival, competing in the "Big Artists" section with her entry "Strani amori".
The song ranked third in the competition, behind Aleandro Baldi's "Passerà" and Giorgio Faletti's "Signor tenente",
During the same year, Pausini released her first Spanish-language album, Laura Pausini, a compilation of ten adapted versions of hits from her previous albums, issued by Dro Records. The record became the best-selling album of 1994 in Spain,
The album was successful in Latin America too, being certified platinum by the Argentine Chamber of Phonograms and Videograms Producers, the Asociación Colombiana de Productores de Fonogramas
Moreover, the first four singles from the album, "La soledad", "Se fue", "Amores extraños" and "Gente", entered the top 30 on the Hot Latin Songs chart compiled by Billboard.
Pausini's first record for the British market was a self-titled compilation album released in 1995, including nine Italian-language hits and an English-language version of her first single, "La solitudine (Loneliness)",

1996–1997: Third album and World Wide Tour 1997

Following the success obtained by Pausini's debut Spanish album, her third studio set was released on 12 September 1996 both in Italian and Spanish, under the titles Le cose che vivi and Las cosas que vives, respectively.
Starting from that moment, Pausini has recorded most of her songs both in her native language and in Spanish, in a practice that, according to Allmusic's Jason Birchmeier, has "come to define her career and compound her success".
A special edition of the album was also released in Brazil, featuring three additional bonus tracks in Portuguese.
The album was preceded by the single "Incancellabile", released to Italian radio stations on 26 August 1996
At the 9th Lo Nuestro Awards for Latin Music, Pausini was nominated for Pop Female Singer and Video of the Year for the Spanish-language version of "Le cose che vivi".
In December 1996, Pausini was among the artists singing for Pope John Paul II during the Natale in Vaticano concert, a Christmas show held at the Paul VI Audience Hall.
In February 1997 she was also invited as a guest to the Viña del Mar International Song Festival in Chile.
On 1 March 1997, she launched from Geneva the World Wide Tour in support of the album, giving concerts in Italy, Switzerland,
In August of the same year, during the last night of the Festivalbar, she received the International award for the success she achieved abroad.

1998–1999: La mia risposta / Mi respuesta and second World Tour

In 1998, Pausini released her fourth studio album, La mia risposta, together with its Spanish-language counterpart, Mi respuesta. The album, which included a song penned by Phil Collins, it was a moderate commercial success, selling two million copies worldwide.
The lead single from the album, "Un'emergenza d'amore", was released in September 1998,
To promote the album, Pausini began in early 1999 the La mia risposta World Tour '99, during which she performed in theatres throughout Europe.
On 1 June 1999, she was one of the artists performing along with Italian tenor Luciano Pavarotti in Modena during his annual "Pavarotti and Friends" concert.
In 1999 she also contributed the Richard Marx composition "One More Time" to the Message in a Bottle soundtrack. who was featured on piano.

2000–2001: Tra te e il mare / Entre tú y mil mares and greatest hits album

In 2000, she recorded the song "The Extra Mile" for the soundtrack of the movie Pokémon 2000: The Power of One.
The album also features the songs "Viaggio con te", which was composed for his father and which was awarded in 2001 with an Italian Lunezia Award for Best Songwriter of the Year,
Tra te e il mare received a nomination for Album of the Year at the Premio Italiano della Musica, while Pausini was nominated for Best Female Artist during the same award ceremony,
A Spanish-language version of the album, titled Entre tú y mil mares, was released shortly before the Italian-language edition, on 11 September 2000. At the 2001 Latin Grammy Awards, the record received two nominations for Best Female Pop Vocal Album and Best Engineered Album, while Pausini and Alfredo Cerruti were in the shortlist for Producer of the Year.
Pausini's first international greatest hits album was released in 2001, both in an Italian-language version and in a Spanish-language edition, titled The Best of Laura Pausini: E ritorno da te and Lo mejor de Laura Pausini: Volveré junto a ti, respectively. The first single, "E ritorno da te"—"Volveré junto a ti" in Spanish—was accompanied by a music video shot by Italian film director Gabriele Muccino.
Supported by the 2001/2002 World Tour, which started in Miami on 19 October 2001, the greatest hits became one of Pausini's biggest commercial successes, selling 700,000 copies in Italy and 800,000 copies in France.
During the concert she gave in Milan on 2 December 2001 as part of the tour, Pausini also recorded her first live video album, titled Live 2001-2002 World Tour and released on 30 November 2002.

2002–2003: From the Inside, the English-language debut

In 2001, Pausini started working with producers such as Patrick Leonard and John Shanks
Released in Canada, Mexico and the United States by Atlantic Records on 5 November 2002, the album did not get the expected success, selling 100,000 copies in the U.S., according to Nielsen-Soundscan.
The album singles "Surrender" and "If That's Love" reached the top spot on the Hot Dance Club Songs Chart,
The album was later released in Europe too, selling 800,000 copies worldwide.
In 2003 Luciano Pavarotti invited her for the second time to the "Pavarotti and Friends" concert, where they duetted again in "Tu che m'hai preso il cuor".

2004–2005: Resta in ascolto / Escucha and the Grammy

In October 2004 Pausini released her eight studio album, Resta in ascolto / Escucha. Influenced by international artists including Phil Collins and Celine Dion,
The album features the song "Mi abbandono a te" / "Me abandono a ti", co-written by Pausini, Rick Nowels and Madonna. It also includes the Biagio Antonacci-written ballad "Vivimi" / "Viveme", which won a Billboard Latin Music Award in 2006 for Female Latin Pop Airplay Song of the Year,
The album debuted at number one on the Italian Albums Chart and Best Latin Pop Album at the 48th Grammy Awards, making Pausini the first Italian female artist to win a Grammy Award.
Pausini made a guest appearance on Michael Bublé's 2005 live album Caught in the Act, singing a duet with Bublé of Lou Rawls' hit "You'll Never Find Another Love Like Mine". The duet was placed on both the audio CD, and the full concert DVD that aired on PBS as an episode of Great Performances.
At the 2006 Lo Nuestro Award, Pausini was nominated in the sections Album of the Year for Escucha, Song of the Year and Video of the Year for "Viveme"
In January 2005, Pausini started a new tour to promote the album.

2006–2007: Io canto and the concert in San Siro

In November 2006, Pausini released the album Io canto / Yo canto, consisting of covers of Italian pop rock songs. On the album liner notes, Pausini wrote:
"here is the music I listen to when I'm at my saddest, or when I feel a moment is special, the songs I used to sing as a young girl when I first started performing, and above all those which taught me to love music, and how music can move you so deeply, regardless of its genre or style".
The album also features duets with Tiziano Ferro, Juanes and Johnny Hallyday.
Laura dedicated the award to the memory of Italian tenor Luciano Pavarotti. Later on during the show she sang "Vivere (Dare to Live)" alongside Italian singer Andrea Bocelli.
In Summer 2006, Pausini played a Juntos en concierto tour with Marc Anthony and Marco Antonio Solís,
On 2 June 2007, Laura Pausini was the first female artist to play at the San Siro Stadium in Milan,

2008–2010: Primavera in anticipo, Amiche per l'Abruzzo and Laura Live

Pausini spent the first months of 2008 recording her tenth studio album, Primavera in anticipo / Primavera anticipada. The Spanish language edition of the album was released on 11 November 2008,
The album was preceded by the single "Invece no" / "En cambio no", released on 24 October 2008
The album also features a the single "Primavera in anticipo (It Is My Song)" / Primavera anticipada (It Is My Song)", a duet with British singer-songwriter James Blunt.
In November 2009 the album won Best Female Album at the Latin Grammy Awards.
On 21 June 2009, Pausini organized a mega-concert in the San Siro Stadium in Milan, raising money to support the victims of the 2009 L'Aquila earthquake. The concert, named Amiche per l'Abruzzo, involved 43 Italian female singers
In the meanwhile, on 5 March 2009, Pausini began her World Tour 2009 in Turin,
A CD of the tour, along with a DVD, was released on 27 November 2009 with the title Laura Live World Tour 09 / Laura Live Gira Mundial 09. The album also includes three new song, the singles "Con la musica alla radio" / "Con la musica en la radio", "Non sono lei" / "Ella no soy" and "Casomai" / "Menos mal".

2011–2012: Inedito and the Inedito World Tour

On 30 December 2010, Pausini announced her eleventh studio album,
The title and the tracklist of the album were announced through Pausini's website on 10 September 2011. The first single from the album, "Benvenuto" / "Bienvenido", was released on 12 September 2011.
In order to promote the album, Pausini engaged the Inedito World Tour, starting with 11 shows in Italy in late December 2011.
The album also spawned the singles "Non ho mai smesso" "Mi tengo", "Le cose che non mi aspetto" / "Las cosas que no me espero" and "Celeste". The song "Troppo tempo" was originally chosen as the sixth and last single of the album, but when Pausini discovered her pregnancy she changed her mind to "Celeste".
On 25 June 2012, Pausini took part in the mega-concert Concerto per l'Emilia, organized to raise funds in support of the people affected by the 2012 Northern Italy earthquakes. During the show, Pausini duetted with Cesare Cremonini, performing a cover of Lucio Dalla's "L'anno che verrà".
The album has sold 1,000,000 copies worldwide.
On 27 November 2012, a special edition of Inedito, in both Italian and Spanish, was released, featuring a live DVD recorded during the 2012 Inedito World Tour. The Italian-language version and the Spanish-language version of the DVD were recorded in Bologna on 17 April 2012 and in Madrid on 20 April 2012, respectively. The CD included in the new edition of Inedito also features a live medley performed by Pausini on New Year's Eve 2012, as well as a duet with Venezuelan singer Carlos Baute on the track "Las cosas que no me espero", released as a single in Spain and Latin America.
In 2012 Pausini also recorded an Italian-language duet with Josh Groban, "E ti prometterò", included in his album All That Echoes, released in February 2013.

2013: 20 - The Greatest Hits and the new world tour

On 26 February 2013, in order to celebrate the twentieth anniversary of her career, Pausini released a digital single including the original versions in Italian, Spanish and English of the song which launched her career in 1993, "La solitudine". The track was launched as a limited-edition single, available for purchase for a week only.
On 1 June 2013 Pausini took part in the concert Chime for Change in London, supporting the global campaign of the same name for girls' and women's empowerment. Pausini performed the songs "Io canto" and "It's Not Goodbye".
During the same year, she appeared as a featured artist on the track "Sonríe (Smile)", included in American singer Gloria Estefan's album The Standards.
A new world tour has also been confirmed by Pausini through her official website. Starting from December 2013, Pausini will promote her greatest hits album with concerts in her native Italy, as well as in other European countries, in Latin America, in the United States and in Canada. The tour also includes a performance during the Viña del Mar International Song Festival in Chile.
On September 9, 2013, Pausini released a new single named "Limpido" (in Spanish, "Limpio"), in order to promote her new album. The song is a duet between Pausini and the Australian singer Kylie Minogue. On the same day, the name of the album was confirmed to be 20 - The Greatest Hits / 20 - Grandes Exitos.
On September 20, 2013, Pausini posted the official cover of this new album in her Instagram account, created in order to share the image.Laura Pausini: inaugura Instagram, rivelando la copertina del nuovo album

Artistry

Laura Pausini is described as a mezzosoprano
At the beginning of her career, she was considered by music critics as a teen idol
Starting from her 1998's La mia risposta / Mi respuesta, Italian music critics considered her as a more mature singer and later praised her simplicity
Although Pausini is mainly a melodic pop singer,
Starting from her 1996's album Le cose che vivi / Las cosas que vives, Pausini has also co-written most of her songs

Personal life

Pausini left her hometown in 1995, when she moved to Milan with her partner, manager and producer Alfredo Cerruti Jr. Their relationship ended in 2002. Between 2002 and 2005 Pausini was romantically involved with her new manager, Gabriele Parisi.
She is currently engaged with the Italian guitarist, composer, music producer and former singer Paolo Carta.
Pausini describes herself as a Roman Catholic woman, In September 2000 she explained her position during an interview to the Italian newspaper la Repubblica:

Honours

100px – Commander Order of Merit of the Italian Republic: Awarded the fourth highest civil honour in Italy, by President Carlo Azeglio Ciampi on 6 February 2006.

Discography

Tours

Awards

Notes

 
  
  ^ Sources indicate different locations for Pausini's birth—The Comunes of Faenza and Solarolo, Ravenna, Italy. One state source, The Presidency of the Italian Republic, cites Faenza as the location of her birth. Pausini, Laura. Interview. Las hijas, Hosts Monserrat Olivier and Yolanda Andrade, Unicable Mexico, 27 January 2007. 






