[[Flagship Studios]]

CATEGORIES: Companies based in San Francisco, California, Companies established in 2003, Companies disestablished in 2008, Defunct video game companies, Video game companies of the United States, Video game development companies

Flagship Studios was a computer game company founded by Bill Roper along with Max Schaefer, Erich Schaefer, and David Brevik, the original developers of Diablo and former high level Blizzard North executives. Flagship Studio's primary target platform for their games was the PC.
Flagship Studios had a partnership with Namco Hometek and HanbitSoft to cover an international market for game marketing and distribution.
The company dissolved in August 2008 because of financial troubles. Max Schaefer and Erich Schaefer moved on to help form Runic Games.

Titles

Hellgate: London

In March 2005, following months of teasing concept art for an unknown game, Flagship Studios' first title named Hellgate: London was announced via an exclusive article in the computer magazine PC Gamer. It was formally released October 31, 2007 as an action role-playing game (RPG) in the same vein as the Diablo games, but with the twist of being played in 3D, primarily from a first-person perspective. The game takes place in a post-apocalyptic demon-infested London, following a great battle between demons and humans. The developer was careful to point out that the game experience would be nothing like that of regular first-person shooters, but with much deeper RPG content in the form of e.g. random quests, and where a character's combat efficiency is more determined by statistics than player reflexes. In addition, the game featured random levels, uncommon in games of similar perspective and scale. Expectations from the game were high, as earlier games the developers have been involved in, especially titles from Blizzard Entertainment, have become best sellers with few exceptions. The company no longer owns the intellectual property rights to Hellgate: London 

Mythos

Mythos was a game under development by a division of Flagship Studios commonly called "Flagship Seattle". An online RPG, similar in style to Diablo, the game was used to test the networking technology behind the multiplayer component of Hellgate: London. It was expected to be free to play and download, although the financing model was never set in stone. Runic Games developed the Diablo-like action RPG Torchlight.torchlightgame.com/press/ 2009-0917-1842








