[[Aristides de Sousa Mendes]]

CATEGORIES: 1885 births, 1954 deaths, People from Carregal do Sal Municipality, Portuguese diplomats, Catholic Righteous Among the Nations, Righteous Among the Nations, Humanitarians, Portuguese Roman Catholics, Portuguese anti-fascists, University of Coimbra alumni, People from Viseu

Aristides de Sousa Mendes do Amaral e Abranches, GCC, OL (July 19, 1885 – April 3, 1954; ) was a Portuguese consul. As Portuguese Consul-General in Bordeaux, France, he defied the orders of Portugal's Salazar dictatorship, issuing visas in 1940 to thousands of refugees fleeing from invading German military forces in the early period of World War II. He was punished by his government for his actions but was eventually vindicated after his death.  He was honored posthumously by Yad Vashem as Righteous Among the Nations, the first diplomat to be so honored.

Early life

Aristides de Sousa Mendes was born in Cabanas de Viriato, in Carregal do Sal, in the district of Viseu, Centro Region of Portugal, on July 19, 1885, shortly after midnight.
Sousa Mendes and his twin studied law at the University of Coimbra, and each obtained his degree in 1908. They eventually had fourteen children, born in the various countries in which he served.  Shortly after his marriage, Sousa Mendes began the Consular Officer career that would take him and his family around the world. Early in his career, he served in Zanzibar, Brazil, Spain, the United States, and Belgium.
In August 1919, while he was posted in Brazil, Sousa Mendes was "temporarily suspended by the Foreign Ministry, which regarded him as hostile to the republican regime." He returned home to Portugal where his son Pedro Nuno was born in Coimbra in April 1920.
In 1921, Sousa Mendes was assigned to the Portuguese consulate in San Francisco, and two more of his children were born there. While in San Francisco, Sousa Mendes helped establish a Portuguese Studies program at the University of California at Berkeley.1.
In May 1926 a coup d'état replaced the republic in Portugal with a dictatorship,

World War II and Circular 14

Beginning in 1932, Portugal was under the dictatorship of Antonio de Oliveira Salazar. In 1933 Salazar created his secret police, the Polícia de Vigilância e de Defesa do Estado ("State Defense and Surveillance Police") or PVDE. According to historian Avraham Milgram, by 1938 Salazar "knew the Nazis' approach to the 'Jewish question'...  In keeping with his fear of aliens, who, according to his worldview, might undermine his regime, he severely limited their entry. Toward this end, he expanded the apparatus of the PVDE whose International Department, in particular, was given greater control over matters relating to border patrol and entry of aliens. Presumably, most aliens wishing to enter Portugal at that time were Jews."
On November 9, 1938, the Nazi government of Germany began open war against its Jewish citizens in the pogrom known as Kristallnacht, when 1,000 synagogues were burned, 30,000 Jews were arrested, and at least 91 Jews were murdered. On September 1, 1939, Nazi Germany invaded Poland, home at that time of the largest Jewish community in the world, and World War II began. Salazar reacted sending a telegram to the Portuguese Embassy in Berlin ordering that it should be made clear to the German Reich that Portuguese law did not allow any distinction based on race and therefore Portuguese Jewish citizens could not be discriminated against. Edicao Imprensa Nacional 1961
On September 1, 1939, Germany invaded Poland, and on September 3 France and United Kingdom declared war on Germany. The numbers of people trying to use neutral Portugal as an escape route increased and between September 1939 and December 1939, approximately 9,000 refugees entered in Portugal.
On November 11, 1939, the Portuguese government issued Circular 14, an order sent to Portuguese consuls throughout Europe that spelled out the categories of war refugees whom the PVDE considered to be "inconvenient or dangerous."Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Portugal, Spared Lives: The Actions of Three Portuguese Diplomats in World War II, Documentary Exhibition, Catalogue, September 2000, p.81. The circular allowed consuls to keep on granting Portuguese transit visas, but established that in the case of "foreigners of indefinite or contested nationality; the stateless; Russians; holder of Nansen passports, or Jews expelled from their countries and also all those alleging that they will be embarking from a Portuguese port but have no consular visa in their passports for their country of destination, or air or sea tickets, or an embarkation guarantee from the respective companies the consuls needed to ask previous permission to the Ministry in Lisbon."Spared Lives pp.81-82 With Europe at war, this meant that refugees from Nazism would have a difficult time escaping Europe.
Historian Neill Lochery asserts that Circular 14 "was not issued out of thin air" and that this type of barriers was not unique to Portugal and with the country's very limited economic resources it was viewed as necessary. It was economic reasons rather than ideology that made the Portuguese avoid accepting more refugees says Lochery. while it grew racist and virulent elsewhere in early twentieth-century Europe. Nevertheless although it was not anti-Semitism that motivated the Portuguese government, but the danger of mass emigration to the country, the outcome of the border policy made life difficult for Jews fleeing Nazism.

Sousa Mendes' disobedience of the orders of the Salazar dictatorship

According to Dr. Mordecai Paldiel, past Director of the Department of the Righteous at Yad Vashem, "In Portugal of those days, it was unthinkable for a diplomatic official, especially in a sensitive post, to disobey clear-cut instructions and get away with it."
The process that ended with Sousa Mendes' discharge from his consular career began with two visas:  the first issued on November 28, 1939 to Professor Arnold Wiznitzer, an Austrian historian who had been stripped of his nationality by the Nuremberg Laws, and the second on March 1, 1940 to the Spanish Republican Eduardo Neira Laporte, an anti-Franco activist living in France. Sousa Mendes was reprimanded and warned in writing that "any new transgression or violation on this issue will be considered disobedience and will entail a disciplinary procedure where it will not be possible to overlook that you have repeatedly committed acts which have entailed warnings and reprimands."Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Portugal, Spared Lives: The Actions of Three Portuguese Diplomats in World War II, Documentary Exhibition, Catalogue, September 2000, p.36.
When Sousa Mendes issued these visas and thousands of others, it was a deliberate act of disobedience to the decree of an authoritarian dictatorship.  "Here was a unique act by a man who believed his religion imposed certain obligations," said Paldiel.  "He said, 'I'm saving innocent lives,' as simply as he might have said, 'Come, walk with me in my garden.'"Mordecai Paldiel as cited in Gerald Clark, "The Priceless Signature of Aristides de Sousa Mendes," Reader's Digest (December 1988):  66.
It is also at this time that Andrée Cibial, a French pianist and singer, started to disturb Sousa Mendes' family life. Andrée became his mistress and got pregnant. Andrée did not try to hide it, quite the contrary, she made a public announcement, during a Sunday mass at Riberac`s cathedral.
On May 10, 1940, Germany launched the blitzkrieg offensive against France, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg, and millions of refugees took to the roads.  On May 15, Sousa Mendes issued transit visas to Maria Tavares, a Luxembourg citizen of Portuguese origin, and to her husband Paul Miny, also a Luxembourger. 48 and "Miny," Sousa Mendes Foundation. Retrieved 15 March 2014. Two weeks later, the couple returned to the Bordeaux Consulate asking Sousa Mendes to issue them false papers. Sousa Mendes later provided the following explanation: "This couple asked me for a Portuguese passport, where they would figure as brother and sister, for fear that the husband, who was still of military age, would be detained on passing the French border, and incorporated in the Luxembourg army then being organized in France."Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Portugal, Spared Lives: The Actions of Three Portuguese Diplomats in World War II, Documentary Exhibition, Catalogue, September 2000, p.98. Under the terms imposed by the German occupation of Luxembourg in World War II, that army was under Nazi control.
There were other cases from May 1940 where Sousa Mendes disobeyed Circular 14 issued by the Salazar dictatorship.  Examples include issuing visas to the Ertag, Flaksbaum and Landesman families, all granted on May 29, 1940 despite having been rejected in a telegram from the Portuguese dictator Salazar to Sousa Mendes."Albuquerque-Ertag-Flaksbaum-Landesman-Untermans," Sousa Mendes Foundation. Retrieved 15 March 2014.  Another example is the writer Gisèle Quittner, rejected by Salazar, but rescued by Sousa Mendes, to whom she expressed her gratitude:  "You are Portugal's best propaganda and an honor to your country.  All those who know you praise your courage...."Fralon, p.109 and "Quittner," Sousa Mendes Foundation. Retrieved 15 March 2014.

Encounter with Rabbi Chaim Kruger

As the German army approached Paris, the largest single movement of refugees in Europe since the Dark Ages began. An estimated six to ten million people took to the roads and railways to escape the German invasion. Bordeaux and other southern French cities were overrun by desperate refugees. One of these was a Chassidic Rabbi, Chaim Kruger, originally from Poland but more recently from Brussels, escaping with his wife and five children. Kruger and Sousa Mendes met by chance in Bordeaux, and quickly became friends.  Sousa Mendes offered a visa to the Kruger family in defiance of Circular 14. In response, Kruger took a moral stand and refused to accept the visa unless all of his "brothers and sisters" (the mass of Jewish refugees stranded on the streets of Bordeaux) received visas too. Kruger's response plunged Sousa Mendes into "a moral crisis of incalculable proportions."Mordecai Paldiel, The Righteous Among the Nations:  Rescuers of Jews During the Holocaust, Jerusalem:  Collins, 2007, p.264. He secluded himself and prayed, pondering whether or not he should issue visas to everyone he could, saving their lives at the expense of his own career.264.  "Here the situation is horrible and I am in bed because of a strong nervous breakdown,"Aristides de Sousa Mendes to Silvério de Sousa Mendes, 13 June 1940, "De Winter," Sousa Mendes Foundation. Retrieved 15 March 2014. he wrote to his son-in-law on June 13, 1940.

Act of conscience

On June 12, despite the guarantees given to the Portuguese Ambassador Teotónio Pereira, Spain took on the status of a non-belligerent power and invaded Tangiers, further endangering Portuguese neutrality.  On June 16, despite his seclusion, Sousa Mendes issued 40 visas, including those for the Rothschild family, although he did feel it was fair to be paid his customary personal compensation fee for issuing visas on a Sunday. 48 On June 17 Petain announced in a broadcast to the French people that "It is with a heavy heart that I tell you today that we must stop fighting."  and he calls on the Germans for an armistice that will end the fighting. On that same day Sousa Mendes emerged from his seclusion, impelled by "a divine power,"César de Sousa Mendes (nephew), as cited in Wheeler, "A Hero of Conscience," p.69. and with his decision made.  According to his son Pedro Nuno:
His daughter Isabel and her husband Jules strongly opposed his decision, and tried to dissuade him from what they considered to be a major mistake.76. But Sousa Mendes did not listen to them and instead began to work intensively to grant the visas. "I would rather stand with God and against man than with man and against God,"Robert Jacobvitz, "Reinstating the Name and Honor of a Portuguese Diplomat Who Rescued Jews During World War II: Community Social Work Strategies," Journal of Jewish Communal Service, (Spring 2008):  250. he reportedly explained.  He set up an assembly line process, aided by his wife, sons Pedro Nuno and José Antonio, his secretary José Seabra, Rabbi Kruger and a few other refugees.
On Wednesday, June 19, American writer Eugene Bagger, after waiting in line to no avail at the Portuguese Consulate from 9 a.m. till 11 o'clock, found Sousa Mendes at Hotel Splendide having an aperitif with a friend. Sousa Mendes was tired from overworking the previous day, the crowds and heat, yet he still managed to help the Eugene Bagger get a visa.
Bordeaux was bombed by the Wehrmacht on the night of June 19–20, 1940. Retrieved 15 March 2014. In the morning, the demand for Portuguese visas intensified, not only in Bordeaux but also in nearby Bayonne, near the Spanish border.  Sousa Mendes rushed to the Portuguese consulate in Bayonne, which was under his jurisdiction, to relieve the Vice-Consul Faria Machado, who was refusing to grant visas to the crush of refugees.265.
On June 20, the British Embassy in Lisbon sent a letter to the Portuguese Foreign Office accusing Sousa Mendes of "deferring until after office hours all applications for visas" as well as "charging them at a special rate" and requiring at least one refugee "to contribute to a Portuguese charitable fund before the visa was granted."
In issuing visas to the thousands at the Bayonne consulate, Sousa Mendes was aided by the Bayonne consular secretary, Manuel de Vieira Braga.  Faria Machado, a Salazar loyalist in charge of the Bayonne consulate, reported this behavior to Portugal's ambassador to Spain, Pedro Teotónio Pereira. Teotónio Pereria a loyalist to the historic Anglo-Portuguese alliance[ref]
 After observing Sousa Mendes' action, Teotónio Pereira sent a telegram to the Lisbon authorities in which he described Sousa Mendes as "giving shelter to the scum of the democratic regimes and defeated elements fleeing before the German victory."Pedro Teotónio Pereira telegram to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Lisbon, late June 1940, as cited in Mordecai Paldiel, The Righteous Among the Nations; Rescuers of Jews During the Holocaust, Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 2007, p.266. He declared Sousa Mendes to be mentally incompetent and, acting on Salazar's authority, he invalidated all further visas.105. The Jewish Virtual Library article notes that a Spanish newspaper headline the next day announced the sudden insanity of "the Consul of Portugal in Bayonne," an ironic error that labeled Sousa Mendes' accuser as the one who had lost his faculties. 
Sousa Mendes continued on to Hendaye to assist there, thus narrowly missing two cablegrams from Lisbon sent on June 22 to Bordeaux ordering him to stop even as France's armistice with Germany became official.
The Armistice was signed on June 22. Under its terms, two thirds of France was to be occupied by the Germans. On June 26 the British Ambassador in Madrid writes to London "The arrival of the Germans to the pyrenees is a tremendous event in the eyes of every Spaniard.  Will it mean the passage of troops through Spain to Portugal or Africa?" Meanwhile, Teotónio Pereira, following Spanish protests,citation needed ordered the French/Spanish border sealed. The New York Times reported that some 10,000 persons attempting to cross over into Spain were excluded because authorities no longer granted recognition to their visas: "Portugal announced that Portuguese visas granted at Bordeaux were invalid, and Spain was permitting bearers of these documents to enter only in exceptional cases.""American Writers Escape Into Spain," The New York Times, 26 June 1940, p.15.
On June 24, Salazar recalled Sousa Mendes to Portugal, an order he received upon returning to Bordeaux on June 26 but complied with slowly, arriving in Portugal on July 8. Dee, p.10. Along the way, he continued issuing Portuguese visas to refugees now trapped in occupied France, and even led a large group to a remote border post that had not received Lisbon's order.  His son John-Paul Abranches told the story:
After the intervention of Augusto d'Esaguy and Amzalak most of the refugees issued visas by Sousa Mendes were allowed to continue on their way to Portugaland on June 26 the main HIAS-HICEM (Jewish relief organization) European Office was authorized by Salazar to be transferred from Paris to Lisbon.

Disciplinary proceeding and punishment

Upon returning to Portugal in early July 1940, Sousa Mendes was subjected to a disciplinary proceeding that has been described as "a severe crackdown"
The accusation asserted that "an atmosphere of panic does in fact provide an extenuating circumstance for the acts committed by the Defendant during the month of June and possibly even for those committed in the second half of the month of May (…), however, the acts committed during that period are no more than a repetition or extension of a procedure that already existed, for which the same extenuating circumstance cannot be invoked. There had been infractions and repetitions long before 15 May (…) as regards his previous good professional conduct, it should be noted that this is the 4th case of disciplinary proceedings brought against the Defendant".
Sousa Mendes submitted his response to the charges on August 12, 1940, in which he clarified his motivation:
On October 19, 1940, the verdict was handed down: "disobeying higher orders during service."Fralon, p.114.  The disciplinary board recommended a demotion.268.  On October 30, 1940, Salazar rejected this recommendation and imposed his own sentence: "I sentence Consul First Class, Aristides de Sousa Mendes, to a penalty of one year of inactivity with the right to one half of his rank's pay, being obliged subsequently to be retired."Fralon, p.115. He further ordered that all files in the case be sealed.
There was also an unofficial punishment: the blacklisting and social banishment of Aristides de Sousa Mendes and his family. "My grandfather ... knew there would be some retribution, but to lose everything and have the family disgraced, he never thought it would go that far," said the hero's grandson, also named Aristides. Retrieved 15 March 2014. The family took meals at the soup kitchen of the Jewish community of Lisbon. When told that the soup kitchen was intended for refugees, Sousa Mendes replied, "But we too are refugees."Fralon p.118 and Isaac Bitton testimonial, United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, 17 May 1990, 6:30-9:45. Retrieved 15 March 2014.
Sousa Mendes was listed in the Portuguese Consular and Diplomatic Yearbook until 1954.
According to Milgram, Mendes' action, while exceptional in its scope, was not unique, as issuing visas in contravention of the Portuguese government's instructions occurred at other Portuguese consulates as well.
After the war, with the victory of the Allied forces over the Axis led by Nazi Germany, Salazar took credit for Portugal having received the refugees,Fralon, pp.122 and 126. Sousa Mendes' accuser Teotonio Pereira also took some of the credit:  Fralon, p.106. and the Portuguese history books were written accordingly. Manuela Franco, Director of the Portuguese Foreign Ministry archives, stated in 2000 that "the image of 'Portugal, a safe haven' was born then in Bordeaux, and it lasts to this day."Manuela Franco, "Politics and Morals" in Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Portugal, Spared Lives: The Actions of Three Portuguese Diplomats in World War II, Documentary Exhibition, Catalogue, September 2000, p.19.

Last years

Throughout the war years and beyond, Sousa Mendes was optimistic that his punishment would be reversed and his deed would be recognized.
In 1941 Sousa Mendes applied to the Portuguese bar association and he was admitted to the bar to practice law. But in 1942, he wrote a letter to the bar, explaining that since he was living in a small village, in his mansion at Passal, he was not able to work as a lawyer and he asked for his license to be cancelled.
Just before the war's end in 1945, Sousa Mendes suffered a stroke that left him at least partially paralyzed and unable to work.A letter writen by Sousa Mendes, saying he is ill and unable to work, can be found at the Portugures Bar Association, an online copy can be found in the Sousa Mendes Virtual Museum at 
In 1946, a Portuguese journalist tried to raise awareness for Sousa Mendes outside of Portugal by publishing the facts under a pseudonym in a US newspaper.  Sousa Mendes' wife Angelina died in 1948.
The following year he married his former mistress Andrée Cibial, with whom he had a daughter, Marie-Rose. Andrée soon clashed with Sousa Mendes' sons and the couple moved to Cabanas de Viriato. It did not take long for Andrée to show to Sousa Mendes's sons that they were not welcome at Passal and soon the youngsters were separated from their father.
As his financial situation deteriorated he would sometimes write to the people he had helped asking for money. On one occasion Maurice de Rothschild sent him 30,000 Portuguese Escudos, a considerable amount of money for Portugal at that time.
In 1950 Sousa Mendes and Andrée travelled to France. Their daughter, Marie-Rose had been raised in France by her aunt and uncle and she was ten when she met her father for the first time; her parents then started to spend the summer months with her each year.
In his final years, Sousa Mendes was abandoned by most of his colleagues and friends and at times was blamed by some of his close relatives. Retrieved 15 March 2014. His children moved to other countries in search of opportunities they were now denied in Portugal, although by all accounts they never blamed their father or regretted his decision. Retrieved 15 March 2014.  He asked his children to help clear the family name and make the story known. In 1951, one of his sons, Sebastião, published a novella about the Bordeaux events, Flight Through Hell.Sebastian Mendes, "Lifelong Champion of Major Holocaust Hero Dies", 17 December 2006. Retrieved 15 March 2014.  César de Sousa Mendes, twin brother of Aristides, did everything he could to try to get Salazar to reverse his punishment, but to no avail.124-25.  Sousa Mendes never regretted his action.  "I could not have acted otherwise, and I therefore accept all that has befallen me with love,"Aristides de Sousa Mendes, as cited in Paldiel, The Righteous Among the Nations, p.268. he reportedly said.  To his lawyer he wrote:
Sousa Mendes always lived with financial problems and Andrée's spending habits did not help him much. The couple eventually ended up selling all their furniture from their family mansion and raising debts with banks.

Number of visa recipients

It is impossible to determine the precise number of refugees who were granted visas by Sousa Mendes, although all sources agree that the number was in the thousands, and most say that it was in the tens of thousands.  Holocaust scholar Yehuda Bauer characterized Sousa Mendes' deed as "perhaps the largest rescue action by a single individual during the Holocaust."Yehuda Bauer, A History of the Holocaust, Franklin Watts, 2002, p.235. One generally accepted figure is that he issued visas to approximately 30,000 people, of whom around 10,000 were Jews.  This figure includes not only those refugees who successfully transited through Portugal, but also those trapped by the Portuguese government's order to seal the French/Spanish border on June 24, 1940."Spain Halts Flow of War Refugees; Border Guards Hold Up Most of Those Seeking Entrance," The New York Times, 25 June 1940, p.3; "American Writers Escape Into Spain," The New York Times, 26 June 1940, p.15.
In 1999 Yad Vashem historian Avraham Milgram published a study where he asserted that "the discrepancy between the reality and the myth of the number of visas granted by Sousa Mendes is great."
In 2008 the Portuguese ambassador João Hall Themido took a stand affirming that in his opinion the Sousa Mendes story was a Myth and  asserting his disbelief in the 30,000 figure.
As a reaction to Milgram´s assertion, French writer, Eric Lebreton, in 2010, argued that "Milgram does not account for the visas that were delivered in Bayonne, Hendaye and Toulouse, and on the other hand, he Milgram holds firm to the number presented in the one surviving registry book of José Seabra (Sousa Mendes' deputy). Milgram's article, while very interesting in other ways, lacks details and knowledge on this point."Lebreton p.231

Posthumous rehabilitation and recognition

From 1954 on, Sousa Mendes' childrenParticularly active were Sebastião, Joana, John Paul, Luis Felipe and Pedro Nuno. worked tirelessly to clear his name and make the story known.  In the early 1960s a few articles began appearing in the U.S. press.000 judeus no tempo da guerra, mas foi castigado," Diario de Noticias (New Bedford, MA), 19 May 1961, pp.1 and 5. On February 21, 1961, Ben Gurion, the Prime Minister of Israel, ordered that twenty trees be planted by the Keren Kayemet in memory of Sousa Mendes and in recognition of his deed."Um português salvou 10.000 judeus no tempo da guerra, mas foi castigado," Diario de Noticias (New Bedford, MA), 19 May 1961, p.5.  In 1963, the Israeli Holocaust authority Yad Vashem began recognizing Holocaust rescuers as Righteous Among the Nations, and Sousa Mendes, in 1966, was among the earliest to be so named, thanks in large part to the efforts of daughter Joana. Thomas Jr., "Joana Mendes, 77, Champion of Father's Effort to Save Jews," The New York Times, 10 April 1997, obituaries, C29. Retrieved 15 March 2014.  But with Salazar still in power, "the diplomat and his efforts remained unknown even in his own country for years.""Portugal's Unforgettable Forgotten Hero," USC Shoah Foundation, 10 July 2013. Retrieved 15 March 2014. Moreover, Salazar's representatives gave statements to the press casting doubt on Sousa Mendes' heroism by denying that Circular 14 had ever existed.2.
Following the 1974 Carnation Revolution in Portugal when the Estado Novo dictatorship was overthrown and democracy was established, Dr. Nuno A. A. de Bessa Lopes, a Portuguese government official, took the initiative of reopening the Sousa Mendes case and making recommendations. Mendes has been recognized. Full recognition, however, has yet to come," Moment, June 1987, p.52. His assessment, based on his viewing of previously sealed government files, was that the Salazar government had knowingly sacrificed Sousa Mendes for its own political ends, and that the verdict and punishment were illegal and should be overturned.151.  "Aristides de Sousa Mendes was condemned for having refused to be an accomplice to Nazi war crimes,"Bessa Lopes report as cited in Fralon, p.152. the report concluded. The report was suppressed by the Portuguese government for over a decade. 4. Retrieved 15 March 2014.  "The failure to act on the Lopes report reflects the fact that there was never a serious purge of Fascist supporters from government ministries,"Erlich, "Mending the Past," p.53. explained journalist Reese Erlich.
In 1986, inspired by the election of Mário Soares, a civilian president in Portugal, Sousa Mendes' youngest son John Paul began to circulate a petition to the Portuguese president within his adopted country, the United States. "I want people in Portugal to know who he was, what he did, and why he did it,"John Paul Abranches, as cited in Erlich, "Mending the Past," p.54. explained John Paul. He and his wife Joan worked with Robert Jacobvitz, an executive at the Jewish Federation of the Greater East Bay in Oakland, California, and lawyer Anne Treseder to create the "International Committee to Commemorate Dr. Aristides de Sousa Mendes."Robert Jacobvitz, "Reinstating the Name and Honor of a Portuguese Diplomat Who Rescued Jews During World War II: Community Social Work Strategies," Journal of Jewish Communal Service, Spring 2008 and Jonathan Curiel, John Paul Abranches, Hero Envoy's Son, Dies," San Francisco Chronicle, 19 February 2009. Retrieved 15 March 2014. They were able to gain the support of two members of the California delegation of the United States House of Representatives, Tony Coelho and Henry Waxman, who introduced a resolution in Congress to recognize his humanitarian actions."70 Lawmakers Ask Portugal to Honor Posthumously a Portuguese Diplomat Who Saved Jews in WWII," Jewish Telegraphic Agency, 2 September 1986. Retrieved 15 March 2014.  That same year, Sousa Mendes was honored at the Simon Wiesenthal Center in Los Angeles, where John Paul and his brother Sebastião gave impassioned speeches and Waxman spoke as well. Retrieved 15 March 2014.
In 1987, the Portuguese Republic began to rehabilitate Sousa Mendes' memory and granted him a posthumous Order of Liberty medal, one of that country's highest honors, although the consul's diplomatic honors still were not restored. In October of that year, the Comité national français en hommage à Aristides de Sousa Mendes was established in Bordeaux, France, presided for the next twenty-five years by Manuel Dias Vaz."Comité national français en hommage à Aristides de Sousa Mendes". Retrieved 18 March 2014.
In 1995 the Portuguese President Mário Soares declared Sousa Mendes to be "Portugal's greatest hero of the twentieth century."Mário Soares, "Encerramento da la parte por S. Exa o Presidente da República," Aristides de Sousa Mendes, Homenagem Nacional, Cinema Tivoli, Avenida de Liberdade, Lisbon, Portugal, 23 March 1995, as cited in Sebastian Mendes, "Lifelong Champion of Major Holocaust Hero Dies," International Raoul Wallenberg Foundation, 17 December 2006. Retrieved 15 March 2014.
On March 18, 1988, the Portuguese parliament officially dismissed all charges, restoring Sousa Mendes to the diplomatic corps by unanimous vote[ref]
