[[Debenhams]]

CATEGORIES: Debenhams, Retail companies based in London, Department stores of the United Kingdom, Retail companies of the United Kingdom, Private equity portfolio companies, Companies established in 1778, CVC Capital Partners companies, 1778 establishments in England, Retail companies of England, Retail companies of Ireland, Retail companies of Denmark, Companies listed on the London Stock Exchange

Debenhams plc is a multinational retail chain operating under a department store format in the United Kingdom and Ireland with franchise stores in other countries. The company was founded in the eighteenth century as a single store in London and has now grown to 172 locations across the UK, Ireland and Denmark. It is listed on the London Stock Exchange and is a constituent of the FTSE 250 Index. Since 1993 it has also been known for the Designers at Debenhams brand range.

History

The business was formed in 1778 by William Clark, who began trading at 44 Wigmore Street in London as a drapers' store.
The modern Debenhams group grew from the acquisition of department stores in towns and cities throughout the UK, under the leadership of its chairman, Ernest Debenham. The first of these purchases, Marshall & Snelgrove at Oxford Street in London, was acquired in 1919.  Later purchases included Harvey Nichols in London's Knightsbridge in 1920. Most of the acquired stores  retained their former identities until a unified corporate image was rolled out. The company was first listed on the London Stock Exchange in 1928.
In 1976 the company acquired Browns of Chester. It remains the only UK store to have retained an individual identity.
In 1985 the company was acquired by the Burton Group.
Debenhams demerged from the Burton Group in January 1998 and was once again listed as a separate company on the London Stock Exchange.
Debenhams opened its largest British store on 4 September 2003, at the new Bull Ring shopping centre in Birmingham. Following the closure of the store in Dudley in January 1981 and the Birmingham store in 1983, the company's only store in the West Midlands for the next six years was a town centre store in Walsall. On 4 November 1989, it opened a store at the Merry Hill Shopping Centre in Brierley Hill.
A private consortium named Baroness Retail Limited acquired the company in November 2003,
The company purchased the brand name and stock of Principles in March 2009 after the business entered administration. Principles operated concessions within 121 Debenhams stores, and was subsequently relaunched by Ben de Lisi as part of the Designers at Debenhams range.
In November 2009, Debenhams acquired the Danish department store group Magasin Du Nord for £12.3 million.
In July 2010 Debenhams purchased the 115 Faith concessions trading within its stores, after Faith entered administration.
In April 2012 the company announced it would be building 14 new stores, and was in negotiations over a further 25 sites in the UK.
Debenhams moved to a new headquarters in 2013, in Brock Street, London. The company moved to a new building, built by British Land in Regent's Place. The company leased  
The company began a refurbishment of its flagship store in Oxford Street in 2013, which will involve the installation of 180,000 aluminium tiles on the exterior of the building that will appear to ripple with the wind. An existing floor will also be converted to become a trading floor. The total cost of the refurbishment will be £40 million, of which Debenhams will contribute £25 million. The owner of the building, British Land, will also contribute towards the cost.
The company's trading statement for the 17 weeks up to 28 December 2013 was released on 31 December 2013, and revealed a reduction in pre-tax profit from £115 million to £85 million.
On 13 January 2014 4.6% of Debenhams shares were bought by Sports Direct, the retailer run by Mike Ashley. The stock market purchase of 56.8 million shares (worth around £46m) was made without the prior knowledge of the Debenhams board. Sports Direct stated at the time it intends to be a supportive share holder. The Debenhams board responded by stating they are open-minded with regard to exploring operational opportunities to improve its performance.

Incidents involving the Animal Liberation Front

Debenhams was targeted three times during the 1980s by the Animal Liberation Front in protest at the sale of animal furs in stores. Stores in Romford, Luton, and Harrow were fire-bombed by members, the worst attack being on the Luton store. As a result, the company stopped selling clothes with animal furs.
It was alleged by Caroline Lucas MP in  a debate in Westminster Hall that Rob Lambert, a then undercover police officer, planted the fire bomb that caused £340,000 worth of damage to the Harrow branch of Debenhams in 1987. It is unclear if anything has come of these allegations as of March 2014.

Products and services

In 1993 the company introduced the 'Designers at Debenhams' brand, the creation of then CEO Belinda Earl, Ben de Lisi and Spencer Hawken. The idea put designer names and brands at High Street prices, including Jasper Conran, John Rocha, Betty Jackson Black, Butterfly by Matthew Williamson, H! by Henry Holland, Star by Julien Macdonald, Frost French, Erickson Beamon, Eric Van Peterson, Janet Reger, Pip Hackett, Melissa Odabash, Ted Baker, St George by Duffer, Jeff Banks, and Ben de Lisi. The brand Designers at Debenhams was the saving grace for the company which had been in decline since the late 1980s. The company also sells goods under a number of brand names that it owns.
In October 2010, Debenhams announced the launch of four new designer names to its fashion range; Jonathan Saunders, Preen, Jonathan Kelsey, and Roksanda Ilincic, who will be working with the retailer on a new concept called Edition.
In the UK the company operates a retail website, as well as a mobile-enabled website and mobile apps that allow customers to shop the online range and scan product barcodes in store. Localised retail websites for Ireland and Germany have also been introduced. 
Debenhams provide store card and credit card services, operated by NewDay. Insurance products are also provided under the Debenhams brand by other financial companies. Debenhams also operate bureau de changes in selected stores.
In October 2013 the company launched an online ticket service known as Debenhams Box Office

Stores

United Kingdom, Ireland and Denmark

As of 2013, the company owns and operates 172 stores in the United Kingdom, Ireland and Denmark. Stores in Denmark trade under the Magasin  du Nord brand. Stores in Ireland are operated by Debenhams Ireland, which is a subsidiary of Debenhams plc.
Debenhams occupies the most sites of any of the traditional department store groups in the UK. The majority of the original trading names of the stores, in each of their respective locations, were replaced with the "Debenhams" name during the 1970s. All department stores in the group now trade as "Debenhams" except Browns in Chester. New stores are usually located within wider town and regional shopping centre developments. Stores amalgamated into the group include:

International franchises

The Debenhams brand is used for stores operating under licence in 26 other countries, which are 
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Egypt, Estonia, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, and Vietnam.
The company announced in January 2013 that it planned to increase the number of international franchise stores to 150 within 5 years.






