[[Tom Hicks]]

CATEGORIES: 1946 births, Living people, American financial businesspeople, American sports businesspeople, American soccer chairmen and investors, Major League Baseball owners, Dallas Stars, Liverpool F.C. chairmen and investors, National Hockey League executives, National Hockey League owners, People from Dallas, Texas, Private equity and venture capital investors, Stanley Cup champions, Texas Rangers owners, University of Texas at Austin alumni, University of Texas System regents, University of Southern California alumni

Thomas Ollis "Tom" Hicks, Sr. (born 1946), is an American 'leveraged buyout' businessman living in Dallas, Texas. Despite Forbes Magazine estimating Hicks' wealth at USD 1 billion in 2009, Hicks was unable to pay off joint loans of circa £200 million the following year. Hicks co-founded the investment firm, Hicks, Muse, Tate & Furst, previously owned 50% of the English football club Liverpool F.C., and is chairman of Hicks Holdings LLC, which owns and operates Hicks Sports Group, the company that formerly owned the Texas Rangers, the Dallas Stars, and the Mesquite Championship Rodeo.

Biography

The son of a Texas radio station owner, Hicks was born in Houston, Texas, he graduated from Thomas Jefferson High School, received his Bachelor's degree in Finance from the University of Texas in 1968, and received his MBA from the University of Southern California in 1970. He is a member of the Sigma Phi Epsilon social fraternity.
Hicks became interested in leveraged buyouts as a member of First National Bank of Austin's venture capital group. Hicks and Robert Haas formed Hicks & Haas in 1984. The next year that firm bought Hicks Communications, a radio outfit run by Hicks' brother Steven – the first of several media companies bought or created by the buyout firm that involved Steven (Capstar, Chancellor, and AMFM).
Hicks & Haas' in the mid-1980s bought several soft drink makers, including Dr Pepper and 7 Up. The firm took Dr Pepper/7 Up public just 18 months after merging the two companies. In all, Hicks & Haas turned $88 million of investor funding into $1.3 billion. The pair went their separate ways in May 1989. Retrieved April 18, 2010. He wanted to raise large pools to invest, while Haas preferred to work with investors deal by deal. Retrieved April 18, 2010.
In 1989, Hicks co-founded the investment firm, Hicks, Muse, Tate & Furst with former Prudential Securities banker John Muse. The firm raised $250 million, with early investments including a life insurance company, Life Partners Group (bought in 1990 and sold in 1996). In 1991, Morgan Stanley's Charles Tate and First Boston's Jack Furst became partners. Hicks was chairman from 1989 to 2004, Hicks Muse raised $12 billion of private equity funds, consummated over $50 billion of leveraged acquisitions, and grew to become one of the largest private investment firms in the country. Retrieved April 17, 2010.
But Hicks Muse hit a rough patch by the early 2000s, when investors in Equity Fund IV were burned by a $1.2 billion plunge into telecom investments in 1999. Hicks announced that he would leave the Hicks Muse on March 8, 2004, to spend more time with his family and his sports teams. (Hicks Muse was subsequently renamed HM Capital Partners.) He has remained active in his own ventures. He created Hicks Holdings, a vehicle for his sports and real estate empire, and then started buying companies again in the $10 to $250 million level, including: a Chinese electronics firm, a venture with DirecTV selling bundled TV-telecom services to condos, a landscaping materials company in the Midwest, a pet food firm in Argentina, and Gammaloy – an oil field rental outfit he bought from his wife's family, paying approximately $20 million in the 1990s.
Additionally, he formed Hicks Acquisition Company I, Inc. (HACI). In September 2009, HACI merged into Resolute Energy Corporation (REN), an oil and gas firm.sec.htm SEC EDGAR Website. Retrieved April 17, 2010. Hicks does not sit on REN's board of directors, but his son, Thomas O. Hicks, Jr., represents HACI on the board. Accessed June 1, 2013
As of August 13, 2010, the website for Hicks Sports Group appears to have disappeared. As for other websites for Hicks companies, while they are still operating, they appear to be empty of any data and Hicks Sports Marketing now appears to be a Word Press blog site, with the first page advertising Online Gaming.

Politics

Hicks was a member of the political action committee for the 2008 presidential election campaign for former Republican Mayor of New York City, Rudy Giuliani.

Tom Hicks Elementary School

Tom Hicks Elementary School in Frisco, Texas, part of the Lewisville Independent School District, was given its name after Hicks donated the land for the school.

Sports

Hicks moved from the business pages to the sports section in December 1995 when he bought the National Hockey League Dallas Stars for $82 million.

Corinthians

In 1999, Hicks, Muse, Tate & Furst entered into a partnership with Sport Club Corinthians Paulista, a successful Brazilian football club. Club directors and Hicks, Muse, Tate & Furst assured the fans that a new stadium was in development, but this never materialized.
Corinthians had won the Brazilian championship in 1998, so they inherited a winning team. There was an initial capital investment to tie down existing players and to finance the signing of Dida and Luizão. The initial expenditure assisted in retaining the league title in December 1999 and the club also won the inaugural FIFA Club World Championship the following month.
They began selling the club's star players and announced plans to change Corinthians' famous black-and-white kit. This led to a furious reaction from supporters. In 2003, after legal/financial troubles and partner infighting, Hicks retired from the company and the ownership group eventually left the partnership with Corinthians. There was no new stadium.The Mirror coverage of Corinthians' scandal

Dallas Stars

Hicks contracted to purchase the NHL franchise from Norman Green in December 1995. During his tenure as owner of the club, Hicks served as the Stars' Chairman of the Board and the club's representative on the NHL Board of Governors. Hicks played an instrumental role in the development and planning of American Airlines Center. Under his ownership, Stars won seven Division Championships, two Western Conference crowns, two Presidents' Trophies as the team with the best regular season record, two consecutive trips to the Stanley Cup Finals and the 1999 Stanley Cup Championship. In April 2010, Hicks's company defaulted on $525-million in bank loans backed by the Stars and a 50-percent interest in the American Airlines Center.
On September 13, 2011, lenders voted to agree to have the Stars file for bankruptcy and sold at auction.com. September 14, 2011.
On November 22, 2011, a bankruptcy court judge approved a bid by Vancouver businessman and Kamloops Blazers owner Tom Gaglardi to buy the team for $240 million."Dallas Stars Sale To Tom Gaglardi For $240 Million Pummels Team's Creditors", November 22, 2011, Forbes.com; accessed November 23, 2011

Texas Rangers

In June 1998, Hicks became the Chairman and Owner of the Texas Rangers Baseball Club of the Major League Baseball's American League. Under Hicks ownership, the Rangers won the American League West Division crown in 1998 and 1999, but failed to deliver a World Series. Hicks made headlines across all MLB when he personally negotiated and signed then shortstop Alex Rodriguez to the biggest contract in MLB history at that time; a ten-year, $252 million deal at the December 2000 winter meetings.R. Hicks 'betrayed' by A-Rod's steroid use MLB."Marchand, Andrew Tom Hicks regrets A-Rod contract ESPN.com, accessed June 1, 2013
The Rangers also spent a large amount of money on  Chan Ho Park, who signed a $65,000,000 contract with the Rangers following the 2001 season. The Park signing would be a disaster for the Rangers as the new 'staff ace' was unable to pitch away from the pitcher-friendly Dodgers stadium and in the hitter friendly American League. After finishing in last place for the division three seasons in a row with Rodriguez, Hicks agreed to trade to the New York Yankees before the 2004 season. Five years later, Hicks stated that he felt personally "betrayed" and "deceived" after Rodriguez admitted use of steroids while with the club in 2001-2003.
As part of the agreement the Rangers would supplement a portion of his remaining contract. This agreement would continue until Rodriguez opted out of his contract in 2007. Hicks' ownership would see only 3 winning seasons in 11 full seasons of ownership. On January 23, 2010, it was announced Hicks had agreed to sell the Rangers to a group led by Chuck Greenberg and Nolan Ryan. Hicks would have been a minority share holder in the new ownership group.
Prior to bids being placed by potential buyers, Hicks told the media the Rangers were operating under normal business with no interference from MLB. Regarding the Rangers' inability to sign 2009 first round pick Matt Purke, he said, "We were disappointed that the family insisted on $6 million. The Texas Rangers were not willing to do that. It had nothing to do with MLB restrictions. There is a clear misimpression we didn't sign Matt Purke because MLB wouldn't let us. That's not true. We didn't because of Tom Hicks, Nolan Ryan and Jon Daniels. We were not willing to go to $6 million." Hicks has been sued by 3 different parties over the land adjacent to the stadium that was sold in a separate transaction as a part of the purchase by Greenberg and Ryan."Hicks Sued Over Glorypark", nbcdfw.com, February 2, 2010
On May 24, 2010, HSG filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection/separation of the Texas Rangers from HSG and asked the courts to approve of the sale of the Rangers to the group headed by Greenberg and Ryan. The move was made to expedite the sale and resolve the sale prior to the MLB trade deadline and draft signing deadline. Ironically, Alex Rodriguez was the largest unsecured creditor, owed nearly $25 million in deferred payments despite being traded six years earlier.
Emails presented in court show that after Hicks agreed to an exclusive negotiation period with Greenberg attorneys for HSG were still in discussion with another bidder, Dennis Crane, about a sale price for the team and emailed the creditors on December 31, 2009 saying "Basically, the response from the MLB was to prohibit us from negotiating with anyone other than Greenberg. Their intent seems to be to lock us into Greenberg even though Crane now has a clearly superior economic deal -- and may always have had based on Greenberg's current position. We need help here. Unless the lenders weigh in, we are going to be stuck negotiating a deal that is clearly worse than Crane's."
The bankruptcy court ordered a public auction to be held on August 4, 2010, and the winning bid was submitted by Greenberg/Ryan. Co-lead investors Ray Davis and Bob R. Simpson were named co-chairmen.[ref]Club release on Chuck Greenberg's exit - Dallas Texas Rangers Blog - ESPN Dallas
[/ref]
In March 2011 Greenberg resigned as Chief Executive, sold his interest,

and Nolan Ryan was named President and Chief Executive Officer.

Ryan was subsequently designated the Controlling Owner of the Club by a unanimous vote of the 30 owners of Major League Baseball on May 12, 2011.

Liverpool F.C.

On February 1, 2007, it was made known through the English press that he was involved in a consortium with one-time friend and Montreal Canadiens owner George N. Gillett Jr. to purchase English Premiership club Liverpool F.C.; this takeover proposal was believed to be the front-runner after Dubai International Capital (DIC) withdrew their bid. Liverpool became the third FA Premier League club to be acquired by U.S. businessmen, the others being Aston Villa and Manchester United. When taking over the club, Hicks and Gillett made a joint declaration: "Liverpool is a fantastic club with a remarkable history and a passionate fanbase. We fully acknowledge and appreciate the unique heritage and rich history of Liverpool and intend to respect this heritage in the future." Hicks stated his foremost priority was gaining silverware, and vowed to build a new stadium for the club at Stanley Park Stadium.telegraph.co.html   
Hicks became extremely unpopular among Liverpool fans During Hicks and Gillett's period of ownership, Liverpool became associated with frequent boardroom wranglings as the owners fell out with each other   and engaged in public battles with Parry and Benitez.timesonline.co.ece  Anger was also directed at the Hicks family when Tom Hicks's son, Tom Jr, had to resign from the Liverpool board of directors after sending an abusive e-mail to a Liverpool fan saying "Blow me f*** face. Go to hell. I'm sick of you".guardian.co.dallasobserver.php
On January 22, 2008, a majority of Liverpool fans at the game between Liverpool and Aston Villa, protested against Gillett and Hicks' running of the club, urging the pair to sell their shares in Liverpool F.C. to Dubai International Capital (DIC). Neither owner, nor their representative Foster Gillett, was present at the game. George Gillett was reportedly targeted by DIC to sell his shares. It was reported that he had fallen out with Hicks and he subsequently kept silent over his dealings with the club.
In October 2010, as part of a fans' campaign against the ownership, a video entitled Dear Mr Hicks was released virally via YouTube. Produced and directed by Mike Jefferies, it featured celebrity fans of the club giving their reasons why they wanted to see a change of ownership.bbc.co.guardian.co.youtube.wikio.co.telegraph.co.html The Independent newspaper praised the video, saying: "True to the city's capacity to create something out of adversity, a wonderfully inventive viral film, Dear Mr Hicks, has been published online to make it clear where he ought to go. The fans' view can be summarised thus: away, and soon".
It was claimed that the video was watched 400 000 times in 42 hours.empireofthekop.com/anfield/?p=22859
On October 15, 2010, Hicks lost ownership of Liverpool F.C. Despite numerous attempts to prevent it, the club was sold to New England Sports Ventures (NESV), for a fee believed to be around £300 million, which was far below Hicks' valuation of "between £600M and £1 billion(B)", by the Liverpool F.C. board of directors in a 3–2 vote. Hicks is pursuing a (max.) £1B suit against NESV and Kop Holdings for damages, claiming that "This outcome... devalues the club..." and suggesting that he had been the victim of an "epic swindle".bbc.co.stm
Liverpool F.C. fans were delighted to hear that the club had been sold.bbc.co.stm     Steve Horner, from the fans' group Kop Faithful declared:
"It's like a huge cloud has been lifted off us....."  A lot has been taken off the club's shoulders now. Good riddance to Hicks and Gillett." Former Liverpool player Tommy Smith expressed his joy at the departure of Hicks and Gillett in his regular newspaper column: "But today they are out of our club - and I'm as happy as every one of the Liverpool fans who've made it clear they're so sick of them. All they were ever interested in was making money - not in owning what is for me the greatest football club in the world, investing in it properly and taking good care of it. Good riddance." I am saddened by it."
In the two years before Hicks and Gillett took control of the club, Liverpool won the Champions' League in 2005 and the FA Cup in 2006 under manager Rafa Benitez. In the three and a half years in which Hicks and Gillett owned the club, they won not a single trophy and at the time they left Liverpool the club were in the relegation zone of the Premier League.nytimes.html 
Fans blame a lack of investment in players for the declining performances on the pitch. Hicks has denied this claim, declaring that during his reign Liverpool's net spend on player transfers was £150 million (sometimes cited as $150 million).irishtimes.html  million and has accused Hicks of "creative accountancy", stating "what is irrefutable is that Hicks has exaggerated the net spend by probably close to six fold".mirrorfootball.co.html
During Hicks and Gillett's period of ownership, the club struggled to meet the interest payments on the loans taken out as part of the leveraged buy-out. Christian Purslow, managing director of Liverpool since June 2009, publicly stated in September 2010 that the debt was an important burden for the club because it limited investment in players: "The issue is that too much of that profit is being used to service loans put into place when the club was bought." He has also suggested that the Royal Bank of Scotland prevented him paying back the debt to them: "I can't go into the details but I can confirm the funds were available to pay off Royal Bank of Scotland entirely but between Royal Bank of Scotland, the chairman and the employees that conspired against us, they would not let us."
After more legal trouble with his other sports team, Tom Hicks decided not to pursue his claims of a conspiracy against him.com/site/2011/05/06/fan-power-wins-the-day-liverpool-fc-an-epic-swindle-part-two/ On 11 January 2013 Tom Hicks and George Gillet finally decided to drop their case in the English Law Courts against Sir Martin Broughton, Christian Purslow & Ian Ayre, the 3 directors on the board of Liverpool FC at the time of the sale of the club to NESV, they also agreed to drop their case against NESV and RBS Bank. The terms of the agreement are confidential, though it is believed that no monies were paid to Hicks or Gillet. Earlier in the week Hicks and Gillet had lost a Court of Appeal bid to delay a High Court Trial so they could have more time to raise the monies needed to fund the multi million pound lawsuit.  

Philanthropy

In addition to donating the land for aforementioned school in Frisco, Hicks donated a gymnasium to the St. Mark's School of Texas in Dallas. Hicks was also the 1996 co-chair of the "Dallas Jewish Coalition for the Homeless 'Vogel Alcove' project", and received the 2000 "Henry Cohn Humanitarian Award" from the Anti-Defamation League.






