[[Malcolm X]]

CATEGORIES: Malcolm X, 1925 births, 1965 deaths, 20th-century African-American activists, 20th-century American writers, African-American life in Omaha, Nebraska, African-American Muslims, African-American non-fiction writers, African-American religious leaders, African-Americans' civil rights activists, American burglars, American dissidents, American memoirists, American people of Grenadian descent, American people of Scottish descent, American Sunni Muslims, Assassinated American civil rights activists, Assassinated religious leaders, Black supremacists, Burials at Ferncliff Cemetery, COINTELPRO targets, Converts to Islam from Protestantism, Deaths by firearm in New York, Deaths onstage, Former Nation of Islam members, Murdered African-American people, Muslim activists, Muslim writers, Pan-Africanists, People from Boston, Massachusetts, People from Lansing, Michigan, People from North Omaha, Nebraska, People from Omaha, Nebraska, People from Queens, New York, People murdered in New York, Racism in the United States

Malcolm), was an African-American Muslim minister and a human rights activist. To his admirers he was a courageous advocate for the rights of blacks, a man who indicted white America in the harshest terms for its crimes against black Americans; detractors accused him of preaching racism and violence. He has been called one of the greatest and most influential African Americans in history.
MalcolmX was effectively orphaned early in life. His father was killed when he was six
and his mother was placed in a mental hospital when he was thirteen, after which he lived in a series of foster homes.
In 1946, at age 20, he went to prison for larceny and breaking and entering. While in prison he became a member of the Nation of Islam, and after his parole in 1952 quickly rose to become one of its leaders. For a dozen years he was the public face of the controversial group; in keeping with the Nation's teachings he espoused black supremacy, advocated the separation of black and white Americans and scoffed at the civil rights movement's emphasis on integration.
By March 1964 Malcolm X had grown disillusioned with the Nation of Islam and its head Elijah Muhammad, and ultimately repudiated the Nation and its teachings. He embraced Sunni Islam and, after a period of travel in Africa and the Middle East, returned to the United States to found Muslim Mosque, Inc. and the Organization of Afro-American Unity. While continuing to emphasize Pan-Africanism, black self-determination, and black self-defense, he disavowed racism, saying, "I did many things as a Black Muslim that I'm sorry for now. I was a zombie then... pointed in a certain direction and told to march".
In February 1965, shortly after repudiating the Nation of Islam, he was assassinated by three of its members. The Autobiography of Malcolm X, published shortly after his death, is considered one of the most influential nonfiction books of the 20th century.

Early years

Malcolm Little was born May2–3.
Malcolm3–4.
Because of Ku Klux Klan threats{–}4.
When Little was six his father was killed in what was officially ruled a streetcar accident, though Louise believed Earl had been murdered by the Black Legion. Rumors that white racists were responsible for his father's death were widely circulated, and were very disturbing to Malcolm X as a child. As an adult, he expressed conflicting beliefs on the question. After a dispute with creditors, a life insurance benefit
(nominally $1,000{–}32.
In 1937 a man Louise had been dating{–}33–34, 331.
Malcolm Little excelled in junior high school but dropped out after a white teacher told him that practicing law, his aspiration at the time, was "no realistic goal for a  nigger".X recalled feeling that the white world offered no place for a career-oriented black man, regardless of talent.
From age 14 to 21 Little held a variety of jobs while living with his half-sister Ella Little-Collins in Roxbury, a largely African-American neighborhood of Boston.32–48, 58–61.
Then after a short time in Flint, Michigan he moved to Harlem, New York in 1943, where he engaged in drug dealing, gambling, racketeering, robbery, and pimping;Perry, pp.62–81.
according to recent biographies, he also occasionally had sex with other men, usually for money.
He was called "Detroit Red" because of the reddish hair he inherited from his Scottish maternal grandfather.
Little was declared "mentally disqualified for military service" after he told draft board officials he wanted to be sent down south to "organize them nigger  soldiers ... steal us some guns, and kill us some crackers".Malcolm
In late 1945, Little returned to Boston, where he and four accomplices committed a series of burglaries targeting wealthy white families.67–68.

Nation of Islam period

Prison

During Little's imprisonment he met fellow convict John Bembry,Natambu, p.108–110, 118. It was during this period that Little later stated he damaged his vision and required eyeglasses, "I had come to prison with 20/20 vision…I had read so much by the lights-out glow in my room at the Norfolk Prison Colony that I had astigmatism and the first pair of the eyeglasses that I have worn ever since."Malcolm X, Autobiography, (1992, thirty-third printing), pp. 189.
At this time, several of his siblings wrote to him about the Nation of Islam, a relatively new religious movement preaching black self-reliance and, ultimately, the return of the African diaspora to Africa, where they would be free from white American and European domination.136.
In late 1948, Little wrote to Elijah Muhammad, the leader of the Nation of Islam. Muhammad advised him to renounce his past, humbly bow in prayer to Allah, and promise never to engage in destructive behavior again.138–139.
Though he later recalled the inner struggle he experienced in bending his knees in prayer,Malcolm116.
In 1950, the FBI opened a file on him after he wrote a letter from prison to President Truman expressing opposition to the Korean War and declaring himself a communist.

Early ministry

After his parole in August 1952,Marable, Malcolm161–164.
In 1953, the FBI began surveillance of him, turning its attention from Malcolm95.
During 1955, Malcolm122–123.
Beside his skill as a speaker, Malcolm189. and another as "mesmerizingly handsome ... and always spotlessly well-groomed".

Marriage and family

In 1955, Betty Sanders met MalcolmX after one of his lectures, then again at a dinner party; soon she was regularly attending his lectures.
In 1956 she joined the Nation of Islam, changing her name to Betty61–63.
Malcolm73–74. They had six daughters:
Attallah (b. 1958, named after Attila the Hun);Rickford, pp.
Qubilah (b. 1960, named ater Kublai Khan);Rickford, p.286.

Johnson Hinton incident

Malcolm164.
On Aprilsaw the police officers beating an African-American man with nightsticks. They attempted to intervene, shouting "You're not in Alabama or Georgia. This is New York!" One of the officers turned on Hinton, beating him so severely that he suffered brain contusions and subdural hemorrhaging. All four men were then arrested.
Alerted by a witness, Malcolm128.
Hinton's injuries were treated and by the time he was returned to the police station, some four thousand people had gathered outside it. Inside the station, Malcolm132.
A grand jury declined to indict the officers who beat Hinton, and in October, Malcolm134–135.

Increasing prominence

By the late 1950s, Malcolm174–179. and he was featured in a 1959 New York City television broadcast about the Nation of Islam, The Hate That Hate Produced.
In September 1960, at the United Nations General Assembly in New York, Malcolm18.

Advocacy and teachings while with Nation

From his adoption of the Nation of Islam in 1952 until he broke with it in 1964, MalcolmX promoted the Nation's teachings. These included the beliefs:
Many whites and some blacks were alarmed by Malcolm
Malcolm 
While the civil rights movement fought against racial segregation, Malcolm

Impact on Nation membership

Malcolm

Leaving the Nation of Islam

On December242.
Another source of tension had appeared between Malcolm230–234
Malcolmall of which greatly upset Muhammad and made him envious.
On March

Activities after leaving the Nation

Organizations founded and views expressed

After leaving the Nation of Islam, Malcolm23–44.

Becoming a Sunni Muslim

At this time, several Sunni Muslims encouraged Malcolm261.

Pilgrimage to Mecca

In April 1964, with financial help from his half-sister Ella Little-Collins, Malcolm267.
Malcolm390–391.

Africa

Malcolm403.

France and United Kingdom

On November
On February312.
On February

Return to United States

After leaving the Nation of Islam and traveling internationally, Malcolm277–278.

Death threats and intimidation from Nation of Islam

Throughout 1964, as conflict with the Nation of Islam intensified, MalcolmX was repeatedly threatened.
In February a leader of Temple Number Seven ordered the bombing of Malcolm
On June352–356.
On July264.
The September 1964 issue of Ebony dramatized Malcolm

Assassination

On FebruaryX was preparing to address the Organization of Afro-American Unity in Manhattan's Audubon Ballroom when someone in the 400-person audience yelled
"Nigger! Get your hand outta my pocket!"[ref]
Karim, p.295.
[/ref]
As Malcolm450.
One gunman, Nation of Islam member Talmadge Hayer (also known as Thomas Hagan) was beaten by the crowd before police arrived;Perry, pp.289.
(At trial Hayer confessed, but refused to identify the other assailants except to assert that they were not Butler and Johnson;Kondo, p.110.
in 1977 and 1978 he reasserted their innocence and named four other Nation members as participants in the murder or its planning.)112–129.
Butler, today known as Muhammad Abdul Aziz, was paroled in 1985 and became the head of the Nation's Harlem mosque in 1998; he maintains his innocence.474–475.

Funeral

The public viewing, FebruaryX, says 22,000 (p. 519).
For the funeral on February
Among the civil rights leaders attending were John Lewis, Bayard Rustin, James Forman, James Farmer, Jesse Gray, and Andrew Young.X as "our shining black prince":
 There are those who will consider it their duty, as friends of the Negro people, to tell us to revile him, to flee, even from the presence of his memory, to save ourselves by writing him out of the history of our turbulent times. Many will ask what Harlem finds to honor in this stormy, controversial and bold young captain{–} 
Malcolm255
Actor and activist Ruby Dee and Juanita Poitier (wife of Sidney Poitier) established the Committee of Concerned Mothers to raise money toward a home for the family and for the children's educations.261–262.

Reactions to assassination

Reactions to MalcolmX's assassination were varied.
Martin Luther King, Jr.'s telegram to Betty Shabazz expressed his sadness at "the shocking and tragic assassination of your husband."
 While we did not always see eye to eye on methods to solve the race problem, I always had a deep affection for Malcolm and felt that he had a great ability to put his finger on the existence and root of the problem. He was an eloquent spokesman for his point of view and no one can honestly doubt that Malcolm had a great concern for the problems that we face as a race. 
Elijah Muhammad told the annual Savior's Day convention on February232.
The New York Post wrote that "even his sharpest critics recognized his brilliance{–}
Outside of the U.S., and particularly in Africa, the press was sympathetic.306. while in Cuba, El Mundo described the assassination as "another racist crime to eradicate by violence the struggle against discrimination".

Allegations of conspiracy

Within days, the question of who bore ultimate responsibility for the assassination was being publicly debated. On February372.
In the 1970s, the public learned about COINTELPRO and other secret FBI programs established to infiltrate and disrupt civil rights organizations during the 1950s and 1960s.294.
Some, including the Shabazz family, have accused Louis Farrakhan of involvement in Malcolm305. and in a 1993 speech Farrakhan seemed to acknowledge the possibility that the Nation of Islam was responsible:
 Was Malcolm your traitor or ours? And if we dealt with him like a nation deals with a traitor, what the hell business is it of yours? A nation has to be able to deal with traitors and cutthroats and turncoats. 
In a 60 Minutes interview that aired during May 2000, Farrakhan stated that some of the things he said may have led to the assassination of Malcolm
No consensus on who was responsible has been reached.315–316.

Philosophy

Except for his autobiography, Malcolm15–16.

Beliefs of the Nation of Islam

Before he left the Nation of Islam in 1964, Malcolm He later compared himself to a ventriloquist's dummy who could only say what Elijah Muhammad told him.
Malcolm171.
Malcolm
While the civil rights movement fought against racial segregation, Malcolm96. He also rejected the civil rights movement's strategy of nonviolence, instead advocating that black people should defend themselves.

Independent views

After leaving the Nation of Islam, Malcolm33–35.
Malcolm43, 47.
Malcolm117.
In his speeches at the Militant Labor Forum, which was sponsored by the Socialist Workers Party, Malcolm277.
Although he no longer called for the separation of black people from white people, Malcolm212–213.
After his Hajj, Malcolm391. In a conversation with Gordon Parks, two days before his assassination, Malcolm said:
Up until one week before his death, MalcolmX continued to publicly advocate that black people should achieve advancement "by any means necessary".

Legacy

Malcolm380.
In the late 1960s, increasingly radical black activists based their movements largely on MalcolmX.
In 1963 Malcolm375.
During the late 1980s and early 1990s, there was a resurgence of interest in his life among young people. Hip-hop groups such as Public Enemy adopted Malcolm4 an adaptation of The Autobiography of Malcolm X.
In 1998 Time Magazine named The Autobiography of Malcolm

Portrayals in film and on stage

Denzel Washington played the title role in Malcolm Other portrayals include:

Memorials and tributes

The house that once stood at 3448 Pinkney Street in North Omaha, Nebraska, was the first home of Malcolm Little with his birth family. The house was torn down in 1965 by owners who did not know of its connection with Malcolm
In Lansing, Michigan, where Malcolm Little spent his early, formative years, a Michigan Historical Marker was erected in 1975 to mark his homesite.
In cities around the world, Malcolm
Many cities have renamed streets after Malcolm
Dozens of schools have been named after Malcolm
In 1996, the first library named after Malcolm
The U.S. Postal Service issued a Malcolm

Published works



Notes



Footnotes

Works cited

Further reading




