[[Thomas Weinandy]]

CATEGORIES: American theologians, Capuchins, American Roman Catholic priests, People from Delphos, Ohio, 1946 births, Living people, Alumni of King's College London, Wardens of Greyfriars, Oxford

Father Thomas G. Weinandy (born January 12, 1946 in Delphos, Ohio) is a Catholic priest and a leading scholar in the Roman Catholic Church.  He is a prolific writerPopular Authors, Theologians, Commentators Contribute to Catholic Communication Campaign's 'Jesus Decoded' Web Site in both academic and popular works, including articles, books, and study courses.

Biography

Father Weinandy entered the Order of Friars Minor Capuchin in 1966, was solemnly professed in 1970, and was ordained to the priesthood in 1972. He earned a B.A. in Philosophy at St. Fidelis College, Herman, Pennsylvania in 1969, an M.A. in Systematic Theology at Washington Theological Union in 1972, and a Doctorate in Historical Theology at King's College London in 1975. He lived in and was an active member of the Mother of God Community, Washington, for 19 years before leaving to teach at Oxford University.
His major fields of specialty are History of Christology, especially Patristic, Medieval and Contemporary, History of Trinitarian Theology, History of Soteriology, and Philosophical Notions of God. He has held academic positions at Georgetown University, Mount St. Mary's University in Emmitsburg, Maryland, Franciscan University of Steubenville, and Loyola College, Baltimore. Father Weinandy served at the University of Oxford from 1991 to 2005. 
He was the Warden of Greyfriars (1993–2004)(Honorary Fellow 2004) and tutor and lecturer in History and Doctrine in the Faculty of Theology. He was Chairman of the Faculty of Theology from 1997 to 1999. He is a member of the Catholic Theological Society of America, the Fellowship of Catholic Scholars, the Catholic Theological Society of Great Britain, the North American Patristics Society and the Association Internationale D'Etudes Patristiques, as well as the Academy of Catholic Theology.
The Human Origins Initiative of the Smithsonian Institution invited Fr. Weinandy to participate as a member of the Broader Social Impacts Committee, made up of individuals from diverse religious communities, to reflect publicly on the exhibition 'What Does It Mean To Be Human?' and on human origins.
In October 2010, Father Weinandy participated in the Seventh Round of the Catholic-Reformed Dialogue concluded in Henryville, Indiana. That dialogue was jointly sponsored by the USCCB Committee on Ecumenical and Interreligious Affairs, the Christian Reformed Church in North America, the Presbyterian Church-USA, the Reformed Church in America and the United Church of Christ.
Father Weinandy assisted in the development of content for an iPhone app to guide Catholics through the act of confession, understood to be the first endorsed by the U.S. Catholic Church. "It has been approved by Bishop Kevin Rhoades," said Fr. Weinandy.
In March, 2011, Fr. Weinandy participated in a telephone press conference with scholars from Catholic, Protestant and Jewish backgrounds the day before the release of Pope Benedict XVI's book Jesus of Nazareth: Holy Week. Weinandy said that Pope Benedict "sees Jesus as someone the world is longing to meet, and he's doing his best to try to provide that opportunity."
In a May 2011 address to the Academy of Catholic Theology in Washington, D.C., Fr. Weinandy, warned of a "crisis" in Catholic theology, precipitated by theologians who "often appear to possess little reverence for the mysteries of the faith as traditionally understood and presently professed within the church." The Secretariat for Doctrine had previously criticized a book on the Trinity by St. Joseph Sr. Elizabeth Johnson of Fordham University in New York, leading to a defense of Johnson by many theologians as well as Fordham faculty. Weinandy's address did not mention any theologian by name. "Theology may be the only academic pursuit where one can seemingly be considered a theologian without actually having to know the subject matter," he said. "It would appear at times that a theologian need not actually know God." Describing the theological crisis, Weinandy said: "Much of what passes for contemporary Catholic theology, often is not founded upon an assent of faith in the divine deposit of revelation as proclaimed in the sacred scriptures and developed within the living doctrinal and moral tradition of the church."
Father Weinendy responded to a July, 2012 article in Newsweek written by theoretical physicist Lawrence Krauss describing how confirmation of existence of the Higgs Boson particle could get rid of the idea of a supernatural creator permanently. "While the Higgs particle may help us in understanding the relationship between mass and matter, it does not explain why the Higgs particle itself exists," Weinandy said. "There must be a being whose very nature demands that it exists and, because of this, is able to bring other beings into existence."

Publications

Some of his books on religion have been translated into several languages including Roumanian and Polish. He has also published many scholarly articles in various journals including The Thomist, New Blackfriars, Communio, First Things, Pro Ecclesia, Logos: A Journal of Catholic Thought and Culture, and the International Journal of Systematic Theology. He has written many popular articles including those for New Covenant, National Catholic Register, Pastoral Life, Canadian Catholic Review, New Oxford Review, the Arlington Catholic Herald, and The Family.
Fr. Weinandy one of many distinguished contributors to Benedict XVI: Essays and Reflections on His Papacy. His essay Hope for Today says "Benedict perceives that all men and women today both desperately need hope and search for a reason for hope. He is convinced that true authentic hope is found in the Gospel of Jesus Christ."

Authored by Thomas Weinandy

Co-Author






