[[Murray–Darling basin]]

CATEGORIES: Regions of Australia, Drainage basins of Australia, Physiographic provinces, Murray-Darling basin, Biosphere reserves of Australia

The Murray–Darling basin is a large geographical area in the interior of southeastern Australia, whose name  is derived from its two major rivers, the Murray River and the Darling River. It drains around one-seventh of the Australian land mass, and is one of the most significant agricultural areas in Australia.  It spans most of the states of New South Wales, Victoria, and the Australian Capital Territory, and parts of the states of Queensland (lower third) and South Australia (southeastern corner). It is  long).
Most of the  basin is flat, low-lying and far inland, and receives little direct rainfall. The many rivers it contains tend to be long and slow-flowing, and carry a volume of water that is large only by Australian standards.

Native fauna

The Murray-Darling basin is home to many native animal species. The true numbers may not be known, but a fairly confident estimate has been made of these animals and the current status of their population. Among the aboriginal fauna in the region, the study found  that there were:

Introduced species

The basin has also played host to a variety of introduced species. One of the most well known is the carp. The time of the introduction of carp into the system is not known, but by the 1920s, they had become established in the basin.
Four varieties of carp were used to stock up fish dams. Since then they have made their way into the river systems, where they spread quite quickly. Human introduction, possibly by anglers using small carp illegally as live bait has also increased their distribution. These fish are very mobile, as they can travel easily on flood waters and their eggs can be transported by birds.
Carp are a problem because they feed by sucking gravel from the river bed and taking all the edible material off it, before returning the rest to the water. This stirs up all the sediment, reducing the quality of the water. When caught by fishermen, carp must be killed by law.
Cane toads have entered the upper reaches of the Darling Basin and there are several reports of individuals being found further down the system., Mazzer, T.M. and Ellis, M.V.  (2004).  Herpetofauna of the Darling Basin.  In: The Darling (Eds. R. Breckwoldt, R. Boden and J. Andrew) (Murray-Darling Basin Commission, Canberra). Cane toads compete with native amphibians and are toxic to native carnivores.

Physiography

This area is one of the physiographic provinces of the larger East Australian basins division, and encompasses the smaller Naracoorte Platform and Encounter Shelf physiographic sections.
Total water flow in the Murray–Darling basin 1885 to the present has averaged around 24,000 gigalitres (19.5 maf) per year. This is the lowest rate of the world's major river systems.. Despite the magnitude of the basin, the hydrology of the streams within it is quite varied.
These waters are divided into four types:Brown, J. A. H. (John Alexander Henstridge); Australia's Surface Water Resources. ISBN 0-644-02617-0
Of the approximately 13,000 gigalitres of flow in the basin, which studies have shown to be divertible, 11,500 gigalitres are removed for irrigation, industrial use, and domestic supply. Agricultural irrigation accounts for about 95 percent of the water removed, including for the growing of rice and cotton. This extraction is highly controversial among scientists in Australia, regarding the agriculture industry's high water use in a region extremely short of water (as much due to exceptionally low run-off coefficients as to low rainfall).

Rivers in the Murray–Darling basin

The rivers listed below comprise the Murray–Darling basin and its direct significant tributaries, with elevations of their confluence with the downstream river. The tributary with the highest elevation is Swampy Plain River that rises in the Snowy Mountains, below Mount Kosciuszko at an elevation of .
The ordering of the basin, from downstream to upstream, is:

Management

The basin covers five states and territory governments, who according to the Constitution, are responsible for managing water resources. The River Murray Commission was established in 1917. Under the River Murray Waters Agreement, which never included Queensland despite the state containing about a quarter of the basin, the Commission's role was only as an advisory body with no authority for the enforcement of provisions. For a long time the Commission was only concerned with water quantity until salinity became a problem. This led to minor reforms in 1982 in which water quality became part of the Commission's responsibilities. However, it was soon recognised that a new organisational structure which considered the national perspective was needed for effective management.
The Murray–Darling Basin Agreement was first adopted in 1985 but it wasn't until 1993 that its full legal status was enacted. The Agreement led to the creation of a number of new organisations under what is known as the Murray-Darling Basin Initiative. These included the Murray-Darling Basin Ministerial Council and the Murray Darling Basin Commission.

The Murray–Darling Basin plan

The Murray-Darling Basin Plan was signed off by Tony Burke, Minister for Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities on 22 November 2012, and passed disallowance period in the Australian Parliament on the 19 March 2013. Following is the history leading up to this significant occasion in the history of Australian water reform.

=History=

In October 2010, The Murray–Darling Basin Authority released a draft plan to secure the long-term ecological health of the Murray–Darling Basin. This entailed cutting existing water allocations and increasing environmental flows. The document is officially titled the Guide to the Proposed Murray–Darling Basin Plan. It is the first part of a three-stage process to address the problems of the Murray–Darling Basin. Sarah Clarke and staff. 8 October 2010. ABC News Online. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. MDBA is responsible for preparing and overseeing a legally-enforceable management plan — the Basin Plan.
The Basin Plan is designed to set environmentally sustainable limits on the quantities of water that may be taken from Basin water resources, to set Basin-wide environmental, water quality and salinity objectives, to develop efficient water trading regimes across the Basin, to set requirements for state water resource plans and to improve water security for all Basin users.
With the release of the Guide to the Proposed Murray–Darling Basin Plan there have been a number of protests and voiced concerns about the plan in rural towns that the MDBA  visited to present the plan to consultation meetings. Australian Broadcasting Corporation More than 5,000 people attended a MDBA meeting in Griffith where Griffith Mayor, Mike Neville, said the plan would "obliterate" Murrumbidgee valley communities. Other groups also echo this feeling, such as the Victorian Farmers FederationVFF Declares War!: Stop the MDBA plundering. and Wine Group Growers' Australia. Media Release. 13 October 2010. Conversely, support for the Murray–Darling Basin plan has been received by various groups, including Australian Conservation Foundation,Cautious support from scientists for the emerging Murray‐Darling Basin Plan. and Environment Victoria.
New legal advice from the lawyers of the Federal Government is changing the plan. The Government's interpretation is that the plan must give equal weight to the environmental, social, and economic impacts of proposed cuts to irrigation.
Environmentalists and South Australian irrigators, at the end of the river in South Australia, say that the authority should stick to its original figure. (27 October 2010). SA irrigators back Murray–Darling cuts. ABC News.
In October 2010, a parliamentary inquiry into the economic impacts of the plan was announced. (18 October 2010). Murray authority chairman faces uphill battle. ABC News.
In late October 2010 the Water Minister, Tony Burke, played down the prospect of a High Court challenge to the Murray–Darling Basin plan, as confusion continued over new legal advice released by the Government. In response to community concerns that the Murray–Darling Basin Authority had put environmental issues first over social and economic needs, Burke released new advice on the requirements of the Water Act. Burke stated that the Act does allow for the authority to "optimise" the needs of all three areas, but constitutional lawyer, George Williams, had cast doubts over the interpretation of the laws, stating it could be subject to a legal challenge. (28 OCtober 2010) Burke plays down challenge to basin plan. ABC News.
The MDBA announced in November 2010 that it might be forced to push back the release of its final plan for the river system until early 2012. (2 November 2010) Basin authority flags delay to final plan. ABC News.
The then MDBA chairman, Mike Taylor, reassured the public meeting that more work is being done to look at how the proposed cuts would affect regional communities. He stated; "Importantly, we want to make sure the social and economic impacts—which under any sort of scenario is very significant—were fully teased out".(4 November 2010). Water cuts treat farmers as 'second-class citizens'. ABC News. Taylor resigned as he allegedly believed that the overriding principle should be the environmental outcome which was in conflict with the Gillard Government and following a period of sustained criticism of the Authority and the implementation of the proposed draft basin plan.[ref]
