[[Shawn Colvin]]

CATEGORIES: 1956 births, American female guitarists, American female singers, American folk singers, American singer-songwriters, Fast Folk artists, Grammy Award-winning artists, Living people, Musicians from London, Ontario, People from Clay County, South Dakota, Musicians from Austin, Texas, People from Carbondale, Illinois

Shawn Colvin (born January 10, 1956) is an American singer-songwriter and musician widely known for her Grammy-winning 1997 single "Sunny Came Home."

Early and personal life

Colvin was born in Vermillion, South Dakota and spent her youth in London, Ontario and Carbondale, Illinois.  She is the second of 4 children and has 2 brothers, Geoff and Clay and a sister Kay.
Colvin has been married twice, first to Simon Tassano in 1993

Career

Colvin moved to Austin, Texas and joined a Western swing band called the Dixie Diesels. She then entered "the folk circuit in Illinois and Berkeley", CaliforniaKoster, Rick (2000) First St. Martin's Griffin, Texas Music page 219, retrieved May 25, 2012 before she "strained her voice" singing rock songs and took a sabbatical from singing at the age of 24.
Colvin later moved to New York City, joining the Buddy Miller Band in 1980. When Buddy Miller left the band it became The Shawn Colvin Band.levonhelm.htm With Buddy gone the band needed a lead guitarist and this led to her meeting John Leventhal. She later becoming involved in the Fast Folk cooperative of Greenwich Village. "A Folk Stylist Hangs on to Intimacy Artist: Shawn Colvin.", Los Angeles Times, November 26, 1989. Accessed June 5, 2009. Over time she became progressively more popular on the new folk circuit and while participating in off-Broadway shows such as Diamond Studs, Pump Boys and Dinettes, and Lie of the Mind. She was featured in Fast Folk magazine, and in 1987, producer Steve Addabbo hired her to sing backup vocals on the song "Luka" by Suzanne Vega.
After touring with Suzanne Vega, Colvin was brought to the attention of Columbia Records by Addabbo and signed a recording contract with the label. Colvin released her debut album  Steady On  with her fellow songwriter and co-producer, John Leventhal in 1989. The album won a Grammy Award for Best Contemporary Folk Album and featured backing vocals by Vega. The song "I Don't Know Why" was nominated for a Grammy in the Best Female Pop Vocal category. In 1993 she moved back to the city of Austin and in 1994 released the album Cover Girl, a collection of cover songs.
In 1996, Colvin released her "platinum  status" album A Few Small Repairs  and in 1997 the success of her single "Sunny Came Home" firmly catapulted her into the mainstream after spending four weeks at the number one spot on the Adult Contemporary chart. The album won the 1998 Grammy Awards for both Song and Record of the Year.  After becoming a mother Colvin released the album Holiday Songs and Lullabies in 1998 and  in 2001 released another album called Whole New You.  In 2004, she released  another album, this time a compilation of past songs called, Polaroids: A Greatest Hits Collection.
In 2008, she left Columbia Records and released a 15 song album called These Four Walls on her new label, Nonesuch Records which featured contributions by Patti Griffin and Teddy Thompson."Live", Nonesuch. In 2009 she released Shawn Colvin Live, which was recorded at the jazz club Yoshi' s in San Francisco, California and featured 12 original songs plus cover versions of songs by Gnarls Barkley, The Talking Heads and Robbie Robertson.
Her eighth studio album, All Fall Down, was released in 2012 and was produced by Buddy Miller at his home studio in Nashville, Tennessee. The album featured guest appearances by Emmylou Harris, Alison Krauss and Jakob Dylan. In 2012, Colvin performed at the first annual PEN Awards for songwriting excellence at the JFK Presidential Library, honoring Chuck Berry and Leonard Cohen in Boston, Massachusetts.
Since 2000, Colvin has collaborated with a variety of artists and has made vocal contributions to songs by James Taylor, Béla Fleck, Edwin McCain and Shawn Mullins. She also collaborated with Sting on the Disney theme song, "One Day She'll Love Me". Colvin played the voice of character Rachel Jordan on the TV show The Simpsons In 2011, she appeared on the HBO series Treme, in the episode "Santa Claus, Do You Ever Get The Blues".
Memoirs== 
Colvin published her book of memoirs, Diamond in the Rough, in 2012. She says the book is about her survival from anorexia, clinical depression, alcoholism , motherhood, career crises, and relationships with men.
Andy Langer in The New York Times calls the book "candid about her heartaches but also comically self-deprecating. She balances the serious admission that she needs medication to combat her depression with a funny anecdote about the time she wet herself on national television while dancing with 'N Sync during a late '90s Disney Christmas special".

Awards and recognition

Discography








