[[Gyeongui Line]]

CATEGORIES: Railway lines in North Korea, Railway lines in South Korea, International railway lines, Standard gauge railways in North Korea, Standard gauge railways in South Korea, Rail transport in Korea, Seoul subway lines, Railway lines opened in 1905

The Gyeongui Line is a rail line of the Seoul Metropolitan Subway from Munsan Station to Seoul Station and Gongdeok Station, officially defined by Korail as "subway". This is despite the line being substantially overground because the term "subway" in Korean is synonymous with metro.naver.nhn?dicQuery=%EC%A0%84%EC%B2%A0&x=0&y=0&query=%EC%A0%84%EC%B2%A0&target=dic&ie=utf8&query_utf=&isOnlyViewEE= When opened in 1906 originally as a railway, it linked Seoul in what is now South Korea to P'yŏngyang and Sinŭiju in what is now North Korea. At Seoul, the line connected with the Gyeongbu Line to Busan, while at Sinŭiju, the line connected with the South Manchuria Railway, linking the Korean railway system to the rest of Asia and Europe.

History

Korea intended to build the Gyeongui Line with its own resources at the end of the 19th century, but the project stalled due to lack of funds. Imperial Japan, which gained to concession to build the Gyeongbu Line from Busan to Seoul, also sought to gain control of the Gyeongui Line project as its continuation further north, recognising the trunk route as a means to keep Korea under its influence. The line was also advanced for military considerations in expectation of a confrontation with Russia, which came in 1904 as the Russo-Japanese War. At the start of the war, Japan ignored Korea's declaration of neutrality and transported troops to Incheon, and forced the Korean government to sign an agreement that gave Japan's military control of railway projects if deemed necessary for military operations. Japan's military began to build the Gyeongui Line, while troop bases were established in connection with the railway, the biggest of them next to the terminus of the line, Yongsan Station in Seoul.
The first section of the Gyeongui Line opened from Yongsan in Seoul to Munsan on April 3, 1906.

Inter-Korea border

After the division of Korea in 1945, trains stopped operating between the north and south halves of the country, meaning that southern trains probably terminated at Kaesŏng, which is now in North Korea but was at the time part of the US-administered southern zone. Northern trains would have terminated north of Kaesŏng.
After the end of the Korean War in 1953, southern trains were cut back to around Munsan (north of Seoul), with northern trains terminating at Kaesŏng. Around the same time, North Korea renamed the P'yŏngyang-Kaesŏng section of the line as the P'yŏngbu (P'yŏngyang + Busan) Line and the P'yŏngyang-Sinŭiju section as the P'yŏngŭi (P'yŏngyang + Sinŭiju) Line. The DPRK sector is now 100% electrifed, although the double track section spans only from Pyongyang to Sunan Airport.
Since the summit between the two Koreas in 2000, an effort has slowly been underway to reconnect the Gyeongui Line.

Upgrade

Meanwhile, work began to upgrade the South Korean section for high-capacity commuter services. Between Seoul and Munsan, the line is converted into an electrified, double-tracked railway in a new, straighter, 48.6 km long alignment.
The line is to be further upgraded for 

Services

Seoul Metropolitan Subway

The South Korean section of the Gyeongui Line was integrated with the Seoul Metropolitan Subway system with the opening of the DMC-Munsan upgrade on July 1, 2009. The northernmost subway station is Munsan, and the subway runs through Paju and Ilsan, then all the way into Seoul Station.
It's included as part of Seoul Metropolitan Subway's metro system — It is newly electrified and double tracked, uses subway cars, is shown on subway maps in Seoul, and has free transfers with Seoul Subway Line 2, Seoul Subway Line 3, Seoul Subway Line 5, Line 6, AREX and (off-platform) Line 1.
The current section from Seoul Station to Digital Media City Station is a branch line, not the main line. Most trains go from Munsan to Digital Media City and stop, while only one or two trains per hour go all the way to Seoul Station.
When the full extension to Yongsan Station is completed in December 2014, trains will run to Yongsan Station, and then continue eastward on what is currently the Jungang Line all the way to Sinwonju Station, near Gangwon-do. It is known that the two lines will directly link with each other to form one (very long) subway line, but it is not clear as to what the line will be called.

Stations

Regular rail service

Before the integration with the subway system, the most common service on the line was a Tonggeun train service between Seoul and Imjingang, with one Saemaeul-ho train. Since the line was integrated with the Seoul Subway system, Tonggeun service has been restricted to a few stations in the north, from Munsan to Imjingang, with a few continuing on to Dorasan, near the North Korean border.

KTX

There is a depot for Korea Train Express (KTX) trains along the Gyeongui Line at Haengsin.
The line may see more KTX service after the upgrade for 230 km/h considered in the government's strategic plan for 2020.






