[[Parson Weems]]

CATEGORIES: 1759 births, 1825 deaths, George Washington, People from Anne Arundel County, Maryland, American writers

Mason Locke Weems (October 11, 1759 – May 23, 1825), generally known as Parson Weems, was an American book agent and author.  He is best known as the source of some of the apocryphal stories about George Washington. The famous tale of the cherry tree ("I cannot tell a lie, I did it with my little hatchet") is included in The Life of Washington (1800), Weems' most famous work. This nineteenth-century bestseller depicted Washington's virtues and provided an entertaining and morally instructive tale for the youth of the young nation. "the Story of George Washington and the Colt a True Story?" Teachinghistory.

Biography

Weems was born on October 11, 1759 in Anne Arundel County, Maryland. He studied theology in London and was ordained in the Protestant Episcopal Church in 1784. He worked as a minister in Maryland in various capacities from 1784 to 1792. Financial hardship forced Weems to seek additional employment, and he began working as a traveling book agent. Weems married Frances Ewell in 1795 and established a household in Dumfries, Virginia. He had a small bookstore in Dumfries that now houses the Weems–Botts Museum, but he continued to travel extensively, selling books and preaching.W. "Mason Locke Weems" American Historians, 1607–1865. Ed. Clyde Norman Wilson. Dictionary of Literary Biography Vol. 30. Detroit: Gale Research, 1984. From Literature Resource Center.
Dumfries is not far from Pohick Church, part of Truro Parish, in Lorton, Virginia, where both George Washington and his father Augustine had worshipped in pre-Revolutionary days. Weems would later inflate this Washington connection and promote himself as the former "rector of Mount-Vernon parish".
Other notable works by Weems include Life of General Francis Marion (1805); Life of Benjamin Franklin, with Essays (1817); and Life of William Penn (1819). He was an accomplished violinist.
After the death of his father-in-law, Colonel Jessie Ewell (1743 - 1805), Weems assumed the Ewell family estate, Bel Air, located in Prince William County, Virginia, to partially satisfy debts owed to Weems.  In 1808, Weems and his family moved into Bel Air, where he lived until his death.  While on travel in Beaufort, South Carolina, Weems died on May 23, 1825 of unspecified causes. He is buried at Bel Air.historicprincewilliam.html

Influence and historical reliability

The New York Times has described Weems as one of the "early hagiographers" of American literature "who elevated the Swamp Fox, Francis Marion, into the American pantheon and helped secure a place there for George Washington".
Weems' name would probably be forgotten today, had it not been for the tension between the liveliness of his narratives, contrasted with the "... Another dubious anecdote found in the Weems biography is that of Washington's prayer during the winter at Valley Forge.  The alleged feat was recapitulated in 1936 by the renowned professional baseball pitcher Walter Johnson.coinbooks.html

The exaltation of Washington

The exalted esteem in which the founding fathers, and especially George Washington, were held by 19th-century Americans seems quaintly exaggerated to their 21st-century counterparts; but that Washington was so regarded is undisputed.  The acme of this esteem is found on the ceiling of the United States Capitol Building in the form of Brumidi's fresco The Apotheosis of Washington.
Weems' A History of the Life and Death, Virtues and Exploits of General George Washington,  According to this account, publicly his subject was ".....;" furthermore, at a level above that "..."   With this hyperbole, Weems elevated Washington to the Augustan level of the god "Jupiter Conservator Orbis"  (that is, "Jupiter, Conservator of the Empire", later rendered "Jupiter, Savior of the World").

The cherry-tree anecdote

Arguably the most famous (or infamous) of the exaggerated or invented anecdotes is that of the cherry tree, attributed by Weems to ".....,"  who referred to young George as "cousin".virginia.html CHAPTER II: BIRTH AND EDUCATION

Popular Culture

In 1911, Lawrence C. Wroth authored Parson Weems; a biographical and critical study; it was his first book.
He appears in the 2012 video game Assassin's Creed III.

Notes

Sources

Further reading


