[[List of emperors of the Qing dynasty]]

CATEGORIES: Lists of Chinese monarchs, Qing dynasty emperors

The Qing dynasty (1644–1912) was the last imperial dynasty of China. It was officially founded in 1636 in what is now Northeast China, but only succeeded the Ming dynasty in China proper in 1644. The Qing period ended when the imperial clan (surnamed Aisin Gioro) abdicated in February 1912, a few months after a military uprising had started the Xinhai Revolution (1911) that led to the foundation of the Republic of China (1912–1949).
Nurhaci (1559–1626), khan of the Jurchens, founded the "Later Jin" in 1616 in reference to the Jurchen Jin dynasty (1115–1234) that had once reigned over north China. His son and successor Hong Taiji (1592–1643) renamed his people "Manchu" in 1635 and changed the name of Nurhaci's state from "Later Jin" to "Qing" in 1636. Hong Taiji was the real founder of Qing imperial institutions. He was the first to adopt the title of "emperor" (huangdi) and founded an Imperial Ancestral Temple in the Qing capital Mukden in 1636. After the Qing captured Beijing in 1644 and appropriated the Ming Ancestral Temple, from 1648 on, Nurhaci was worshiped there as Qing "Taizu", a temple name reserved for dynastic founders.
Like their Ming (1368–1644) predecessors—but unlike the emperors of earlier dynasties like the Han (206 BCE–220 CE), Tang (618–907), and Song (960–1276)—Qing emperors used only one era name ("Shunzhi", "Qianlong", "Guangxu", etc.) for their entire reign, and are most commonly known by that name. Starting with Nurhaci, there were thirteen Qing rulers. Following the capture of Beijing in 1644, the Shunzhi emperor (r. 1643–1661) became the first of the eleven Qing sovereigns to rule over China proper. At 61 years, the reign of the Kangxi emperor (r. 1661–1722) was the longest, though his grandson Qianlong (r. 1735–1796) would have reigned even longer if he had not purposely ceded the throne to the Jiaqing emperor (r. 1796–1820) in order not to reign longer than Kangxi. Qing emperors succeeded each other from father to son until the Tongzhi emperor (r. 1861–1874), the eleventh Qing ruler, died childess in 1874. The last two emperors were chosen by Empress Dowager Cixi from other branches of the imperial clan.

Succession

Unlike the Ming emperors, who named their eldest son heir apparent and forbade other sons from participating in politics, the Qing monarchs did not choose their successors according to primogeniture.
Shunzhi, who died of smallpox in 1661, chose his third son Xuanye as successor because he had survived smallpox.
To avoid such struggles in the future, Yongzheng designed a system by which the living emperor would choose his successor in advance and on merit, but would keep his choice secret until his deathbed.
When Zaichun, the Tongzhi Emperor, died heirless in 1874, his mother Empress Dowager Cixi was the one who selected the next emperor. But instead of making the deceased emperor adopt an heir from the generation below himself (in this case this would have been a nephew of the Tongzhi Emperor) as the rules of imperial succession dictated, she picked one from the same generation.

Regents and empresses dowager

Qing succession and inheritance policies made it difficult for empresses and their relatives to build power at court, as they had in the Han dynasty for example.
The reign of the Shunzhi emperor ended when he died of smallpox in 1661 at the age of 22.
For almost 200 years, the Qing empire was governed by adult emperors. In the last fifty years of the dynasty—from the death of the Xianfeng Emperor in 1861 to the final abdication of the child emperor Puyi in 1912—the imperial position again became vulnerable to the power of regents, empress dowagers, imperial uncles, and eunuchs. She was the one who chose Guangxu's successor the child Puyi, whose regent was his father Zaifeng, Prince Chun.

Multiple appellations

Like the emperors of previous dynasties, Qing monarchs were known by several names, which were to be used in different circumstances.

Era name

An emperor's era name was chosen at the beginning of his reign to reflect the political concerns of the court at the time. Because of this discrepancy between the first day of an era and the day of an emperor's accession, most emperors first reigned under their predecessor's era name.
Like the emperors of the Ming dynasty, Qing monarchs used only one reign era name and are usually known by that name, as when we speak of the "Qianlong emperor" (r. 1735–1795) or the "Guangxu emperor" (r. 1875–1908).
Reign names are usually left untranslated, but some scholars occasionally gloss them when they think these names have a special significance. Historian Pamela Crossley explains that Hong Taiji's first era name Tiancong 天聰 (abkai sure in Manchu) referred to a "capacity to transform" supported by Heaven, and that his second one Chongde 崇德 (wesihun erdemungge) meant the achievement of this transformation.
An era name was used to record dates, usually in the format "Reign-name Xth year, Yth month, Zth day" (sometimes abridged as X/Y/Z by modern scholars). Qing era names were also used on the coins that were cast in each reign.

Personal name

As in previous dynasties, the emperor's personal name became taboo after his accession.
When the Yongzheng emperor, whose generation was the first in which all imperial sons shared a generational character as in Chinese clans, acceded the throne, he made all his brothers change the first character of their name from "Yin" 胤 to "Yun" 允 to avoid the taboo.
Later emperors found other ways to diminish the inconvenience of naming taboos. The Jiaqing Emperor (r. 1796–1820), whose personal name was Yongyan 永琰, replaced the very common first character of his personal name (yong 永, meaning "forever") with an obscure one (顒) that was also pronounced "yong".
In accordance with Manchu practice, Qing emperors rarely used their clan name Aisin Gioro.

Posthumous titles

=Temple name=

After their death, emperors were given a temple name and a honorific name under which they would be worshiped at the Imperial Ancestral Temple. On the spirit tablets that were displayed there, the temple name was followed by the honorific name, as in "Shizu Zhang huangdi" for the Shunzhi Emperor and "Taizong Wen huangdi" for Hong Taiji. As dynastic founder, Nurhaci ("Taizu") became the focal ancestor in the main hall of the temple.), which were compiled at the end of each reign, retrospectively referred to emperors by their temple names.
Hong Taiji created the Qing ancestral cult in 1636 when he assumed the title of emperor.
The last emperor of a dynasty usually did not receive a temple name because his descendants were no longer in power when he died, and thus could not perpetuate the ancestral cult.

=Honorific posthumous name=

After death emperors were given an honorific posthumous title that reflected their ruling style. Nurhaci's posthumous name was originally the "Martial Emperor" (武黃帝 wǔ huángdì)—to reflect his military exploits—but in 1662 it was changed to "Highest Emperor" (高皇帝 gāo huángdì), that is, "the emperor from whom all others descend."

List of emperors

This is a complete list of the emperors of the Qing dynasty. These emperors were usually enthroned on an auspicious day soon after the death of the previous monarch. With two exceptions (Jiaqing and Guangxu), they reigned under their predecessor's era name until the following New Year. The date that appears under "Dates of reign" indicates the first day of the lunisolar year following the death of the previous emperor, which is when the new emperor's era name came into use. The number of years indicated in the same column is the number of years in which that era name was used. Because of discrepancies between the western and the Chinese calendar, this number does not perfectly correspond to the number of years in which an emperor was on the throne.
Since posthumous titles and temple names were often shared by emperors of different dynasties, to avoid confusion they are usually preceded by the dynastic name. The Qianlong emperor, for instance, should be referred to as Qing Gaozong rather than just Gaozong. The table, however, omits the term "Qing", because it is understood that all the emperors listed were from that dynasty. Because each emperor's posthumous name was extremely long—that of the Shunzhi Emperor, for instance, was "Titian longyun dingtong jianji yingrui qinwen xianwu dade honggong zhiren chunxiao Zhang huangdi" 體天隆運定統建極英睿欽文顯武大德弘功至仁純孝章皇帝—the table only shows the short form. 163 of the Zhonghua shuju edition.
Except for the last emperor Puyi, all portraits are official court portraits. All dates in the table are in the Gregorian calendar.



Notes

Works cited


