[[Americana (The Offspring album)]]

CATEGORIES: The Offspring albums, 1998 albums, English-language albums, Columbia Records albums, Albums produced by Dave Jerden

Americana is the fifth studio album by the American punk rock band The Offspring, released on November 17, 1998 (see 1998 in music). Following a worldwide tour in support of its previous album, Ixnay on the Hombre (1997), The Offspring commenced work on a new album. The music on the album marked a change, expanding their sound and exploring more pop punk elements.
Americana was a huge commercial success, debuting at number six on the Billboard 200 with around 175,000 copies sold in its first week with over 9 million copies certified, while going 5x platinum in the United States for 5 million copies shipped. The album contains the hit singles "Pretty Fly (for a White Guy)", "Why Don't You Get a Job?" and "The Kids Aren't Alright" being the band's 3 biggest hits to date all crossing over from mainstream rock and alt-rock radio to Top 40 pop radio stations and sharing the similar success to the singles from Smash. "She's Got Issues" was the last single from the album and it only received some moderate success and it was not as popular or successful as its 3 prior hit singles making the song an unsuccessful finish for the album. The singles (except "She's Got Issues") can also be heard on the band's Greatest Hits compilation.
The Compact Disc version of the album also featured, "The Meaning Of Life" music video from the 1997 album,"Ixnay On the Hombre" playable on DVD ROM. 
Americana was nominated for the 1999 MTV Europe Music Awards for Best Album, but lost to Boyzone's By Request. The Offspring supported the album with a worldwide tour and appeared at the infamous Woodstock 1999, where their performance was broadcast live on pay-per-view television.

Background and recording

After the unexpected success of Smash (1994), The Offspring were signed to Columbia Records in 1996, releasing the fourth studio album Ixnay on the Hombre (1997) to moderate success. Although Ixnay on the Hombre was not as well received as Smash, it managed simultaneous gold and platinum certification in the United States in April 1997. After touring in support of Ixnay on the Hombre, The Offspring began writing new material for their next album. Frontman Dexter Holland told Rolling Stone in August 1998 that, "I wanted to write a record that wasn't a radical departure from what we've done before. I feel like we have managed to change stuff up from Ignition to Smash to Ixnay. We're in a place where we more or less set the boundaries where we can do a lot of stuff without having to stretch it out farther ... and do a swing song or something."
One of the songs, "Pay the Man", was actually recorded during the making of Ixnay on the Hombre, but was left out because it sounded too different from anything else the band had currently made, in a dark, psychedelic rock/heavy metal sound, comparable to stoner rock. The structure of the song more resembles progressive rock (having no repetitive sections, and no continuous musical theme). The chorus melody is reused on this album on the song "Walla Walla."

Music

Americana contains themes of unhappy American lifestyles.  Speaking of the album shortly after its release, Holland explained, "The songs on Americana aren't condemnations, they're short stories about the state of things and what we see going on around us.  We want to expose the darker side of our culture. It may look like an episode of Happy Days out there in America, but it feels more like Twin Peaks."

Release and reception

Americana was released on November 17, 1998 and peaked at number 2 on the Billboard 200 album chart,
The album received positive reviews, Michael Gallucci of Allmusic described the album as a "raucous ride through America as seen through the eyes of a weary, but still optimistic, young kid". Gallucci praised the music as "a hearty combination of poppy punk" and a "blend of salsa and alterna-rock sounds", stating the band's music was taking a different direction. The album received a rating of three out of five stars, while "Pretty Fly (for a White Guy)", "Why Don't You Get a Job?", "The Kids Aren't Alright" and "She's Got Issues" earned The Offspring its heaviest airplay on MTV and radio stations to date.

Packaging

The album's cover art, illustrated by Frank Kozik, features a blonde boy seated on a swing holding a sand flea. Pictures in the booklet are also illustrations for the songs and these pictures are also used on the single covers. In the booklet of the album, where the lyrics to "Pay the Man" are, there is an image that is extremely similar to a design of a poster for the No Control tour, featuring Bad Religion. Considering both pieces of art are by Kozik, it is likely that The Offspring requested this piece of art to be used in the booklet. The typeface used for the band's logo on the album cover, Friz Quadrata bold, has also been used by Bad Religion.
Some pressings of Americana are also enhanced CDs and contain the karaoke videos of "Staring at the Sun", "Pretty Fly (for a White Guy)" and "Why Don't You Get a Job?", and the previous MTV music videos from its predecessor, Ixnay on the Hombre.

Track listing

All songs written and composed by Dexter Holland, except where noted.BMI Entry  

Chart positions

=Australia=

Singles

=North America=

=Australia=

End of decade charts

Charts and certifications

Charts

Certifications





Personnel

The Offspring

Other musicians



General references

Notes




