[[Menorah (Temple)]]

CATEGORIES: Jewish ritual objects, Tabernacle and Jerusalem Temples, Hebrew words and phrases, Jewish symbols, Candelabra, Gold objects

The menorah () is described in the Bible as the seven-lamp (six branches) ancient Hebrew lampstand made of pure gold and used in the portable sanctuary set up by Moses in the wilderness and later in the Temple in Jerusalem. Fresh olive oil of the purest quality was burned daily to light its lamps. The menorah has been a symbol of Judaism since ancient times and is the emblem on the coat of arms of the modern state of Israel.

Construction

This devices' purpose was to focus the light emitted by the seven oil lamps and at the same time funnel the smoke of the service toward the Ark which is held up 7 1/2 feet up by means of its poles interfaced with (the middle pole "SHOOTS through from end to end") vertical blind style. This gold was beaten into a thin sheet and bent around into a cone-like shape and hammered and pressed and embossed around into a circular 4 1/2 foot tall combination table cover and light reflector. Pounded into the gold the similitude of an almond branch with its stem or (shaft) and six branches {3 per side) wrapped around and containing 3 bowls on each branch. The central stem having 4 bowls bent in together with the 18 in the branches totaling 22 bowls in all. Looking down these bowls form Gods STAR or LOGOEXODUS of menorah willow consisted of a base and a shaft with six branches, beaten out of solid gold. The six branches rose to the height of the central shaft so that all seven lamps at their apexes were in a straight line where it was taken out of fashion by the Romans.
The Hebrew Bible, or Torah, states that God revealed the design for the menorah to Moses and describes the construction of the menorah as follows ():
 
 31 And you must make a lamp-stand of pure gold. Of hammered work the lamp-stand is to be made. Hammered into a sheet and hammered around a sphere to form a rounded overall shape with a flat bottom edge to support it and the top bent around the sphere to complete its shape. Into this one piece of gold (foil) he then inscribed and tapped the directed image-work. (Exodus). Exodus. The duel purpose of this object appears to be the containment and deflection of smoke from the table up into the Ark since it sits kitty corner over the table. The Ark is of course held up 7 1/2 feet up into the smoke by means of its 2 staves interacting with the middle "bar shooting thru the standing vertical bars"  Rashi,Exodus 25:32 Ibn Ezra, and MaimonidesMaimonides depicted them as straight in two separate manuscript drawings. But see Seth Mandel's alternative interpretation below. (according to his son Avraham),Commentary on Exodus, ch 7 held they were straight; no other Jewish authority expresses an opinion on the subject.Mandel, Seth The shape of the Menorah of the Temple Avodah Mailing List, Vol 12 Num 65
Until 2009, the earliest preserved representation of the menorah of the Temple was depicted in a frieze on the Arch of Titus, commemorating his triumphal parade in Rome following the destruction of Jerusalem in the year 70 CE.
In 2009, however, the ruins of a synagogue with pottery dating from before the destruction of the Second Temple were discovered under land in Magdala owned by the Legionaries of Christ, who had intended to construct a center for women's studies.regnumchristi.phtml?se=364&ca=118&te=782&id=27331  Inside that synagogue's ruins was discovered a rectangular stone, which had on its surface, among other ornate carvings, a depiction of the seven-lamp menorah differing markedly from the depiction on the Arch of Titus, probably carved by an eyewitness to the actual menorah present at the time in the Temple at Jerusalem.  This menorah has arms which are polygonal, not rounded, and the base is not graduated but triangular.
Representations of the seven lamp artifact have been found on tombs and monuments dating from the 1st century as a frequently used symbol of Judaism and the Jewish people.
It has been noted that the shape of the menorah bears a certain resemblance to that of the plant Salvia palaestina.JTS Taste of Torah commentary, 18 June 2005
Contrary to some modern designs, the ancient menorah did not contain anything resembling seven candles, as candles were unknown in the Middle East until about 400CE.

Use

The lamps of the menorah were lit daily from fresh, consecrated olive oil and burned from evening until morning, according to .
The Roman-Jewish historian Flavius Josephus states that three of the seven lamps were allowed to burn during the day also;

History and fate

The original menorah was made for the Tabernacle, and the Bible records it as being present until the Israelites crossed the Jordan river. When the Tabernacle is pitched in Shiloh () some centuries later.
During the restoration of the Temple worship after the 70-year captivity in Babylon, no mention is made of the return of the menorah but only of "vessels" (). Since the Temple was an enclosed place with no natural light, some means of illumination must have existed.
The Book of Maccabees records that Antiochus Epiphanes took away the lampstands (plural) when he invaded and robbed the Temple (). There is no biblical mention of the fate of the menorah.
The fate of the menorah used in the Second Temple is recorded by Josephus, who states that it was brought to Rome and carried along during the triumph of Vespasian and Titus. The menorah was deposited afterwards in the Temple of Peace in Rome.
Most likely, the menorah was looted by the Vandals in the sacking of Rome in 455 CE, and taken to their capital, Carthage.  From the Online Library of Liberty. The J. B. Bury edition, in 12 volumes.) The Byzantine army under General Belisarius might have removed it in 533 and brought it to Constantinople. According to Procopius, it was carried through the streets of Constantinople during Belisarius' triumphal procession. Procopius adds that the object was later sent back to Jerusalem where there is no record of it, although it could have been destroyed when Jerusalem was pillaged by the Persians in 614.

Symbolism According to Christians

The Holy Bible KJV New Testament, describes the menorah as holding the "lights" of the seven churches. They as listed are; Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamum, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia and Laodicea. Many of the letters of The New Testament are written to these bodies... So, Ephesians 3:4 New International Version (NIV)
4 In reading this, then, you will be able to understand my insight into the mystery of Christ,
The letters concern their "light" or condition in practice through God's Holy Spirit.
The menorah symbolized the ideal of universal enlightenment. ISBN 965-7108-92-6 The seven lamps allude to the branches of human knowledge, represented by the six lamps inclined inwards towards, and symbolically guided by, the light of God represented by the central lamp. The menorah also symbolizes the creation in seven days, with the center light representing the Sabbath. It is also said to symbolize the burning bush as seen by Moses on Mount Horeb (). ISBN 978-1-58980-720-4
According to Clement of Alexandria and Philo Judaeus, the seven lamps of the golden menorah represented the seven classical planets in this order: the Moon, Mercury, Venus, the Sun, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn.p.10, Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry by Albert Pike (L.H. Jenkins, 1871 1948)
Kevin Conner has noted of the original menorah, described in Exodus 25, that each of the six tributary branches coming out of the main shaft was decorated with three sets of "cups... shaped like almond blossoms... a bulb and a flower..." (Exodus 25:33, NASB). The main shaft, however, had four sets of blossoms, bulbs and flowers, making a total of twelve units on the shaft (Exodus 25:34). This would create a total of 66 units, which Conner claims is a picture of the completed Christian canon of scripture (containing 66 books). Moreover, Conner notes that the total decorative units on the shaft and three branches equate to 39 (the number of Old Testament books); and the units on the remaining three branches come to 27 (the number of New Testament books).g. Psalms 119:105; Psalms 119:130; cf. Proverbs 6:23).Kevin Conner, The Tabernacle of Moses, City Christian Publishing (1976), p43-44

Hanukkah (Chanukah)

The Menorah is also a symbol closely associated with the Jewish holiday of Hanukkah (Chanukah). According to the Talmud, after the Seleucid desecration of the Jewish Temple in Jerusalem, there was only enough sealed (and therefore not desecrated) consecrated olive oil left to fuel the eternal flame in the Temple for one day. Miraculously, the oil burned for eight days which was enough time to make new pure oil.
The Talmud (Menahot 28b) states that it is prohibited to use a seven-lamp menorah outside of the Temple. The Hanukkah menorah therefore has eight main branches, plus the middle ninth lamp set apart as the shamash (servant) light which is used to kindle the other lights.  This type of menorah is called a hanukiah in Modern Hebrew.

Modern use

Synagogues have a continually lit lamp or light in front of the Ark, where the Torah scroll is kept, called the ner tamid (eternal light). This lamp represents the continually lit ner Elohim of the menorah used in Temple times.
In addition, many synagogues display either a Menorah or an artistic representation of a menorah.
A menorah appears in the coat of arms of the State of Israel, based on the depiction of the menorah on the Arch of Titus.
Sometimes when teaching learners of the Hebrew language, a chart shaped like the seven-lamp menorah is used to help students remember the role of the binyanim of the Hebrew verb.

Temple Institute reconstruction

The Temple Institute has created a life-sized menorah, designed by goldsmith Chaim Odem, intended for use in a future Third Temple,  The Jerusalem Post describes the menorah as made "according to excruciatingly exacting Biblical specifications and prepared to be pressed into service immediately should the need arise.". "More than a Model Menorah"  December 13, 2011  The menorah is made of one talent (interpreted as 45 kg) of 24 karat pure gold, hammered out of a singlar block of solid gold, with decorations based on the depiction of the original in the Arch of Titus and the Temple Institute's interpretation of the relevant religious texts

In other cultures

The kinara is also, like the menorah, a seven candleholder which is associated with the African American festival of Kwanzaa. One candle is lit on each day of the week-long celebration, in a similar manner as the Hanukiah (which was modeled after the menorah) during Hanukkah.
In the Orthodox Church the use of the menorah has been preserved, always standing on or behind the altar in the sanctuary.[ref]
