[[Adios (KMFDM album)]]

CATEGORIES: 1999 albums, KMFDM albums, TVT Records albums

Adios, the eleventh studio album released by KMFDM, was originally conceived as the group's parting shot to its longtime record label, Wax Trax! Records, but it ended up also signaling the break-up of KMFDM itself, at least for a time. Recorded in Seattle, Washington, this was the last album to feature En Esch and Günter Schulz, who both went on to form Slick Idiot. Following the break-up, founding member Sascha Konietzko created the band MDFMK, before reforming KMFDM in 2002 without Esch or Schulz.
The album was released on April 20, 1999, on the same date the Columbine High School massacre took place. Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold, the two perpetrators of the massacre, were both avid KMFDM fans. Eric Harris noted the coincidence of the album's title and release date in his journal."heh, get this. KMFDM's new album is entitled "Adios" and its release date is in April. how fuckin appropriate, a subliminal final "Adios" tribute to Reb and Vodka. thanks KMFDM... I ripped the hell outa the system" -Eric Harris A Columbine Site Retrieved September 17, 2010
A digitally remastered reissue of Adios was released on May 8, 2007, along with Symbols.

Background

The 1990s core of KMFDM (Sascha Konietzko, En Esch, and Günter Schulz) had reunited for the previous album, Symbols, and toured together along with fellow German industrial rock band Rammstein in 1997.  The core line-up was joined on tour by John DeSalvo, Nivek Ogre, and Tim Sköld.  Adios was written almost entirely by Konietzko and Sköld, who became an official member for the band's final release with Wax Trax! Records.  Schulz, who had done significant writing for the previous five albums, acted only as a studio musician, while Esch helped write only a pair of songs.

Release

Adios was released on April 20, 1999, which coincided with the Columbine High School massacre and Adolf Hitler's birthday.

Reception

Adios received positive reviews. Gina Boldman of Allmusic said of the album: "KMFDM sound smoother yet maintain their emotive mayhem in all its glory."

Track listing

Personnel






