[[Magna International]]

CATEGORIES: Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange, Companies listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange, Auto parts suppliers, Automotive companies of Canada, Magna International, Manufacturing companies of Canada, S&P/TSX 60 Index, S&P/TSX Composite Index, Aurora, Ontario, Electric vehicle manufacturers, Companies established in 1957

Magna International Inc. ( Its operating groups include Magna Steyr, Magna Powertrain, Magna Exteriors, Magna Interiors, Magna Seating, Magna Closures, Magna Mirrors, Magna Electronics and Cosma International.
Magna manufactures auto parts that are primarily supplied to General Motors, Ford Motor Company, and Chrysler LLC. In Europe, Magna Steyr holds contracts for the assembly of the Peugeot RCZ and Mini Countryman.magna.
Magna has approximately 125,000 employees in 316 manufacturing operations and 84 product development, engineering and sales centres in 29 countries.  operates under a corporate constitutionMagna Constitution from Magna website which calls for distribution of profits to employees and shareholders. The terms of this contract are "fair enterprise" according to Frank Stronach, company founder.

Capabilities and products

Magna's capabilities include the design, engineering, testing and manufacture of exterior systems, interior systems, seating systems, closure systems, vision systems, powertrain systems, electronic systems, roof systems, body & chassis systems, hybrid & electric vehicle systems, and vehicle engineering & contract assembly. 2011 annual report

History

The company was founded in 1957 by Frank Stronach as "Multimatic" and "Multimatic Motorsports". This company merged with Magna Electronics in 1969, and the combined company became Magna International in 1973.
Magna acquired 80% of New Venture Gear, once a joint venture between General Motors and Chrysler, in September 2004, and combined it into Magna Powertrain. It assumed full ownership in 2007.
Magna purchased CTS Fahrzeug-Dachsysteme, a supplier of convertible roofs, from Porsche in November 2005.
The Sunday Telegraph in London reported January 2007 that Magna International was on a short list of bidders to purchase Aston Martin.canada.html?id=496ec29d-6cc5-4775-a3a7-dcde6508667c Their bid was unsuccessful; the company instead went to a British consortium led by Dave Richards of Prodrive for £479 million.
According to a NPR broadcast on March 23, 2007, Magna showed interest in acquiring the Chrysler division of DaimlerChrysler. However on 14 May 2007, it was announced that Cerberus Capital Management had won the acquisition bid for $7.4 billion.
In April 2008, Magna's wholly owned subsidiary, Cosma International, announced that they were buying the Ogihara America Corp. stamping plant in Birmingham, Alabama, that makes parts for Mercedes-Benz and other automakers.

Electric vehicles

In October 2008, Magna Electronics acquired BluWav Systems LLC, a Michigan-based company that focused on propulsion and energy management for electric vehicles and trains. Together with the electric- and hybrid-vehicle capabilities of other Magna groups, the company began to assemble all of its electric and hybrid propulsion activities into one entity. On August 31, 2010, Magna E-Cars Systems
One of Magna E-Car Systems' early successes is supplying the powertrain on the upcoming Ford Focus Electric vehicle. This project started in 2008. A few months after a round of preliminary discussions with Ford Motor Company with regard to all-electric (BEV) vehicles, Magna made a surprise visit
The risk behind the initiative is that only a few so called "compliance cars" will be sold to cope with Corporate Average Fuel Economy-regulations.

Political connections

The firm is also known for its political connections, such as having former Premiers of Ontario on its board, as well as connections with numerous other former politicians. Some politicians who have had notable positions with Magna include Mike Harris and Brian Tobin, retired Premiers of Ontario and Newfoundland & Labrador, respectively, and the latter also a once prominent federal minister of Fisheries and Oceans. In 1988, Frank Stronach ran as a candidate for parliament for the federal Liberal Party, but was defeated.
Magna International has also been noted for its connections to the Ontario Progressive Conservative Party and the Ontario Liberal Party. In 2003, the Progressive Conservatives under Ernie Eves presented the provincial budget at a Magna plant leading to accusations
In 2010, Spanish National Court Prosecutor Jose "Pepe" Grinda Gonzalez alleged that elements within the Russian Mafia had acquired a significant share in Magna International Cable Drum  Spain Details its Strategy to Combat the Russian Mafia.

Restatement

On May 18, 2000, the company restated its net income and earnings per share (previously $109 million and $1.22 respectively) due to an accounting policy change relating to design and engineering and pre-production start-up costs.








