[[Post Office Ltd]]

CATEGORIES: Government-owned companies of the United Kingdom, Postal system of the United Kingdom, Retail companies established in 1986, Retail companies of the United Kingdom, Royal Mail, 1986 establishments in the United Kingdom

Post Office Ltd (

History

The Post Office, along with postal service Royal Mail, was formerly part of the General Post Office. Post Office Counters Ltd was created as a wholly owned subsidiary of Royal Mail in 1986, becoming Post Office Ltd in 2001.
Post Office Ltd has in recent years announced losses; a reported £102 million in 2006. This has raised many concerns in the media regarding Post Office Ltd's ability as a company to operate efficiently.timesonline.co.ece, The Times article analysing Post Office losses. Plans to cut the £150m-a-year subsidy for rural post offices led to the announcement that 2,500 local Post Offices were to be closed. This announcement resulted in a backlash from local communities that relied on the service.
In 2007, the government gave a £1.7 billion subsidy to Royal Mail Group so that it could turn a profit by 2011. This was to be used to invest across the whole network of Royal Mail, Post Office Ltd and Parcelforce. 85 Crown Post Offices were closed, 70 of which were sold to W H Smith. This followed a trial of six Post Office Outlets in W H Smith stores. W H Smith was expected to make up to £2.5 million extra in annual profit. 2,500 sub-Post Offices closed between 2008 and 2009. Redundancy packages were provided from public funding, (subpostmasters were paid over 20 months salary, roughly £65,000 each).publications.uk/pa/cm200607/cmselect/cmtrdind/593/593.pdf
In November 2010, the government committed £1.34 billion of funding up to 2015 to Post Office Ltd to enable it to modernise the Post Office network.
As part of the Postal Services Act 2011, Post Office Ltd became independent of Royal Mail Group on 1 April 2012. The Act also contained the option for Post Office Ltd to become a mutual organisation in the future.Building a Mutual Post Office Department of Business, Innovation and Skills (retrieved 8 December 2012)
On 8 February 2013, Post Office Ltd announced it was planning to move around 70 of its Crown Post Offices into shops. This would reduce the Crown network, which it stated was losing £40 million a year, to around 300.
On 27 November 2013, the government committed an additional £640 million of funding for 2015 to 2018 to allow Post Office Ltd to complete its network modernisation.

Services

There are currently around 11,500 Post Office branches across the UK, of which 370 are directly managed by Post Office Ltd (known as Crown Offices). The majority of other branches are either run by various franchise partners or local subpostmaster or operators (who may be members of the National Federation of SubPostmasters or the CWU Postmasters Branch), as "sub-postoffices".
The Post Office has a wide variety of services throughout the network of branches. Products and services available vary throughout the network; main post offices generally provide the full range of services.
In towns, Post Offices are usually open from around 09:00 to 17:30 from Monday to Friday and from 09:00 to 12:30 on Saturday. In some country areas, opening hours are much shorter - perhaps only four hours per week. In some villages an outreach service is provided, this can be in a van, village hall, village shop etc. Most Post Offices are shut on Sundays and Bank Holidays.

Postal services

The Post Office provides information on services and accepts postal items and payment on behalf of the two collection and delivery divisions of Royal Mail Group, Royal Mail and Parcelforce. These include a variety of ordinary and guaranteed services both for delivery within the United Kingdom and to international destinations. Postage stamps (including commemorative stamps and other philatelic items) are sold, while applications for redirection of mail are accepted on behalf of Royal Mail.
Post Office Local Collect is a scheme whereby undelivered mail can be redirected at customer request to a post office for convenient collection. Poste restante mail can also be held for collection by people travelling.

Banking services

Personal banking services are offered on behalf of a number of "partner banks" that the Post Office has agreements with. Although different services are available on behalf of different institutions, these may include cash withdrawals, paying in cash and cheques, balance enquiries and cheque encashment. Some post offices also have cash machines, mainly provided by Bank of Ireland.
The Post Office Card Account is a basic bank account allowing customers to collect benefit payments. Most other basic accounts can also be accessed through post offices.  The Card Account cannot be accessed anywhere other than a Post Office Counter or ATM at a Post Office.  These accounts are limited to Department of Work & Pensions deposits of benefit payments and HMRC Tax Credits/Child Benefit.  Housing Benefit from the local Council for example, must be paid elsewhere.  If the account remains dormant for one year, it is closed.  These bank accounts are run by J.P. Morgan Europe Ltd on behalf of the Post Office.  To open an account, you must be in receipt of benefits and a referral is made via the Jobcentre Plus.
Business banking services are also offered, mainly through Santander (the  successor to Alliance & Leicester Commercial Bank, prior to that the Post Office Girobank).

Savings products

The Post Office has long been an agent for National Savings and Investments (NS&I), which was originally the Post Office Savings Bank but is now a wholly separate institution. Since November 2011, only Premium Bonds can be bought in Post Offices; all other products are available by telephone, online and post.
In recent years the Post Office has launched its own range of branded savings products, which are sometimes in competition with those offered by NS&I. The most recently introduced, in September 2008, is a Post Office ISA. Also on offer is an instant access account (Instant Saver), while issues of two fixed term investments (Five Year Saver and Growth Bond) are periodically available. The Post Office are also a provider for the Child Trust Fund.

Telephony

The Post Office operates as a provider of a home landline telephone service (branded as Post Office HomePhone) and has recently added broadband internet to its portfolio.
Mobile phone E Top-up is available on behalf of most networks. Post Office branded prepay phonecards are available, offering potential savings particularly on international call rates.

Insurance and financial services

The Post Office is now seeking to establish itself as a financial service provider and provides a number of branded insurance products including for cars, vans and motorbikes; home insurance (buildings and/or contents); pet insurance and travel insurance. Life insurance, over 50s life cover and lifestyle protection insurance are also available.
The Post Office is now offering itself as a mortgage lender and also offers personal loans, although the latter are now marketed purely through the company's website and not through the branch network. The first loans, provided by Bank of Ireland, launched in 2004.

Bill payments

A number of bill payments can be accepted on behalf of a variety of organisations including utilities, local authorities and others. These can be in the form of automated payments (barcoded bills, swipe cards, key charging) or manual transactions through the Alliance & Leicester Transcash system.copy-house.co.pdf The name Transcash was formerly used by Girobank. The Transcash service is not advertised and a search for "Transcash" on the Post Office website returns no results.  However, Transcash forms (still marked "Girobank") were still  available at Post Office counters in October 2010.

Government services

A Check and send service is available for the government department HM Passport Office and the Post Office used to do a check and send with DVLA (for the photocard driving licence), they now offer a photocard driving license renewal service in some Post Office's around the country.postoffice.co. Selected branches issue international driving permits.

Post Office Saving Stamps

Post Office savings stamps were first introduced by Henry Fawcett in the 1880s but were phased out in the 1960s. These were re-introduced in August 2004 because of consumer demand. In 2010 saving stamps were withdrawn and replaced by the Budget Card. In 2011 it was announced that Post Office saving stamps would have to be redeemed by 28 February 2011, although any customers who missed the deadline can post their saving stamps to a central Post Office location where the stamps will be validated. A payout letter will be sent to the customer that can be exchanged for cash at their local branch (ID required).

Other services

Post Offices not open to the public

Six post office branches are not open to the public:






