[[Miguel de Icaza]]

CATEGORIES: 1972 births, GNOME developers, Living people, Mexican bloggers, Mexican computer programmers, National Autonomous University of Mexico alumni, People from Mexico City, Technology evangelists, Free software programmers

Miguel de Icaza (born c. 1972) is a Mexican free software programmer, best known for starting the GNOME and Mono projects.

Biography

Early years

Miguel de Icaza was born in Mexico City and studied at the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de México (UNAM) but never received a degree. He came from a family of scientists in which his father is a physicist and his mother a biologist. He started writing free software in 1992.

Early software career

One of the earliest pieces of software he wrote for Linux was the Midnight Commander file manager, a text-mode file manager.
He worked with David S. Miller on the Linux SPARC port and wrote several of the video and network drivers in the port, as well as the libc ports to the platform.
In summer of 1997, he was interviewed by Microsoft for a job in the Internet Explorer Unix team (to work on a SPARC port), but lacked the university degree required to obtain a work H-1B visa. He declared in an interview that he tried to persuade his interviewers to free the IE code even before Netscape did so with their own browser.microsoft.asp?url=/library/en-us/dndotnet/html/deicazainterview.asp

GNOME, Ximian, Xamarin, and Mono

De Icaza started the GNOME project with Federico Mena in August 1997 to create a completely free desktop environment and component model for Linux and other Unix-like operating systems. He also created the GNOME spreadsheet program, Gnumeric.
In 1999, de Icaza, along with Nat Friedman, co-founded Helix Code, a GNOME-oriented free software company that employed a large number of other GNOME hackers. In 2001, Helix Code, later renamed Ximian, announced the Mono Project, to be led by de Icaza, with the goal to implement Microsoft's new . In August 2003, Ximian was acquired by Novell. There, de Icaza was Vice President of Developer Platform.
In May 2011, de Icaza started Xamarin to replace MonoTouch and Mono for Android after Novell was bought by Attachmate and the projects were abandoned. However, shortly afterwards Xamarin and Novell reached an agreement where Xamarin took over the development and sales of these products. (2011-07-18) Xamarin mobile products available now! | Xamarin Blog. Blog.com. Retrieved on 2013-09-19.

Advocacy of Microsoft technologies

De Icaza endorsed Microsoft's Office Open XML (OOXML) document standard, disagreeing with a lot of the widespread criticism in the open source and free software community.
He has also been a longtime advocate of using Mono - a free software implementation of Microsoft's .  This has raised much disagreement due to the patents that Microsoft holds on, and related to, the .
For advocating Microsoft technologies, de Icaza was criticized by Richard Stallman on the Software Freedom Day 2009 as "Traitor to the Free Software Community".

Linux desktop criticism

In August 2012, de Icaza criticized the Linux desktop as "killed by Apple". De Icaza specifically criticized a generally developer-focused culture, lack of backward compatibility and fragmentation among the various Linux distributions.

Awards and recognition

Miguel de Icaza has received the Free Software Foundation 1999 Award for the Advancement of Free Software, the MIT Technology Review Innovator of the Year Award 1999, and was named one of Time magazine's 100 innovators for the new century in September 2000.
In early 2010 he received a Microsoft MVP Award.
In March 2010, he was named as the fifth in the "Most Powerful Voices in Open Source" by MindTouch.

Personal life

De Icaza has had cameo appearances in the 2001 motion pictures Antitrust and The Code.
He married Brazilian Maria Laura Soares da Silva (now Maria Laura de Icaza) in 2003.
De Icaza is critical of the actions of the state of Israel towards the Palestinians in the Middle East and has blogged about Israel being a "terrorist state", echoing the same statements made by Noam Chomsky. - Miguel de Icaza. Tirania. Retrieved on 2013-09-19.: Information Clearing House - ICH. Informationclearinghouse. Retrieved on 2013-09-19.





Interviews


