[[Amir Khusrow]]

CATEGORIES: Hazara people, Urdu poets, Indian poets, Indian Muslims, Persian-language poets, Indian Sufis, Sufi poets, Delhi Sultanate, Muslim writers, Performers of Sufi music, Hindi poets, Medieval writers, 1253 births, 1325 deaths, Chishti Order, People from Etah district, Macaronic language, Qawwali, World Digital Library related

Ab'ul Hasan Yamīn ud-Dīn Khusrow (1253–1325 CE) Hindi अमीर खुसरो, (
He is regarded as the "father of Qawwali" (a devotional music form of the Sufis in the Indian subcontinent). Introduced the Ghazal style of song into India. These music styles are still used widely in India and Pakistan. Powers. Sufi Music of India. Sound, Context and Meaning in Qawwali. Journal of the American Oriental Society, Vol. 109, No. 4 (Oct. – Dec. 1989), pp. 702–705. . He is also credited with introducing Persian, Arabic and Turkish elements into Indian classical music and was the originator of the khayal and tarana styles of music.
Khusrow was an expert in many styles of Persian poetry which were developed in medieval Persia, from Khāqānī's qasidas to Nizami's  khamsa. He used 11 metrical schemes with 35 distinct divisions. He has written in many verse forms including Ghazal, Masnavi, Qata, Rubai, Do-Beti and Tarkibhand. His contribution to the development of the g͟hazal, is significant.A. Schimmel, "Amīr k̲oṣrow Dehlawī", in Encyclopaedia Iranica, Online Edition, 2007,

Early life and background

Amīr Khusrow was born in Patiyali in Etah, Uttar Pradesh. His father, Amīr Saif-ud-Dīn Mahmūd, was a Turkic officer and a member of the Lachin tribe of Transoxania, themselves belonging to the Kara-Khitais.A. Schimmel, "Amīr Ḵoṣrow Dehlawī", in Encyclopaedia Iranica, Online Edition, 2007, (LINK)"Амир Хосров Дехлеви", Great Soviet Encyclopedia, Moscow, 1970Dr. Iraj Bashiri. "Amir Khusrau Dihlavi". 2001 At the invasion of Genghis Khan, Saif-ud-Din migrated from his hometown Kesh, near Samarkand, to Balkah. Saif-ud-Din was then the chieftain of the Hazara. Shams-ud-Din Altamish, the Sultan of Delhi welcomed them to Delhi. He provided shelter to the dislodged princes, artisans, scholars and rich nobles. In 1230, he was granted a fief in the district of Patiali (in Etah District of present Uttar Pradesh).
Amir Saif-ud-Din married Bibi Daulat Naz, who was the daughter of Rawat Arz, the famous war minister of Balban, and belonged to the Rajput tribes of Uttar Pradesh. 219 They had four children, three sons and a daughter. Amir Khusro was one among them born in the year 1252-53 CE at Patiyali (Hazrat Amir khusro Nagar). His father Saif-ud-Din died in 1260 CE.
Khusrow was an intelligent child. He started learning and writing poetry at the age of eight. After the death of his father, he came to Delhi to his maternal grandfather Imadul Mulk's house. In 1271 CE, when Khusrow was 20 years old, his grandfather who was 113 years old died. His mother brought him up after his death.

Career

After Khusrow's grandfather's demise, he joined as a soldier in the Army of Malik Chajju, a nephew of Sultan Balban. This brought his poetry to the attention of the Assembly of the Royal Court where he was honored.
When he was forty seven years old, his mother and brother died.
He wrote these lines in their honour:
"A double radiance left my star this year 
Gone are my brother and my mother, 
My two full moons have set and ceased to Shine 
In one short week through this ill-luck of mine."
Khusro's homage to his mother on death was:
"Where ever the dust of your (mother) feet is found it is like a relic of Paradise for me."
Bughra Khan, son of Balban was invited to listen Amir Khusro. He was impressed and became Khusrow's patron. In 677 A.H/1277 A.D. Bughra Khan was then appointed ruler of Bengal but Amir Khusro decided to return to Delhi.
The eldest son of Khan, Mohd of Balban (who was in Multan) came to Delhi. When he heard about Amir Khusrow he invited him to his court. Finally Khusrow accompanied him to Multan in 679 A.H/1279 A.D. Multan at that period was the gateway to Hind and a center place of knowledge and learning. The caravans of scholars, tradesmen and emissaries transited from Baghdad, Arab, Iran to Delhi via Multan. Amir Khusro says that:
"I tied the belt of service on my waist and put on the cap of companionship for another five years. I imparted lustre to the water of Multan from the ocean of my wits and pleasantries."
In the year 683A.H./1283A.D Jinar Khan a Mongol, invaded India. Khan Mohd was killed in battle. Khusrow wrote the two elegies in grief of his death. At the old age of eighty, King Balban called his second son Bughra Khan from Bengal, but he refused to come back to Delhi. After King Balban's death his grandson Kikabad was made the King of Delhi who was 17 years of age. Khusro remained in his service for two years (686 A.H to 687 A.H/1286 to 1287 A.D.).
After the death of Kikabad, a Turk soldier Jalal ud din Firuz Khilji took power and became the King. He appreciated poetry and invited many poets to his court. Khusrow was honoured and respected in his Darbar and was given his name "Amir Khusrow". He was made secretary to the King "Mushaf-Dar". The darbar life made Amir Khusro focus more on his literary works. Khusro's Ghazals which he composed in quick succession were set to music and were sung by singing girls every night before the king. Khusrow writes about him: 
"The King of the world Jalal ud din, in reward for my infinite pain which I undertook in composing verses, bestowed upon me an unimaginable treasure of wealth."
After Jalal ud din, Alauddin Khilji descended to the throne of Delhi on 22nd Zilhaj 695A.H/1295A.D. Amir Khusro wrote a short auto-biographical Masnavi called "Shah Name mun"—of Alauddin's life. Khusrow in his book "Khazinatul-Futuh" (the treasures of victory) recorded Alauddin's construction works, wars, peace and security, administrative services.
Further in another poetical work Masnavi "Matta-ul-Anwaar" (Fountain of light) consisted of 3310 verses (completed in 15 days) had the theme of "Love of God". The second masnavi, "Shireen" consisted of 4000 verses. The third Masnavi "Laila Majnu" story of Laila and Majnu and their romance. The fourth voluminous Masnavi was "Aina-e-Sikandari" had 4500 verses relating to the heroic deeds of Alexander the Great. The fifth Masnavi was "Hasht Bahisht" related to the events of King Bahram Gaur.
All these works made Amir Khusro a leading luminary in the poetical world. The King Allauddin Khilji was highly pleased by his works and rewarded him handsomely.
After Alauddin Khilji's death, his son Qutub al din Mubarak Shah became the king. Amir Khusro wrote a Masnavi on Mubarak Shah as "Nahsi Pahar" (Nine Skies), a historical poetry relating the events of Mubarak Shah. He classified his poetry in nine chapters, each part is considered as a sky. In the third chapter he wrote a vivd account of India and its environment, seasons, flora and fauna, cultures, scholars etc. He wrote another book in the period of Qutubuddin Mubarak Shah by name "Ejaze Khusravi" consisting of five volumes. When Qutubuddin Mubarak Shah son was born, he prepared the horoscope of child where certain predictions, were made. This horoscope is included in the Masnavi "Saqiana".hazratmehboob-e-elahi.htm#a
After Mubarak Shah, Ghiyath al-Din Tughluq came to the throne. Amir Khusro wrote a historic Masnavi "Tughlaq Nama" about his reign and that of other Tughlaq rulers.
On 3 April 1325 Hazrat Nizamuddin Auliya, Khusrow's teacher died, and after six months Khusrow himself. Khusrow 's tomb is next to that of his teacher in the Nizamuddin Dargah of Delhi.Nizamuddin Auliya

Major life events in chronological order

Khusrow was born in Patiyali in Kasganj district which is also known as Kansiram Nagar near Etah in what is today the state of Uttar Pradesh in northern India. His father Amir Saifuddin came from Balkh in modern day Afghanistan and his mother hailed from Delhi.

Khusrow the royal poet

Khusrow was a prolific classical poet associated with the royal courts of more than seven rulers of the Delhi Sultanate. Through his literary output, Khusrow represents one of the first (recorded) Indian personages with a true multi-cultural or pluralistic identity.

Urdu language and its development

Amir Khusrow was the author of a Khamsa which emulated that of the earlier poet of Persian epics Nizami Ganjavi. His work was considered to be one of the great classics of Persian poetry during the Timurid period in Transoxiana.
He wrote primarily in Persian and Hindustani.  He also wrote a war ballad in Punjabi. In addition, he spoke Arabic and Sanskrit. Hazrat Amir Khusrau of Delhi, 1979, p. 4Islamic Cultural Board. Islamic Culture, 1927, p. 219Amir Khusrau: Memorial Volume, by Amir Khusraw Dihlavi, 1975, p. 98Amir Khusrau: Memorial Volume, by Amir Khusraw Dihlavi, 1975, p. 1G. N. Devy. Indian Literary Criticism: Theory and Interpretation, Orient Longman, Published 2002Amir Khusrau: Memorial Volume, by Amir Khusraw Dihlavi, 1975, p. 1 His poetry is still sung today at Sufi shrines throughout Pakistan and India.

Contributions to Music

Khusrow is credited for the invention of the musical instruments tabla and sitar. The term tabla is derived from an Arabic word, tabl, which means "drum". Sitar is named after a Persian instrument called the setar (meaning "three strings"). The instrument appears to have descended from long-necked lutes taken to India from Central Asia. The first prototype instruments were invented during the Delhi Sultanate period of the 13th/14th centuries when the Persian patrons of music and poetry encouraged innovation in Indian art. The sitar flourished in the 16th and 17th centuries and arrived at its present form in the 18th century. Both these instruments are crucial for India's classical music.britannica.comSitar#World music influence
The development of the Tabla originated from the need to have a drum that could be played from the top in the sitting position to enable more complex rhythm structure's that were required for the new Indian Sufi vocal style of singing/chanting and Zikr. At the same time to complement the complex early Sitar melodies that Khusro was composing. The Tabla uses a "complex finger tip and hand percussive" technique played from the top, unlike the Pakhawaj and mridangam which mainly use the full palm and are sideways in motion and are more limited in terms of sound complexity.

On Kashmir

Khusrow wrote said a couplet about Kashmir. 
"Agar firdaus bar roo-e zameen ast, 
Hameen ast-o hameen ast-o hameen ast "
"If there is a paradise on earth,It is this, it is this, it is this."

Works





Further reading

Further reading




