[[The Boondock Saints]]

CATEGORIES: 1990s action thriller films, 1990s crime thriller films, 1990s LGBT-related films, 1999 films, 20th Century Fox films, American action thriller films, American crime thriller films, American LGBT-related films, Buddy films, Canadian action films, Canadian LGBT-related films, Canadian thriller films, Cross-dressing in film, English-language films, Films about religion, Films set in Boston, Massachusetts, Films shot in Massachusetts, Films shot in Toronto, Fox Searchlight Pictures films, Gangster films, Independent films, Irish-American media, Mafia films, Vigilante films

The Boondock Saints is a 1999 American vigilante film written and directed by Troy Duffy. The film stars Sean Patrick Flanery and Norman Reedus as fraternal twins, Connor and Murphy MacManus, who become vigilantes after killing two members of the Russian Mafia in self-defense. After both experience an epiphany, the brothers, together with their friend "Funny Man" (David Della Rocco), set out to rid their home city of Boston, Massachusetts of crime and evil, all while being pursued by FBI Agent Paul Smecker (Willem Dafoe).
Duffy indicates that the screenplay was inspired by personal experience, while living in Los Angeles.

Plot

The Irish American fraternal twin brothers, Connor and Murphy MacManus, attend a Catholic Mass, where the priest mentions the fate of Kitty Genovese. Later, while celebrating St. Patrick's Day with friends, the two get into a bar brawl with three Russian mobsters who want to close the pub and take over the land it is built on. The two brothers try to reason with the mobsters, but the latter respond with violence. The next morning, two of the Russians seek revenge on Connor and Murphy, who kill the mobsters in an act of self-defense.
FBI Agent Paul Smecker is assigned to the case, and finds that the police and local news reporters see them as heroes. The MacManus brothers turn themselves in at a police station, where Smecker interviews them. After they retell their incident to Smecker, he allows them to spend the night in a holding cell to avoid attention from the media. That night, they receive what appears to be a "calling" from God telling them to hunt down wicked men so that the innocent will flourish.
Connor and Murphy resolve to rid Boston of evil men. Connor learns of a meeting of Russian syndicate bosses at a hotel from a pager taken from one of the dead Russian mobsters. Having equipped themselves with weaponry from a local underground gun dealer, the brothers quickly kill all nine Russian mobsters, while Rocco, a friend of the brothers and mob errand boy for local mafia boss Giuseppe "Papa Joe" Yakavetta, is sent in as backup. During the investigation, Smecker believes that the killings of the Russian mobsters are the result of the beginning of a mob war.
The next day, Rocco learns that he was betrayed by Papa Joe after attempting to have Rocco killed by the Russian mobsters by sending him in with only a six-shot revolver. That night, the MacManus brothers and Rocco hunt down an underboss of the Yakavetta crime family, Vincenzo Lapazzi, and kill him. Concerned he may be a target, Papa Joe contacts a hitman, Il Duce (The Duke), to deal with them. After killing a criminal that Rocco had a personal hatred for, the three men are ambushed by Il Duce. Although they manage to chase Il Duce away, the three men suffer serious wounds, the most serious being the loss of Rocco's finger.  The three return to a house where after a brief, heated argument, they cauterize each other's wounds.  While watching Smecker give a press conference, Rocco insists that he is a liability and should be taken care of, but the brothers insist no action be taken against him.
Hours later as the police conduct an investigation at the crime scene, the investigation seems futile since the brothers covered their tracks by spraying any blood left behind with ammonia. However, Smecker happens upon the part of the finger lost by Rocco and decides to do an independent investigation to see who was behind the gun battle. Smecker is able to track the evidence down to Rocco and his two allies. This leaves Smecker in a difficult scenario, and struggles with the choice of whether to prosecute the three men, or join them in their cause, as Smecker had become sympathetic towards the brothers' actions. After getting drunk at a gay bar and subsequently getting advice from a reluctant priest (being held at gunpoint by Rocco, who in turn is held by Conner for threatening the priest), Smecker decides to help the trio.
Later, the brothers and Rocco inform Smecker that they plan to infiltrate the Yakavetta headquarters to finish off the family, but Smecker learns they are walking into a trap. The brothers are captured, and Rocco is shot and killed by Papa Joe. As Papa Joe leaves his house, Smecker arrives in drag claiming to have been sent by another soldier. After fixing his costume, he leaves the bathroom and shoots the man who objected to "her" presence. Smecker finds the last man with his throat cut and is knocked out shortly after by Il Duce, who does not kill Smecker because he objects to harming women and children. The brothers manage to escape and kill the soldier sent down. As the brothers say their family prayer over Rocco, Il Duce enters the room and is prepared to open fire. However, it is revealed that Il Duce is the father of the brothers. He finishes the prayer and decides to join his two sons in their mission.
Three months later, Papa Joe is sent to trial for a third time. However, the reporters on-scene anticipate his acquittal. The brothers and Il Duce, aided by Agent Smecker and the three detectives, infiltrate the trial after sliding their weapons over the metal detector, unmasked, and make a speech stating that they intend to eradicate evil wherever they find it before the three men recite their family prayer and kill Papa Joe. The media dubs the three as "the Saints", and the movie ends with various candid interviews with the public, reflecting on the question "Are the Saints ultimately good...or evil?"

Cast

Production

Troy Duffy's screenplay was inspired by his disgust at seeing a drug dealer taking money from a corpse across the hall from his apartment. Duffy, who was working as a bartender and bouncer, had never written a screenplay before.
Duffy completed the screenplay in fall of 1996 and passed it to a producer's assistant at New Line Cinema to be read by a senior executive. The screenplay changed hands through multiple studios and Duffy was approached by multiple producers for the rights. In March 1997, he was contracted by Paramount Pictures for $500,000, and later in the month, Miramax Films won a bidding war to buy The Boondock Saints. The studio offered $450,000 to Duffy to write and direct the film.
Duffy sought to cast Stephen Dorff and Mark Wahlberg as the brothers, though Wahlberg passed for Boogie Nights.  The director also wanted to cast Billy Connolly and Kenneth Branagh in the film, with Branagh playing the FBI agent.  While Duffy was able to keep the writer's fee of $300,000, the studio required the reimbursement of the $150,000 director's fee and the $700,000 advance to develop the project.
The independent studio Franchise Pictures sought to finance the project once other elements were in place. Duffy approached Sean Patrick Flanery and Norman Reedus to play the brothers, and Willem Dafoe to play the FBI agent. Having found someone to back the film, filming began in Toronto, with the final scenes being filmed in Boston. The name of Duffy's band The Brood was changed to The Boondock Saints, following the movie's release. The film featured two songs from the band: "Holy Fool", which played during Rocco's tavern shootout, and "Pipes", which played during the credits.

Release

The Boondock Saints saw very limited theatrical release, with its distributor showing the film in 1999 on only five screens in the United States for a duration of a week. However, the original unrated version of the film was later re-released in theaters on May 22, 2006. The film was shown on major foreign screens (most notably in Japan) with success. Blockbuster released The Boondock Saints as a "Blockbuster Exclusive", a collection of independent direct-to-video films. The Boondock Saints gained a following mostly thanks to word of mouth publicity and was a bestseller when released on DVD. Despite its success, Troy Duffy never saw any of the profits from DVD distribution, having signed away the DVD rights in his contract with Indican.

Home media 

The Boondock Saints has been released numerous times on DVD, including an import on March 13, 2001 and an uncut Japanese release published by Toshiba Entertainment, whose special features include anamorphic widescreen, audio commentary, trailers, and interviews with the Japanese media.
A Blu-ray Disc edition containing both the theatrical and unrated directors cuts was released on February 10, 2009.

Reception

The film received generally negative reviews from critics; critics polled on the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes gave the film a score of 20% "Rotten", with the site's consensus calling the film, "A juvenile, ugly movie that represents the worst tendencies of directors channeling Tarantino." However, users gave the film a score of 92. Robert Koehler of Variety described the film in his review as "A belated entry in the hipster crime movie movement that began with Reservoir Dogs, Troy Duffy's "Boondock Saints" mixes blood and Catholic-tinged vigilante justice in excessive portions for sometimes wacky and always brutal effect. film is more interested in finding fresh ways to stage execution scenes than in finding meaning behind the human urge for self-appointed righting of wrongs."
Koehler also described Flanery and Reedus as "curiously stolid and blank", while praising supporting actors Connolly, Dafoe, and Rota for making the most of their screen time. Koehler also praised the tech personnel, "This uneven exercise in pacing and cutting is abetted by an eclectic score by Jeff Danna and whiz lensing by Adam Kane. Other tech credits fire bull's-eyes."
Film critics have taken note of the film's extreme violence and "slow-motion bloodletting".
In its original 5-theater run, the film only earned $30,471. It later developed a cult following and has grossed about $50 million in domestic video sales.

Documentary

The documentary film, Overnight, was released in 2003, following the story of Troy Duffy during his negotiations with Miramax over The Boondock Saints script. Duffy's abrasive behavior strained his relationships with friends and people in the film industry and ultimately led to Miramax pulling out of the project, leaving the film to be made by another studio at half the originally proposed budget.

Sequel

After numerous delays, Troy Duffy shot a sequel, entitled All Saints Day, in which the brothers return to continue their run of vengeance. It was released October 30, 2009.
In an October 27  Although on September 14, 2012, Reedus stated there was going to be no Boondock Saints III.
Again, on February 26, 2013, Troy Duffy stated that he was getting together with Norman Reedus and Sean Patrick Flanery to resume talks about Boondock Saints 3, in hopes that they could make the film a reality for fans.
As of July, 2013, Duffy has confirmed in an interview that he is working on the script for the third movie, and possibly a T.V. series. Reedus and Flanery are confirmed to come back, and he is attempting to get Dafoe back as well. (Interview)

Comic book

A two-part comic book story, serving as a companion to the movie sequel, was released in May 2010. The series is written by Troy Duffy, produced by Innfusion Inc. and released through 12 Gauge Comics.






