[[Barramundi]]

CATEGORIES: Latidae, Fish of Bangladesh, Freshwater fish of Australia, Sport fish, Euryhaline fish

The barramundi or Asian seabass (Lates calcarifer) is a species of catadromous fish in family Latidae of order Perciformes.  The species is widely distributed in the Indo-West Pacific region from the Persian Gulf, through Southeast Asia to Papua New Guinea and Northern Australia. Known in Thai language as  pla kapong (), it is very popular in Thai cuisine. It is known as koduva in the Tamil language, kalaanji in Malayalam language, pandugappa (పండుగొప్ప) in the Telugu language in India, bhetki (ভেটকী) in the Bengali language in eastern India and Bangladesh and chonak in the Konkani language in Goa in western India.

Origin of name

Barramundi is a loanword from an Australian Aboriginal language of the Rockhampton area in Queensland  
However, the name was appropriated for marketing reasons during the 1980s, a decision which has aided in raising the profile of this fish significantly. L. calcarifer is broadly referred to as Asian seabass by the international scientific community, but is also known as Australian seabass, and by a variety of names in other languages, such as ikan siakap in Malay, ikan kakap putih in Indonesian, apahap in Tagalog (Philippines), and pla kapong in Thailand.

Description

This species has an elongated body form with a large, slightly oblique mouth and an upper jaw extending behind the eye. The lower edge of the preoperculum is serrated with a strong spine at its angle; the operculum has a small spine and a serrated flap above the origin of the lateral line. Its scales are ctenoid. 
In cross section, the fish is compressed and the dorsal head profile clearly concave. The single dorsal and ventral fins have spines and soft rays; the paired pectoral and pelvic fins have soft rays only; and the caudal fin has soft rays and is truncate and rounded.
Barramundi are salt and freshwater sportfish, targeted by many. They have large, silver scales, which may become darker or lighter, depending on their environments. Their bodies can reach up to 1.8 m (6 ft) long, though evidence of them being caught at this size is scarce. The maximum weight is about 60 kg (130 lb). The average length is about 0.6-1.2 m (2-4 ft).
Barramundi are demersal, inhabiting coastal waters, estuaries, lagoons, and rivers; they are found in clear to turbid water, usually within a temperature range of 26−30°C. This species does not undertake extensive migrations within or between river systems, which has presumably influenced establishment of genetically distinct stocks in Northern Australia.

Life cycle

The barramundi feeds on crustaceans, molluscs, and smaller fish (including its own species); juveniles feed on zooplankton. 
The barramundi is euryhaline, but stenothermal. It inhabits rivers and descends to estuaries and tidal flats to spawn.  In areas remote from fresh water, purely marine populations may become established.  
At the start of the monsoon, males migrate downriver to meet females, which lay very large numbers of eggs (several millions each).  The adults do not guard the eggs or the fry, which require brackish water to develop.  
The species is sequentially hermaphroditic, with most individuals maturing as males and becoming female after at least one spawning season; most of the larger specimens are therefore female. Fish held in captivity sometimes demonstrate features atypical of fish in the wild: they change sex at a smaller size, exhibit a higher proportion of protogyny and some males do not undergo sexual inversion.[ref]

</ref>

Recreational fishing

Highly prized by anglers for their good fighting ability, barramundi are reputed to be good at avoiding fixed nets and are best caught on lines and with fishing lures. In Australia, the barramundi is used to stock freshwater reservoirs for recreational fishing.
These "impoundment barramundi", as they are known by anglers, have grown in popularity as a "catch and release" fish. Popular stocked barramundi impoundments include Lake Tinaroo near Cairns in the Atherton Tablelands, Peter Faust Dam near the Whitsundays, Teemburra Dam near Mackay, Lake Moondarra near Mount Isa, Lake Awoonga near Gladstone, and Lake Monduran south of Lake Awoonga.

Commercial fishing and aquaculture

The fish is of large commercial importance; it is fished internationally and raised in aquaculture in Australia, Saudi Arabia, Malaysia, India, Indonesia, Vietnam, Israel, Thailand, the United States, Poland, and the U.K.
The Australian barramundi industry is relatively established, with an annual production of more than 4000 tons. In the broader Southeast Asian region, production is estimated to exceed 30,000 tons. By contrast, the US industry produces about 800 tons a year from a single facility. 
Barramundi under culture will commonly grow from a hatchery juvenile, between 50 and 100 mm in length, to a table size of 400-600 g within 12 months and to 3.0 kg within 18–24 months.

Aquarium use

Smaller specimens are a popular aquarium fish, and can be very entertaining, especially at feeding time. However, they grow quickly, so they are recommended to be kept in setups of 500 litres or larger.
In aquaria, they become quite tame and can be hand fed; they are not aggressive, but their feeding reflex is violent and sudden, so they can not be kept with any tank mates small enough to be swallowed.

As food

Barramundi have a mild flavour and a white, flaky flesh, with varying amount of body fat.  
In Australia, barramundi is an iconic table fish revered as a quintessential Australian brand. Its name is, after all, derived from an Australian Aboriginal name. However, such is the demand for the fish that a substantial amount of barramundi consumed in Australia is actually imported. This has placed significant economic pressure on Australian producers, both fishers and farmers, whose costs are significantly greater due to remoteness of many of the farming and fishing sites, as well as stringent environmental and food safety standards placed on them by government. While country of origin labelling has given consumers greater certainty over the origins of their barramundi at the retail level, no requirement exists for the food service and restaurant trades to label the origins of their barramundi. 
Barramundi are a favorite food of the region's apex predator, saltwater crocodiles (Crocodylus porosus), which have been known to take them from unwary fishermen.
Nile perch—a similar fish found in the Afrotropic ecozone, or sub-Saharan Africa—is often mislabeled as barramundi. It does not fall under the recommendation for US-farmed barramundi.  

Thai cuisine

Barramundi from local fish farms are known as pla kapong () in Thailand. It is often eaten steamed with lime and garlic, as well as deep-fried or stir-fried with lemongrass, among a variety of many other ways. Pla kapong can be seen in aquaria in many restaurants in Thailand, where sometimes this fish is wrongly labeled as "snapper" or "sea bass" on menus.

Goan cuisine

Locally caught chonak (barramundi) is a favourite food, prepared with either recheado (a Goan red masala) or coated with suji (semolina) and pan fried. The fish is generally filleted on the diagonal. It is eaten as a snack or as an accompaniment to drinks or the main course. It is one of the more expensive fish available.

Bengali cuisine

Locally caught bhetki (barramundi) is a popular fish among bengali people, mainly dished in festivities like marriages and other important social events as it is far being expensive as everyday eating fish, cooked as Bhetki macher paturi, bhetki macher kalia or coated with suji (semolina) and pan fried.
It is very popular amongst people who are usually sceptical to eat fish because of their thorns. Bhetki fillets literally have no thorns in them.








