[[Greg Rusedski]]

CATEGORIES: 1973 births, Living people, Anglophone Quebec people, BBC Sports Personality of the Year winners, British male tennis players, British people of Canadian descent, British people of Polish descent, British people of Ukrainian descent, Canadian emigrants to the United Kingdom, Canadian male tennis players, Canadian people of English descent, Canadian people of Polish descent, Canadian people of Ukrainian descent, Citizens of the United Kingdom through descent, Dancing on Ice participants, Olympic tennis players of Great Britain, People from Pointe-Claire, Racket sportspeople from Quebec, Tennis commentators, Tennis players at the 1996 Summer Olympics, Tennis players at the 2000 Summer Olympics, US Open (tennis) junior champions, Wimbledon junior champions

Gregory "Greg" Rusedski (born 6 September 1973) is a British Canadian former tennis player who turned professional in 1991 and played until his retirement on 7 April 2007, at the age of 33. He represented Canada in the early years of his career, before changing to the United Kingdom in June 1995. He is a former British No. 1 and ATP World No. 4.

Personal life

Rusedski was born in Montreal, Quebec, Canada to an English mother and a German-born father of Polish–Ukrainian descent.
Rusedski has been with his wife Lucy Connor since 1991, when they met while he was competing in a junior tournament where she was a ball girl.

Career

Rusedski's first career singles tournament title was at the Hall of Fame Championship in Newport, Rhode Island in 1993.
Rusedski reached the singles final of the US Open in 1997, where he lost to Pat Rafter in four sets (shortly thereafter reaching his career high rank of World No. 4). He also won the BBC Sports Personality of the Year Award.
In 1998, Tim Henman eclipsed Rusedski as Britain's No. 1 tennis player. Rusedski, however, won the Grand Slam Cup in 1999.
Rusedski was defeated in the second round of Wimbledon in 2005 by Joachim Johansson of Sweden, 6–7, 6–3, 4–6, 6–7. Following that disappointment, Rusedski had a successful July. He defended his title at the Hall of Fame Championship, defeating Vince Spadea in the final. This was the first time he had successfully defended a title and the third time he had won the championship. He then reached the semifinals at both the RCA Championships in Indianapolis, losing to Taylor Dent, and the Canada Masters tournament in Montreal, losing to Andre Agassi.
Towards the end of 2005, Rusedski's ranking had risen to the high thirties. A poor end to the year by Henman almost allowed Rusedski to overtake him as British No. 1 again. However, a defeat for Rusedski in the first round of the Challenger Event in Dnepropetrovsk, Ukraine, left him ranked 38th, just one place short of regaining the British top spot. Rusedski finally reclaimed the British No. 1 spot on 15 May 2006, overtaking Andy Murray by getting to the third round of the Rome Masters Event. But Rusedski lost the top British ranking after a first-round exit at Wimbledon.
On 7 April 2007, Rusedski officially retired from tennis after partnering with Jamie Murray to a doubles victory over the Netherlands in a Davis Cup match, a result which gave Great Britain a winning 3–0 lead in the tie. He announced his retirement immediately after the win during a live interview with Sue Barker on BBC Television.
On 25 January 2009, Rusedski announced a shock return to professional tennis. However, he was denied an opportunity to compete in his much-loved Davis Cup.

Rusedski vs. Henman

Rusedski was often overshadowed in the British press by the more popular Henman, especially at Wimbledon. It is arguable who had the better playing career. Rusedski won more singles titles than compatriot Henman, with 15 singles titles compared to Henman's 11. Rusedski also reached the final of the US Open in 1997, whereas Henman never made it past the semifinals of a Grand Slam tournament. However, Henman reached six Grand Slam semifinals and an additional four quarterfinals, whereas Rusedski reached just two Grand Slam quarterfinals in total: his US Open final performance, and at Wimbledon (also in 1997), a venue where he consistently under-performed. Neither Rusedski nor Henman ever reached the quarterfinals of the Australian Open. Henman reached the semifinals of the French Open, while Rusedski never made it past the fourth round at that tournament.
Rusedski's Davis Cup singles record was also considerably poorer than Henman's. In Great Britain's two key Davis Cup ties in the World Group knockout stage, Rusedski lost all four singles rubbers, despite home advantage (against the USA in 1999 and Sweden in 2002). Rusedski and Henman were, however, a formidable doubles partnership, winning tournaments together, and vital matches in Davis Cup.
Henman shares a birthday with Rusedski; Henman is exactly a year younger.
It was perhaps fitting that Rusedski's final match at a Major was against his old rival and compatriot Tim Henman, at the 2006 US Open. After a competitive first set, where Rusedski was edged out by Henman in a tie-break, Henman dispatched his opponent, 7–6, 6–2, 6–3. This did turn out to be Rusedski's final match in a major, and it was against a man with whom he not only competed on a tennis court, but also off it for the affection of his home fans. In their head-to-head encounters, Henman won 8–2.

Controversies

In the 2002 US Open, after losing to Pete Sampras in the third round after a gruelling five-set match, Rusedski described Sampras as "a half-step slow" and predicted that Sampras would lose his fourth-round match to young German star Tommy Haas.
Rusedski tested positive for nandrolone in January 2004, but was cleared of the charges in a hearing on 10 March 2004.

Media career

Rusedski has written columns for tabloid newspapers The Sun and the Daily Mirror. He also has done some acting, appearing in an episode of Miss Marple as a tennis star. In 2008, he appeared as a contestant on the reality TV shows Dancing On Ice and Beat the Star. Sky Sports contracted him to provide analysis for the 2008 US Open alongside former British tennis player Annabel Croft.
Rusedski now provides commentary and analysis on the BBC's Wimbledon coverage. He also provides commentary and analysis on British Eurosport for the French Open and Sky Sports for the US Open.

Major finals

Grand Slam finals

=Singles: 1 (0–1)=

Masters Series finals

=Singles: 2 (1–1)=

Career finals

Singles: 27 (15–12)

|
|}

Doubles: 5 (3–2)

Singles performance timeline

1 This event was held in Stockholm through 1994, Essen in 1995, and Stuttgart from 1996 through 2001.
2 Rusedski was granted British citizenship in June 1995.






