[[Möbius function]]

CATEGORIES: Multiplicative functions

The classical Möbius function μ(n) is an important multiplicative function in number theory and combinatorics. The German mathematician August Ferdinand Möbius introduced it in 1832. XVI: "... μ(n) occurs implicitly in the works of Euler as early as 1748, but Möbius, in 1832, was the first to investigate its properties systematically."In the Disquisitiones Arithmeticae (1801) Carl Friedrich Gauss showed that the sum of the primitive roots (mod p) is μ(p − 1), (see #Properties and applications) but he didn't make further use of the function. In particular, he didn't use Möbius inversion in the Disquisitiones.  This classical Möbius function is a special case of a more general object in combinatorics (see below).

Definition

μ(n) is defined for all  positive integers n and has its values in } depending on the factorization of n into prime factors. It is defined as follows:
Values of μ(n) for the first 25 positive numbers :
The first 50 values of the function are plotted below:

Properties and applications

Properties

The Möbius function is multiplicative (i.e. :
The equality above leads to the important Möbius inversion formula and is the main reason why  is of relevance in the theory of multiplicative and arithmetic functions. 
Other applications of  in combinatorics are connected with the use of the Pólya enumeration theorem in combinatorial groups and combinatorial enumerations.
In number theory another arithmetic function closely related to the Möbius function is the Mertens function, defined by
for every natural number  and the Riemann hypothesis.
There is a formula for calculating the Möbius function without directly knowing the factorization of its argument:
i.e. -th roots of unity. (However, the computational complexity of this definition is at least the same as of the Euler Product definition.)
From this it follows that the Mertens function is given by:
This formula is used in the proof of the Franel–Landau theorem. 12.2

=Proof of the formula for \sum_{d | n} \mu(d)=

The formula given above,
is trivially true when . The asserted result follows from the fact that every non-empty finite set has an equal number of odd- and even-cardinality subsets.
This last fact can be shown easily by induction on the cardinality . The inductive step follows directly from these two bijections.
A related result is that the binomial coefficients exhibit alternating entries of odd and even power which sum symmetrically.

Applications

=Mathematical series=

The Dirichlet series that generates the  Möbius function is the (multiplicative) inverse of the Riemann zeta function
This may be seen from its Euler product
The Dirichlet series for the Mobius function has the equivalence:
The Lambert series for the Möbius function is:
The ordinary generating function for the Möbius function follows from the binomial series
applied to triangular matrices:

=Algebraic number theory=

GaussGauss, Disquisitiones, Art. 81 proved that for a prime number .
If 

Recurrence

This is a table starting:

Matrix inverse

Average order

The average order of the Möbius function is zero. This statement is, in fact, equivalent to the prime number theorem.

μ(n) sections

μ(n) =  0 if and only if n is divisible by the square of a prime. The first numbers with this property are : 
If n is prime, then μ(n) =  −1, but the converse is not true. The first non prime n for which μ(n) =  −1 is 30 = 2·3·5. The first such numbers with three distinct prime factors (sphenic numbers) are:
and the first such numbers with 5 distinct prime factors are:

Generalizations

Incidence algebras

In combinatorics, every locally finite partially ordered set (poset) is assigned an incidence algebra. One distinguished member of this algebra is that poset's "Möbius function". The classical Möbius function treated in this article is essentially equal to the Möbius function of the set of all positive integers partially ordered by divisibility. See the article on incidence algebras for the precise definition and several examples of these general Möbius functions.

Popovici's function

where the binomial coefficient is taken to be zero if a > k.  The definition may be extended to complex k by reading the binomial as a polynomial in k.107

Physics

The Möbius function also arises in the primon gas or free Riemann gas model of supersymmetry.  In this theory, the fundamental particles or "primons" have energies log p.  Under second quantization, multiparticle excitations are considered; these are given by log n for any natural number n. This follows from the fact that the factorization of the natural numbers into primes is unique.  
In the free Riemann gas, any natural number can occur, if the primons are taken as bosons. If they are taken as fermions, then the Pauli exclusion principle excludes squares. The operator (−1)F that distinguishes fermions and bosons is then none other than the Möbius function μ(n).
The free Riemann gas has a number of other interesting connections to number theory, including the fact that the partition function is the Riemann zeta function. This idea underlies Alain Connes' attempted proof of the Riemann hypothesis. J.-B. Bost and Alain Connes (1995), "Hecke Algebras, Type III factors and phase transitions with spontaneous symmetry breaking in number theory", Selecta Math. (New Series), 1 411-457.



Notes



The Disquisitiones Arithmeticae has been translated from Latin into English and German. The German edition includes all of his papers on number theory: all the proofs of quadratic reciprocity, the determination of the sign of the Gauss sum, the investigations into biquadratic reciprocity, and unpublished notes.




