[[Peter Sculthorpe]]

CATEGORIES: 1929 births, Living people, 20th-century classical composers, Australian composers, Opera composers, Ballet composers, Australian musicians, People from Launceston, Tasmania, Australian Living Treasures

Peter Joshua Sculthorpe AO OBE (born 29 April 1929) is an Australian composer.  Much of his music has resulted from an interest in the music of Australia's neighbours as well as from the impulse to bring together aspects of native Australian music with that of the heritage of the West. He is known primarily for his orchestral and chamber music, such as Kakadu (1988) and Earth Cry (1986), which evoke the sounds and feeling of the Australian bushland and outback. He has also written 17 string quartets, using unusual timbral effects, works for piano, and two operas.   He has stated that he wants his music to make people feel better and happier for having listened to it. He has typically avoided the dense, atonal techniques of many of his contemporary composers.  His work has often been distinguished by its distinctive use of percussion.

Early life

Sculthorpe was born and grew up in Launceston, Tasmania. His mother (Edna) was passionate about English literature and his father (Joshua) loved fishing and nature.
He began writing music at age nine in 1938, after having his first piano lesson.  As a young composer, he independently discovered the whole-tone scale, and was disappointed when he learned that others, such as Debussy, had already used it. in his father's memory.
He is distantly related to Fanny Cochrane Smith, a Tasmanian Aboriginal whose wax cylinder recordings of songs are the only audio recordings of any of Tasmania's indigenous languages.  Her daughter Gladys married Sculthorpe's great-grandfather's nephew."From the Heart", Shirley Apthorp interview with Peter Sculthorpe, ABC Radio 24 Hours, May 1999, p.38

Musical career

In 1963 he became a lecturer at the University of Sydney, and has remained there more or less ever since, where he is now an emeritus professor.  In the mid-1960s he was composer-in-residence at Yale University.  In 1965 he wrote Sun Music I for the Sydney Symphony Orchestra's first overseas tour, on a commission from Sir Bernard Heinze, who asked for "something without rhythm, harmony or melody". Neville Cardus, after the premiere of Sun Music I, wrote that Sculthorpe was set to "lay the foundations of an original and characteristic Australian music"."50 Classical Works that Changed History", Limelight, April 2010, p. 32   In 1968 the Sun Music series was used for the ballet Sun Music, choreographed by Sir Robert Helpmann, which gained wide international attention.  In the late 1960s, Sculthorpe worked with Patrick White on an opera about Eliza Fraser, but White chose to terminate the artistic relationship.  Sculthorpe subsequently wrote an opera (music theatre), Rites of Passage (1972–73), to his own libretto, using texts in Latin and the Australian indigenous language Arrernte.  Another opera Quiros followed in 1982.  The orchestral work Kakadu was written in 1988.
In 2003, the SBS Radio and Television Youth Orchestra gave the premiere of Sydney Singing, a composition by Sculthorpe for clarinet solo (Joanne Sharp), harp solo (Tamara Spigelman), percussion solo (Peter Hayward) and string orchestra. This performance was released on SBS DVD in July 2005.
His Requiem is possibly his most serious, substantial work to date.  It was premiered in March 2004 in Adelaide by the Adelaide Symphony Orchestra and Adelaide Chamber Singers conducted by Richard Mills, with didgeridoo soloist William Barton, to critical acclaim.
Sculthorpe is a represented composer of the Australian Music Centre and is published by Faber Music Ltd.  He was only the second composer to be contracted by Faber, after Benjamin Britten.
His autobiography Sun Music: Journeys and Reflections From a Composer's Life was published in 1999.

Style and themes

Much of Sculthorpe's early work demonstrates the influence of Asian music, but he says that these influences dwindled through the 1970s as indigenous music became more important. He says that he had been interested in indigenous culture since his teens, mainly because of his father "who told me many stories of past wrongs in Tasmania. I think he was quite extraordinary for that time, as was my mother". However, it was only with the advent of recordings and books on the subject around the 1970s that he started to incorporate indigenous motifs in his work.
Sculthorpe says he is political in his work – and that his work has also always been about "the preservation of the environment and more recently, climate change".  His 16th String Quartet was inspired by extracts from letters written by asylum seekers in Australian detention centres.

Personal

In the early 1970s Sculthorpe was engaged to Anne Boyd  but he has never married. In 1982 a painting of Sculthorpe by artist Eric Smith won the Archibald Prize.

Honours

Works

Orchestral

Concertante

Vocal/Choral

Opera

Chamber/Instrumental

Piano

Film soundtracks

Notes






