[[Kaori Mochida]]

CATEGORIES: 1978 births, Living people, Singers from Tokyo, Japanese female singers, Every Little Thing members

 is the female lead singer of Japanese pop group Every Little Thing.

Biography

Mochida began her career as a child actress, appearing in magazines and TV commercials. She then became a member of the second generation of idol group The Kuro Buta All-Stars, and entered the entertainment world as 
In 1995, she met Mitsuru Igarashi, and signed to the Avex label. At first she was meant to debut as a solo artist, but as Max Matsuura suggested, she then formed a duo with Igarashi, and then a trio when Ichiro Ito was incorporated as a guitarist. They debuted in 1996 with "Feel My Heart". Following her debut with Every Little Thing, Mochida became a popular fashion icon in Japan, and started to appear in TV commercials for a wide variety of beauty products. The spots that she starred in usually used the songs of her band as background music. After the departure of Mitsuru Igarashi from Every Little Thing in 2000, Mochida started to take more control in the music making process, and soon started to write her own songs. The first song for Every Little Thing that she wrote lyrics for was "All along" included in the Time to Destination album, and the first song she composed was "Jump", released as a single in 2001.
She did not release any solo music until 2002, when she participated in the Avex charity project Song+Nation, where she recorded the song "In Case of Me", produced by Tetsuya Komuro. In 2004, she released "Itsunomanika Shōjo wa", a cover single of Yosui Inoue which was produced by the musician himself. In 2006, she wrote Haruka Ayase's debut single "Period" along with Takeshi Kobayashi, This year she also provided vocals for Dragon Ash's song "Wipe Your Eyes", song that also had a promotional video despite not being released as a single.
In 2009, Kaori Mochida's solo career officially started, and she started to work on her first solo album. She released her first official solo single, "Ame no Walts", on January 28, 2009. It debuted at number 9 in the Oricon charts and enjoyed moderated success.
On August 25, 2009, her second album, Niu, was released. The album had no commercial singles, except for a CD single of "Green", that was included in a special edition of fashion magazine Journal Standard. For this album she made her first domestic solo tour between September and October.
On August 1, 2012, her third solo album Manu a Manu was released.

Solo discography

Albums

=Singles=

Other appearances

Other works






