[[Mourne Mountains]]

CATEGORIES: Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty in Northern Ireland, Climbing areas of Ireland, Mountains and hills of County Down, Protected areas of County Down, Geology of Northern Ireland

The Mourne Mountains 

The mountains

The Mournes are visited by many tourists, hillwalkers, cyclists and rock climbers. Following a fundraising drive in 1993, the National Trust purchased nearly  the second-highest mountain in the area.
The Mourne Wall is among the more famous features in the Mournes. It is a  area of land purchased by the Belfast Water Commissioners in the late 1800s. This followed a number of Acts of Parliament allowing the sale, and the establishment of a water supply from the Mournes to the growing industrial city of Belfast. Construction of the Mourne Wall was started in 1904 and was completed in 1922.
Some of the mountains have names beginning Slieve, from the Irish word sliabh, meaning mountain. Examples are Slieve Donard, Slieve Lamagan and Slieve Muck. There are also a number of curious names: Pigeon Rock; Buzzard's Roost; Brandy Pad; the Cock and Hen; Percy Bysshe; the Devil's Coach Road; and Pollaphuca, which means "hole of the fairies or sprites".
The Mournes are very popular as a destination for many Duke of Edinburgh's Award expeditions.
The Isle of Man and even Snowdonia in Wales can sometimes be seen across the Irish sea from some parts of the Mournes on clear days.

Vegetation and wildlife

Aside from grasses, the most common plants found in the Mournes are heathers. Of these, three species are found: the cross-leaved heath (erica tetralix), the bell heather (erica cinerea), and the ling (calluna vulgaris). Other plants which grow in the area are: Bog Cotton, Roseroot (Rhodiola rosea), Harebell (Campanula rotundifolia), Marsh St John's Wort, Wild Thyme (Thymus serpyllum), Wood sorrel and Heath Spotted Orchids.
Sheep graze high into the mountains, and the range is also home to birds, including the common Raven, Peregrine Falcon, Wren, and Buzzard, and native Meadow Pipit, Grey Wagtail, Stonechat and Snipe. The Golden Eagle, a former inhabitant, has not been seen in the Mournes since 1836.

Possible national park status

It has been proposed that the Mourne Mountains be made Northern Ireland's first national park.

Popular culture

The mountains are immortalised in a song written by Percy French in 1896, "The Mountains of Mourne". The song has been recorded by many artists, including Don McLean.
The Mourne Mountains also influenced C.S. Lewis to write The Lion, The Witch and The Wardrobe.
"The Mountains of Mourne" are also mentioned in John Lennon's song The Luck of the Irish on the album Some Time in New York City.
The scenery of the Mourne Mountains have also provided the backdrop for a number of films, including Philomena (film).

Recreation

The Mournes are a very popular area for hiking, the Wall providing a convenient navigation aid.
There are a large number of granite cliffs, in the form of outcrops and tors, scattered throughout the range, making the Mournes one of Northern Ireland's major rock-climbing areas since the first recorded ascents in the 1930s. The rock forms are generally quite rounded, thus often depending on cams for protection, but with good friction. The 1998 guidebook lists 26 separate crags, with a total of about 900 routes of all grades.

Railway Access

The Northern Ireland Railways service and the Enterprise link into Newry railway station.








