[[Hollingworth]]

CATEGORIES: Geography of Tameside, Villages in Greater Manchester, Towns and villages of the Peak District

Hollingworth is a village within the Metropolitan Borough of Tameside, in  Greater Manchester, England. It is about twelve miles (19 km) east of Manchester on the Derbyshire border near Glossop. It is the name of a family who owned much of the surrounding area from before the time of the Norman conquest.

History

Toponymy

Hollingworth was recorded Holisurde before 1059 and in 1086.

Early history

Hollingworth in Longdendale is located on an ancient pagan religious site known as Wedneshough Green. A grassy knoll opposite the Gunn Inn in Hollingworth, Wedneshough was anciently called 'Wedenshaw' or 'Wodens Hawe' after the pagan god Woden. 
Hollingworth was part of the ancient Hundred of Hamestan before the year 1000 which is believed to be the ancient boundaries of the Pecsaetan tribesmen. After the Norman Conquest in 1086, The Hundred of Hamestan was redefined and renamed the Hundred of Macclesfield. 
The tribesman living in the Longdendale Valley were pagans until around 627AD when the surrounding districts are known to have started converting to Christianity.

Manor

Hollingworth was an ancient manor governed by a local lord. A single local family were in possession of the lordship of Hollingworth for more than 700 years and were styled 'Hollingworth of Hollingworth' or De Hollyngworth (Holynworth). In this part of Cheshire, local lords assumed the name of their manor as their surname. Some families, such as the Hollingworths were even granted distinct arms by the Earl of Chester. 
In 1059 during the Saxon reign of Cheshire, Hollingworth was owned by a 'freeman' who owed his rights to his senior lord; the then Saxon Earl of Chester, Edwin. The Earl was the chief lord of all the manors within the Hamestan Hundred including Hollingworth. Earl Edwin leased the manor of Hollingworth to a 'freeman' for his lifetime and that of his descendants for an annual rent and military service.  In 1059, Hollingworth was recorded as having 30 acres of productive farmland. The Saxon 'freeman' in possession of Hollingworth manor was later removed sometime before 1086 by the invading Normans.
After the Norman Invasion, Earl Edwin's lands were forfeited and came under the control of the Normans. An account in 1086 for the Norman Earl of Chester, Hugh Lupus, shows that Hollingworth manor was barren and worthless during his reign. The wholesale ejectment of the Saxons in possessions of manors in Longdendale appears to have specific to those lands under the control of Hugh Lupus as the Earl of Chester. The Earl replaced the original Saxon 'freeman' on the Cheshire side of Longdendale with a new group of Norman and Saxon farmers under the control of a local Saxon chieftain called Wulfric (pronounced Uluric). On the Derbyshire side of Longdendale, which was under the control of William the Conqueror (King William I), many ancient Saxon families were able to remain in control of their lands. Neighbouring towns in Derbyshire such as Padfield, Dinting, Charlesworth and Ludworth had the same Saxon owners before and after conquest. 
The Domesday Book shows that Hollingworth was held directly by the Earl of Chester with no local lord in control of the manor at this time. The Saxon chieftain Wulfric appears to have managed the various manors of Longdendale, including Hollingworth, on behalf of the Earl of Chester. 
In 1211, William De Neville gave his son-in-law, Thomas de Burgh or Burgo, control of all the manors in Longdendale as the supreme over-lord. Around 1222, Thomas de Burgh took the neighbouring manor of Godley away from Albinus and gave it to Adam, son of Reginald de Bredbury. 
The earliest records for the Hollingworth family of Hollingworth manor are Tomas de Holinwurthe circa 1222, 1246; and Henry de Holenwart in 1222.
The ancient family of Hollingworth migrated to London, Lincoln, Maidestone in Kent and Dale Abbey in Derbyshire. A pedigree for the original family shows they descended in a continuous male line from the original Lords of Hollingworth to the present day. Branches of this ancient family still live in England, Australia and New Zealand.
Local gentry owning lands within Hollingworth manor 1280–1378:
A list of nobles and gentry owning lands at Hollingworth was recorded among the Davenport family's Puter Collections for Longdendale; which was a tax raised to finance a medieval constabulary. People required to pay puter for their lands in Hollingworth before 1342, include Nicholas Holynworthe, Robert the son of John de Holinworthe, Adam de Holinworthe, William Thortolgh (de Thorncliffe), Dolbe Traz, William Wolegh,  William de le Soleris, Ralph de Wolegh, Dike de Wolegh, Robert de le Soleris, John de la Halle and Dikon de le Soler. By 1342, land owners now include John de Holynworthe (lord of Hollingworth), Robert de Holynworthe (Mottram Old Hall), Robert Godart, William son of Gilbert Godleigh, Richard Wolegh, William Peryson and Christiana daughter of John, Lord of Holynworthe who was the wife of Tom de Honford (Thorncliffe Hall). In 1357, the owners of land in Hollingworth remained much the same, however Robert de Holynworthe was managing the manor on behalf of his brother John while he was absent during the French wars. Note: John Hollingworth, Robert Hollingworth and Christiana Honford (née Hollingworth) all held their share of Hollingworth manor by knights service, so it was customary for members of the family to be absent during the various wars with the Welsh, Scots and French. By 1378, the ownership of lands must have changed considerably, as those paying puter were John de Holynworth, Thomas de Holynworth, Richard le Barker, William Godley and Richard Stavely. 
By 1378, it would seem that at least seventeen different families had all owned lands within the manor of Hollingworth.

Notable descendants of the Lord de Holynworth

Arms

The arms of Captain Robert de Hollyngworthe include both the paternal arms of the Hollingworths (top left) emblazoned with the maternal arms of the Hollingworth family. The arms include De Holynworthe arms (top left), De le Grene arms (top centre), the Haywood arms top right. The arms of a junior branch of the Davenports (bottom left), unidentified arms bottom centre and the Masci arms bottom right.

Surname

In the neighbouring manor of Ashton-under-lynne another family used the surname of Hollinworth in 1422. The rental roll of the manor of Ashton-under-Lynne in Lancashire, records a John de Hollinworth renting a farm at 'Birchenshaw', Syssot the wife of Dycon de Hollinworth, using 'Palden Wood', Richard de Hollinsworth with the farm at 'Palden Legh' and possibly the same Richard de Hollinworth, renting tenements within the village of Ashton. 
These people do not appear to have come from Hollingworth manor in Cheshire. When Hibbet-ware compiled the Ashton-under-lynne rental roll for 1422, he notes that the family of Hollinworth documented within this rental roll, obtain their surname from the farm located at a place called the 'hollies' within Lord Asshton's manor. This is evidence of men with a single name such as John, Dycon and Richard, being given the surname 'de Hollinworth'. Families originating from Ashton-under-lynne with the surname Hollingworth appear to be unrelated to the family of de Holynworthe of Hollingworth Hall. This example, demonstrates how the surname of Hollingworth came to be used in places other than the village of Hollingworth.

History

The village is named after the Hollingworth of Hollingworth family. The Hollingworths of Hollingworth are descendants of the Anglo-Norman family Houxvert, from French houx vert, or green holly.com, accessed 2 July 2006 (Note: there is no evidence to support Frank Hollingworth's claim. See history above)
This is the conjecture of Frank Hollingworth, and he has published no research to back up the claims made that the family came with the Normans, not conquered by the Normans. The family motto is "Disce ferenda pati", or "Suffer that which must be borne", which is a veiled reference to the Norman Conquest of 1066 and the resulting subjugation of the Anglo-Saxon inhabitants, of which the Hollyngworthe family was one, and the village named for the family. 
The family estate or manor was known as Hollingworth Hall, no longer standing, but the family's chapel does still remain. The Hollingworth/Hollingsworth name is an early Saxon name originating around 1022 when this family moved into northeast Cheshire and purchased an estate named Hollingworth Manor. (Note: there is no evidence to support Frank Hollingworth's claim. See history above) The name means a "Farm of Holly Trees". The Domesday Survey made during the Norman Conquests lists this manor as lying on the edge of a great woods at Macclesfield.DVHS Family History: Hollingworth, accessed 16 January 2008
A visitation by an official herald in 1580 included the gentry, John Hollingsworth, Gentleman and Robert Hollingsworth of Hollinsworth. A further record of the time period states that Robert of Hollingsworth Hall is of whom the family descends. He was listed as the Magistrate for the counties of Cheshire and Lancaster. The church and hall belonging to this family that contain the Hollingsworth Coat of Arms is still standing. The last family member to own the hall, Capt. Robert Hollingsworth, died in 1865. The motto included was "Learn to suffer what must be borne."

Transport

The village is served by the A628 road (leading to the Woodhead pass to Barnsley) and the A57 road (leading to the Snake Pass to Sheffield). Going west, the A57 joins the M67 motorway a couple miles from the village. The M67 goes towards Manchester.  It has severe traffic congestion.

Education

There are two schools in Hollingworth: 

Culture and community






