[[Baruch Samuel Blumberg]]

CATEGORIES: 1925 births, 2011 deaths, Alumni of Balliol College, Oxford, American military personnel of World War II, American Nobel laureates, American Orthodox Jews, American physicians, American virologists, Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons alumni, Columbia University alumni, Far Rockaway High School alumni, Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, Jewish inventors, Jewish American scientists, Masters of Balliol College, Oxford, Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences, Nobel laureates in Physiology or Medicine, People from Brooklyn, People from Far Rockaway, Queens, Union College (New York) alumni, Deaths from myocardial infarction

Baruch Samuel "Barry" Blumberg (July 28, 1925April 5, 2011) was an American doctor and co-recipient of the 1976 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine (with Daniel Carleton Gajdusek) for his work on the Hepatitis B virus as an investigator at the NIH, and the President of the American Philosophical Society from 2005 until his death.
Blumberg received the Nobel Prize for "discoveries concerning new mechanisms for the origin and dissemination of infectious diseases." Blumberg identified the Hepatitis B virus, and later developed its diagnostic test and vaccine.

Early life and education

Blumberg was born in Brooklyn, New York, the son of Ida (Simonoff) and Meyer Blumberg, a lawyer.
Originally entering the graduate program in mathematics at Columbia University, Blumberg switched to medicine and enrolled at Columbia's College of Physicians and Surgeons, from which he received his M.D. in 1951. He remained at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center for the next four years, first as an intern and then as a resident. He then began graduate work in biochemistry at Balliol College, Oxford and earned his Ph.D there in 1957 as well as eventually being the first American to be master there.

Scientific career

Throughout the 1950s, Blumberg traveled the world taking human blood samples and studying the inherited variations in human beings, focusing on why some people contracted diseases in similar environments that others did not.  In 1964, while studying yellow jaundice, he discovered a surface antigen for hepatitis B in the blood of an Australian aborigine.
Blumberg became a member of the Fox Chase Cancer Center in Philadelphia in 1964, and held the rank of University Professor of Medicine and Anthropology at the University of Pennsylvania starting in 1977. Concurrently, he was Master of Balliol College from 1989 to 1994. He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1994.
In November 2004, Blumberg was named Chairman of the Scientific Advisory Board of United Therapeutics Corporation, as well as guiding the biotechnology company into the development of a broad-spectrum anti-viral medicine.
Beginning in 2005, Blumberg  also served as the President of the American Philosophical Society. He had been first elected to membership in the society in 1986.
In October 2010 Blumberg participated in the USA Science and Engineering Festival's Lunch with a Laureate program whereby middle and high school students of the Greater Washington D.C., Northern Virginia and Maryland area get to engage in an informal conversation with a Nobel Prize winning scientist over a brown bag lunch.[ref]
</ref>  Blumberg came to General George A. McCall Elementary on Sept. 29, 2010 as part of the program.
In an interview with the New York Times in 2002 he stated that "lives is what drew me to medicine. There is, in Jewish thought, this idea that if you save a single life, you save the whole world".
In discussing the factors that influenced his life, Blumberg always gave credit to the mental discipline of the Jewish Talmud, and as often as possible he attended weekly Talmud discussion classes until his death.

Death

Blumberg died on April 5, 2011,[ref]
