[[Chinatown, Las Vegas]]

CATEGORIES: Asian-American culture in Nevada, Las Vegas Valley, Chinatowns in the United States, Restaurant districts and streets, Chinatowns

The Chinatown in the Las Vegas Valley (

History

The history of Chinese population in the Las Vegas Valley shows that the Chinese population remained small throughout most of its history.  As a result, a Chinatown could only be created with initiative from entrepreneurs that would in essence fabricate a scenario that came naturally in other large cities that have historically important Chinatowns.
According to Tsui's book, Senator Harry Reid "... ordered a sign to be put up for Chinatown Interstate 15..." but was taken down by the order of the governor of Nevada Bob Miller.  In 1996, the Clark County, Nevada designated the area as "Chinatown".

Demographics

Originally, "Chinatown" was conceived for the purpose of serving Chinese-speaking tourists and businesses visiting Las Vegas from the Southern California area and Asia.  At present, the population of Asian Americans in the Las Vegas area (Clark County) is 132,032 and comprise 7.2% of the total population as of the 2005-2009 Census.Gov US Census for Clark County, United States Census, 2005-2009, accessed February 9, 2011.  Almost half of the of Las Vegas metropolitan area Chinese American population - numbering at 2,784 residents - are from Taiwan.  Some are also from mainland China and Southeast Asia.  There are significant numbers of ethnic Chinese in the city of Las Vegas as well as in the Las Vegas suburbs of Spring Valley and Paradise.  Filipinos remain the largest Asian ethnic group of the Las Vegas area, that is, the city itself and surrounding suburbs.
In comparison with the early 1990s when the size of the Chinese population was nominal, Las Vegas now has Chinese-language newspapers and a Chinese American Chamber of Commerce. The Las Vegas Chinese Daily News, based in Chinatown, was founded by an immigrant from Taiwan.  Other newspapers, such as conservative-leaning World Journal and liberal-leaning International Daily News, come from the Los Angeles area (specifically from Monterey Park).

Boundaries

The Chinatown (or the Asian business district) extends for  The owners of the grocery store in October 2009 estimated that Las Vegas has 200,000 Asian-Americans, of which 30,000 are Korean. The census bureau has previously estimated 128,594 Asian-Americans in their 2006-2008 Community Survey for Clark County. But an additional 127,215 respondents checked the some other race category which may include many people who decline to choose a race with which they most closely identify. Another 10,036 responded Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander and 60,416 responded two or more races. Adding in another 10% growth in county population since that time, the figure of 200,000 may be an underestimate.

Public transportation from the Strip

Public bus route #203 runs at half hour intervals starting from the bus stand next to the Fashion Show Mall near the base of the pedestrian bridge crossing from Treasure Island. Transit time on the bus to the district is from 8 to 18 minutes from the eastern end to western end. The 24-hour pass on The Deuce is also valid on local buses for no extra charge.

Shopping centers and malls

Chinatown Plaza

Located on Spring Mountain Road between Valley View Boulevard and Arville Street, Chinatown Plaza (中國城, Mandarin: zhong guo cheng) comprises  of bustling immigrant commerce, with restaurants offering regional Chinese and Hong Kong cuisine as well as other Asian cuisine (Filipino, Korean, Japanese, and Vietnamese).  The assortment of businesses also includes a book store (selling Chinese language publications), a ginseng shop, a travel agent, a VCD store, a bakery, and an optometrist.
The entrance of the parking lot of Chinatown Plaza is marked by an ornamental traditional Chinese arch (called in Mandarin Chinese paifang), providing an opportunity for photo-taking.  There are also statues in front of the mall depicting Xuan Zang and the Monkey King, characters from the epic Journey to the West, a Ming Dynasty-era classic from Chinese literature.

Others

Other shopping centers developed adjacently in recent years by other developers include:
These Las Vegas shopping centers contain unique architecture that combine traditional Chinese motifs and red gateways with modern-style strip malls found in American suburbia and are located well away from the touristy casino areas.  Chinatown is not a residential district as in other Chinatowns and very few live in the immediate vicinity. Nevertheless, it is a central location for a booming Asian origin population in Las Vegas.
Events==  	
During the Chinese New Year, the Chinatown Plaza hosts Las Vegas's annual Asian food festival with lion and dragon dance performances (performed by a local Shaolin group) and Japanese taiko drum performances as well as martial arts demonstrations. There are also stalls offering goods and services oriented around Chinese culture. The Miss Chinatown Las Vegas pageant is held in Chinatown Plaza, where the winner will represent Chinatown.
Similarly, Pacific Asian Plaza is the venue for the Chinese autumnal Moon Festival.
To promote cultural diversity and understanding, field trips to Chinatown Plaza bring students from local elementary schools and the University of Nevada, Las Vegas who are interested in learning about Chinese culture.





Further reading


