[[UTV (TV channel)]]

CATEGORIES: ITV franchisees, Television in Northern Ireland, Television channels and stations established in 1959, Television channels in the United Kingdom, UTV, Media in Belfast, Television stations in Ireland



UTV (formerly Ulster Television) is a commercial television broadcaster in Northern Ireland owned and operated by UTV Media plc as part of the UK-wide ITV Network. Formed in November 1958 and appointed as programme contractor for the Independent Television Authority soon after, UTV was the first indigenous broadcaster in Ireland and is today available throughout the island.

Reception

UTV can be watched via the following methods:

Terrestrial

The main transmitters which broadcast UTV's analogue and digital signals are based at Divis transmitting station outside Belfast,Divis on mb21 Transmission Gallery Each transmitter has a series of relay stations.
UTV was the last of the ITV stations to cease broadcasting on analogue transmitters. The analogue signal was closed at just after 11:35 pm on Tuesday 23 October 2012.

Satellite

Cable and MMDS

History

thumb|right|200px|UTV Player screenshotThe governing body of the Independent Television network, the Independent Television Authority, first advertised the franchise for Northern Ireland in September 1958. Two consortia applied for the franchise; one led by the Duke of Abercorn and supported by The Belfast Telegraph and The Northern Whig newspapers, the other led by the Earl of Antrim and supported by The News Letter and Sir Laurence Olivier. The ITA eventually persuaded both applicants to merge their bids to obtain the new franchise, on the provision that a greater stake of investment in the station was offered to Catholic sources.
With the ITA request met, the group, under the name Ulster Television Limited, set out their plans for broadcasting; initially, the station would try to provide 20 minutes of locally-sourced programmes per day, and the company arranged with ABC Television to sell advertising time and to maintain their studio premises at a former hemstitching warehouse in Havelock House on the Ormeau Road in Belfast.
Ulster Television went on air at 4.45 pm on Saturday 31 October 1959... Ulster Television's opening night, October 31, 1959"; dated 24 July 2004. Retrieved 17 June 2008. The station's opening was overseen by Lord Wakehurst, then Governor of Northern Ireland, and Sir Laurence Olivier introduced the opening ceremony. The station's first night of programming, introduced by duty announcer Adrienne McGuill, featured networked series such as The Adventures of Robin Hood and 77 Sunset Strip,Extract from Brum Henderson "Brum: A Life in Television", Belfast Telegraph, "Exclusive: My life on the box"; dated 4 October 2003. Retrieved 17 June 2008. two news bulletins from ITN and the 1949 feature film Task Force. Sir Laurence Olivier delivered the station's first epilogue, an excerpt from Joseph Addison's "The Spacious Firmament".
The following evening, UTV contributed a play to the Armchair Theatre series, A Shilling for the Evil Day, produced in association with ABC Television. Earlier in the day, the station broadcast its first unofficial colour production – a film of images from across Northern Ireland was broadcast entitled Ulster Rich and Rare, produced by Lord Wakehurst.
At launch, Ulster Television employed a staff of 100 people including six presenters: Ivor Mills and Anne Gregg were chosen as the presenters of local magazine programme Roundabout, Adrienne McGuill, James Greene and Brian Durkin were the first continuity announcers, and former rugby union international Ernest Strathdee was recruited as the station's sports presenter. Retrieved 17 June 2008.
Initially, Ulster Television's programmes would only be available to viewers located within range of the Black Mountain transmitter near Belfast. On the station's first night of programmes however, it was reported that some residents of Dublin, located over 100 miles away, had called the station to report poor picture reception. Coverage of UTV spread to Western areas of Northern Ireland when the Strabane transmitter opened in February 1963.
Ulster Television's UHF PAL colour service was launched with the opening of the UHF transmitter Divis in September 1970. This was followed by two additional transmitters at Limavady (opened in 1975) and Brougher Mountain (in 1978). The station was the last in the ITV network to begin 24-hour transmission in 1988.
At the company's annual general meeting in Belfast on 26 May 2006, the registered company name was changed from 'Ulster Television plc' to 'UTV plc'. The company believed that the existing name no longer reflected the full scope of the company's business.

Programmes

Current/recent series

Notable programmes shown on the ITV network

Contributions to series on the ITV network

Notable programmes shown on Channel 4

Notable regional programmes

Regional News programmes

Identity and presentation

Since 1959, Ulster Television have used different logos, or idents on-screen:

Continuity announcers

Current announcers

UTV is the only company in the ITV network to still broadcast in-vision continuity announcements, where the announcer appears in front of the camera to introduce the evening's programmes. Retrieved 26 March 2008. Ballantine, Browne, Neill and Porter also present UTV Live news bulletins. Retrieved 26 March 2008.
Former announcers/newscasters

Station theme tunes

In common with the rest of the ITV Network, the station aired specially composed signature tunes as part of its daily start-up routine. From launch until 1971, the opening theme was Seamus by the American musician, composer and bandleader Van Phillips, who had earlier written the theme tune of the popular 1950s BBC radio science fiction drama Journey Into Space. UTV's best known theme was The Antrim Road, a classical symphony composed by the English musician Wayne Hill, which was used between 1971 and 1983.

UTV HD

UTV HD, a simulcast of UTV in high-definition, launched on Virgin Media channel 113 on 5 October 2010.
Currently UTV's acquisition and presentation infrastructure is SD only; all HD content is line-fed to UTV in Belfast from Technicolor Network Services' transmission facility at Chiswick Park, with UTV's presentation and local content being upscaled and switched into the transmission chain for UTV HD using a simple A/B switcher.
In May 2011, the presentation infrastructure was upgraded to become fully HD-capable in readiness for the digital switchover in 2012.

UTV +1

On 4 January 2011, Freeview announced details for the launch of ITV1+1, together with the possibility that both STV and UTV will launch their own timeshift services, STV +1 and UTV +1 in Scotland and Northern Ireland respectively. The channel is available to Freeview viewers on channel 33 and Virgin Media cable customers on channel 114. The channel is not currently available on the Freesat and Sky satellite services.






