[[Ground Force]]

CATEGORIES: 1997 British television programme debuts, 2005 British television programme endings, BBC Television programmes, Gardening in the United Kingdom, Television series by Endemol, Makeover reality television series



Ground Force is a British garden makeover television series originally broadcast by the BBC between 1997 and 2005. The series was originally hosted by Alan Titchmarsh, Charlie Dimmock and Tommy Walsh and was produced by Endemol for the BBC.

Production

The series was created by Peter Bazalgette
The series moved to BBC One for the second series. Kirsty King joined the team after Titchmarsh left.
A number of new five-minute segments were filmed for Ground Force Revisited and appended onto repeats of earlier episodes, where Dimmock and Walsh revisited the garden concerned to surprise the owners and see how the gardens had developed.
The series was credited with helping the increase in sales of garden decking in the late 1990s and early 2000s due to its use during the series. Retailer B&Q had sales rise from £5,000 in 1997 to £16 million in 2001. In an interview in the Daily Mail, Titchmarsh said: "I am partly to blame for the decking boom, and I am sorry, I know it's everywhere these days."
The series was cancelled in 2005. Describing its cancellation, BBC Director-General Mark Thompson said that the series was "reaching the end of its natural life" and that "the public do get very cross when they see the BBC flogging a dead horse".
At its peak, the series attracted 12 million viewers. Repeats of Ground Force are currently shown on Home.

Music

The theme music for the series was performed by the Black Dyke Band, and included the following pieces:

Specials

The team worked on a number of other special projects, including:
The Ground Force team's final episode was aired in July 2005. It took place in the forecourt of the British Museum in London, where the team designed and created the Africa Garden as part of the Africa 05 celebration, the biggest celebration of African culture organised in the UK. The design of the garden features temperate, tropical and desert zones.

International versions

A New Zealand version of Ground Force aired on TV One from 1998-2003. It was titled Firth Ground Force, named after a local concrete and masonry company.
In 2000, the producers sought legal advice after accusing the Nine Network in Australia of producing a "carbon copy" of Ground Force entitled Backyard Blitz. A legitimate Australian version of Ground Force was already in production, and aired shortly after on the Seven Network. While this version of Ground Force was short lived, Backyard Blitz continued on until 2007.
Ground Force America is the American version, presented by Dimmock and Walsh. It began airing in 2003 on BBC America, and it was the channel's first original production. The channel had been airing the UK version since 1999.

Top Ground Gear Force

On 14 March 2008, Top Gear "resurrected" Ground Force in a Sport Relief special called Top Ground Gear Force where the presenters of Top Gear conducted a Ground Force style show on Sir Steve Redgrave's garden.Top Gear: Top Garden Ground Gear Force

Episodes

Nearly 100 episodes were produced and shown:
Specials






