[[Freddy Got Fingered]]

CATEGORIES: 2001 films, 2000s comedy films, American films, American comedy films, English-language films, Films directed by Tom Green, Directorial debut films, Skateboarding films, Worst Picture Golden Raspberry Award winners, Regency Enterprises films, 20th Century Fox films

Freddy Got Fingered is a 2001 American comedy film directed, co-written by and starring Tom Green. The film follows Green as Gordon "Gord" Brody, a 28-year-old slacker who wishes to become a professional cartoonist. The film's plot resembles Green's struggles as a young man trying to get his TV series picked up, which would later become the popular MTV show The Tom Green Show.
The film was critically panned at the time of its release, many considering it one of the worst films of all time. It won 5 Golden Raspberry Awards out of 8 nominations, as well as a Dallas-Fort Worth Film Critics Association Award for Worst Picture. The film received a cult following, and was also met with more positive praise over time, most notably from The New York Times, Metacritic, IFC. Despite performing poorly at the box office, the film became a financial success by selling millions of copies on DVD.

Plot

Throughout the film, unemployed 28-year-old cartoonist Gordon "Gord" Brody pursues his lifelong ambition to obtain a contract for an animated television series. He lives in Portland, Oregon with his parents. They give him a car, in which he heads off for Hollywood, and subsequently gets a job in a cheese sandwich factory in Los Angeles. Gord manages to speak to Dave Davidson, the CEO of a major animation studio, and shows him his drawings; despite noting that the drawings are "pretty good", Davidson disparages Gord's idea of an "X-Ray Cat", declaring it "fucking stupid".
A disheartened Gord quits his job and returns home to his parents, angering his dad, Jim. Jim constantly insults and belittles Gord, and also disparages Gord's girlfriend Betty, an attractive nurse in a wheelchair with an obsessive penchant for fellatio and an ambition to create a rocket-powered wheelchair. After Jim smashes Gord's handbuilt half-pipe, Gord falsely accuses Jim of sexual molestation of Gord's younger brother, Freddy. The 25-year-old Freddy is sent to a home for sexually-molested children, while Gord's mother, Julie, leaves Jim, and ends up dating Shaq.
After seeing Betty's successful experiment with a rocket-powered wheelchair, Gord returns to Hollywood, with a concept based on his relationship with his father, for a series called "Zebras in America". After Jim bursts in on Gord's proposal and trashes Davidson's office, Davidson is amused enough by Jim's antics to greenlight the series and give Gord a million dollar check. Gord kidnaps his father and takes him to Pakistan as a response to Jim's earlier insult: "If this were Pakistan, you would have been sewing soccer balls when you were four years old!". Father and son come to terms, but are soon kidnapped and held hostage. The kidnapping becomes a news item, as Gord's series is already highly popular. After four years, Gord and Jim return to America, with a huge crowd welcoming them home.

Cast

Release

The theatrical release is 89 minutes and received an R rating from the Motion Picture Association of America following requested cuts to tone it down from an NC-17, a rating which Tom Green described as "like porn with murder." As an extra on the DVD release, Green also included a version which he had edited to secure a PG rating. The PG-rated cut of Freddy Got Fingered is a mere three minutes long with a comedic voiceover. Some footage was leaked by the Newgrounds website before release.com. Years later, Tom Fulp, owner of Newgrounds, confirmed that the leak was a publicity stunt.

Reception

Box office

On a budget of $14 million, Freddy grossed $14,333,252 domestically in 59 days in North American cinemas. (available at highbeam research at  for someone with access to change this reference to point to)

Critical response

Upon its original release, the film received overwhelmingly negative reviews, many critics considering it one of the worst films of all time. Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 11% based on reviews from 93 professional critics, with an average rating of 2.7 out of 10. The site's consensus reads "Unfavorably comparing it with such infamously bad titles as Battlefield Earth, a significant number of critics are calling Tom Green's extreme gross-out comedy the worst movie they have ever seen." Metacritic, which assigns a weighted mean rating out of 100 to reviews from film critics, the film has an "Overwhelming dislike" rating score of 13% based on 25 reviews. CinemaScore polls revealed the average grades cinemagoers gave Freddy Got Fingered were C and D, and F from older viewers, on an A+ to F scale.
The Toronto Star created a one-time new rating for Freddy Got Fingered, giving it "negative one star out of five stars." CNN's Paul Clinton called it "quite simply the worst movie ever released by a major studio in Hollywood history" and listed the running time as "86 awful minutes."Clinton, Paul (April 19, 2001). "'Freddy Got Fingered' is a bad, bad film: Gross, stupid, sick. And that's being kind". CNN.
Film critic Roger Ebert gave the film a rare zero-stars rating, listed it as one of his most hated films of all-time, The magazine also ranked the film at #14 on its "25 Movies That Killed Careers". "25 Movies that Killed Careers - Freddy Got Fingered". Complex.
Richard Roeper, in the TV show At The Movies, hosted by Roeper and Ebert, called it "horrible" and expressed the view that Tom Green was a bad comedian, going so far as to say that he "should be flipping burgers somewhere". Along with Ebert, he was also offended by the numerous "gross-out" gags.
Film critic Leonard Maltin shared Ebert and Roeper's views of the film: "Instantly notorious word-of-mouth debacle became the poster child for all that's wrong with movie comedy. Gags include the maiming of an innocent child and a newborn spun around in the air by its umbilical cord—compounded by the almost unimaginable ineptitude with which they're executed."

Awards and nominations

The film received eight Golden Raspberry Award nominations in 2002, winning five. In acknowledgment of the critical consensus regarding the film's merits, Green personally appeared at the ceremony to accept his awards, making him the first to ever do so, saying: "I'd just like to say to all the other nominees in the audience: I don't think that I deserve it any more than the rest of you. I'd like to say that; I don't think that it would be true, though." It lost to Battlefield Earth.

=Resurgence=

Freddy Got Fingered began to see more positive praise over time. One of the few notable critics who gave it a generally positive review was A. O. Scott of The New York Times, who compared the film to conceptual performance art.
Later, in his review of the film Stealing Harvard, a film co-starring Green, Ebert wrote:
"Seeing Tom Green reminded me, as how could it not, of his movie Freddy Got Fingered, which was so poorly received by the film critics that it received only one lonely, apologetic positive review on the Tomatometer. I gave it—let's see—zero stars. Bad movie, especially the scene where Green was whirling the newborn infant around his head by its umbilical cord. But the thing is, I remember Freddy Got Fingered more than a year later. I refer to it sometimes. It is a milestone. And for all its sins, it was at least an ambitious movie, a go-for-broke attempt to accomplish something. It failed, but it has not left me convinced that Tom Green doesn't have good work in him. Anyone with his nerve and total lack of taste is sooner or later going to make a movie worth seeing."
The film has received a large cult following. In Tom Green's interview on The Opie and Anthony Show, host Opie noted the film had begun to be regarded as 'one of the funniest movies ever made'. Green notes that he was not trying to make The Jazz Singer'' and that many fans of the movie shout out scenes from the film regularly at his stand-up performance.
Unreality Magazine featured the movie in its list of "10 Hilarious Movies That Received Terrible Reviews", noting that critics' taste in comedies tend not to reflect the general public.

Director's Cut release

On March 9, 2010, on Loveline, Tom Green officially announced that a director's cut will be released.






