[[Locally convex topological vector space]]

CATEGORIES: Topological vector spaces

In functional analysis and related areas of mathematics, locally convex topological vector spaces or locally convex spaces are examples of topological vector spaces (TVS) that generalize normed spaces.   They can be defined as topological vector spaces whose topology is generated by translations of  balanced, absorbent, convex sets.  Alternatively they can be defined as a vector space with a family of seminorms, and a topology can be defined in terms of that family.  Although in general such spaces are not necessarily normable, the existence of a convex local base for the zero vector is strong enough for the Hahn–Banach theorem to hold, yielding a sufficiently rich theory of continuous linear functionals.
Fréchet spaces are locally convex spaces that are metrizable and complete with respect to this metric. They are generalizations of Banach spaces, which are complete vector spaces with respect to a norm.

Definition

Suppose ).  A locally convex space is defined either in terms of convex sets, or equivalently in terms of seminorms.

Convex sets

A subset  is called
More succinctly, a subset of .
A locally convex topological vector space is a topological vector space in which the origin has a local base of absolutely convex absorbent sets. Because translation is (by definition of "topological vector space") continuous, all translations are homeomorphisms, so every base for the neighborhoods of the origin can be translated to a base for the neighborhoods of any given vector.

Seminorms

A seminorm on  such that
If  is a norm.  While in general seminorms need not be norms, there is an analogue of this criterion for families of seminorms, separatedness, defined below.
A locally convex space is then defined to be a vector space .  The space carries a natural topology, the initial topology of the seminorms. In other words, it is the coarsest topology for which all the mappings
are continuous. A base of neighborhoods of , let
Note that
That the vector space operations are continuous in this topology follows from properties 2 and 3 above. The resulting TVS is locally convex because each  is absolutely convex and absorbent (and because the latter properties are preserved by translations).

Equivalence of definitions

Although the definition in terms of a neighborhood base gives a better geometric picture, the definition in terms of seminorms is easier to work with in practice.  The equivalence of the two definitions follows from a construction known as the Minkowski functional or Minkowski gauge.  The key feature of seminorms which ensures the convexity of their -balls is the triangle inequality.
For an absorbing set  to be
From this definition it follows that  is balanced and convex (it is also absorbent by assumption).  Conversely, given a family of seminorms, the sets
form a base of convex absorbent balanced sets.

Further definitions and properties

{{unordered list
|1= A family of seminorms .  A locally convex space is Hausdorff if and only if it has a separated family of seminorms.  Many authors take the Hausdorff criterion in the definition.
|2= A pseudometric is a generalisation of a metric which does not satisfy the condition that .  A locally convex space is pseudometrisable, meaning that its topology arises from a pseudometric, if and only if it has a countable family of seminorms.  Indeed, a pseudometric inducing the same topology is then given by
(where the , and therefore does not define a (pseudo)norm. The pseudometric is an honest metric if and only if the family of seminorms is separated, since this is the case if and only if the space is Hausdorff. If furthermore the space is complete, the space is called a Fréchet space.
|3= As with any topological vector space, a locally convex space is also a uniform space.  Thus one may speak of uniform continuity, uniform convergence, and Cauchy sequences.
|4= A Cauchy net  in a locally convex space is a net , 

Examples and nonexamples

Examples of locally convex spaces

Examples of spaces lacking local convexity

Many topological vector spaces are locally convex. Examples of spaces that lack local convexity include the following:
Both examples have the property that any continuous linear map to the real numbers is . In particular, their dual space is trivial, that is, it contains only the zero functional.

Continuous linear mappings

Because locally convex spaces are topological spaces as well as vector spaces, the natural functions to consider between two locally convex spaces are continuous linear maps.  Using the seminorms, a necessary and sufficient criterion for the continuity of a linear map can be given that closely resembles the more familiar boundedness condition found for Banach spaces.
Given locally convex spaces 
In other words, each seminorm of the range of  is a directed family, and it can always be chosen to be directed as explained above, then the formula becomes even simpler and more familiar:
The class of all locally convex topological vector spaces forms a category with continuous linear maps as morphisms.






