[[Slippy Toad]]

CATEGORIES: Animal characters in video games, Anthropomorphic characters in video games, Characters created by Shigeru Miyamoto, Extraterrestrial characters in video games, Fictional aviators, Fictional frogs and toads, Fictional mechanics, Inventor characters in video games, Male characters in video games, Mercenary characters in video games, Military personnel characters in video games, Nintendo protagonists, Star Fox characters, Video game sidekicks, Video game characters introduced in 1993



 is a player character in the Star Fox series of video games published by Nintendo. He was created by Shigeru Miyamoto along with Takaya Imamura, who also designed the character, and was based on the assistant director of the original Star Fox game. Slippy acts as the inventor and mechanic of Star Fox Team as well as the sidekick to Fox McCloud and Falco Lombardi.
Slippy first appeared in the 1993 game Star Fox. Since then, he has appeared in multiple Star Fox games. Reception to the character has been generally negative, with video game reviewers criticizing mainly his voice and appearance, which led Slippy to be included in several lists of the most annoying video game characters. On other hand, he was praised for being a "cute character".

Creation and design

The name "Slippy" in his name is a colloquial name to "Slippery" that was chose by Dylan Cuthbert in order to represente his "clumsy nature".

Appearances

Slippy's debut was in the 1993 Super Nintendo Entertainment System (SNES) action game Star Fox. After antagonist Andross launches an attack against the planet Corneria, the Star Fox team resolves to stop him. Slippy's design is that of an anthropomorphic green frog (despite his name). He is a member of the Star Fox team of mercenaries. However, as Slippy is relatively unskilled at flying, he is instead serving as the "brains" of the team, developing weapons, He designed the "blaster" and "reflector" weapons that they use.
Slippy makes a cameo in the Gamecube fighting game Super Smash Bros. Melee and in the 2008 Wii fighting game Super Smash Bros. Brawl in the "Shadow Moses Island" stage, conversing with Solid Snake about Falco if that character is selected. He also appears on the Lylat Cruise stage conversing with Star Fox and Star Wolf.

Reception

Critical opinion of Slippy has been generally negative; criticism has been leveled primarily at his voice. An article from IGN calls Slippy "an annoying croaking pest", also noting his "high-pitched cries for help". In an April Fools article IGN's Levi Buchanan epithetized his voice as "the sound of the earth cracking open just as the four horsemen visit plague and pestilence on humankind." 
Slippy has also been criticized for his inadequacy as a pilot; IGN stated that "he can never seem to help himself out of any kind of tight situation." The IGN team and Colin Moriarty ranked him third on their list of ten video game characters who should die, rationalizing that "we can't decide what makes him more annoying: his inadequacy in the cockpit or his ear-splitting voice."
In contrast to negative reception, GameSpy journalist Bryn Williams called him "that froggy legend".






