[[Royal Rumble]]

CATEGORIES: Royal Rumble, Professional wrestling match types, Recurring events established in 1988, Recurring sporting events established in 1988

The Royal Rumble is a professional wrestling pay-per-view event, produced every January by professional wrestling promotion WWE.

History

Match

The Royal Rumble is based on the classic Battle Royal match, in which a number of wrestlers aim at eliminating their competitors by tossing them over the top rope, with both feet touching the floor. The winner of the event is the last wrestler remaining after all others have been  eliminated.
The Royal Rumble differs from the classical Battle Royal as the thirty contestants do not enter the ring at the same time but instead are "assigned" entry numbers, usually via a lottery, although they can win guaranteed, desirable spots via a number of other scripted means, the most common being winning a match. This lottery is usually staged right before the event begins. The match begins with the two wrestlers who have drawn entry numbers one and two, with the remaining 28 wrestlers entering the ring at regular timed intervals, either 90 seconds or two minutes, according to their entry number. This format is credited to Pat Patterson. To date, only two men have won the Royal Rumble match starting from the number one spot, with Shawn Michaels being the first to do this in 1995, followed by Chris Benoit in 2004, although both Vince McMahon and Rey Mysterio won from the number two spot, which is functionally identical.
In 2000, Rock was declared the victor, as intended, until replays revealed that his feet had actually touched before those of The Big Show.  A rematch was held to determine who got the Wrestlemania title shot and Big Show won with the help of Shane McMahon.  Despite this, Rock was still added to the title match by Vince McMahon, and it was held early on a RAW broadcast.  Mick Foley was then added to the Wrestlemania title match by Linda McMahon and part of the hype was the idea of a McMahon in each corner (Stephanie McMahon being in her husband HHH's corner).  Rock is still officially regarded as the Rumble winner, despite replays and the rematch showing a different result.
Although most eliminations are caused by active participants, eliminations caused by other means have occurred, and have been ruled legitimate, including self-eliminations (such as Kane eliminating himself in 1999 and Drew Carey eliminating himself in 2001; however 1992's Randy Savage self-elimination was ruled illegitimate and he returned to the match) and elimination from previously-eliminated participates (such as The Undertaker eliminating Maven in 2002 and Kurt Angle eliminating Shawn Michaels in 2005). Furthermore, if an injured wrestler is taken away by medical staff, he can return to the match as long as the match is still ongoing (such as Steve Austin in 1999), but if the match ends without the injured wrestler returning, he is deemed eliminated (such as Scotty 2 Hotty in 2005).
The reward for winning the 1992 Royal Rumble was the WWF Championship. He also became the first since The Rock in 2000 to win the Royal Rumble match but fail to win the title in his championship opportunity as a result.
The Royal Rumble winner may also choose to put his championship opportunity on the line in a match. This was first done in 1996, when Shawn Michaels risked his WrestleMania XII title shot in a match against Owen Hart at In Your House 6. The second time was in 1999, when Steve Austin offered to forfeit his title opportunity to the Big Boss Man, who won third place in the Rumble (Austin was actually the runner-up in that rumble, but the winner—Vince McMahon himself—had voluntarily given up his title opportunity) if Vince McMahon could beat him in a cage match at St. Valentine's Day Massacre: In Your House, which Austin would go on to win. The third time was in 2002, when Kurt Angle convinced Triple H to put his WrestleMania X8 championship spot on the line at No Way Out, a match which Angle won. However, Triple H would later defeat Angle and regain his WrestleMania championship spot. The fourth time was in 2006, when Randy Orton goaded Rey Mysterio into putting his main event spot at WrestleMania 22 on the line at No Way Out, a match which Orton won. Mysterio was eventually reinserted into the main event at WrestleMania, making it a triple threat match, and went on to win the World Heavyweight Championship. On the February 25, 2013 edition of Raw, John Cena successfully defended his WrestleMania 29 WWE Championship opportunity in a match against CM Punk.
Five non-PPV Rumble matches have taken place. The first on January 17, 1994 at Madison Square Garden when Owen Hart last eliminated Fatu.  The second took place on House Show in May 9, 1994, when The Undertaker last eliminated Bam Bam Bigelow. The third took place on Raw is War in 1999, known as the Corporate Rumble, when Chyna last eliminated Vince McMahon to obtain the 30th entry in the Royal Rumble that year.  The fourth took place on Smackdown in 2004 when Eddie Guerrero last eliminated Kurt Angle to face Brock Lesnar at No Way Out for the WWE Championship. The fifth took place on Raw in 2011 when Jerry Lawler last eliminated Sheamus to face The Miz at Elimination Chamber for the WWE Championship.

Event

The Royal Rumble is a pay-per-view consisting of the Royal Rumble match, championship matches, and various other matches. The first Royal Rumble took place on January 24, 1988 and was broadcast live on the USA Network. The following year, the event was rebranded as a pay-per-view. It is part of WWE's "classic four" pay-per-views, along with WrestleMania, Survivor Series, and SummerSlam. Main Event: WWE in the Raging 80s (p.166)
The Royal Rumble match is usually located at the top of the card, though there have been exceptions such as the 1988, 1996, 1997, 1998, 2006, and 2013 events.  Due to the Rumble match taking up a large amount of time (most Rumble matches last roughly one hour), the Rumble event tends to have a smaller card than most other pay-per-view events, which routinely have six to eight matches per card.
The first Rumble match featured only twenty men, The modern Rumble matches are much longer, with the longest match, at the 2002 event, lasting over one hour and nine minutes of an approximately three-hour pay-per-view.
With the brand extension introduced in mid-2002, the 30 entrants from 2003 to 2006 consisted of 15 wrestlers from both the Raw and SmackDown brands. At first, the winner of the match received a shot at their brand's champion.
The 2011 edition is the only such match that has had a forty participant field as opposed to the nominal thirty.
The 2008 Royal Rumble was the first WWE pay-per-view to be available in high-definition.

Dates, venues and winners

 1. This Rumble featured 20 participants.

 2. This Rumble featured 40 participants.

Royal Rumble winner's WrestleMania title shots

Royal Rumble records

Most Rumble Victories
Longest Time Spent in a Single Royal Rumble

Top twenty individual superstar longest times in a single Royal Rumble match. As of the 2014 Royal Rumble.
(Note: Bold letters indicates the winner of that year's royal rumble match.)
Longest Cumulative Time Spent in Royal Rumbles

Only wrestlers who have spent more than 3 cumulative hours are shown.
As of the 2014 Royal Rumble.
Shortest Time Spent in a Single Royal Rumble

Only wrestlers who spent 10 seconds or less in a single rumble are shown.
Most Eliminations in a Single Royal Rumble

Top wrestlers with most eliminations in a single match. Only wrestlers with at least seven eliminations are shown. As of the 2014 Royal Rumble. 
Total Eliminations in Cumulative Royal Rumbles

Top wrestlers with the most eliminations. Only wrestlers with at least 15 eliminations are shown. As of the 2014 Royal Rumble.[ref]


Most Rumble Appearances

Only wrestlers with at least  6 appearances are shown. As of the 2014 Royal Rumble.
Diva Entrants

Video box set

In March 2007, WWE released a complete DVD box set titled Royal Rumble: The Complete Anthology, which showcases every Royal Rumble event in its entirety, up to the 2007 Royal Rumble.





Further reading




