[[USS Joseph Strauss (DDG-16)]]

CATEGORIES: Charles F. Adams-class destroyers, Ships built in New Jersey, 1961 ships, Cold War destroyers of the United States, Vietnam War destroyers of the United States, Kimon-class destroyers

The USS ''Joseph Strauss'' (DDG-16), named for Admiral Joseph Strauss USN (1861–1948), was a Charles F. Adams-class guided missile armed destroyer of the United States Navy.
The Joseph Strauss was laid down by the New York Shipbuilding Corporation at Camden in New Jersey on 27 December 1960, launched on 9 December 1961 by Mrs. Lawrence Haines Coburn, granddaughter of Admiral Joseph Strauss and commissioned on 20 April 1963.
The Joseph Strauss served as plane guard for carriers on Yankee Station in the Tonkin Gulf, participated in Sea Dragon operations, patrolled on search and rescue duties and carried out Naval Gunfire Support missions during the Vietnam War.

1960s

The Joseph Strauss departed Philadelphia 6 June 1963 for a brief cruise to Puerto Rico and Willemstad, Curaçao, and then transited the Panama Canal to join the Pacific Fleet on the western seaboard. She arrived in the Long Beach Naval Shipyard 13 July 1963 for alterations, followed by tactics out of San Diego north to Seattle, Wash.
As flagship of Destroyer Squadron 3, Joseph Strauss sailed from Long Beach 30 June 1964. After calling at Pearl Harbor and Midway Atoll, she arrived in Yokosuka, Japan, 18 July. While in port at Yokosuka, the crew of the Strauss learned that North Vietnamese PT boats had attacked the U.S. destroyer .
Following upkeep in Subic Bay (1–10 March), the Joseph Strauss sailed with ships of the Royal Thai Navy for exercises in the Gulf of Thailand. She was briefly flagship of the 7th Fleet (22–26 March) during the official visit of Vice Admiral Paul B. Blackburn, Jr., to Bangkok, Thailand. She departed Yokosuka, 19 April for operations that brought recognition and honor to both the ship and her crew.
From 24 April 1965, the Joseph Strauss, together with the , under the Joseph Strauss advisory control, shot down two MIG-17's, accounting for the first two hostile aircraft downed by U.S. Forces in aerial combat since 1953. Three days later, two propeller-driven Skyraiders, also from Midway and under the Joseph Strauss advisory air control shot down another MiG-17.   As a result, members of the Strauss Combat Information Center team were decorated by the Secretary of the Navy.
The Joseph Strauss arrived in Hong Kong 6 July 1965, putting out to sea 14 to 16 July to avoid Typhoon Freda, and again 18 to 19 July to carry the 7th Fleet Salvage Officer to Pratus Reef to assist in refloating . She departed Hong Kong 21 July for Yokosuka. The following day she took a disabled Nationalist Chinese fishing boat in tow and delivered it safely to Keelung the 23d, thence sailed to Yokosuka, arriving 25 July for upkeep.
On 3 September 1965, she successfully fired two improved Tartar missiles off Okinawa. After a 1-day stop at Sasebo, Joseph Strauss proceeded south in the screen of  in the Gulf of Tonkin. She returned to Yokosuka 7 December 1965 for upkeep and preparations to resume operations off South Vietnam. The Joseph Strauss returned to the Gulf of Tonkin 10 February 1966 and remained active in the war zone until heading for Hong Kong exactly one month later. Back in the fighting 26 April, she remained in the war zone until returning to Yokosuka 15 June. That day her home port was changed to Pearl Harbor which she reached 26 July.
The Joseph Strauss operated in the Hawaiian area until heading back for the Western Pacific 14 January 1967. She remained in the Far East supporting the struggle against Communist aggression until returning to Pearl Harbor 17 June.

Operation Praying Mantis

On 14 April 1988,  sighted three mines floating approximately one-half mile from the ship. Twenty minutes after the first sighting, as the Samuel B. Roberts was backing clear of the minefield, she struck a submerged mine nearly ripping the warship in half. The crew stabilized the ship. The Samuel B. Roberts was sent back to the United States for repair.
On 18 April 1988, Operation Praying Mantis took place which was an attack by U.S. Naval Forces in retaliation for the Iranian Mining of the Persian Gulf and damage to an American ship (the Samuel B. Roberts).S. Navy History. The Americans attacked with several groups of surface warships, plus aircraft.
In the middle of the action, the Joshan, an Iranian Combattante II Kaman-class fast attack craft, challenged ) closed on the Joshan, destroying it with naval gunfire. Fighting continued when the Iranian frigate Sahand departed Bandar Abbas and challenged elements of an American surface group. The frigate was spotted by two VA-95 A-6Es while they were flying surface combat air patrol for the Joseph Strauss. The Sahand fired missiles at the A-6Es, and the Intruders replied with two Harpoons and four laser-guided Skipper bombs. The Joseph Strauss added a Harpoon. Most, if not all, of the U.S. weapons hit the Iranian ship. Fires blazing on the Sahands decks eventually reached her magazines, causing an explosion that helped sink the ship. Despite the loss of the Sahand, one of Iran's most modern ships, the Iranian navy continued to fight. Late in the day, a sister ship, the Sabalan, departed from its berth and fired a surface-to-air missile at several A-6Es from VA-95. Intruder pilot Engler dropped a laser-guided bomb on the Sabalan, leaving the ship dead in the water. The Iranian frigate, stern partially submerged, was taken in tow by an Iranian tug.

Decommissioning

The Joseph Strauss was decommissioned on 1 February 1990, transferred to Greece on 1 October 1992 and renamed the Formion, for the Athenian Admiral Formion, and stricken from the Naval Vessel Register on 11 January 1995.  Greece decommissioned the Formion on 29 July 2002 and the ship was sold as scrap 19 February 2004.






