[[Kochira Katsushika-ku Kameari Kōen-mae Hashutsujo]]

CATEGORIES: 1976 manga, 1996 anime television series, 1999 anime films, 2003 anime films, Japanese television dramas based on manga, Japanese television dramas, Kochira Katsushika-ku Kameari Kōen-mae Hashutsujo, Manga adapted into films, Shōnen manga, Shueisha manga, Gallop (studio), Animax shows, Fuji Television shows, Anime series based on manga

, is a Japanese comedy manga series written and illustrated by Osamu Akimoto. It takes place in the present day, in and around a neighborhood police station (kōban) in the downtown part of Tokyo, and revolves around the misadventures of middle-aged cop Kankichi Ryotsu. 
It has been continuously serialized in Weekly Shōnen Jump since September 1976 with over 1700 chapters collected into 189 tankōbon volumes, making it the manga series with the highest number of volumes.

Plot

The typical Kochikame plot involves Kankichi "Ryo-san" Ryotsu coming up with a money-making scheme by inventing a new gadget or capitalizing on a fad, achieving great success, calling on Keiichi Nakagawa's help as things turn sour, and finally losing it all as the fad runs out of steam or out of control. While the plots are gag-driven, much of the humor comes from the combination of mundane characters with those that are bizarrely out of place; such as Nakagawa who has wealth and Ai Asato who has appeal. What they have in common is everyone's lack of actual police work, most of which is never explained or rationalized in the slightest. (It is explained in Jump that Ryo-san is one of the best officers at catching criminals.) Nakagawa and Reiko Akimoto have special licenses (such as for wearing personal clothes instead of uniforms to work) from police headquarters because of their skills in linguistics.
The plot have consistently evolved with the on-going times, though most of the main characters have not really aged despite the fact that the series started in the 1970s and is now clearly set in 2010s. However some characters have aged (like the grandchild of Buchao, who was a baby in the early books but is now close to junior high) at a relatively reasonable pace, which the author has self mocked in a few "look back" episodes.
Kochikame has a broad audience, ranging from adolescent boys to middle-aged salarymen. Much like Homer Simpson, Ryo-san's antics appeal to children who can laugh at an old buffoon and to men fearing that they are becoming old buffoons themselves and also because it often subtly mocks the latest fads and trends. The stories are generally innocent in content, and what little violence appears is comical, while the occasional risqué subjects are included strictly for laughs rather than to titillate. In another parallel to The Simpsons, Kochikame's immense popularity has led to guest appearances in the strip by real-life Japanese celebrities such as Tetsuya Komuro.
For creator Osamu Akimoto, Kochikame is an ongoing homage to the working-class people and districts of old Tokyo, and most episodes open with an elaborate full-page illustration of a Shitamachi (down-town) street scene, typically with old wooden buildings and boys playing in the streets.

Media

Manga

Written and illustrated by Osamu Akimoto, Kochira Katsushika-ku Kameari Kōen Mae Hashutsujo has been continuously serialized in Weekly Shōnen Jump since September 1976. Periodically the chapters are collected into tankōbon volumes by publisher Shueisha; the first released on July 9, 1977.

Anime

A television anime adaptation of Kochikame began airing on Fuji Television on June 16, 1996. Produced by Studio Gallop, it ran for eight years and 373 episodes before ending on December 19, 2004.
Studio Gallop also produced two animated theatrical films, released on December 23, 1999 and December 20, 2003 respectively.

Live-action

Kochikame has also had a live-action movie and several stage adaptations. The movie was directed by Kazuhiko Yamaguchi, starred Mitsuo Senda as Ryo-san and was released in 1977. A second live-action movie, based on this TV series and titled Kochikame - The Movie: Save The Kachidiki Bridge!, opened in Japan on August 6, 2011.

Other media

Ryotsu appears playable in the Weekly Shōnen Jump crossover fighting video games Jump Super Stars, Jump Ultimate Stars and J-Stars Victory Vs. Other characters from the series appear in a non-playable capacity.
In addition, various toys and collectibles have been created, including some items that first appeared in the manga as creations of Ryo-san.

The real-life Kochikame

Kameari Koen is an actual park in Tokyo's Katsushika ward. The station is fictional, but it is modeled after a real one located on the north side of Kameari railway station. The manga has brought considerable fame to the neighborhood, and it draws sightseers from all over Japan to a (usually vacant) station in a nondescript residential neighborhood.
In February 2006, a life-size bronze statue of Ryo-san was erected in front of Kameari station. There is currently a trail of 11 statues in the area.

September 2006: Kochikame Anniversary

In commemoration of the 30th anniversary of Kochira Katsushika-ku Kameari Kōen Mae Hashutsujo's serialization, several special events were held. Separate one-shots of the series were published in thirteen different Shueisha magazines between August and October 2006.
In September 2006, Ryo-san made a cameo in every serialized manga in Weekly Shōnen Jump; most notably, he had a full appearance as a marine in One Piece (chapter 427), as a spectator of the Taiyo/Hakushuu football game in Eyeshield 21, as a crazed citizen in Majin Tantei Nougami Neuro, as a zombie in Gintama (also emphasized in the animated version of the chapter) and drinking alongside Don Patch in Bobobo-bo Bo-bobo.
At the same time, a special manga known as  was published featuring the Kochikame characters in special chapters of series such as Golgo 13, Lupin III, Kinnikuman and Dragon Ball, as well as congratulatory pics from over 80 manga artists, many from Weekly Shōnen Jump authors past and present, but also from other Shueisha manga artists and even from manga artists not associated with Shueisha such as Hiromu Arakawa (Fullmetal Alchemist) and George Morikawa (Hajime no Ippo). Notable congratulatory drawings include a Bankai challenge with Ichigo in Bleach (saying his pistol is his Bankai because of the "BANG!!" sound of his pistol), having his face on the mountain depicting the Hokage of Konohagakure in Naruto and even solving the "Kira" crisis in Death Note.








