[[Lubumbashi]]

CATEGORIES: Lubumbashi, Populated places in Katanga Province, Populated places established in 1910

Lubumbashi (formerly official names:  (Dutch)) in the southeastern part of Democratic Republic of the Congo, is the second largest city in the country, second only to the nation's capital Kinshasa. Lubumbashi is the mining capital of the Democratic Republic of Congo, acting as a hub for many of the country's biggest mining companies.  Population estimates vary widely but average around 1.5 million.

Geography

Lubumbashi lies at around 1,208 meters (3,963 ft.) above sea level. The high altitude serves to cool somewhat the Climate year round which would be very hot otherwise. The Kafue River rises along the Zambian border near the city and meanders through north-central Zambia to the Zambezi River, cutting a long, deep, panhandle into that Country.

Climate

Lubumbashi has a humid subtropical climate (Cwa, according to the Köppen climate classification), with warm rainy summers and pleasant, dry winters, with most rainfall occurring during summer and early autumn. Annual average rainfall is 1,238 mm (48.75 inches).

Government

From 2000–2006, Floribert Kaseba Makunko served as mayor of Lubumbashi; he was later elected to the National Assembly in 2006.

Elisabethville under Belgian rule

Belgian people established the modern day government in the city of Élisabethville (sometimes Elizabethville, both in French, or Elisabethstad in Dutch) in 1910, named in honour of their queen Elisabeth, wife to king Albert I. 
The location of the city was chosen by Vice-Governor-General Emile Wangermée because of the proximity to the copper mine of Etoile du Congo and the copper ore smelting oven installed by Union Minière du Haut Katanga on the nearby Lubumbashi river.
The Comité Spécial du Katanga (CSK), a semi-private concessionary company set up in 1906, had its headquarters in Elisabethville throughout the colonial era. It enjoyed large privileges, mainly in terms of land and mining concessions, in the Katanga province.
The city prospered with the development of a regional copper mining industry. and J.-L. Moreau (2006), De la mine à Mars, La genèse d'Umicore, Tielt : Lannoo. Huge investments in the 1920s, both in the mining industry and in transport infrastructure (railline Elisabethville-Port Francqui and Elisabethville-Dilolo), turned the Katanga province into one of the world's major copper ore producers. The population of the city grew apace from approx. 30,000 in 1930, to 50,000 in 1943 and 180,000 in 1957. It was the second city of the Belgian Congo, after Léopoldville.
The city was the seat of the apostolic vicariat of Katanga. The first apostolic vicar, the formidable and authoritarian Mgr Jean-Felix de Hemptinne, occupied this post from the 1930s until his death in 1958. He is buried in the city's cathedral St Pierre et Paul.
As was customary in sub-saharan colonies, the city centre of Elisabethville was reserved for the white (European) population. This consisted mainly of Belgians, but there were also important British and Italian communities, as well as Jewish Greeks. Congolese were only allowed to be present in the white city during the day, except for the house servants ("boys") who often lived in precarious dwellings ("boyeries") in the backyards of the European city houses.
The black population consisted of labour immigrants from neighbouring regions in the Belgian Congo (Northern Katanga, Maniema, Kasaï), from Belgian Rwanda and Burundi and from British Northern Rhodesia (Zambia). The black population lived initially in a so-called cité indigène, called quartier Albert (now: Kamalondo), south of the city centre and separated from the white city by a 700 metres wide neutral zone. With population growth new indigenous quarters were created, that still form the main suburbs of present-day Lubumbashi: Kenia, Katuba, Ruashi. The proximity of the mines made Elisabethville the most prosperous region of the Congo during the final decade of Belgian rule. In 1954 there were eight thousand black home owners in the city while thousands more were skilled workers. It was estimated that black Africans living in Elisabethville had a higher standard of living than anywhere else on the continent at that time. John Gunther, page 640 "Inside Africa" Hamish Hamilton Ltd London 1955
Miners in Élisabethville conducted a strike in December 1941 to protest the increasingly severe forced-labor regime that the Belgians imposed on the population, because of the "war efforts". A rally in the Union Minière football stadium got out of hand. Police opened fire and numerous protesters were killed. In early 1944, the city was again in the grip of severe tensions and fear of violent protests, following a mutiny of the Force Publique in Luluabourg.
Starting in 1933, the Belgian colonial authorities experimented with a limited form of self-governance by creating the cité indigène of Elisabethville into a so-called "centre extra-coutumier" (a centre not subject to customary law), administered by an indigenous council and presided over by an indigenous chief. However, through constant interference from the Belgian authorities, the experiment soon proved a failure. (1951), Le Centre Extra-Coutumier d'Elisabethville, Elisabethville-Bruxelles: CEPSI-Institut Royal Colonial Belge. The first indigenous chief – Albert Kabongo – appointed in 1937, was dismissed in 1943 and not replaced. The system was abandoned in 1957, when Elisabethville was created a fully autonomous city and the first free municipal elections were organised in which the Congolese population participated. The people of Élisabethville gave a vast majority to the Nationalist Alliance de Bakongo, which demanded immediate independence from the Belgians.
Elisabethville functioned as the administrative capital of the Katanga province. It was also an important commercial and industrial centre, and a centre of education and health services. The Benedictine Order and Order of Salesians offered a wide range of educational facilities to Europeans and Congolese alike, including vocational training (Kafubu). The Belgians established the University of Élisabethville in 1954–1955 (now the University of Lubumbashi). 

Lubumbashi from 1960

Élisabethville served as the capital and centre of the secessionist independent state of Katanga during the 1960–1963 Congolese civil war. Moise Tshombe proclaimed Katangan independence in July 1960.  Congolese leaders arrested him and charged him with treason in April 1961; however, he agreed to dismiss his foreign advisers and military forces in exchange for his release.  Tshombe returned to Élisabethville but repudiated these assurances and began to fight anew.  United Nations troops opposed Katangan forces and took control of the city in December 1961 under a strong mandate. Roger Trinquier, well known for his published works on counter-insurgency warfare, served as a French military advisor to President Tshombe until international pressure, led by Belgium, caused his recall to France.
Mobutu Sese Seko ultimately assumed power and renamed Élisabethville "Lubumbashi" in 1966 and, in 1972 renamed Katanga "Shaba."
In May 1990, the university campus of Lubumbashi was the scene of a brutal killing among students by Mobutu's security forces. In 1991–92 ethnic tensions between the Luba from Katanga and the Luba from Kasaï resident in the city led to violent confrontations and the forced removal from the city of the latter.
Congo entered another genocidal civil war in the late 1990s.  The Alliance of Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Congo rebels captured Lubumbashi in April 1997. Rebel leader Laurent-Désiré Kabila spoke from Lubumbashi to declare himself president of the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 17 May 1997 after Mobutu Sese Seko fled Kinshasa.
When Laurent-Désiré Kabila decided to appoint a transitional parliament, in 1999, a decision was made to install the Parliament in Lubumbashi, in order to consolidate the fragile unity of the country. The parliament was installed in the building of the National Assembly of secessionist Katanga (the former city theatre), which had its capital in this city as well, in the 1960s. Lubumbashi was therefore the Legislative capital of the Democratic Republic of the Congo from 1999 to 2003, when all the country's central institutions were brought back to Kinshasa.
On 7 September 2010 a large prison break happened in Lubumbashi after gunmen attacked a prison on the outskirts of the city. 960 prisoners managed to escape, including the Mai-Mai leader Gédéon Kyungu Mutanga.
On 23 March 2013 a militia group of 100 fighters attacked Lubumbashi and seized a United Nations compound which was then surrounded by Congolese soldiers and members of the president's Republican Guard.

Economy

Lubumbashi serves as an important commercial and national industrial centre. Manufactures include textiles, food products and beverages, printing, bricks, and copper smelting. The city is home to the Simba brewery, producing the famous Tembo beer.
The area also has a daily newspaper.
The city hosts the headquarters of one of the country's largest banks, Trust Merchant Bank.  The airline Korongo Airlines, a joint-venture between Brussels Airlines and the Belgian multinational Groupe George Forrest International, also maintains its head office in Lubumbashi.

Mining

Lubumbashi, the mining capital of the Democratic Republic of Congo, is a hub for many of the country's biggest mining companies. The Democratic Republic of Congo produces "more than 3 percent of the world's copper and half its cobalt, most of which comes from Katanga." 

Transport

Rail

Lubumbashi lies at the centre of railway lines to Ilebo, Kindu, Sakania and Kolwezi.
In the 1960s, the section from Mutshatsha to Lubumbashi was electrified at 25 kV AC.

Air

Lubumbashi is home to the modern Lubumbashi International Airport.  The city consequently serves as a distribution centre for such minerals as copper, cobalt, zinc, tin, and coal.

Tourism and culture

Attractions in the city include a botanical garden, a zoo and the regional archaeological and ethnological National Museum of Lubumbashi. Some of the most prominent examples of colonial architecture, such as the art-déco style Palace of Justice, the Grand Hotel or the cathedral St Pierre et Paul, have been restored over recent years.
The city also hosts the major University of Lubumbashi, which maintains a library.

Language(s)

Although French is the official language, the main lingua franca in Lubumbashi is Kiswahili although it is not the 'pure' form found in Tanzania. The dialect of Kiswahili spoken all down the east side of Congo (including the provinces of North Kivu, South Kivu, Maniema, Katanga and Oriental, Western Kasai and Eastern Kasai) and almost all the way across to the Katangan border with Angola is called Kingwana.richmond.htm As many people move into Lubumbashi for employment from rural areas there many other local languages spoken in Lubumbashi including kiluba, Chokwe, Bemba and Kisanga but Kiswahili has always been the most practical and suitable solution for the prospering mines and surging ethnic influx.blogspot.html

Sports

Lubumbashi is home to football clubs TP Mazembe, FC Saint Eloi Lupopo and CS Don Bosco. Chairman of Mazembe is the current governor of the province of Katanga Moïse Katumbi Chapwe. 
Basketball players Myck Kabongo and Bismack Biyombo are from Lubumbashi.

Sister city






