[[Jaywalking]]

CATEGORIES: Crimes, Road safety, Walking

Jaywalking is illegal or reckless pedestrian crossing of a roadway. Examples include a pedestrian crossing between intersections without yielding to drivers and starting to cross a crosswalk at a signalized intersection without waiting for a permissive indication to be displayed. In the United States, state statutes generally reflect the Uniform Vehicle Code in requiring drivers to yield the right of way to pedestrians at crosswalks; at other locations, crossing pedestrians are either required to yield to drivers or, under some conditions, are prohibited from crossing. The term's dissemination in the 1920s and 1930s was due in part to the redefinition of some streets as places where pedestrians do not belong.
The United Kingdom does not formally describe priority regulations for drivers and pedestrians at road junctions or other locations, except with respect to marked Zebra, Pelican, and Puffin crossings, where motorists are required to give way to pedestrians under defined conditions. Elsewhere, the Highway Code relies on the pedestrian making their own judgement on whether it is safe to cross based on the Green Cross Code.  If the pedestrian's judgement was correct then no evasive re-action should be required by any drivers, but drivers are expected to avoid hazards and are examined on their ability to do so during the Hazard Perception Test.

Origin of the term

According to recent research, the earliest use of the word jaywalker in print was in the Chicago Tribune in 1909. (The earliest citation in the Oxford English Dictionary is from 1917.) The term's dissemination was due in part to a deliberate effort by promoters of automobiles, such as local auto clubs and dealers, to redefine streets as places where pedestrians do not belong. Norton, "Street Rivals: Jaywalking and the Invention of the Motor Age Street," Technology and Culture 48 (April 2007), 331-359 (342).bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-26073797
The word jaywalk is a compound word derived from the word jay, an inexperienced person, and walk. Fourth Edition, 2000. No historical evidence supports an alternative folk etymology by which the word is traced to the letter "J" (characterizing the route a jaywalker might follow).
In towns in the American Midwest in the early 20th century, "jay" was a synonym for "rube," a pejorative term for a rural resident, assumed by many urbanites to be stupid, slightly unintelligent, or perhaps simply naïve. Such a person did not know to keep out of the way of other pedestrians and speeding automobiles.A history of "jaywalking." February 1, 2009, citing Peter D. Norton, Fighting Traffic MIT, 2008, pp. 72-79.  It may also have been coined from the existing American word Jayhawker, being a term for American guerilla fighters in Kansas in the 19th century.
Originally, the legal rule was that "all persons have an equal right in the highway, and that in exercising the right each shall take due care not to injure other users of the way."Miller McClintock for the Chicago Association of Commerce, "Report and Recommendations of the Metropolitan Street Traffic Survey", p. 133, quoted by Norton, Fighting Traffic, on p. 289.  In time, however, streets became the province of motorized traffic, both practically and legally. Automobile interests in the USA took up the cause of labeling and scorning jaywalkers in the 1910s and early 1920s; a counter-campaign to name (and disapprove of) "jay drivers" failed. 79-79.

Causes

People jaywalk for various reasons, including technical, religious and more mundane ones. For example, the common practice of car-centric traffic-signal synchronization produces green waves for motorists but not necessarily for pedestrians, who may encounter little or no conflicting traffic at cross streets where signals instruct them to wait. Where signalized crosswalks require a pedestrian to trigger their operation, they are at times unusable for some Jewish people who observe Shabbat. Also, pedestrians are generally unwilling to observe lengthy wait times at signals. They are also more likely to make "informal crossings" at wide roads, or at locations where formal crosswalks are simply too distant to be practical for them to use. Also, pedestrians may dislike using intersections for other reasons, such as being uncomfortable dealing with traffic from a multitude of directions (whereas jaywalking at a location distant from an intersection results in the need to observe only two directions of traffic), or wanting to avoid the extra air emissions generated by vehicles stopping and starting (given that vehicular emissions are significantly less when vehicles are moving at steady speeds).
Pedestrians in London were found to be more likely to follow the traffic-engineer preferred way through intersections with a design that is attentive to the needs of pedestrians.

Safety

Jaywalking is generally perceived as an urban traffic safety problem. Many American newspapers publish stories that are critical of pedestrian road users' safety practices, while police departments often instigate education and enforcement campaigns to curb jaywalking. While nearly three fifths of American pedestrian deaths occur outside of crosswalks, fewer than one fifth occur in close proximity to a crosswalk.

Legal issues by jurisdiction

When used in the technical sense, jaywalking specifically refers to violation of pedestrian traffic regulations and laws and is therefore illegal. In many countries, such regulations do not exist and jaywalking is an unknown concept.

Europe

=United Kingdom=

The term "jaywalking" is rarely used, and there is no law preventing jaywalking as such. In England, Wales and Scotland it is legal to cross (or indeed, walk along) all roads except motorways (where pedestrians and slow vehicles are not permitted), and roads with the "No Pedestrians" sign displayed.
The Highway Code contains additional rules for crossing a road safely,
When crossing a road, pedestrians are advised to wait until it is safe to cross. Vehicles have priority when crossing a road, although, if a pedestrian is crossing the road across a side street where a car is about to turn, vehicles should give way to the pedestrian. This is demonstrated in the Highway Code. In UK schools children are taught to cross roads safely through the Green Cross Code. British children are taught to "Stop, Look, Listen and Think" before crossing a road, as demonstrated in the Arrive Alive campaign.
Zebra crossings can be seen in many roads in towns and cities. These are points where pedestrians can cross with the right of way. Vehicular traffic should stop at zebra crossings, both for pedestrians on the crossing and for any waiting to cross.  The Highway Code advises pedestrians to walk within the marked path (studs or stripes) of pedestrian crossings; and not to cross the carriageway over the zig-zag lines painted either side of the crossing itself. 
In Northern Ireland, jaywalking can be charged at police discretion and usually only in the case of an accident when clearly witnessed. Otherwise, Northern Ireland is essentially the same as elsewhere in the UK.

=Belgium=

In Belgium, pedestrians are obligated to use marked crossings if located within 30 metres.lokalepolitie.html

=France=

In France, pedestrians used to be banned from crossing a street outside zebra crossings if there was one within 50 metres;  the fine was 4 euros.legifrance.fr/affichCodeArticle. Since November 2010, drivers are required to give way if a pedestrian is crossing or showing the intention to cross in a situation where he is allowed to cross. - Article R415-11

=Poland=

Jay-walking is an offense. One may cross only at recognized crossing points if there is one within 100m. If caught by the police, the typical punishment is a fine. The same applies to crossing at a red light.

=Scandinavia=

It is legal to cross all roads except motorways in Denmark, Sweden and Norway. Cars are required by law to give way to pedestrians (but not bicycle riders) at zebra crossings unless there is a traffic light. Pedestrians are encouraged to cross the road at zebra crossings if there is one nearby and are also discouraged from crossing at a red light. In Norway, a red man signal at the crossing indicates that pedestrians must not begin crossing if it would impede cars or entail danger,

=Serbia=

In Serbia, it is illegal to cross roads other than at pedestrian crossings if there is a zebra crossing within 100 m.

North America

=United States=

State road rules in the United States typically require a driver to yield the right of way to a pedestrian crossing a road when the pedestrian crosses at a marked crosswalk or an unmarked crosswalk. Unmarked crosswalks generally exist as the logical extensions of sidewalks at intersections with approximately right angles. Following the Uniform Vehicle Code, state codes often do not prohibit a pedestrian to cross a roadway between intersections if at least one of the two adjacent intersections is not controlled by a signal, but stipulate that a pedestrian not at a crosswalk must yield the right of way to approaching drivers. State codes often permit pedestrians to use roads which are not controlled access facilities and without sidewalks but they must keep to the leftmost side of the road unless this renders them invisible to approaching traffic.
State codes may include provisions that allow local authorities to prohibit pedestrian crossing at locations outside crosswalks, but since municipal pedestrian ordinances are often not well known to drivers or pedestrians, and can vary from place to place in a metropolitan area that contains many municipalities, obtaining compliance with local prohibitions of pedestrian crossings much more restrictive than statewide pedestrian regulations can be difficult. Signs, fences, and barriers of various types (including planted hedges) have been used to prohibit and prevent pedestrian crossing at some locations; where detour to a legal crossing would be highly inconvenient, even fences are sometimes not effective. Street design, traffic design, and locations of major building entrances that make crosswalks the most logical and practical locations to cross streets are usually more effective than police enforcement in reducing the incidence of illegal or reckless pedestrian crossings.
At a signalized crossing, a pedestrian is subject to the applicable pedestrian traffic signal or, if no pedestrian signal is displayed, the signal indications for the parallel vehicular movement. A pedestrian signal permits a pedestrian to begin crossing a street during the "Walk" display; the pedestrian is usually considered to be "jaywalking" only if he entered the crosswalk at some other time. The meanings of pedestrian signal indications are summarized in Section 4E.02 of the national Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.Part 4, Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, Federal Highway Administration, 2003
Jaywalking is considered an infraction, but in some jurisdictions, it is a misdemeanor or requires a court appearance. The penalty is usually a fine. In some cities (e.g. New York City, Chicago, and Boston), although prohibited, "jaywalking" behavior has been so commonplace that police generally cite or detain jaywalkers only if their behavior is considered excessively dangerous or disruptive, such as running out in front of a moving vehicle, or crossing after the light is about to change to allow cross traffic to proceed. Penalties for jaywalking vary by state, and, within a state, may vary by county or municipality. In Tempe, Arizona, as of June, 2006, jaywalking carried fines up to US$118; a sampling of other U.S. cities found fines ranging from US$1–$1,000.
Jaywalking at a signalized intersection may carry higher fines in some jurisdictions due to disobeying the signalized controls. Many jurisdictions have a separate law defining the difference between jaywalking, or "disobedience of traffic signal controls."  Some jurisdictions may fine you up to the same amount as a vehicle running a red light, but no driving points are issued, as the pedestrian was not driving at the time.

=Mexico=

Although not illegal, jaywalking is a serious issue around the country, particularly in Mexico City. In the Paseo de la Reforma, one of the city's longest and most important avenue, jaywalking became such an issue that Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador, then the city's mayor, commissioned the installation of concrete prisms along the avenue's central curb, to discourage pedestrians from jaywalking.files.com/2009/04/la_invasi.pdf

Asia

In many Asian countries, the low level of traffic control means that jaywalking is often more of a necessity to a pedestrian and is rarely punished outside of major commercial hubs such as Singapore (below). In many countries such as India or Vietnam it is quite common, given the level of traffic, that pedestrians will walk out into oncoming traffic and effectively "carve out" a route to the other side of the road .

=Iran=

In Iran jaywalking is illegal. One may cross only at recognized crossing points if there is one within 150m. Regarding to Traffic laws, jaywalking and crossing when a pedestrian light is red or to start walking when it is flashing is prohibited from 1970's, If in an intersection there is no pedestrian light, traffic lights would be considered, so it would be illegal when it is red or orange. As of November, 2009, jaywalking carries fines from 300,000 up to 2,000,000 Ir-Rials($30 to $200).jamejamonline.aspx?newsnum=100862565256  


=Singapore=

In Singapore jaywalking is an offence. A fine of S$20 is payable for the first offence. Repeat offenders can be charged $1000 and a jail term of 3 months though it's rarely imposed.singaporecriminallawyer.com/information/littering-jaywalking/

=Australia=

In Australia, it is illegal to start crossing the road at an intersection when a pedestrian light is red or flashing red. Furthermore, it is illegal to cross any road within 20m of an intersection with pedestrian lights or within 20m of any pedestrian crossing (including a zebra crossing, school crossing, or any other pedestrian crossing). Some roads, such as roads with a record of pedestrian accidents feature fences in their centres to discourage pedestrians but there is no law against traversing them.Australian Road Rules Feb 2012, Part 14 Division 1

=New Zealand=

In New Zealand, the fine is up to NZ$10 for child pedestrians or NZ$35 for adult pedestrians who cross a road without using a marked crossing if there is one within 20 m or those who cross at a red light.





Further reading




