[[Melancholia]]

CATEGORIES: Abnormal psychology, Humorism, Mood disorders, Emotions, Melancholia, Obsolete medical terms

Melancholia (from Greek  melancholia "sadness", literally black bile),[ref]μελαγχολία,
Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus Digital Library[/ref] also  lugubriousness, from the Latin lugere, to mourn; moroseness, from the Latin morosus, self-willed, fastidious habit; wistfulness, from old English wist: intent, or saturnine, in contemporary usage, is a mood disorder of non-specific depression, characterized by low levels of both enthusiasm and eagerness for activity.
In a modern context, "melancholy" applies only to the mental or emotional symptoms of depression or despondency; historically, "melancholia" could be physical as well as mental, and melancholic conditions were classified as such by their common cause rather than by their properties.

History

The name "melancholia" comes from the old medical belief of the four humors: disease or ailment being caused by an imbalance in one or other of the four basic bodily liquids, or humors. Personality types were similarly determined by the dominant humor in a particular person. According to Hippocrates, melancholia was caused by an excess of black bile,Hippocrates, De aere aquis et locis, 10.103, on Perseus Digital Library hence the name, which means 'black bile', from Ancient Greek μέλας (melas), "dark, black",[ref]μέλας,
Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus Digital Library[/ref] and χολή (kholé), "bile";χολή, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus Digital Library a person whose constitution tended to have a preponderance of black bile had a melancholic disposition.
Melancholia was described as a distinct disease with particular mental and physical symptoms in the 5th and 4th centuries BC. Hippocrates, in his Aphorisms, characterized all "fears and despondencies, if they last a long time" as being symptomatic of melancholia.23 When a patient could not be cured of the disease it was thought that the melancholia was a result of demonic possession. 18th-Century Theories of Melancholy & Hypochondria Farmer, Hugh. An essay on demoniacs of the New Testament 56 (1818)
In his study of French and Burgundian courtly culture, Johan HuizingaHuizinga, "Pessimism and the ideal of the sublime life", The Waning of the Middle Ages, 1924:22ff. noted that "at the close of the Middle Ages, a sombre melancholy weighs on people's souls." In chronicles, poems, sermons, even in legal documents, an immense sadness, a note of despair and a fashionable sense of suffering and deliquescence at the approaching end of times, suffuses court poets and chroniclers alike: Huizinga quotes instances in the ballads of Eustache Deschamps, "monotonous and gloomy variations of the same dismal theme", and in Georges Chastellain's prologue to his Burgundian chronicle,"I, man of sadness, born in an eclipse of darkness, and thick fogs of lamentation". and in the late fifteenth-century poetry of Jean Meschinot. Ideas of reflection and the workings of imagination are blended in the term merencolie, embodying for contemporaries "a tendency", observes Huizinga, "to identify all serious occupation of the mind with sadness".
The most extended treatment of melancholia comes from Robert Burton, whose The Anatomy of Melancholy (1621) treats the subject from both a literary and a medical perspective. Burton wrote in the 16th century that music and dance were critical in treating mental illness, especially melancholia.Cf. The Anatomy of Melancholy, subsection 3, on and after line 3480, "Music a Remedy":

A famous allegorical engraving by Albrecht Dürer is entitled Melencolia I. This engraving portrays melancholia as the state of waiting for inspiration to strike, and not necessarily as a depressive affliction.  Amongst other allegorical symbols, the picture includes a magic square, and a truncated rhombohedron.wolfram.V.), and, a few years later, a sonnet by Edward Dowden.

Cult

During the early 17th century, a curious cultural and literary cult of melancholia arose in England.  It was believed that religious uncertainties caused by the English Reformation and a greater attention being paid to issues of sin, damnation, and salvation, led to this effect.
In music, the post-Elizabethan cult of melancholia is associated with John Dowland, whose motto was Semper Dowland, semper dolens. ("Always Dowland, always mourning.")  The melancholy man, known to contemporaries as a "malcontent," is epitomized by Shakespeare's Prince Hamlet, the "Melancholy Dane."  Other major melancholic authors include Sir Thomas Browne, and Jeremy Taylor, whose Hydriotaphia, Urn Burial and Holy Living and Holy Dying, respectively, contain extensive meditations on death.
A similar phenomenon, though not under the same name, occurred during the German Sturm und Drang movement, with such works as The Sorrows of Young Werther by Goethe or in Romanticism with works such as Ode on Melancholy by John Keats or in Symbolism with works such as Isle of the Dead by Arnold Böcklin. In the 20th century, much of the counterculture of modernism was fueled by comparable alienation and a sense of purposelessness called "anomie"; earlier artistic preoccupation with death has gone under the rubric of memento mori.

Related concepts In Islam

The Arabic word found as ḥuzn and ḥazan One may see similarities with how  melancholic romantic paintings in the west sometimes used ruins from the age of the Roman Empire as a backdrop.
As a parallel with physicians of classical Greece, ancient Arabic physicians and psychologists also categorized ḥuzn as a disease. As remedies, he recommends treatments addressing both the medical and philosophical sources of the melancholy, including rational thought, morale, discipline, fasting and coming to terms with the catastrophe.
The various uses of ḥuzn and hüzün thus describe melancholy from a certain vantage point, show similarities with female hysteria in the case of Avicenna's patient and in a religious context it is not unlike sloth, which by Dante was defined as "failure to love God with all one's heart, all one's mind and all one's soul". Thomas Aquinas described sloth as "an oppressive sorrow, which, to wit, so weighs upon man's mind, that he wants to do nothing."Summa Theologica, Thomas Aquinas



Footnotes

Other notes

Further reading




