[[Michelle Malkin]]

CATEGORIES: 1970 births, Living people, American anti–illegal immigration activists, American bloggers, American Roman Catholics, American columnists, American journalists of Asian descent, American political pundits, American political writers, American pro-life activists, American television news anchors, American television reporters and correspondents, American women journalists, American writers of Filipino descent, Commentators, Conservatism in the United States, Fox News Channel people, Oberlin College alumni, People from Absecon, New Jersey, People from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 21st-century American writers, 21st-century women writers, Women television journalists

Michelle Malkin (née Maglalang; born October 20, 1970) is an American conservative blogger, political commentator, and author."Right at home" Pitts, Jonathan. The Baltimore Sun, March 9, 2008, page E 1. "A Hard Right Punch: Michelle Malkin's Conservative Fight", The Washington Post, February 16, 2007,page C1. Her weekly syndicated column appears in a number of newspapers and websites. She is a Fox News Channel contributor and has been a guest on MSNBC, C-SPAN, and national radio programs. Malkin has written four books published by Regnery Publishing.

Early life

Malkin was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, to Philippine citizens Rafaela (née Perez) – a homemaker and teacher – and Apolo DeCastro Maglalang, who was then a physician-in-training. Several months prior to Malkin's birth, her parents had immigrated to the United States on an employer-sponsored visa. Booknotes Transcript on "Invasion: How America Still Welcomes Terrorists", Booknotes, December 8, 2002. (archived from the original on October 13, 2007) After her father finished his medical training, the family moved She has described her parents as Reagan Republicans who were "not incredibly politically active."Nahm, H Y. "Michelle Malkin: The Radical Right's Asian Pitbull", "Goldsea Asian American". Retrieved July 16, 2009.
Malkin, a Roman Catholic,Malkin, Michelle, (April 9, 2010), "The Pfleger-ization of the Catholic Church", MichelleMalkin. Retrieved August 17, 2011. attended Holy Spirit Roman Catholic High School, where she edited the school newspaper and aspired to become a concert pianist. Following her graduation in 1988, she enrolled at Oberlin College. Malkin originally planned to pursue a bachelor's degree in music, but changed her major to English. During her college years, she worked as a press inserter, tax preparation aide, and network news librarian. Fox News. Retrieved August 18, 2011. Her first article for the paper heavily criticized Oberlin's affirmative action program and received a "hugely negative response" from other students on campus. She graduated in 1992Bookshelf: Invasion By Michelle Malkin, Reviewed by Jan Ting, Oberlin Alumni Magazine, Spring 2003. Retrieved August 18, 2011. and later described her alma mater as "radically left-wing."Article preview. "Michelle Malkin", The American Enterprise, September 1, 2005.

Career

Malkin began her journalism career at the Los Angeles Daily News, working as a columnist from 1992 to 1994. In 1995, she worked in Washington, D.C., as a journalism fellow at the Competitive Enterprise Institute,Fox News Bios. "Fox News Contributor","FoxNews. Retrieved July 23, 2009. a free-market, anti-government regulation, libertarian think tank.S. Officials on Climate, Washington Post, March 6, 2009 In 1996, she moved to Seattle, Washington, where she wrote columns for The Seattle Times. Malkin became a nationally-syndicated columnist with Creators Syndicate in 1999. "Michelle Malkin's Latest Opinion Column HLML", Creators SyndicateMalkin, Michelle. "Michelle Malkin's Latest Opinion Column RSS", Creators Syndicate.
For many years, Malkin was a frequent commentator for Fox News Channel and a regular guest host of The O'Reilly Factor. In 2007, she announced that she would not return to The O'Reilly Factor, claiming that Fox News had mishandled a dispute over derogatory statements made about her by Geraldo Rivera in a Boston Globe interview. "Geraldo Rivera unhinged", MichelleMalkin. Since 2007, she has concentrated on her writing, blogging and public speaking, although she still appears on television occasionally, especially with Sean Hannity on Fox News and Fox & Friends once a week.
In August 2004, following claims by Swift Boat Veterans for Truth that presidential candidate John Kerry had lied about his record during the Vietnam War, Malkin appeared on MSNBC's Hardball with Chris Matthews and stated that there were "legitimate questions" over whether one of Kerry's wounds was "self-inflicted." When host Chris Matthews asked her eleven times whether she meant Kerry had shot himself on purpose, she dodged the question. but ultimately said that other soldiers had made this claim. August 2004 interview with Chris Matthews on Hardball, MSNBC Malkin criticized Matthews and the MSNBC staff in her blog the following day. Georgia Senator Zell Miller, while later being interviewed by Mathews, accused him of "browbeating her to death." Mathews explained, "When somebody comes on my show and makes an allegation that somebody committed a felony, I'm going to browbeat them. I want them to say the truth. And if they can't come out with the truth, they shouldn't be talking."
Malkin founded the websites Hot Air, an internet broadcast network, and Twitchy.About Us | Twitchy

Books

Malkin has written four books, all published by Regnery Publishing.

Blogging

MichelleMalkin.com

In June 2004 Malkin successfully launched a political blog, MichelleMalkin.Malkin, Michelle. "Extreme Makeover", "MichelleMalkin. A 2007 memo from the National Republican Senatorial Committee described Malkin as one of the five "best-read national conservative bloggers",Budoff, Carrie. "GOP issues rules to avoid Macaca moments", The Politico, June 13, 2007 and Technorati ranks MichelleMalkin.
After she criticized hip hop artist Akon for "degrading women" in a Vent episode, Akon's record label, Universal Music Group, forced YouTube to remove the video by issuing a DMCA takedown notice,[ref]Malkin, Michelle.
"Akon's record company abuses DMCA to stifle criticism on YouTube", MichelleMalkin.[/ref] but decided to retract this noticeMalkin, Michelle."UMG & YouTube retreat over Akon report", MichelleMalkin.Press release. "Malkin Fights Back Against Copyright Law Misuse", Electronic Frontier Foundation, May 9, 2007
In an interview with BusinessWeek magazine in July 2007, Malkin said, "We're doing what few other blogs can do. We serve up terabytes of bandwidth... I'm shelling out for gold-plated servers. That's expensive, and we want to be able to withstand huge traffic surges."Small Business. "Michelle Malkin and Hot Air", Businessweek.
She continued to contribute frequently to MichelleMalkin.Malkin, Michelle. "Welcome to the new michellemalkin.com", June 19, 2007. With the new redesign, she re-enabled comments on her blog, which she said she had disallowed after February 2005 due to a high level of obscene and racist comments.

=Jamil Hussein=

Malkin was among the first of several bloggers who questioned the credibility and even the existence of Iraqi police Captain "Jamil Hussein" who had been used as a source by the Associated Press in over 60 stories about the Iraq war. The controversy started in November 2006 when the AP reported that six Iraqis had been burned alive as they left a mosque and that four mosques had been destroyed, citing Hussein as one of its sources. In January 2007, Malkin visited Baghdad, and stated, "the Iraqi Ministry of Interior says disputed Associated Press source Jamil Hussein does exist. At least one story he told the AP just doesn't check out: The Sunni mosques that as Hussein claimed and AP reported as 'destroyed,' 'torched' and 'burned and blown up' are all still standing. So the credibility of every AP story relying on Jamil Hussein remains dubious."Malkin, Michelle. "Fact-checking the AP and Jamil Hussein", MichelleMalkin. Malkin has since issued a correction for her denial of Hussein's existence. Malkin contests the extent of damage to the mosques as reported by the AP. Malkin visited Iraq and stated, "several mosques did, in fact, come under attack by Mahdi Army forces." She further speculated that a corroborating witness to the Hussein account who had, according to the AP, recanted due to Iraqi government pressure, instead recanted because his story wasn't true. Malkin said the summary reports she obtained from US and Iraqi army officials didn't corroborate the claim about people being burned alive while Iraqi soldiers failed to intervene.

=Students Against War controversy=

In April 2006, Students Against War (SAW), a campus group at University of California, Santa Cruz, staged a protest against the presence of military recruiters on campus, and sent out a press release containing contact details (names, phone numbers and e-mail addresses) of three student leaders for use by reporters. Malkin included these contact details in a blog column entitled "Seditious Santa Cruz vs. America".
"Seditious Santa Cruz vs. America", "michellemalkin.Malkin, Michelle. "More Thuggery In Santa Cruz", MichelleMalkin. "Malkin moves, takes child from school, as SC students retaliate", "Santa Cruz Indymedia", April 22, 2006. Retrieved July 20, 2009. writing in her blog: "I am leaving it up. If you are contacting them, I do not condone death threats or foul language. As for SAW, my message is this: You are responsible for your individual actions. Other individuals are responsible for theirs. Grow up and take responsibility."
SAW remarked: "Due to the continued irresponsible actions of some bloggers, members of the group have received numerous death threats and anti-Semitic comments through phone calls and emails."[ref]
Students Against The War. "Far-Right Threats Fail to Distract from Santa Cruz Protest Successes", April 19, 2006,[/ref] A blog war ensued. Malkin claimed that she received hostile e-mailsMalkin, Michelle."The Moonbats Strike Back", MichelleMalkin. then her private home address, phone number, photos of her neighborhood and maps to her house were published on several websites. The Santa Cruz Sentinel reported receiving an email from Malkin saying that this forced her to remove one of her children from school and move her family. "Cyber war over UCSC protest heats up", Santa Cruz Sentinel, April 22, 2006.
Another controversy involving private addresses began on July 1, 2006, when Malkin and other bloggers commented on a New York Times Travel section article that had featured the town where Vice President Dick Cheney and Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld owned summer homes. The article included a picture of Rumsfeld's long tree-lined driveway that showed a birdhouse and small portion of the housefront."Weekends with the President's Men" The New York Times June 30, 2006. Malkin declared that this story was part of "a concerted, organized effort to dig up and publicize the private home information of prominent conservatives in the media and blogosphere to intimidate them."  The photos of Rumsfeld's house were taken with Rumsfeld's permission.

Hot Air

On April 24, 2006, Hot Air, a "conservative Internet broadcast network," went into operation, with Malkin as founder/CEO."Conservative Internet Broadcast Network Debuts", PR Web, April 24, 2006, Accessed July 18, 2009 She intended the blog to provide "content and analysis you can't get anywhere else on a daily basis–both on the blog and in our original video features". "Hot Air turns One", HotAir. Her staffers included 'Allahpundit' and Bryan Preston, though the latter was replaced by Ed Morrissey on February 25, 2008."The Road Goes Ever On" February 25, 2008 In February 2010, Hotair.Malkin, Michelle. "A note on the acquisition of Hot Air" February 21, 2010

Viewpoints

Citizenship

Malkin believes that the custom of granting automatic citizenship at birth to U.S.–born children of foreign tourists, temporary foreign workers, and illegal aliens undermines the integrity of citizenship and national security. She argues that the Citizenship Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution, "originally intended to ensure the citizenship rights of newly freed slaves and their families after the Civil War, has evolved into a magnet for alien lawbreakers and a shield for terrorist infiltrators and enemy combatants". "What makes an American?", Jewish World Review, July 4, 2003. Retrieved July 18, 2009.

Immigration enforcement

Malkin also opposes sanctuary cities, in which local authorities do not enforce all national immigration laws or coordinate with agencies such as Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE). Following the August 2007 execution-style murder of three college students in Newark, New Jersey, she repeated her criticisms of politicians' posture toward sanctuary cities. In particular, she criticized former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani's proposal for a tamper-proof identification card with this comment:
She supports coordination with federal authorities through the use of Section 287(g) of the IIRIRA to investigate, detain, and arrest aliens on civil and criminal grounds. "Bush's Open Borders Nominees" Retrieved July 18, 2009.[ref]Sanctuary Nation or Sovereign Nation: It's your choice Update: Illegal alien deportation evader Elvira Arellano will leave church sanctuary to participate in amnesty march,
By Michelle Malkin,
August 15, 2007,


Unemployment benefits

During an appearance as a news analyst on the roundtable segment of ABC's This Week with George Stephanopoulos on August 2, 2009, she explained why she opposed another 13-week extension of unemployment benefits: "If you put enough government cheese in front of people they are going to just keep eating it and kicking the can down the road... people will just delay getting a job until the three weeks before the benefits run out."

Women's issues

In a February 2012 column, Malkin called the "War on Women" a false narrative, arguing rather that "It's the progressive left in this country that has viciously and systematically slimed female conservatives for their beliefs."

Personal life

At Oberlin, she began dating Jesse Malkin who was granted a Rhodes Scholarship to begin study at Oxford University in 1991.
They married in 1993, and have two children. Jesse Malkin worked as an associate policy analyst and economist focusing on healthcare issues for the RAND Corporation. "The Health Savings Account Mirage", United Press International, February 20, 2006. In 2004, Malkin reported on her website that her husband had left a "lucrative health-care consulting job" to be a stay-at-home dad.com.
In 2006, Malkin gave a lecture at her alma mater, Oberlin College, discussing racism, among other topics. She denied allegations that she had been insensitive to the "plight of minorities," listing several racial epithets that had been used against her, and by relating a lesson she learned from her mother for which she is "eternally grateful." When in kindergarten, Malkin went home in tears one day because her classmates had called her a racist name. But, her mother comforted Michelle by telling her that everyone has prejudices. "Michelle Malkin, Alumna Pundit, Lambastes the Left", The Oberlin Review, February 17, 2006
Malkin and her family lived in North Bethesda, Maryland until 2008 when they relocated to Colorado Springs, Colorado."Home-Schooling Under Siege" Capitalism Magazine. May 21, 2001. Retrieved September 25, 2010.






