[[USS Essex (1799)]]

CATEGORIES: 1799 ships, Barbary Wars American ships, Captured ships, Quasi-War ships of the United States, Sailing frigates of the United States Navy, Ships built in Massachusetts, Vessels captured from the United States Navy, War of 1812 ships of the United States, Frigates of the Royal Navy

The first USS ''Essex'' of the United States Navy was a 36-gun  or 32-gun sailing frigate that participated in the Quasi-War with France, the First Barbary War, and in the War of 1812. The British captured her in 1814 and she then served as HMS ''Essex'' until sold at public auction on 6 June 1837.

Service history

The frigate was built by Enos Briggs, Salem, Massachusetts, at a cost of $139,362 subscribed by the people of Salem and Essex County, to a design by William Hackett. She was launched on 30 September 1799. On 17 December 1799 she was presented to the United States Navy and accepted by Captain Edward Preble.
With the United States involved in naval action against France on 6 January 1800, Essex, under the command of Captain Preble, departed Newport, Rhode Island, in company with  to rendezvous with a convoy of merchant ships returning from Batavia, Dutch East Indies. Shortly after commencement of her journey, Essex became the first US Naval Ship to cross the Equator.  Congress was dismasted only a few days out, and Essex was obliged to continue her voyage alone, making her mark as the first US man-of-war to double the Cape of Good Hope, both in March and in August 1800 prior to successfully completing her convoy mission in November.

First Barbary War

Captain William Bainbridge commanded Essex on her second cruise, whereon she sailed to the Mediterranean with the squadron of Commodore Richard Dale. Dispatched to protect American trade and seamen against depredations by the Barbary pirates, the squadron arrived at Gibraltar on 1 July 1801 and spent the ensuing year convoying American merchantmen and blockading Tripolitan ships in their ports. Following repairs at the Washington Navy Yard in 1802, Essex resumed her duties in the Mediterranean under Captain James Barron in August 1804. She participated in the Battle of Derne on 27 April 1805, and remained in those waters until the conclusion of peace terms in 1806.
Returning to the Washington Navy Yard in July, she was placed in ordinary until February 1809 when she was recommissioned for sporadic use in patrolling American waters and a single cruise to Europe.

War of 1812

When war was declared against Britain on 18 June 1812, Essex, commanded by Captain David Porter, made a successful cruise to the southward. On 11 July near Bermuda she fell in with seven British (the Silverside being one) transports and by moonlight engaged and took one of them as a prize. On 13 August she encountered and captured the sloop  after an engagement. By September, when she returned to New York, Essex had taken ten prizes. The youngest member of the Essex crew was 10-year-old midshipman David Glasgow Farragut, who would become the first admiral of the US Navy. Farragut, who was Captain Porter's foster son, remained with the ship for the next two years.
thumb|left|Essex capturing Alert. Although her crew suffered greatly from a shortage of provisions and heavy gales while rounding Cape Horn, she anchored safely at Valparaíso, Chile, on 14 March, having seized whaling schooners Elizabeth and Nereyda along the way. In the next five months, Essex captured thirteen British whalers, including , (ex-Atlantic) which cruised in company with her captor to the Island of Nuku Hiva for repairs. Porter put his executive officer John Downes in command of that ship.
In January 1814, Essex sailed into neutral waters at Valparaíso, only to be trapped there for six weeks by the British frigate,  thumb|280px|Engraving by Abel Bowen
For 

British service and fate

Because Essex was stored and provisioned for six months, and capable of sailing to Europe without "the slightest cause for alarm", Captain Hillyar placed Lieutenant C. Pearson in command of her for the voyage to England, where she arrived in November. There, the Admiralty had her repaired and taken into the Royal Navy as HMS Essex.
The Royal Navy never fitted her for sea, but re-classed her as a 42-gun ship. She served as a troopship on 7 July 1819. She was hulked at Cork to serve as a prison ship in October 1823.
Between 1824 and 1834 she served as a prison ship at Kingston, Ireland. On 6 June 1837 she was sold at public auction for £1,230.
During some recent resurfacing work on the east pier of Dún Laoghaire harbour, Essex

In literature and popular culture

Herman Melville wrote about Essex in "Sketch Fifth" in The Encantadas, focusing on an incident off the Galápagos Islands with an elusive British ship.  The story was first published in 1854 in Putnam's Magazine.
Patrick O'Brian adapted the story of Essex



Notes



Bibliography




