[[Serie B]]

CATEGORIES: Football leagues in Italy, Serie B, Professional sports leagues in Italy, National association football second tier leagues, 1929 establishments in Italy, Sports leagues established in 1929

Serie B, currently named Serie B Eurobet due to sponsorship reasons, is the second-highest division in the Italian football league system after the Serie A. It is contested by 22 teams and organized by the Lega Serie B since July 2010, after the split of Lega Calcio that previously took care of both the Serie A and Serie B. Common nicknames for the league are campionato cadetto and cadetteria, as cadetto is the Italian for junior or cadet.
Serie B was composed of 20 teams until the 2002–03 season. It was enlarged to 24 teams for the 2003–04 season due to legal problems relating to Calcio Catania relegation. The league reverted to 22 teams for the 2004–05 season, while Serie A expanded from 18 to 20 teams.
During the regular season, each team plays 42 games – two games against every opponent. In Italian football, a true round-robin format is used. In the first half of the season, called andata, each team plays once against all its opponents, a total of 21 games.  In the second half of the season, called ritorno, each team will play the same teams in exactly the same order, the only difference being that a home game played in the first half will be an away game with that same team in the second half, and vice versa.
Since the 2006–07 season, the Serie B champion is awarded the cup Ali della Vittoria (Wings of Victory). The trophy is 63 cm high and weighs 5 kg.  Its structure represents the wings of the goddess Nike, the goddess of victory, holding a cup similar to an olympic flame.
Serie B matches are usually played on Saturday.  After one year where all games were played on Saturday, the league is again scheduling one game that is played on Friday called anticipo (the advanced game) and one game that is played on Monday called posticipo (the post-dated game).  The league also plays on several Tuesdays to fit in all 42 games.  The league also plays on Sunday if Serie A is off.

Promotion and relegation

At the end of the season, three teams are promoted to Serie A and four teams are relegated to Lega Pro Prima Divisione. The top two teams are automatically promoted. If the 3rd-placed team is 9 or more points ahead of the 4th-placed team, it too is automatically promoted, otherwise a playoff tournament determines the third team that will be promoted. Starting in the 2013–14 season, anywhere between two and six teams within a "playoff margin" of 14 points from the 3rd-placed team will enter the playoff tournament. Under the new playoff format, up to three rounds may be required. The final two rounds are two-legged ties, while opening round matches (if required) are single legs hosted by the higher-ranked team. If a tie is drawn at the end of regular play (one or two matches, depending on the round), extra time is played. If the two teams are still tied after thirty minutes, the higher classified team advances.
In the relegation zone, the three last-placed teams (20th, 21st and 22nd) are automatically demoted to Lega Pro Prima Divisione. If the 18th-placed team is 5 or more points ahead of the 19th-placed team, then the 19th-placed team becomes the 4th and final team to be demoted, otherwise the conditions for a playoff more commonly called playout exist.
If the playout is necessary, the 18th and 19th-placed teams are paired in a two-legged series with home-field advantage in the 2nd leg going to the 18th-placed team.  The team with the higher aggregate score remains in Serie B while the loser becomes the fourth team relegated to Lega Pro Prima Divisione.  If an aggregate tie exists at the end of regulation play of the 2nd leg, the 18th-placed team is saved, and the 19th-placed team is demoted.

Brief history

A junior football championship was created at first in Italy in 1904, after seven editions of the major tournament of FIGC: it was called Second Category, and was composed both by senior squads of town clubs and by youth teams of city clubs. If the first ones won the championship, they would be promoted to First Category, which consequentely improved in size: the first team to reach the honour, was Pro Vercelli in 1907, which even won the scudetto in 1908. FIGC attempted many times to introduce relegations on the contrary, but the reform was really adopted only in 1921 by the secessionist CCI in its Northern League, which consisted of a First Division and a Second Division: the first teams to be relegated were AC Vicenza and FC Inter even if, after the reunion with FIGC, the regulations were changed, and SSC Venezia was demoted instead of the Milanese club. Even if part of the same league, differently from First Division, Second Division was based on local group with proximity criteria. Only in 1928, the big reform was conceived by FIGC's President Leandro Arpinati: after a year, a new second division based on the same national format of the major tournament would be born. Serie B began in 1929 with 18 clubs and continued until WWII after whom it was divided again between the northern and the southern part of the country, due to the destructions of the war. The championship became national again in 1948, and for many years in the second half of the 20th century, it was played by 20 clubs. In 2003–04 a single group of 24 teams was formed, the biggest in all history of all levels of the Italian championship. After 2004, a 22-teams format was introduced together with playoffs.
After Serie A split with Serie B to form Lega Serie A, Lega Serie B was formed on 7 July 2010. The league signed a new sponsor bwin for 2010–11 and 2011–12 season; changed the league name from Serie B TIM in the last season to Serie bwin.
Serie B is the lowest division where five clubs have ever played: Torino, Juventus, Milan, Roma and Lazio.

Club Performances

Promotions by season

Performance by club

Updated at the end of 2012-13 season

Titles by region

Updated at the end of 2012-13 season

Titles by city

Updated at the end of 2012-13 season

Promotions by region

Updated at the end of 2012-13 season

Complete team list

Seasons in Serie B

This is the complete list of the clubs that took part to the 81 Serie B seasons played from 1929–30 to 2013–14. The bolded teams compete in Serie B in the current season.

The Serie B-C Alta Italia post-war championship

This championship was organized by geographical criteria with only Northern Italy Serie B and the best Northern Italy Serie C teams taking part. Southern Italy Serie B teams took part to Serie A 1945-46. For this reason, this championship is not included in the statistics.

Serie B members for 2013–14

The following twenty-two clubs will be competing in Serie B during the 2013–14 season.

List of Lega Serie B presidents








