[[Dan Brouthers]]

CATEGORIES: 1858 births, 1932 deaths, National Baseball Hall of Fame inductees, Major League Baseball first basemen, 19th-century baseball players, Baltimore Orioles (NL) players, Buffalo Bisons (NL) players, Detroit Wolverines players, Boston Beaneaters players, Boston Reds (PL) players, Boston Reds (AA) players, Brooklyn Grooms players, Louisville Colonels players, New York Giants (NL) players, Philadelphia Phillies players, Troy Trojans players, Baseball players from New York, National League batting champions, National League home run champions, National League RBI champions, Minor league baseball managers, People from Dutchess County, New York, People from Brooklyn, People from Manhattan, Baltimore (minor league baseball) players, Rochester (minor league baseball) players, New York New Yorks players, Brooklyn Atlantics (minor league) players, Springfield Ponies players, Springfield Maroons players, Toronto Canucks players, Rochester Bronchos players, Poughkeepsie Colts players, Newburgh Hill Climbers players

Dennis Joseph "Dan" Brouthers (
Recognized as the first great slugger in baseball history, with his final total of 106 tying for the fourth most of the 19th century. His career slugging percentage of .519 remained the major league record for a player with at least 4,000 at bats until Ty Cobb edged ahead of him in 1922. At the time of his initial retirement, he also ranked second in career triples (205), and third in runs batted in (1,296) and hits. There are slight variations in other seasons as well, but most sources today credit Brouthers with 2,296 hits.
A dominating hitter during the prime of his career, he led (or was in the top of) the league in most offensive categories, including batting average, runs scored, runs batted in (RBI), on-base percentage and hits. He led the league in batting average five times, the most by a 19th-century player, and his career .342 batting average still ranks ninth all-time. Brouthers is one of only 29 players in baseball history to date who have appeared in Major League games in four decades.
He was also an active players' union member, and was elected vice president of the Brotherhood of Professional Base Ball Players. Brouthers was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1945 by the Veterans Committee.

Early career

Born in Sylvan Lake, New York,

Major league career

Troy

Brouthers made his major league debut on June 23, , for the Troy Trojans, and contributed a single in a come-from-behind victory against the Syracuse Stars. Although he was a first baseman, he was called upon to pitch that season with the Trojans in three games, one of which was on August 21 against Tommy Bond and the Boston Red Caps. Brouthers lost 16–0, and within two weeks he was released from the club. He hit .274 that first season, with four home runs, and had 17 RBIs in 39 games played.
After his release, Brouthers played for a minor league team in Rochester, New York, and on one occasion in 

Buffalo

He got his first chance to be an everyday player in , Brouthers went 6-for-6 with two doubles in a 25–5 defeat of the Philadelphia Quakers.

Detroit and The Brotherhood

At the end of the , Brouthers hit three home runs‚ along with a double and a single, to set the NL record with 15 total bases in one game. This mark tied the major league record at the time, as Guy Hecker of the Louisville Colonels totaled 15 the previous month in the American Association.
The Detroit team was filled with stars from the era, including future Hall of Famers Sam Thompson and Ned Hanlon, as well as second baseman Fred Dunlap, the "Big Four", and the pitching of Lady Baldwin and Charlie Getzien.
During the off-season, on November 11, , The Executive Council of the Brotherhood of Professional Base Ball Players‚ formed in 1885 as the first organized players' union, met and re-elected John Montgomery Ward as president, and elected Brouthers as vice president.
In 
Following the season, on November 17, , members of the NL officially recognized the Brotherhood and met with a Brotherhood committee that consisted of three players – Ward‚ Hanlon and Brouthers.
The  Brouthers' numbers declined as well, as he did not produce at the same level of his previous seasons. Even with the lower numbers, he still led the league in runs scored with 118, and doubles for the third year in a row. The team's decline is attributed to prolonged injuries sustained by key players, while turmoil that unfolded concerning veteran stars' salary demands, and with falling attendance numbers, the club was forced to fold at the season's end. Brouthers was then purchased by the Boston Beaneaters of the NL on October 16.

Boston

In , his only season with the Beaneaters, he batted a league-leading .373, along with 105 runs scored and 118 runs batted in; he struck out only six times. The first strikeout occurred on June 11, when he fell victim to Mickey Welch of the Giants.
After the season, he – along with many major league players – jumped to the Players' League, a league established by the Brotherhood which competed against the two other major leagues already in existence.
The Players League lasted just the one season, and the Reds merged into the American Association, carrying many of the championship team's previous players. Brouthers led the league in batting average (.350), on-base percentage and slugging, while finishing second in triples with 19, sixth in doubles with 26, and third in RBIs with 109.

Late career

After the American Association folded following the  season, he played in only 77 of the team's games, but did well, hitting .337. After the season, Brouthers was traded along with Willie Keeler to the Baltimore Orioles for Billy Shindle and George Treadway.
This trade brought in two future Hall of Fame players, which added to the already established Orioles core of players including third baseman John McGraw, catcher Wilbert Robinson, shortstop Hughie Jennings, and center fielder Joe Kelley, all future Hall of Fame members. The Orioles won the league's championship that season, and it was Brouthers' last full season in the majors, as he again produced great numbers, batting .347, finishing seventh in total bases, fifth in RBIs (128), fourth in doubles (39), and fifth in triples (23).
During his career, and most notably during his time in Baltimore, he was known to always have his dog, an Irish setter named Kelly, and had him sit in the players' area. It is claimed that the players never minded much, as he was very well-behaved and never left the area to run out on the field or made very much noise.
Early in the  New York Giants, where he was hitless in a two-game stint before retiring.
Brouthers is still among the all-time leaders in many offensive categories. His .342 batting average ranks ninth, 205 triples ranks eighth, and his .423 on-base percentage ranks 15th. He is tied with Mike Tiernan for fourth among 19th-century home run hitters with a total of 106, behind Roger Connor (138), Sam Thompson (127) and Stovey (122).

Post-career

Brouthers played minor league baseball for the  Toronto Maple Leafs of the Eastern League, where he won a batting title with a .415 average. Later he played for the Poughkeepsie, New York, team of the Hudson River League, batting a league-leading .373 at age 46.
He remained near baseball for many years, working for his former teammate and New York Giants manager John McGraw, who placed him in charge of the Polo Grounds press gate. He was with the Giants for nearly 20 years in this and other capacities.
Brouthers died at the age of 74 of a heart attack










