[[Bitterroot Range]]

CATEGORIES: Bitterroot Range, Ranges of the Rocky Mountains, Mountain ranges of Idaho, Mountain ranges of Montana, Landforms of Mineral County, Montana

The Bitterroot Range is a mountain range and a subrange of the Rocky Mountains that runs along the border of Montana and Idaho in the northwestern United States.  The range spans an area of 

History

In 1805, the Corps of Discovery, led by Meriwether Lewis and William Clark and aided by Sacajawea of the Shoshone Native American tribe, crossed the Bitterroot Range several times. Lewis first crossed the mountains at Lemhi Pass on August 12, then returned across the pass to meet Clark.  The entire expedition then crossed the pass to the Salmon River valley, and the next month entered the Bitterroot Valley from the south via either Lost Trail Pass or Chief Joseph Pass.  It then crossed Lolo Pass to the west. The mountains were crossed by the Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul and Pacific Railroad (the "Milwaukee Road"). and Wood, Dorothy M., "Milwaukee Road West," (1972, Superior Publishing Co.). 

Ranges

According to the U.S. Board on Geographic Names, the Bitterroot Range runs from Pend Oreille Lake (near Sandpoint, Idaho) to Monida Pass,.  It is sometimes considered to extend east of the Monida Pass to include the Centennial Mountains.  The range comprises the following subranges (from north to south):

Coeur d'Alène Mountains

The Coeur d'Alène Mountains are the northwestern-most portion of the Bitterroot Range and encompass an area of  Retrieved 4 March 2007.

Saint Joe Mountains

The Saint Joe Mountains, the smallest named portion of the Bitterroot Range, encompass an area of 698 square miles (1,808 km²).  They lie between the St. Joe River on the south, the Coeur d'Alène River on the north, the Slate Creek saddle on the east and the plateau of the Moscow, Idaho/Pullman, Washington area on the Idaho/Washington border.. Retrieved 4 March 2007.St. "Joe Mountains". Canadian Mountain Encyclopedia. Bivouac. Retrieved 4 March 2007.

Bitterroot Mountains

The Bitterroot Mountains, comprising the Northern and Central Bitterroot Ranges, are the largest portion of the Bitterroot Range and encompass an area of 4,862 square miles (12,593 km²). The mountains are bordered on the north by Lolo Creek, on the south by the Salmon River, on the east by the Bitterroot River and Valley, and on the west by the Selway and Lochsa Rivers."Bitterroot Mountains". Canadian Mountain Encyclopedia Bivouac. Retrieved 4 March 2007.  Its highest summit is Trapper Peak, at 10,157 feet (3,096 m). Retrieved 4 March 2007.

Beaverhead Mountains

The Beaverhead Mountains encompass an area of 4,532 square miles (11,738 km²).  They lie to the east of the Bitterroot Mountains and lie to the west of the Big Hole Basin and the Pioneer Mountains.  Passes in the mountains include Lemhi Pass, Bannock Pass, Big Hole Pass, Big Hole Pass II, Junction Pass and Monida Pass. The Beaverheads are further subdivided into the West Big Hole Mountains, the Big Hole Divide, the Tendoy Mountains, the Italian Peaks, and the Garfield Peaks. Retrieved 4 March 2007.

Centennial Mountains

The Centennial Mountains encompass an area of 2,064 square miles (5,346 km²). Retrieved 4 March 2007.
The Centennials are home to Brower's Spring, discovered in 1888 by Jacob V. Brower, which is believed to be the furthest point on the Missouri River.  Brower published his finding in 1896 in "The Missouri: It's Utmost Source."
The site of Brower's Spring at around 8,800 feet (2,680 m) feet in the Centennials.  The site now commemorated by a rock pile at the source of Hellroaring Creek which flows into Red Rock River and then into Clark canyon reservoir where it joins the Beaverhead River and then the Big Hole River before ultimately hooking up with the Jefferson River.The True Utmost Reaches of the Missouri - Montana Outdoors - July-August 2005

In popular culture






