[[Breakup]]

CATEGORIES: Interpersonal relationships, Love

A relationship breakup, often referred to simply as a breakup, 
Susie Orbach (1992) has argued that the dissolution of dating and cohabiting relationships can be as painful as or more painful than divorce because these nonmarital relationships are less socially recognized'. Harvey, Perspectives on Loss (1998) p. 106

Models

Several psychological models have been proposed to explain the process of a relationship breakup, many suggesting that 'relationship dissolution occurs in stages'. 106

Stages leading to a breakup

L. Lee proposes that there are five stages leading ultimately up to a breakup.

Cycle of a breakup

Steve Duck outlines a six-stage cycle of relationship breakup,Steve Duck et al, The Basics of Communication (2011) p. 151 Table 6.2 including

Factors that predict a breakup before marriage

Hill, Rubin and Peplau identify 5 factors that predicted breakup before marriage:

Uncoupling theory

In 1976, sociologist Diane Vaughan proposed an "uncoupling theory," where there exists a "turning point" in the dynamics of relationship breakup - 'a precise moment when they "knew the relationship was over," when "everything went dead inside"' - followed by a transition period in which one partner unconsciously knows the relationship is going to end, but holds on to it for an extended period, even for years. p. 81 and p. 218n
Vaughan considered that the process of breakup was asymmetrical for initiator and respondent: the former 'has begun mourning the loss of the relationship and has undertaken something tantamount to a rehearsal, mentally and, to varying degrees, experientially, of a life apart from the partner'. 60 The latter then has to play catch-up: 'to make their own transition out of the relationship, partners must redefine initiator and relationship negatively, legitimating the dissolution'. 154
As a result, for Vaughan 'getting out of a relationship includes a redefinition of self at several levels: in the private thoughts of the individual, between partners, and in the larger social context in which the relationship exists'. 6 She considered that 'uncoupling is complete when the partners have defined themselves and are defined by others as separate and independent of each other - when being partners is no longer a major source of identity'.

Phases of grief

Grief counselor and breakup expert Susan J. Elliott who likened the process of grief as "phases" rather than "stages." Elliott, who has researched grief extensively, writes that the phases of breakup grief are "Shock and Disbelief," "Review and Painful Relinquishment," and "Reorganization, Integration, and Acceptance." Any of these three phases may be skipped, repeated, or rearranged, depending on one's situation and personality.

Statistics

According to John Fetto,Fetto, John (2003) – Love Stinks: Statistics on Failed Relationships. BNet: Business Network Retrieved January 25, 2008 a survey conducted by eNation found that nearly one-third of all Americans have experienced a breakup in the past ten years. He also found that the younger the person, the more likely they are to have experienced more than one breakup in the last decade. It is believed.

Recovery

Depending on the emotional attachment, healing from a breakup can be a long process with multiple stages, which may include: sanctioning adequate time to recover, improving intrapersonal relationships and, ultimately, finding the motivation necessary to dismiss the breakup itself.
Laurie Helgoe,Helgoe, Laurie A. (2006). The Pocket Idiot's Guide to Breaking Up. New York, NY: Penguin Group. ISBN 978-1-59257-570-1. believes that, "By releasing the past, you can approach new relationships with a fresh perspective and clearer vision." Releasing the relationship and the person physically from one's life will help to keep both from constantly resurfacing in everyday life. Releasing the relationship and the person from the mind and daily thoughts allocates more space to think about other important things, including future relationships.
Positive psychology stresses the up-side to relationship breakup, for example emphasizing research wherein 'students reported five positive changes in their lives from the break-up for every negative change', (although 'women report more growth after a relationship break-up'Shane J. Lopez, Positive Psychology (2008) p. 31 and p. 39 than do men). Once freed from 'the collusive solace of coupledom',Adam Phillips, On Flirtation (1994) p. 159 the newly emerging singleton has to see him- or herself as 'a separate person in the world, standing alone facing his future, having to make his own choices from the new position of unwanted freedom'. 50 If seen as an opportunity, however, 'this process of self-rediscovery and independent expansion of self is important for anyone experiencing a romantic relationship break-up'. 43
New York City-based psychoanalyst and psychotherapist Janice Lieberman, PhD, says not every relationship deserves a dramatic breakup. How you experience your relationship depends on how you handle the breakup. WebMD. Retrieved 2014-02-05.





Further reading


