[[Lee's Ferry]]

CATEGORIES: Crossings of the Colorado River, Ferries of Arizona, Geography of Arizona, Landmarks in Arizona, Rivers of Arizona, Transportation in Coconino County, Arizona, Historic American Buildings Survey in Arizona

Lee's Ferry (also known as Lees Ferry, Lee Ferry, Little Colorado Station and Saints Ferry south of the Utah-Arizona border.
Due to its unique geography – the only place in hundreds of miles from which one can easily access the Colorado River – it historically served as an important river crossing and starting in the mid-1800s was the site of a ferry operated by John Doyle Lee, for whom it is named. Boat service at Lee's Ferry continued for over 60 years before being superseded by a bridge in the early 20th century, which allowed for much more efficient automobile travel.
Lee's Ferry has also served as a military outpost for 19th century Mormon Utah, a center of limited gold seeking and since the 1920s the principal point at which river flow is measured to determine water allocations in the  Colorado River basin. Today it is a well-known fishing and boat launching point, including for whitewater rafting trips through the Grand Canyon.

Geography and geology

Lee's Ferry is located in northern Arizona, at the point where the Paria River joins the Colorado from the north. Lying in an open valley directly downstream of Glen Canyon and shortly above Marble Canyon (the uppermost section of the Grand Canyon), it is the only place in more than 
The surrounding valley formed because of a swell in the underlying rock of the Colorado Plateau that causes the regional elevation to intersect the Chinle and Moenkopi Formations, deposited in the Triassic about 208–245 million years ago. 

History

Early inhabitants and explorers

In pre-Columbian times, the Lee's Ferry area was inhabited first by Paleo-Indians, who populated the region beginning about 11,500 years ago, and the Archaic culture, which established on the Colorado Plateau about 8,000 years ago.
The first Europeans who happened upon Lee's Ferry were members of the Dominguez-Escalante Expedition, an attempt to find an overland route through the Southwest between Spanish settlements in present-day New Mexico and California and to convert as many Southwestern Native Americans as possible to Christianity.
During the 19th century Lee's Ferry served as a gateway for the expansion of white settlement from Utah south into Arizona. Most of the settlers were Mormons, who had been long established in the Utah Valley near present-day Salt Lake City and were now looking for greener pastures.

John D. Lee and the ferry (1870–76)

John D. Lee, for who Lee's Ferry is now named, came to the crossing in 1870 with the goal of setting up a permanent ferry service for Mormon settlers heading south to Arizona. In 1857, Lee had partaken in the Mountain Meadows Massacre, in which a group of Mormons and Native Americans attacked a passing non-Mormon wagon train from Arkansas, killing about 120 people. The ill-conceived attack was the result of animosity toward Arkansans after the murder of Mormon apostle Parley P. Pratt near Van Buren, Ark. Years after the massacre, the LDS church sent Lee to the remote Colorado River crossing to shield him from the law as part of an attempted cover-up.
Lee arrived in September with two of his wives and his children, and created a small settlement named Lonely Dell. The ferry was formally established in January 1873, with the launching of the Colorado, the first of many boats that would ply the treacherous and fluctuating river at this point. The location of the ferry upstream from the Paria River confluence required passengers to traverse a dangerous incline nicknamed "Lee's Backbone" on their ascent up the south wall of the valley.

Later years, 1877–1929

After Lee's death, his wife Emma continued to operate the ferry for two years, in 1878 establishing an alternative ferry route below the confluence of the Paria River that allowed travelers to avoid the infamous Lee's Backbone segment. However, this route could not be used in the summer months due to dangerous high water levels from snowmelt. In 1879, the LDS Church bought the ferry and transferred its operation to Warren Marshall Johnson and family. In 1896 the ferry was transferred to Jim Emett, who installed a cable across the Colorado River to reduce the risk of boats washing downstream during high water.
During this time, Lee's Ferry and surrounds also attracted people after a series of gold strikes in southern Utah, beginning with Cass Hite, a prospector who discovered gold in Glen Canyon in 1883.
The ferry itself continued to run until 1928; in 1929 the first Navajo Bridge was completed at a location four miles (6.4 km) downstream and allowed for far more efficient road travel between Utah and Arizona. Somewhat ironically, the ferry was instrumental in transporting materials for the bridge – at least until June 1928, when the ferryboat capsized, drowning three men and a Ford Model T. The ferry was never replaced, and the bridge was completed seven months later, relegating Lee's Ferry from a crowded transportation hub to a quiet backwater.

Water rights

Since August 1921, Lee's Ferry has been the site of a stream gage operated by the U.S. Geological Survey and has since accumulated one of the most extensive streamflow records ever made in the United States. The river flow here is the principal factor in allocating water to the seven U.S. and two Mexican states in the Colorado River basin. The Colorado River Compact of 1922 apportioned an equal portion of the river's flow to the Upper Basin (the U.S. states of Colorado, New Mexico, Utah, Wyoming and northern Arizona) and the Lower Basin (Arizona, California and Nevada) each, with the individual "basins" divided by an imaginary line at Lee's Ferry. 139
Including a later 1944 treaty with Mexico guaranteeing that country most of the remaining water in the river, the total allocations ran up to 16.5 million acre feet (20.3 km3), which was believed to be the natural flow of the Colorado River based on early observations at Lee's Ferry and other gages along the river.
Lee's Ferry has long been a focal point of American Southwest water disputes, and has been called "both the physical and spiritual heart of water history in the arid West". 141

Lee's Ferry today

Lee's Ferry is considered the official beginning of Grand Canyon National Park on the Colorado River and is used as a fishing area and river rafting launch site. The main access is by Lees Ferry Road, which splits off from U.S. Route 89 at the hamlet of Marble Canyon, Arizona, on the west side of the Navajo Bridges. The Lonely Dell Ranch Historic District, listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1978 and expanded to include Lee's Ferry in 1997, features several buildings built during and after John D. Lee's brief tenure at the site along with some remnants of the Charles H. Spencer. The area is managed by the National Park Service within the Glen Canyon National Recreation Area as a historical site.
Lee's Ferry is the principal starting point for whitewater rafting trips through the Grand Canyon, which are said to offer "a trip backwards through time" as the river cuts through progressively older strata.
Trips upstream from the nearby Paria Riffle may be made without special permit (other than a day use boating fee) and users may travel 

In film

Irvin Willat and a cast and crew of 200 people used Lee's Ferry during the filming of Heritage of the Plains (1924)."Picture Filmed Under Severe Difficulties." St. Petersburg Evening Independent. February 18. 1924 p 6. Web. October 15. 2013
Scenes from the movie Into the Wild (based on the book by Jon Krakauer) were shot on location at the Lee's Ferry National Park Service Station, which featured actors Emile Hirsch as Christopher McCandless and Steven Wiig as the Lee's Ferry Ranger, Steve Koehler.





Works cited

|author=DeBuys, William E.
|title=A Great Aridness: Climate Change and the Future of the American Southwest
|publisher=Oxford University Press
|year=2011
|isbn=978-0-19-977892-8}}

External links and further reading


