[[The Tabernacle]]

CATEGORIES: Buildings and structures in Atlanta, Georgia, Churches in Atlanta, Georgia, Culture of Atlanta, Georgia, Music venues in Georgia (U.S. state), 1910 establishments in the United States

The Tabernacle, known colloquially as The Tabby, city of Atlanta. The Tabernacle has been a venue for notable acts, including Guns N' Roses, The Black Crowes, Fergie, Adele, Robbie Williams, Alice in Chains, Bob Dylan, Prince & The New Power Generation and Atlanta's own Sevendust, among others. Along with music concerts, the venue also holds many comedy tours annually including Bob Saget, Lisa Lampanelli, Cheech & Chong and Stephen Lynch. The Tabernacle is managed by concert promoter Live Nation and has a seating capacity of 2,600 people.

History

The building is nearly a century old and has a varied history.

Baptist Tabernacle (1898—1994)

Dr. Len G. Broughton was recruited from Virginia to become pastor of Third Baptist Church in Atlanta in March 1898.  Within a year he had founded a new Baptist Tabernacle church on the southwest corner of Luckie and Harris streets (now the middle of Centennial Olympic Park).
right|thumb|The cornerstone of the building, placed March 1910. Seeing need for further growth, Broughton sought another location closer to the center of town, which led to the current property on Luckie St. However his Board of Deacons found the price too high and declined to buy it. As a result Broughton himself and a few of his deacons bought the property on July 7, 1906 and gave it to the church. The Atlanta Constitution reported the $52,000 transaction on its front page, reporting it as "one of the most important real estate and church transactions ever made in Atlanta" and described an auditorium "eight or ten stories in height" and estimated construction cost at $250,000.
The building was designed by noted Chattanooga architect Reuben Harrison Hunt, along with three other buildings for the same site including a nurses dormitory and a hospital building. (None of these other buildings survive to the present day). The plans were revealed in November 1907 and depict a church building somewhat larger than what was finally constructed, extending all the way to the corner of Luckie and Spring Street (see photo).
Ground-breaking ceremonies were held for the new building on August 17, 1909, at which time the construction cost had been revised to $125,000.  At the time the membership of the church was 1,850 (up from 350 at its founding ten years before).  Broughton, who was preaching at Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church at the time, was not present at the ground-breaking.
The cornerstone for the building was laid at the end of the 1910 Bible Conference held at the church.  Immediately after a sermon by F. B. Meyer on March 9, 1910, an "immense crowd" adjourned to the construction site.  Meyer said at the ceremony, "I believe that this will be an historic occasion, not only in the history of the church, but not unworthy to be chronicled in the history of this great and beautiful city."  Paul Dwight Moody (son of D.L. Moody) also spoke at the ceremony.  Broughton placed some papers in the stone including that day's program, the membership roll of the church and a list of officers. He capped the stone and sealed it with mortar.
The structure measures 147 by 130 feet with an exterior of red brick trimmed by granite. The style is neoclassical with Ionic columns and arches on the facade. but this was eventually delayed.
The first services in the new building were held on September 3, 1911 beginning with a Sunday school at 9:30 (attended by 2,000).  The doors opened for the main service at 10:40 am, by which time some people had been waiting two hours to enter.  A week-long dedication for the church was held from September 10–17, 1911, during which as many as 8,000 people crowded into the auditorium and hundreds more were turned away.
On the very first day in the new building, Broughton gave a sermon criticizing local politicians for standing in the way of prohibition.  Aside from the  temperance movement, Broughton was outspoken on other political issues, and over the coming years he would have guest speakers appear at the Tabernacle toward this end.  These included (then Vice President elect) Calvin Coolidge,
The congregation reached its peak in the 1950s with a membership of over 3,000.  However, the phenomenon of white flight caused the church to go into decline in the decades afterward.  By the 1980s, attendance at the church had dwindled to around 500, and it had trouble attracting a permanent pastor.
An attempt by the city government to give the building historic status was resisted in 1989, the members citing a loan plan necessary to insure the survival of the church.
The building's history as a church ended on Friday, October 14, 1994 when it was sold (along with the offices and the two parking lots) for $2.2 million to a group of investors led by James B. Cumming who intended to redevelop the area in conjunction with the 1996 Summer Olympics.  Its position just across from Centennial Olympic Park made it very attractive as a potential Olympic entertainment venue.

House of Blues (1996—1997)

At least two different teams attempted to develop the building as a venue for the Olympics with little success.
The first act to perform (on July 19 & 20) was The Blues Brothers (with Dan Aykroyd, James Belushi and John Goodman)'
Civic leaders in Atlanta had high hopes that House of Blues would continue as a permanent downtown attraction, especially when the lease was extended through January 1997. But immediately after the Olympics were finished, word came that it would shut down. Efforts were launched to convince Tigrett to continue in Atlanta, but the local investment money he insisted upon ($4 million by some accounts) could not be found.
Some concerts were held at the venue under the House of Blues name beginning in 1997 through the efforts of Lance Sterling.  The trial run began on Wednesday, November 12, 1997 with a concert by Hall & Oates.

The Tabernacle (1998—present)

On March 11, 1998 Lance Sterling announced that he had entered into a 30 year lease agreement and was investing $2 million of his own money to develop the building.  The venue was renamed The Tabernacle at this time.  The reopening was set for March 28, the same day that Centennial Olympic Park was set to reopen across the street.  The Tabernacle operated as a successful concert venue under Sterling's management for almost two years.
Eventually Sterling (whose home is in California) found the business was conflicting with his family life.  "I would spend a week there and a week home. It was just too much," he said. He sold his interest in the building to SFX Entertainment (now Live Nation) on December 17, 1999.
At the same time as the SFX sale, local music promoters Alex Cooley and Peter Conlon announced that they would move their Cotton Club to the basement of the building (the former Sunday school room) as an additional feature of the venue.
The Tabernacle continues as a major concert venue in Atlanta into 2013. Conan O'Brien hosted a week of Conan shows at The Tabernacle between April 1—4, 2013.com/Atlanta

March 2008 tornado

On March 14, 2008, the Tabernacle sustained extensive damage when a tornado tore through downtown Atlanta.  Windows were blown out and the roof was severely damaged.  A broken water pipe caused additional damage.[/ref]
Major repairs and restoration took less than two months, working around the clock.  Because the ornate plasterwork on the ceiling could not be repaired, drywall and molding were used to re-create the same designs.  The original painter from the 1996 opening was found to repaint the repaired sections.  Upgrades were also done to electrical and other systems.

February 2014

Shortly after the beginning of a Panic! At the Disco concert, the building was evacuated due to possible cracking in the floor.name="ajcevacuation">[/ref]

Awards

The Tabernacle has been named one of the best concert venues in the nation by Rolling Stone
It has also won numerous "Best of Atlanta" awards over the years:

Popular culture






