[[Migraine]]

CATEGORIES: Migraine

Migraine is a chronic neurological disorder characterized by recurrent moderate to severe headaches often in association with a number of autonomic nervous system symptoms. The word derives from the Greek ἡμικρανία (hemikrania), "pain on one side of the head",
Typically the headache affects one half of the head, is pulsating in nature, and lasting from 2 to 72 hours. Associated symptoms may include nausea, vomiting, and sensitivity to light, sound, or smell. The pain is generally made worse by physical activity. as PDF Up to one-third of people with migraine headaches perceive an aura: a transient visual, sensory, language, or motor disturbance which signals that the headache will soon occur. Occasionally an aura can occur with little or no headache following it.
Migraines are believed to be due to a mixture of environmental and genetic factors.
Initial recommended management is with simple analgesics such as ibuprofen and paracetamol (also known as acetaminophen) for the headache, an antiemetic for the nausea, and the avoidance of triggers. Specific agents such as triptans or ergotamines may be used by those for whom simple analgesics are not effective. Globally, approximately 15% of the population is affected by migraines at some point in life.

Signs and symptoms

Migraines typically present with self-limited, recurrent severe headache associated with autonomic symptoms. About 15-30% of people with migraines experience migraines with an aura There are four possible phases to a migraine, although not all the phases are necessarily experienced:

Prodrome phase

Prodromal or premonitory symptoms occur in about 60% of those with migraines,

Aura phase

An aura is a transient focal neurological phenomenon that occurs before or during the headache. Auras appear gradually over a number of minutes and generally last fewer than 60 minutes. Symptoms can be visual, sensory or motor in nature and many people experience more than one. Visual effects occur most frequently; they occur in up to 99% of cases and in more than 50% of cases are not accompanied by sensory or motor effects. Vision disturbances often consist of a scintillating scotoma (an area of partial alteration in the field of vision which flickers and may interfere with a person's ability to read or drive). These typically start near the center of vision and then spread out to the sides with zigzagging lines which have been described as looking like fortifications or walls of a castle. Usually the lines are in black and white but some people also see colored lines. Some people lose part of their field of vision known as hemianopsia while others experience blurring.
Sensory aurae are the second most common type; they occur in 30–40% of people with auras. Often a feeling of pins-and-needles begins on one side in the hand and arm and spreads to the nose-mouth area on the same side. Numbness usually occurs after the tingling has passed with a loss of position sense. Other symptoms of the aura phase can include speech or language disturbances, world spinning, and less commonly motor problems. Motor symptoms indicate that this is a hemiplegic migraine, and weakness often lasts longer than one hour unlike other auras.
Rarely, an aura occurs without a subsequent headache;The Headaches, pp.407–19 this is known as a silent migraine. However, it is difficult to assess the frequency of such cases, because patients who do not experience symptoms severe enough to drive them to seek treatment, may not realise that anything special is happening to them, and pass it off without reporting anything.

Pain phase

Classically the headache is unilateral, throbbing, and moderate to severe in intensity.
The pain is frequently accompanied by nausea, vomiting, sensitivity to light, sensitivity to sound, sensitivity to smells, fatigue and irritability. In a basilar migraine, a migraine with neurological symptoms related to the brain stem or with neurological symptoms on both sides of the body, Swelling or tenderness of the scalp may occur as can neck stiffness. Associated symptoms are less common in the elderly.

Postdrome

The effects of migraine may persist for some days after the main headache has ended; this is called the migraine postdrome. Many report a sore feeling in the area where the migraine was, and some report impaired thinking for a few days after the headache has passed. The patient may feel tired or "hung over" and have head pain, cognitive difficulties, gastrointestinal symptoms, mood changes, and weakness.

Cause

The underlying causes of migraines are unknown. However, they are believed to be related to a mix of environmental and genetic factors. They run in families in about two-thirds of cases and rarely occur due to a single gene defect. While migraines were once believed to be more common in those of high intelligence, this does not appear to be true. A number of psychological conditions are associated, including depression, anxiety, and bipolar disorder,The Headaches, pp. 246–47 as are many biological events or triggers.

Genetics

Studies of twins indicate a 34% to 51% genetic influence of likelihood to develop migraine headaches. This genetic relationship is stronger for migraines with aura than for migraines without aura. A number of specific variants of genes increase the risk by a small to moderate amount.
Single gene disorders that result in migraines are rare. Three of these genes are involved in ion transport. The fourth is an axonal protein associated with the exocytosis complex. Another genetic disorder associated with migraine is CADASIL syndrome or cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy.

Triggers

Migraines may be induced by triggers, with some reporting it as an influence in a minority of cases and others the majority. Many things have been labeled as triggers, however the strength and significance of these relationships are uncertain.  A trigger may be encountered up to 24 hours prior to the onset of symptoms.

=Physiological aspects=

Common triggers quoted are stress, hunger, and fatigue (these equally contribute to tension headaches). Migraines are more likely to occur around menstruation. These hormonal influences seem to play a greater role in migraine without aura. Migraines typically do not occur during the second and third trimesters or following menopause.

=Dietary aspects=

Reviews of dietary triggers have found that evidence mostly relies on self-reports and is not rigorous enough to prove or disprove any particular triggers.

=Environmental aspects=

A review on potential triggers in the indoor and outdoor environment concluded the overall evidence was of poor quality, but nevertheless suggested people with migraines take some preventive measures related to indoor air quality and lighting.

Pathophysiology

Migraines are believed to be a neurovascular disorder High levels of the neurotransmitter serotonin, also known as 5-hydroxytryptamine, are believed to be involved.

Aura

Cortical spreading depression or spreading depression of Leão is bursts of neuronal activity followed by a period of inactivity, which is seen in those with migraines with an aura. 28, pp. 269–72 There are a number of explanations for its occurrence including activation of NMDA receptors leading to calcium entering the cell. After the burst of activity the blood flow to the cerebral cortex in the area affected is decreased for two to six hours. It is believed that when depolarization travels down the underside of the brain, nerves that sense pain in the head and neck are triggered.

Pain

The exact mechanism of the head pain which occurs during a migraine is unknown.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of a migraine is based on signs and symptoms. Neuroimaging tests are not necessary to diagnose migraine, but may be used to find other causes of headaches in those whose examination and history do not confirm a migraine diagnosis. It is believed that a substantial number of people with the condition remain undiagnosed.
The diagnosis of migraine without aura, according to the International Headache Society, can be made according to the following criteria, the "5, 4, 3, 2, 1 criteria":
If someone experiences two of the following: photophobia, nausea, or inability to work or study for a day, the diagnosis is more likely. In those with four out of five of the following: pulsating headache, duration of 4–72 hours, pain on one side of the head, nausea, or symptoms that interfere with the person's life, the probability that this is a migraine is 92%. In those with fewer than three of these symptoms the probability is 17%.

Classification

Migraines were first comprehensively classified in 1988. According to this classification migraines are primary headaches along with tension-type headaches and cluster headaches, among others.
Migraines are divided into seven subclasses (some of which include further subdivisions):

Abdominal migraine

The diagnosis of abdominal migraines is controversial. or are at least a precursor to migraines. These episodes of pain may or may not follow a migraine-like prodrome and typically last minutes to hours. They often occur in those with either a personal or family history of typical migraines. Other syndromes that are believed to be precursors include cyclical vomiting syndrome and benign paroxysmal vertigo of childhood.

Differential diagnosis

Other conditions that can cause similar symptoms to a migraine headache include temporal arteritis, cluster headaches, acute glaucoma, meningitis and subarachnoid hemorrhage. Temporal arteritis typically occurs in people over 50 years old and presents with tenderness over the temple, cluster headaches presents with one-sided nose stuffiness, tears and severe pain around the orbits, acute glaucoma is associated with vision problems, meningitis with fevers, and subaracchnoid hemorrhage with a very fast onset. Tension headaches typically occur on both sides, are not pounding, and are less disabling.
Those with stable headaches which meet criteria for migraines should not receive neuroimaging to look for other intracranial disease.[ref]

Prevention

Preventive treatments of migraines include medications, nutritional supplements, lifestyle alterations, and surgery. Prevention is recommended in those who have headaches more than two days a week, cannot tolerate the medications used to treat acute attacks, or those with severe attacks that are not easily controlled.
The goal is to reduce the frequency, painfulness, and/or duration of migraines, and to increase the effectiveness of abortive therapy.

Medication

Preventive migraine medications are considered effective if they reduce the frequency or severity of the migraine attacks by at least 50%.
Amitriptyline and venlafaxine are probably also effective.

Alternative therapies

While acupuncture may be effective, "true" acupuncture is not more efficient than sham acupuncture, a practice where needles are placed randomly. Both have a possibility of being more effective than routine care, with fewer adverse effects than preventative medications.

Devices and surgery

Medical devices, such as biofeedback and neurostimulators, have some advantages in migraine prevention, mainly when common anti-migraine medications are contraindicated or in case of medication overuse. Biofeedback helps people be conscious of some physiological parameters so as to control them and try to relax and may be efficient for migraine treatment.

Management

There are three main aspects of treatment: trigger avoidance, acute symptomatic control, and pharmacological prevention. Medications are more effective if used earlier in an attack. The frequent use of medications may result in medication overuse headache, in which the headaches become more severe and more frequent. This may occur with triptans, ergotamines, and analgesics, especially narcotic analgesics. Due to these concerns simple analgesics are recommended to be used less than three days per week at most.

Analgesics

Recommended initial treatment for those with mild to moderate symptoms are simple analgesics such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) or the combination of paracetamol, acetylsalicylic acid, and caffeine.
Aspirin can relieve moderate to severe migraine pain, with an effectiveness similar to sumatriptan. In pregnancy, paracetamol and metoclopramide are deemed safe as are NSAIDs until the third trimester.

Triptans

Triptans such as sumatriptan are effective for both pain and nausea in up to 75% of people.

Ergotamines

Ergotamine and dihydroergotamine are older medications still prescribed for migraines, the latter in nasal spray and injectable forms. They appear equally effective to the triptans,

Other

Intravenous metoclopramide or intranasal lidocaine are other potential options. Metoclopramide is the recommended treatment for those who present to the emergency department. A single dose of intravenous dexamethasone, when added to standard treatment of a migraine attack, is associated with a 26% decrease in headache recurrence in the following 72 hours. It is recommended that opioids and barbiturates not be used.

Prognosis

Long term prognosis in people with migraines is variable. There are four main patterns to the disease: symptoms can resolve completely, symptoms can continue but become gradually less with time, symptoms may continue at the same frequency and severity, or attacks may become worse and more frequent.
Migraines with aura appear to be a risk factor for ischemic stroke

Epidemiology

