[[Adam Spencer]]

CATEGORIES: 1969 births, Living people, People from New South Wales, Australian male comedians, Australian mathematicians, Australian DJs, Triple J announcers, Australian radio personalities, Radio in Sydney, Australian soccer coaches, Date of birth missing (living people), Australian people with disabilities, University of Sydney alumni, People educated at St Aloysius' College (Sydney)

Adam Barrington Spencer (born 1969) is an Australian radio presenter, comedian, and media personality. He first came to fame when he won his round of the comedic talent search Raw Comedy in the mid-1990s. Soon thereafter, he began working at Triple J, on mid-dawn and drive shifts before hosting the Triple J Breakfast Show with Wil Anderson.
He is a patron of science-related events and programs, including the University of Sydney's Eureka Prize, a "lateral-thinking" science prize. He is a member of the Sleek Geek Week tour along with Karl Kruszelnicki, as well as performing his own comedy at events around the country.

Early life

Born on 29 January 1969, in Sydney, Spencer grew up in the Hunters Hill/Gladesville area.
Spencer was born without the muscle levator palpebrae superioris in his right upper eyelid, leading to permanent ptosis (drooping of the upper eyelid) and noticeable facial asymmetry. He later received a transplant from a donor in an operation performed by eye surgeon Fred Hollows, allowing him to "open" that eye.
Spencer attended St Aloysius' College in Sydney, and was a vice-captain of the College and Captain of the Australian Schools Debating Team.
He graduated from the University of Sydney with a Bachelor of Science with first class honours in pure mathematics in 1991.

Career

He won the Triple J Raw Comedy Championship in 1996.

Television

Adam Spencer has been a host of ABC science shows Quantum, FAQ and Sleek Geeks. In 2005, Spencer hosted Australia's first poker TV show, Joker Poker, on the Ten Network.

Radio

From 1999, and joined in 2000 by Wil Anderson, Spencer hosted Triple J's breakfast show, before they both retired from the show in 2004. On 20 February 2006, he began presenting Breakfast on 702 ABC Sydney replacing Angela Catterns. Spencer previously hosted the "Smile High Club" radio show programme on Qantas Airlines radio channel, Q.
On 6 December 2013 Spencer hosted his last breakfast radio program for ABC 702.

Controversy

In July 2011 Spencer interviewed climate change sceptic Christopher Monckton. During a heated interview Spencer hung up on Monckton.

Personal life

On the final day of his breakfast show in 2004, he announced that his partner Mel was pregnant and that the next year he would be leaving his media career to become a full-time dad. He returned within two years to present another breakfast radio show. He married Mel on 28 January 2006.
While Spencer attended St. Aloysius' College and was brought up a Catholic, he describes himself an atheist.

Charity

Spencer promotes the work of Redkite, Unifem, Kids For Life and UNICEF, and is an ambassador for the The Fred Hollows Foundation

Recognition

Main-belt asteroid 18413 Adamspencer has been named after him.






