[[Moroccan Wall]]

CATEGORIES: Walls, Western Sahara conflict, Buildings and structures in Western Sahara

The Moroccan Wall of Western Sahara is an approximately 2,700 km-long structure, mostly a sand wall (or "berm"), running through Western Sahara and the southeastern portion of Morocco.  It acts as a  barrier between the Moroccan-controlled areas (Southern Provinces) and the Polisario-controlled section of the territory (Free Zone) that lies along its eastern and southern border.
According to maps from MINURSODeployment of MINURSO or the UNHCR,Western Sahara Atlas Map - June 2006 part of the wall extends several kilometers into internationally recognized Mauritanian territory.

Physical structure

The fortifications lie in uninhabited or very sparsely inhabited territory.  They consist of sand  and stone walls or berms about three meters in height, with bunkers, fences and landmines throughout. The barrier minebelt that runs along the structure is thought to be the longest continuous minefield in the world. Military bases, artillery posts and airfields dot the interior behind the wall at regular intervals, and radar masts and other electronic surveillance equipment scan the areas in front of it.
The following is one observer's description of the Berm:
In all, six lines of berms have been constructed. Website of the United Nations MINURSO mission.  The main ("external") line of fortifications extends for about 2,500 km. It runs east from Guerguerat on the coast in the extreme south of Western Sahara near the Mauritanian town of Nouadhibou, closely parallelling the Mauritanian border (and crossing it several times) for about 200 km, before turning northwards beyond Techla. It then runs generally northeastward, leaving Guelta Zemmur, Smara, crossing again Mauritanian territory and reaching Hamza in Moroccan-held territory, before turning east and again closely following the Algerian border as it approaches Morocco. A section extends about 200 km into southeastern MoroccoUnited Nations Map No.  3691 Rev. 53 United Nations, October 2006 (Colour), Department of Peacekeeping Operations, Cartographic Section. Depicts the deployment of the MINURSO mission, as well as the Wall location.g. this satellite montage at Google Maps for a section of the wall in Moroccan territory. The northernmost fort that is clearly distinguishable can be seen here. (Google Maps, as of 30 November 2006)
Significant lines of fortifications also lie deep within the Moroccan-controlled area. (Google Maps, as of 30 November 2006) Their exact number and location are a source of some confusion for overseas commentators.(author and date unknown)(in Dutch) Marokkaanse veiligheidsmuur al twee decennia onomstreden, CIDI Israel website, Nieuwsbrief (2004)
All major settlements, the capital El Aaiún, and the phosphate mine at Bou Craa lie far into the Moroccan-held side.
The fortifications were progressively built by Moroccan forces starting in 1981, and formally ending on 16 April 1987. Its main function was to exclude the guerrilla fighters of the Polisario Front, who have sought Western Saharan independence since before Spain ended its colonial occupation in 1975, from the Moroccan-controlled part of the territory.

Consequence

Effectively, after the completion of the wall, Morocco has controlled the bulk of Western Sahara territory that lies to the north and west of it, calling these the kingdom's "Southern Provinces". The Polisario-founded Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic controls the mostly uninhabited "Free Zone", which comprises all areas to the east of the barrier.  Units from the United Nations mission MINURSO separate the two sides, and enforce cease-fire regulations on their troops.
Many of Western Sahara's native Sahrawi people live as refugees in camps in the Tindouf Province of Algeria, where the POLISARIO is based.

International reaction and Incidents

In the summer of 2005, the Moroccan Army accelerated the expulsion (started in late 2004) of illegal immigrants detained in northern Morocco to the eastern side of the wall, into the Free Zone. The Polisario Front and the MINURSO rescued several dozens lost in the desert, who had run out of water. Others died of thirst.
Western attention to the wall, and to the Moroccan annexation of the Western Sahara in general, has been minimal, apart from Spain. In Africa, the annexation of Western Sahara by Morocco has attracted somewhat more attention. Algeria supports the Polisario Front "in its long-running desert war to oppose Moroccan control of the disputed area"."Security Problems with Neighboring States", Country Studies/Area Handbook Series, Library of Congress Federal Research Division (retrieved May 1, 2006). The Organization of African Unity/African Union and United Nations have proposed negotiated solutions, though the African Union's stance on Western Sahara led to Morocco's exit from the organisation.

The Thousand Column

Since 2008, a demonstration called "The Thousand Column" is held annually in the desert against the barrier by international human rights activists and Sahrawi refugees. In the 2008 demonstration, more than 2,000 people (most of them Sahrawis and Spaniards, but also Algerians, Italians, etc...) made a human chain demanding the demolition of the wall, the celebration of the self-determination referendum accorded by the UN and the parts in 1991, and the end of the Moroccan occupation of the territory.000 personas pide el derribo del muro del Sáhara El Mundo (EFE), 22 March 2008 
In the 2009 edition, a teenager Sahrawi refugee named Ibrahim Hussein Leibeit lost half of his right leg in a landmine explosion.Screenings in The Devil's Garden: The Sahara Film Festival New Internationalist, Issue 422, 20 May 2009The Berlin Wall of the Desert New Internationalist, Issue 427, 10 November 2009

Construction of the wall

The wall was built in six stages, and the area behind the wall was expanded from a small area near Morocco in the north to most of the western and central part of the country gradually. The walls built were:

Gallery

File:The Berm, Western Sahara..
File:Mahbes.

Satellite views

(Google Maps)



References and notes




