[[Prince Edward of Saxe-Weimar]]

CATEGORIES: 1823 births, 1902 deaths, 67th Regiment of Foot officers, British Life Guards officers, Grenadier Guards officers, Royal Lincolnshire Regiment officers, British Field Marshals, Commander-in-Chief, Ireland, British Army personnel of the Crimean War, Knights of St Patrick, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath, Knights Grand Cross of the Royal Guelphic Order, Knights Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the Netherlands Lion, Members of the Privy Council of Ireland, House of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach, Princes of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach, People from Richmond, London

Prince William Augustus Edward of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach, KP, GCB, GCH, GCVO, PC (11 October 1823 – 16 November 1902) was a British military officer of German parents. After a career in the Grenadier Guards, he became Major General commanding the Brigade of Guards and General Officer Commanding the Home District in 1870, General Officer Commanding Southern District in October 1878 and Commander-in-Chief, Ireland in October 1885. He was promoted to field marshal in 1897 despite his career including no great military achievements.

Career

Edward was born to Prince Bernhard of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach and Princess Ida of Saxe-Meiningen at Bushy House, the home of his mother's sister Adelaide and her husband the future King William IV of the United Kingdom.
After being naturalised as a British subject, Edward's military career began on 1 June 1841, when, having trained at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, he joined the 67th (South Hampshire) Regiment of Foot as an ensign. 114 He was promoted to ensign in the Grenadier Guards and lieutenant in the Army on 8 June 1841 and lieutenant in his regiment and captain in the Army on 19 May 1846
Edward was promoted to brevet major in the Grenadier Guards on 20 June 1854.
Edward was appointed an aide-de-camp to the Queen and received his colonelcy in the Grenadier Guards on 5 October 1855.
In retirement Edward was a commissioner of the Patriotic Fund. following which there was adverse comment in The Times that his career had included no great military achievements.
Edward died on 16 November 1902 at Portland Place in London and was buried in Chichester Cathedral,"Funeral of Prince Edward of Saxe-Weimar", The Times (20 November 1902): 12. in the crypt of his wife's family, the dukes of Richmond and Lennox.

Family

On 27 November 1851 Edward married, morganatically, Lady Augusta Katherine Gordon-Lennox, (a daughter of Charles Gordon-Lennox, 5th Duke of Richmond), who was created Countess of Dornburg by the Grand Duke of Saxe-Weimar the day before the wedding. The Court Circular shows that she was usually known by that title until early 1886, when the Circular began to consistently refer to her by her husband's title, i.e. "HSH Princess Edward of Saxe-Weimar". They had no children.

Honours

Edward's honours included:



Sources




