[[Andy Kubert]]

CATEGORIES: 1962 births, American comics artists, American comics writers, American educators, American people of Polish descent, Artists from New Jersey, Jewish artists, Living people, People from Dover, New Jersey, The Kubert School alumni

Andrew "Andy" Kubert (born February 27, 1962) is an American comic book artist, son of Joe Kubert, and brother of Adam Kubert, both of whom are also artists. He is a graduate of and an instructor of second-year classes at The Kubert School, founded by his father who also taught there.

Early life

Andrew Kubert is the son of Muriel (née Fogelson) and Joe Kubert,

Career

Andy Kubert started his comics career as a lettere at DC Comics in 1980. His first credited artwork for the company was the story "Old Soldiers Never Die" in Sgt. Rock #393 (Oct. 1984).[ref]
[/ref] He later drew Adam Strange and drew the wedding of Cyclops and Jean Grey in X-Men #30 (March 1994). 269: "X-Men founders Scott Summers and Jean Grey finally got hitched thanks to writer Fabian Nicieza and artist Andy Kubert." Kubert drew the Amazing X-Men limited series as part of the "Age of Apocalypse" storyline in 1995. 273 In 2001, Kubert drew two issues of the new Ultimate X-Men title. 304: "Looking to repeat the success of Ultimate Spider-Man in 2000, the second major title of this alternate universe was crafted by esteemed writer Mark Millar along with the famed Kubert brothers, Andy and Adam, taking turns at the drawing table." With writers Bill Jemas, Joe Quesada and Paul Jenkins, Kubert produced the Origin limited series which revealed the early history of Wolverine. 307: "Joe Quesada, along with writer Bill Jemas, scripter Paul Jenkins, and artist Andy Kubert, decided to the history with Origin, a six-issue miniseries." Kubert collaborated with novelist Neil Gaiman on the Marvel 1602 eight-issue limited series published from November 2003 to June 2004. 317: "Neil Gaiman... Digitally painted by Richard Isanove..." Writer Orson Scott Card and Kubert crafted the Ultimate Iron Man limited series in 2005. 325: "Acclaimed sci-fi novelist Orson Scott Card, with Marvel artists Andy Kubert and Mark Bagley delved into Tony Stark's past in the five-issue miniseries Ultimate Iron Man."
Both Kubert and his brother, Andy, signed exclusive contracts to work for DC Comics in 2005. Andy Kubert became the penciller of the Batman series and with writer Grant Morrison introduced the Damian Wayne character. 326: "The story not only brought Talia al Ghul back into Bruce Wayne's life but also introduced a major new character: Damian Wayne, Batman's son..."
Kubert illustrated the covers to Batman: Cacophony, a three-issue miniseries published in November 2008.
While his brother Adam has returned to Marvel Comics following his three-year deal with DC, Dan DiDio has confirmed that following "Whatever Happened to the Caped Crusader?", Kubert has two more Batman projects in the works, one of which he is writing himself. He contributed covers to the Blackest Night: Batman mini-series, as well as variant covers for "Blackest Night" issues of Green Lantern.
Dan DiDio announced that Andy Kubert was working on two DC stories, one featuring Batman, the other featuring the DCU.

Teaching

Kubert, along with his brother Adam, teaches at his family business and alma mater, the Joe Kubert School.

Bibliography

DC Comics

Eclipse Comics

Marvel Comics

Pacific Comics






