[[Koreatown]]

CATEGORIES: Ethnic enclaves, Koreatowns

A Koreatown (), also known as a Little Korea, or Little Seoul, is a Korean ethnic enclave within a city or metropolitan area outside of the Korean Peninsula.

History

Koreatowns as an Asian ethnic enclave have only been in existence since the mid 1860s as Korea had been a territorially stable polity for centuries; as Jaeeun Kim describe it, "The congruence of territory, polity, and population was taken for granted".
[/ref]
Koreatowns in the western countries such as the United States, Canada have only been in place much later with the Los Angeles Chinatown receiving official recognition in 2008.  Also many Koreatowns are not officially sanctioned where the only evidence of such enclaves exist as clusters of Korean stores with Korean signage existing only on the storefronts.  In the 1992 Los Angeles riots, many Korean businesses were targeted where the signage only served to point out targets for rioters.  In Philadelphia's Koreatown, anti-Korean sentiment was so strong that official signage was often vandalized as residents protested the "official recognition" of such areas, making many Koreatowns across the western countries never having official statuses that many Chinatowns receive today.  Many Koreatowns today exist in a suburban setting as opposed to the urban settings of Chinatown mainly because many ethnic Koreans, especially in the western countries, fear crime that is often associated with the city dwellings and the higher quality of schools as education is often a top priority, which is why the Philadelphia Koreatowns exist in suburban settings such as Cheltenham, Pennsylvania instead of its original location in the Olney section of Philadelphia.

Characteristics

The features described below are characteristic of many modern Koreatowns.

Korean signage

Many modern Koreatowns will exhibit the usage of the Korean language and Hangul on storefront signs as sometimes on official highway signage.  Officially sanctioned Koreatowns may also exhibit signs in the local language.  In English, the word "Koreatown", "Little Korea", and "Korea Way" can sometimes be seen, as in the case with the Los Angeles Koreatown.  As Korean is the official language of South Korea and North Korea as well as one of the two official languages in China's Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture, there are approximately 80 million people speak Korean worldwide. For over a millennium, Korean was written with adapted Chinese characters called hanja, complemented by phonetic systems like hyangchal, gugyeol, and idu. In the 15th century, a national writing system called hangul was commissioned by Sejong the Great, but it only came into widespread use in the 20th century, because of the yangban aristocracy's preference for hanja.
Most historical linguists classify Korean as a language isolateSong, Jae Jung (2005) "The Korean language: structure, use and context" Routledge, p. 15 Lyle Campbell & Mauricio Mixco. 2007. A Glossary of Historical Linguistics. University of Utah Press. ("Korean, A language isolate", p. 90; "Korean is often said to belong with the Altaic hypothesis, often also with Japanese, though this is not widely supported", pp. 90–91; "......... 7) David Dalby. 1999/2000. The Linguasphere Register of the World's Languages and Speech Communities. Linguasphere Press. Nam-Kil Kim. 1992. "Korean", International Encyclopedia of Linguistics. Volume 2, pp. 282–86. ("... 282) András Róna-Tas. 1998. "The Reconstruction of Proto-Turkic and the Genetic Question", The Turkic Languages. Routledge. pp. 67–80. ("comparisons of Korean and Altaic have been heavily criticised in more recent studies, though the idea of a genetic relationship has not been totally abandoned", p. 77.) Claus Schönig. 2003. "Turko-Mongolic Relations", The Mongolic Languages. Routledge. pp. 403–19. ("... 403) while a few consider it to be in the controversial Altaic language family. Human migrations in continental East Asia and Taiwan: genetic, linguistic and archaeological evidence. 2008. Taylor & Francis The Korean language is agglutinative in its morphology and SOV in its syntax.

Korean restaurants

Many Koreatowns will have stores that serve Korean cuisine, usually serving as the major differentiator between other Asian ethnic enclaves such as Chinatown and Little Saigons.  The Korean national cuisine known today has evolved through centuries of social and political change. Originating from ancient agricultural and nomadic traditions in southern Manchuria and the Korean peninsula, Korean cuisine has evolved through a complex interaction of the natural environment and different cultural trends.
Korean cuisine is largely based upon rice, vegetables, and meats. Traditional Korean meals are noted for the number of side dishes (banchan) that accompany steam-cooked short-grain rice. Kimchi is served often, sometimes at every meal. Commonly used ingredients include sesame oil, doenjang (fermented bean paste), soy sauce, salt, garlic, ginger, pepper flakes and gochujang (fermented red chili paste).
Ingredients and dishes vary by province. Many regional dishes have become national, and dishes that were once regional have proliferated in different variations across the country. The Korean royal court cuisine once brought all of the unique regional specialties together for the royal family. Meals are regulated by Korean cultural etiquette.

Locations

Korean demographics

Many Koreatowns are actual ethnic enclaves where nearly four-fifths of expatriate Koreans live in just three countries: China, the United States, and Japan. Other countries with greater than 0.5% Korean minorities include Australia, Canada, Kazakhstan, New Zealand, and Uzbekistan. All these figures include both permanent migrants and sojourners. If one focuses on long-term residents, there were about 5.3 million Korean emigrants as of 2010.

Asia

=China=

==Beijing==

There are roughly 200,000 Koreans living in Beijing, including 120,000 Joseonjok (ethnic Korean citizens of China) and about 80,000 South Korean expatriates.

==Qingdao==

An estimated 182,000 Koreans live in Qingdao, Shandong Province, including 134,000 Joseonjok and 48,000 South Korean expatriates.

==Shenyang==

Shenyang has a large Koreatown known as Xita/Seotap (Chinese: 西塔, ) meaning Western Pagoda. Both North and South Korea have consulates in Shenyang but in different districts.

==Shanghai==

86,000 Koreans live in Shanghai, including 65,000 Joseonjok and 21,000 South Korean expatriates. Longbai in the Minhang district, to the west of the city, has a Korean-oriented neighborhood.

=Indonesia=

A 31,000 m2 Koreatown block is being constructed on north Jakarta Pulomas. Upon its completion, it will be the first artificially-made Koreatown in the world with 7 blocks and 9 buildings.
Koreans in Indonesia number approximately 40,000, which makes Indonesia the 12th largest country with Koreans living outside of Korea.com - Berita seputar Rumah123.com

=Japan=

During the Korea under Japanese rule, approximately 2.4 million ethnic Koreans emigrated to Japan. Some for economic reasons, and some were forced to move during the Second World War to work as laborers. While most departed after the war, still many chose to remain, and were joined in the 1950s by a wave of refugees from Jeju Island. Today, Koreans, known as Zainichi Koreans (, who have adopted South Korean nationality), are the largest ethnic minority in Japan, amounting to 620,000 in 2002. Those with North Korean ties are a key source of remittances to North Korea. There is a separate group of more recent migrants from South Korea with strong links to their home country, and there is a considerable cultural gap between these so-called "newcomers" and the Zainichi Koreans.

==Osaka==

The Korean enclave in the city of Osaka, numbering over 90,000, is the largest in Japan, concentrated in the Ikuno Ward, where 25% of the inhabitants are of Korean origin. Tsuruhashi in the Ward is the most famous Koreatown in Japan and is dominated by Jeju Islanders. Imazato-Shinchi is an area increasingly dominated by recent South Korean "new-comers". The total Korean population in Osaka prefecture amounted to 150,000 in 2002.

==Tokyo==

According to official statistics in 2002, the Korean population in Tokyo amounted to 80,000, which was the second largest following that of Osaka.
Tokyo's Korean-oriented commercial centre is located in the district of Okubo around the area of Shin-Okubo Station and Okubo Station in Shinjuku Ward. Shinjuku Ward itself has over 14,201 registered Korean residents this is over 20% of the registered Korean residents in Tokyo;  Unlike other Japanese Koreatowns, the Okudo Koreatown developed after World War II and is dominated by "new-comers" - recent immigrants from South Korea who have retained their ethnic and cultural identity, as can be seen from the ubiquitous signs written in hangul.
One of the contributing factors in the development of Okubo into a Korean area is the low rents and a reputation as a seedy area with many Love Hotels south of Okubo station. The low rents and willingness of landlords to accept foreign tenants has attached Korean and other Asian migrants to the area. These Businesses cater of the migrant community and increasingly Japanese who come to experience ethnic cuisine. Other immigrants from China, Taiwan, Southeast Asia, and various other nationalities makes this one of the most colourful and multicultural areas in Tokyo.
The area around Mikawashima station on the Jōban Line, to the north of the city, is a Koreatown dominated by Zainichi immigrants from Jeju island.
Also noteworthy is a smaller-scale Zainichi Korean quarter to the southeast of Ueno station, and to the southwest, a community of South Korean "new-comers".

==Kyoto==

A small Koreatown has developed in the Gion neighborhood (the Geisha district) of Kyoto.

==Shimonoseki==

Green Mall in Shimonoseki, Yamaguchi is a Koreatown. It is also known as "Little Pusan" partly because of the Kanpu ferry that goes to the city of Pusan in South Korea.

=Hong Kong=

In 2011, there were 13,288 individuals of Korean descent in Hong Kong. Kimberley Street in Tsim Sha Tsui has Korean cuisine restaurants and Korean grocery stores. Kimberley Street is nicknamed mini Koreatown (小韓國; lit. Little Korea).

=Kazakhstan=

=Malaysia=

Koreans in Malaysia numbered 14,580 individuals as of 2009, nearly triple the total of 5,920 individuals in 2005, according to South Korea's Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade. This made them the 20th-largest community of overseas Koreans, and the 5th-largest in Southeast Asia. The number of retirees coming under the Malaysia My Second Home immigration programme has also been increasing.

==Kuala Lumpur==

There are more than 20,000 Koreans living in the capital of Malaysia. Sri Hartamas is an affluent residential township in the city which houses many expatriate families, particularly from Korea. There are two Korean supermarkets in the area - Seoul Mart and Lotte Mart, various Korean restaurants and many Korean hair saloons. Malaysia's first officially-registered school for Korean nationals, the Malaysia Korean School, was established on 7 December 1974; it had 26 teachers and enrolled 148 students as of 2006. It is located on Jalan Ampang.

==Sabah==

About 1,800 to 2,000 Koreans reside in Sabah, most of them in the state's capital of Kota Kinabalu. Sabah Oil and Gas Terminal project in Kimanis, Papar has brought South Korean employees of Samsung Engineering to work and live there until the terminal completion in December 2013. Around 200,000 South Korean tourists came to Malaysia in 2006; Kota Kinabalu was their most popular destination.

=Philippines=

The most well-known Koreatown in the Metro Manila area is located in Makati's Barangay Poblacion. Most of the Korean businesses can be found in the area bounded north-south by JP Rizal Avenue and Jupiter, and east-west by Makati Avenue and Rockwell Drive, with P. Burgos running roughly through the middle of the area. In Quezon City, the Kalayaan Plaza Building has various Korean businesses, apartments, and a church (one of seven or eight Korean churches in QC that existed in 2005). Increasingly, students are billeted in rented houses in expensive gated communities such as Barangay Ayala Alabang, Muntinlupa City.

=Singapore=

There are Koreatowns in the Upper Bukit Timah area and the Tanjong Pagar area due to the large number of Koreans living in these two areas. Koreans in Singapore formed a population of 16,650 individuals as of 2010, according to the South Korea's Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade.

=Taiwan=

Jhongsing Street in Yonghe, New Taipei, a suburb of Taipei, is concentrated with stores opened by migrated Chinese Koreans, lending it the nickname of "Korean Street".

North America

=Toronto, Ontario, Canada=

Toronto, Ontario, Canada's Korean Business Area, is composed of the retail businesses along Bloor Street between Christie and Bathurst Streets in the Seaton Village section of The Annex.toronto.htm The adoption of a more liberal immigration policy by the Canadian government in 1967 led to an influx of Korean immigrants, many of whom settled in the Toronto area.  Indeed, Toronto has the largest single concentration of Koreans in Canada with almost 50,000 living in the city, according to the 2001 Census.statcan.gc.htm  Many of them settled in the Bloor and Bathurst area, and before long, a small Korean business neighbourhood emerged along Bloor Street, centred around the intersection of Bloor and Manning Avenue.  Restaurants, bakeries, gift shops, grocery stores, and travel agencies began to open up, most of which catered to the Korean-Canadian community. Today, although many Koreans work in the region, very few Koreans actually live there. An influx of Latino immigrants is changing the demographics of the area today.

=Mexico City, Mexico=

Most of Mexico City's Korean population lives in and around Zona Rosa. According to the newspaper Reforma, there are at least 1,000 Koreans living in Zona Rosa and about 3,000 total in Colonia Juárez, the larger official neighborhood of which Zona Rosa is a part.  The area around Hamburgo, Praga, Florencia, and Biarritz streets converted into "Pequeño Seul," or Little Seoul in the 1990s before receding since then.

=United States=

The first large group of Korean Immigrants settled in America between 1901 and 1905. Between those years 7,226 immigrants, including 6,048 men, 637 women, and 541 children, came on 65 trips. Most of the early immigrants of that period had some contract with American missionaries in Korea. For some Western-oriented Korean intellectuals, immigrating to the United States was considered useful, in part, to help them in the modernization of their homeland. Consequently, the recruiter for labourers for the Hawaiian Sugar Planters' Association (HSPA), David Deshler, had no trouble finding Koreans from a wide range of social classes willing to sail to Hawaii.Chang and Patterson 2003

==Atlanta, Georgia==

Atlanta has a population of approximately 50,000 individuals of Korean descent. Atlanta's Koreatown is mostly centered around the I-85 corridor extending from Duluth, Georgia to Buford Highway in Northeast Atlanta.

==Baltimore, Maryland==

There is a small portion of lower Charles Village that is sometimes referred to as Koreatown

==Boston, Massachusetts==

Boston's Koreatown is in Allston Village, which includes parts of Cambridge Street and Brighton, Harvard, and Commonwealth Avenues.bostonglobe.html

==Chicago, Illinois==

Chicago's Albany Park neighborhood has been referred to as Chicago's "Koreatown" since the 1980s.

==Dallas, Texas==

A sizable Koreatown can be found in Dallas, though this mostly commercial area of the city has not been officially designated as such. Dallas has the largest Korean American community in Texas and second (to Atlanta) in the southern United States. Instead, large signs situated at the intersection of Harry Hines Boulevard and Royal Lane proclaim the area as the Asian Trade District. The signs also feature depictions of a red and blue "taeguk," a symbol that is prominently featured on the national flag of South Korea, thereby acknowledging the specifically Korean affiliation of the district. This area in the northwest part of the city is characterized by a large number of Korean-owned businesses serving the city's sizable Korean American community. Although, Korean business is undoubtedly the most dominant in the area, there are isolated Chinese and Vietnamese businesses as well.

==Houston, Texas==

Spring Branch in Houston is considered to have the largest Koreatown in the Houston area.

==Denver, Colorado==

Metro Denver's most distinct, though not officially designated, Korean neighborhood lies in Aurora, immediately east of Denver. The stretch of Parker Road roughly between I-225 and East Jewell Avenue is largely commercial in nature and is dotted with Korean supermarkets, restaurants, and shops. Much of the business signage displays both English and Korean, though some businesses exclusively display Korean characters. Though many Koreans and Korean Americans live in the vicinity, the district also serves as a regional center of Korean products and culture for the entire Front Range and is home to several Korean-language newspapers.

==Los Angeles, California==

The Greater Los Angeles Area is home to the largest number of ethnic Koreans outside of Korea. Koreatown is an officially recognized district of the city and contains probably the heaviest concentration of Korean residents and businesses. However, when the term "Koreatown" is used it usually refers to a larger area that includes the adjacent neighborhoods of Wilshire Center, Harvard Heights and Pico Heights. Koreans began to move into the area in the late 1960s after changes in US immigration laws, establishing numerous businesses, although never outnumbering Latino residents. In the aftermath of the 1992 riots, Koreatown entered into a period of development, especially during the 1994 Asian Market Crisis as South Korean investors sought to invest in the then-profitable California real-estate market. More recently, L.A.'s Koreatown has been perceived to have experienced declining political power secondary to re-districting prompting an exodus of Koreans from the area.

==New York metropolitan area==

===Manhattan===

In the New York City borough of Manhattan, Koreatown is bordered by 31st and 33rd Streets, Fifth Avenue, and the Avenue of the Americas. Its location in Midtown Manhattan is close to the Empire State Building and Macy's at Herald Square. The heart of Koreatown is the segment of 32nd Street between Fifth Avenue and Broadway, officially nicknamed "Korea Way", featuring stores on multiple stories, with small, independently-run establishments reaching up to the third or fourth floors, including restaurants, exuding an ambience of Seoul itself.
Per the 2010 United States Census, the rapidly growing Korean population of Manhattan (co-extensive with New York County) had nearly doubled to approximately 20,000 over one decade since the 2000 Census.

===Long Island===

The Long Island Koreatown, on Long Island in the New York City Metropolitan Area, is one of the largest and fastest growing ethnic Korean enclaves outside of Korea. The core of this Koreatown originated in the Flushing neighborhood of the New York City borough of Queens. However, this Koreatown has continued to expand rapidly eastward through the Queens neighborhoods of Murray Hill, Bayside, Douglaston, and Little Neck, and eventually into adjacent suburban Nassau County. In the 1980s, a continuous stream of Korean immigrants emerged into the Long Island Koreatown, many of whom began as workers in the medical field or Korean international students who had moved to New York City to find or initiate professional or entrepreneurial positions. They established a foothold on Union Street in Flushing between 35th and 41st Avenues, featuring restaurants and karaoke (noraebang) bars, grocery markets, education centers and bookstores, banking institutions, offices, electronics vendors, apparel boutiques, and other commercial enterprises. As the community grew more affluent and rose in socioeconomic status, Koreans expanded their presence eastward along Northern Boulevard, buying homes in more affluent and less crowded Queens neighborhoods and more recently into Nassau County, bringing their businesses with them, and thereby expanding the Koreatown itself. This expansion has led to the creation of an American Meokjagolmok, or Korean Restaurant Street, around the Long Island Railroad station in Murray Hill, Queens, exuding the ambience of Seoul itself. The eastward pressure was also created by the inability to move westward, inhibited by the formidable presence of the enormous Flushing Chinatown (法拉盛華埠) centered on Main Street.

===Bergen County, New Jersey===

Main articles: Koreatown, Palisades Park and Koreatown, Fort Lee
The two most prominent Koreatowns in Bergen County

==Oakland, California==

The largest concentration of Korean businesses and community services in the San Francisco Bay Area is centered on Oakland's Telegraph Avenue between 20th and 35th Streets between Downtown Oakland and the Temescal district. Roughly 150 Korean-owned businesses are located in the neighborhood, including a shopping center and Korean American community centers. This segment of Telegraph Avenue is lined with bright banners proclaiming the district as "Koreatown-Northgate" with the slogan "Oakland's got Seoul," and accompanied by an annual cultural festival. Officially named "Koreatown-Northgate", the area was characterized by urban decay before Korean Americans began opening businesses and reviving the area in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Before 1991, the area was characterized by homelessness and crime and was known as the Northgate district. The aftermath of the Los Angeles Riots of 1992 also saw a large number of Koreans from Southern California moving to the Bay Area and opening businesses and buying property in the district on a large scale. Tensions remain between African Americans and Koreans in the neighborhood, which has witnessed declines in both populations. Despite some Koreans continuing to move into the neighborhood, the majority of the Bay Area's Korean population is concentrated in the suburbs surrounding Oakland and in the South Bay.

==Philadelphia, Pennsylvania==

There are at least two areas known as "Koreatown" in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.  The original Koreatown was located in the Olney section of the city around North 5th Street and subsequently migrated to the Logan section of the city.  However, Koreans are generally dispersed with pockets also existing in Upper Darby, West Philadelphia (52nd Street), and Cheltenham.

==Washington, District of Columbia==

Koreatown in Annandale, Virginia

South America

=Argentina=

=Buenos Aires=

Buenos Aires's 'Barrio Coreano' is in the neighborhood of Flores, specifically in the south of this neighborhood. The primary artery of the district is Carabobo Avenue, which houses various Korean businesses and organizations, including restaurants, beauty salons, a Korean school (Instituto Coreano Argentino) and churches, among others.
In recent years, there has been a huge move from the Bajo Flores towards the Avellaneda Avenue, the reason being the increasing theft and insecurity around the slums close to Av. Castanares. 
What some might call these days "The New Koreatown" has been increasing in size at a faster rate while the shops in Av. Carabobo have been closing.
There are over 22,000 Koreans in Argentina, most of them in Buenos Aires, where the Asian population is around 2.5%.

=São Paulo, Brazil=

Brazil has several Korean enclaves but, recently a Koreatown was formed in Bom Retiro a densely populated area of Brazil's biggest city, São Paulo.
The Korean consulate in Brazil said that the municipal government in São Paulo has designated Bom Retiro as 'Koreatown' and has passed an ordinance that will see the city provide administrative and financial support to the new community.
The Korean consul general in São Paulo said that the town will be turned into a special Korean economic and cultural district which will help attract tourists from around the world and will further promote Korean culture in Brazil. A more recent return migration has been noted from Brazil back to South Korea.

=Santiago, Chile=

The Korean population of Santiago is mostly concentrated in Patronato.  Currently, approximately 3000 Koreans live in Chile.
The Korean community is well organized and united.  Colonia Coreana organizes several events annually.  Among these events are: soccer tournaments, Korean festivals, and the annual Mr. and Ms. Patronato.

Australia

=Sydney=

Sydney's primary Koreatown is located in the heavily immigrant populated neighbourhood areas of Strathfield, Eastwood and Campsie, which is home to The Sydney Korean Society. These suburbs and surrounding areas are famous for their Korean population which have created a strong cultural identity for the community. These areas are home to a number of Korean speaking businesses and retail stores which include Korean restaurants, DVD stores, supermarkets, hairdressers and cafes.
Other important Korean commercial areas are located in the northern Sydney suburbs of Epping and Chatswood. The intersection of Bathurst Street and Pitt Street in Sydney's Central Business District is also becoming a popular area for Korean commercial activity which once again include restaurants, karaoke, supermarkets and hairdressers.
Australia's Korean population is estimated to be around 150,000.

=Melbourne=

Melbourne's de facto Koreatown is concentrated around the vicinity of La Trobe Street.
It also now has a distinct pocket on Victoria Street North Melbourne directly opposite the Victoria Market.

London, United Kingdom



Notes






