[[Hotel California]]

CATEGORIES: 1976 songs, 1977 singles, Eagles (band) songs, Songs about drugs, Songs written by Glenn Frey, Songs written by Don Henley, Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles, Grammy Award for Record of the Year, Oricon International Singles Chart number-one singles, Songs about California, Songs about Los Angeles, California, RPM Top Singles number-one singles, Asylum Records singles, Song recordings produced by Bill Szymczyk, Rock ballads, Singles certified silver by the Syndicat National de l'Édition Phonographique

"Hotel California" is the title song from the Eagles' album of the same name and was released as a single in February 1977. It is one of the best-known songs of the album-oriented rock era. Writing credits for the song are shared by Don Felder, Don Henley, and Glenn Frey. The Eagles' original recording of the song features Henley singing the lead vocals and concludes with an extended section of electric guitar interplay between Felder and Joe Walsh.  The song has been given several interpretations by fans and critics alike, but the Eagles have described it as their "interpretation of the high life in Los Angeles"...History of the Eagles, 2013]

History and recognition

"Hotel California" topped the Billboard Hot 100 singles chart for one week in May 1977 and peaked at number ten on the Adult Contemporary charts. Three months after its release, the single was certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), representing one million copies shipped.  The Eagles also won the 1977 Grammy Award for Record of the Year for "Hotel California" at the 20th Grammy Awards in 1978.Grammy Award winners
In 2009, the song "Hotel California" was certified Platinum (Digital Sales Award) by the RIAA for sales of one million digital downloads.
The song is rated highly in many rock music lists and polls; Rolling Stone magazine ranked it number 49 on its list of "The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time".s Top 100 Guitar SolosThe Top 100 Solos of All Time
As one of the group's most popular and well-known songs, "Hotel California" has been a concert staple for the band since its release. Performances of the song appear on the Eagles' 1980 live album, simply called Live, and in an acoustic version on the 1994 Hell Freezes Over reunion concert CD and video release. The Hell Freezes Over version is performed using eight guitars and has a decidedly Spanish feel to it, with Don Felder's flamenco-inspired arrangement and intro. During the band's Farewell 1 Tour-Live from Melbourne, the song was performed in a manner closer to the original album version, but with a trumpet interlude in the beginning.
Glenn Frey described the origins of the song:

Interpretation

The lyrics weave a surrealistic tale in which a weary traveler checks into a luxury hotel. The hotel at first appears inviting and tempting, but it turns out to be a nightmarish place where "you can check out anytime you like, but you can never leave". The song is an allegory about hedonism, self-destruction, and greed in the music industry of the late 1970s. In 2008, Don Felder described the origins of the lyrics:

The term "colitas" in the first stanza means "little tails" in Spanish; in Mexican slang it refers to buds of the cannabis (marijuana) plant. "Rockin' 'Round the Round" San Francisco Chronicle February 5, 2003
In a 2009 interview, The Plain Dealer music critic John Soeder asked Don Henley this about the lyrics:
Henley responded:
According to Glenn Frey's liner notes for The Very Best Of, the use of the word "steely" in the lyric, "They stab it with their steely knives, but they just can't kill the beast," was a playful nod to band Steely Dan, who had included the lyric "Turn up the Eagles, the neighbors are listening" in their song "Everything You Did".Liner Notes - The Very Best of the Eagles

Conjectures

The metaphorical character of the story related in the lyrics has inspired a number of conjectural interpretations by listeners. In the 1980s some Christian evangelists alleged that "Hotel California" referred to a San Francisco hotel that was purchased by Anton LaVey and converted into a Church of Satan. Serge; Schurk, William. Tarnished Gold: The Record Industry Revisited (1986): 407Stoffels, Kenneth. "Minister Links Rock, Sympathy for the Devil" The Milwaukee Sentinel September 28, 1982: 6 Other rumors suggested that the Hotel California was the Camarillo State Mental Hospital. Weird California (2006): 228

Cover art for single

The front cover art for the 45rpm release of the song was a reworked version of the Hotel California LP cover art, which used a photograph of the Beverly Hills Hotel by David Alexander, with design and art direction by Kosh.

Harmonic structure

The intro and verse's chord pattern counts eight measures, each one assigned to a single chord. Seven different chords are used in the eight measures. As the song opens, it is not until the eighth measure that a chord is repeated. The song is initially in the key of B-minor. "Locked into the Hotel California: Or, expanding the Spanish progression". Soundscapes.
The chords are played as follows:
The eight measure sequence is repeated in the intro, for each verse and in the outro, providing the harmonic framework for the entire extended dual guitar solo at the end of the song. Although this chord sequence is not a commonly used progression, it does resemble Jethro Tull's "We Used to Know" from their 1969 album Stand Up. One explanation of the progression is that it is a common flamenco chord progression called the "Spanish progression" (i-VII-VI-V in a phrygian context) that is interspersed with consecutive fifths.
The chorus, or refrain, uses five of the song's seven chord set, structured with the melody in a way that shifts the key from B-minor to its relative major of D:

Rhythmic structure

It should be noted that all of the verses of this song are basically played in a reggae rhythm, most emphasized by the "skank" guitar (muted strikes on 2 and 4) and the "one drop" on 3 for the snare. As is typical for non-reggae bands, the bass playing is excessively staccato and there are a lot more bass drum strikes than would usually be found in songs by actual reggae bands. And, there is no reggae style keyboard playing in "Hotel California", neither a piano "skank" nor an organ "bubble". But nonetheless it is clear that the basis of the rhythm for the verses is reggae. This is likely why there are so many reggae style covers of this song.

Certifications

Personnel

Cover versions and parodies

Covers

Many cover versions of "Hotel California" have been released:

Parodies

Parodies include:






