[[Junoon (band)]]

CATEGORIES: Junoon (band), Musical groups established in 1990, Musical trios, Pakistani musical groups, Pakistani rock music groups, Musical groups from Lahore, World music groups

Junoon (Urdu/Punjabi: 
Pioneers of sufi rock with an original sound,A Rock and Roll Jihad for the Soul of Pakistan. Huffington PostThe Pluralism Project at Harvard University: Salman Ahmed Brings Sufi-Rock, Political Message to Harvard (Massachusetts) they achieved success during the early 1990s. Its members were signed to major record label EMI Records and afterwards released their self-titled debut album Junoon in 1991. After two years, the band recorded their second album Talaash (1993) with their new bassist Brian O'Connell after Nusrat Hussain left the band. The release of their second album began to create a cult following for the band. In 1996, Junoon released their third album Inquilaab, and it was only then that Junoon developed a nationwide fan following, with blending rock guitars and bluesy vocals with Eastern elements like the use of tablas, raga-inspired melodies, traditional Pakistani folk music, and Eastern-inspired poetry. The following year, the band recorded the critically acclaimed Azadi (1997), being the band's first international record deal, and making it Junoon's debut album in neighbouring India. The band went on to record and release Parvaaz in 1999. The band found renewed success and popularity starting with 2001's Andaz and through 2003's Dewaar and their supporting tours.
After the release of their seventh studio album, vocalist Ali Azmat and lead guitarist Salman Ahmad went on to pursue a career as a solo singer, while bassist Brian O' Connell returned to his native United States.A band is dead. Long live music!', Retrieved on 26 December 2006. Although Junoon's two other members, Ali Azmat and Brain O'Connell, left the band in 2005, Salman Ahmad continues to perform as a solo artist under the "Junoon" label and has moved to New York. In 2010, Junoon released the soundtrack album Rock & Roll Jihad based on Salman Ahmad and Junoon's musical journey throughout the years.

History

Early years (1980–1989)

Junoon's roots stretch back to Tappan, New York, in the 1970s. Salman Ahmad left Lahore, Pakistan, for New York with his family when he was eleven, and received his baptism in rock music when a friend offered him a ticket to a Led Zeppelin concert. Salman Ahmad was so enthralled by the show that he saved $235 to buy his own electric guitar. He also befriended Brian O'Connell in Tappan, another young aspiring musician, with whom Ahmad formed their first band together by the name of "Eclipse". Before the two friends could take their aspirations out of the basement and onto a bigger stage, Salman Ahmad's parents moved back to Pakistan in 1981, and Salman began to study medicine at Lahore's King Edward's Medical College. Rock Star' Urges Muslim Students in Queens to Rock Out Retrieved on July 25, 2010
In 1987, Nusrat Hussain, by then the lead guitarist of the band Vital Signs, after composing the song "Dil Dil Pakistan" parted ways with Vital Signs and suggested Rohail Hyatt, founder and keyboardist of Vital Signs, to bring Salman Ahmad as his replacement in the band. Vital Signs then went on to record their debut album at the EMI Studios in Karachi, but almost all the songs were written and composed at Salman Ahmad's residence where the band had been lodged. In March 1989, the band released their debut album, Vital Signs 1, which was a success throughout the country. The following year, Salman Ahmad parted ways with the most successful pop band of Pakistan as he wanted a change in the band's music for their second album and therefore after leaving the band he went on to form his own band.Vital Signs: A Personal History Retrieved on August 13, 2010

Formation (1990–1993)

thumb|right|250px| Junoon, during its early days, rehearsing before a concert. Visible from left to right are; Ustad Ashiq Ali Mir and Salman Ahmad.Junoon Biography & Awards Retrieved on May 18, 2009Salman Ahmad – Interview Retrieved on June 05, 2009 Junoon were not an overnight success; the band members struggled for the first few years. Their self-titled debut album, Junoon, recorded at the EMI Studios in Karachi barely made a dent in the Pakistani music industry when released in September 1991. After the release of their debut album, Nusrat Hussain parted ways with the band to pursue his own career as a solo singer and went on to release his debut solo album Amrit in 1992. Nusrat Hussain Retrieved on July 27, 2010
After the departure of Nusrat Hussain, Salman Ahmad contacted Brian O'Connell and invited him to play bass on the band's second album. Brian O'Connell quit his job as a social worker and traveled 10,000 miles to Karachi, Pakistan, where he reunited with his old friend. It was after ten years both the friends reunited. In 1992, the band started working on their second studio album. The album was recorded and mixed at Tahir Gul Hasan's Sound On Sound recording studios in Karachi. While working on their second album at one side, on the other hand the band also featured in a television series, Talaash, directed by Atiqa Odho and written by Anwar Maqsood, based on the true story of the band in which the band members acted themselves and due to its novel storyline it became an extremely popular television series in Pakistan.Talaash PTV Show
On September 23, 1993, Junoon released their second album Talaash. Singles from the album, such as "Talaash", were politically influenced and became subject to censorship, which led to the eventual ban.

Rise to fame (1994–1997)

In 1994, Junoon started working on their third studio album. In 1995, the band released their first compilation album, Kashmakash, which is the first such compilation album by a band in Pakistan. 1995 was also the year that Junoon's manager, Shehryar Ahmad, set up Junoon's website, www.com, which was the first ever website of any Pakistani music group. That year Junoon were courted for the controversial video release of the single "Ehtesaab", from Kashmakash, which included footage of a polo pony eating in a posh restaurant. Many thought that the image was an indictment of the corrupt Pakistani political elite, and especially of former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto. In 1996, the band released their third studio album, Inquilaab, which was recorded and engineered with a completely new sound at Aamir Hasan Studios, Inquilaab was a blend of western music with classical eastern sufi music. It was the release of their third album when Junoon started to gain success and began to reach a wider audience when one of their singles, "Jazba-e-Junoon", became the signature song of the Cricket World Cup. 
Following the success of "Inquilaab", in 1997 Junoon went on their first full-scale tour of the United States, performing from Birmingham, Alabama, to Los Angeles where they appeared at the House of Blues and at the New York's Roosevelt Hotel, which was reviewed in the international edition of Newsweek Magazine. They also went on tour to Canada and the UAE through which Junoon's fame grew rapidly. In September 1997, Junoon released their fourth studio album, Azadi, which was the band's first international record deal after the band manager, Shehryar Ahmad, secured a deal with EMI/Virgin Records which released Azadi as Junoon's debut album in India. Within three weeks of the release of Azadi, the album had sold over a million copies in India alone and hit platinum sales status in a record of four weeks.

International Success (1998–2000)

Azadi was released in India in February 1998 by EMI. In March 1998, Zee TV invited Junoon to perform at the star-studded Zee Cine Awards in Mumbai, where the group received accolades from the crème de la crème of India's entertainment industry.
On August 9, Junoon performed at New York's Central Park. This was one of Junoon's most legendary live performances, with over 20,000 fans in attendance. This concert was made into a live video and recording titled "Junoon Live at Central Park: A Tribute to Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan". 
In March 1999, the Prime Minister of India, Atal Bihari Vajpayee, in a spirit of cross-border friendship, invited the band to perform at the anniversary of his government in Delhi. Travelling in the same gilded bus that Vajpayee had travelled cross-border to shake hands with Pakistan and sign the Lahore declaration, Junoon crossed the Wagah border from Lahore into India. In a very emotional performance before the Prime Minister, they performed the Jupiters hit, "Dosti" onstage with Indian group, Silk Route. Later the same year, Junoon released their fifth studio album, Parvaaz, which was recorded and mixed at Abbey Road Studios in London and was hailed by many critics as the finest work by Junoon to date and was released by EMI internationally. The album was mostly based on the poetry of Bulleh Shah and singles from the album such as "Bulleya", "Sajna", "Ghoom" and "Mitti" were a success and did well at the music charts. The album was produced by John Alec who came from New York to work on the band's fifth studio album. Also in 1999, UNESCO invited Junoon to perform at their Millennium Peace concert held in Paris, France. Junoon were presented with an award "Outstanding Achievements in Music and Peace" by UNESCO. The event was attended by many well-known artists from around the world like Yesudas,Unesco award for musician K.J. Yesudas Lionel Richie, Montserrat Caballe and Zubin Mehta. 
In 2000, Junoon released a compilation of their albums and videos, Millennium 1990-2000. The compilation album consisted of singles like "Azadi", "Muk Gaye Nay" and live tracks like "Allah Hu". Later the same year, Junoon performed in Japan.  On June 30, the band then went on to perform at the European Rock Festival, Roskilde Festival, near  Copenhagen, in Denmark.Rosklide Festival 2000 BandsRoskilde Festival 2000 At the end of the year, Junoon performed at a concert in Dubai, UAE, with Bollywood singer Sonu Nigam, with nearly 20,000 in attendance, which was organised by Oberoi Middle East Events.

Continued success (2001–2004)

In March 2001, Junoon released its sixth studio album, Andaz (titled as Ishq in Pakistan). The album topped the music charts in Pakistan as well as in the Persian Gulf and South Asia. The first single entitled "Zamanae Ke Andaz (Saqi-Nama)" made it to #1 in the Persian Gulf and to #5 on the Asian charts. In April, Junoon performed to a sold out concert at the Wembley Arena in London and went on to perform at the "United for Gujrat" concert, the first South Asian rock concert, held in New Delhi along with bands from India and Bangladesh, singing together to raise funds for the Gujrat Earthquake victims. In June, Salman Ahmad attended the UN General Assembly in New York where he was appointed as the 'Goodwill Ambassador' of Pakistan by United Nations. On July 7, the band performed at the Hyatt Regency in Chicago, Illinois. In September, Junoon did a concert in Norway with Morten Harket, lead vocalist of A-ha,Morten guest artist with the Pakistani band Junoon performing a duet "Piya (Ocean of Love)".
Following the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, Junoon, in the aftermath of the attacks, traveled to the United States for a series of shows at universities and high schools. On October 9, the band played a peace concert at the United Nations (UN). They became the first ever rock band to be invited to perform at the United Nations general assembly, by UN secretary-general Kofi Annan. On November 29, the music television channel, VH1, aired a special documentary, Islamabad: Rock City, about the group hosted by Susan Sarandon.'VH1 News Special: Islamabad Rock City'Islamabad: Rock City (2001) On December 25, Junoon had once again been embraced by the Pakistani government, and were even joined on stage by then the President, General Pervez Musharraf, as he invited them to perform at the mausoleum of Pakistan's founder, Muhammad Ali Jinnah, on Jinnah's birthday. Although Junoon continues to promote peace and harmony, the band also speaks out on contentious issues that most popular groups avoid. The band served as goodwill ambassadors for HIV/AIDS awareness for the UN and raised several issues.
In 2002, Junoon opened a new chapter by releasing the antiterrorism song "No More" in English, yet another attempt by the group to spread their message to a wider audience. The song "No More" is the first English song for which Junoon released a music video. Visible from left to right are; vocalist Ali Azmat and lead guitarist Salman Ahmad. CNN aired a 30 minute interview of Junoon on the program Talk Asia. They received rave reviews in The New York Times, Billboard Magazine, The New York Post, Newsweek, and others.Evaluation - Daur-e-Junoon Retrieved on July 27, 2010
On February 16, 2003, Junoon performed at the Basant Festival Show held in Lahore. On May, 5, the band went to Karachi to perform at the PAF Creek Club. On June 18, Junoon performed live at the Royal Albert Hall, London, England. On July, 17, the documentary The Rock Star and the Mullahs  by Wide Angel was aired on BBC based upon Junoon and music in Islam."Wide Angle" The Rock Star and the Mullas (2003)The Rock Star & The Mullahs In December, Junoon released their seventh studio album, Dewaar. Another single off the album "Pappu Yaar" shot to the #1 spot on the music charts in Pakistan. This was the album which last featured the trio together. After the release of the band's seventh studio album bassist, Brian O'Connell went back to United States and vocalist, Ali Azmat went on to pursue his career as a solo singer. In April 2004, Junoon released their third compilation album, Dewaar: The Best of Junoon. In August, Junoon released Ghoom Taana video and a special documentary entitled "Building Bridges" which was screened at a launch ceremony in Karachi in time for the Independence Day celebrations of Pakistan and India. On October 14, Journeyman Pictures released a short film documentary based on Pakistani music featuring local rock bands, Junoon and Fuzön.journeyman.html Retrieved on March 20, 2010

Breakup (2005–2008)

Dewaar was the album which last featured the trio together. After the release of the album Brian O'Connell went back to United States. On February 2, 2005, Junoon performed a charity concert for the Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami victims at Alhamra Auditorium in Lahore. On March 3, Salman Ahmad appeared on the documentary It's My Country Too: Muslim Americans aired on BBC television documentary strand This World.Ali Azmat Explains Going Solo Later the same year, he released his debut solo album, Social Circus. Salman Ahmad also released his debut solo album, Infiniti in July 2005.Junoon splitting
In September 2007, Junoon re-released three albums, Parvaaz, Azadi and Infiniti with Magnatune. On December 11, Junoon performed at the Nobel Peace Prize Concert in Oslo, Norway together with a variety of artists, which was broadcast live to over 100 countries.
On May 25, 2008, Junoon performed in Srinagar for the first time and turned thousands of music lovers hysterical.Coke Studio Season One Episode 1 On August 15, Ali Azmat released his second album, Klashinfolk,Ali Azmat - Klashinfolk which was recorded at Mekaal Hasan Studios in Lahore.

Post-breakup: Rock & Roll Jihad (2009–2010)

Salman continues to take the band to new heights. From performing at the Nobel Peace Prize, featuring at the Clinton Global Initiative to performing at the Atlantic City House of Blues with Multi Academy/Grammy winning artist Melissa Etheridge after collaborating with her on one of her albums. Salman also featured in the series of Mystical Sufi Tours throughout the US and Canada. He has performed at various famous educational institutions throughout the world, including places like Oxford, Harvard, Yale, Stanford etc. various times and continues to actively tour and engage college audiences. He also happens to be actively involved as a professor of Islamic Arts at Queens College NY.
On September 12, 2009, Junoon performed at "The Concert for Pakistan" along with other musicians from around the world which included, Outlandish, Sting held at the UN General Assembly Hall.Gavin Rossdale at the UN 09-12-09, All Along The Watchtower (cover) Retrieved on March 16, 2011 On November 30, Salman Ahmad, as Junoon, announced that the first single from the upcoming album will be "Love Can You Take Me Back". On January 12, 2010, Salman Ahmad published a book, Rock & Roll Jihad: A Muslim Rock Star's Revolution, regarding his time with Junoon and all the struggle he faced to become a rockstar. On March 14, Junoon released the video of their first single. On March 25, Salman Ahmad was invited at the television programme Good Day L.A. where he talked about his soundtrack album and about the book.
On July 23, Salman Ahmad was present at the opening ceremony of Masala Mehndi Masti 2010 in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. On July 24, Salman Ahmad with his band performed at the Masala Mehndi Masti 2010.Salman Ahmad, musician and campaigner In August, Salman Ahmad was interviewed by American music magazine The Rolling Stone, he talked about his novel and the soundtrack album based on the novel. In the interview, Salman informed that in India the book will be published by Jaico Publishing House and will be accompanied by a free cd which includes two singles, "Love Can You Take Me Back" and "Bulleya/Lonely Heart" and also including two other tracks, "Sayonee" and "Meri Awaz Suno". Salman also confirmed that he's currently working on a new Junoon album release, which will release in next year. He also confirmed that the song will be internationally released within a few week's time and hopes to record it with Pakistani and Western artists.Salman Ahmad (Junoon) to collaborate with Peter Gabriel on 'Khwab' On August 25, Salman Ahmad talked to Dutch TV about organizing a charity concert with various artists to collect money for the flood victims in Pakistan.Alison Sudol to sing a Sufi inspired melody on 'Pakistan Hamara' Salman further added that Peter Gabriel will be bringing his genius to the song on September 6. "Will try and send a picture from the studio", says Salman.
In an interview with ABC News, it was confirmed that both the U.S. & British governments have enlisted Salman Ahmad to speak against extremism.Peter Gabriel records song for Pakistan The song was launched on November 2, to be downloaded from digital music sites globally. Each dollar for download will go to Pakistan flood relief through their charity organisation, Salman and Samina Global Wellness initiative (SSGWI).Peter Gabriel Offered Salman Ahmad To Record Complete Album Salman Ahmad also confirmed that he's working on a duet with American artist and producer David Sisko who has worked for the likes of Justin Timberlake & Gwen Stefani.Salman Ahmad collaborating with American artist & producer David Siskovic

Reunion: Junoon's 20th anniversary (2011-2012)

On January 26, 2011, Junoon performed at Lahore University of Management Sciences for United Nations HIV/AIDS campaign. On March 16, the single "Pakistan Humara" in collaboration with Peter Gabriel was dedicated to the Pakistan cricket team playing at the 2011 Cricket World Cup.World music, Sufi rock superstars Junoon perform live in concert Retrieved on March 19, 2011 On March 23, Junoon launched the music video of the single "Pakistan Humara" directed by Asad Pathan. Peter Gabriel (Music video) Retrieved on March 24, 2011Pakistan Hai Hamara by Salman Ahmad feat. Peter Gabriel Retrieved on March 24, 2011
On August 12, in an interview with The Express Tribune Ahmad confirmed that he is set to celebrate Junoon's 20th anniversary with the band's former bassist Brian O'Connell.20 years of Junoon Retrieved on 12 August 2011 "We are reaching Junoon's 20th anniversary, so I'm excited about more projects coming up regarding that," Ahmad told The Express Tribune. Ahmad also confirmed that Junoon's 20th anniversary celebration concert will be held at the Asia Society on September 24 in New York. The band also announced that it will release an album to mark two decades of Junoon. The album will be featuring Strings, Farhan Saeed, Bilal Khan, Outlandish, Aag, Usman Riaz, Laal's Taimur Rahman, Momina Mustehsan, and Sajid & Zeeshan.Shoaib Mansoor as the lyricist for Junoon's 20th Anniversary album Retrieved on August 12, 2011
On September 24, Junoon celebrated their 20th Anniversary by performing a concert at the Asia Society & Museum in New York City. In response to the 20th Anniversary of the band, former vocalist, Ali Azmat in an interview with Newsweek Magazine said that he does not want to associate his name with Junoon as there are some personal issues between Salman Ahmad and him. Azmat also confirmed that Salman Ahmad invited him to be part of the 20th Anniversary reunion concert but he never replied to his emails.'When the Music Is Over' On September 30, Junoon performed at the Crowell Concert Hall in Wesleyan University, Middletown, Connecticut, United States and also released the first edition of their 20th Anniversary album, Junoon 20.
On December 21, EMI Pakistan released Junoon's 20th anniversary album volume I in a ceremony held at Marriott Hotel, Karachi, Pakistan. On December 25, Salman Ahmad announced that he will be collaborating with former Vital Signs lead vocalist, Junaid Jamshed to record a 21st-century version of the two famous Pakistani patriotic songs "Dil Dil Pakistan" and "Jazba-e-Junoon". Ahmad also stated that the rehearsal session was captured by Ahmad's son, Imran, with his phone. "The video and the photo contain a true emotion providing a rare glimpse of hope for the new generation. Two days ago, my dear friend and Vital Signs bandmate, Junaid Jamshed and I came together to rehearse after many years. We felt inspired to sing two anthems of our youth; 'Jazba Junoon' and 'Dil Dil Pakistan'."Patriotic Partners
On April 28, 2012, Junoon travelled on a tour to India performing at Mumbai. Followed by performing at BlueFrog in the capital city, New Delhi at a sold-out concert on May 10.Sunidhi Chauhan's a junooni: Salman Ahmad

Collaborations (2013-present)

Former members of Vital Signs and Junoon collaborated to release a patriotic song, "Naya Pakistan". The song is written by Salman Ahmad and Aania Shah featuring Shahi Hassan on bass, Nusrat Hussain on keyboards and percussions, and vocalist Junaid Jamshed. The song was recorded at Indus Music World Studios and released on February 22, 2013.Vital-Junoonions unite for Naya Pakistan
Salman Ahmed while talking about his latest project at Asia Talk on BBC said, "For almost a decade, Junaid has always asked me not to bring guitar or to ask him to sing. When you are friends with somebody you always have to transcend differences and I respect Junaid's views. Junaid once told me that his biggest regret was not to be a part of Jazba Junoon's recording. So when we came up with 'Naya Pakistan', I asked him that this is the chance that's not going to come again so finally Junaid accepted the offer with the condition that he will sing only the opening lines with no music at all." and further added "it signifies the metaphor for unity as we have to compromise for unity in hope of Naya Pakistan."BBC interview premier of Naya Pakistan

Music

Language

On their debut album Junoon and their second album Talaash, songs were written in both the English and Urdu languages, but since then the band has only written songs in Urdu, with the only exceptions being "No More" from the live album Junoon for Peace and the single "Piya (Ocean of Love)", which is a duet with Morten Harket of A-ha. The soundtrack album Rock & Roll Jihad released in 2010 contain five tracks written in English by Salman Ahmad.

Influence

Salman Ahmad, writer of most of the band's lyrics and music scores, says that he gets most of his inspiration for Junoon's songs from Led Zeppelin and Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan music. Songs like "Lal Meri Pat" (from Azadi), "Dharti" (from Andaz) and "Mera Mahi" (from Inquilaab) are some examples of this influence. Another great influence of the band was poetry. The lyrics for the song "Khwaab" was taken by a poem called"khwaab hakikat na sahi" by a poet named Faiza Fiza in her book, chaand aur mein. Other songs, such as "Garaj Baras" and "Taara Jala" (from Dewaar) have elements of hard rock,Junoon Dewaar review Retrieved on June 4, 2010 and some others, like "Yaar Bina" (from Azadi), "Zamane Ke Andaz" (from Andaz) and the album Parvaaz have elements of classical music. Bands stated as influence include Led Zeppelin, Pink Floyd, Van Halen, U2, Bee Gees, A-ha and Queen.
Poetry by famous poets like Maulana Rumi, Allama Iqbal and Bulleh Shah are also a big influence on Junoon's music.
On the other hand, Junoon has also been noted as a source of inspiration for other bands. Atif Aslam, former lead vocalist of rock band Jal, has done many covers of Junoon's music, most notably "Dosti" of which a video was also released.net, Atif Aslam's video of Dosti (Cover- Junoon) Atif Aslam also acknowledged that Junoon had greatly inspired him. Goher Mumtaz, lead guitarist of Jal, has also shown fondness for Junoon and acknowledged that some early work of the band has inspired him.The On/Off Jounarlist - Interview with Strings Retrieved on January 9, 2011 In 2007, Strings performed a cover of Junoon's single version of "Lal Meri Pat" at Oslo Mela.Jumbo Jutt: Sajna (Cover) Retrieved on March 4, 2011 Pakistani rock band Call performed a live session cover of Junoon's hit song "Bulleya" on Indus Music.Harshdeep - Saeein Tu Hi Retrieved on May 4, 2011 The instrumental song "Aap Aur Hum" (also known as "Jugalbandi", from Talaash) was covered by American rock band Black Clover Leaf, adding vocals to the instrumental and releasing it on their self-titled debut album as "Breathe", in 2009.Aap Aur Hum - Junoon cover by Black Leaf Clover (updated) Retrieved on August 4, 2010

Musical style

Junoon performs a blend of western music and classical eastern poetry. Junoon aimed to combine loud guitar riffs with the tranquility of sufi poetry by the likes of Maulana Rumi, Shah Hussain, Bulleh Shah and Allama Iqbal. Their music has been based on worldly issues and to have peace in the world. Their music has been one major force which has truly kept the national spirits high amidst the prevailing social woes which have surely worsened in the last three decades. Songs like "Jazba-e-Junoon", "Talaash", "Main Kaun Hoon" and "Sayonee" are examples. Their music has been captivating to the Pakistani youth for over ten years and have been the only saving grace of Pakistani music internationally after the departure of groups like Vital Signs and Nazia and Zoheb.New York Times, 28-11-1997, Pop and Jazz Guide Retrieved on May 18, 2009
While the music of Junoon is centered around a male lead singer, the band has also featured some female vocals on their albums ever since their self-titled debut release Junoon. Since the release of their third studio album Inquilaab the band's music has been based on classical eastern poetry blending with western music. Their seventh studio album Dewaar featured elements of hard rock music with songs like "Garaj Baras" and "Dewaar".Evaluation - Dewaar Retrieved on July 27, 2010

Live performances

As the band started to gain success after the release of their third studio album Inquilaab, Junoon went on their first full scale tour of the United States, performing from Birmingham, Alabama, to Los Angeles where the appeared at the House of Blues and from there to New York's Roosevelt Hotel, which featured in Newsweek Magazine.

Awards and nominations

Junoon won the "Best International Group" award at the Channel V Awards in New Delhi in 1998, beating Prodigy, Sting and Def Leppard. The Band's first international release Azadi, went triple platinum in India alone. "Sayonee" was at the top of the Mtv India and Channel V charts for over two months. Junoon won the Award for "Best Rock Band" at the Indus Music awards in 2004. Indus Music Awards

Discography

Band members



Bibliography

Published sources

Literature




