[[Quad City International Airport]]

CATEGORIES: Airports in Illinois, Moline, Illinois, Transportation in the Quad Cities, Buildings and structures in Rock Island County, Illinois, Transportation in Rock Island County, Illinois

Quad City International Airport 
Quad City is the third-busiest commercial airport in Illinois – Chicago's O'Hare and Midway International Airports lead the state.  The international designation is for being an official port of entry and having a U.S. customs port of entry.  A Foreign Trade Zone and U.S. Customs Office are located at the airport, enabling international inbound and outbound shipments.  While there are no scheduled commercial flights to international destinations, local corporate jets (especially those owned by Deere & Company) do make periodic non-stop trips to destinations in Africa, Asia, Europe, and South America.

History

Franing Field, the site of the present Quad City International Airport, was picked as an ideal flying field, with 
Air Midwest, AirTran Airways, America West Airlines, American Airlines, Allegiant Air, Chicago Air, Midway Connection, Northwest Airlines, Ozark Air Lines, Pan American World Airways, Skyway Airlines, Trans World Airlines and United Airlines have flown to Quad Cities.  At one time Mississippi Valley Airlines had its headquarters at the airport."World Airline Directory." Flight International. March 30, 1985. 98. "Head Office: PO Box 949, Quad City Airport, Moline, Illinois 61265, USA."  In the early and mid-1990s turboprop equipment was common;  Northwest Airlink and other airlines had Saab 340Bs.  Carriers have replaced their turboprops with newer regional jets.  Allegiant Air MD 80s fly to Orlando, Las Vegas, Clearwater, and Phoenix-Mesa.  Beginning in June 2013 Delta Air Lines began flying the Airbus A319 to Atlanta, the first time Delta itself has flown to Quad City.
In 2001 the terminal underwent a major renovation and expansion: two new concourses, a larger baggage claim area, new restaurants and gift shops. The project doubled the size of the passenger terminal. The Philadelphia architectural firm DPK&A designed the new concourses.
A larger U.S. Customs and Border Protection Facility was opened in 2014 in a former air cargo building.  The facility processes international passengers arriving on general aviation flights.  It includes a processing room, an interview room, space for agricultural inspections, office space, and holding cells for passengers who are prohibited from entering the U.S. or who are being detained and transported by law enforcement.   Phase two of the project will renovate the remainder of the building to create an international terminal should the airport establish direct international commercial flights. Gere-Dismer Architects of Rock Island designed the facility.
The airport set its passenger record in 2007 when 484,212 passengers boarded flights while 481,930 deplaned.

Facilities and aircraft

Quad City International Airport covers  and has three runways:
The airfield at the Quad City International Airport can accommodate any type of aircraft in virtually any type of weather conditions with the long runways, ILS, and high-intensity lighting.  Airport officials claim that the airport is possibly capable of handling the new Airbus A380.  The airfield has gone through many changes over the past few years as well, including extending Taxiway Hotel. Also, Runway 5/23 has been expanded to a usable .
Runway 9/27, the longest runway, was rebuilt in 2011.  The program included a temporary 
In 2010 the airport had 49,170 aircraft operations, an average of 135 per day: 51% general aviation, 35% air taxi, 13% scheduled commercial and 1% military. 87 aircraft were then based at this airport: 69% single-engine, 23% multi-engine, 8% jet and 1% helicopter.
The airport is designated international for having a port of entry customs service.  A Foreign Trade Zone and U.S. Customs Office are located at the airport, enabling international inbound and outbound shipments. The Customs & Border Protection offices recently opened in the easternmost former cargo building. There are three cargo facilities for every available ramp and the airport has expansion capabilities.  A number of air freight companies are located at the airport including BAX Global, DHL, and UPS Supply Chain Solutions.

Services

The terminal features the full-service Air Host Restaurant.  There is also a full-service bar, Paradies Gift Shop, shoe shine service, and post office boxes and a mail drop.  An art gallery, featuring local and regional modern and contemporary art, is located near the security check point.  There is also a visitor information center near baggage claim to provide passengers local tourism information and directions.  Free wireless internet (Wi-Fi) is available throughout the airport.
Beyond the security checkpoint in between Concourses A & B, there is a snack bar, lounge, bar, and a Gevalia Kaffe Coffee Shop.  Located on Concourse B is a CNBC News and Gift Shop, along with a chair massage stand.  Destination Points, a frequent flyer lounge, is available for members only.  There are also several work stations that passengers may utilize to set out their computers or work, and recharge their electronics.
An  new on-site hotel, Hampton Inn & Suites, opened in 2006 on airport property across the parking lot from the terminal.
The airport boasts the regional headquarters for the Department of Homeland Security's Transportation Security Administration, whose offices are located on the second floor of the passenger terminal.

Airlines and destinations

All passengers enter the airport at the main terminal and then proceed to either Concourse A (gates A1-A6) or Concourse B (gates B5, B7, B8, B8A, B9 - B11, B15, B17).

Top Destinations






