[[Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie]]

CATEGORIES: 1977 births, Living people, 21st-century Nigerian writers, Drexel University alumni, Eastern Connecticut State University alumni, English-language poets, Feminist writers, Igbo activists, Igbo educators, Igbo dramatists and playwrights, Igbo novelists, Igbo poets, Igbo short story writers, Igbo women writers, Johns Hopkins University alumni, MacArthur Fellows, Nigerian dramatists and playwrights, Nigerian educators, American writers of African descent, Nigerian expatriates in the United States, Nigerian feminists, Nigerian Roman Catholics, Nigerian short story writers, Nigerian women novelists, Nigerian women poets, O. Henry Award winners, People from Enugu, Roman Catholic feminists, Wesleyan University faculty, Women short story writers, Yale University alumni

Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie She has been called "the most prominent" of a "procession of critically acclaimed young anglophone authors that is succeeding in attracting a new generation of readers to African literature". 20.

Personal life and education

Born in the city of Enugu, she grew up the fifth of six children in an Igbo family in the university town of Nsukka in southeastern Nigeria, where the University of Nigeria is situated. While she was growing up, her father James Nwoye Adichie was a professor of statistics at the university, and her mother Grace Ifeoma was the university's first female registrar Her family's ancestral village is in Abba in Anambra State.l3.ac.html
Adichie studied medicine and pharmacy at the University of Nigeria for a year and a half. During this period, she edited The Compass, a magazine run by the university's Catholic medical students. At the age of 19, Adichie left Nigeria and moved to the United States for college. After studying communications and political science at Drexel University in Philadelphia, she transferred to Eastern Connecticut State University to live closer to her sister, who had a medical practice in Coventry. She received a bachelor's degree from Eastern, where she graduated summa cum laude in 2001.
In 2003, she completed a master's degree in creative writing at Johns Hopkins University. In 2008, she received a Master of Arts degree in African studies from Yale University.
Adichie was a Hodder fellow at Princeton University during the 2005–06 academic year. In 2008 she was awarded a MacArthur Fellowship. She has also been awarded a 2011–12 fellowship by the Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study, Harvard University.
Adichie, who is married, divides her time between Nigeria, where she teaches writing workshops, and the United States.

Writing career

Adichie published a collection of poems in 1997 (Decisions) and a play (For Love of Biafra) in 1998. She was shortlisted in 2002 for the Caine Prize for her short story "You in America".net
In 2003, her story "That Harmattan Morning" was selected as joint winner of the BBC Short Story Awards, and she won the O. Henry prize for "The American Embassy". She also won the David T. Wong International Short Story Prize 2002/2003 (PEN Center Award) and a 2007 Beyond Margins Award for her short story "Half of a Yellow Sun". "Awards & Nominations", Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie website; PEN.org Half of a Yellow Sun, full story
Her first novel, Purple Hibiscus (2003), received wide critical acclaim; it was shortlisted for the Orange Prize for Fiction (2004) and was awarded the Commonwealth Writers' Prize for Best First Book (2005).
Her second novel, Half of a Yellow Sun, named after the flag of the short-lived nation of Biafra, is set before and during the Biafran War. It was awarded the 2007 Orange Prize for Fiction. Half of a Yellow Sun has been adapted into a film of the same title directed by Biyi Bandele, starring Academy Award nominee Chiwetel Ejiofor and BAFTA award-winner Thandie Newton, and was released in 2014.
Her third book, The Thing Around Your Neck (2009), is a collection of short stories.
In 2010 she was listed among the authors of The New Yorker′s "20 Under 40" Fiction Issue. Adichie's story, "Ceiling", was included in the 2011 edition of The Best American Short Stories.
In 2013 she published her third novel, Americanah which was selected by the New York Times as one of The 10 Best Books of 2013.net/blog/blog/2013/12/18/americanah-by-chimamanda-adichie-features-in-ny-times-10-best-books-of-2013/
In April 2014 she was named as one of 39 writers aged under 40List of artists, Africa39. in the Hay Festival and Rainbow Book Club project celebrating Port Harcourt UNESCO World Book Capital 2014.

Lectures

Adichie spoke on "The Danger of a Single Story" for TED in 2009. This speech was sampled for the 2013 song "***Flawless" by American performer Beyoncé, where it attracted further attention.

We should all be Feminists

"We Should all be Feminists" was a TED talk that was given by Adichie in 2012.
She shared her experiences of being an African feminist, and her views on gender construction and sexuality. 
Adichie believes that the problem with gender is that it shapes who we are. 
″I am angry. Gender as it functions today is a grave injustice. We should all be angry. Anger has a long history of bringing about positive change, but in addition to being angry, I'm also hopeful because I believe deeply in the ability of human beings to make and remake themselves for the better." 
The talk was sampled in Beyoncé's song 'Flawless' in December 2013.
Different parts of the speech are featured.
Adichie commented about the featuring of her speech in 'Flawless' in an interview with NPR. She believes it is great that the young generation starts talking about feminism. 
The use of Adichie's speech in the song has brought many critiques against Beyoncé that she was a feminist. 
Adichie defended Beyoncé by asserting that people who say others are feminists are indeed feminists. 

Distinctions

Awards and nominations

Other recognitions

Bibliography

Notes






