[[Quinten Hann]]

CATEGORIES: 1977 births, Living people, Australian snooker players, Australian pool players, World champions in pool

Quinten Hann (born 4 June 1977) is an Australian former professional snooker player who now plays professional pool. He was the 1999 WEPF World Eight-ball Champion and 1994 world under 21 champion.

Snooker career

Hann was ranked in the top 16 for two seasons (2002–2003 and 2003–2004), ranked at #14 for both seasons. He has reached the quarter-finals of several ranking tournaments and the semi-final of the 2004 Irish Masters
He missed several ranking events after breaking his wrist and collar bone whilst motorcycle racing in 1999. He also broke his foot in a parachute jump in 2000, and was forced to play shoeless in the UK Championship.
Renowned for his volatile temper, Hann incurred the wrath of several other players throughout the course of his career. The first notable instance of this occurred during the second round of the 2001 Grand Prix, where Hann repeatedly made offensive gestures towards both the spectators and his opponent, Anthony Hamilton. The latter showed no visible annoyance during the match itself, and went on to defeat Hann 5-3. In the post-match interview, however, the normally mild-mannered Hamilton was furious with his opponent, accusing him of bad sportsmanship and complaining not only about his behaviour towards the spectators but also his tactics. A number of times during the match Hann smashed the cue ball into the pack of reds at the beginning of each frame, spreading the reds over the table and consequently making breakbuilding difficult for both players, a tactic which was described by BBC commentator Clive Everton as bringing the sport into disrepute.
At the 2004 World Championships, he was rebuked for making threatening comments to Andy Hicks
In the 2005 World Championship Hann was forced to play with a new cue after his original cue was lost after the China Open earlier that year.

Departure from snooker

Hann is known in snooker for his "bad boy" image, and in 2002 he was tried in the UK for allegedly raping a woman while both were intoxicated, but was acquitted.
Hann was cleared of further sex attacks on two women in 2005. The women accused Hann of behaving like a "crazed animal" and said that they thought they were going to die. One of them claimed that he repeatedly struck her, an accusation that Hann strongly denied explaining that his mother had taught him to never raise a hand to a woman.  Ultimately the case turned on the credibility of his accuser, which was undermined when it was admitted she had lied consistently under oath throughout the trial.
The day after his acquittal The Sun alleged that Hann had agreed to lose his opening match against Ken Doherty at the China Open in return for large amounts of money. The story was held back so it would not prejudice the outcome of Hann's trial. A hearing at the World Professional Billiards and Snooker Association was convened after the WPBSA panel was shown transcripts of video and audio footage of the meetings which took place between Hann and the undercover Sun journalists in March and April 2005.
On 14 February 2006 he resigned from the WPBSA, just a couple of days before he was due to attend the hearing. Hann did not attend and was found guilty in absentia. The newspaper did not go through with any agreement, but by agreeing to lose the game Hann was in breach of rule 2.8, which states "a member shall not directly or indirectly solicit, attempt to solicit or accept any payment or any form of remuneration of benefit in exchange for influencing the outcome of any game of snooker or billiards." Hann was banned from snooker until 2014 and also fined £10,000.




