[[McLaren]]

CATEGORIES: British auto racing teams, British racecar constructors, Can-Am entrants, Champ Car teams, Companies based in Surrey, Companies established in 1963, Formula One constructors, Formula One entrants, Formula Two entrants, McLaren Group, Vodafone

McLaren Racing Limited, trading as McLaren Mercedes, is a British Formula One team based in Woking, Surrey, England, United Kingdom. McLaren is best known as a Formula One constructor but has also competed and won in the Indianapolis 500 and Canadian-American Challenge Cup (Can-Am). The team is the second oldest active team (after Ferrari) and one of the most successful teams in Formula One, having won 182 races, 12 drivers' championships and 8 constructors' championships.
Founded in 1963 by New Zealander Bruce McLaren, the team won its first Grand Prix at the 1968 Belgian Grand Prix but their greatest initial success was in Can-Am, where they dominated from 1967 to 1971. Further American triumph followed, with Indianapolis 500 wins in McLaren cars for Mark Donohue in 1972 and Johnny Rutherford in 1974 and 1976. After Bruce McLaren died in a testing accident in 1970, Teddy Mayer took over and led the team to their first Formula One constructors' championship in 1974, with Emerson Fittipaldi and James Hunt winning the drivers' championship in 1974 and 1976 respectively. 1974 also marked the start of a long standing sponsorship by Phillip Morris' Marlboro cigarette brand.
In 1981 McLaren merged with Ron Dennis' Project Four Racing; Dennis took over as team principal and shortly after organised a buyout of the original McLaren shareholders to take full control of the team. This began the team's most successful era: with Porsche and Honda engines, Niki Lauda, Alain Prost and Ayrton Senna took between them seven drivers' championships and McLaren six constructors' championships. The combination of Prost and Senna was particularly dominant—together they won all but one race in 1988—but later their rivalry soured and Prost left for Ferrari. Fellow English team Williams offered the most consistent challenge during this period, the two winning every constructors' title between 1984 and 1994. However, by the mid-1990s Honda had withdrawn from Formula One, Senna had moved to Williams and the team went three seasons without a win. With Mercedes-Benz engines, West sponsorship and former Williams designer Adrian Newey, further championships came in 1998 and 1999 with driver Mika Häkkinen and during the 2000s the team were consistent front-runners, driver Lewis Hamilton taking their latest title in 2008. In 2009 Dennis retired as team principal of McLaren handing the former role to longtime McLaren employee Martin Whitmarsh.

Origins

Bruce McLaren Motor Racing was founded in 1963 by New Zealander Bruce McLaren.
Bruce won the 1964 series, but Mayer was killed in practice for the final race, prompting his brother and manager Teddy Mayer to become involved with the running of the team. In 1964 and 1965 McLaren were based in New Malden, then Feltham before settling on premises in Colnbrook.
During this period, Bruce drove for his team in sports car races in the United Kingdom and North America and also entered the 1965 Tasman Series with Phil Hill but didn't win it.

Racing history: Formula One

Bruce McLaren (1960s)

Bruce made the team's Grand Prix debut at the 1966 Monaco race (of the current Formula One teams only Ferrari are older Bruce decided to use a British Racing Motors (BRM) V12 engine, but due to delays with the engine, was forced initially to use a modified Formula Two car called the M4B powered by a 2.1 litre BRM V8, later building a similar but slightly larger car called the M5A for the V12. Neither car brought great success, the best result being a fourth at Monaco.
For 

Teddy Mayer (1970s)

) and Jackie Oliver again failed to score a win. The 1972 season saw improvements though: Hulme won the team's first Grand Prix for two-and-a-half years in South Africa and he and Peter Revson scored ten other podiums, the team finishing third in the constructors' championship. McLaren gave Jody Scheckter his Formula One debut at the final race at Watkins Glen.
The McLaren M23, designed by Gordon Coppuck, was the team's new car for the 1973 Formula One season. Sharing parts of the design of both McLaren's Formula One M19 and Indianapolis M16 cars (itself inspired by Lotus's 72), was a less successful year for the team: Fittipaldi was second in the championship behind Niki Lauda. Hulme's replacement Jochen Mass took his sole GP win in Spain.
At the end of 1975 Fittipaldi left to join his brother's Fittipaldi/Copersucar team. With the top drivers already signed to other teams, Mayer turned to James Hunt, a driver who biographer Gerald Donaldson reflected on as having "a dubious reputation". Hunt capitalised by winning four more Grands Prix giving him a three-point deficit going into the finale in Japan. Here it rained torentially, Lauda retired because of safety concerns and Hunt sealed the drivers' championship by finishing third. McLaren, though, lost the constructors' championship to Ferrari.
In  saw no improvement; Coppuck's M28 design was described by Mayer as "ghastly, a disaster" and "quite diabolical" and the M29 did little to change the situation. Tambay scored no points and Watson only 15 to place the team eighth at the end of the year.

Ron Dennis (1980s)

The 1980s started much as the 1970s had ended: Alain Prost took over from Tambay
In the early 1980s, teams like Renault, Ferrari and Brabham were using 1.5-litre turbocharged engines in favour of the 3.0 litre naturally aspirated engines that had been standard since 1966.
Having been fired by Renault, Prost was once again at McLaren for  In the hands of Prost and Stefan Johansson though, Nichols's MP4/3 and the TAG engine couldn't match the Williams-Honda.
For 
The next year, with turbos banned Honda supplied a new 3.5 L naturally aspirated V10 engine

Ron Dennis & Adrian Newey (1990s)

With former McLaren men Nichols and Prost (Barnard had moved to the Benetton team), Ferrari pushed the British team more closely in  had overtaken McLaren, breaking their four-year run as champions, despite the latter winning four races.
Honda withdrew from the sport at end of the year. A deal to secure Renault engines fell through, which saw McLaren switching to customer Ford engines for the 
McLaren tested a Lamborghini V12 engine ahead of the 
While Williams dominated in  Despite the car's improved pace, unreliability proved costly throughout the season, with retirements at the British and Luxembourg Grands Prix occurring whilst Häkkinen was in the lead.
With Newey able to take advantage of new technical regulations for  It was Schumacher and Ferrari who provided the greatest competition, the former levelled on points with Häkkinen with two races to go, but wins for Häkkinen at the Luxembourg and Japanese Grands Prix gave both him the drivers' championship and McLaren the constructors' championship. Häkkinen won his second drivers' championship the following season but, due to a combination of driver errors and mechanical failures, the team lost the constructors' title to Ferrari.

Ron Dennis & Martin Whitmarsh (2000s)

 Coulthard took their solitary win at Monaco while Ferrari repeated McLaren's 1988 feat of 15 wins in a season.
 Despite this, Räikkönen scored points consistently and challenged for the championship up to the final race, eventually losing by two points. The team began 2004 with the MP4-19, which technical director Adrian Newey described as "a debugged version of MP4-18." It was not a success though, and was replaced mid-season by the MP4-19B. With this, Räikkönen scored his and the team's only win of the year at the Belgian Grand Prix, as McLaren finished fifth in the constructors' championship, their worst ranking since 1983.
Coulthard left for Red Bull Racing in  to be replaced by former CART champion Juan Pablo Montoya for what was McLaren's most successful season in several years as he and Räikkönen won ten races. However, the unreliability of the MP4-20 cost a number of race victories when Räikkönen had been leading or in contention to win allowing Renault and their driver Fernando Alonso to capitalise and win both titles.
thumb|right|Kimi Räikkönen nearly won the drivers' championship in 
Steve Matchett argued that the poor reliability of McLaren in 2006 and recent previous years was due to a lack of team continuity and stability. His cited examples of instability are logistical challenges related to the move to the McLaren Technology Centre, Adrian Newey's aborted move to Jaguar and later move to Red Bull, the subsequent move of Newey's deputy to Red Bull and personnel changes at Ilmor.
The 
In  Going into the final race in Brazil Hamilton had a seven-point lead over Massa. Massa won there but Hamilton dramatically clinched his first drivers' championship by moving into the necessary fifth position at the final corner of the final lap of the race. Despite winning his first Grand Prix in Hungary, Kovalainen finished the season only seventh in the overall standings, allowing Ferrari to take the constructors' title.
Before the start of the 2009 season, Dennis retired as team principal, handing responsibility to Martin Whitmarsh.

Martin Whitmarsh and Ron Dennis' return (2010s)

Button won twice (in Australia and China) and Hamilton three times (in Turkey, Canada and Belgium), but they and McLaren failed to win their respective championships, that year's MP4-25 largely out-paced by Red Bull's RB6.
Hamilton and Button remained with the team into , with Hamilton winning 3 races – China, Germany and UAE and Button also winning three races – Canada, Hungary and Japan. Button finished the driver's championship in second place with 270 points behind 2011 Driver's Champion Sebastian Vettel of Red Bull Racing, ahead of Hamilton's 227 points. McLaren were second in the constructor's championship to Red Bull Racing.
2012 saw McLaren win the first race of the year in Melbourne, Australia with a 1–3 finish for Button and Hamilton, while Hamilton went on to win in Canada, but by the mid-way mark of the season at the team's home race at Silverstone, the McLaren cars managed only 8th place (Hamilton) and 10th place (Button), while the drivers' and constructors' championships were being dominated by Red Bull Racing and Ferrari, whose cars occupied the first 4 places of the 2012 British Grand Prix, this was partially due to pit stop problems and Button's loss of form after not working as well with the new car as Hamilton and the car not adapting to the Pirelli tyres. The car also suffered reliability problems which cost the team and its drivers numerous potential points, most notably in Singapore and Abu Dhabi where Hamilton had been leading from the front in both races.
Sergio Pérez replaced Hamilton for 
Kevin Magnussen replaced Pérez for  and Ron Dennis, who had remained at arm's length since stepping down from the team principal role, returned as CEO of the operation. McLaren were the first team to officially launch their 2014 car, the MP4-29, which was revealed on 24 January 2014.

Racing history: other series

Can-Am

McLaren's first sports-racing car was the Group 7 M1 – with a small-block Chevrolet engine in a modified Elva chassis. The car was raced in North America and Europe in 1963 and 1964 in various G7 and USRRC (United States Road Racing Championship) events. For the Can-Am Series, which started in 1966, McLaren created the M3 which Bruce and Chris Amon drove – customer cars also appeared in a number of races in the 1966 season. With the M3, they led two races but scored no wins, and the inaugural title was taken by John Surtees in a Lola T70. The following year Robin Herd purpose-designed the Chevrolet V8 powered M6A, delays with the Formula One programme allowing the team to spend extra resources on developing the Can-Am car which was the first to be painted in McLaren orange. With Denny Hulme now partnering Bruce, they won five out of six races and Bruce won the championship, setting the pattern for the next four years. In 1968 they used a new car, the M8, to win four races—non-works McLarens took the other two—but this time Hulme was victorious overall. 1969 saw McLaren domination become total as they won all eleven races with the M8B; Hulme won five, Bruce won six and the driver's championship. From 1969 onwards, McLaren M12 – the customer "variant" of the M8 – was driven by a number of entrants, including a version modified by Jim Hall of Chapparal fame. McLaren's success in Can-Am brought with it financial rewards, both prize money and money from selling cars to other teams, that helped to support the team and fund the nascent and relatively poor paying Formula One programme.
When Bruce was killed testing the 1970 season's M8D, he was at first replaced by Dan Gurney, then later by Peter Gethin. They won two and one races respectively while Hulme won six on the way to the championship. Private teams competing in the 1970 Can-Am series included older M3Bs as well as the M12 – the customer version of the team's M8B. In 1971 the team saw off the challenge of 1969 world champion Jackie Stewart in the Lola T260, winning eight races, with Peter Revson taking the title. Hulme also won three Can-Am races in 1972 but the McLaren M20 was defeated by the Porsche 917/10s of Mark Donohue and George Follmer. Faced by the greater resources of Porsche, McLaren decided to abandon Can-Am at the end of 1972 and focus solely on open-wheel racing. When the original Can-Am series ceased at the end of 1974, McLaren were by far the most successful constructor with 43 wins.

Indianapolis 500

McLaren first contested the United States Auto Club's (USAC) Indianapolis 500 race in 1970, encouraged by their tyre supplier Goodyear who wanted to break competitor Firestone's stranglehold on the event. With the M15 car, Bruce, Chris Amon and Denny Hulme entered, but after Amon withdrew and Hulme was severely burned on the hands in an incident in practice, Peter Revson and Carl Williams took their places in the race to retire and finish seventh respectively. The team also contested some of the more prestigious races in the USAC championship that year, as they would do in subsequent years.

Customer cars

Besides the cars raced by the works team, a variety of McLaren racing cars have also been used by customer teams. In their formative years, McLaren built Formula Two,
In the mid-1990s, McLaren Racing's sister company, McLaren Cars (now McLaren Automotive) built a racing version of their F1 road car, the F1 GTR which won the 1995 24 Hours of Le Mans and the 1995 and 1996 BPR Global GT Series.

Characteristics

McLaren Racing is part of the McLaren Group which includes five other associated companies;

Ownership and management

Former team principal Ron Dennis is chairman of the Group—a role he resigned from in 2009 before retaking it a year later
In 2000 Mercedes's parent company Daimler (then DaimlerChrysler) bought a 40% share of McLaren which they maintained until 2009 when they bought out the championship winning Brawn team and began to sell back their McLaren stake.
As of January 2014, the Bahrain royal family's Mumtalakat investment company owns 50% of the group and Ron Dennis owns 25%. His business partner Mansour Ojjeh owns the remaining 25%.

Politics

McLaren has had an uneasy relationship with the Formula One's governing body, the FIA, and its predecessor FISA, as well as with the commercial rights holder of the sport. In the early 1980s McLaren were involved, along with the other teams of the Formula One Constructors Association, in a dispute over control of the sport with FISA and the teams of car manufacturers Alfa Romeo, Renault and Ferrari. This was known as the FISA-FOCA war and saw a breakaway series threatened, FISA refusing to sanction one race and another race boycotted by FOCA. It was eventually resolved by a revenue sharing deal called the Concorde Agreement. In 2007 McLaren were involved in an espionage controversy after their chief designer Mike Coughlan obtained confidential technical information from Ferrari. McLaren was excluded from the constructors' championship and fined 100 million US dollars.

Sponsorship, naming and livery

McLaren's Formula One team was originally called Bruce McLaren Motor Racing, and for their first season ran white-and-green coloured cars, which came about as a result of a deal with the makers of the film Grand Prix.
Between 
In 
In  and adopting a silver and black livery.
By mid-2005, a European Union directive banned tobacco advertising in sport, which forced McLaren to end its association with West., the team competed without a title sponsor, entering under the name "Team McLaren Mercedes". McLaren altered their livery to introduce red into the design, and changed the silver to chrome.
In 
McLaren's early cars were named simply with the letter M followed by a number and sometimes a letter denoting the model.

Formula One World Championship results

(italics indicates non-works entries; bold indicates championships won)
 Season in progress.





Footnotes

Citations

Bibliography








