[[Keith Locke]]

CATEGORIES: 1944 births, Living people, Green Party of Aotearoa New Zealand MPs, New Zealand republicans, New Zealand left-wing activists, People from Christchurch, University of Canterbury alumni, NewLabour Party (New Zealand) politicians, University of Alberta alumni, Alliance (New Zealand) politicians, New Zealand list MPs, Unsuccessful candidates in the New Zealand general election, 1996

Keith James Locke
He was the Green Party spokesperson on Foreign Affairs, Defence, Ethnic Affairs, Pacific Affairs, Human Rights, Immigration, Police and Auckland Transport. He served on the Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade Select Committee. 
During his 12 years in Parliament he won a number of awards. He was twice named 'Backbencher of the Year', first in 2002 by Vernon Small, then deputy political editor of The New Zealand Herald, 

Family and background

Locke was born and grew up in Christchurch, to Jack and Elsie Locke, prominent lifelong political activists for a wide variety of causes. Their four children were brought up in this environment and followed their parents into a life of activism, (as well as Keith, his sister Maire Leadbeater is a well-known activist and former city councillor for Auckland City Council). Former Prime Minister Robert Muldoon is said to have described the Lockes as the most "notorious Communist family in New Zealand". The Lockes lived in the Avon Loop area of the Christchurch Central City and were very active in the community notably organising Avon River clean-ups and native tree planting and arguing against development of the area, and in favour of retaining the character of the area.
He attended Christchurch Boys' High School and has a BSc in Psychology from the University of Canterbury and then went to Canada for a Masters in Sociology at the University of Alberta. He studied towards but never completed a Ph.D in Sociology at the University of Toronto, before returning to New Zealand. Locke lectured in Sociology at Victoria University from 1970–72, but then decided to leave academia to work as a full-time editor of the fortnightly socialist paper, Socialist Action, from 1972 to 1976. From 1978 to 1984 he worked as an active socialist and unionist in a car factory, railway workshops and meatworks in the Wellington region. In 1985 he moved to Auckland, working in the Auckland City abattoirs, 1985-86. From 1986 to 1990 Locke worked full-time as the national coordinator of the Philippines Solidarity Network, based in Auckland. From 1990 to 1999 he was manager of One World Books, a non-profit bookshop in Auckland specialising in social, environmental and development issues.Green Party website bio

Political history

Politically active all his life, he joined the Socialist Action League (SAL) in 1970. By 1972 he was both the National Secretary of the SAL and chairman of "Socialists for Labour". By 1985 Locke had left the SAL but was still involved in various issue movements. These included Latin America, the Philippines and East Timor solidarity movements and the anti-nuclear movement.
In 1989 Jim Anderton broke away from the Labour Party to form the NewLabour Party (NLP). Locke as well as several other former SAL members were given roles in the NLP's first National Council. Locke was their foreign affairs spokesperson and stood as the NLP candidate for Eden in the 1990 election.
In December 1991 the NLP merged with the Greens, Mana Motuhake and the Democrats to form the Alliance Party. Locke continued as foreign affairs spokesperson for the Alliance and stood in Eden in the 1993 election and Owairaka in the 1996 election.
However, by 1997 the Greens had decided to leave the Alliance. Soon after Locke left the Alliance and joined the Greens where he was made foreign affairs spokesperson.

Member of Parliament

In the 1999 election he was elected to Parliament at number 7 on the Green Party list. He was returned to Parliament in the 2002 election again at number 7 on the Green Party list and in the 2005 election at number 5, and in the 2008 election at number 6. In all four elections he stood in the Epsom electorate.
In 2000, Locke had two member's bills drawn from the ballot.  The first, the Intelligence and Security Committee Act Repeal Bill 2000, attempted to reform oversight of the New Zealand Security Intelligence Service and Government Communications Security Bureau. but ultimately defeated at its second reading in 2003.
In January 2011 Locke announced that he would retire at that year's election.

Political viewpoints

As a Member of Parliament, Locke has established a profile of being an "unofficial civil liberties watchdog". Recently, Locke has been involved in campaigns against the New Zealand Police being armed with Taser guns, and repeal of the law of sedition.
Locke is a supporter of a New Zealand republic. In his maiden speech, Locke stated "We should also break free of the British Crown and become a republic. The question is not whether the monarchy has a lot of power over us. In practice it doesn't. The problem is that bowing before the British Queen reflects a colonial mentality."Keith Locke's Maiden Speech, 1999 In 2002, Locke put forward the Head of State (Referenda) Bill, which if passed would bring about a referendum on the question of whether New Zealand should become a republic.

Controversy

His political enemies have referred to him during question time as "Pol Pot" or "the Honourable Member for Cambodia" due to supportive articles he wrote while editor of the New Zealand Socialist Action newspaper about the Khmer Rouge regime under the headline; Cambodia liberated: victory for humanity. Locke has claimed his initial support for the Khmer Rouge was because "..... He also responded that he renounced his support after hearing of their atrocities, while the New Zealand Government of the time continued to express support for the regime.
Similarly, while he opposed the 2001 war in Afghanistan to remove the Taliban, he wrote an article (in Socialist Action) entitled "Why workers should support Soviet action in Afghanistan" in 1980. This led to accusations of hypocrisy.Personal Explanation - Alleged Support of Soviet Invasion of Afghanistan, New Zealand Hansard, 10 October 2001
During the 2005 election he contested the Epsom electorate in Auckland and at a public meeting he promised to run through the streets of Epsom naked if the electorate was won by ACT New Zealand's leader Rodney Hide. Hide won the seat. "I'll do it. I have to," Locke was reported as saying. "I was so confident, but I have turned out to be wrong and I have got to do it." The paint camouflaged Locke's skin by depicting a suit and tie from the neck down.






