[[WCMH-TV]]

CATEGORIES: Television stations in Columbus, Ohio, NBC network affiliates, Channel 14 digital TV stations in the United States, Channel 4 virtual TV stations in the United States, Television channels and stations established in 1949, Media General, Me-TV affiliates

WCMH-TV, channel 4, is a television station in Columbus, Ohio, USA, affiliated with the NBC television network and owned by Media General. The station's studios are located near the Ohio State University campus on Olentangy River Road, while its transmitter is located off Twin Rivers Drive in west Columbus.

History

Columbus' first television station began operations on April 3, 1949 as WLWC on channel 3.  The station's original owner was the Cincinnati-based Crosley Broadcasting Corporation, a division of the Avco Company."WLWC starts; Columbus video outlet opened by Crosley." Broadcasting - Telecasting, April 4, 1949, pg. 41.   Together these stations comprised the "WLW Network", and they emphasized their connection to each other within their on-air branding: the Columbus station was known as WLW-C.
Like all of the WLW television stations in Ohio, WLWC was an NBC affiliate, though it carried some programming from the DuMont network until WTVN-TV (now WSYX) took the DuMont affiliation when that station launched in September 1949.  In 1952, following the release of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)'s Sixth Report and Order which ended the four-year freeze on station license awards, a VHF frequency realignment resulted in WLWC being forced to move to channel 4, trading channels with NBC-owned WNBK (now WKYC-TV) in Cleveland;"TV coverage; RTMA predicts expansion." Broadcasting - Telecasting, May 19, 1952, pg. 78.  Broadcasting - Telecasting, December 15, 1952, pg. 59. 
The Crosley TV station group would later grow to include WLWI (now WTHR) in Indianapolis, WOAI-TV in San Antonio, and WLWA (now WXIA-TV) in Atlanta.  Along with NBC programming, the Crosley/Avco stations in Ohio and Indianapolis also aired common programming, including The Paul Dixon Show, Midwestern Hayride, The Ruth Lyons 50-50 Club (later to become The Bob Braun Show), The Phil Donahue Show, and telecasts of Cincinnati Reds baseball.  The Crosley broadcast division took the name of its parent company in 1968, becoming Avco Broadcasting Corporation.
In 1969 the FCC enacted its "one-to-a-market" rule, which prohibited common ownership of AM radio and television stations with overlapping coverage areas under certain conditions while grandfathering some already existing instances.  WLWC's channel 4 coverage area covered portions of the Dayton and Cincinnati markets, and Avco's ownership of WLWC, WLWT, WLWD, and WLW radio (a 50,000-watt, clear-channel station which can also be heard throughout much of eastern North America at night) was granted protection under the clause.  In 1975, Avco announced the sale of its broadcasting outlets; channel 4 was sold in February 1976 to the Providence, Rhode Island-based Outlet Company, who changed the station's call letters to the current WCMH-TV."Avco sells off another TV." Broadcasting, May 26, 1975, pg. 42"Changing Hands." Broadcasting, January 19, 1976, pg. 33WCMH-TV/Outlet Broadcasting advertisement. Broadcasting, February 23, 1976, pg. 77. 
Outlet sold its broadcast interests to NBC in 1996, and channel 4 became an NBC owned-and-operated station, spending much of the next decade as one of two stations in the market to hold such status; the other was UPN's WWHO (owned by that network from 1997 to 2005; it was later sold to LIN TV and is now owned by Manhan Media and controlled by WSYX).
WCMH-TV was placed up for sale by NBC-Universal on January 9, 2006, along with sister stations WJAR-TV in Providence, WVTM-TV in Birmingham, Alabama, and WNCN-TV in Goldsboro, North Carolina.  Media General, the Richmond, Virginia-based company which already owned five NBC affiliates in the southeastern United States, announced it would purchase the four stations on April 6, 2006; the sale was finalized on June 26, 2006.mediageneral.htm As a result, channel 4 became Media General's first station in the Great Lakes region.
For several months after the sale closed, WCMH's website and those of the other three stations remained in the format used by the websites of NBC-owned stations.  In December 2006, WNCN and WJAR launched redesigned websites, which are no longer powered by Internet Broadcasting. On December 11, 2006, WVTM's website followed suit, followed by WCMH on December 14.  Media General has since located the master control for all Media General NBC affiliates at its Columbus studios.[ref]
