[[Mike Moore (New Zealand politician)]]

CATEGORIES: 1949 births, Ambassadors of New Zealand to the United States, Leaders of the Opposition (New Zealand), Living people, Members of the Order of New Zealand, New Zealand diplomats, New Zealand MPs for Christchurch electorates, New Zealand foreign ministers, New Zealand Labour Party MPs, New Zealand Labour Party leaders, People from Whakatane, Prime Ministers of New Zealand, World Trade Organization Directors-General, New Zealand MPs for Auckland electorates, Honorary Officers of the Order of Australia, Recipients of the Order of the Golden Heart (Kenya), Recipients of the National Order of the Ivory Coast, Recipients of the Order of Duke Branimir, Recipients of the Order of Honor (Georgia), Recipients of the New Zealand 1990 Commemoration Medal, People from Kawakawa, New Zealand, Members of the New Zealand House of Representatives

Michael Kenneth Moore, ONZ AO (known as Mike Moore, born 28 January 1949) is a politician from New Zealand who has served both as Prime Minister of New Zealand and Director-General of the World Trade Organization. He is the current New Zealand Ambassador to the United States.

Early life

Moore was born in Whakatane, New Zealand in 1949. He was raised in Kawakawa and educated at the Bay of Islands College and Dilworth School. After leaving school he first worked as a labourer and then a printer. He became an active trade unionist and at the age of 17 was elected to the Auckland Trades Council. He became the first youth representative on the Labour Party executive and was Vice-president of the International Union of Socialist Youth for two consecutive terms. E., 'Who's Who in New Zealand' A.H. & A.W. Reed 1978 ISBN 0-589-01113-8Prime Minister of New Zealand – Past Prime Ministers: Mike Moore. Primeminister.nz. Retrieved on 6 July 2011. Iusy. Retrieved on 6 July 2011.

Member of Parliament

Moore began his parliamentary career when elected as the MP for Eden in 1972.
In 1978 he moved to Christchurch and was elected MP for the north Christchurch electorate, then known as Papanui. He held the electorate until 1999: as Papanui until 1984, as Christchurch North until 1996, and as Waimakariri thereafter.
As a government minister he has held numerous portfolios, becoming best known in his role as Overseas Trade Minister (since 1984) with involvement in the GATT negotiations. In 1987 he also became Minister of External Relations and in 1988 Deputy Minister of Finance. In 1990 he became leader of the Labour Party and consequently Prime Minister for a few months, convincing the Labour caucus that, while he could not win the election for Labour, he would help save more seats than staying with the incumbent, Geoffrey Palmer. The Labour government was not returned to power in the next general election. 
The circumstances of Moore's installment as Prime Minister would later be compared to the return of Kevin Rudd as Prime Minister of Australia.stuff.co.nz/dominion-post/comment/editorials/8851794/Editorial-Ousting-about-saving-the-furniture
He led the Official Opposition until 1993 and was spokesman on Foreign Affairs and Trade until 1999. 
He was dumped as Labour leader after the 1993 election despite leading the party to near victory at that election after only one term in opposition.nzherald.co.cfm?c_id=1&objectid=10716608
As a result of his dumping as Labour leader, he strongly considered forming a break-away party, the New Zealand Democratic Coalition, for the 1996 MMP election but then decided against it. He won the 1996 election, obtaining more than twice as many votes as the next-highest candidate, National's Jim Gerard.
In 1998, he ran for the post of Director-General of the World Trade Organisation and was elected to this position on 22 July 1999. He took up the post on 1 September 1999; close enough to the  to not trigger a by-election. Gfc2007. Retrieved 6 July 2011 The deal with his rival and successor Supachai Panitchpakdi meant that he served only half of the usual six year term in the post.

Political positions held

World Trade Organization

Mike Moore was the director-general of the World Trade Organisation from 1999 to 2002. His term coincided with momentous changes in the global economy and multilateral trading system. He attempted to restore confidence in the system following the setback of the 1999 WTO ministerial conference held in Seattle. Ministers at the 2001 ministerial conference in Doha, Qatar regarded him as the driving force behind the decision to launch a new round of multilateral trade negotiations—the ill-fated Doha Development Round. That 2001 meeting also saw the successful accession to the WTO of China and Chinese Taipei, which along with Estonia, Jordan, Georgia, Albania, Oman, Croatia, Lithuania and Moldova joined during Mr Moore's term, bringing the majority of the world's population within the rules-based trading system. He gave particular attention to helping poor countries participate effectively in the multilateral trading system.

Later life

Moore has been New Zealand Ambassador to the United States since 2010. Beehive.nz (20 February 2010). Retrieved on 6 July 2011.

International services and appointments

Author

Mike Moore is an author of a number of books, on subjects ranging from politics to the Pacific. His most recent book on globalisation, 'A World Without Walls', has also been published in Chinese and Turkish. He has a regular newspaper column that appears in five countries.La Trobe University, Melbourne, Australia: Media Release

Publications

Honours and awards

to the education sector.

Notes





|-
|-
|-
|-
|-
|-


