[[Nottingham Express Transit]]

CATEGORIES: Tram transport in Nottingham, Transdev Group companies, Railway lines opened in 2004, Electric railways in the United Kingdom, Tram transport in England

"Nottingham" Express Transit (NET) is a light-rail tramway in Nottingham, England. The first line opened to the public on 9 March 2004, having cost £200 million (equivalent to £

Network

Line 1

From Nottingham railway station, south of the city centre, north past the Lace Market, Nottingham Trent University, Forest Recreation Ground to Hucknall. There are 23 stops, with provision for a stop between Basford and Wilkinson Street close to the site of the British Gas works, and there is a proposal for a stop at the redeveloped Broadmarsh Shopping Centre adjacent to the projected new bus station.
It is 14 km long, of which 4 km is on street. A little north of the city centre is a section about 1 km long where northbound and southbound trams follow different streets, crossing at each end to run on the 'wrong side'. From Wilkinson Street north for about 8 km, the line runs alongside the Robin Hood Line. At Highbury Vale, about half way, a branch turns west for 1 km to Phoenix Park, while the main line runs north to Hucknall. There are park-and-ride facilities at several stations.
Construction was by Carillion. It is arguably the only 'new' tram system in the UK to have been an instant success. Whilst others are starting to carry the number of passengers that was hoped for, Nottingham has exceeded the most optimistic predictions, carrying 9.7 million people in 2005. This bolsters the case for the construction of new lines. In 2006 it was also the only operation in the British Isles with 100% low-floor trams.
From 4 April 2005, trams run every five minutes during peak times, and every six minutes during the weekday daytime, alternating between Hucknall and Phoenix Park, dropping to every 10 minutes Monday–Saturday evening, every 15 minutes Sunday evening.
The tram connects with East Midlands Trains, CrossCountry and Northern Rail at Station Street, for Nottingham railway station; and at Bulwell and Hucknall, for the Robin Hood Line.
The main bus interchanges are at: Hucknall, for buses to the Hucknall Estates and Mansfield; Moor Bridge, for buses to Arnold; Bulwell Forest, for buses to the City Hospital; Bulwell; Cinderhill (via a short walk to Nuthall Road), for buses to Eastwood ; Wilkinson Street, for Medilink buses to City Hospital and QMC; Royal Centre; Old Market Square;  Lace Market; Phoenix Park, for buses to Nuthall, Kimberley, IKEA and Ilkeston.

Future lines

NET Phase Two is for two extensions NET Phase 2 from Station Street. A bridge will be constructed across the top of Nottingham Station. NET Phase 2: stations

Phase 2

Phase Two is under construction and is an extension of the current Line 1 from Hucknall and Phoenix Park to Nottingham Station. Phase two will extend the line into Toton and Clifton. The new lines will be routes across the city - Line 1 from Hucknall will follow the same route into the City Centre until Nottingham Station (The Hub) - then it will continue to Toton Lane. Line 2 from Phoenix Park will follow the same route as it currently does into the City Centre until Nottingham Station - then it will continue to Clifton (A453).

=Line 2=

The Clifton route will go through densely populated residential areas to the south of the city, including the Meadows, Wilford/Ruddington Lane area and the Clifton Estate, to a new park and ride site serving the A453. It will cross the River Trent on the Wilford Toll Bridge, which will be widened to allow pedestrians and cyclists to continue to use it, and then use part of the Great Central Railway formation through Wilford.
The route is 7.6 km long, of which 63% is segregated. The journey time from the Old Market Square will be 23.5 minutes.
Current outline designs show 13 tram stops, attracting approximately 3.9 million passenger journeys a year.
The full Line 2 service route from Phoenix Park to Clifton will feature 28 tram stops.

=Line 3=

The Chilwell and Beeston route will go to the south west of the city, serving the northern edge of the Meadows residential area, the ng2 development site, Queen's Medical Centre, the University of Nottingham, Beeston town centre and Chilwell, to a new park and ride site at the junction of the A52 road and Toton Lane, about one mile from junction 25 of the M1 motorway.
The route is 9.8 km long, of which 59% is segregated. The journey time from the Old Market Square will be 30 minutes.
The full line 1 service will go from the current terminus at Hucknall to Toton Lane via the City Centre.
Current outline designs show 15 tram stops, attracting approximately 5.1 million passenger journeys a year. The full line 1 service route from Hucknall will feature 37 tram stops, 15 of the 37 being on the new extension to Toton Lane. The journey time from Hucknall to Toton Lane will be 62 minutes.

=Project progress=

Programme Entry approval was given on 25 October 2006 with the Government agreeing to provide up to £437 million in Private Finance Initiative (PFI) credits. The local councils will also provide up to £141M in PFI credits.  The two local councils (Nottinghamshire County and Nottingham City Councils) voted on 22 February 2007 and 3 March 2007 respectively to table an application for a Transport & Works Act Order.
The City and County Councils' application for the order were available to view from 26 April 2007 to 7 June 2007 when it was submitted to the Secretary of State for Transport for consideration.  A public inquiry was held in December 2007. The project was given the go-ahead by the government on 30 March 2009.[ref]
</ref><ref>
</ref>
Following the local elections in 2009, Nottinghamshire County Council indicated that it was no longer willing to contribute financially to the project, so Nottingham City Council decided to cover the shortfall and be the sole promoter. Nottinghamshire County Council confirmed that it would not obstruct the project.
Funding was approved by the government on 31 July 2009.transportbriefing.co.coi.uk/clientmicrosite/Content/Detail. Building work was expected to begin in 2011, in two phases, with trams running from 2014.  The scheme aims to reduce the number of car journeys into Nottingham by four million per annum.
The scheme survived the 2010 Comprehensive Spending Review ordered by the government.
On 24 March 2011 the government confirmed that funding had been approved, and at the end of the month the preferred bidder to build the new lines and operate the whole network was announced as Tramlink Nottingham. The finalised contract was hoped to be signed by September,
Tramlink Nottingham is a consortium of Alstom, Keolis, Trent Barton owner Wellglade, Vinci,  OFI InfraVia & Meridiam Infrastructure.

=The future=

During the development of NET a number of possible routes around the city were considered. There are no detailed plans for further expansion, but during the tendering process for Phase Two, documents contained nine possible routes:
The document raised the possibility of tram-train lines from Nottingham to Gedling and/or Bingham, and to Ilkeston.
Kimberley, Eastwood & Nuthall Tram Action Group (KENTAG) campaigns for an extension from Phoenix Park to Eastwood and Kimberley.
News that a station for the proposed HS2 line (the East Midlands Hub) is likely to be built on the site of Toton sidings, only a short distance from the planned Chilwell terminus has fuelled speculation that the line could be extended to the new station.

Route

Tram fleet

The system has 15 Incentro AT6/5 trams, similar to those used in Nantes, built by Bombardier Transportation (formerly ADtranz) in Derby. The Flexity Outlook Eurotram was also considered, but was rejected as its large single-leaf doors did not comply with British door-alarm regulations.
The trams run on 750 volts DC and have a top speed of . They are 100% low-floor vehicles articulated in five sections, and are 33 metres long and 2.4 metres wide.
From a very early stage, the trams have been named after famous local people. Vinyl transfers carrying the names are mounted on diagonally opposite corners of the tram exterior. Upon introduction they were also on the front right-hand side (in direction of travel) on the top of tram windows, in the same style as advertisements.
In 2013 Nottingham Express Transit announced that all trams would be refurbished and receive a new livery and interior.net | NET – Nottingham Express Transit. TheTram (8 March 2013). Retrieved on 17 July 2013. The first tram to be refurbished was 215, followed by 214, 205 and 213.

Future fleet

In preparation for the Phase Two extensions to Beeston and Clifton, 22 new Alstom Citadis 302 trams have been ordered.  The first Citadis tram (216) arrived at the Wilkinson Street depot on 10 September 2013. Along with the current Incentro fleet, they will run test operation on the new lines from Summer 2014 to December 2014. The trams will also be tested on the current network when delivered.

Incidents








