[[Miniature horse]]

CATEGORIES: Horse breeds

  
Miniature horses are found in many nations, particularly in Europe and the Americas. The designation of miniature horse is determined by the height of the animal, which, depending on the particular breed registry involved, is usually less than  as measured at the last hairs of the mane, which are found at the withers. While miniature horses are the size of a very small pony, many retain horse characteristics and are considered "horses" by their respective registries.   They have various colors and coat patterns.
Miniature horses are friendly and interact well with people. For this reason they are often kept as family pets, though they still retain natural horse behavior, including a natural fight or flight instinct, and must be treated like an equine, even if they primarily serve as a companion animal. They are also trained as service animals, akin to assistance dogs for people with disabilities.  Miniature horses are also trained for driving, equine agility and other competitive horse show type events.  

Characteristics and registration

There are two registries in the United States for Miniature Horses, the American Miniature Horse Association (AMHA) and the American Miniature Horse Registry (AMHR). The AMHA was founded in 1978 and was dedicated to establishing the Miniature horse as a distinct breed of horse. Many of the international organizations are associated with the AMHA, including clubs throughout Canada and in several European countries."Approved Clubs"., American Miniature Horse Association. Accessed April 28, 2014. The AMHR is a division of the American Shetland pony Club and was established as a separate registry in 1972."Unique -- Interesting -- A Class All of lts Own," The Journal of The American Shetland Pony Club Accessed January 17, 2007 
Worldwide, there are dozens of miniature horse registries. Some organizations emphasize breeding of miniatures with horse characteristics, others encourage minis to retain pony characteristics. Along with registries for miniature horses in general, there are also breed-specific registries, such as several for the Falabella horse."The Top 20 Miniature Horse Registries". The Guide Horse Foundation. Accessed April 28, 2014. 
In the AMHR, Miniatures cannot exceed 34 inches at the withers (which the AMHR defines as located at the last hair of the mane). There are two divisions in AMHR - the "A" division for horses ."American Miniature Horse", American Shetland Pony Club/American Miniature Horse Registry. Accessed April 28, 2014. The AMHA requires that horses stand under 34 inches. Horses of any eye or coat color, and any form of white markings, are allowed to be registered. The AMHA standard suggests that if a person were to see a photograph of a miniature horse, without any size reference, it would be identical in characteristics, conformation, and proportion to a full-sized horse."2014 American Miniature Horse Association Rule Book", American Miniature Horse Association, page 3. Accessed April 28, 2014. According to the AMHR, a "Miniature should be a small, sound, well-balanced horse and should give the impression of strength, agility and alertness. A Miniature should be eager and friendly but not skittish in disposition." 
They are generally quite hardy, often living longer on average than some full-sized horse breeds; the average life span of miniature horses is from 25 to 35 years."Miniature Horse Facts", Guide Horse Foundation. Accessed April 28, 2014. However, there are also some health issues that are more frequently found in miniature horses than their full-sized relatives. Overfeeding is a common problem in miniature horses, leading to obesity; this is especially true when owners are used to owning full-sized horses. Dental issues, including crowding, brachygnathism (overbites) and prognathism (underbites) are frequently seen, due to having the same number of teeth in a much smaller mouth. They can also experience retention of deciduous teeth (baby teeth) and sinus problems from overcrowding. The combination of a propensity for overeating and dental problems can lead to an increased occurrence of colic. A major metabolic problem seen more frequently in miniature horses is hyperlipemia, where an appetite-reducing stressor can cause the body to break down significant amounts of fat, overwhelming the liver and potentially leading to liver failure. Reproduction is also more difficult in miniature horses, with a higher incidence of difficult births and a greater potential for eclampsia. The majority of the health problems seen more frequently in miniature horses are easily rectified with proper feeding and maintenance. 

History

Miniature horses were first developed in Europe in the 1600s, and by 1765, they were seen frequently as the pets of nobility. Others were used in coal mines in England and continental Europe."American Miniature Horse". International Museum of the Horse. Accessed April 28, 2014. The English began using small ponies in their mines after the Mines and Collieries Act 1842 prohibited the use of young children as mine workers. Shetland ponies were most frequently seen, although any small, strong ponies that would fit in the small mine shafts were used as pit ponies. The first small horses in the United States date to 1861, when John Rarey imported four Shetland ponies, one of whom was  In the 1960s, public appreciation for miniature horses began to grow, and they were increasingly used in a number of equestrian disciplines.
The Falabella miniature horse was originally developed in Argentina in the mid-1800s by Patrick Newell. When Newell died, the herd and breeding methods were passed to Newell's son-in-law, Juan Falabella. Juan added additional bloodlines including the Welsh Pony, Shetland pony, and small Thoroughbreds. With considerable inbreeding he was able to gain consistently small size within the herd.
The South African Miniature Horse was developed in South Africa and has a wide range of conformations represented in its population. Some resemble miniature Arabians, while others appear to be scaled-down versions of draft horses. Wynand de Wet was the first breeder of miniature horses in South America, beginning his program in 1945 in Lindley, South Africa. Other breeders soon followed, with many using Arabian horses in their breeding programs. In 1984, a breed registry was begun, and the national livestock association recognized the South African Miniature Horse as an independent breed in 1989. There are approximately 700 miniature horses registered in South Africa."History", Miniature Horse Breeders' Society of South Africa. Accessed April 28, 2014.

Uses

There are many horse show opportunities offered by registries and show sanctioning organizations worldwide. Many classes are offered, including halter (horse conformation), in-hand hunter and jumper, driving, liberty, costume, obstacle or trail classes, and showmanship. Miniature horses are also used as companion animals and pets for children, the elderly and the handicapped, as they are generally less intimidating then full-sized horses. While miniature horses can be trained to work indoors, they are still real horses and are healthier when allowed to live outdoors (with proper shelter and room to run) when not working with humans."Horses in the house." Guide Horse Foundation. Accessed April 28, 2014.

Controversies

Horse or pony?

There is an ongoing debate over whether a miniature horse should possess horse or pony characteristics.  This is a common controversy within the miniature horse world and also is a hot debate between mini aficionados and other horse and pony breed owners.  While technically any member of Equus caballus under  
Some miniature horse breed standards prefer pony characteristics such as short, stout legs and elongated torsos, while others prefer ordinary horse proportions.Mini Horse History

Dwarfism

Dwarfism is a concern within the miniature horse world. Dwarf horses, while often setting world records for size, are not considered to have desirable traits, generally have incorrect conformation, and may have significant health and soundness issues."The Miniature Horse: More Than Just a Smaller Horse". The Horse. January 13, 2013. Accessed April 30, 2014. Therefore, many miniature horse registries try to avoid accepting minis affected by dwarfism for breeding stock registration. "Dwarfism in Miniature Horses." Miniature Horse World, , p. 37-39 June/July issue, publication year unclear, web page accessed September 2, 2007. In 2014, a commercial DNA test became available for one set of dwarfism mutations. The four mutations of the ACAN gene are known to cause dwarfism or aborted fetuses in miniature horses. The test does not detect the mutations that cause skeletal atavism in miniature horses and some ponies, or the osteochondrodysplasia dwarfism seen in some horse breeds."Testing Available for Dwarfism Gene in Miniature Horses", The Horse, April 24,2014. Accessed April 28, 2014.
The oldest living horse on record was a miniature horse affected by dwarfism named Angel who lived with the Horse Protection Society of North Carolina and lived to be over 50.  The current record holder for the world's smallest horse is also a horse affected by dwarfism, Thumbelina, who is fully mature but stands  miniature horse foal named Einstein challenged Thumbelina for the title of the World's Smallest Horse in part based upon the idea that there should be a separate world record category for the smallest non-dwarf horse.H. farm, Boston Herald, retrieved February 8, 2012

Assistance animals

There is controversy over whether miniature horses are suitable as assistance animals for persons with disabilities.  Those who favor their use point out that horses live much longer than dogs and can be trained to perform similar tasks. Another plus is that some individuals, particularly from Muslim cultures, consider dogs unclean, but accept horses.








