[[Isaac Brock (musician)]]

CATEGORIES: 1975 births, Living people, A&R people, American atheists, American banjoists, American male singers, American rock guitarists, Alternative rock guitarists, American rock singers, Sub Pop artists, People from Issaquah, Washington, Musicians from Portland, Oregon, Songwriters from Washington (state)

Isaac K. Brock (born July 9, 1975) is the lead singer, guitarist, banjoist, and songwriter for the American indie rock band, Modest Mouse, as well as his side project band, Ugly Casanova. As a songwriter he is noted for wordplay and frequent use of metaphors, philosophical lyrics, themes of oppressive rural lifestyles, and certain phrases and sayings commonly used in the early to mid-20th century and in blue collar environments. " Paste Magazine. Retrieved June 14, 2005. " Retrieved November 17, 2003.

Early life

Brock was born in Helena, Montana. During his childhood, he lived with his mother and sister in Montana and Oregon in hippie communes and churches before moving to Issaquah, Washington when Isaac was 11 years old. Brock was home-schooled for part of his school career. When his mother's house flooded three times, she was forced to move into her future husband's trailer. Brock asked to stay behind in his own room until the new home was completed. He lived in the flooded home until the house was sold. After a short period of living in a friend's basement, he moved into the "Shed" built on the land next to his mother and stepfather's trailer. He was raised in a Christian religious sect called the Grace Gospel church.ink19.html November 1998 :: Ink Spots :: Modest Mouse (Isaac Brock) ... so records on labels like Sub Pop, Up, and K. Singer/songwriter Isaac Brock began the band as a personal outlet, .... I spent some time in this Christian gospel cult when I was a kid.com altmusic.com › Entertainment › Alternative Music › Artists Modest Mouse are an indie-rock band based around songwriter Isaac Brock's ... Background. Brock was raised within the religious sect the Grace gospel church.
In 1992, when he was sixteen, Brock moved to D.C. for the summer where he met his girlfriend.  Brock traveled back and forth from the East Coast to Issaquah, where he took a community-college course to get his high school diploma before moving back to D.C. and to New York's East Village. He earned a living cleaning out meat trucks, posing as a nude model for art classes and taking part in medical experiments, before eventually landing in the Seattle area.  It was there that he, Eric Judy (bass) and Jeremiah Green (drums) first started practicing music together in the Shed.

Personal life

Although many of his songs use religious themes, Brock describes himself as "not really religious at all," adding that "I'm 100 percent on the whole Christianity thing being a crock of shit, pretty much." He claims to "toy around with the whole Biblical thing," because it "just has amazing characters" and also identifies himself as "pretty much" an atheist.
He's talked about the DUIs he has gotten and cut himself onstage with a pocket knife.mtv.jhtml
[/ref] His songs have also addressed his substance abuse, as in "The Good Times Are Killing Me." Brock admits to past drug use, and now says that drugs are "just something I kind of have to fight... I just try and make sure that it's not around, or I'm not around it."
Brock is a former A&R man for the record label Sub Pop; his most notable accomplishment with them was signing Wolf Parade in 2004.
Brock currently resides in Portland, Oregon. But, also has an apartment in Huntington Beach, California.
Brock made a cameo appearance in season two of the sketch comedy show Portlandia.  His character was shown donating records to a pre-school library.

False accusation of rape

In March 1999, a 19-year-old woman filed a police report accusing Brock of rape. The allegations started right before Modest Mouse was to begin a nationwide tour with Seattle garage punk band Murder City Devils. The allegations led to an alleged fist fight between members of the Murder City Devils and Isaac Brock, after which Brock reportedly moved to Gainesville, Florida. Charges were never pressed, and Brock maintains his innocence. In a 2004 interview with The A.V. Club, he claimed: 

Equipment

Brock's main guitar is custom made by Wicks Guitars.

Glacial Pace

In October 2005, Brock started his own record label called Glacial Pace. The label used to be a subsidiary of Epic Records, but is now independent. Its first signee was Minnesota songwriter Mason Jennings, followed by Love As Laughter, Marcellus Hall, Mimicking Birds, Morning Teleportation, and Talkdemonic.






