[[Northern Arizona University]]

CATEGORIES: Northern Arizona University, Public universities, Public universities and colleges in Arizona, Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities, American Association of State Colleges and Universities, Educational institutions established in 1899, Arizona Cardinals, National Football League summer camp sites, North Central Association of Colleges and Schools, Education in Coconino County, Arizona, Buildings and structures in Coconino County, Arizona, 1899 establishments in Arizona Territory

Northern Arizona University (NAU) is a public university located in Flagstaff, Arizona, United States. It is accredited by the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools, and has 36 satellite campuses in the state of Arizona. The university offers both undergraduate and graduate degrees.
As of fall 2013, 26,006 students were enrolled, 19,320 at the Flagstaff campus. The average cost of tuition and fees for a full-time, Arizona resident undergraduate student for two semesters is $9,692. NAU offers Flagstaff undergraduate students the Pledge Program that guarantees the same tuition rate for four years. For the Fall 2013 school year, out-of-state undergraduates will pay an estimated $22,094 for tuition and fees. NAU also participates in the  Western Undergraduate Exchange Program, which offers lower tuition rates for students from the Western United States. WUE tuition rates for fall 2013 are $12,680.
The Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education classifies NAU as a research university with high research activity.

History

Initially named the Northern Arizona Normal School, the institution was established on September 11, 1899. The first graduating class, in 1901, consisted of four women who received credentials to teach in the Arizona Territory. In 1925, the Arizona State Legislature allowed the school, which was now called the Northern Arizona State Teacher's College, to grant Bachelor of Education degrees. In 1929 the school became Arizona State Teacher's College.nau.html NAU History
Enrollment dropped sharply, however, as World War II dawned. ASTC became a Navy V-12 program training site.

Campuses

Flagstaff Campus

Perched at  northwest of Flagstaff.
NAU offers 87 bachelor degree programs, 48 master's degree programs and 10 doctoral degree programs, along with 38 undergraduate and 26 graduate certificates. The university was charged by the Arizona Board of Regents in 2006 to develop innovative ways to provide access and affordability to all Arizona residents. NAU developed the Pledge Program,2NAU partnerships with community colleges and NAU-Yavapai, a collaboration with Yavapai College in Prescott Valley, Ariz. NAU-Yuma just celebrated its 25th anniversary of the partnership with Arizona Western College.

Extended Campuses

Northern Arizona University is a public university accredited by the Higher Learning Commission North Central Association. In addition to 19,000 students on the Flagstaff campus, NAU currently serves more than 7,000 students statewide.
NAU's Extended Campuses offers more than 50 online accredited degree programs on more than 30 campuses throughout the state. NAU is the first public university to offer a competency-based online degree program that allows students to earn credit for experience. Personalized Learning was launched in May 2013, and federal financial aid is available for the program, which has a flat fee of $5,000 per year.
NAU is the first university in Arizona to attain program accreditation from the National Council for the Accreditation of Teacher Educators (NCATE).  Additional accreditations include Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP) and Hotel and Restaurant Management has earned accreditation from the Accreditation Commission for Programs in Hospitality Administration, an honor earned by fewer than 20% of the nation's baccalaureate degree-granting programs in the field.
NAU's Extended Campuses students pay the lowest per-credit-hour tuition and Flagstaff offers an affordable locked-in tuition.

Academics

 
 Fall Freshman Statistics

In the fall of 2010, the top undergraduate degrees by enrollment were elementary education, biology, hotel and restaurant management, nursing, and criminology and criminal justice.Quick Facts

College of Arts and Letters

The College of Arts and Letters (CAL) houses the Asian Studies Program, Cinema Studies, Comparative Cultural Studies (formerly Humanities, Arts, and Religion), English, History, Latin American Studies, Modern Languages, Museum Studies, Philosophy, School of Art, School of Music, and Theatre.  The college also oversees the NAU Art Museum, Martin-Springer Institute (promoting lessons of the Holocaust), Northern Arizona Writing Project, Ardrey Memorial Auditorium, and Ashurst Hall. The College of Arts and Letters Film Series has been providing quality classic films to the NAU and Flagstaff community for more than nine years, and the NAU International Film Series has recently been established. Department faculty and students share their scholarly work and artistic achievement through more than 300 performances, lectures, films, and exhibitions a year.Welcome - College of Arts and Letters - Northern Arizona University

College of Education

The College of Education prepares educators, counselors, school psychologists, and school administrators. Fields of study include teaching and learning (e.g., early childhood, elementary, and secondary), educational leadership, educational psychology, and educational specialties (e.g., bilingual and multicultural education, career and technical education, educational technology, and special education).Northern Arizona University - College of Education

College of Engineering, Forestry, and Natural Sciences

The College of Engineering, Forestry, and Natural Sciences has eleven departments and a Quaternary Program, thirteen centers, and two institutes.

College of Health and Human Services

NAU's College of Health and Human Services consists of the School of Nursing, Health Sciences, Dental Hygiene, Communication Sciences and Disorders, Physical Therapy, and a newly formed (as of Fall 2012) Physician Assistant school based out of Phoenix, Arizona.

College of Social and Behavioral Sciences

The College of Social and Behavioral Sciences undergraduate programs include anthropology, applied indigenous studies, criminology and criminal justice, ethnic studies, geography, planning and recreation, political science, psychology, communication, sociology/social work, and women's and gender studies."Departments and Programs" Retrieved 06-03-2013.

The W.A. Franke College of Business

The W.A. Franke College of Business's primary focus is undergraduate education, but it also offers a master's level education and research opportunities.
Businessman Bill Franke's commitment of $25 million resulted in the renaming of the college in his honor. The W.A. Franke College of Business was fully re-accredited in fall 2008 by the national accrediting body AACSB International - The Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business. The NAU program is one of about 400 accredited programs among the more than 1,000 throughout the nation. In 2006, the college moved into a new , LEED-certified building. A. Franke College of Business(see Mission Statement)

Hauntings

While there are numerous reports of hauntings throughout NAU's North Campus, one of the most persistent legends is that of "Kathy the Ghost" in Morton Hall. right|thumb|A former dormitory on NAU's North Quad, where rumors of ghost are abundant.
Of the story variations surrounding Kathy's death, the most common is that, in 1953, she hanged herself in Morton Hall over Christmas break after being abandoned by her boyfriend. Since that time, Morton Hall Residents have reported witnessing many mysterious events including lights flickering on and off, footsteps in the hallways when no one is there, the sound of sobbing, doors opening or locking by themselves,  radios turning to 1950's music, and a ghostly woman in a nightgown wandering through the building at night. As Amity France, a former resident of Morton Hall, reported to the Arizona Daily Sun, "It is a little creepy coming up to the building at night. You think, 'Please don't let there be a ghost behind the door when I come in. The worst part is if you don't have your key ready and you look around and say, 'OK Kathy, where are you?'"  In 2012, Morton Hall was listed as number nine on a list of infamously haunted places in Arizona.
McConnell Hall, another dormitory at NAU, is also rumored to be haunted.  Completed in 1987, McConnell Hall is said to have been designed by an obsessive architect who meticulously planned for each room to receive approximately six minutes of sunlight a day.  According to the legend, once the building was complete and he realized one room fell short of his goal, the now despondent architect committed suicide in it.  Over the years, students under the influence of LSD have reported seeing apparitions wandering the halls, hearing scratching sounds in the walls, and seeing water faucets turn on by themselves.

Residence halls

Northern Arizona University has 20 residence halls on its Flagstaff campus.Northern Arizona University- Residence Life

Freshman residence halls

Upper division housing

=Traditional halls=

=Suites=

=Apartments=

Campus apartments consist of:
Residents of family units are within the Flagstaff Unified School District."Parking Map." Northern Arizona University. Residents are zoned to Kinsey Elementary School, Mount Elden Middle School, and Flagstaff High School."2010/11 Middle (6-8) and High (9-12) School Attendance Areas with Elementary School (K-5) Attendance Area Outlines (Zoomed-In View of the City of Flagstaff)." Flagstaff Unified School District.

NAU Partner Housing by American Campus Communities

These halls are located on the NAU campus but are operated by American Campus Communities.

Athletics

Student athletes compete at national, international, and professional levels in football, basketball, baseball, ice hockey, track and field, tennis, and swimming and diving. The university participates in fifteen intercollegiate sports programs. NAU teams compete at the Walkup Skydome, a multipurpose building providing facilities for football, basketball, indoor track and field, soccer, weight lifting, lacrosse, student recreation, major concert events, commencements, intramurals, and a variety of other university and community activities.J. Lawrence Walkup Skydome
The Lumberjacks compete at the NCAA Division I level in all sports. In football, the Lumberjacks compete at the Football Championship Subdivision level (formerly known as Division I-AA). NAU competes in the Big Sky Conference in all sports except swimming and diving, which is part of the Western Athletic Conference.

On campus activities

NAU has more than 200 recognized professional, academic, service and social organizations, an intramural sports program, The Lumberjack student newspaper, and active residence hall organizations.nau.asp, Northern Arizona University, October 4, 2012

The Lumberjack

The university's award-winning, weekly newspaper is an independent, student-run publication called ''The Lumberjack."  In May 2007, the newspaper won a Society of Professional Journalists national award in the editorial writing category for articles printed during 2006.Society of Professional Journalists Mark of Excellence Awards, Society of Professional Journalists, 2005NAU's 'Lumberjack' wins 4 awards, Northern Arizona University, March 30, 2005

KJACK, NAZ Today, and UTV62

KJACK is available in Flagstaff on 1680 AM or online. KJACK reports to the College Music Journal and specializes in new and local music. NAU's televised news program, NAZ Today, airs Monday through Thursday in Flagstaff on NPG cable channels 4, 59 and UTV 62 on campus at 6pm MST; formerly, it also aired on UniversityHouse (Dish Network channel 9411) until it folded. Since the shutdown of Channel 2 news in August 2008, NAZ Today is now the only TV news source for the Flagstaff area. UTV62 is NAU's student run and produced television station. UTV62 runs 24 hours a day and 7 days a week on channel 62 on campus.

Recreation services

The NAU Recreation Center was remodeled in the fall of 2011, creating the NAU Health and Learning Center in its place. Features include an indoor jogging track, 38 foot climbing wall, larger weight room, multipurpose gym, and a cardio theatre. The Health and Learning Center also includes all of the on-campus medical services that were previously housed in the Fronske Health Center, a pharmacy, and the offices for Disability Resources on campus.Northern Arizona University-Features

Intramural sports

Intramural sports are organized for teams and individuals and include flag football, soccer, volleyball, softball, racquetball, and backgammon. Sports clubs include baseball, rugby, soccer, hockey, lacrosse, Wushu, kendo and judo (martial arts), and water polo.

Movies and other events

Unions and Student Activities offers many services and events for the campus community, such as movies and the popular Friday night AfterHours program produced by SUN Entertainment. SUN also presents several concerts and special events each year and coordinates Welcome Week concerts.  The College of Arts and Letters  presents classic films every Tuesday night during the school year, and also presents more than 300 music and theatrical performances, lectures, films and art exhibitions yearly.

Alumni

The NAU Alumni Association represents more than 125,809 alumni from the U.S.

File:Raul Castro.S. ambassador, and oldest living United States governor
File:VADM Robin R. Braun.jpg|Robin Braun, United States Navy rear admiral
File: Rick Renzi, official 109th Congress photo.jpg|Rick Renzi, Arizona Congressman, District 1
File:'Natoma', patinated bronze sculpture of a Navajo dancer by --R. C. Gorman--, --East-West Center--, Honolulu, Hawaii. C. Gorman, Native American artist
File:DianaGabaldon-BookSigning-August11-07.png|Diana Gabaldon, New York Times Best Selling Author
File:Seamus Dever.jpg|Seamus Dever, Actor in Castle (TV series)
File: Lomong headshot.jpg|Lopez Lomong, South Sudanese-born American rack and field athlete and Olympian

Professional sports

The Arizona Cardinals of the NFL conducted their summer training camp at Northern Arizona University's Flagstaff campus for many years until 2013.








