[[Grasmere]]

CATEGORIES: Villages in Cumbria

Grasmere is a village, and popular tourist destination, in the centre of the English Lake District. It takes its name from the adjacent lake, and is associated with the Lake Poets. The poet William Wordsworth, who lived in Grasmere for fourteen years, described it as "the loveliest spot that man hath ever found".A Farewell. Retrieved 02 December 2013
Before 1974, Grasmere lay within the former county of Westmorland, but today it is part of the county of Cumbria.

Etymology

" 'The lake flanked by grass'; 'gres', 'mere'. Early spellings in 'Grys-', 'Gris(s)-' might suggest ON 'griss' 'young pig' as 1st el...."Whaley, 2006, p.411,
(OE is Old English, the language spoken until about AD 1100; ON is Old Norse.)

Geography

The village is on the river Rothay which flows into Grasmere lake which lies about 0.5 km to the south. The village is overlooked from the NW by the rocky hill of Helm Crag, popularly known as The Lion and the Lamb or the Old Lady at the Piano. These names are derived from the shape of rock formations on its summit, depending on which side you view it from.Retrieved on 2008-02-07
A number of popular walks begin near the centre of the village, including the ascent of Helm Crag and a longer route up to Fairfield. The village is also on the route of Alfred Wainwright's Coast to Coast Walk.wainwright.uk/coast_to_coast/index.html thumb|right|Grasmere Village
The A591 connects Grasmere to the Vale of Keswick over Dunmail Raise to the north, and Ambleside to the south. In other directions, Grasmere is surrounded by high ground. To the west, a long ridge comes down from High Raise and contains the lesser heights of Blea Rigg and Silver How. To the east, Grasmere is bordered by the western ridge of the Fairfield horseshoe.

Transport

Grasmere is served by the Stagecoach 555 service which connects it with other towns in the Lake District such as Keswick and Lancaster.stagecoachbus.aspx?serviceid=992&locationId=93&from=&to=&locval=210 During summer months it is served by an open top double-decker 599 service, operated by Stagecoach, which runs between it and Bowness-on-Windermere

Communal events

Rushbearing

Grasmere's famous Rushbearing Ceremony, centred on St Oswald's Church, has ancient origins. The present day ceremony is an annual event which features a procession through the village with bearings made from rushes and flowers. In this procession there are also six Maids of Honour, a brass band, the church choir, and anyone who wishes to join in by carrying their own decorated rushbearing.thumb|St Oswald's Church, decorated for the Rushbearing Day

Grasmere Sports

The annual Grasmere Sports take place in August and were first held in 1852. This is the main event in the village's calendar and one of the most popular traditional events in the Lake District. Participants compete in a variety of sports, including Cumberland Wrestling, fell running and hound trails (similar to drag hunting).Retrieved on 2008-02-03 thumb|right|Dove Cottage

Grasmere gingerbread

Today's Grasmere Gingerbread is made to a "secret recipe" popularized by Sarah Nelson (1815-1904). Poet Dorothy Wordsworth wrote in 1803 that she and her brother William yearned for the gingerbread.

Religious

Until September 2013 Grasmere's three main church parishes (Catholic, Church of England and Methodist) gathered three times a year to celebrate mass in the Catholic Church of Our Lady of the Wayside (which has now closed due to the parish priest retiring and not enough residents to be worthy of its own - the few catholic residents of Grasmere are now served by the church in Ambleside).

Government

The former civil parish was for a time governed by an urban district council before becoming part of the Lakes UDC in 1934. The village is now part of Lakes Parish. Grasmere is currently represented by Liberal Democrat politicians on both the district council and county council, as well as at Westminster.southlakeland.uk/default.cumbria.uk/councillordata/db/details.timfarron.co.Retrieved on 2008-02-07

Notable persons






