[[Bravo (Canada)]]

CATEGORIES: Bravo (Canada), Bell Media, Television channels and stations established in 1995, English-language television stations in Canada

Bravo (styled bravo) is a Canadian English language Category A specialty channel owned by Bell Media. Bravo is an entertainment channel with a particular focus on television dramas, films, and art-related programming.
The channel was founded as a Canadian version of the U.S. channel Bravo (which is now owned by NBCUniversal). However, the channels have since diverged from a focus on the arts; Bravo in the U.S. was re-launched with an emphasis on fashion and pop culture in 2003, while Bravo in Canada began to add more dramatic series to its lineup beginning in 2006. Aside from still airing programming such as Inside the Actors Studio, a 2012 re-branding effectively separated the Canadian Bravo from its American counterpart.

History

In the 1980s, a precursor to Bravo existed called C Channel. It was a national commercial-free pay television channel that focused on arts programming. C Channel launched on February 1, 1983 before it went bankrupt and ceased operations on June 30, 1983 due to its inability to attract a sufficient number of subscribers at a price of $16 per month.
Over 10 years later, another attempt at an arts-based channel was proposed when CHUM Limited applied to the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) for Bravo. In June 1994, CHUM's application for Bravo was approved, citing its nature of service as focusing on "performance and drama programming, as well as documentary and discussion."CRTC Decision 1994-281
Bravo was launched on January 1, 1995 with the tagline, "NewStyleArtsChannel". It focused on arts programming, including music, ballet, literature, television and film drama, visual arts, modern dance, opera and architecture. As a condition of licence, Bravo was to contribute a predetermined amount or percentage of its revenues to ArtsFACT (now called Bravo!FACT), a fund established to provide grants for the production of Canadian short films covering a wide range of arts-related disciplines. Films funded by Bravo!FACT have regularly aired on the channel.
In July 2006, Bell Globemedia (later called CTVglobemedia) announced that it would purchase CHUM for an estimated $1.7 billion CAD, included in the sale was BravoBell Globemedia acquires CHUM; Fasken Martineau; 2006-07-12 The sale was subject to CRTC approval and was approved in June 2007,Broadcasting Decision CRTC 2007-165; CRTC; 2007-06-08 with the transaction completed on June 22, 2007.
After CTVglobemedia's purchase of Bravo, the channel increasingly shifted its focus toward more television and film dramas such as Criminal Minds, and lessening its focus on arts programming.
On September 10, 2010, BCE (a minority shareholder in CTVglobemedia) announced that it planned to acquire 100% interest in CTVglobemedia for a total debt and equity transaction cost of $3.2 billion CAD. The deal which required CRTC approval, was approved on March 7, 2011CRTC approves BCE's purchase of CTVglobemedia and closed on April 1 of that year, on which CTVglobemedia was rebranded Bell Media.Bell completes acquisition of CTV, launches Bell Media business unit CNW 2011-04-01
While under Bell Media ownership, the shift toward television and film dramas and general entertainment was extended and is the point at which the channel exists today. This was further emphasized when on May 14, 2012, Bravo unveiled a new on-air look consisting of a new logo and new on-air presentation. The new logo dropped the original "square" logo that Bravo had maintained since its launch, in favour of a design no longer resembling any logo of its American counterpart.
On June 6, 2013, Bell announced that Bravo would be its first network to implement a TV Everywhere service, which would allow subscribers to Bravo on participating television service providers to stream video on demand content and the Bravo channel live via the Bravo Go app.

Logos

Original programs

Between programs, Bravo often airs short films by Canadian artists, funded by its foundation Bravo!FACT, which may range from comedy to drama to opera to jazz to animation. Many of these also air on Bravo's weekly series Bravo!Fact Presents.
Bravo has also produced a number of notable specials, including a telecast of Canadian rock band Spirit of the West's Open Heart Symphony concert with the Vancouver Symphony Orchestra, and three early television films within the Murdoch Mysteries franchise, Except the Dying, Poor Tom Is Cold and Under the Dragon's Tail.

Bravo HD

On October 6, 2011, a high definition simulcast of Bravo's standard definition feed was launched. It is available on Bell TV, Bell Fibe TV, Shaw Cable, Rogers Cable, Vidéotron and Telus Optik TV.






