[[Hayedeh]]

CATEGORIES: 1942 births, 1990 deaths, Burials at Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery, Deaths from myocardial infarction, Iranian classical vocalists, Iranian female singers, Iranian musicians, Iranian pop singers, Operatic contraltos, Singers from Tehran, Persian-language singers, Iranian contraltos

Hayedeh or Haydeh () (April 10, 1942 – January 20, 1990) was a Persian classical and pop singer. She was one of the few Persian female vocalists with a contralto voice.

Early life and career

Hayedeh was born in .com/en/component/content/article/1/57-hayedeh-at-a-glance.html/
She studied Avaz (Persian vocal music) with Persian violinist and composer Ali Tajvidi. Her professional career began in 1967 at the age of twentyfive as a singer on a Persian traditional music Tehran Radio program called "Golhaa-yeh Rangarang" (Colorful Flowers) (Persian: گلهای رنگارنگ) directed by Davoud Pirnia.
Hayedeh performed her first hit song "Azadeh" which was composed by Tajvidi on the lyrics of Rahi Mo'ayeri, with Golha Orchestra.payvand.html
[/ref] The song was later released by Ahang-e Rooz Records in 1968 in Tehran.
In the 1970s Hayedah added Persian pop music to her classical Persian repertoire. In this period  Hayedeh worked with several songwriters, such as Fereydoun Khoshnoud, Jahanbakhsh Pazouki, Anoushiravan Rohani and Mohammad Heydari. "Bezan Tar", "Gol-e Sang", "Nowrouz Aamad", "Eide Tou" and "Soghati" were among her works during this period.com/en/component/content/article/1/57-hayedeh-at-a-glance.html
Hayedeh is the older sister of Persian singer Mahasti, who had started her career also but died in 2007 from cancer.

After the revolution and exile

On August 29, 1978 shortly before the 1979 Islamic Revolution, Hayedeh emigrated to the United Kingdom. She stayed there for three years and moved to the USA in 1982 to continue her career and live close to her sister Mahasti.
Hayedeh lived in Los Angeles from 1982 until the end of her life. The growth of the Persian community in Southern California due to the increasing number of people leaving Iran after the revolution bolstered Hayedeh's career in the 1980s. Heyedeh released many albums during this time and many songs of hers were bootlegged in Iran. Hayedeh's political and nostalgic songs such as "Rouza-ye Roshan Khodahafez" and Faryad became very popular with the Persian (Iranian) exile community. Some of her other hits were "Shabeh Eshgh" (Night of Love), "Ravi" (Story Teller), "Ye Eshareh" (One Sign), "Ghesseyeh Man" (My Story), "Zendegi" (Life) and "Narges-e Shiraz" (Narcissus of Shiraz).
Hayedeh's songwriters in the USA were mostly Farid Zoland, Sadegh Nojouki, Mohammad Heydari and Andranik. Lyricists she worked with were Ardalan Sarfaraz, Homa Mir-Afshar, Iraj Razmjou but the lyricist who wrote most of Hayedeh's songs and hits was her best friend Leila Kasra (a.k.a. Hadieh). She was featured in two of her albums reading her songs. Kasra died in 1989 a few months prior to Hayedeh's death, after a long struggle with breast cancer.
During the 1980s Hayedeh played in sold-out venues in the United States, Canada, Europe, and other places in the world such as Royal Albert Hall in London.
Hayedeh also regularly appeared on the Los Angeles-based Persian TV channels such as Jaam-E-Jam TV, IR TV and Jonbesh TV. In some of her TV programs Hayedeh criticized Iran's fundamental regime and was a supporter of the Persian monarchy of Mohammad Reza Shah.

Documentary

The first film about Hayedeh was produced and directed by Persian pianist and journalist Pejman Akbarzadeh in 2009. The 100-minute documentary about Hayedeh was first shown in Amsterdam in January 2009.payvand.html
The documentary had its US premier in May 2009 at Noor Iranian Film Festival in Los Angeles and nominated as the "best documentary" at the Festival.com/home/en/synopsis.[ref]
[/ref] In September 2009 the semi-official Fars News Agency in Tehran criticized Pejman Akbarzadeh for making a film about the "corrupt monarchist singer, Hayedeh".
Hayedeh documentary was released on 20 January 2010, the 20th anniversary of her death. The DVD was released by Persian Dutch Network in Amsterdam. The short version of the film was played on the Voice of America radio station.

Personal life

Hayedeh married and divorced three times and had three children named Kamran, Keyvan and Noushin Nouri, all of whom live in the US. Her eldest grandson "Soheil", who is the first-born son of Keyvan Nouri,  was pursuing a career as a freelance composer in Los Angeles.

Death

Hayedeh was recording an album shortly before her death, and was due to finish recording it after she returned from her concert in San Francisco. Hayedeh was last interviewed a week before her death by Javanan Magazine; Hayedeh said that she was tired of rumors about her and that she was going to continue her work and expand it even more. The interview was released a day after her death.
On the afternoon of Saturday January 20, 1990, the day after her concert at the Casablanca Club in San Francisco, California, Hayedeh died from a heart attack at the age of 47. Hayedeh had complained of discomfort since the morning but her doctor in Los Angeles had assured her that it was nothing serious. Hayedeh had a history of heart problems, diabetes and hypertension. Her father was also a diabetic, and died from a heart attack. Her two older brothers also died of heart attacks. After being exiled from Iran she suffered from depression for the rest of her life.
On January 24, 1990, Hayedeh was buried at the Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery in Los Angeles, California. Her funeral was attended by thousands and most of the Persian singers and entertainers in exile.

Legacy

Hayedeh's songs are played on Persian TV and radio channels outside Iran. Houshmand Aghili performed Hayedeh's "Sarab," Parviz Rahman Panah remixed her "Saal", Shahla Sarshar performed a tragic song called "In Memory of Hayedeh," singer Amir did a cover of Hayedeh's song "Soghati" in 2008 and Mahasti performed three songs in memory of her late sister. In 2010 Rastin did a cover on her song "Saghi".
According to Prof. Erik Nakhjavani in Encyclopædia Iranica: "Analogues to Delkash, before her, Hayedeh sang with technical authority and passionate energy. Her laryngeal control made it possible for her to produce a series of graceful vibrato and glissando vocalizations required by the Avaz Persian vocal music. She could smoothly pass from the upper reaches of her alto voice to the lower, fuller, and darker range of the contralto. This mixture of strong laryngeal strength and learned vocal technique gave her alto-contralto voice a rare, powerful resonance and texture in the performance of the Avaz. Furthermore an acute sense for musical timing, the rhythmic flow of vocal music, affective musical phrasing, and poetic delivery enabled her to express and interpret effectively any songs she sang."
As of 2007 Hayedeh's albums were sold on iTunes.

Partial discography








