[[Pergolide]]

CATEGORIES: Dopamine agonists, Equine medications, Ergolines, Thioethers, Withdrawn drugs

Pergolide (trade name Permax) is an ergoline-based dopamine receptor agonist used in some countries for the treatment of Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease is associated with low levels of the neurotransmitter dopamine in the brain. Pergolide has some of the same effects as dopamine in the body.
In 2007, pergolide was withdrawn from the U.S. market for human use, after several published studies revealed a link between the drug and increased rates of valvular heart disease.FDA Public Health Advisory: Pergolide (marketed as Permax) 
However, a veterinary form of pergolide (trade name Prascend) is permitted for the treatment of equine Cushing's syndrome (ECS) in horses.wedgewoodpetrx.html

Indications

Pergolide is not available for use by humans in the United States, however it is still used in various other countries, where it is used to treat various conditions including Parkinson's disease, hyperprolactinemia, and restless leg syndrome.
Furthermore, pergolide may also be used for veterinary purposes. Under the trade name Prascend, manufactured by Boehringer Ingelheim,

Pharmacology

Pergolide functions as an agonist at the dopamine D2, D1 and serotonin 5-HT1A, 5-HT1B, 5-HT2A, 5-HT2B, and 5-HT2C receptors. It may possess agonist activity at other dopamine receptor subtypes as well, similar to cabergoline. The weak agonist activity of pergolide at D1 receptors somewhat alters its clinical and side effect profile in the treatment of Parkinson's disease.

Side effects

The drug is in decreasing use, as it was reported in 2003 to be associated with a form of heart disease called cardiac fibrosis.
Pergolide has also been shown to impair associative learning.

Claimed side effects

At least one British pergolide user has attracted some media attention with claims that it has caused him to develop a gambling addiction."Drug 'caused' gambling addiction" BBC TV 24 Jan. 2008"Parkinson's Gambler" ITV. 2008 In June 2010, it was reported that more than 100 Australian users of the drug are suing the manufacturer over both gambling and sex addiction"Parkinson's treatment linked to sex, gambling" 'The Age' 4 June 2010 problems they claim are the result of the drug's side effects.




