[[Nights into Dreams…]]

CATEGORIES: 1996 video games, Action video games, Dreams in fiction, Fantasy video games, Nights (series), Platform games, PlayStation 2 games, PlayStation 3 games, PlayStation Network games, Sega Saturn games, Sonic Team games, Tiger handheld games, Video games featuring female protagonists, Video games with 2.5D graphics, Windows games, Xbox 360 Live Arcade games, Yuji Naka games

 achieved through 3D graphics and a combination of both 2D and 3D gameplay.
The game was re-released for the Sony PlayStation 2 on February 21, 2008 exclusively in Japan. A high-definition version was released worldwide for PlayStation Network and Xbox Live Arcade in October 2012, with a Microsoft Windows version later released via Steam on December 17, 2012. A direct sequel, Nights: Journey of Dreams, was released for the Wii in 2007.

Story

Every night, all human dreams are played out in Nightopia and Nightmare, the two parts of the dream world. In Nightopia, distinct aspects of dreamers' personalities are represented by luminous colored spheres known as "Ideya". However, the evil ruler of Nightmare, Wizeman the Wicked, is stealing this dream energy from sleeping visitors to gather power to take control of Nightopia and eventually the real world. To achieve this, he creates numerous beings called "Nightmaren", including two "Level One" Nightmaren, acrobatic jester-like, flight-capable beings called Nights and Reala. However, Nights rebels against Wizeman's plans, and is punished by being imprisoned inside an Ideya palace, a gazebo-like container for dreamers' Ideya.
One day, Elliot Edwards and Claris Sinclair, two children from the city of Twin Seeds, go through failures. Elliot likes to play basketball, but is challenged by kids from another grade and loses. Claris wants to sing in a play but is overcome by stage-fright in front of the judges. That night, they both suffer nightmares that replay the events. They escape into Nightopia and find that they both possess the rare Red Ideya of Courage, the only type Wizeman cannot steal. They release Nights, who tells them about dreams, and Wizeman and his plans, and the three begin a journey to stop Wizeman and restore peace to Nightopia.

Characters

Gameplay

Nights into Dreams... is split into seven levels, referred to as "Dreams". The levels are distributed equally between the two child characters; three are unique to Claris, three to Elliot, and each play through an identical final seventh level, "Twin Seeds". Initially, only Claris' Spring Valley and Elliot's Splash Garden are available, and successful completion of one of these unlocks the next level in that child's path. Previously completed stages may be revisited to improve the player's high scores; a "C" grade in all the selected child's levels must be achieved to unlock the relevant Twin Seeds stage for that character.
Each level is split up into four "Mares" set in Nightopia and a boss fight which takes place in Nightmare. In each level, players initially control Claris or Elliot, who immediately have their Ideyas of hope, growth, intelligence and purity stolen from them by Wizeman's minions, leaving behind only their Ideya of courage. The goal of each Mare is to recover one of the stolen Ideya by collecting 20 blue chips and delivering them to the cage holding the Ideya, which will overload and release the orb it holds. It is possible to complete some of the levels' goals by wandering around the landscape of Nightopia as Claris or Elliot (pursued by an egg-shaped alarm clock which will wake up the child and end the level if it catches the player), but the majority of the gameplay centers on Nights' flying sequences, triggered by walking into the Ideya Palace near the start of each level so that the child merges with the imprisoned Nights.
In the flying sections, the player controls Nights' flight along a particular predetermined route through each Mare. Players can only fly in the 2D plane of the screen, with their actual motion through the level determined by the automatic camera angle at that point in the Mare. The player has only a limited period available before Nights falls to the ground and turns back into Claris or Elliot, and each collision with an enemy subtracts five seconds from the time remaining. After retrieving the Ideya in a Mare, the player can either return to the Ideya Palace to progress to the next Mare, or continue flying more laps of the Mare (with replenished items).
Whilst flying, Nights can use a boost to travel faster, as well as defeat certain enemies littered across the field. Grabbing onto certain enemies will cause Nights to spin around, launching Nights and the enemy in the direction the boost is pressed. Various acrobatic maneuvers can be performed, including the "Paraloop", whereby flying around in a complete circle and connecting the trail of stars left in Nights' wake will cause any items within the loop to be attracted towards Nights. The game features a combo system known as "Linking", whereby actions such as collecting items and flying through rings are worth more points when performed in quick succession than they are individually. Flying through certain special rings activates a short period of time in which extra points can be earned through the performance of various aerobatic stunts.
At the end of each Mare, players are given a rank (between A and F) based on their score, and after all four Mares are cleared an overall rank for the level is displayed. Nights is then transported to Nightmare for a boss fight against one of Wizeman's Nightmarens. Each boss fight has a time limit, and the game will end if the player runs out of time during the battle. Upon winning the boss fight, the player is awarded a score multiplier based on how quickly the boss was defeated, which is then applied to the score earned in the Nightopia section in order to produce the player's final score for that Dream.

A-Life

Aside from the immediate game mission, the game also contains an artificial life ("A-Life") system, a precursor to the Chao featured in Sonic Team's later Sonic Adventure titles. The system involves entities called Nightopians. The game keeps track of the moods of the Nightopians (harming them will displease them, for example), and the game features an evolving music engine, allowing tempo, pitch, and melody to alter depending on the state of Nightopians within the level. It is also possible to merge Nightopians with the small Nightmaren enemies, creating a hybrid being called a Mepian. It is even possible through extensive controlled breeding to produce a "King" Pian, or Superpian. An expanded version of the A-life system was included in Nights: Journey of Dreams.

3D controller

Nights into Dreams was introduced alongside an optional game controller, included with most copies of the game, called the Saturn 3D controller. This gamepad featured an analog stick  (launching just after the release of the Nintendo 64 in Japan, which featured an analog stick on its standard controller). The stick, D-pad, and shoulder triggers were located in an arrangement similar to that of Sega's later Dreamcast controller.

Music

The game's music has proven to be quite popular and has been remixed several times, both professionally and by fans. It also makes an appearance in Sega's Phantasy Star Online games, as bonus music for completing a quest themed after the original Nights game. The music from the levels was generated in-game using the Saturn version of Invision's Cybersound, which was also used in other games such as Panzer Dragoon II Zwei and Panzer Dragoon Saga.
Several versions of the Nights theme song "Dreams Dreams" appear throughout the games in the series. The song is a duet between a man and a woman, which features a call and answer chorus. The vocal versions of the song featured in this game are the adults' version, sung by Curtis King, Jr., & Dana Calitri; and the children's version, sung by Cameron Earl Strother and Jasmine Ann Allen, which segues into the adults' version after the bridge. Christmas Nights features an a cappella version sung by Marlon Saunders, Gabriel Morris and Issa Clemon.

Ports

Remake

Sega released a remake of Nights into Dreams... for the Sony PlayStation 2 in Japan on February 21, 2008. It includes 16:9 wide screen support, both a classic Sega Saturn graphics mode and a Sony PS2 remake mode, an illustration gallery and a movie viewer mode. The game is available for a budget price, or the Nightopia Dream Pack, which includes a reprint of a picture book that was released in Japan alongside the original Saturn game. The Christmas Nights levels are included as an unlockable bonus, playable after the main game is completed.
The Sony PlayStation 2 version of the game was released only in Japan, much to the dismay of many fans of the original in other countries.

HD version

A high definition port of the PS2 version was released for PlayStation Network on October 2, 2012 and for Xbox Live Arcade on October 5, 2012,.

Reception

At the time of its release, Nights into Dreams was the top-selling game for the Sega Saturn, and was the 21st highest selling game in Japan for the year 1996.
Nights has appeared in several "greatest games" lists. In a January 2000 poll of readers of Computer and Video Games magazine, it appeared in 15th place in a list of the "100 greatest games" (directly behind Super Mario 64).
Eurogamer gave the HD re-release a 9/10, opining that "perhaps Nights is Sonic Team's masterpiece," while acknowledging that the game "is still destined to be misunderstood by many" due to its "utterly unique" design.

Related games

Christmas Nights

Christmas Nights is a Christmas-themed two-level game of Nights into Dreams that was released in December 1996. In Japan, it was part of a Christmas Sega Saturn bundle. Elsewhere it was given away with the purchase of select Sega Saturn games such as Daytona USA Championship Circuit Edition, and was bundled in with issues of Sega Saturn Magazine, Game Players and Next Generation Magazine. The CD-ROMs given away on the front cover of Sega Saturn Magazine were missing the card slip case in which to keep the disc, and were instead supplied with a transparent plastic one. The game was also available for rent at Blockbuster Video locations in America. In the UK, Christmas Nights was not included with the official Sega Saturn Magazine until December 1997.
The Christmas Nights disc contains the full version of Claris' Spring Valley dream level from Nights into Dreams, which allows both Claris and Elliot to play through the area, something Elliot could not do previously as it was not his dream. Elliot's version of the level contains a different item layout than Claris'.
The story of Christmas Nights follows Elliot and Claris during the holiday season following their adventures with Nights. Though they both enjoy the Christmas season, they feel as if something is missing. Finding that the Christmas Star that usually sits at the top of the Twin Seeds Christmas tree is missing, the pair head off to Nightopia to find it. There, they meet up with Nights again and re-explore Spring Valley, which has now been Christmas-ified due to the kids' dreams of the holiday season. The trio of heroes must now take down a revived Gillwing and retrieve the Christmas Star from his lair.
The game uses the Saturn's internal clock to change elements of the game according to the date and time. In November and January, the title screen label "Nights: Limited Edition" is changed to "Winter Nights", with the lush greenery of the environment being replaced by white snow. During December, "Christmas Nights" mode is activated, resulting in further Christmas-themed alterations, such as item boxes becoming Christmas presents, Nightopians dressing in elf costumes, and Christmas trees replacing Ideya captures. The background music is replaced by an instrumental version of "Jingle Bells", as well as there being a "Christmas-like" rendition of the boss theme. During the "Winter Nights" period, the weather in Spring Valley will change according to what hour it is. Other cosmetic changes are visible on New Year's Day and Halloween, and loading the game on April Fool's Day results in Reala replacing Nights as the playable character.
The disc features a number of unlockable bonuses such as character artwork. Further extra modes allow players to observe the status of the A-life system, experiment with the game's music mixer, time attack one Mare, or play the demo stage as Sega's mascot Sonic the Hedgehog. In the "Sonic the Hedgehog: Into Dreams" minigame, Sonic is only able to traverse the Spring Valley stage on foot, and the original game's Puffy boss is re-skinned as a "bouncy ball" version of Doctor Robotnik. The music is a slightly remixed version of "Final Fever", the final boss battle music from the Japanese and European version of Sonic CD. The Christmas Nights content is playable in the HD version after the game has been cleared once.

Sequel

Demand for a sequel to Nights into Dreams... has been strong for many years. A game with the working title "Air Nights" was intended to use a tilt sensor in the Saturn analog pad, and development later moved to the Dreamcast for a time, but eventually the project was discontinued. "Sonic Team Player", Official Dreamcast Magazine UK issue 14 (December 2000), pp. 35. Aside from a handheld electronic game released by Tiger Electronics (which was also ported to Tiger's R-Zone console) and small minigames featured in several Sega titles, no full Nights sequel was released for a Sega console. Yuji Naka expressed his reluctance to develop a sequel, but also noted that he was interested in using Nights as a license "to reinforce Sega's identity".Edge, November 2003
On April 1, 2007, a sequel called Nights: Journey of Dreams was officially announced for the Wii.
In 2010, Takashi Iizuka commented that he would be very interested in making a third Nights game, should Sega's management decide to develop one.

Further appearances

A Nights handheld electronic game was released by Tiger Electronics, and a port of it was later released for Tiger's short lived R-Zone console.

Comics

Archie Comics adapted Nights into Dreams... into a three-issue comic book miniseries to test whether or not a Nights comic would sell well in North America. The first mini-series was loosely based on the game. The company later released a second three-issue miniseries, continuing the story of the first, but the series didn't gain enough sales to warrant an ongoing series.






