[[St. Cloud State University]]

CATEGORIES: St. Cloud State University, North Central Association of Colleges and Schools, American Association of State Colleges and Universities, Universities and colleges in Minnesota, Buildings and structures in St. Cloud, Minnesota, Educational institutions established in 1869, Education in Stearns County, Minnesota, Visitor attractions in Stearns County, Minnesota

St. Cloud State University is a four-year public university founded in 1869 on the banks of the Mississippi River in St. Cloud, Minnesota, United States. The university is the largest school in the Minnesota State Colleges and Universities (MnSCU) system, which is the largest single provider of higher education in Minnesota. and nearly 110,000 alumni worldwide.

Academics

The university was created as a Normal school, then developed college-level programs for teachers. Today it offers more than 200 majors, minors and pre-professional programs in six colleges and schools.
Among the undergraduate programs of note are accounting, and meteorology.
The School of Graduate Studies offers more than 60 graduate programs and certificates leading to specialist, Master of Arts, Master of Business Administration, Master of Engineering Management, Master of Music, Master of Science degrees and an Ed.D. in Higher Education Administration.
St. Cloud State has 32 education-abroad programs, including a year-around program at Alnwick Castle in northern England.

Reputation and rankings

Colleges and schools

St. Cloud State offers more than 200 undergraduate and more than 60 graduate programs of study through two colleges and six schools.

Student life

At the start of each academic year students are invited to "Mainstreet," a showcase for student organizations, campus services and community connections.
Nearly 20 percent of St. Cloud State students live in one of the eight residence halls or in University-managed apartments.
Traditional residence halls:

Apartment-style residence halls:
St. Cloud State has a long-term plan to revitalize its student housing. A wing of Shoemaker Hall was renovated in 2011. A $12 million renovation of Case and Hill halls was completed in 2012.

Student organizations

St. Cloud State encourages students to participate in one or more of the 250 student organizations.

Greek life

Students can also join one of the eight houses that represent the Greek population at St. Cloud State.

Student media

KVSC 88.1 FM is an educational public radio station licensed to St. Cloud State. The station started on May 10, 1967 and expanded broadcasting times in September 1994.
The student newspaper, University Chronicle, has been published since 1921.
UTVS Television is a student-run television station, which airs live newscasts and other programming. The station is broadcast on Charter Communications' cable channel 21 in the greater St. Cloud area. Broadcasts of sporting events, including men's hockey, are also aired on other cable franchises.
Among the awards earned in 2013 were UTVS' five awards at the Broadcast Education Association's Festival of Media Arts, including a Best of Festival award for a Husky Productions broadcast of a men's hockey game.

Minnesota State University Student Association

Each student attending St. Cloud State University pays a .43 cent per credit fee to fund the Minnesota State University Student Association, a student-led non-profit that advocates on behalf of all Minnesota state university students.

Athletics

The team name is the Huskies, represented by Blizzard, the mascot. The university has 19 Division II teams and is a member of the Northern Sun Intercollegiate Conference. Men's and women's ice hockey teams compete in Division I. Men's Husky Hockey is in the NCHC. Women's Husky Hockey is in the WCHA.
The flagship intercollegiate sport is hockey. Men's Husky Hockey has made nine NCAA Men's Ice Hockey Championship appearances, notably advancing to the 2013 Frozen Four in Pittsburgh, Penn.
Hockey at St. Cloud State has a storied history, with powerhouse teams of national repute emerging in the 1930s. Among these teams was the 1933-34 squad that featured goaltender Frank Brimsek, a two-time winner of the NHL's Stanley Cup and a 1966 inductee into the Hockey Hall of Fame in Toronto, Canada.
In the 1986–87 season, Herb Brooks, the 1980 USA men's Olympic hockey coach, became the coach of the Huskies and helped men's hockey attain Division I status. That season he led the Huskies to a 25-10-1 record and a third-place trophy at the NCAA Division III Men's Ice Hockey Championship.
In 1998, the university added a women's hockey team at the Division I level. In 2001, the men's team won the WCHA post-season tournament, symbolized by the Broadmoor Trophy.
Men's Husky Basketball advanced to the 2010 NCAA Men's Division II Basketball Tournament in Springfield, Mass., losing 76-70 to Indiana University of Pennsylvania in a national semifinal game. The Huskies finished 29-6 that season behind the rebounding of center Matt Schneck and the shooting of guard Taylor Witt.
Husky Wrestling is one of the nation's leading Division II programs, placing second in the NCAA Wrestling Championships in 2011, 2012 and 2013.

Notable events

Simon Award

St. Cloud State was recognized with the 2013 Simon Award for its excellence in integrating international education across all aspects of the university. The Simon Award for Comprehensive Internationalization is named for the late Senator Paul Simon (D-Ill.), who supported international education and foreign language learning. In its 11th year, the award is presented annually by NAFSA: Association of International Educators.


HEED Award

St. Cloud State was among 56 colleges and universities honored for creating diverse and inclusive environments on their campuses, according to INSIGHT Into Diversity's 2013 Higher Education Excellence in Diversity (HEED) Awards. The HEED Award, given by the oldest and largest higher education diversity-focused publication, recognizes broad-ranging efforts to support diversity at U.S. colleges and universities. These efforts include gender, race, ethnicity, veterans, people with disabilities, members of the LGBT community and more.

Harlander chosen to study atmosphere for NASA

Physics professor John Harlander was named in 2013 to NASA's Ionospheric Connection team, which will develop instruments for an Explorer satellite mission to be launched in 2017 from Goddard Space Flight Center, northeast of Washington D.C. Harlander will design, fabricate and pre-flight test an instrument that will measure winds and temperatures in the thermosphere, an upper layer of Earth's atmosphere.

Drew LeBlanc named nation's best college hockey player

Men's Husky Hockey forward Drew LeBlanc was honored as the top player in men's NCAA ice hockey, earning the 2013 Hobey Baker Award. The fifth-year senior from Hermantown, Minnesota also earned the top two awards from the WCHA—player of the year and student-athlete of the year.

Winter Institute

For more than 50 years leading economists have provided insights into national and global issues at the Winter Institute. Past presenters include the late Nobel Prize laureate Milton Friedman; Ben Bernanke, chairman of the Federal Reserve System; Claremont College neuroeconomist Paul J. Zak; Richard Morgenstern,a senior fellow at Resources for the Future; James B. Bullard, president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis; and Nicholas Lardy, a fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics.

St. Cloud Area Quarterly Business Report

Since 1999, economics professors King Banaian and Rich MacDonald have produced the St. Cloud Area Quarterly Business Report. They research, collect and analyze data, information and opinions from local business leaders and regional financial experts, and then publish it online and in the St. Cloud Times.

ISELF building opened

Known formally as the Integrated Science and Engineering Laboratory Facility, ISELF will serve mostly upper-level and graduate-level science, technology, engineering, mathematics, medical technology and radiology classes. The building, which broke ground in October 2011, went into service fall 2013. ISELF is the final project of St. Cloud State's three-part Science Initiative. The $14.5 million addition to the Wick Science Building was completed in January 2009. The $15 million renovation of Brown Hall was finished in December 2009. University officials say ISELF's function, collaboration, flexibility, scale and sustainability will transform how faculty work and students learn.


Twin Cities Graduate Center opened

In 2009, St. Cloud State added a presence in the Minneapolis/St. Paul metropolitan area with a graduate center in Maple Grove, MN. The Twin Cities Graduate Center uses the cohort instructional model of learning, in which small groups of students proceed through the program together. Classes from programs such as business administration, higher education administration, counseling and regulatory affairs and services are offered.

Lawrence Hall renovated

Built in 1905, Lawrence Hall housed students and academic offices for generations before being closed in 1999. It was restored in 2002-03 with funding from the 2000 Legislature. Today, the four-level building houses international students, the Center for International Studies and the Department of Languages and Cultures.

History

St. Cloud State opened its doors to students in 1869, under the name Third State Normal School. The school consisted of one building, the Stearns House, a renovated hotel purchased by the state Legislature for $3,000. Classrooms were on the first floor, the model school was on second floor and a women's dormitory was housed on the third floor. The five-member faculty was headed by Principal Ira Moore. Of the 53 original students, 43 were women. In 1898, the school began offering a junior college curriculum.
In 1914, the school dropped its secondary education program entirely. The legislature authorized a name change in 1921, allowing the school to adopt the name St. Cloud State Teachers College (the word "teachers" was deleted in 1957). The first bachelor's degrees were awarded in 1925, with master's degree programs offered beginning in 1953. 
File: St.jpg
File:St. Cloud State University (seal, 1975-2001).jpg

In 1975, St. Cloud State became a university, comprising five colleges and a graduate school. The G.R. Herberger Business School is recognized as one of the top business colleges in the country and is one of only four in the state that is nationally accredited. Within the past decade, the College of Science and Engineering established and gained full accreditation for its Computer Engineering program. It is the only university in Minnesota that offers an ABET accredited Manufacturing Engineering Program. It also offers ABET accredited Electrical and Mechanical Engineering programs, along with Computer Science. St. Cloud State's Master of Engineering Management is the only program in Minnesota certified by the American Society of Engineering Management (ASEM).
In 1987, men's hockey became an NCAA Division I program. Two years later the team moved into a new two-rink arena called the National Hockey Center. The building, now called the Herb Brooks National Hockey Center, is undergoing a $14.7 million expansion and renovation.
In 2010, the university teamed with the private sector to build a welcome center and student housing complex at Coborn Plaza, adjacent to campus. The university leases the Welcome Center and Coborn Plaza Apartments.

Previous school names

Notable alumni

|accessdate=2019-03-10}}[/ref]

Notable faculty and staff

Presidents








