[[Cristiano Ronaldo]]

CATEGORIES: 1985 births, Living people, People from Funchal, Portuguese footballers, Madeiran footballers, Association football wingers, Primeira Liga players, Sporting Clube de Portugal footballers, Premier League players, Manchester United F.C. players, La Liga footballers, Real Madrid C.F. players, Portugal youth international footballers, Portugal under-21 international footballers, Portugal international footballers, Portuguese Roman Catholics, UEFA Euro 2004 players, UEFA Euro 2008 players, UEFA Euro 2012 players, 2006 FIFA World Cup players, 2010 FIFA World Cup players, Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics, Olympic footballers of Portugal, Golden Globes (Portugal) winners, Grand Officers of the Order of Prince Henry, First Division/Premier League topscorers, Pichichi Trophy winners, European Footballer of the Year winners, FIFA World Player of the Year winners, World Soccer Magazine World Player of the Year winners, FIFA Century Club, Portuguese expatriate footballers, Expatriate footballers in England, Expatriate footballers in Spain, Portuguese male models, Portuguese people of Cape Verdean descent, Portuguese expatriates in England, Portuguese expatriates in Spain, TIME 100 Most Influential People in the World, TIME 100 (2014)



Cristiano Ronaldo dos Santos Aveiro,
Ronaldo began his career as a youth player for Andorinha, where he played for two years, before moving to C.D. Nacional. In 1997, he made a move to Portuguese giants Sporting Clube de Portugal. Ronaldo caught the attention of Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson, who signed him for £12.24 million (€15 million) in 2003. In 2004, Ronaldo won his first club honour, the FA Cup.
Ronaldo was the first player playing in England to win all four main PFA and FWA awards, doing so in 2007. In 2008 and 2013, Ronaldo won the FIFA/Ballon d'Or award for the best footballer on the planet, being the first ever Portuguese to win the award twice. In 2007 and 2008, Ronaldo was named FWA Footballer of the Year. Ronaldo was the inaugural winner of the FIFA Puskás Award for the Goal of the Year in 2009.
Ronaldo is the first top European league player to reach 40 goals in a single season in two consecutive years, fastest Real Madrid player to reach one hundred league goals, and the first player ever to score against every team in a single season in La Liga. After spending his first year at Madrid wearing the number 9 shirt, he began wearing the number 7 again following the departure of long-serving striker Raúl. Ronaldo had previously worn the number 7 shirt at Manchester United.
Ronaldo is a Portuguese international and made his debut in August 2003. He has been capped over 100 times and is his country's top goalscorer of all time. With Portugal he has participated in five major tournaments; UEFA Euro 2004, the 2006 FIFA World Cup, UEFA Euro 2008, the 2010 FIFA World Cup and UEFA Euro 2012. He scored his first international goal in the opening game of Euro 2004 against Greece, in addition to helping Portugal reach the final. He took over the captaincy of the side in July 2008 and went on to captain Portugal to the semi-finals at Euro 2012 and finished the competition as the joint-top scorer.

Early life

Ronaldo was born in Santo António, a neighbourhood of Funchal, Madeira, the youngest child of Maria Dolores dos Santos Aveiro, a cook, and José Dinis Aveiro, a municipal gardener.
The family was staunchly Catholic and Ronaldo later claimed that he lived in poverty, sharing a room with his brother and sisters. At the age of 14, Ronaldo agreed with his mother to then focus entirely on football.

Club career

Early career

At the age of eight, Ronaldo played for amateur team Andorinha, where his father was the kit man. In 1995, Ronaldo signed with local club Nacional, and, after a title-winning campaign, he went on a three-day trial with Sporting CP, who subsequently signed him for an undisclosed sum.

Sporting CP

Ronaldo joined Sporting's other youth players who trained at the Academia Sporting, the club's football academy, in Alcochete. He became the only player ever to play for Sporting's under-16, under-17, under-18, B-team, and the first team, all within one season.
At the age of 15 Ronaldo was diagnosed with a racing heart, a condition that might have forced him to give up playing football. The Sporting staff were made aware of the condition and Ronaldo's mother gave her authorisation for him to go into hospital.
In November 2002, Ronaldo was invited to Arsenal's training ground, London Colney to meet manager Arsène Wenger and his coaching staff.
On April 2013, Ronaldo was honoured by Sporting as the club announced that the player had become their 100,000th member.

Manchester United

=2003–2006=

Ronaldo became Manchester United's first-ever Portuguese player when he signed for €15 million
Ronaldo made his team debut as a 60th-minute substitute in a 4–0 home victory over Bolton Wanderers. He scored his first goal for Manchester United with a free kick in a 3–0 win over Portsmouth on 1 November 2003. Ronaldo ended his first season in English football by scoring the opening goal in United's 3–0 FA Cup final victory over Millwall.
He scored United's 1000th Premier League goal on 29 October 2005 in a 4–1 loss to Middlesbrough. He scored ten goals in all competitions, and fans voted him to his first FIFPro Special Young Player of the Year award in 2005.
He was sent off in the Manchester derby at the City of Manchester Stadium on 14 January 2006 (a game which United lost 3–1) for kicking City's former United player Andrew Cole.

=2006–2009=

The 2006–2007 season proved to be the breakout year for Ronaldo, as he broke the 20 goal barrier for the first time and picked up his first league title with Manchester United. An important factor in this success was his one-to-one training by first team coach René Meulensteen. Meulensteen coached him in moves to make himself more unpredictable. He also helped him to work better with his team-mates, calling for the ball and scoring more 'ugly' goals instead of waiting for the special occasion when he could score the 'beautiful' goals for which he was already famous.Henry Winter, The Daily Telegraph, Sport, 29 Aug 2013, The secrets behind the development of Real Madrid's Cristiano Ronaldo, revealed by Rene Meulensteen
In November and December 2006, Ronaldo received consecutive Barclays Player of the Month honours, becoming only the third player in Premier League history to do so after Dennis Bergkamp in 1997 and Robbie Fowler in 1996. He scored his 50th Manchester United goal against city rivals Manchester City on 5 May 2007 as United claimed their first Premier League title in four years, and he was voted into his second consecutive FIFPro Special Young Player of the Year award at the end of the year.
Despite rumours circulating in March 2007 that Real Madrid were willing to pay an unprecedented €80 million (£54 million) for Ronaldo,
Ronaldo amassed a host of personal awards for the season. He won the PFA Players' Player of the Year and PFA Young Player of the Year awards, joining Andy Gray (in 1977) as the only players to receive this honour. In April, he completed the treble by winning the PFA Fans' Player of the Year. He also won the FWA Footballer of the Year, becoming the first player to win all four main PFA and FWA awards. Ronaldo was also one of eight Manchester United players named in the 2006–07 PFA Premier League Team of the Year.
Ronaldo's 2007–08 season began with a red card for a headbutt on Portsmouth player Richard Hughes during United's second match of the season, for which he was punished with a three-match ban.
He finished as the runner-up to Kaká for the 2007 Ballon d'Or,
Ronaldo scored his first hat-trick for Manchester United in a 6–0 win against Newcastle United at Old Trafford on 12 January 2008, bringing Manchester United up to the top of the Premier League table.
On 19 March 2008, Ronaldo captained United for the first time in his career in a home win over Bolton, scoring both goals in the 2–0 victory.

In the 2007–08 Champions League final on 21 May against league rivals Chelsea, Ronaldo scored the opening goal after 26 minutes, which was negated by a Chelsea equaliser in the 45th minute as the match ended 1–1 after extra time. His misfire in the penalty shoot-out put Chelsea in position to win the trophy, but John Terry shot wide right after slipping on the pitch surface, and Manchester United emerged victorious 6–5 on penalties. Ronaldo was named the UEFA Fans' Man of the Match, and wrapped up the campaign with a career-high 42 goals in all competitions, falling four short of Denis Law's team-record mark of 46 in the 1963–64 season. In the Champions League he was also named best forward and player of the tournament and was the competition's top goalscorer.
On 5 June 2008, Sky Sports reported that Ronaldo had expressed an interest in moving to Real Madrid if they offered him the same amount of money the team had allegedly promised him earlier in the year.
Ronaldo underwent ankle surgery at the Academic Medical Center in Amsterdam on 7 July. and scored his first goal of the season in a 3–1 League Cup third round win over Middlesbrough on 24 September.
In a 5–0 win over Stoke City on 15 November 2008, Ronaldo scored his 100th and 101st goals in all competitions for Manchester United, both from free kicks.
On 8 January 2009, Ronaldo was uninjured in a single-car accident in which he wrote off his Ferrari 599 GTB Fiorano in a tunnel along the A538 near Manchester Airport. A breathalyser test he gave to police officers at the scene was negative, and he attended training later that morning.
Ronaldo scored his first Champions League goal of the season, and first since the final against Chelsea in a 2–0 victory over Internazionale that sent United into the quarter-finals. Ronaldo participated in his second consecutive Champions League final, but made little impact in United's 2–0 loss to Barcelona. He finished with 53 appearances in all competitions, which was four higher than the previous year, but scored sixteen fewer goals (26) than his career-best total of 42 from the previous season.
On 11 June, Manchester United accepted an unconditional offer of £80 million from Real Madrid for Ronaldo after it was revealed that he again had expressed his desire to leave the club.

Real Madrid

=2009–10 season=

On 26 June 2009, Real Madrid confirmed that Ronaldo would join the club on 1 July 2009 from Manchester United for £80 million (€94 million) becoming the most expensive footballer in history,
Ronaldo made his Madrid debut on 21 July in a 1–0 win over Shamrock Rovers. His first goal came a week later with a penalty in Madrid's 4–2 win over LDU Quito.
An ankle injury suffered on 10 October, while Ronaldo was on international duty with Portugal against Hungary, kept him out until 25 November, which in turn caused him to miss both of Madrid's Champions League group stage matches against Milan.
Ronaldo was second in the 2009 FIFA World Player of the Year award and also second in the 2009 Ballon d'Or award. On 5 May 2010, Ronaldo scored his first Real Madrid hat-trick in an away game against Mallorca. Ronaldo and Gonzalo Higuaín scored 53 league goals during the course of the season and became Real's highest scoring league duo in their history.

=2010–11 season=

With the departure of Raúl during the summer of 2010, Ronaldo was handed the number 7 jersey for Real Madrid.
Ronaldo began 2011 with a very promising outlook, especially after Real Madrid acknowledged he had broken numerous goalscoring records, previously settled and held by classic players such as Alfredo Di Stéfano, Hugo Sánchez, and Manuel Alday. He then consolidated his massive performances by scoring a hat-trick and assisting Kaká to score his first league goal after his return from injury in a 4–2 victory over Villarreal on 9 January. On 3 March 2011, Ronaldo scored a hat-trick in a 7–0 trashing of Málaga, but was affected by a muscle injury at the end of the match, which forced him to spend 10 days on the sidelines.
In April, he made another massive comeback from injury, sustaining a three-game scoring streak (including two goals in Champions League quarter-finals against Tottenham Hotspur), thus arriving to the first of a historical series of four El Clásico encounters two goals short of breaking his personal record of 42 goals in all competitions in a single season, achieved at Manchester United in the 2007–08 season.
During the second league edition of El Clásico, Ronaldo scored from the penalty spot and took his tally to 41 goals, also taking his scoring streak to four games. On 20 April, Ronaldo scored the winning goal against Barcelona in the 103rd minute of the Copa del Rey final. On 15 May, after scoring two free-kick goals in a 3–1 win over Villarreal, he equalled the La Liga record with most goals in a season with 38, a record previously held by Telmo Zarra and Hugo Sánchez.
On 21 May, he scored two goals in the last league match of the season against Almería, taking his Pichichi total to 41, and La Liga total to 40, becoming the only player to score 40 goals in a La Liga season. By doing this, he won the European Golden Shoe award once again, becoming the first player to win the trophy in two different leagues. The sports newspaper Marca, which awards the Pichichi Trophy, included the goal scored on 18 September 2010 against Real Sociedad in Ronaldo's goal count, which had been officially attributed to Pepe. rating him as one of the world's best footballers.
Ronaldo ended his second season at Real Madrid by winning his first club honour with the club, the 2011 Copa del Rey, notching a total of 53 goals (not granting him the controversial goal from Pepe) in all competitions, having scored 25 goals with his right foot (excluding free kicks and penalty kicks) and nine with his left foot.

=2011–12 season=

Real Madrid's pre-season began with a 4–1 victory over MLS team Los Angeles Galaxy, Four days later Ronaldo scored a second half hat-trick in a 3–0 win against Guadalajara. Ronaldo's preseason performance was highly praised as world media kept hailing Ronaldo's extreme competitiveness and motivation, even during friendly matches. On 17 August 2011, Ronaldo scored his 100th goal with Real Madrid with a first-half equaliser against Barcelona in the second leg of the 2011 Spanish Supercup in the Camp Nou. On 27 August 2011, he opened the 2011–12 La Liga season with a hat-trick in a 6–0 win at Real Zaragoza.
In early September, Ronaldo's physical performance was subject to scrutiny by world media, after Castrol released a television film named Ronaldo: Tested to the Limit where he was tested in several fields, including mental and physical tests. On 24 September, Ronaldo scored a hat-trick (including two penalties) in Real Madrid's 6–2 win over Rayo Vallecano at the Santiago Bernabéu. This was his ninth La Liga hat-trick and tenth hat-trick for Real Madrid.
On 27 September, Ronaldo scored Real's opening goal in a 3–0 victory over Ajax at the Santiago Bernabéu in the UEFA Champions League. On 22 October, after not scoring in his previous three games, Ronaldo scored his tenth La Liga hat-trick and eleventh in total for Real Madrid in a match away to Málaga, which Real Madrid won 4–0. His twelfth Real Madrid hat-trick followed on 6 November in a 7–1 victory over Osasuna that ensured Madrid stayed top of the table heading into the international break.
On 19 November 2011, Ronaldo scored Real's second goal in a 2–3 defeat of Valencia. On 26 November 2011, Ronaldo scored two penalties in a 4–1 defeat of Atlético Madrid in the El Derbi madrileño. On 3 December 2011, Ronaldo scored Madrid's second goal in a 0–3 defeat of Sporting de Gijón in La Liga. He was one of the three finalists for the 2011 FIFA Ballon d'Or. On 13 December 2011, Ronaldo scored the second goal against SD Ponferradina in the first leg of the Copa del Rey Round 4, the match ended in a 0–2 win. On 17 December 2011, Ronaldo scored his twelfth La Liga hat-trick and thirteenth overall in a 6–2 win away to Sevilla.
Ronaldo was third in the 2010–11 UEFA Best Player in Europe Award, behind Lionel Messi and Xavi, and second in the 2011 FIFA Ballon d'Or, behind Lionel Messi and ahead of Xavi. In Real Madrid's next game in La Liga at home to Granada Ronaldo scored the fifth goal in a 5–1 win. On 22 January 2012, Ronaldo scored two penalties in a 4–1 win over Athletic Bilbao, and on 28 January scored Real Madrid's second and winning goal in a 3–1 win against Zaragoza. Ronaldo also scored two goals against Barcelona in the Copa del Rey Quarter-finals, which Real lost 4–3 on aggregrate. On 12 February 2012, Ronaldo scored a hat-trick, his thirteenth in La Liga and fourteenth for Real Madrid in a 4–2 home win over Levante. This win stretched Real Madrid's lead over second-placed Barcelona to 10 points.
On 24 March 2012, Ronaldo reached more than 100 goals in La Liga in just three seasons at Real Madrid when he scored the first of his two goals in the match against Real Sociedad, the second quickest La Liga player to reach that milestone in the league after Isidro Lángara, reaching the milestone in 92 matches and breaking the previous club record held by Puskás. As of 24 March 2012, Ronaldo had averaged 1.01 goals per game in La Liga.
On 11 April, Ronaldo scored a hat-trick against Atletico Madrid in a 1–4 win, as well as assisting the last goal. His hat-trick, one goal from a free kick, one from 30 yards on the left wing and one penalty, gave him 40 league goals in the season, making him the only player in La Liga history, or in any other major European league, to score 40 goals in two seasons, even doing so in consecutive seasons. Ronaldo officially broke his previous record of 40 goals in a La Liga season on 14 April, scoring in a 3–1 win against Sporting Gijón. On 25 April, in the second leg of the semi-finals in the 2011–12 UEFA Champions League against Bayern Munich, Ronaldo converted a penalty from a David Alaba handball and scored a second goal from a pass from Mesut Özil. Extra time ended with the tie level at 3–3, and Real Madrid were eliminated in the shootout with Ronaldo's kick being saved by Manuel Neuer.
On 13 May 2012, the last matchday, Ronaldo scored against Mallorca which made him the first player ever to score against every team in a single season in La Liga. He ended his third season at Real Madrid by winning his first league title with the club, with a record 100 points, notching a total of 46 league goals and 60 goals in all competitions, breaking the Real Madrid record he had set the previous season. At the end of the season, Ronaldo claimed that he believed that he had played better than Lionel Messi in the 2011–12 season, and he went on to win the Trofeo Alfredo Di Stefano as the La Liga player of the season.

=2012–13 season=

Ronaldo started the season by lifting the Supercopa de España with Real Madrid, scoring two goals in a 4–4 away goals aggregate win against Barcelona. The goal in the first leg made him the first Madrid player in the history of El Clásico to score for the fourth game in a row at the Camp Nou,
On 2 September 2012, Ronaldo scored his first league goal of the season in a 3–0 win over Granada, which was also his 200th career goal in league matches played in England, Spain and Portugal. He added another goal, which was his 150th goal for Real Madrid in all competitions in 149 matches played. This goal made him the 10th highest scorer for Real Madrid in all competitions. Ronaldo was substituted at the 63rd minute by team mate Higuaín, due to a minor thigh injury.
On 18 September, Ronaldo scored his first Champions League goal of the season in a 3–2 victory over Manchester City.

On 11 November, in a 2–1 away win over Levante, Ronaldo received an elbow to the eye in the second minute in the match, but scored his twelfth La Liga goal to give Madrid the lead, before being substituted at half-time.
On 6 January, following the 2012–13 winter break, Ronaldo scored a brace to lift 10-man Real Madrid to a 4–3 victory over Real Sociedad.
Ronaldo faced his former club Manchester United for the first time on 13 February in the Champions League Round of 16 and scored the equaliser in a 1–1 draw at the Santiago Bernabéu.
On 10 March, Ronaldo struck twice against Celta Vigo to send Real Madrid above city rivals Atlético into second place in La Liga.
Ronaldo picked up an a thigh muscle injury while warming up for the UEFA Champions League semi-final first leg on 24 April, where he scored an away goal in a 4–1 loss against Borussia Dortmund.
Ronaldo scored his 200th goal for Real Madrid on 8 May in a 6–2 win against Málaga. This figure made him sixth in the list of the club's all-time top scorers and the player that took fewest matches (197) to reach 200 goals.
Ronaldo ended his fourth season at Real Madrid as the Champions League top goalscorer for a second time in his career, with 12 goals. In the league, Real Madrid failed to defend their La Liga title, finishing runners up to arch-rivals Barcelona, and were eliminated in the semi-finals in the UEFA Champions League for the third consecutive year. Accounting for all competitions, Ronaldo ended the season with a total of 55 goals, having scored 30 goals with his right foot, 17 with his left foot and 8 with his head.

=2013–14 season=

Real Madrid's failure to win major silverware last season and reports of division in the dressing room had prompted speculation that Ronaldo, whose contract runs until June 2015, might be seeking a move away from the Spanish capital.
On 18 August 2013, Ronaldo made his 200th competitive appearance for Real Madrid in a 2–1 home win over Real Betis.
On 15 September 2013, after much speculation,
In his 100th game in the European competitions against Copenhagen on 2 October 2013, Ronaldo scored a brace as Real Madrid went on to a 4–0 home victory.
In a debate at Oxford Union in October 2013, when asked whether FIFA president Sepp Blatter preferred Messi or Ronaldo, Blatter paid tribute to the work ethic of the Argentine before taking a swipe at Ronaldo, claiming "one of them has more expenses for the hairdresser than the other". Real Madrid demanded – and promptly received – a full apology, and the Portuguese issued his own riposte with a mock-salute celebration after scoring a penalty against Sevilla, after Blatter had described him as a "commander" on the pitch.
In his 106 away appearances for Real Madrid on 2 November 2013, Ronaldo scored his 100th away goal as he hit a brace in a 3–2 away victory against Rayo Vallecano, averaging 0.94 per game.
After his strong form in the 2013–14 campaign by which he had scored 32 goals from 22 matches played for both club and country by the middle of November 2013, including five hat-tricks, Ronaldo suggested that he could be in the "best form of his life".
In Real Madrid's first match following the 2013–14 winter break, Ronaldo score a brace in a 3–0 home victory against Celta Vigo, including his 400th career goal in 653 games for club and country. He dedicated his two goals to Eusébio, who had died two days before. With the brace, he also reached 230 goals in just 221 appearances for Real Madrid in all competitions.

On 13 January 2014, Ronaldo won the 2013 FIFA Ballon d'Or, beating Lionel Messi, who had won the prize the previous four years, and Franck Ribéry.
On 18 January 2014, Ronaldo netted a long-range finish from 26 meters that nestled to the top right corner in a 5–0 away win over Real Betis,
On 15 March 2014, after he scored the only goal of the match against Málaga, Ronaldo become the first player to score 25 goals in five consecutive league seasons.
Ronaldo made his return for Real Madrid on 23 April 2014 in the Champions League's semi-final first leg win (1–0) over Bayern Munich.bbc.realmadrid. On 29 April 2014, with his two goals against Bayern Munich in a 4–0 away win at the Allianz Arena for the second leg of the Champions League semi-final, Ronaldo set a new record by becoming the first player to score 16 goals in a single Champions League/European Cup season.espn.co.html

International career

Ronaldo earned his first cap for Portugal in a 1–0 victory against Kazakhstan on 20 August 2003.

Euro 2004 and 2004 Summer Olympics

Ronaldo was called up for Euro 2004,
Ronaldo also represented Portugal at the 2004 Summer Olympics, scoring a goal in the tournament, although the Portuguese Olympic football squad was eliminated in the first round, finishing bottom of their group with three points.

2006 World Cup

Ronaldo was the second-highest scorer in the 2006 FIFA World Cup qualification in the European zone with seven goals, and scored his first World Cup goal against Iran (2-0) with a penalty kick in Portugal's second match in the group stage.
During a quarter-final match against England on 1 July 2006, Ronaldo's United teammate Wayne Rooney was sent off for stamping on Portugal defender Ricardo Carvalho. The English media speculated that Ronaldo had influenced referee Horacio Elizondo's decision by aggressively complaining, after which he was seen in replays winking at the Portuguese bench following Rooney's dismissal. After the match, Ronaldo insisted that Rooney was a friend and that he was not pushing for Rooney to be sent off.
The angry reaction from the English press caused Ronaldo to consider leaving United,
Ronaldo was booed during Portugal's semi-final defeat to France (0-1),

=Post-World Cup=

One day after his 22nd birthday, Ronaldo captained Portugal for the first time in a friendly against Brazil on 6 February 2007.

Euro 2008 and 2010 World Cup

Ronaldo scored eight goals in Portugal's UEFA Euro 2008 qualifying campaign,
After Portugal's unsuccessful performance in the European Championship, Luiz Felipe Scolari was replaced as Portugal coach with Carlos Queiroz.
On 15 June 2010, in Portugal's opening 2010 World Cup match against Côte d'Ivoire, Ronaldo was tackled by right-back Guy Demel, which led to an argument and both being booked. The next day, Portugal contacted FIFA to suggest that Ronaldo's yellow card be rescinded since he was "pulled into" the confrontation after having already moved away from the spot where he was tackled, but the appeal was rejected.
Ronaldo was named man of the match in all three of Portugal's group matches against Côte d'Ivoire (0-0), North Korea (7-0) and Brazil (0-0). The World Cup ended for Portugal with a 1–0 loss against eventual champions Spain in the Round of 16.

Euro 2012

Ronaldo scored seven goals in Portugal's UEFA Euro 2012 qualifying campaign, including two strikes against Bosnia in the play-offs for the tournament, and finished behind Germany's Miroslav Klose and the Netherlands' Klaas-Jan Huntelaar (not including the play-offs round). Portugal were drawn in Group B with Netherlands, Denmark and Germany, which was widely referred to as the "group of death" of the tournament.
After the opening 0–1 defeat against Germany, Ronaldo was criticised for under performing, showing frustration at his and his team-mates' errors and for walking off into the changing-rooms straight after the match, rather than thanking the crowd with the team. Ronaldo's team-mate, Nani, later defended him, stating that he had left the pitch as he needed to instantly be treated for a possible injury, also adding that he was under excessive pressure, as football is a team sport.
During the group stage match between Denmark and Portugal (3-2 win), the Denmark fans chanted Lionel Messi's name whenever Ronaldo was on the ball. Ronaldo squandered two gilt-edged one-on-one chances, and Ronaldo looked frustrated and tormented throughout.
In the final group match between Portugal and the Netherlands, Ronaldo silenced his critics by scored two goals to secure a 2–1 victory for Portugal, allowing the team to advance to the quarterfinals.
Ronaldo was further praised for his performance against the Czech Republic in the quarter-finals, where he darted in from behind his marker in the 79th minute and headed a cross from Joao Moutinho, sending Portugal into the semifinals with a 1–0 victory. After scoring the winning goal, he ran to the camera and chanted "para ti" as he had dedicated the goal to his son.

In the semi-final against Spain, Ronaldo had several chances, but he sent three shots over the bar.
Before and throughout the tournament, Ronaldo was particularly hailed by Argentine great Diego Maradona, who described Ronaldo as "the best player on the planet" and went on to say that "Ronaldo has shown his countrymen that he does deserve a monument in Lisbon."

2014 World Cup cycle

On 17 October 2012, Ronaldo won his 100th cap for the Portugal national team in a World Cup qualification match against Northern Ireland (1-1) at Porto's Estádio do Dragão. He became the third youngest European ever to reach that figure in the process, after Germany's Lukas Podolski and Estonia's Kristen Viikmäe.
On 14 August 2013, Ronaldo scored his 40th goal for Portugal in a 1–1 friendly draw against the Netherlands. With his goals against Northern Ireland, Ronaldo also established a personal record, since it was the first time that he scored in three consecutive matches with Portugal.F. – Official Web Site
Ronaldo scored eight goals in Portugal's FIFA World Cup 2014 qualifying campaign, including all four of the team's goals in the two-legged play-off against Sweden which ensured Portugal's place at the finals.
On 5 March 2014, Ronaldo netted twice in Portugal's 5-1 friendly win over Cameroon to take his tally to 49 goals, thus becoming his country's all-time leading goalscorer.

Style of play

Widely regarded as one of the two best players in the world within his generation (the other being Lionel Messi),
Tactically, Ronaldo plays a powerful attacking role, often drifting from the left wing into the centre when moving off the ball.
Ronaldo is known for his pace, skill, control and dribbling ability, as well as his flair in beating players during one on one situations. He is able to finish well both inside the area and from distance.
Since his arrival at Manchester United, Ronaldo underwent a major body transformation, from a skinny youth to an athletically built adult. His well-built, muscular body type allows him to retain possession of the ball.
However, Ronaldo has at times been criticised for his diving when tackled. For which José Mourinho said: "Cristiano is a player who does not have the culture of the swimming pool, he has no culture of simulation, he is a British-trained player, Ferguson trained. In some cases, the simulators are given more protection, and those who are honest are often the losers. I'm not a hypocrite if I say that they (defenders) hit Cristiano very hard, and that the yellow cards do not arrive or are slow in coming."
Earlier in his career, Ronaldo had been described as having an "arrogant image" on the field with Ronaldo stating that he had become a "victim", because of how he was portrayed in the media.
Ronaldo's direct football style, skill and goalscoring ability have been his most noticeable traits throughout his career, and his overall talent has at times led him to be considered a player who stands out and who can be a match changer.
Ronaldo's increasing production led the media to draw comparisons between him and FC Barcelona forward Lionel Messi,


Outside football

Personal life

Ronaldo's father, José Dinis Aveiro, died of an alcoholism-related liver condition at the age of 52 in September 2005 when Ronaldo was 20.
In October 2005, a month after his father died, Ronaldo was arrested on suspicion of raping a woman in a London hotel and released on bail.
Ronaldo announced that he had become a father on 3 July 2010. His official Facebook and Twitter pages refer to the birth of his son and request privacy. The child, named Cristiano was born in the United States
Ronaldo has previously dated English models Alice GoodwinAlice Goodwin da catedra sobre sexo on El Argentino (27 May 2010) and Gemma Atkinson, and since the start of 2010, he has been dating Russian model Irina Shayk. Retrieved 19 December 2010. He is a practising Roman Catholic.

Philanthropy

Television footage of the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami showed an eight-year-old boy survivor named Martunis wearing a No. 7 Portuguese football jersey who was stranded for 19 days after his family was killed. Following this, Ronaldo visited Aceh, Indonesia, to raise funds for rehabilitation and reconstruction.
In November 2011, Ronaldo donated a pair of his football boots to be auctioned by Real Madrid's 'Clasico' network. They were sold for £2050 with the proceeds going to fund schools in Gaza, Palestine.
In January 2013, Ronaldo became Save the Children's new Global Artist Ambassador, in which he hopes to help fight child hunger and obesity.

Wealth

In March 2010, France Football ranked Ronaldo third in its list of the world's highest paid footballers, behind David Beckham and Lionel Messi, with £27 million (€30 million) in combined income from salaries, bonuses and off-field earnings.
In January 2014, Spain's high tax laws meant that, reportedly the world's highest-paid player in terms of gross salary, Ronaldo (£11.87 million-a-year) could only rank second in terms of net pay in World Soccer Magazine's list of the footballers with the highest salary, focusing on net basic salaries and do not include bonuses and incentives.
In March 2014, Goal ranked Ronaldo first in its list of the world's richest footballers, with an estimated net wealth of €148 million, taking into account all the players' income throughout their careers.

Sponsorships

Ronaldo has signed many sponsorships as his reputation rapidly grew from his time at Manchester United.

Fashion

In 2006, Ronaldo opened a fashion boutique under the name "CR7" (his initials and shirt number) on the island of Madeira, Portugal. Ronaldo expanded his business with a second clothes boutique in Lisbon in 2008. The stores include diamond-studded belts, jeans with leather pockets and patented buckled loafers. The store also sells slinky outfits for women.
In 2013, Ronaldo expanded his fashion line. In partnership with Danish company JBS Textile Group, Ronaldo designed his own underwear line.

Media

Ronaldo's autobiography, titled Moments, was published in December 2007.
On 9 June 2010, Madame Tussauds London unveiled Ronaldo's waxwork as part of the build-up to the World Cup. Ronaldo joined fellow footballers Steven Gerrard, Pelé and David Beckham at the event's venue.
Ronaldo was featured on the front cover of the video games FIFA Street 2 and Pro Evolution Soccer 2008. In May 2011, Ronaldo was confirmed as the new face of football series PES with his debut as a cover star of the series Pro Evolution Soccer 2012 and was involved in promotional campaigns for the game.
In August 2010, Ronaldo reached 10 million fans on Facebook and in doing so made history by becoming the first non-American personality ever to achieve that kind of success on the social networking site. According to Forbes, Ronaldo had the 5th highest social rank in the world in 2012, bettered only by Lady Gaga, Rihanna, Justin Bieber, and Katy Perry. Forbes. 16 May 2012. Retrieved 8 June 2012.
In September 2011, Castrol EDGE presented "Cristiano Ronaldo: Tested to the Limit", an award-winning documentary that showed Ronaldo undertaking a series of challenges while under scientific examination.
In June 2012, SportsPro rated Ronaldo as the 5th most marketable athlete in the world,
In July 2012, Ronaldo was revealed by computer security company McAfee as the most "dangerous" footballer online in cyberspace. According to McAfee, fans on the internet searching out for "Cristiano Ronaldo", "Cristiano Ronaldo download", "Cristiano Ronaldo and photos" or "Cristiano Ronaldo and videos" might run the risks of online threats that could steal their personal information.
On 15 December 2013, Ronaldo unveiled a museum, Museu CR7, dedicated to himself in his hometown of Funchal, Madeira. The exhibition features a number of trophies, medals, memorabilia and numerous photos of the Portuguese player.
On 20 January 2014, Ronaldo was named Grand Officer of the Order of Prince Henry by Portugal President Aníbal Cavaco Silva in a ceremony at the Belém National Palace in Lisbon. The knighthood is given in relation to the expansion of Portuguese culture, which Ronaldo helped to promote over the last decade.
It is widely acknowledged that Ronaldo has reached a popularity level in football like no other has in the past. In 2013, Ronaldo alone was responsible for Real Madrid selling one million shirts with his name printed on the back (1.4 million jerseys overall). Only two other clubs in the world sold more than one million jerseys in 2013.

Career statistics

Club

International



=International goals=

Honours

Club

International

Individual

=Orders=

Records

(As of 28 April 2014)

=World=

=Europe=

=England=

=Spain=

=Portugal=

=Real Madrid=








