[[Denison's barb]]

CATEGORIES: Cyprinidae, Fish of India

Sahyadria denisonii, Denison's barb, is a species of cyprinid fish endemic to the fast-flowing hill streams and rivers of the Western Ghats., Philip, S., Ali, A. & Dahanukar, N. (2013): Sahyadria, a new genus of barbs (Teleostei: Cyprinidae) from Western Ghats of India.  Journal of Threatened Taxa, 5 (15): 4932-4938.

Physical characteristics

The fish is characterized by a torpedo-shaped body with silver scales, a red line running from their snout, through the eye, back towards the middle of the body; and below the red line, a black line that runs the length of the fish to the tail. As they mature, a distinctive green/blue marking on top of the head develops. This species can reach a length of  TL. They are active schooling fishes.

Habitat and threats

Denison's barb or red line torpedo barb  is endemic to the Achenkovil and Chaliyar rivers. Specifically, they are found in four locations — Cheenkannipuzha (a major tributary of Velapattanam River), the Achankovil river, the Chaliyar river and near Mundakayam town. 'Miss Kerala' gets a protective shield, The Hindu(February 01,2010) 
As reported by Practical Fishkeeping in January 2009, new research by team of scientists from India suggests that the species is being over-exploited for the aquarium trade, potentially placing it at risk of extinction. In spite of being listed as Endangered by local assessment reports Molur, S. and Walker, S., Report of the workshop on 'Conservation Assessment and Management Plan for Fresh Water Fishes of India', Zoo Outreach Organization and NBFGR, Lucknow, 1998,p. 156. the fish had been promoted as an 'Export item' by several government agencies.
The fish was most likely collected and exported out of India in 1996. In 1997, it won the third prize at 'Aquarama 1997' (world exhibition on Ornamental fish) under the 'New Species Category'. et al.,  Aquat. Conserv: March  Freshwater Res., 2009, 19, 67–74. By 2007-08 it constituted about 60- 65% of the total live ornamental fish exported from India which was worth US$ 1.54 million. Though the Government of Kerala banned the fishing and export of the endangered barb, it is yet to be listed under the National Wlidlife Protection Act.

In the aquarium

This fish is a relatively new addition to the fish keeping hobby. The Denison's barb is a schooling fish that is usually kept in groups. It tends to be peaceful but some have been known to be slightly aggressive around food, especially if kept in less space than they require. They eat bloodworms, shrimp, meat, fish flake and some vegetation. A similar fish, Sahyadria chalakkudiensis is sometimes confused with this fish, but it is a larger, less colourful and a more aggressive species.

Breeding

Over the years many efforts have been made to breed this rapidly depleting species in captivity with limited success. Recent (2009) success has come from the work carried out at the Fisheries College, Kerala by Dr.T.V Anna Mercy. Equally if not more important breeding efforts have been carried out by Chester Zoo and two amateur fish-lovers from Chennai, Venkatesh and Murali (as reported by The Hindu in October 2008). 'Miss Kerala' gets a protective shield, The Hindu(February 01,2010) 



Captive Technology Breeding of Sahyadria denisonii has been standardised by Dr. T.V. The technology is transferred to the research assistants of State Fisheries Department, Azheekode hatchery, Ernakulam. They are producing this species in large numbers under captive conditions and those who want the fish may contact Mr. Suhair or Mr. Santhosh of the hatchery. It is the only place in India where this fish is successfully produced under hatchery conditions.
Anna Mercy, T.V.
Professor
Faculty of Fisehries
Kerala University of Fisheries and Ocean studies
Panangad, P.O.



|author=Clarke, Matt
|title=The Red lined torpedo, Puntius denisonii (with details on an imposter species P. chalakudiensis)
|work=Practical Fishkeeping
|url=
|accessdate=April 19, 2004
}}




