[[Tom Simpson]]

CATEGORIES: 1937 births, 1967 deaths, BBC Sports Personality of the Year winners, British Vuelta a España stage winners, Burials in Nottinghamshire, Commonwealth Games silver medallists for England, Cyclists at the 1956 Summer Olympics, Cyclists at the 1958 British Empire and Commonwealth Games, Cyclists killed while racing, Doping cases in cycling, English male cyclists, English sportspeople in doping cases, Filmed deaths in sports, Olympic bronze medalists for Great Britain, Olympic cyclists of Great Britain, Olympic medalists in cycling, Sport deaths in France, Sportspeople from County Durham, Sportspeople from Nottinghamshire, Tour de France cyclists, UCI World Champions, Drug-related deaths in France

Thomas "Tom" or "Tommy" Simpson (30 November 1937 – 13 July 1967) was one of Britain's most successful professional cyclists. He was born in Haswell, County Durham and later moved to Harworth, Nottinghamshire. Simpson began road cycling as a teenager before taking up track cycling, specialising in pursuit races. He won a bronze medal for track cycling at the 1956 Summer Olympics and a silver at the 1958 Commonwealth Games.
In 1959 at age 21, Simpson was signed by the French professional road-racing team St. Raphaël-Géminiani. He advanced to their first team (Rapha-Gitane-Dunlop) the following year, and won the 1961 Tour of Flanders. Simpson then joined Gitane-Leroux-Dunlop; in the 1962 Tour de France he became the first British rider to wear the yellow jersey, finishing sixth overall.
In 1963 Simpson moved to Peugeot-BP-Englebert, winning Bordeaux–Paris that year and Milan – San Remo in 1964. In 1965 he became Britain's first world road race champion and won the Giro di Lombardia; this made him the BBC Sports Personality of the Year, the first cyclist to win the award. Injuries hampered much of Simpson's 1966 season. He won two stages of the 1967 Vuelta a España before taking the general classification of Paris–Nice that year.
During the 13th stage of the 1967 Tour de France, Simpson collapsed and died during the ascent of Mont Ventoux. He was 29 years old. The post-mortem examination found that he had mixed amphetamines and alcohol; this diuretic combination proved fatal when combined with the heat, the hard climb of the Ventoux and a stomach complaint. A memorial near where he died has become a place of pilgrimage for many cyclists. Simpson was known to have taken performance-enhancing drugs during his career, when no doping controls existed. Despite this, he is held in high esteem by many cyclists for his character and will to win.

Early life and amateur career

Childhood and club racing


Simpson was born on 30 November 1937 in Haswell, County Durham, the youngest of six children of coal miner Tom Simpson and his wife Alice (née Cheetham).
Simpson began winning club time trials at his club, but sensed resentment of his boasting from senior members.
Simpson immersed himself in the world of cycling; he wrote to naturalised Austrian rider George Berger, who helped him with his riding position.

Track years: Olympics, Commonwealths and amateur worlds

Berger told Simpson that if he wanted to be a successful road cyclist, he needed experience in track cycling (particularly the 4000 m individual pursuit).
Simpson began working with his father as a draughtsman at the glass factory in Harworth.

After the Olympics, Simpson trained throughout his winter break into 1957.
In September 1958, Simpson competed at the amateur world championships in Paris. Against reigning world champion Carlo Simonigh of Italy in the opening round of the individual pursuit, his wheel got caught in the guttering tyre at the end of the race; when he bunny hopped his bike out, his tyre burst as it hit a crack in the concrete track. Simpson was briefly knocked unconscious and sustained a dislocated jaw; however, he won the race since he crashed after the finish line. Although he was in pain, team manager Benny Foster forced him to race in the quarterfinal against New Zealand's Warwick Dalton as a strategic move favouring Simpson's teammate Sheil (who won the gold medal). Simpson felt that if he had not crashed, the world championship would have been his.
After Simpson's failed hour-record attempt, he was invited to a race in East Berlin as part of a British team; upon his return, he decided to move to the continent for a better chance at success.

Move to Brittany

In April 1959, Simpson left for France with two Carlton bikes (one road and one track) and £100 from Carlton in appreciation of his help promoting the company. His last words to his mother before the move were, "I don't want to be sitting here in 20 years' time, wondering what would have happened if I hadn't gone to France". The next day, his National Service papers were delivered; although willing to serve before his move, he later avoided conscription.

Professional career

1959: Foundations

Simpson's first race as a professional was the Tour de l'Ouest in July. In the opening stage he finished in a breakaway group with teammate Pierre Everaert, who took the leader's jersey. In stage four, a break formed; Simpson tried to bridge the gap for Everaert (who could not mange the pace), winning a sprint finish and taking the leader's jersey. He won the next stage, a  finishing the race in 14th place overall.
In August Simpson competed at the world championships in the 5000 m individual pursuit at Amsterdam's large, open-air velodrome and the road race on the nearby Circuit Park Zandvoort motor-racing track. He placed fourth in the individual pursuit, losing by 0.3 seconds in the quarterfinals. He expected to progress further, and prepared for the 
Simpson moved up to St. Raphaël-Géminiani's first team, Rapha-Gitane-Dunlop, for the end-of-season classic races. He rode in Paris–Tours, finishing 16th after a bunch sprint, Simpson finished the season with 28 wins.

1960: Tour debut

Simpson's first major race of the 1960 season was Milan – San Remo on 19 March, in which the organisers introduced the now-famous Poggio climb to keep the race from finishing with a bunch sprint. Simpson broke clear from a breakaway group over the first climb (the Turchino), leading the race for 
In June, Simpson made his Grand Tour debut at the Tour de France at age 22. Rapha team manager Raymond Louviot opposed his participation, but since the race was contested by national teams Simpson accepted the invitation from the British squad.
After the Tour, Simpson rode criteriums around Europe until crashing in central France; he returned home to Paris and checked himself into a hospital. finishing 84th in the Giro di Lombardia.

1961: Tour of Flanders and injury

Simpson's first major event of the 1961 season was the Paris–Nice stage race in March. During stage three his team won the team time trial, giving him the leader's jersey and the GC lead by three seconds; however, he lost it in the next stage. In the final stages of the race Simpson's attacks were thwarted, and he finished fifth overall. In his next race (Milan – San Remo), teammate Jean-Claude Annaert was part of a breakaway. Simpson helped prevent other riders from bridging the gap and finished 25th. The next day, he rode the opening stage of the short Menton–Rome race. Simpson placed second in two stages, finishing second overall to teammate Albertus Geldermans.
On 26 March, Simpson rode the Tour of Flanders. With Carpano's Nino Defilippis, he chased down an early break that included 1959 winner (and world champion) Rik Van Looy of 
A week later, Simpson rode in Paris–Roubaix in the hope of bettering his previous year's ninth place. As the race reached the paved section, he went on a solo attack and was told that 
At Simpson's next race, the G.P. Eibar, his knee injury still bothered him. He won the second stage, but was forced to quit during the following stage. His injury had not healed; after seeing several specialists, for financial reasons he rode the Tour de France with the British team.

1962: Yellow jersey

Simpson moved to Ghent, Belgium, and was earning money in one-day races around the country.
Coming into the Tour de France, Simpson was leader of the Gitane-Leroux-Dunlop team;
Simpson lost the lead on the following stage, an 

1963: Bordeaux–Paris

Leroux withdrew its sponsorship of the Gitane team for the 1963 season. Simpson was contracted to their manager, Raymond Louviot; Louviot was rejoining St. Raphaël-Gitane-Geminiani and Simpson could follow, but he saw that as a step backwards. Peugeot-BP-Englebert bought the contract (which ran until the end of the season) from Louviot.

On 26 May, Simpson rode the one-day, 
Simpson announced that he would not ride the Tour de France, concentrating on the world road championships instead. He won the Manx Trophy, a one-day race on the Isle of Man, in treacherous conditions where only 16 out of 70 riders finished. At the road world championships in Ronse, Belgium, Simpson was favoured with Van Looy (although Simpson had only three teammates, compared to Van Looy's ten). The Belgians controlled the race until Simpson broke free, catching two riders ahead: Henry Anglade (France) and Seamus Elliott (Ireland). Anglade was dropped, and Elliott refused to work with Simpson.
Simpson placed second at the Critérium des As in Paris to Anquetil, and in Paris–Tours to Jo de Roo (St. Raphaël-Gitane-Geminiani). He was tenth in the Giro di Lombardia, finishing the Super Prestige Pernod International in second place behind Anquetil. Simpson's season ended with six-day races in Madrid, Brussels and Ghent before an invitation to race on the Pacific island of New Caledonia with riders who included Anquetil and De Roo.

1964: Milan – San Remo

After a training camp near Nice in southern France Simpson rode the one-day Kuurne–Brussels–Kuurne in Belgium, finishing second to Solo-Superia's Arthur Decabooter in cold conditions.
Simpson spent the next two months training for the Tour de France, finishing eighth in the Manx Trophy.
After the race, Simpson prepared for the world road championships with distance training and criteriums.

1965: World championship and Lombardia

During the winter Simpson injured himself skiing in Saint-Gervais-les-Bains, suffering a broken foot and a sprained ankle. He recovered to ride in the lucrative Milan six-day race. Simpson followed it with the Antwerp six-day, dropping out on the fourth day with a cold. His cold worsened and he missed most of March, abandoning Milan – San Remo and Gent–Wevelgem. He began to recover later in the month, finishing fifth in Harelbeke–Antwerp–Harelbeke, sixth in the Circuit of the Eleven Towns and third overall in the Circuit de Provençal.
Simpson rode the 
After ten days off his bike, Simpson rode three contracted post-Tour criteriums (which were all he was offered). His training for the road world championships included kermesse races. Simpson's last race before the world championships was the Paris–Luxembourg stage race, riding as a super-domestique. Simpson would be the only British world road race champion for 46 years, until Mark Cavendish won in 2011.
Simpson's next major race was Paris–Tours; he had two lone breaks, but was caught by the peloton with over 

1966: An injury ridden season

As he did the previous winter, Simpson went on a skiing holiday. On 25 January he fell, breaking his right tibia, and his leg was in a plaster cast until the end of February. He missed contract races, crucial training and most of the spring classics. Simpson began riding in March; within two weeks he rode his first road race (a criterium in Sint-Niklaas, Belgium), followed by an omnium track event in Antwerp. He rode a derny-paced race at the Good Friday Meeting at Herne Hill, defeating other British pros. In late April he started (but did not finish) Liège–Bastogne–Liège, and in early May he finished 20th in the Four Days of Dunkirk.
Simpson's injury did not stop the press from naming him a favourite for the Tour de France.
After recovering from his injury Simpson rode 40 criteriums in 40 days, capitalising on his world championship and his attacks in the Tour.

1967: Paris–Nice and Vuelta stages

Simpson's primary objective for 1967 was overall victory in the Tour de France; in preparation, he planned to ride stage races instead of one-day classics. Simpson felt his chances were good because this Tour was contested by national (rather than corporate) teams. He planned to attempt the one-hour record after the Tour.
Simpson's first victory of the season was in the Giro di Sardegna in late February, where he also took the fifth stage. of Paris–Roubaix, Simpson's bike was unridable and he retired from the race.
In late April Simpson rode for Great Britain in his first Vuelta a España, using the race to prepare for the Tour. During stage two a breakaway gained over 13 minutes, dashing his hopes for a high placing. Simpson nearly quit the race before the fifth stage (from Salamanca to Madrid), but rode it because it was easier to get home by air from Madrid. He won the stage, attacking from a breakaway, and finished second in stage seven. Simpson won stage 16 (from Vitoria to San Sebastian, where he became world champion), his second stage victory, and finished the Vuelta 33rd overall.
Simpson was determined to make an impact in the Tour de France; in his eighth year as a professional cyclist, he hoped for larger appearance fees in post-Tour criteriums to help secure his financial future after retirement.

Death

The 13th stage (13 July) of the 1967 Tour de France measured 
On the next racing day, the other riders were reluctant to continue racing and asked the organisers for a postponement.

Doping

Two years before his death, Simpson hinted in the British newspaper The People at drug-taking in races, although he implied that other competitors were involved.
William Fotheringham spoke to British professional cyclist Alan Ramsbottom for his biography of Simpson, Put Me Back on My Bike. He quoted Ramsbottom as saying, "Tom went on the 1967 Tour de France with one suitcase for his kit and another with his stuff, drugs and recovery things", which Fotheringham said was confirmed by Simpson's roommate Colin Lewis. Ramsbottom added, "Tom took a lot of chances. He took a lot of it drugs. I remember him taking a course of strychnine to build up to some big event. He showed me the box, and had to take one every few days."

Riding style and legacy

Simpson looked for any advantage over his opponents. He made his own saddle, a design which is now standard. During his time with Peugeot, he rode bikes made by Italian manufacturer Masi that resembled Peugeots.
A granite memorial to Simpson (with the words "Olympic medallist, world champion, British sporting ambassador") stands on the spot where he collapsed and died on Ventoux, one kilometre east of the summit.
Ray Pascoe, a fan, made the 1995 film Something To Aim At over a 30-year period; the film includes interviews with those closest to Simpson.

Personal life

Soon after moving to France in 1959 the 21-year-old Simpson met 19-year-old Helen Sherburn, an au pair from Sutton, Yorkshire. Simpson is the maternal uncle of Belgian cyclist Matthew Gilmore.
He was interested in vintage cars, and his driving and riding styles were similar; Helen remembered, "Driving through the West End of London at 

Career achievements

Major results

Source:

Grand Tour general classification results timeline

Source:

Monuments results timeline

Source:

Awards and honours



Notes

Citations








