[[Juhu]]

CATEGORIES: Suburbs of Mumbai, Beaches of Mumbai

Juhu is a suburb of Mumbai. It is most famous for the sprawling Juhu beach. It is surrounded by the Arabian Sea to the west, Versova to the north, Santacruz and Vile Parle to the east and Khar to the south. Juhu is among the most affluent areas of the city and home to many Bollywood celebrities. The nearest railway stations are Santacruz, Andheri and Vile Parle on the Western Line and Harbour Line of the Mumbai Suburban Railway.
J. R. D. Tata, the father of civil aviation in India, made his maiden voyage to Juhu Airport from Drigh Road airstrip, Karachi, via Ahmedabad, on 15 October 1932 carrying mail in a Puss Moth aircraft. Page 112

History

In the nineteenth century, Juhu was an island: a long, narrow sand bar rising above sea level by a metre or two, just off the west coast of Salsette. It could be reached during low tides by walking across the tidal inlet.
Juhu was called "Juvem" by the Portuguese. At its north point, nestled the village of Juhu, inhabited by Bhandaris (toddy tappers), Agris (salt traders) and Kulbis (cultivators) and at its south point, opposite Bandra island, lived a small colony of fisher folk and cultivators (Koliwada). The inhabitants of Juhu were mainly East Indians and there was a small section of Goans. The Church of St. Joseph was built by the Portuguese in 1853.
The open beaches of Juhu have attracted the well-heeled and the most affluent among Mumbai's population for almost a century. In the 1890s, Jamsetji Tata purchased land on Juhu and built a bungalow there. He planned to develop 1200 acres (5 km²) in Juhu Tara. This was to yield 500 plots of one acre (4,000 m²) each and a seaside resort. Simultaneously he wanted to extend the Mahim Causeway to Santacruz, to access to this area. After his death in 1904, the scheme was abandoned. With the dawn of aviation in the 20th century, the Bombay Flying Club commenced operations in 1929 at what eventually became the present Juhu Aerodrome.

Climate

Juhu enjoys a uniform climate throughout the year. In summers the maximum temperature reaches the 35°C and the minimum temperature is 25°C. The weather is pleasant in winter. Monsoons prevail from mid June to September, when it rains quite heavily.

Popular Attractions

Juhu Beach

Juhu beach is located 18 kilometres north of the city centre on the shores of Arabian sea stretches for six kilometres right up to Versova. It is a popular tourist attraction throughout  the year and is also a sought after destination for shooting films. The beach generally gets more crowded on weekends with families and courting couples. The food court at its main entrance is famous for its 'Mumbai style' street food, notably bhelpuri, pani puri and shevpuri. Horse pulled carriages offer joyrides to tourists for a small fee while acrobats, dancing monkeys, cricket matches, toy sellers vie for tourist's attention. The beach is among the most popular sites in the city for the annual Ganesh Chaturthi celebrations where thousands of devotees arrive in grand processions, carrying idols of the Lord Ganesh of various sizes, to be immersed in the water at the beach.

Home to celebrities

The busy-yet-peaceful surroundings of Juhu is home to many Bollywood celebrities like Akshay Kumar, Amitabh Bachchan, Hritik Roshan, Dimple Kapadia, Anil Kapoor, Yash Chopra, Rakesh Roshan, Hema Malini, Mithun Chakraborty, Vidya Balan, Aishwarya Rai, Abhishek Bachchan, Ameesha Patel, Zayed Khan, Paresh Rawal, Shakti Kapoor, Govinda, Dharmendra, Sunny Deol, Bobby Deol, Raveena Tandon, Anupam Kher, Rani Mukherjee, Fardeen Khan, Mahesh Bhatt, DCM Sir and Vivek Oberoi, reside in Juhu. Salman Khan also owns an apartment in a building known as Galaxy Apartments, not too far from the beach. Apart from celebrities, it is also home to a significant portion of Mumbai's Business elite. Hence, Juhu has come to be referred to as 'The Beverly Hills of Bollywood'.

ISKCON Temple in Juhu-Mumbai

ISKCON temple  in  Juhu is set upon four acres of land and a stone throw away from Juhu beach. A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, the founder-acharya of ISKCON (also known as the Hare Krishna Movement) inspired the construction of one of India's most beautiful temple of Lord Krishna in Mumbai. The presiding Deities at the temple, Sri Sri Gaura-Nitai, Sri Sri Radha Rasabihari and Sri Sri Sita Rama Laxman Hanuman were personally installed by the founder of ISKCON. In early 1970's, Srila Prabhupada acquired the Juhu property  and promised Sri Sri Radha Rasabihari Deities who were then housed in small shack. The temple complex opened in 1978 and includes a spacious marble temple, an auditorium, restaurant and a twin towered seven-storey guest house where visitors can stay and participate in the daily spiritual programs of the temple. ISKCON is regular destination of visit for many eminent celebrities. Many Indian and International movies have shown the Hare Krishna culture.
ISKCON Juhu is also a hub of research and education starting from its scientific research to school education (Bhaktivedanta Swami Mission School) with I.C.S.E curriculum . Its also hold daily discourses on various Vedic scriptures along with many regular seminar and courses. One can watch ISKCON's many international videos and relish hundreds of lectures, kirtans and bhajans. Membership is free and all are welcome to avail of the excellent facilities. The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust (BBT) is the world's largest publisher of books concerning Krishna and the philosophy, religion, and culture of the Gaudiya Vaishnava tradition of India. Bhakti Kala Kshetra is the cultural wing, consisting an auditorium, is a center for many cultural festival starring Ravi Shankar, Jagjit Singh, Protima Bedi, Vyajayantimala, Hema Malini, Anup Jalota and many others.

Juhu Citizen Welfare Group

The Juhu Citizen Welfare Group is the outcome of many years of activism by Juhu residents who have been associated with other NGOs. It was formed in April 2002 (The Juhu Seatizen) and later formalised in August 2003 with its own monthly publication called The Juhu Citizen. Officially registered in March 2004, it now comprises voluntary members invited from NGOs in the K-West Municipal Ward of North West Mumbai.

Religious places

Hotels and restaurants

Education

Primary and secondary schools

Colleges and universities

Institutes and organisations




