[[Billy Goodman]]

CATEGORIES: 1926 births, 1984 deaths, American League All-Stars, American League batting champions, Atlanta Braves coaches, Atlanta Crackers players, Baltimore Orioles players, Baseball players from North Carolina, Boston Red Sox players, Boston Red Sox scouts, Chicago White Sox players, Durham Bulls managers, Durham Bulls players, Houston Colt .45s players, Louisville Colonels (minor league) players, Major League Baseball first basemen, Major League Baseball second basemen, People from Concord, North Carolina

William Dale Goodman (March 22, 1926 – October 1, 1984) was an American baseball player. An outstanding hitter and fielder, he was one of the most versatile players of his era. He played every position in Major League baseball except catcher and pitcher. He batted .300 in 16 Major League seasons (over .300 in five seasons and .290 or better in eleven seasons). His career .376 on-base percentage made him an ideal lead-off hitter.
Goodman was inducted into the North Carolina Sports Hall of Fame in 

Early years

Goodman was born in Concord, North Carolina, and played Textile League baseball in Concord before signing with the Atlanta Crackers of the Southern Association in 

Minor League

Goodman hit .336 his first season in Atlanta. He left baseball temporarily, serving in the United States Navy during World War II in . While assigned to the Pacific Theater on Ulithi with Major Leaguer Mickey Vernon and future Baseball Hall of Famer, Larry Doby, both Goodman and Vernon encouraged Doby to become a Major League baseball player.
Goodman returned to the Atlanta Crackers in  season before being reassigned to the American Association's Louisville Colonels, where he batted .340 over the remainder of the season.

Major League

Boston Red Sox

Goodman spent the Spring with the Red Sox in 1947 playing in 12 games, 2 in the outfield, and 10 filling in at second base for an injured Bobby Doerr,

=1950, hit .354=

He was named to the first of two American League All-Star rosters in  Goodman took over in left field for the Bosox, and batted .338 with 23 RBIs filling in for the Boston legend. Playing five different positions over the course of the season, Goodman logged enough at-bats to win the American League batting title with a .354 batting average (Stan Musial, National League, .346) and was the runner-up in AL Most Valuable Player Award balloting to New York Yankees shortstop, Phil Rizzuto.
Goodman resumed his utility player role in  He spent most of the month of August at second base when Bobby Doerr's bad back kept him out of the line-up. In all, Goodman played five different positions, and batted .297 with fifty RBIs and 92 runs scored. His 638 plate appearances were third highest on the team behind Dom DiMaggio and Ted Williams.
Doerr retired at the end of the season,
In  Upon Williams' return, he began platooning at first with Harry Agganis (despite the fact that both were left-handed batters) until he was shifted back to second base in the beginning of August.
He had a starting job at second base again in 

Baltimore Orioles

Goodman was immediately inserted into the starting line-up in Baltimore, and hit a home run in his first game as an Oriole.

Chicago White Sox

In 1958, with Nellie Fox at second base, Goodman shifted to third with the White Sox. He was sidelined by a knee injury for most of the month of May. Upon his return, he quickly shot up among the American League leaders in batting, with his average peaking at .336 in late July.
At 33 years old at the start of the  Overall, he batted .231 (3-for-13) in Chicago's six game loss to the Los Angeles Dodgers.
Goodman was used sparingly by manager Al Lopez in 

Houston Colt .45s

Goodman joined the Houston Colt .45s in 1962, playing in 49 games into their inaugural season, and went two-for-five with two runs scored in his first game as a Colt 45. Overall, he batted .255 in 82 games for the Colt .45s, while playing first, second, and third base.

Post Major League

Player-manager

In . In three seasons, he had a combined 184-228 record for a .447 winning percentage.

Scout and instructor

He became a scout for the Red Sox in .

Retirement and death

He retired from the game in 

Major League stats

 
 
Goodman had five, 5-hit games. His best baseball playing position percentagewise was first base, where he maintained a .991 fielding percentage in 3856 total chances.








