[[Complex number]]

CATEGORIES: Complex numbers

A complex number is a number that can be expressed in the form  in the complex plane. A complex number whose real part is zero is said to be purely imaginary, whereas a complex number whose imaginary part is zero is a real number. In this way the complex numbers contain the ordinary real numbers while extending them in order to solve problems that cannot be solved with real numbers alone.
As well as their use within mathematics, complex numbers have practical applications in many fields, including physics, chemistry, biology, economics, electrical engineering, and statistics. The Italian mathematician Gerolamo Cardano is the first known to have introduced complex numbers. He called them "fictitious" during his attempts to find solutions to cubic equations in the 16th century.



Complex numbers allow for solutions to certain equations that have no real solutions: the equation
has no real solution, since the square of a real number is either 0 or positive. Complex numbers provide a solution to this problem. The idea is to extend the real numbers with the  imaginary unit :
In fact not only quadratic equations, but all polynomial equations with real or complex coefficients in a single variable can be solved using complex numbers.

Definition

A complex number is a number of the form  is a complex number.
The real number . For example,
A real number .

Notation

Some authors write .

Complex plane

A complex number can be viewed as a point or position vector in a two-dimensional Cartesian coordinate system called the complex plane or Argand diagram (see ), named after Jean-Robert Argand. The numbers are conventionally plotted using the real part as the horizontal component, and imaginary part as vertical (see Figure 1). These two values used to identify a given complex number are therefore called its Cartesian, rectangular, or algebraic form.

History in brief

The solution in radicals (without trigonometric functions) of a general cubic equation contains the square roots of negative numbers when all three roots are real numbers, a situation that cannot be rectified by factoring aided by the rational root test if the cubic is irreducible (the so-called casus irreducibilis). This conundrum led Italian mathematician Gerolamo Cardano to conceive of complex numbers in around 1545, though his understanding was rudimentary.
Work on the problem of general polynomials ultimately led to the fundamental theorem of algebra, which shows that with complex numbers, a solution exists to every polynomial equation of degree one or higher. Complex numbers thus form an algebraically closed field, where any polynomial equation has a root.
Many mathematicians contributed to the full development of complex numbers. The rules for addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division of complex numbers were developed by the Italian mathematician Rafael Bombelli. A more abstract formalism for the complex numbers was further developed by the Irish mathematician William Rowan Hamilton, who extended this abstraction to the theory of quaternions.

Relations

Equality

Two complex numbers are equal if and only if both their real and imaginary parts are equal.  In symbols:

Ordering

Because complex numbers are naturally thought of as existing on a two-dimensional plane, there is no natural linear ordering on the set of complex numbers.wolfram.html
There is no linear ordering on the complex numbers that is compatible with addition and multiplication. Formally, we say that the complex numbers cannot have the structure of an ordered field. This is because any square in an ordered field is at least 0, but .

Elementary operations

Conjugation

Formally, for any complex number z:
The real and imaginary parts of a complex number  can be extracted using the conjugate:
Moreover, a complex number is real if and only if it equals its conjugate.
Conjugation distributes over the standard arithmetic operations:
The reciprocal of a nonzero complex number  is given by
This formula can be used to compute the multiplicative inverse of a complex number if it is given in rectangular coordinates. Inversive geometry, a branch of geometry studying reflections more general than ones about a line, can also be expressed in terms of complex numbers.

Addition and subtraction

Complex numbers are added by adding the real and imaginary parts of the summands. That is to say:
Similarly, subtraction is defined by
Using the visualization of complex numbers in the complex plane, the addition has the following geometric interpretation: the sum of two complex numbers A and B, interpreted as points of the complex plane, is the point X obtained by building a parallelogram three of whose vertices are O, A and B. Equivalently, X is the point such that the triangles with vertices O, A, B, and X, B, A, are congruent.

Multiplication and division

The multiplication of two complex numbers is defined by the following formula:
In particular, the square of the imaginary unit is −1:
The preceding definition of multiplication of general complex numbers follows naturally from this fundamental property of the imaginary unit. Indeed, if , the above multiplication rule is identical to the usual rule for multiplying two sums of two terms.
The division of two complex numbers is defined in terms of complex multiplication, which is described above, and real division.  Where at least one of  is non-zero:
Division can be defined in this way because of the following observation:
As shown earlier,  of the denominator must not both be zero for division to be defined.

Square root

and
|title=Handbook of mathematical functions with formulas, graphs, and mathematical tables
|edition=
|first1=Milton
|last1=Abramowitz
|first2=Irene A.
|last2=Stegun
|publisher=Courier Dover Publications
|year=1964
|isbn=0-486-61272-4
|page=17
|url= Section 3.7.26, p. 17
[/ref][ref]
, Extract: page 59
Polar form== 

Absolute value and argument

An alternative way of defining a point P in the complex plane, other than using the x- and y-coordinates, is to use the distance of the point from O, the point whose coordinates are  (the origin), together with the angle subtended between the positive real axis and the line segment OP in a counterclockwise direction. This idea leads to the polar form of complex numbers.
The absolute value (or modulus or magnitude) of a complex number  is
If  to the origin.
|title=Complex Variables: Theory And Applications
|edition=2nd
|first1=H.S.
|last1=Kasana
|publisher=PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd
|year=2005
|isbn=81-203-2641-5
|page=14
|url= Extract of chapter 1, page 14[/ref]
The value of  if the value is negative. The polar angle for the complex number 0 is indeterminate, but arbitrary choice of the angle 0 is common.
Together,  give another way of representing complex numbers, the polar form, as the combination of modulus and argument fully specify the position of a point on the plane. Recovering the original rectangular co-ordinates from the polar form is done by the formula called trigonometric form
Using Euler's formula this can be written as
Using the cis function, this is sometimes abbreviated to
In angle notation, often used in electronics to represent a phasor with amplitude , it is written as[ref]
, Chapter 9, page 338
[/ref]

Multiplication and division in polar form

Formulas for multiplication, division and exponentiation are simpler in polar form than the corresponding formulas in Cartesian coordinates. Given two complex numbers , because of the well-known trigonometric identities 
we may derive
In other words, the absolute values are multiplied and the arguments are added to yield the polar form of the product. For example, multiplying by . The picture at the right illustrates the multiplication of
Since the real and imaginary part of  are equal, the argument of that number is 45 degrees, or π/4 (in radian). On the other hand, it is also the sum of the angles at the origin of the red and blue triangles are arctan(1/3) and arctan(1/2), respectively. Thus, the formula
holds. As the arctan function can be approximated highly efficiently, formulas like this—known as Machin-like formulas—are used for high-precision approximations of π.
Similarly, division is given by

Exponentiation

Euler's formula

Euler's formula states  that, for any real number x,
where e is the base of the natural logarithm.  This can be proved by observing that
and so on, and by considering the Taylor series expansions of eix, cos(x) and sin(x):
The rearrangement of terms is justified because each series is absolutely convergent.

Natural logarithm

Euler's formula allows us to observe that, for any complex number 
where r is a nonnegative real number, one possible value for z's natural logarithm is
Because cos and sin are periodic functions, the natural logarithm may be considered a multi-valued function, with:

Integer and fractional exponents

We may use the identity
to define complex exponentiation, which is likewise multi-valued: 
Where n is an integer, this simplifies to de Moivre's formula:
The  are given by
for any integer  is a uniquely defined number. Formulas such as
(which holds for positive real numbers), do in general not hold for complex numbers.

Properties

Field structure

The set C of complex numbers is a field. Briefly, this means that the following facts hold: first, any two complex numbers can be added and multiplied to yield another complex number. Second, for any complex number :
These two laws and the other requirements on a field can be proven by the formulas given above, using the fact that the real numbers themselves form a field.
Unlike the reals, C is not an ordered field, that is to say, it is not possible to define a relation  precludes the existence of an ordering on C.
When the underlying field for a mathematical topic or construct is the field of complex numbers, the thing's name is usually modified to reflect that fact. For example: complex analysis, complex matrix, complex polynomial, and complex Lie algebra.

Solutions of polynomial equations

Given any complex numbers (called coefficients) , the equation
has at least one complex solution z, provided that at least one of the higher coefficients ).
There are various proofs of this theorem, either by analytic methods such as Liouville's theorem, or topological ones such as the winding number, or a proof combining Galois theory and the fact that any real polynomial of odd degree has at least one real root.
Because of this fact, theorems that hold for any algebraically closed field, apply to C. For example, any non-empty complex square matrix has at least one (complex) eigenvalue.

Algebraic characterization

The field C has the following three properties: first, it has characteristic 0. This means that  for any number of summands (all of which equal one). Second, its transcendence degree over Q, the prime field of C, is the cardinality of the continuum. Third, it is algebraically closed (see above). It can be shown that any field having these properties is isomorphic (as a field) to C. For example, the algebraic closure of Qp also satisfies these three properties, so these two fields are isomorphic. Also, C is isomorphic to the field of complex Puiseux series. However, specifying an isomorphism requires the axiom of choice. Another consequence of this algebraic characterization is that C contains many proper subfields that are isomorphic to C.

Characterization as a topological field

The preceding characterization of C describes the algebraic aspects of C, only. That is to say, the properties of nearness and continuity, which matter in areas such as analysis and topology, are not dealt with. The following description of C as a topological field (that is, a field that is equipped with a topology, which allows the notion of convergence) does take into account the topological properties. C contains a subset  (namely the set of positive real numbers) of nonzero elements satisfying the following three conditions:
Moreover, C has a nontrivial involutive automorphism  in C.
Any field  is isomorphic as a topological field to C.
The only connected locally compact topological fields are R and C. This gives another characterization of C as a topological field, since C can be distinguished from R because the nonzero complex numbers are connected, while the nonzero real numbers are not.

Formal construction

Formal development

Above, complex numbers have been defined by introducing i, the imaginary unit, as a symbol. More rigorously, the set C of complex numbers can be defined as the set R2 of ordered pairs  of real numbers. In this notation, the above formulas for addition and multiplication read
It is then just a matter of notation to express .
Though this low-level construction does accurately describe the structure of the complex numbers, the following equivalent definition reveals the algebraic nature of C more immediately. This characterization relies on the notion of fields and polynomials. A field is a set endowed with an addition, subtraction, multiplication and division operations that behave as is familiar from, say, rational numbers. For example, the distributive law
must hold for any three elements  with real coefficients is an expression of the form
where the  are real numbers. The usual addition and multiplication of polynomials endows the set RX of all such polynomials with a ring structure. This ring is called polynomial ring.
The quotient ring RX/ can be shown to be a field.
This extension field contains two square roots of −1, namely (the cosets of) X and −X, respectively. (The cosets of) 1 and X form a basis of RX/ of real numbers. Moreover, the above formulas for addition etc. correspond to the ones yielded by this abstract algebraic approach – the two definitions of the field C are said to be isomorphic (as fields). Together with the above-mentioned fact that C is algebraically closed, this also shows that C is an algebraic closure of R.

Matrix representation of complex numbers

Complex numbers  matrices that have the following form:
Here the entries  are real numbers. The sum and product of two such matrices is again of this form, and the sum and product of complex numbers corresponds to the sum and product of such matrices. The geometric description of the multiplication of complex numbers can also be phrased in terms of rotation matrices by using this correspondence between complex numbers and such matrices. Moreover, the square of the absolute value of a complex number expressed as a matrix is equal to the determinant of that matrix:

Complex analysis

The study of functions of a complex variable is known as  complex analysis and has  enormous practical use in  applied mathematics as well as in other branches of mathematics. Often, the most natural proofs for statements in real analysis or even number theory employ techniques from complex analysis (see prime number theorem for an example). Unlike real functions, which are commonly represented as two-dimensional graphs, complex functions have four-dimensional graphs and may usefully be illustrated by color-coding a three-dimensional graph to suggest four dimensions, or by animating the complex function's dynamic transformation of the complex plane.

Complex exponential and related functions

The notions of convergent series and continuous functions in (real) analysis have natural analogs in complex analysis. A sequence  of complex numbers is said to converge if and only if its real and imaginary parts do. This is equivalent to the (ε, δ)-definition of limits, where the absolute value of real numbers is replaced by the one of complex numbers. From a more abstract point of view, C, endowed with the metric
is a complete metric space, which notably includes the triangle inequality
for any two complex numbers .
Like in real analysis, this notion of convergence is used to construct a number of elementary functions: the exponential function , is defined as the infinite series
and the series defining the real trigonometric functions sine and cosine, as well as hyperbolic functions such as sinh also carry over to complex arguments without change. Euler's identity states:
for any real number φ, in particular
Unlike in the situation of real numbers, there is an infinitude of complex solutions  of the equation
for any complex number —satisfies
where arg is the argument defined above, and ln the (real) natural logarithm. As arg is a multivalued function, unique only up to a multiple of 2π, log is also multivalued. The principal value of log is often taken by restricting the imaginary part to the interval .
Complex exponentiation  is defined as
Consequently, they are in general multi-valued. For th roots mentioned above.
Complex numbers, unlike real numbers, do not in general satisfy the unmodified power and logarithm identities, particularly when naïvely treated as single-valued functions; see failure of power and logarithm identities. For example they do not satisfy
Both sides of the equation are multivalued by the definition of complex exponentiation given here, and the values on the left are a subset of those on the right.

Holomorphic functions

A function f : C → C is called holomorphic if it satisfies the Cauchy–Riemann equations. For example, any R-linear map C → C can be written in the form
Complex analysis shows some features not apparent in real analysis. For example, any two holomorphic functions .

Applications

Complex numbers have essential concrete applications in a variety of scientific and related areas such as signal processing, control theory, electromagnetism, fluid dynamics, quantum mechanics, cartography, and vibration analysis. Some applications of complex numbers are:

Control theory

In control theory, systems are often transformed from the time domain to the frequency domain using the Laplace transform.  The system's poles and zeros are then analyzed in the complex plane.  The root locus, Nyquist plot, and Nichols plot techniques all make use of the complex plane.
In the root locus method, it is especially important whether the poles and zeros are in the left or right half planes, i.e. have real part greater than or less than zero.  If a linear, time-invariant (LTI) system has poles that are
If a system has zeros in the right half plane, it is a nonminimum phase system.

Improper integrals

In applied fields, complex numbers are often used to compute certain real-valued improper integrals, by means of complex-valued functions. Several methods exist to do this; see methods of contour integration.

Fluid dynamics

In fluid dynamics, complex functions are used to describe potential flow in two dimensions.

Dynamic equations

In differential equations, it is common to first find all complex roots .

Electromagnetism and electrical engineering

In electrical engineering, the Fourier transform is used to analyze varying voltages and currents. The treatment of resistors, capacitors, and inductors can then be unified by introducing imaginary, frequency-dependent resistances for the latter two and combining all three in a single complex number called the impedance. This approach is called phasor calculus. 
In electrical engineering, the imaginary unit is denoted by  which is generally in use to denote electric current.
Since the voltage in an AC circuit is oscillating, it can be represented as
To obtain the measurable quantity, the real part is taken:
See for example.S. Grant, W.R. Phillips, Manchester Physics Series, 2008 ISBN 0-471-92712-0

Signal analysis

Complex numbers are used in signal analysis and other fields for a convenient description for periodically varying signals. For given real functions representing actual physical quantities, often in terms of sines and cosines, corresponding complex functions are considered of which the real parts are the original quantities. For a sine wave of a given frequency, the absolute value  the phase.
If Fourier analysis is employed to write a given real-valued signal as a sum of periodic functions, these periodic functions are often written as complex valued functions of the form
where ω represents the angular frequency and the complex number z encodes the phase and amplitude as explained above.
This use is also extended into digital signal processing and digital image processing, which utilize digital versions of Fourier analysis (and wavelet analysis) to transmit, compress, restore, and otherwise process digital audio signals, still images, and video signals.
Another example, relevant to the two side bands of amplitude modulation of AM radio, is:

Quantum mechanics

The complex number field is intrinsic to the mathematical formulations of quantum mechanics, where complex Hilbert spaces provide the context for one such formulation that is convenient and perhaps most standard. The original foundation formulas of quantum mechanics – the Schrödinger equation and  Heisenberg's matrix mechanics – make use of complex numbers.

Relativity

In special and general relativity, some formulas for the metric on spacetime become simpler if one takes the time variable to be imaginary. (This is no longer standard in classical relativity, but is used in an essential way in quantum field theory.) Complex numbers are essential to spinors, which are a generalization of the tensors used in relativity.

Geometry

=Fractals=

Certain fractals are plotted in the complex plane, e.g. the Mandelbrot set and Julia sets.

=Triangles=

Algebraic number theory

As mentioned above, any nonconstant polynomial equation (in complex coefficients) has a solution in C. A fortiori, the same is true if the equation has rational coefficients. The roots of such equations are called algebraic numbers – they are a principal object of study in algebraic number theory. Compared to , the algebraic closure of Q, which also contains all algebraic numbers, C has the advantage of being easily understandable in geometric terms. In this way, algebraic methods can be used to study geometric questions and vice versa. With algebraic methods, more specifically applying the machinery of field theory to the number field containing roots of unity, it can be shown that it is not possible to construct a regular nonagon  using only compass and straightedge – a purely geometric problem.
Another example are Gaussian integers, that is, numbers of the form  are integers, which can be used to classify sums of squares.

Analytic number theory

Analytic number theory studies numbers, often integers or rationals, by taking advantage of the fact that they can be regarded as complex numbers, in which analytic methods can be used. This is done by encoding number-theoretic information in complex-valued functions. For example, the Riemann zeta function  is related to the distribution of prime numbers.

History

The earliest fleeting reference to square roots of negative numbers can perhaps be said to occur in the work of the Greek mathematician Hero of Alexandria in the 1st century AD, where in his Stereometrica he considers, apparently in error, the volume of an impossible frustum of a pyramid to arrive at the term 
In the 18th century complex numbers gained wider use, as it was noticed that formal manipulation of complex expressions could be used to simplify calculations involving trigonometric functions. For instance, in 1730 Abraham de Moivre noted that the complicated identities relating trigonometric functions of an integer multiple of an angle to powers of trigonometric functions of that angle could be simply re-expressed by the following well-known formula which bears his name, de Moivre's formula:
In 1748 Leonhard Euler went further and obtained Euler's formula of complex analysis:
by formally manipulating complex power series and observed that this formula could be used to reduce any trigonometric identity to much simpler exponential identities.
The idea of a complex number as a point in the complex plane (above) was first described by Caspar Wessel in 1799, although it had been anticipated as early as 1685 in Wallis's De Algebra tractatus.
Wessel's memoir appeared in the Proceedings of the Copenhagen Academy but went largely unnoticed. In 1806 Jean-Robert Argand independently issued a pamphlet on complex numbers and provided a rigorous proof of the fundamental theorem of algebra. Gauss had earlier published an essentially topological proof of the theorem in 1797 but expressed his doubts at the time about "the true metaphysics of the square root of −1". It was not until 1831 that he overcame these doubts and published his treatise on complex numbers as points in the plane, largely establishing modern notation and terminology. The English mathematician G. H. Hardy remarked that Gauss was the first mathematician to use complex numbers in 'a really confident and scientific way' although mathematicians such as Niels Henrik Abel and  Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi were necessarily using them routinely before Gauss published his 1831 treatise.  Augustin Louis Cauchy and Bernhard Riemann together brought the fundamental ideas of complex analysis to a high state of completion, commencing around 1825 in Cauchy's case.
Later classical writers on the general theory include Richard Dedekind, Otto Hölder, Felix Klein, Henri Poincaré, Hermann Schwarz, Karl Weierstrass and many others.

Generalizations and related notions

The process of extending the field R of reals to C is known as Cayley–Dickson construction. It can be carried further to higher dimensions, yielding the quaternions H and octonions O which (as a real vector space) are of dimension 4 and 8, respectively.
However, just as applying the construction to reals loses the property of ordering, more algebraic properties familiar from real and complex numbers vanish with increasing dimension. The quaternions are only a skew field, i.e. for some .
Reals, complex numbers, quaternions and octonions are all normed division algebras over R. However, by Hurwitz's theorem they are the only ones. The next step in the Cayley–Dickson construction, the sedenions, in fact fails to have this structure.
The Cayley–Dickson construction is closely related to the regular representation of C, thought of as an R-algebra (an R-vector space with a multiplication), with respect to the basis . This means the following: the R-linear map
for some fixed complex number , this matrix is
i.e., the one mentioned in the section on matrix representation of complex numbers above. While this is a linear representation of C in the 2 × 2 real matrices, it is not the only one. Any matrix
has the property that its square is the negative of the identity matrix: . Then
is also isomorphic to the field C, and gives an alternative complex structure on R2. This is generalized by the notion of a linear complex structure.
Hypercomplex numbers also generalize R, C, H, and O. For example this notion contains the split-complex numbers, which are elements of the ring  has four solutions.
The fields R and Qp and their finite field extensions, including C, are local fields.



Notes



Mathematical references

Historical references

Further reading




