[[Aleksandr Karelin]]

CATEGORIES: 1967 births, Sportspeople from Novosibirsk, Living people, Heroes of the Russian Federation, Olympic wrestlers of Russia, Olympic wrestlers of the Unified Team, Olympic wrestlers of the Soviet Union, Olympic gold medalists for the Soviet Union, Olympic gold medalists for the Unified Team, Soviet sport wrestlers, Russian sport wrestlers, Wrestlers at the 1988 Summer Olympics, Wrestlers at the 1992 Summer Olympics, Wrestlers at the 1996 Summer Olympics, Wrestlers at the 2000 Summer Olympics, Olympic gold medalists for Russia, Olympic silver medalists for Russia, Members of the State Duma of the Russian Federation, Olympic medalists in wrestling, Russian sportsperson–politicians

Aleksandr Aleksandrovich Karelin, or simply Alexander Karelin, ( he won gold medals at the 1988, 1992 and 1996, as well as a silver in the 2000 Olympic Games. Karelin's wrestling record is 887 wins and only two losses in his entire sport career."The World's Five Greatest Athletes No One Knows"/"Alexander Karelin"

Biography

Karelin was born as a 6.8 kg (15 lb) baby. Karelin holds a Ph.D. in Physical Education. 
Nicknamed the "Russian Bear," "Alexander the Great" and "The Experiment", he went undefeated in international competition from 1987 to 2000.com/articles/97368-alexander-karelin-the-meanest-man-in-the-world 
In the 1996 Summer Olympic Games in Atlanta, Karelin faced American Matt Ghaffari for the gold medal. Karelin had come off shoulder surgery and looked vulnerable against a strong Ghaffari, who was able to repel Karelin's efforts to lift and slam him, forcing Karelin to use all of his skill and experience to defend a 1-0 lead.cnn.com/olympics/2000/wrestling/news/2000/09/27/mccallum_gardner/
After going 13 years undefeated in international competition and six years without giving up a point, he had an upset 1-0 loss to Rulon Gardner of the United States in the gold-medal match at the Sydney Olympics. The win was controversial at the time as it took 90 seconds to review, According to The Slate, "Karelin's icy gulag death stare during the medal ceremony is one of the most terrifying sights in Olympic history".slate.html
Karelin was revered for his extraordinary strength and unprecedented success in international competition. He competed at the heaviest weight class of his day, 130 kg (286 lb) and 1.91 m (6-feet-3 1/4 inches) tall. His conditioning and quickness combined with his dominance of the sport, led to him being known as "The Experiment". His coach convinced him to wrestle at the age of 13 and Karelin trained by running through thigh deep snow for 2 hours at a clip and rowing a boat on Siberian lakes until his hands bled.tripod.html
On February 21, 1999 Aleksandr Karelin defeated Akira Maeda in a professional wrestling contest that drew a gate of $1 million. The match gained widespread media coverage, including mentions in The New York Times and Sports Illustrated.

Technique

Karelin was famous for his reverse body lift, the "Karelin Lift", where facing the opponent who was lying flat on the mat to keep from being thrown, Karelin hoisted his opponents into the air and slammed them violently to the mat. This devastatingly effective maneuver, when properly executed, awarded Karelin 5 points per throw, the maximum awarded in Greco-Roman wrestling. The throw had long been in use by lighter wrestlers but not by heavyweights since the technique required immense strength. Karelin's ability to perform this throw against elite opponents weighing as much as 130 kg was amazing to audiences as well as other participants and observers of the sport.

Politics

Karelin officially retired from competitive wrestling in 2000Alexander Karelin – Chronology and began his political career. He joined the United Russia party and was elected to the State Duma as a representative of the Novosibirsk Oblast in 1999 and 2003. In 2007 he was elected to the Duma as a representative of the Stavropol Krai. He is a member of Duma's committee on international affairs.

Mixed martial arts record

|-
| Win
| align=center| 1-0
| Akira Maeda
| Decision (Unanimous)
| Rings: Final Capture
| 
| align=center| 3
| align=center| 5:00
| Japan
| 






