[[Anastacia (album)]]

CATEGORIES: 2004 albums, Albums produced by Dallas Austin, Albums produced by Glen Ballard, Albums produced by John Shanks, Albums produced by Patrick Leonard, Albums produced by Ric Wake, Anastacia albums, English-language albums, Epic Records albums

Anastacia is the eponymous third studio album by American recording artist Anastacia, released on March 29, 2004 by Epic Records. The album was a commercial success, peaking at the top of the albums charts in several countries, including Australia, Belgium, Germany, Greece, the Netherlands, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. Anastacia was never released in Anastacia's native United States, despite plans for an August 30, 2005 release with a different track listing from that of the European version, which would replace "Sexy Single" with the B-side "Underground Army". The plans were canceled for unknown reasons.

Background

In January 2003, Anastacia had discovered that she had breast cancer when she was preparing for breast reduction surgery due to orthopedic reasons. Anastacia subsequently established the Anastacia Fund through The Breast Cancer Research Foundation to promote awareness of breast cancer amongst younger women.
After this traumatic experience, Anastacia entered recording studios in September 2003 to record the Anastacia album with Glen Ballard, Dallas Austin, and Dave Stewart for release in 2004. Anastacia was after more of a rock feel on the album, as noted in tracks such as "Seasons Change", "Time", and "I Do" (which features Sonny Sandoval from P.O.D.).
Anastacia explained on her website that her illness made it more difficult to record the album:
 
 "... the experience was not pleasant. I usually look for the bright side of things, but so far nothing about making this record was positive for me. My doctor told me I'd be tired, not stupid. I could not focus on anything. I'd write a verse and then I couldn't write the chorus or I'd write the chorus but couldn't write the bridge. I couldn't talk, I couldn't think straight, I was totally out of it. The doctors said I'd be tired—but of course I had insomnia. It was tough..."

She struggled through the process to finish the album for release in March 2004.

Commercial performance

Anastacia proved to be a huge smash hit, reaching the top of the albums charts in eleven European countries, including Austria, Germany, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Sweden, and the United Kingdom, as well as number two in Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain. The album's lead single "Left Outside Alone" proved to be equally successful, peaking at number one in Australia, Austria, Italy, Spain, and Switzerland, and reaching the top five in several other countries and on the European Hot 100 Singles chart. The album also spawned another three European hit singles: "Sick and Tired", "Welcome to My Truth", and "Heavy on My Heart". "Sick and Tired" was the biggest hit from the three, scoring top five single status across numerous European nations, almost matching the success of "Left Outside Alone". "Welcome to My Truth" earned Anastacia her best-selling single ever in Spain and gained moderate European airplay and sales success, while "Heavy on My Heart" fared slightly worse but proceeds from the single were donated to the Anastacia Fund.

Track listing

Charts

Weekly charts

Year-end charts

Certifications








Release history






