[[RTÉ 2fm]]

CATEGORIES: Radio stations established in 1979, RTÉ 2fm

RTÉ 2fm, or 2FM as it is more commonly referred to, is the second national radio station of Raidió Teilifís Éireann (RTÉ) in Ireland.

History

The station commenced broadcasting in 1979 and has undergone numerous name changes and line-up switches throughout its history. During the 2000s, Ian Dempsey and Tony Fenton opted for moves to rival radio station Today FM, whilst 2FM has in turn raided Phantom FM for Cormac Battle, Jenny Huston and Dan Hegarty, while Colm & Jim-Jim were poached from FM104. Old stalwarts such as Dave Fanning and Larry Gogan were moved to the weekend to make way for the likes of Rick O'Shea and Nikki Hayes. As part of the expansion of RTÉ's young people's music radio output, an all-music (mostly of the rock genre) sister station of 2FM, RTÉ 2XM, designed for students and young adults, now operates on the RTÉ DAB Multiplex. RTÉ. Accessed 19 October 2008.
The station is recognised as being the first in the world to play any new single released by U2, due to the band's long-term friendship with Dave Fanning.
In 2008, the station captured 17% of the national audience, the second most popular station in Ireland after RTÉ Radio 1 (23%). This was presented by Gerry Ryan from 1988 until his sudden death on 30 April 2010. The Gerry Ryan Show was the longest running show in the station's history.
RTÉ 2fm, like RTÉ Radio 1, technically broadcasts 24 hours a day, however weekday programming from 01:00 until 05:00 is replays of programmes from the previous day along with live news updates on the hour, and weekend overnight hours have been home to specialist music recorded shows since 2001. The station regularly broadcasts live from large Irish music festivals, such as Oxegen, Electric Picnic and Life Festival, and latterly has broadcast live music under the title 2fm XtrAlive (formerly 2fm Live), with the most recorded visiting act being Manic Street Preachers. The series of shows entitled the 2fm 2moro 2our maintained the station's reputation for homegrown live performance promotion as well as offering career boosts to artists such as The Immediate, The Flaws, Ham Sandwich, Concerto For Constantine and David Geraghty.

Radio 2 (1979 - 1988)

RTÉ Radio 2, as it was originally known, began broadcasting on 31 May 1979. It was developed as a response by RTÉ to the pirate radio craze sweeping Dublin and the rest of the country. Its original slogan was "Radio 2 Comin'atcha" and, as well as broadcasting popular music, it carried a number of other musical strands as well as news and current affairs. Its original broadcast frequencies were 612 kHz MW (until 2004) and 90-92 MHz FM. Original DJs included some like Larry Gogan, Vincent Hanley and Jimmy Greeley who transferred from RTÉ Radio 1 and Mark Cagney who transferred from RTE Cork Local Radio. Most of the remaining deejays were recruited directly from the pirate stations, such as Michael McNamara, Declan Meehan, Ronan Collins, Gerry Ryan and Dave Fanning.

2FM (1988 - 1999)

In 1988 after many years presenting a nightly music show called Lights out for around 6 years previously The Gerry Ryan Show, a morning topical radio show, began broadcasts. Not long afterwards, RTÉ began radical changes to Radio 2's format. Most non-pop music programming was dropped. The station was rebranded as "2FM" in 1988. At this stage the basic schedule for the next decade or so was put in place: Ian Dempsey, Gerry Ryan, Larry Gogan, Gareth O'Callaghan, Tony Fenton, Barry Lang, John Kenny and Dave Fanning were staples of this period. Many of these presenters have stayed with 2FM over the years while others have moved to competing stations. In 1998, after 18 years with the station, drivetime presenter Barry Lang left to become an airline pilot, in the Middle East.
2FM in this era was at its most popular. Its mobile broadcasting unit, the roadcaster, made regular trips nationwide, with 2FM organising live events throughout Ireland, such as the "Beat on the Street" with M.C Electric Eddie, Doug Murray, introducing the stations DJs to the vast crowds which gathered at events throughout Ireland and "Lark in the Park". New bands would often get their "big break" by being featured on the Dave Fanning Show. Gerry Ryan's radio show became a national institution.

RTÉ 2fm (2000 - present)

However by 2000, this schedule was looking very stale. In addition, 2FM suffered the high profile departure of Ian Dempsey to the newly established commercial national radio station Today FM. Both Today FM and the emerging independent local radio sector had eroded 2FM's once unassailable listenership base. Tony Fenton was the most recent departure to Today FM in September 2004.
In 1999, veteran producer and disc jockey John Clarke was made Head of 2FM. Unlike the previous people in that position, John had worked his way through a number of pirate stations before joining RTÉ in the late eighties. He rebranded 2FM with a new blue and red logo (as "RTÉ 2fm") and re-arranged the schedule.
During this period (Late 90s/Early 00s) long serving station names such as Andy Ruane, Lorcan Murray, Michael McNamara, Mike Ryan, Suzanne Duffy, Peter Collins, Bob Conway, Simon Young and Gerry Wison disappeared from the schedule.
In 2003, Ryan Tubridy was poached from RTÉ Radio 1 to present The Full Irish breakfast programme; however in 2005 he returned to Radio 1, heralding an era of instability in breakfast broadcasting as first Ruth Scott and Rick O'Shea took charge of The Rick and Ruth Breakfast Show, before being replaced 5 months later by Marty Whelan in September 2005. Whelan has since been ousted as part of the March 2007 revamp to make way for The Colm & Jim-Jim Breakfast Show as 2fm engaged in a spot of poaching for once in persuading Colm Hayes and Jim-Jim Nugent to leave FM104. Canadian Jenny Huston, Dan Hegarty and Kerbdog front-man Cormac Battle also joined the line-up, as did the aforementioned Colm & Jim-Jim and Jennifer Greene.
From 1999 – 2007 Will Leahy presented the most popular weekend show in the station's history, 'The Saturday Show'. It was broadcast live from Limerick each Saturday. This programme ended its run in 2007 with a record 252,000 listeners, the station's second most successful show in its history after only The Gerry Ryan Show.
On 12 January 2007 RTÉ announced a major revamp of 2fm, with the axing of Marty Whelan's breakfast show The new schedule launched on 5 March 2007.
John Clarke resigned unexpectedly his position as Head of RTÉ 2fm on 14 August 2009. McMahon began his reign by bringing in several schedule changes from early 2010, new additions to the station included the arrivals of Hector Ó hEochagáin and Tommy Tiernan live from Galway, and 'Celebrity Sunday' including Louis Walsh, Neil Hannon, Thomas Walsh, Mike Scott and Nicky Byrne.
In the aftermath of the sudden death of Gerry Ryan in 2010, a number of changes were made to the schedule.  Hector Ó hEochagáin headed a very successful breakfast show called 'Breakfast with Hector' which broadcast live from Galway each morning. Ryan Tubridy took over the 9am – 11am slot, with Rick O'Shea the main afternoon anchor. Will Leahy presented the drive time slot, a show which he broadcast live from Limerick for seven years.
In 2014 following the appointment of Dan Healy as head of 2fm, the schedule was revamped. On 17 December 2013 RTÉ announced that Hector Ó hEochagáin would finish presenting the breakfast show. An online campaign protested at the removal of Will Leahy and Hector Ó hEochagáin from their regionally produced shows.

Current presenters and shows

This is the current RTÉ 2fm Schedule.

Budget

References
The following figures were issued by RTÉ as part of their Annual report 2012
Income
Total Costs 
Profit and Loss
Breakdown of Irish Productions
The table below outlines RTÉ 2fm's total in-house and commissioned programming by genre in 2008 and 2012:

Digital sister stations

The launch of digital radio into Ireland has allowed RTÉ to expand their music radio operation. Whereas 2fm has to play a mix of genres and eras of pop, the digital stations can play a wider range of music and focus more tightly on a particular format. RTÉ operates three music-led digital stations, which could be described as sister stations to 2fm:
There is also a chill out music service, RTÉ Chill, which shares a broadcast slot with children station RTÉ Junior.






