[[Southwest Minnesota State University]]

CATEGORIES: North Central Association of Colleges and Schools, American Association of State Colleges and Universities, Universities and colleges in Minnesota, Educational institutions established in 1963, Education in Lyon County, Minnesota, Buildings and structures in Lyon County, Minnesota, Visitor attractions in Lyon County, Minnesota, Planetaria in the United States, Southwest Minnesota State University, 1963 establishments in Minnesota

Southwest Minnesota State University is a public, four-year university that is part of the Minnesota State Colleges and Universities System. It is located in Marshall, Minnesota, United States, a city of 13,680 people.

Academics

Southwest Minnesota State University provides undergraduate education in the liberal arts and professional studies for the following areas: Accounting, Agriculture, Agronomy, Anthropology, Art, Biology, Business Administration, Chemistry, Computer Science, Criminal Justice, Culinology, Economics, Education, English, Environmental Science, Exercise Science, Finance, Foreign Languages, Geography, Global Studies, Hispanic Studies, History, Hospitality Management, Humanities, Indigenous Nations and Dakota Studies, Interdisciplinary Studies, Justice Administration, Liberal Arts and Sciences (AA Degree), Management, Marketing, Mathematics, Music, Philosophy, Physics, Political Science, Psychology, RN to BSN, Social Work, Sociology, Speech Communication, Theatre Arts, and Women's Studies. The university also supports a Center for Rural and Regional Studies, and offers masters degrees in Business Management, Education, Special Education and Physical Education. The most popular majors are Business Administration and Education.
In addition to being regionally accredited by the Higher Learning Commission of the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools, the university also holds accreditation from the National Association of Schools of Music, the Minnesota Board of Teaching, the American Chemical Society and the Council on Social Work Education.
As of August, 2013, Southwest Minnesota State University ranked sixth among colleges and universities in Minnesota for Best Lifetime Return on Investment according to AffordableCollegesOnline. SMSU is the highest-ranked of the seven four-year institutions within the Minnesota State Colleges and Universities (MnSCU) system. The University of Minnesota is ranked second, and the other four institutions in the top six are all private colleges.smsu.edu/today/?articleid=2614

Graduate programs

Southwest Minnesota State University (SMSU) has specialized graduate programs in education, special education, and business administration.smsu.cfm?Id=4223 The SMSU MBA program has degree options in marketing, leadership, and the general MBA.smsu.cfm?Id=4214 Students have the ability to take classes both onsite and online in Minnesota. The graduate school does not currently have a student senate, however there is an MBA student organization that students can be a part of.facebook.

Campus

Most of the SMSU campus was constructed between 1965 and 1973 according to a unified plan. The brick and concrete buildings are interconnected via tunnels and enclosed walkways, providing a continuous and controlled environment during both summer and winter. The residence halls unfortunately are not connected. There are many courtyards with gardens between the buildings. The campus is virtually barrier free, allowing easy access to students in wheelchairs.
The university's residence halls were named by the students during the late 1960s, and reflect various themes and values of the times, e.g. Aquarius, Casa Futura, Methedras and Kama Sutra. Armstrong Hall was named after astronaut, Neil Armstrong in honor of his trip to the moon in 1969. Manchester Hall was named after pop singer, Melissa Manchester after a concert she gave on campus.marshallindependent.pdf
In 2009, the university opened a new constructed residence hall, named Sweetland Hall for a late President Sweetland.
Residence Halls:
There are no fraternities or sororities on campus in order to promote a safe and friendly environment for all students.
The Southwest Marketing Advisory Center (SMAC) is located on the campus of Southwest Minnesota State University. Specifically the second floor of the Science and Technology building room 203. SMAC is a self-funded entity within the academic marketing program at Southwest Minnesota State University (SMSU). Its mission is to service the marketing and research needs of Southwest Minnesota, while giving "real-world" experience to the junior, senior and graduate-level student employees.
Each student attending Southwest Minnesota State University pays a .43 cent per credit fee to fund the Minnesota State University Student Association, a student lead non-profit organization that advocates on behalf of all students.

Athletics

The school athletic teams are the Mustangs. Their colors are the prairie colors of brown and gold.
The Mustangs compete in the Northern Sun Intercollegiate Conference (NSIC), which is a part of NCAA Division II. Programs for men include basketball, wheelchair basketball, baseball, cross country, football, and wrestling. The programs for women are basketball, cross country, golf, soccer, softball, tennis, and volleyball.

History

The university was founded in 1963 as Southwest Minnesota State College (SMSC). It admitted its first class of students on September 19, 1967. The college became Southwest State University (SSU) on August 1, 1975, and kept that name for nearly thirty years until adopting the current name of Southwest Minnesota State University (SMSU) on July 1, 2003.Minnesota State Colleges and Universities News Release, Retrieved January 4, 2007
The student newspaper was originally called The Impact was first published May 10, 1968. The name was changed to The Reader in 1974, and then back to The Impact in 1980.smsu.html In 2003 the name was changed again to The Spur to be more consistent with the Mustang theme and to spur students into action.
The R/A (Recreation/Athletic) Facility was built in 1996 and serves as a 4,000 seat multi-purpose venue.
On January 2, 2002, a fire destroyed the Student Center, which originally featured an underground living area and a glass dome. The concrete framework for the dome was incorporated into the new student and conference center, and is still visible in the food court area. The new student center was completed in 2005. When completed, it featured a replica of the original dome with the words "Student Center Dome: 1972-2002" written on it at the Alumni Heritage Center, located near the Mustang Zone in the upper level.
In 2005, SMSU developed the first bachelors degree culinology program in the nation to be approved by the Research Chefs Association.State of the Nutra Industry, Retrieved January 4, 2007
On September 6, 2008, the new Regional Event Center officially opened on the western edge of campus. The athletic field was named Mattke Field after the old field, and in honor of a past football coach. The center is used by the Mustang football and soccer teams, as well as teams from Marshall High School, and for other regional activities (such as concerts). It took two years and $16 million to complete. (September 10, 2008). Grand opening of the $16 million regional event center goes well. The Spur, Volume 6, Issue 1, Page 1.

Notable alumni

Museums and public attractions

SMSU features several facilities that are open to the general public and school groups.








