[[Yellandu]]

CATEGORIES: Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2001, All articles containing potentially dated statements, Cities and towns in Khammam district

Yellandu, formerly Yellandalapadu is a town and a nagar panchayat in Khammam district in the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh. It is home of the Singareni Collieries Company Limited, a coal mining company., this town has got +100 years of History about coal mining, and produced good mining engineers too. Singareni is the railway station that caters Yellandu. So actually the name of this town was Singareni in the erstwhile Hyderabad state and hence the SCCL company was named after it. However later after the Hyderabad state was merged in India the name of the town was changed to Yellandu.

Geography

Yellandu is located at .Yellandu also called as Boggutta for its coal resources.

Demographics

 Yellandu had a population of 42,417. Males constitute 50% of the population and females 50%. Yellandu has an average literacy rate of 70%, higher than the national average of 59.5%: male literacy is 78%, and female literacy is 62%. In Yellandu, 11% of the population is under 6 years of age.
Yellandu is one of the towns in Yellandu Mandal in Khammam District in Andhra Pradesh State . Yellandu is Main Town for the Yellandu Mandal and also MandalHead. Yellandu is 45.8 km distant from its District Main City Khammam. It is 194 km away from its State Main City Hyderabad.
Nearby villages are Rompaid (2 km), Sudimalla (7.1 km), Komararam (8.5 km), Kambalapalli (11.2 km), Usirikayalapalli (11.5 km). Nearest towns are Yellandu (5.7 km), Singareni (14.2 km), Bayyaram (21 km), Garla (22.4 km). Challa Samudram, Manikyaram, Marrigudem, Raghaboinagudem, Rompaid, and Sudimalla are the villages along with this village in the same Yellandu Mandal.
Yellandu Pin Codes are 507123,507124 and post office name is Yellandu. Other villages in Post Office (507123, Yellandu) are Usirikayalapalli, Bethampudi, Koyagudem, Sulanagar, Rompaid and Sudimalla.
Bhuga vagu divides Yellandu which is started from Yellandula padu cheruvu it is a seasonal nallah, at present drainage water also discharged into this stream.  
yellandu town is heart of singareni coal mines from olden days surrounded with all the old and abandoned underground coal mines, coal deposits locked in that mines which are....some of the mine entries are also sene in the town at no. 2 Basthi, Manu kota busstand, Singareni High School premises, 21 pit areas, which are called as 'ANGAR BAI"  for the purpose of ventilation in mines in the Britishers time. Zandala vagu, Kotilingala, Koragutta, Yellandu to Kothagudem bus route, mango gardens around the Yellandu are picnic spots with beautiful flora and fauna.  BRITISHERS SAMADHI we can see at 24 area as a historical relating to Singareni mines in British era.

Festivals

Yellandu is famous for festivals like Vinayaka Chavithi which was earlier celebrated more colorfully with ganesh pandals by marwadi samaj make them at district level, Diwali,Holi and Dussehra are major festivals a part from these are Sankranthi, Kotamaisamma Jaathara is one of the famous Jaathara's here. Bathukamma is also celebrated here during Dasara season.

Education

Education

There are both private and government schools in Yellandu. Most popular of them are :
Singareni Collieries High School popularly known as S.C.

Higher education

One of the most interesting things about these colleges is that these two colleges will be opposite to each other and most competitive. But the students of both the colleges will be like of the same.

Politics

Telugu Desam Party Had Won The Assembly Seat In 2009 Elections, Abbaiah Vooke has Become the Member Of Legislative Assembly.
Congress won Municipalicty Chairmanship.
sri.and state mahila secretary congress party leader is katakam padmavathi

Spiritual organisations

Yellandu is a place rich in spiritual organisations like Pyramid Spiritual Society, Gayatri parivar and Brahma Kumaris. It has numerous temples and kotamysamma jatara is a very big event which takes place during Dussera and with lot of crowds gathered.2 Basthi and around 8 kilometer from Yellandu in the Forest one more very famous darga is situated, name Hazrath Nagulmeera Darga sharif.
Sri Durga matha pooja especially in "Dasara navarathri utsavalu " at  singareni coal mines is a traditional, highlighting the  bhakti of singareni employees .




