[[Sharon den Adel]]

CATEGORIES: 1974 births, 20th-century singers, 21st-century singers, Dutch fashion designers, Dutch female singers, Dutch heavy metal singers, Dutch mezzo-sopranos, Dutch singer-songwriters, Female heavy metal singers, Female singer-songwriters, Living people, People from Waddinxveen, Rock singer-songwriters, Within Temptation members

Sharon Janny den Adel (born 12 July 1974) is a Dutch singer and composer, best known as the lead vocalist and one of the main songwriters in the Dutch symphonic metal/rock band Within Temptation. She has been a performing musician since the age of 14, and was a founding member of the band Within Temptation, along with Robert Westerholt, in 1996.

Personal life

Sharon Janny den Adel was born on 12 July 1974 in Waddinxveen, South Holland, Netherlands. She traveled extensively in her youth,
Den Adel and long-term partner Robert Westerholt have three children together (daughter Eva Luna, sons Robin Aiden and Logan Arwin), and they currently live near Hilversum, Netherlands. Den Adel was pregnant with their first child, Eva Luna (born 7 December 2005), during The Silent Force tour.  On 22 February 2009, den Adel announced that she was pregnant with her second child,A new kid on the block Robin Aiden Westerholt, whose birth was announced on the band's official website on 1 June 2009. Going by the name of Aiden, he was born premature at 32 weeks and 6 days. The birth of her son, Logan Arwin, was announced on 31 March 2011.

Training and vocal profile

Den Adel never formally studied singing and stated in a 2006 interview that she had sung a short while in a choir and was mostly self-taught.

Within Temptation

Together with her partner, Robert Westerholt, den Adel formed Within Temptation (initially called The Portal, though the name was changed before their first recording) in 1996. She has defined their work as epic and cinematic.Roadrunner Records UK 
Before Within Temptation became famous, she worked for a fashion company, leaving after the band found success with their hit single "Ice Queen". She utilises her fashion expertise by designing her stage costumes and the band's merchandise.

Collaborations with other artists

Sharon den Adel has performed on-stage and in the studio with several notable artists, including Armin van Buuren, After Forever, De Heideroosjes, Oomph!, Delain, Agua de Annique and Anneke van Giersbergen. She sang the part of Anna Held in Tobias Sammet's Avantasia projects, and the part of the Indian on Ayreon's rock opera Into the Electric Castle. She sang the vocals of one Timo Tolkki song, "Are You The One?", co-wrote and provided the vocals for the track "In And Out Of Love" from Armin van Buuren's 2008 album Imagine, and sang on the track "No Compliance" for Delain's album Lucidity, as well as working with the band Voyage on the track "Frozen" (not to be confused with the Within Temptation song of the same title). At the 2009 edition of the Night of the Proms festival, den Adel made a guest appearance during John Miles' performance of "Stairway to Heaven".

Discography

Within Temptation

Guest appearances

Videography

Within Temptation

Guest appearances

Awards

Notes




