[[The Comedy Network]]

CATEGORIES: Canadian analog cable television networks, Bell Media, Canadian comedy and humour, Television channels and stations established in 1997, Comedy television networks, English-language television stations in Canada

The Comedy Network (often referred to as simply "Comedy") is a Canadian English language Category A specialty channel that is owned by Bell Media. The channel specializes in comedy programming, including original and acquired series, films and stand-up comedy specials. The Comedy Network operates two time-shifted feeds, running on Eastern and Pacific Time Zone schedules.

History

In September 1996, 1155636 Ontario Inc. (a company majority controlled by Baton Broadcasting, with the remaining interests held by Shaw Cable, Astral Broadcasting and Les Films Rozon inc.) was granted a television broadcasting licence by the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) for The Comedy Network.
The channel launched on October 17, 1997,The Comedy Network Turns 10 Today and Goes Full-On-Cyber with Revolutionary Revamped Website with the slogan Time Well Wasted, a variation of the U.S.-based channel A&E's then-slogan "Time Well Spent". The slogan was used until the network's overhaul on November 1, 2011.
Through various acquisitions over the years, Shaw, Astral and Les Films Rozon sold their interest in the service to Baton, which became Bell Globemedia in 2001 and was renamed CTVglobemedia in 2007, then Bell Media in 2011 following its acquisition by Bell Canada.
The Comedy Network maintained a consistent look since its incarnation in 1997. The 'yellow oval' logo (which has undergone slight modifications throughout its use) was in use since the network's launch in 1997 until November 1, 2011, when The Comedy Network was relaunched with a new look, consisting a new simplified logo and revamped on-air presentation. 1 Bell Media press release 2011-10-28
In August 2013, the CRTC denied an amendment that would allow The Comedy Network to run more younger-oriented programs, especially animations, as it would lead the channel to compete with Teletoon and BiteTV.gc.htm Due to this, several programs targeted mainly to younger demographics, including Conan and even several Comedy Central programs, moved to sister channel MuchMusic.thecomedynetwork.muchmusic.com/find-out-where-your-favourite-shows-moved-with-this-handy-guide/

Programming

The Comedy Network airs a variety of comedy-related programming including sitcoms, sketch comedy series, reality television series, talk shows, stand-up, movies and animation.

Relationship with Comedy Central

The Comedy Network, since its beginning, has held a relationship with its American counterpart, Comedy Central, broadcasting many of its programs in Canada. This relationship was strengthened in June 2007 when The Comedy Network's parent company announced a deal with Comedy Central for exclusive Canadian rights to the entire Comedy Central library of past and present programs on all electronic platforms, under a multi-year agreement with Viacom.

Successes and awards

Some original Comedy Network shows like Puppets Who Kill, Odd Job Jack and Kevin Spencer developed cult followings with loyal fan bases. Several original programs including Puppets Who Kill, Comedy Now! and The Gavin Crawford Show have won Canadian Comedy Awards, and several shows produced in partnership with parent network CTV have also been quite successful, including Corner Gas's Canadian Comedy Award wins, six Gemini Award wins, seven Leo Award wins and an International Emmy nomination.

Related Services

Comedy Gold

On August 2, 2010, TV Land Canada was rebranded as Comedy Gold, turning the channel into an offshoot of The Comedy Network. Comedy Gold focuses primarily on sitcoms from the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s, similar to the original format of the channel under the brand licensing agreement with TV Land.

The Comedy Network HD

On July 12, 2012, The Comedy Network launched a high definition simulcast feed called The Comedy Network HD. It is available on Bell TV, Bell Fibe TV, Sasktel, Shaw Cable and Telus Optik TV.






