[[Polyoxometalate]]

CATEGORIES: Oxoanions, Cluster chemistry, Catalysts

In chemistry, a polyoxometalate (abbreviated POM) is a polyatomic ion, usually an anion, that consists of three or more transition metal oxyanions linked together by shared oxygen atoms to form a large, closed 3-dimensional framework.
The metal atoms are usually group 5 or group 6 transition metals in their high oxidation states. In this state, their electron configuration is d0 or d1. Examples include vanadium(V), niobium(V), tantalum(V), molybdenum(VI), and tungsten(VI).
The framework of transition metal oxyanions may enclose one or more hetero atoms such as phosphorus or silicon, themselves sharing neighbouring oxygen atoms with the framework. For example, the phosphotungstate anion PW12O403− consists of a framework of twelve octahedral tungsten oxyanions surrounding a central phosphate group.

History

The first example of a polyoxometalate compound was ammonium phosphomolybdate, containing the PMo12O403 anion, discovered in 1826. Gouzerh, M. Che; L'Actualité Chimique, 2006, 298, 9 This anion has the same structure as the phosphotungstate anion, whose structure was determined in 1934. This structure is called the Keggin structure after its discoverer.F. Keggin. Proc. Roy. Soc., A, 144, 851, 75-100 (1934) 
Following this discovery, other fundamental structures such as the Wells-Dawson ion were found, and their chemistry and applications as catalysts were determined.
Recent new developments include the discovery of large, highly symmetric polyoxomolybdates such as the wheel-shaped molybdenum blue anions and spherical keplerates, numerous hybrid organic/inorganic materials that contain POM cores,Y.-F. Song, D.-L. Long, and L. Cronin, Non covalently connected frameworks with nanoscale channels assembled from a tethered polyoxometalate- pyrene hybrid, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 3900-3904  new potential applications based on unusual magneticClassical and Quantum Magnetism in Giant Keplerate Magnetic Molecules Achim Müller, Marshall Luban, Robert Modler, Paul Kögerler, Maria Axenovich, Jürgen Schnack, Paul Canfield, Sergey Bud'ko, Neil Harrison. ChemPhysChem 2001, 2, 517. and opticalField-dependent magnetic parameters in Ni4Mo12: Magnetostriction at the molecular level? Jürgen Schnack, Mirko Brüger, Marshall Luban, Paul Kögerler, Emilia Morosan, Ronald Fuchs, Robert Modler, Hiroyuki Nojiri, Ram C. Rai, Jinbo Cao, Janice L. Musfeldt, Xing Wei. Phys. Rev. B 2006, 73, 094401. properties of some POM's, and potential medical applications such anti-tumor and anti-viral uses.

Structure

Some structural types are found in many different compounds. The first known example of this was the Keggin ion, whose structure was found to be common to both molybdates and tungstates with different central hetero atoms. Examples of some fundamental polyoxometalate structures are shown below. The Lindqvist ion is an iso-polyoxometalate, the other three are hetero-polyoxometalates. The Keggin and Dawson structures have tetrahedrally coordinated hetero-atoms, such as P or Si, and the Anderson structure has an octahedral central atom, such as aluminium.

Framework

The metal atoms that make up the framework, called addenda atoms, are typically molybdenum, tungsten, and vanadium. When more than one element is present the cluster is called a mixed addenda cluster.
The ligands coordinated to metal atoms that together form the bridged framework are usually oxide ions, but other elements, such as S and Br may be substituted for some of the oxide ions. John Errington, Richard L. Wingad, William Clegg, Mark R. J. Elsegood Angewandte Chemie 39, 21 ,3884 – 3886 Polyoxometalates: From Platonic Solids to Anti-Retroviral Activity By Michael Thor Pope, Achim Müller Springer (1994) ISBN 0-7923-2421-8
The typical framework building blocks are polyhedral units, with 4, 5, 6 or 7 coordinate metal centres. These units share edges and/or vertices, or, less commonly, faces (such as in the ion CeMo12O428, which has face-shared octahedra with Mo atoms at the vertices of an icosahedronA New Structural Type for Heteropoly Anions. The Crystal Structure of (NH4)2H6(CeMo12O42)12H2O DD Dexter, JV Silverton - Journal of the American Chemical Society, 1968, 3589).
The most common unit for polymolybdates is the octahedral MoO6 unit, often distorted by the Mo atom being off-centre to give one shorter Mo-O bond. Some polymolybdates contain pentagonal bipyramidal units; these are the key building blocks in the molybdenum blues.

Hetero atoms

Hetero atoms are present in many polyoxometalates. Many different elements can act as hetero atoms, with various coordination numbers:
The hetero atom may be located in the centre of the anion, such as in the Keggin structure, or in the center of a structural fragment, such as the two phosphorus atoms in the Dawson ion, which are central to its two symmetric fragments.
Polyoxometalates bear similarities to clathrate structures. The Keggin ion, for example, can be formulated as  The @ notation denotes the physical enclosure of the left-hand side in the right-hand side.
Some cage structures that contain other ions are known. For example, the vanadate cage V18O42 can enclose a Cl ion. Müller, H. Reuter, S. Dillinger. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 1995, 34, 2328. This structure has 5-coordinate, square pyramidal vanadium units linked together.

Isomerism

Structural isomerism is common in POMs. For example, the Keggin structure has 5 isomers, which are obtained by (conceptually) rotating one or more of the four M3O13 units through 60°.
The five isomers of Keggin structure.

Lacunary structures

The structure of some POM's are derived from a larger POM's structure by removing one or more addenda atoms and their attendant oxide ions, giving a defective structure called a lacunary structure. An example of a compound with a Dawson lacunary structure is As2W15O56. Synthesis and heteroatom effects in Wells–Dawson-derived sandwich complexes  I.M. Mbomekalle, B. Keita, L. Nadjo, P. Berthet, W. A. Neiwert, C.L. Hill, M.D. Ritorto and T. M. Anderson, Dalton Trans., 2003, 2646 - 2650, 

Polyoxometalates outside Group 5 and 6 metals

Polyoxometalates with addenda atoms outside Group 5 and 6 transition metals are known. Examples include the dodecatitanates Ti12O16(OPri)16 (where OPri stands for an alkoxy group)Dodecatitanates: a new family of stable polyoxotitanates V. W. Day, T. A. Eberspacher, W. G. Klemperer, and C. W. Park J. Am. Chem. Soc.; 1993; 115(18) pp 8469 - 8470;  These structures are also categorised as POM's, and are known as polyoxoalkoxometalates due to the presence of the alkoxy groups.

Properties and applications

The huge range of size, structure and elemental composition of known polyoxometalates leads to a wide range of different properties.
The Keggin ions are well-known to be thermally stable and reversibly reduced by accepting electrons. This makes them useful as catalysts for a range of organic reactions.
Some POM's exhibit luminescence.Regular Two-Dimensional Molecular Array of Photoluminescent Anderson-type Polyoxometalate Constructed by Langmuir-Blodgett Technique  Takeru Ito, Hisashi Yashiro, Toshihiro Yamase, Langmuir, 22 (6), 2806 -2810, (2006) 
There have been reports on the role of weak- or non-bonding interactions on the crystal engineering of hybrid polyoxometalates.Role of H-Bonded Interactions in the Crystal Packing of Phenylenediammonium Phosphomolybdates Shailesh Upreti and Arunachalam Ramanan, Crystal Growth & Design, 2006, 6(9), 2066-2071 
Spherical nanoporous polyoxomolybdate-based capsules of different types containing more than 100 metal atoms reported by Achim Müller and his group have versatile unique properties regarding their assembly into vesicles and the chemistry which can be done inside the pores and cavities. A discrete polyoxometalate Lindqvist ion of the form W6O192 was successfully imaged recently for the first time within the capillary of a carbon nanotube following steric locking of the anion with the tubule. In situ relaxation of the anion in its equatorial plane was demonstrated. Kirkland, and Emmanuel Flahaut, ACS Nano, 2(5), 966–976, 2008. 
Some structures containing transition metal atoms with unpaired electrons have unusual magnetic propertiesPolyoxovanadates: High-Nuclearity Spin Clusters with Interesting Host-Guest Systems and Different Electron Populations. Synthesis, Spin Organization, Magnetochemistry, and Spectroscopic Studies A Müller, R Sessoli,E Krickemeyer,    H Bögge,    J Meyer,    D Gatteschi, L Pardi, J Westphal, K Hovemeier, R Rohlfing, J Döring, F Hellweg, C Beugholt and M Schmidtmann Inorg. Chem., 36 (23), 5239 -5250, 1997. and are being investigated as possible nanocomputer storage devices (see qubits). Lehmann, A. Gaita-Ariño, E. Coronado, D. Loss Nature Nanotechnology 2, 312 - 317 (2007) 
Some potential "green" applications have been reported, such as a non-chlorine based, wood pulp bleaching process,Alternatives for lignocellulosic pulp delignification using polyoxometalates and oxygen: a review A. R. Gaspar, J. A. F. Gamelas, D. V. Evtuguin and C P Neto Green Chem., 2007, 9, 717 - 730, 
Polyoxometalates can be reduced by electrons from conduction band of wide-band-gap semiconductors, which expands applications of polyoxometalates into energy storage and conversions. 
Many potential medicinal applications have been reported, such as anti-tumoral and anti-viral applications. Rhule, Craig L. Hill, and Deborah A. Judd Chem. Rev., 98 (1), 327 -358, 1998.



Further reading


