[[Texas State University System]]

CATEGORIES: Universities and colleges in Texas, American Association of State Colleges and Universities, Public university systems in the United States, Education in Texas

The Texas State University System (alternately TSUS) was created in 1911 to oversee the state's normal schools. Since its creation it has broadened its focus and comprises institutions of many different scopes. It is the oldest university system in Texas. Over the years, several member schools have joined the TSUS or moved to other university systems. The Texas State University System saw its largest growth in 1995 when the Lamar University System was incorporated into the TSUS. The incorporation saw four schools join the system: Lamar University, Lamar Institute of Technology, Lamar State College-Orange, and Lamar State College-Port Arthur. Today, the system encompasses eight institutions.tsus.html
The system is headquartered in the Thomas J. Rusk State Office Building at 200 East 10th Street, Suite 600, in Downtown Austin."Contact Us." Texas State University System. "The Texas State University System Thomas J. Rusk Building 208 E. 10th Street, Suite 600 Austin, Texas 78701-2407"
The Texas State University System is governed by a nine member Board of Regents appointed by the Texas Governor. In addition, a nonvoting student regent is appointed annually to the Board. The administration is headed by a board-appointed Chancellor, who is based in Austin. The Board of Regents has the following members: Charlie Amato (Chairman), Donna N. Williams (Vice Chairman), Dr. Jaime Garza, Kevin J. Lilly, Ron Mitchell, David Montagne, Trisha Pollard, Rossanna Salazar, Michael Truncale and Ryan Bridges (Student Regent).

Component institutions

Lamar University

Lamar University, often referred to as Lamar or LU, is a comprehensive coeducational doctoral granting public university located in Beaumont, Texas. The school began as a junior college in 1923 before becoming a four-year institution in 1951 and a university in 1971. Lamar is classified as a Doctoral Research University by the Carnegie Commission on Higher Education, which places it in the top 7% of all US institutions of higher learning.carnegiefoundation.php?clq={%22basic2005_ids%22:%2217%22}&start_page=standard.php&limit=0,50 The university has been a member of The Texas State University System since 1995 and was previously the largest member of the now defunct Lamar University System. As of Fall 2010, the university had 14,388 students, the highest enrollment in the university's 88-year history. Lamar's main academic offerings are Business, Education, and Engineering though it offers a wide variety of fields of study. The average starting salary for a Lamar graduate is among the highest in Texas. The median starting salary for a Lamar graduate is $42,000 and the median mid-career salary is $77,400. Lamar students have the highest median starting and mid-career salaries in the Texas State University System.payscale.asp Lamar has the highest endowment to student ratio in the TSUS.

Texas State University

Texas State University is a doctoral-granting university located in San Marcos, Texas. In Fall 2012, the university had a record-high enrollment of 34,229 students. Texas State is the largest institution in the Texas State University System, the fifth-largest university in Texas, and one of the fifty-five largest universities in the United States. The only university in the state to have a former United States President as an alumnus, President Lyndon B. Johnson graduated from what was then Southwest Texas State Teachers College in 1930 with a teaching certificate and a Bachelor of Science in history.

Sam Houston State University

Sam Houston State University (known as SHSU or Sam) was founded in 1879 and is a public university located in Huntsville, Texas. It is one of the oldest purpose-built institutions for the instruction of teachers west of the Mississippi River and the first such institution of its type in the State of Texas. It is named for one of Texas' founding fathers, Sam Houston, who made his home in the city. SHSU is part of the Texas State University System and has an enrollment of 18,000 students. The institution is classified as a Doctoral/Research University by the Carnegie Commission on Higher Education. The Carnegie classification distinguishes the university by placing it in the top 7 percent of all institutions of higher education in the country.

Other institutions






