[[Nirvana]]

CATEGORIES: Buddhist philosophical concepts, Buddhist terms, Hindu philosophical concepts, Jain philosophical concepts, Sikh beliefs, Salvation


In the Buddhist context nirvana refers to the imperturbable stillness of mind after the fires of desire, aversion, and delusion have been finally extinguished. In Hindu philosophy, it is the union with the divine ground of existence Brahman (Supreme Being) and the experience of blissful egolessness.

Etymology

Phonetics

Nirvāṇa is a composed of three phones ni and va and na:
| url         = 
| title       = Overview of Buddhist Philosophy: Nirvana
| work        = Myoko-in Temple "Wondrous Light Temple" Anchorage, Alaska
| publisher   = White Lotus Center for Shin Buddhism
| location    = Anchorage, Alaska
| archiveurl  = 
| archivedate = April 20, 2009
| accessdate  = April 5, 2011
| quote       = nirvana is a compound of the prefix nir- (ni, nis, nih) which means "out, away from, without", and the root vâna (P. vâti) which can be translated as "blowing" as in "blowing of the wind", but also as "smelling, etc"
}}[/ref]
[/ref]
Vana is forest in/of the forest/forests; composed of flowers and other items of the forest.,Web Search phrase: Sanskrit vana but vana has both phones van and va.  Van has both an auspicious and ominous aspect:
[/ref]

Abhidharma

The abhidharma-mahāvibhāsa-sāstra, a sarvastivādin commentary, 3rd century BCE and later, describes[ref]
[/ref] the possible etymological interpretations of the word nirvana. {{refn|group=note|Concerning the term three roots in the table:
Each of the five aggregates is called a skandha, which means "tree trunk." All five skandha serve to inform the study of experience, or else missing their causal relations leads away from the path to nirvana.  Skandha also means "heap" or "pile" or "mass," which is the nature of their interdependence, like an endless knot's path, or a forest.

Origins

Nirvāṇa is a term used in Hinduism, or sādhanā.
The idea of moksha is connected to the Vedic culture, which had notion of amrtam, "immortality",
Although the term occurs in the literatures of a number of ancient Indian traditions, the concept is most commonly associated with Buddhism. It was later adopted in the Bhagavad Gita of the Mahabharata.

Jainism

The terms moksa and nirvana are often used interchangeably in the Jain texts. When an enlightened human, such as an arihant or a Tirthankara, extinguishes his remaining aghatiya karmas and thus ends his worldly existence, it is called nirvāṇa. Jains celebrate Diwali as the day of nirvāṇa of Mahavira.
 Uttaradhyana Sutra provides an account of Gautama explaining the meaning of nirvāṇa to Kesi, a disciple of Parshva.

Buddhism

In the Buddhist tradition, nirvana is described as the extinguishing of the fires that cause suffering. These fires are typically identified as the fires of attachment (raga), aversion (dvesha) and ignorance (moha or avidya). When the fires are extinguished, suffering (dukkha) comes to an end. The cessation of suffering is described as complete peace.
Bhikkhu Bodhi states:

Hinduism

According to Zaehner and "many commentators",

Moksha

In Hinduism, moksha is the liberation from the cycle of birth and death and one's worldly conception of self. According to Hindson & Caner, when a person achieves moksha, they have reached nirvana; while according to Flood, "The attainment of nirvana is thus moksa."
Moksha is derived from the root mu(n)c () appears, which means to be set free or release - such as of a horse from its harness.
According to Aurobindo, the last bondage is the passion for liberation itself, which must be renounced before the soul can be perfectly free, and the last knowledge is the realisation that there is none bound, none desirous of freedom, but the soul is for ever and perfectly free, that bondage is an illusion and the liberation from bondage is an illusion too.

Brahmanirvana in the Bhagavad Gita

Brahma nirvana (nirvana in Brahman) is the state of release or liberation; the union with the divine ground of existence (Brahman) and the experience of blissful ego-lessness.
According to Helena Blavatsky, in the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna explains that Brahma nirvana can be attained by one who is capable of cognizing the essence of Brahman; by getting rid of vices, becoming free from duality, free from the worldly attractions and anger, dedicated to spiritual pursuits, having subdued thoughts and cognized Atman, and dedicating oneself to the good of all.24, 5,25, 5.26
According to Mahatma Gandhi, the Hindu and Buddhist understanding of nirvana are different:

According to Gavin Flood, 

Brahma Kumaris

In Brahma Kumaris philosophy, nirvana is reaching the meta world called paramdham (supreme abode) or shantidham (abode of peace) and is the highest of the three worlds. It is the original home of the soul and Supreme Soul, Shiva.



Notes



Published references

Web-references

Sources

Further reading




