[[Minnesota State University, Mankato]]

CATEGORIES: Minnesota State University, Mankato, Universities and colleges in Minnesota, North Central Association of Colleges and Schools, American Association of State Colleges and Universities, National Football League summer camp sites, Education in Blue Earth County, Minnesota, Education in Le Sueur County, Minnesota, Education in Nicollet County, Minnesota, Buildings and structures in Blue Earth County, Minnesota, Mankato, Minnesota, Educational institutions established in 1867

The Minnesota State University, Mankato (MNSU) is a public comprehensive university located in Mankato, Minnesota, a community of 53,000 located 

History

The school was founded in 1868 with an enrollment of only 27 students. It was the first public college in the United States to be headed by a woman, suffragette Julia Sears, in 1872. right|thumb|250px|The Ostrander-Student Memorial Bell Tower stands in the MSU campus arboretum. Its construction was made possible by a donation from Lloyd B. Ostrander, a 1927 MSU graduate, his wife, Mildred, and donations from the MSU Student Association and other contributors. The Bell Tower was completed in 1989.
The University has previously been named:

Principals

Presidents

Academic profile

Minnesota State University currently offers 158 undergraduate programs of study, including 16 preprofessional programs, and 82 graduate programs. These are divided into six colleges:

Reputation and rankings

It also confers master's degrees in these areas, and is the first institution in the United States to offer a Master of Fine Arts degree in Forensics. Doctorates are offered in nursing practice, education, and psychology.
The university is accredited by 25 national accrediting agencies, including the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools.
Minnesota State University also has an online learning program with undergraduate and graduate programs of study that can be completed fully online.

Notable Programs

Doctorate of Psychology in School Psychology

Minnesota State University offers a doctoral degree in school psychology (Psy.D.).  The program accepted its first cohort in fall of 2008. Doctoral students in this program are trained in both psychology and education. This training emphasizes preparation in mental health and educational interventions, child development, learning, behavior, motivation, curriculum and instruction, assessment, consultation, collaboration, school law, and systems. Students with this degree can work in a variety of settings.

Master of Arts Program in Industrial and Organizational Psychology

Minnesota State University offers an I/O Psychogy Master's Programs. In SIOP's (Society for Industrial and Organization Psychology) last rankings of MA/MS programs, Minnesota State Mankato's program ranked first in students' ratings, fifth in program resources, and 7th in program culture.siop.aspx Students are able to present their research at the annual Midwest Psychology Conference in Owatonna, MN along with various other presentation opportunities around the United States.mnsu.html The I/O Department also runs their own consulting company entitled The Organizational Effectiveness Research Group. Students are able to gain first hand experience working in this consulting firm while completing their degree.

Masters Degree in Experiential Education

The Masters Degree in Experiential Education at Minnesota State University is the oldest graduate degree program in experiential education in the United States.mnsu.html The program is located in the Educational Leadership department and offers continually-increasing options for graduate students to explore their passions in experiential education. This program was originally started in 1971, as a joint venture between Minnesota State Mankato and Minnesota Outward Bound School (now a part of Outward Bound Wilderness).mnsu.

Student life

There arre five student housing complexes on or near campus:

Cost per credit

When the University began each student attending MSU paid a fee of $0.43 per credit hour. As of 2012, the cost per credit is up to $250

Music

The Music Department at Minnesota State offers four degree programs in Performance, Education, Music Industry, and a Bachelor's in Music, as well as a minor in music. The Department has seven performing student ensembles, The University Chorale, the Concert Choir, the Symphonic Wind Band, the Concert Wind Ensemble, the University Orchestra, the Jazz Mavericks Big Band, and the Jazz Lab Band. Students participate in a variety of other ensembles and musical experiences, including community groups. These ensembles are open to all MSU students.

Athletics

The athletic teams are known as the Minnesota State Mavericks with school colors of purple and gold. More than 500 students participate each year in athletics each year for the University. It offers teams in men's and women's hockey and basketball, football, baseball, golf, women's swimming, track, cross country, women's tennis, wrestling, soccer, golf, volleyball, and softball. The men's and women's ice hockey teams both compete in the NCAA Division I Western Collegiate Hockey Association (WCHA), along with four other Minnesota-based college teams.  Other university athletic teams began competing in the Northern Sun Intercollegiate Conference of NCAA Division II in 2008-09 following the disbandment of the North Central Conference.
Minnesota State University has been the location of the summer training camp for the Minnesota Vikings National Football League team for over 45 years.
The Minnesota State women's basketball team won the 2009 NCAA Division II national championship with a 103–94 win over Franklin Pierce University on March 27, 2009 in San Antonio.  The combined score of the game (197 points) established a championship tournament record for most points in a game by two teams.
The university's baseball team is known mostly for their outstanding shortstop Sophmore Connor McCallum and Junior pitcher Mathias Butala, who both lead the baseball team to 2nd place at the Division II Baseball World Series in Cary, North Carolina in 2013. 

Notable alumni








