[[Lamar University]]

CATEGORIES: Lamar University, Educational institutions established in 1923, Education in Beaumont, Texas, Buildings and structures in Beaumont, Texas, Visitor attractions in Jefferson County, Texas

Lamar University, often referred to as Lamar or LU, is a comprehensive coeducational public research university located in Beaumont, Texas, United States. Lamar confers bachelor's, master's and doctoral degrees and is classified as a Doctoral Research University by the Carnegie Commission on Higher Education. Lamar has been a member of the Texas State University System since 1995. It was previously the flagship institution of the now defunct Lamar University System. As of Fall 2013, the university enrollment was 14,054 students.  Lamar University recently concluded its first-ever comprehensive campaign, exceeding the campaign goal of $125M with a final campaign tally of $132M.
Lamar University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools. It is characterized as a National University in the 2011 edition of U.S. News & World Report. Lamar is a member of the stateu online academic partnership, which offers high school students the opportunity to earn college credits before college. Lamar was one of 10 colleges nationwide named to the Great Colleges to Work For Honor Roll by the Chronicle of Higher Education in 2009. 
In July 2010 Lamar was chosen to join the Gulf Project, a coalition of scientists, policy experts and researchers working to protect Texas' economy and environment in the event of a disaster, such as the Deepwater Horizon explosion in the Gulf of Mexico.

History

Founding and establishment

Louis R. Pietzsch founded a public junior college in Beaumont's South Park. He had become intensely interested in the junior college movement while enrolled in summer school at the University of Chicago in 1918, and by 1921, was convinced that South Park should have a junior college. 
Lamar University started on September 17, 1923 as South Park Junior College, operating on the unused third floor of the new South Park High School, Pietzsch acted as the first president of the college. South Park Junior College became the first college in Texas to receive Texas Department of Education approval during the first year of operation, and became fully accredited in 1925. 

Early growth and campus changes

In 1932, the college administration, recognizing that the junior college was serving the region rather than just the community, renamed it as Lamar College. It was named for Mirabeau B. Lamar, the second president of the Republic of Texas. Because he arranged to set aside land in counties for public schools, he is regarded as the "Father of Texas Education." A statue of him was installed in the quadrangle of the campus near the Setzer Student Center. The inscription is: "The cultivated mind is the guardian genius of democracy and, while guided and controlled by virtue, the noblest attribute of man. It is the only dictator that freemen acknowledge and the only security that freemen desire." 
In 1933, the college was moving toward independence from South Park High School when construction began on new facilities. By 1942, the college was completely independent of the South Park school district, and operations moved to the current campus.

Lamar State College of Technology

With the end of World War II, an influx of veterans boosted enrollment. The Lamar board of trustees asked the Texas Legislature to promote Lamar College to a four-year state college. The initial attempt in 1947, led by Texas Representative Jack Brooks failed, but the following year the bill passed both houses. On June 14, 1949, Governor Beauford Jester signed the bill creating Lamar State College of Technology; it was to focus on engineering and science, an emphasis that continues today.

Path to university status

Enrollment continued to grow throughout the 1950s and 1960s, reaching 10,000 students. Graduate work was authorized in 1960, when master's degrees were offered in several fields. The enrollment plateaued in the 1970s as the baby boomers generation reached adulthood. 
In 1969, Lamar State College opened its first branch at a center in Orange, Texas. In 1970, Lamar State College began offering its first doctoral program, the Doctor of Engineering. In 1971 the college's name was officially changed to Lamar University.

Modern history

In 1975, the university merged with Port Arthur College in Port Arthur, Texas, creating Lamar University-Port Arthur. In 1983, state Senator Carl A. Parker sponsored a bill creating the Lamar University System. In 1986, Lamar University-Orange and Lamar University-Port Arthur were granted accreditation separate from the main campus. Lamar Institute of Technology was created in 1990 in Beaumont to provide technical, business, health, and industrial education through programs two years or fewer in length.
In 1995, the Lamar University System was incorporated into the Texas State University System, with the Lamar State College - Orange, Lamar State College - Port Arthur and Lamar Institute of Technology campuses becoming separate entities within the system. In the fall of 1998 the Lamar University faculty numbered 423 and student enrollment was 8,241. Since the reorganization, Lamar University's enrollment has continually increased. 
Total enrollment reached 15,000 students in Fall 2012. Recently numerous construction projects have revitalized or replaced old buildings. In addition football was revived as a varsity sport.
The campus was moved to the current site in 1942 because the school had outgrown its current location and taken on a more regional role. In the late 1990s, Lamar began undertaking campus improvement projects. Most buildings on the campus dated to the late 1960s and 70s. Many older buildings in the northern part of the campus were gutted and refinished one-by-one.
In 2001, the University began replacing its 1960s-vintage residence halls with new apartment-style housing facilities, dubbed "Cardinal Village." Older campus housing facilities have been demolished as the Cardinal Village complex has expanded to meet demand. Demand for on-campus housing has risen, coinciding with the opening of the new residence halls. Cardinal Village II, III & IV were built specifically to meet these demands. 
In March 2005, the McDonald Gym temporarily closed. The gym underwent extensive renovation and adjacent to it, a new recreational sports center was built. The $19 million center, named the Sheila Umphrey Recreational Sports Center, opened in April 2007.edu climbing wall; basketball, volleyball and badminton courts; racquetball, handball and squash courts; a wellness and fitness center; health food café and juice bar; lounge areas with pool tables; an outdoor putting green; and air hockey, foosball, video games and TV.

Image:LUMontagneCenterNight.jpg|Montagne Center, home of Cardinals Basketball
Image:ArcherPhysicsBuilding.JPG|Archer Physics Building
Image:LUBusStopRolfeChristopher.jpg|Lamar Bus Stop
Image:LUCardinalVillageFullBloom.jpg|Cardinal Village in full bloom
Image:LUMJGrayLibrary6272011.jpg|Mary and John Gray Library
Image:LUCherryBuildingChemEngWinter.jpg|Cherry Building 
Image:LUQuadLucasBuilding.jpg|Lucas Building and Quad at night
Image:LURothwellRecitalHall .jpg|Rothwell Recital Hall interior
Image:LUSetzerCenterTreeView.jpg|Setzer Student Center
Image:LUJGrayCenterFountain.jpg|John Gray Center

In August 2007, the University completed construction on Cardinal Village IV, a $16-million expansion of its state-of-the-art residence halls.edu The University completed construction of Cardinal Village Phase V in August 2010 bringing on-campus housing capacity to 2,500 students.
The University, in anticipation of the return of football program in 2010, renovated and upgraded Provost Umphrey Stadium (formerly Cardinal Stadium) and a new state-of-the-art Dauphin Athletic Complex.edu

Academics

Lamar offers 63 undergraduate, 47 master's and nine doctoral degree programs in five academic colleges, these include the College of Engineering, College of Education and Human Development, College of Business, College of Fine Arts and Communication and the College of Arts and Sciences. Lamar is classified as a Doctoral Research University by the Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education and is one of only two universities classified as such within the Texas State University System.
The university also has many academic units that fall outside of the five main colleges. The College of Graduate Studies handles graduate students. The Center for Teaching and Learning Enhancement offers training and support to faculty and runs the university's Active and Collaborative Engagement for Students (ACES) Program. The ACES program is designed to provide support to high risk students and integrate active learning methods into all core courses at LU. The university also provides secondary education through the Texas Academy for Leadership in the Humanities, stateu.
In the summer of 2009, Lamar University partnered with the University of Texas at Arlington to create an online dual credit program for high school students in Texas, stateu.  The partnership between the two universities operates at the website stateu.
The BAAS online degree completion program, an expansion of a degree the University has offered for almost 20 years, is offered online through Lamar University Academic Partnerships.  The online degree completion program is priced affordably at one of the lowest tuition rates in the country.
The Texas Academy of Leadership in the Humanities (better known as TALH), is a dual-credit high school program created for gifted and talented high school students in their junior and senior years. Students live on campus in the Cardinal Village residence halls. The program enjoys great success with most students receiving major scholarships upon completion such as Lamar's prestigious Mirabeau Scholarship. The participants are known to Lamar students as the Academy Kids, citing their young age.

Recognition, awards and ranking

In August 2010, the American Council of Trustees and Alumni (ACTA) released a study on core curriculum standards for 715 four-year institutions. The study compared colleges on their commitment to core subjects deemed essential to a well-rounded, competitive education. Lamar was one of only 16 institutions to receive an A rating.

College of Engineering

The College of Engineering is arguably the school's most respected program. Lamar's birth was in large part due to the demand for technically trained individuals in the area, after the 1901 Spindletop oil discovery, making Beaumont, Texas one of the most heavily industrialized areas of the United States. The school was founded in 1923 as a junior college. On September 1, 1951, the Texas Legislature promoted the school to a four-year institution and renamed the school Lamar State College of Technology. The legislature specifically noted the school would emphasize engineering, technology, and science to serve the regions large industrial base.
The College of Engineering has 10 research centers under its authority. These are coordinated under the Texas Centers for Technology Incubation (TCTI).
The Dan F. Smith Department of Chemical Engineering was established with a $5 million donation from Dan F. Smith in 2009.edu
Lamar University Chemical Engineering has the proud history of being one of the top rated programs in the country. The program continually produces the same or more M.S. in Chemical Engineering graduates than universities such as Stanford, IIT and MIT. The building housing the Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering program was dedicated the Charles and Eleanor Garrett Engineering Center in Fall 2012.
Headed by Dr. Robert Yuan, the Civil Engineering department is one of the broadest departments in the college offering eight degree programs.
The Philip M. Drayer Department of Electrical Engineering was endowed with a $5 million gift from Philip M. Drayer in 2007.edu
The department has been chaired by Harley Myler, Ph.D., since 2001. Dr. Myler is the inaugural holder of the Mitchell Endowed chair in Telecommunications. The department has many successful alumni in the industry including Phil Drayer (LUEE '67), and Charles Garrett (LUEE '59) inventor and founder of Garrett Metal Detectors.
The Industrial Engineering department is currently headed by Dr. Brian Craig. It offers two undergraduate degrees: B.S. Industrial Engineering, and B.S. in Industrial Technology; and four graduate degrees: Master of Engineering Industrial Engineering, Master of Science Industrial Engineering, Doctor of Engineering in Industrial Engineering, and Master of Engineering Management.
The Mechanical Engineering department is currently headed by Dr. Hsing-wei Chu. It offers both undergraduate degree (B.S) as well as graduate degrees, consisting of degrees programs in Master of Engineering ( M.E.), Master of Engineering Science (M.E.S) and Doctor of Engineering (D.E.). The department is affiliated with ASME and ASTM in order to prepare undergraduate and graduate students in getting updated on the latest challenges faced by the industry and prepare them for intercollegiate competitions as well as industry level symposiums, resulting in rewarding careers in mechanical engineering professions. The department is equipped with the latest simulation software and systems that enable students to develop their skills and apply the knowledge and principles of product design and development in mechanical engineering applications.lamar.htm Department of Mechanical Engineering, Lamar University

College of Business

The University established the College of Business in 1972. Prior to this time,
degrees in business and economics were granted by the Division of Business, which
was established in 1951, and the School of Business, established in 1954.
All undergraduate and graduate degree programs of the College of Business are accredited by
AACSB International.
Four departments—Accounting and Business Law; Economics and Finance;
Information Systems and Analysis; and Management and Marketing—make up the
College of Business. The Bachelor of Business Administration degree is granted in all
areas. A Bachelor of Science degree is granted in Economics. In Fall 2008, the College of Business acquired a new program, the Reese Construction Management program, with a $1.25 million donation from Jerry and Sheila Reese. The program is headed by Steve McCrary Ph.D.
The Aspen Institute Center for Business Education's 2011-2012 edition of Beyond Grey Pinstripes ranked Lamar's MBA program in the top 100 in the world for the third consecutive year.  In November 2010, Janie Nelson Steinhagen and Mark Steinhagen created the Janie Nelson Steinhagen and Mark Steinhagen Global Fellows Endowment in the College of Business. The endowment will provide graduate students and faculty with opportunities to gain first-hand knowledge of the global marketplace. Students taking advantage of the Steinhagen Global Fellows Endowment will travel abroad accompanied by a College of Business faculty Steinhagen Global Fellow. They will participate in classes and seminars with other students, visit businesses and experience the culture of the country – all at an advanced level.
Through the Entrepreneurship Lecture Series, endowed by a business alumnus, students and faculty have the opportunity to be inspired by the world's leading entrepreneurs. The series brings high profile and dynamic speakers to the campus yearly.

College of Education and Human Development

The College of Education an Human Development comprises five departments:  Educational Leadership, Family & Consumer Sciences, Health & Kinesiology, Counseling and Special Populations and Professional Pedagogy.
The teacher preparation and education graduate programs of the College of Education and Human Development are accredited by the National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education (NCATE) at both the initial teacher preparation and advanced preparation levels. Lamar is among the largest educators of teachers in the nation due to its large Masters in Education program.
Family and Consumer Science graduates with post-baccalaureate work routinely experience a 90-100 percent pass rate on the American Dietetic Association (ADA) Registration Examination.
The Educator Preparation Program (EPP) is accredited by the State Board of Educator Certification and routinely has an average 96% summary pass rate for all certification tests.
The College hosts the Governor's School of Texas, a three-week summer program for gifted high school students.

College of Arts and Sciences

The College of Arts and Sciences houses a wide variety of Lamar's academic programs. Fields of study include but are not limited to: Physics, Mathematics, Computer Science, Biology, Chemistry, Nursing, Music, English, Foreign Language, History, Political Science and Psychology. The College is home to the JoAnne Gay Dishman Department of Nursing. The nursing department consists of BSN and ADN degrees. They have recorded a nearly 100% pass rate on the NCLEX-RN exam, a national exam required to receive a license to practice.
The master of nursing online program in the Lamar University JoAnne Gay Dishman Department of Nursing has been ranked second in the nation for excellence in faculty credentials and training by U.S. News & World Report in Fall 2012.

College of Fine Arts and Communication

The College of Fine Arts and Communication offers degree programs in communication fields such as Journalism and Broadcasting and fine arts degree programs such as Art, Theater, Music and Dance. Department programs are housed in the Music, Theater, Art and Communications buildings. The college is home to the Mary Morgan Moore Department of Music. The department of communications operates LUTV, a local educational access television station and KVLU (FM 93.1) a National Public Radio station. The Department of Art's faculty includes internationally acclaimed artists Keith Carter and Prince Varughese Thomas.

Campus

The Lamar University campus is located off of Martin Luther King Boulevard, near U.S. Highway 69, in the southeast part of Beaumont, Texas. The campus is  from Downtown Beaumont. The Big Thicket National Preserve, Village Creek State Park, and The Gulf of Mexico are all located within 30 minutes of the school. Facilities include the 10,080 seat Montagne Center, the eight-story Mary and John Gray Library and the 16,000 seat Provost Umphrey Stadium.

Cardinal Village

Cardinal Village is the university's community of apartment-style dormitories, part of Lamar University's investment in student life on campus. As of 2010, there were five "Phases" of Cardinal Village with the capacity to house 2500 students. Each room includes a private bedroom, furnished with the necessities of college life such as a mini-refrigerator, microwave, computer desk, telephone outlets, cable TV ready, and easy connectivity to the University's network.  Cardinal Village housing also offers community centers, study areas, meeting rooms, fitness centers, a swimming pool, on-site laundry facilities, basketball and volleyball courts, social lounges, and parking. During the summer of 2011 all five phases of Cardinal village were renamed for previously-demolished residence halls on campus: Phase I - Gentry Hall, Phase II - Morris Hall, Phase III - Combs Hall, Phase IV - Campbell Hall and Phase V - Monroe Hall.

Mary & John Gray Library

As the tallest structure on campus at eight stories, the Mary and John Gray Library serves as a landmark for the university. The library was completed on April 26, 1976 taking two and a half years to complete. It was named for Mary and John Gray who are considered the "First Family" of the University.  Its collection exceeds 1.3 million volumes with interlibrary accessibility providing access to millions more. An online catalog is available to locate titles and allowing students to search selected databases at no cost. When you need an answer, a service-oriented library staff provides assistance in the use of reference materials, documents, special collections and instructional media.

Sheila Umphrey Recreational Sports Center

The Sheila Umphrey Recreational Sports Center was completed in 2007 at a cost of $19 million.

Brooks-Shivers Dining Hall

The University's Brooks-Shivers Dining Hall provides a bistro ambience. It was completed in 2006 for $6.2 million and is named for Southeast Texas congressman Jack Brooks and former Texas governor Allan Shivers.  The new facility provides a state-of-the-art dining experience. The  hall is set on a food court-style floor plan that offers a variety of seating areas from barstools to booths. Dining options range from a salad bar, grill and central bakery to pizza, stir fry, Mexican food, pasta, deli and soup stations. The state-of-the-art facility has striking interiors that include artwork created by Lamar University art students and faculty and the latest in high-tech equipment and taste-satisfying food that's focused on variety combine to create a palate-pleasing dining experience at the center of campus. On campus food services are provided by external company Chartwells who, in addition to the dining hall, provides options to franchised fast food chains and coffee shops.

Setzer Student Center

The Setzer Student Center (or the Set as it is known by students) hosts social and cultural activities throughout the year and is the hub for campus student organizations. The lounge areas, Mirabeau's Café and the Cardinal's Nest eatery provide students with a place to socialize and relax. The Setzer Center also houses the bookstore, which stocks text books, school supplies, and Lamar University/Lamar Cardinals merchandise. Administrative divisions located in the Set include the Center for Teaching and Learning Enhancement and the Office of Planning and Assessment.
During the Spring 2012 semester, the Student Government Association, led by then-president Andrew Greenberg, passed a student-wide referendum to finance renovation and remodeling the Setzer Student Center.  The vote was passed with 81% approval.  Ongoing remodeling and renovation projects continue to improve the center.

Dishman Art Museum

The Dishman Art Museum serves as a teaching facility and art museum for Lamar. The museum was established in 1983.museumsusa. The Art Museum is open from 8 a.m. - 5 p.m., Monday - Friday. The Museum's permanent collection includes 19th- and 20th-century paintings from American and European artist and Tribal Art from Africa, New Guinea, and Pre-Columbian Mexico.

Spindletop-Gladys City Museum

The Spindletop-Gladys City Museum is an open-air museum. The museum commemorates the 1901 discovery of oil by the Lucas Gusher in Beaumont. The oil discovery was located on Spindletop salt dome in South Beaumont, the boomtown that sprung up around the well was known as Gladys City. The discovery soon produced 100,000 barrels of oil per day, making it the most productive in the world at that time. This productivity sparked an oil boom in Texas that continues to this day.

Athletics

The Lamar Cardinals (or Cards) refers to the collegiate athletic teams of Lamar University. The inception of the nickname "Cardinals" dates back to the school's name change to Lamar in 1932. The teams compete in Division I of NCAA athletics for all of its varsity sports. Lamar has participated in practically every level of collegiate athletics from its inception as a junior college in 1923 to its gaining university status in 1971. Lamar sponsors fourteen teams (seven men's teams and seven women's teams) that compete in the NCAA's Southland Conference. The newest team is the reinstated football team, and women's softball which began play in the 2013 season. With the addition of softball, Lamar is the only Southland Conference program to sponsor all men's and women's sports.
The Cardinals participate in men's and women's basketball, golf, track and field, cross country, tennis, women's soccer and volleyball, and men's baseball and football.

Football

Under former head coach Larry Kennan, Cardinal fans responded when he delivered a 6-3-2 club in 1979, his first season with the team. Lamar set all-time attendance records under Kennan by averaging 16,380 in 1980. Games against Louisiana Tech (17,600) and West Texas State (17,250) rank second and third, respectively, behind the standing-room-only 18,500 Baylor drew for the 1980 opener. The football program's signature win came on September 5, 1981 in Waco, the Cardinals triumphed with an 18-17 win over the UPI #20 ranked Baylor Bears.lamar.pdf In 1987 Lamar football went independent to join the American South Conference, and the program was dropped altogether in 1989.
On January 30, 2008, 78% of Lamar students voted to approve the athletics fee required for football's resurrection. This vote set in motion the football team's return for the 2010 season.
The Lamar University Cardinals football team returned to the gridiron, after a 21-year hiatus, on September 4, 2010. The first-year squad compiled a respectable 5-6 record. The Cardinals opened Southland Conference play in 2011. The return of football to Lamar University is in part due to a generous donation from Beaumont-based law firm, Provost Umphrey. To help renovate the stadium, Walter Umphrey and his wife Sheila also made a personal donation. The stadium is now named "Provost Umphrey Stadium".com/lamarcards/docs/football_2012

Basketball

Founded in 1924 the men's and women's basketball teams at Lamar have both advanced deep into the NCAA tournament. The men's team has four NIT appearances, six NCAA tournament appearances, four second round appearances, and one sweet 16 appearance. The women's team has one NIT appearance, two NCAA tournament appearances, and one elite eight appearance.
The men's program was previously coached by notable coaches Billy Tubbs, Pat Foster and Pat Knight. The women's team is currently under direction of Robin Harmony.
Both the men's and women's programs have the highest average attendance in the Southland Conference and play their games in the 10,080 seat Montagne Center.

Student life

Student profile

For Spring 2013, the university enrolled, 8,400 undergraduate and 4,609 graduate students. For Spring 2013, the student body was 4,958 male and 8,051 female. The student-to-faculty ratio was 19:1, among the lowest in the state of Texas.

Student media

=University Press=

The University Press also known as the UP is the student operated newspaper of Lamar. The paper was known previously as the S'Park Plug and the Red Bird before becoming the University Press in recognition of Lamar gaining university status in 1971. The University Press has grown into one of Lamar's showpieces. It is the largest student-run business on campus, and it has become one of the most respected student newspapers in the country. Since 1977, the University Press and its magazines have garnered more than 800 awards, including first place for Best Non-Daily Student Newspaper in 1994 and 2005 from The Associated Press Managing Editors of Texas and second place from the same group in 1988, 1997, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2011 and 2012. The UP has averaged more than 26 awards a year in those 35 years.

=KVLU=

KVLU, 91.3FM, is Lamar's very own public radio station. The station is member-supported but receives funding from the university as well.  The station operates on campus. Students in the Communications Department can gain real-world experience on the staff of KVLU, or by hosting their own program.

=LUTV=

LUTV is Lamar's student operated Television Station. The Programs of LUTV are broadcast on local cable TV. Programming includes newscasts to talk shows to soap operas, Lamar University's television programming runs the gamut all programming is student-created and student inspired. LU students produce a weekly 30-minute newscast, a light-news package bundled with a talk-show, and four unique student and faculty talk shows, all aired on local educational-access television.
LUTV also supports C-SPAN and the SETCAST program, covering 222 governmental meetings for the Southeast Texas Regional Council of Governments. These public meetings are aired on local cable systems in Orange, Port Arthur and Beaumont. The program provides 10 full-time scholarships for Lamar television students.
The program emphasizes industry-standard equipment with a mix of linear and nonlinear editing equipment including Leightronix Ultranexus broadcast computer, MAC Pro Quad Core desktop workstation with Final Cut Pro and Adobe Production Premium CS6.  LUTV broadcast students work with Panasonic AG-HMC150 AVCCAM camcorders and a Newtek Tri-Caster system to support LUTV programming.
LUTV provides students with the opportunity to envision, write, create, direct, report, anchor and star in their own productions.

Greeks

Lamar boasts 17 National Fraternities and Sororities. College Panhellenic Council (CPC) is the governing body for the three National Pan-Hellenic Council chapters at LU. National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC) governs the eight historically African American fraternities and sororities, while The Inter-Fraternity Council (IFC) governs men's fraternities.
Lamar University Greek Organizations
Fraternities
Sororities
Co-Ed

Traditions

The student body of Lamar has developed many traditions over the years. Homecoming events like the Greek vs. Faculty Basketball Game, block party and Cardinal Mania Bonfire occur annually on Homecoming week. Food Fest is an event on campus where every organization is given a booth in the Setzer Student Center from which they can sell food. There are normally over 100 groups that participate in Food Fest. Greek organizations also annually hold Greek Olympics among all the different fraternities and sororities. It is a tradition among Cardinal athletes not to step on the Cardinal head in the athletic complex weight room. The L' Raisers a student spirit organization, is responsible for fostering traditions at athletic events. In 2011 the "Endzone Angels" were formed, they help the Football program with fundraising, recruiting and spirit. The Angels are a group of approximately 30 female students, they wear red dresses and cowboy boots to each home football game.
The 'L' Yell
The 'L' Yell occurs during football kickoffs. To accomplish the 'L' Yell, fans form an L with their right hand raised in the air.  At ten seconds prior to kickoff, fans yell "L" until the kicker hits the ball, then the entire stadium yells the letter "U" and rocks the L in their right hand to the right, this forms a U shape. This signifies LU which is a popular moniker for the university. The "'L' Yell" achieves a Doppler effect in the football stadium and is used to intimidate the opposing team. This tradition carries over into many other sports such as free throws in basketball games and serves during volleyball.
Traditions of Lamar University also extend to singing the schools fight song Go Big Red and the Alma Mater.

Notable people

Alumni

The Alumni of Lamar University have gone on to distinguish themselves in every aspect of society. With over 75,000 alumni the school has a significant alumni base.
The average starting salary for a Lamar graduate is among the highest in Texas. The median starting salary for a Lamar graduate is $42,000 and the median mid-career salary is $77,400. Lamar has the highest median starting and mid-career salary in the Texas State University System.
There have been several Cardinals go on to distinguish themselves nationally and internationally in sports such as PGA Tour golfer Chris Stroud, MLB player Kevin Millar and college coaches such as Billy Tubbs and Jim Gilligan.
In Business many cardinals have gone on to found companies and lead Fortune 500 companies. Dan F. Smith an engineering alumnus was CEO of Lyondell. Tom Giannopolous heads MICROS. Charles Garrett another engineering alumnus founded invented and is CEO of Garrett Metal Detectors, one of the worlds largest suppliers of security metal detectors.
In politics such leaders as Jack Brooks, Nick Lampson and Elvin Santos have gone on to be national politicians.

People associated with Lamar






