[[The Royal Conservatory of Music]]

CATEGORIES: The Royal Conservatory of Music, Classical music in Canada, Music schools in Canada, Education in Toronto, Organizations based in Canada with royal patronage, Educational institutions established in 1886, Music venues in Toronto, Concert halls in Canada, 1886 establishments in Ontario

The Royal Conservatory of Music, branded as The Royal Conservatory, is a music education organization and performance venue headquartered in Toronto, Canada. It was founded in 1886 by Edward Fisher as The Toronto Conservatory of Music. In 1947, King George VI incorporated the organization through royal charter.
Its Toronto home was designated a National Historic Site of Canada in 1995 in recognition of the institution's significant influence on music education in Canada.Royal Conservatory of Music,  Directory of Designations of National Historic Significance of CanadaRoyal Conservatory of Music, National Register of Historic Places
Michael Foulkes is the current Chair of the Board

History

The Conservatory was founded in 1886 as The Toronto Conservatory of Music and opened in September 1887, located on two floors above a music store at the corner of Dundas Street and Yonge Street. Dundurn Press Ltd, 2005 Its founder Edward Fisher was a young organist born in the United States.
The Conservatory's initial intake was just over 100, and by its second quarter this number had grown to nearly 300 as its reputation quickly spread. In 1897, the organization purchased a new property at College Street and University Avenue to accommodate its rapid expansion. From its earliest days it was affiliated with the University of Toronto with the purpose of preparing students for degree examinations and shared its premises with the University's Faculty of Music from 1919.
In 1906, Frank Welsman – who became the principal of The Conservatory – founded and directed the Toronto Conservatory Orchestra, which became the Toronto Symphony Orchestra two years later. In 1924, the Canadian Academy of Music merged with The Conservatory. Glenn Gould – arguably its most outstanding pupil – studied theory, organ, and piano, graduating at the age of 12 in 1946 with an ARCT diploma of the highest honours.
In 1947, King George VI awarded The Conservatory its royal charter in recognition of its status as one of the Commonwealth's greatest music schools. The Toronto Conservatory of Music became The Royal Conservatory of Music.
During Ettore Mazzoleni's term as principal (1945–68), The Conservatory grew rapidly. Mazzoleni had been director of the Conservatory Orchestra since 1934. Two other prominent figures who contributed to the achievements of this period were chairman of the board Edward Johnson (who served from 1947–59) and Arnold Walter, who was appointed director of the new Senior School in 1946. The Senior School offered a two-year program with professional performance training combined with related courses in theory and history. The initial success of the project gave rise to a three-year program leading to an Artist Diploma, as well as The Conservatory's Opera School (begun in 1946), which provided training in all aspects of opera production. These developments led to the creation of the Royal Conservatory Opera Company, which went on to become the Canadian Opera Company in 1959.
With space now a major problem, the University of Toronto sold the College Street property to Ontario Hydro in 1962 and The Conservatory moved to 273 Bloor Street West, the original site of McMaster University. The concert and recital halls of the College Street site were only partially replaced in the move, and the library, residence, and all three pipe organs were lost.Academic Dictionaries & Encyclopedias: Royal Conservatory of Music
The Conservatory was governed by the University of Toronto from 1963 until 1991, at which time it became a wholly independent institution again, taking control of its building and diverse music programs. Peter Simon was appointed President of The Conservatory.
Also in 1991, the conservatory developed a master plan to renovate its historic building and expand it with the construction of new facilities on the same site. The plan was carried out by Kuwabara Payne McKenna Blumberg Architects (KPMB) in stages, initially with the 1997 renovation of Mazzoleni Concert Hall in the historic Ihnatowycz Hall.
The original building, McMaster Hall, was renamed Ihnatowycz Hall in 2005,

Arts Education Programs

The Royal Conservatory is a not-for-profit organization offering a wide range of arts programs.

Examinations

This division of The Royal Conservatory sets and supports standards in music examinations across Canada and internationally. The organization conducts 100,000 examinations annually in over 300 communities around the world.
The Royal Conservatory curriculum is made available and accessible to students across North America through the Examinations Certificate Program. Examinations are conducted three times each year in more than 300 communities through a network of local centres. The Certificate Program encompasses all levels and spans 11 grades: from beginner to certification as an Associate of The Royal Conservatory of Music (ARCT), and in Piano Performance, to certification as a Licentiate of The Royal Conservatory of Music (LRCM).org: The Music Exam 3 September 2003
Achievement in Royal Conservatory Examinations is recognized for credit toward secondary school graduation in many school systems in Canada. For most provinces in Canada, a Grade 6 Certificate and Intermediate Rudiments counts as Grade 10 credit, a Grade 7 Certificate and Advanced Rudiments counts as Grade 11 credit, and a Grade 8 Certificate and Advanced Rudiments counts as Grade 12 credit. One's standing in the Certificate Program also plays an important role in entrance requirements for professional music programs at many universities and colleges.Music Matters July/August 2007 page 6

=The Royal Conservatory Music Development Program=

In 2011 The Royal Conservatory partnered with Carnegie Hall to launch The Achievement Program in the United States. In January 2013 The Royal Conservatory took on sole responsibility of successful program,

The Frederick Harris Music Co., Limited

The Frederick Harris Music Co. Limited, is the oldest and largest print-music publisher in Canada.
Frederick Harris (1866–1945) devoted his life to music publishing. He began his career in England working for a large music publishing firm. In 1904, he set up his own business in London and in 1910, established a Canadian office in Toronto – marking the beginning of a long association with The Royal Conservatory that led to an increased emphasis on publications for teaching and learning.
In 1944, the company was donated to The Conservatory with profits to be used for its own purposes.

The Glenn Gould School

A centre for professional training in classical music performance at the postsecondary and postbachelor levels, The Glenn Gould School was established in 1987. Originally called The Royal Conservatory of Music Professional School, it was renamed in 1997 to honour Glenn Gould, the Toronto-born piano virtuoso and a former pupil. Enrollment is limited to 130, and The School is supported by funding from the Department of Canadian Heritage through the National Arts Contribution Program.Canadian Heritage: The Government of Canada Supports Glenn Gould School of the Royal Conservatory of Music 30 November 2007
The faculty consists of internationally acclaimed performers, teachers, and scholars.org 1 February 2001 More than 100 master classes are presented each year with artists, such as Leon Fleisher, Stewart Goodyear, Anton Kuerti, and James Ehnes.
Glenn Gould School alumni have established careers as solo performers, orchestral musicians, chamber musicians, and recording artists. Alumni include the singers Isabel Bayrakdarian and Robert Gleadow, the pianists David Jalbert and Richard Raymond, the harpist Mariko Anraku, the violist Adam Romer, and the St. Lawrence String Quartet.
The Glenn Gould School offers a four-year Performance Diploma in piano, voice, and all orchestral instruments, designed for high school graduates who wish to prepare for a career as a performer. An articulation agreement with Thompson Rivers University also gives students the opportunity to obtain a Bachelor of Music degree. The Artist Diploma is a two-year postbachelor program for piano, voice, orchestral instruments, performance, and pedagogy.

The Phil and Eli Taylor Performance Academy for Young Artists

The Phil and Eli Taylor Performance Academy for Young Artists provides a nurturing environment for gifted classical musicians aged nine to 19. Working together with exceptional faculty and acclaimed guest artists, students of The Academy perfect their performance skills, musicality, and artistic excellence.
After a competitive audition and interview, accepted students are streamed into Junior, Intermediate, or Senior Academy programs. This comprehensive program develops performance skills, musicianship, and academic excellence. Alumni of the Academy who have launched successful careers include Peter Simon, Katie Stillman, Eugene Nakamura, Marcin Swoboda, Janice LaMarre, Marta and Irena Kretchkovsky, and Karen Ouzounian.

The Royal Conservatory School

The Royal Conservatory School offers group and individual instruction in classical, popular, folk, jazz, world music, and the arts to people of all ages, levels, abilities, and backgrounds.
In the Lawrence Park area, the Smart Start series of courses are now offered at the Glenview Sr. Public School for children under five years old and their parents.
In January 2009, The Conservatory School launched its first school outside the Greater Toronto Area, at the TELUS Virtual Learning Centre in Calgary, Alberta.

The Marilyn Thomson Early Childhood Education Centre

In October 2013 The Royal Conservatory launched The Marilyn Thomson Early Childhood Education Centre, which will be dedicated to the development of education apps and online learning programs, with an aim of spreading online learning in music to young children.

Learning Through the Arts

Learning Through the Arts (LTTA) is an arts-driven education program providing public school teachers with creative tools to engage all students in math, science, language, arts, and social studies.

Performing Arts

The Royal Conservatory presents approximately 70 performances a year, featuring classical, jazz, world, and pop music artists from around the world. It has three concert venues: Koerner Hall, Mazzoleni Concert Hall, and the Conservatory Theatre.

Koerner Hall

Named for donors Michael and Sonja Koerner, Koerner Hall opened in September 2009 and houses 1,135 seats. It was designed by KPMB Architects, theatre consultant Anne Minors Performance Consultants, and acoustics company Sound Space Design. It features two balcony tiers above the main orchestra level as well as a third technical balcony. Each level is also equipped to host a variety of private functions.

Mazzoleni Concert Hall

Mazzoleni Concert Hall has 

Conservatory Theatre

"A granite cube which floats above Bloor Street," In scale and proportion, the Conservatory Theatre replicates the acoustic quality and stage size of Koerner Hall to prepare students for live performance.

ARC Ensemble

Established in 2002, the ARC Ensemble (Artists of The Royal Conservatory) is composed of senior faculty members of The Conservatory's Glenn Gould School in Toronto and led by artistic director Simon Wynberg. All are seasoned chamber musicians and veteran performers, either as soloists or as principals in major orchestras. They have dedicated themselves to the performance of both the traditional chamber music canon and the rediscovery of repertoire that, through political changes or shifts in musical fashion, have been ignored or marginalized. The ARC Ensemble's third release is entitled Two Roads to Exile (2010).

Alumni

Attendees

Notable people who have attended The Royal Conservatory's classes and lessons or took Royal Conservatory music examinations include:

Teachers

Notable teachers at The Royal Conservatory include:

Honorary Fellows of The Royal Conservatory

An Honorary Fellowship is the highest honour awarded by The Royal Conservatory. It is presented to outstanding Canadian and international artists and individuals who have made significant contributions to arts and culture in Canada and around the world.





Further reading

  |url = |publisher= Dundurn Group|isbn=1-55002-540-6 }}




