[[De Havilland Flamingo]]

CATEGORIES: British airliners 1930–1939, British military transport aircraft 1930–1939, De Havilland aircraft, World War II British transport aircraft

The British de Havilland DH.95 Flamingo was a high-wing, twin-engined monoplane passenger airliner of the Second World War period, also used by the Royal Air Force (RAF) as a troop-carrier and for general communications duties.

Design and development

The Flamingo was designed by de Havilland, led by their chief designer, as a twin-engined civil airliner. It was the first all-metal aircraft built by de Havilland. The metal framework was mostly metal-covered with fabric covered control surfaces. Two pilots were seated side-by-side with a radio operator behind them in the cockpit, with the cabin accommodating 12-17 passengers. It featured a retractable undercarriage, slotted flaps and variable pitch propellers, and was considered a highly promising sales prospect for the de Havilland company capable of competing with the American Douglas DC-3 and Lockheed Model 10 Electra.
The first prototype flew on 22 December 1938, Jackson 1987, p. 399. powered by 890 hp (660 kW) Bristol Perseus engines. With these, performance was excellent with a takeoff at maximum weight in 750 ft (230 m) and the ability to maintain height or climb at 120 mph (190 km/h) on a single engine. Testing was successful, with the Flamingo being granted a certificate of airworthiness on 30 June 1939,Green and Swanborough 1986, p. 4. with an initial production run of twenty aircraft being laid down. 5.
A single military transport variant was built to Specification 19/39 as the DH.95 Hertfordshire. It had oval cabin windows instead of rectangular ones, and seating for 22 paratroopers. A proposed order for 40 was cancelled to leave de Havillands free to produce Tiger Moth trainers. The sole Hertfordshire crashed with the loss of 11 lives at Mill Hill, Hertfordshire on 23 October 1940, apparently due to jamming of the elevator.

Operational service

Following the success of the first test flights Jersey Airways ordered three 17-seat aircraft, and this was followed by orders from the Egyptian government and the Air Ministry. The Air Ministry aircraft were to be used by the Air Council and the King's Flight. 
The prototype fitted with 12 passenger seats was delivered to Jersey Airways in May 1939 for two months evaluation and became the first revenue-earning Flamingo. The first services carried mail only but in July a regular weekend passenger service was operated.  In October 1939 the prototype was bought by the Air Council, it was delivered to No. 24 Squadron RAF where it operated until it was lost in an accident in October 1940.  
The second aircraft was to be the first for Guernsey and Jersey Airlines but it was impressed into military service and delivered to 24 Squadron, the other two on order were never built due to the outbreak of the Second World War.
The King's Flight aircraft was to be used in the event of the royal family having to leave the country but in the end it was passed to 24 Squadron for communications and liaison duties. 
Early in 1940 BOAC ordered eight aircraft to be powered by the Perseus XVI and originally intended as ten-seaters. The first BOAC aircraft was delivered to Whitchurch on 5 September 1940. The second BOAC aircraft was impressed by the Air Ministry and allocated for Admiralty use at RNAS Donibristle. To replace the impressed aircraft BOAC were later allotted the aircraft ordered by the Egyptian Government. After a period of training all the BOAC Flamingos were moved to Cairo to operate in the Middle East. The BOAC aircraft were named after English Kings and were named by the airline the K-class 
The BOAC Flamingoes were not popular and following three accidents, one fatal and a lack of spares the airline decided to withdrawn the type and in 1943 the five airworthy aircraft were shipped back to the United Kingdom. They did not return to service and were scrapped in the early 1950s. 
Most of the RAF aircraft were withdrawn from use during the war and were slowly scrapped to provide spares for the remaining aircraft. The Admiralty aircraft was due to be withdrawn and scrapped but in August 1944 it ground looped at Gatwick and was abandoned. In 1946 it the former Admiralty aircraft was bought by Southern Aircraft (Gatwick) and rebuilt using former BOAC spare parts. It flew again in 1947 and was delivered to British Air Transport at Redhill, gaining a Certificate of Airworthiness it operated a number of charter flight until it was temporary withdrawn from use in 1949. British Air Transport also arranged to restore three former BOAC aircraft, the scheme was abandoned although the aircraft were in an advanced stage of reconstruction. In 1952 British Air Transport restored the original former Admiralty aircraft which flew again on 27 May 1952. Redhill aerodrome was closed in 1954 and the last flying Flamingo was dismantled and scrapped.

Operators

Military operators

Civilian operators

Specifications (de Havilland Flamingo)






