[[Craig Charles]]

CATEGORIES: 1964 births, Living people, Male actors from Liverpool, Comedians from Liverpool, Black English male actors, British radio DJs, British radio personalities, English male comedians, English people of Guyanese descent, English people of Irish descent, English poets, English male soap opera actors, English male television actors, English television presenters, English writers, People acquitted of rape

Craig Joseph Charles (born 11 July 1964) is an English actor, comedian, author, poet, television presenter and radio and club DJ. He is best known for playing Dave Lister in the British science fiction sitcom Red Dwarf, and Lloyd Mullaney in the long-running soap opera Coronation Street.
Charles first appeared on television as a performance poet, which led on to minor presenting roles. After finding fame in Red Dwarf, he regularly featured on national television, with celebrity appearances on many popular shows, while he continued to host a wide variety of programmes. He has toured the UK extensively as a stand-up comedian.
Charles notably presented the gladiator-style game show Robot Wars and narrated the comedy endurance show Takeshi's Castle. His acting credits include playing inmate Eugene Buffy in the ITV drama The Governor, and leading roles in the British films Fated and Clubbing to Death. As well as starring in Coronation Street and occasional Red Dwarf series, Charles continues to host The Craig Charles Funk and Soul Show on BBC radio, and performs DJ sets at numerous clubs and festivals nationally and internationally.

Early life

Charles was born to a mixed race family in Liverpool, Lancashire: his Guyanese father was black,Liverpool Echo, 22 November 2005, "Actor Craig's tribute to much-loved father" and his mother was white Irish."Craig Charles person page" bbc.co. He grew up on the deprived Cantril Farm housing estate,The Independent, 30 June 2012, Holly Williams "My Secret Life: Craig Charles, 47, DJ and actor", London and went to school with Micky Quinn,. He attended West Derby Comprehensive School followed by Childwall Hall College of Further Education, and studied A-levels in History, Government and Politics, English Literature and General Studies.Interview with Charles by Chris Jarvis, Fully Booked, BBC TV, 1998

Early career

Charles began his career as a contemporary and urban performance poet on the British cabaret circuit. His performances were considered original, with Charles described as having a natural ironic wit which appealed to talent scouts. In 1981, Charles climbed on stage at a Teardrop Explodes concert and recited a humorous, but derogatory, poem about the band's singer. He was invited to open subsequent gigs for the group, and went on to perform as a support act in pubs and clubs, for the next three years,Q magazine, April 1987, David Housham "Craig Charles: Compulsive Listening", pp. 25–26 and at events such as the Larks in the Park music festival at Sefton Park (1982). He performed poetry at Liverpool's Everyman Theatre (1983), alongside such poets as Roger McGough and Adrian Henri.
Charles was involved in the Liverpool music scene, writing and singing lyrics for a number of local rock bands.Daily Post, 16 September 2003, Chris Brown "A club that rocked when punk was in its prime", Liverpool He performed his political rap lyrics as a 'Wordsmith'. In 1983, Charles was invited to record a session on the John Peel BBC Radio show, performing six poems with a band. This was his first professional engagement.AL Peters, "Craig Charles The Wordsmith, The John Peel Radio Show, 1984", Groovin' Records
Charles realised he was using poetry as a vehicle for his sense of humour, and progressed into stand-up comedy. He was part of the Red Wedge comedy tour in 1986, which aimed to raise awareness of the social problems of the time, in support of the Labour Party. He performed his first one-man show in 1986,Raising the Roof for the Gateway Exchange, 29 August 1986, Edinburgh Festival Fringe which premiered in Edinburgh, and then toured internationally.

Television career

Performance poetry

Charles first appeared on television as the resident poet on the arts programme Riverside on BBC2, and on the day-time BBC1 chat show Pebble Mill at One. He performed his political poems as stand-up comedy on the late-night show, Saturday Live, and on the prime-time BBC1 chat show Wogan, where he performed a topical poem in a weekly feature. He also appeared as a guest on shows including Open Air (1988). Charles included significant acting in his performance style, to enable him to put the emotion across.Charles interviewed on the Steve Jones Show, LBC Radio (London), 16 March 1989

Red Dwarf

Charles acquired cult status in 1988, in his first television acting role, as the Liverpudlian slob Dave Lister, in BBC2's new science fiction comedy series Red Dwarf. Charles has played this role in all eight series, until 1999, and in the 2009 three-part special, Red Dwarf: Back to Earth and Red Dwarf X (2012), for channel Dave.Andrew Ellard, Red Dwarf series III DVD boxset Collector's Booklet, Grant Naylor Productions, 2003, pp. 8 The role has involved Charles playing a variety of alternative characters, including a gangster, a cowboy and angelic and evil versions of Lister,TV Zone, November 1993, Carrie Cantor "Red Dwarf Interview: Lager Lout Lister", pp. 8–11 and in him carrying out a wide range of stunts, and acting involving special effects. All episodes, except those of series VII and IX, were recorded in front of a studio audience.
Charles reads the audiobook editions of the Red Dwarf novel Last Human, and his book The Log: A Dwarfer's Guide to Everything, and he regularly attends sci-fi, comedy and memorabilia conventions in connection with the Red Dwarf franchise. During Back to Earth, Charles' character, Lister, visits the set of Coronation Street where he meets the actor Craig Charles. Charles has stated that he would be happy to make further Red Dwarf episodes if his Coronation Street commitments allow.Blokely, 7 November 2012, James York & Richard Luck " Craig Charles: Funk & Soul x Sci-fi"
Along with Danny John-Jules, Charles is one of only two cast members to appear in every episode of Red Dwarf to date.

Robot Wars

Charles notably presented the cult TV hit Robot Wars on BBC2 (1998–2003) and Channel 5 (2003–04), from series 2 until its conclusion at series 7, which included two Extreme series and numerous 'specials'. Charles was the main host and presided over the arena in which teams of amateur engineers battled their home-made radio-controlled robots against each other, and against the house robots. Charles introduced the show, enthusiastically announced the results of the battles and spoke to the contestants after the main events. He ended each episode with a short Robot Wars-themed poem. Charles' son, Jack, appeared on the show on several occasions, and was a contestant on "Team Nemesis" during series 4. Charles also hosted the Robot Wars Live UK tour, in 2001, and shows performed at the Wembley Arena.

Takeshi's Castle

Charles provided the voice-over commentary for the UK version of the Japanese game show Takeshi's Castle, shown on Challenge and Ftn (2002–04), in which contestants attempted to pass a series of near-impossible physical challenges, to reach the final showdown at the castle and win cash prizes. Charles co-wrote the scripted sections and commentated throughout all 122 episodes of the four series, and the special episodes. He provided comedy insights into the contestants' abilities, which were designed to appeal to adult audiences, as well as younger viewers.

Coronation Street

In 2005, Charles joined the principal cast of Coronation Street, the world's longest-running TV soap opera, playing philandering taxicab driver, Lloyd Mullaney. Charles introduced certain aspects of the character himself, making Lloyd a Northern Soul music record collector and funk music enthusiast. Lloyd is portrayed as tough, but kind hearted and romantic, and the character is popular with viewers. Charles adds a comedy element to the role, but is also involved in traumatic and emotional scenes with complicated storylines. In 2010, his character was involved in the show's dramatic 50th anniversary tram crash storyline, which was recorded live. Charles has presented documentaries for the show, including 50 Years of Corrie Stunts (2010), which is included on the Tram Crash DVD. In November 2011, Charles took time off from Coronation Street to film a new series of Red Dwarf, returning in April 2012."Kate Roma Interviews Craig Charles", Future Radio, Norwich, 27 April 2012

Other acting roles

Charles has acted in episodes of popular dramas such as The Bill (1995), EastEnders (2002) and Holby City (2003) and in the comedy The 10 Percenters (1996). Charles played the emotionally disturbed and violent prisoner, Eugene Buffy, in the high successful Lynda La Plante drama series The Governor (1996); the title role in the Channel 4 pirate sitcom Captain Butler (1997); the warden of a women's prison in the Canadian sci-fi fantasy Lexx (2001); Detective Chief Inspector Mercer in 7 episodes of the BBC soap opera Doctors (2003); and soccer agent, Joel Brooks, in the Sky TV football soap Dream Team (2004).

Other presenting roles

Charles has presented children's television programmes, including What's That Noise? (1989) and Parallel 9 (1992) on BBC1, and Go Getters (1994) on ITV. He was the travelling reporter for the highly acclaimed, but controversial, BBC 'mockumentary' Ghostwatch, which tricked viewers into believing it was a live investigation into ghost sightings in a suburban home on Halloween night (1992). Charles presented the virtual reality game show Cyberzone (1993) on BBC2; the late-night entertainment show Funky Bunker (1997) on ITV; the reality show Jailbreak (2000) on Channel 5; the discussion show Amazing Space: The Pub Guide to the Universe (2001) on National Geographic; and the late-night current affairs chat show Weapons of Mass Distraction (2004) on ITV.

Celebrity appearances

Charles has appeared on celebrity editions of University Challenge (1998), Can't Cook, Won't Cook (1998), The Weakest Link (2004) and Pointless (2012), and comedy panel shows such as Have I Got News For You (1995), Just a Minute (1995) and They Think It's All Over (1996). He was a team captain on the sci-fi quiz series Space Cadets (1997) on Channel 4, which guest starred William Shatner. Charles has opened the National Lottery draw (1997) and his home has featured on Through the Keyhole. Charles was a contestant in the Celebrity Poker Club tournament (2004) on Challenge, where he reached the semi-finals, and in the Channel 4 reality game show, The Games (2005), which documented the contestants' intensive training regime and each live Olympic Games-style sporting event.

Other career

Radio

As well as his early appearances on shows such as Radio 4's Loose Ends (1987–88), and Kaleidoscope, in the early 1990s, Charles could be heard on the London Radio Station Kiss 100 (Kiss FM) as the Breakfast show presenter. In 1995, Charles played the Porter in Steven Berkoff's adaptation of Shakespeare's Macbeth, on Radio 4.
Since 2002, Charles has been a DJ on BBC Radio 6 Music, presenting The Craig Charles Funk and Soul Show, where he plays a diverse range of funk and soul music, from classic tracks to the latest releases, and provides publicity for less familiar bands. Charles explains the context for the music and carries out engaging interviews with guest musicians. He was with the station at its launch, and while it was being tested during the previous year, under the name Network Y. Charles has also hosted the stations Breakfast Show (2004), and sits in for other presenters including Andrew Collins, Phil Wilding and Phill Jupitus and Radcliffe & Maconie.
Charles regularly sits in for Janice Long, Steve Wright and Jo Whiley on BBC Radio 2, and has presented numerous programmes on the station, including The Craig Charles Soul All-Nighter (2011), which he hosted continuously for 12 hours, and the Beatleland (2012) documentary on the Beatles. Charles has also chosen music as a guest of other broadcasters such as Ken Bruce on Radio 2 and Liz Kershaw on 6 Music.

Music

Charles has been involved in the music industry through much of his career. His bands have included Watt 4 (1980), in which he played keyboards and provided voice, Craig Charles and the Beat Burglars (1989), The Sons of Gordon Gekko (1989), where he wrote lyrics and also composed tunes for the band, and The Eye (2000–02), with whom he released the rock album "Giving You The Eye, Live at the Edinburgh Festival". Charles plays guitar and piano.
In 1987, Charles provided the poem track used for the opening credits of the BBC series The Marksman (in which he also acted), which is included on the album "The Marksman: Music from the BBC TV series". Charles wrote lyrics for Suzanne Rhatigan's album To Hell With Love (1992). In 1993, Charles was signed to the Acid Jazz record label.Interview with Charles by Terry Christian, The Word, Channel 4, 1994
In 2009, Charles formed the Fantasy Funk Band, from the leading British musicians in the genre, and has presented the band at festivals, including Glastonbury. As a continuation of his 6 Music show, Charles regularly takes the Craig Charles Funk & Soul Club to varied venues across the UK and abroad, and to the major UK music festivals. He performs live DJ sets, occasionally comperes and curates events, and has broadcast the radio show live from festival locations.
In November 2012, Charles released the compilation album The Craig Charles Funk & Soul Club, on CD and as a digital download, as part of a three-album dealMetro, 28 November 2012, Andrew Williams "Craig Charles", London with Freestyle Records.Freestyle Records, 26 November 2012 "ALBUM: The Craig Charles Funk & Soul Club"

Stand-up comedy and theatre

Charles returned to stand-up comedy between 1995The Independent, 20 September 1995, "Comedy: Craig Charles Speaks, Duke of York's Theatre, London", London and 2001, regularly touring his one-man adult-rated shows nationally, and releasing the videos Craig Charles: Live on Earth! (1995), Live Official Bootleg (1996) and Sickbag (2000). International performances included the Great Norwegian Comedy Festival and the Melbourne International Comedy Festival.
Charles appeared in the John Godber comedy play Teechers, in which he swapped in and out of various roles, at the Arts Theatre, London, and at the Edinburgh Festival (1989), and he played Idle Jack in the pantomime Dick Whittington, at the Hull New Theatre (1997).

Film roles

Charles played Eddie in the 1987 political drama Business as Usual. In 2006, Charles starred in two feature films: the fantasy film Fated, and the gangster movie Clubbing to Death. Charles voiced Zipper the Cat in the animation Prince Cinders (1993) and Asterix in Asterix Conquers America (1994). Roles in short films include playing Keith Dennis in the comedy The Colour of Funny (1999) and Mark in the emotional drama Ten Minutes (2004).

Writing

In 1993, Charles worked with Russell Bell on the Craig Charles Almanac of Total Knowledge writing about his 'streetwise' sense of humour on a range of topics, from the world's most embarrassing stories to how to explain the mysteries of the universe. In 1997, he and Russell wrote Charles' Red Dwarf character's book The Log, in which Lister decides to leave a log detailing mankind's greatest achievements. In 1998, Charles published No Other Blue, a collection of his poetry, with illustrations by Philippa Drakeford, on diverse personal subjects including prison, his mother's final illness, love and politics at home and abroad.
In 2000, Charles wrote his first autobiography about his experiences growing up in Liverpool, titled No Irish, No Niggers. In 2007, he announced he would release his autobiography, planned for March 2008, published by Hodder Headline and titled On the Rocks, which would cover the recent incidents in his life. The autobiography would be based on much of his journal, which he said he kept while in rehab.
Charles has been involved in journalism and has had a column in Time Out magazine. In 1994, he launched a single issue of Comedy magazine with articles dedicated to the comedy circuit. In 2005 and 2006, Charles was a monthly columnist for the Liverpool Echo newspaper. His television writing credits include Funky Bunker (1997) and Takeshi's Castle (2002).

Personal life

Relationships

In 1984, Charles married English actress Cathy Tyson. Their son, Jack, was born in 1988. The couple divorced in 1989.
In the early 1990s, Charles dated Irish singer-songwriter Suzanne Rhatigan, co-writing lyrics for her album To Hell With Love and directing a video for her. Rhatigan appeared alongside Charles in the Red Dwarf series IV episode "Camille".
In August 1997, Charles married his second wife, Jackie, with whom he has two daughters Anna-Jo (born 1997) and Nellie (born 2003).

Rape allegation

In July 1994, Charles and a friend were arrested and remanded in custody for several months on a rape charge.

Drug use

In June 2006, newspaper allegations of crack cocaine use resulted in Charles being suspended from both Coronation Street and BBC Radio 6 Music. In August, Charles was arrested and released on bail pending further enquiries and, in September, he accepted a caution for possession of a Class A drug. Charles returned to hosting his 6 Music show from November 2006 and to filming Coronation Street from January 2007.

Credits

, 2007

Filmography

Radio

Bibliography






