[[Alexander McCall Smith]]

CATEGORIES: 1948 births, Living people, Zimbabwean people of British descent, White Zimbabwean people, People from Bulawayo, People from Edinburgh, Alumni of the University of Edinburgh, Academics of the University of Edinburgh, Bioethics, British Book Award winners, Commanders of the Order of the British Empire, Fellows of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, Medical law, People associated with Edinburgh, Rhodesian novelists, Scottish children's writers, Scottish crime fiction writers, Scottish legal scholars, Scottish novelists, Scottish short story writers, Zimbabwean children's writers, Zimbabwean novelists, Zimbabwean short story writers, Zimbabwean people of Scottish descent, British people of Zimbabwean descent, Audio book narrators, Zimbabwean emigrants to the United Kingdom

R. Alexander "Sandy" McCall Smith, CBE, FRSE, (born 24 August 1948) is a Rhodesian-born British writer and Emeritus Professor of Medical Law at the University of Edinburgh. In the late twentieth century, McCall Smith became a respected expert on medical law and bioethics and served on British and international committees concerned with these issues. He has since become internationally known as a writer of fiction. He is most widely known as the creator of the The No. 1 Ladies' Detective Agency series. Headline and also in text: "McCall Smith, 65, says islands take their residents back to childhood." Article dated 14 October 2013. Retrieved 15 October 2013.

Biography

Alexander McCall Smith was born in Bulawayo, in the then British colony of Southern Rhodesia (present-day Zimbabwe), where his father worked as a public prosecutor. He soon taught at Queen's University Belfast, and while teaching there he entered a literary competition: one a children's book and the other a novel for adults. He won in the children's category, and published thirty books in the 1980s and 1990s.
He returned to southern Africa in 1981 to help co-found and teach law at the University of Botswana. While there, he cowrote what remains the only book on the country's legal system, The Criminal Law of Botswana (1992). He returned in 1984 to Edinburgh, Scotland, where he lives today with his wife, Elizabeth, a physician, and their two daughters Lucy and Emily (he lives close to the authors JK Rowling, Ian Rankin and Kate Atkinson. 1 Magazine, Retrieved 24 February 2014). He was Professor of Medical Law at the University of Edinburgh at one time and is now Emeritus Professor at its School of Law. He retains a further involvement with the University in relation to the James Tait Black Memorial Prize.
He is the former chairman of the British Medical Journal Ethics Committee (until 2002), the former vice-chairman of the Human Genetics Commission of the United Kingdom, and a former member of the International Bioethics Committee of UNESCO. After achieving success as a writer, he gave up these commitments.  He was appointed a CBE in the December 2006 New Year's Honours List for services to literature.[ref]
[/ref] In June 2007, he was awarded the Honorary Degree of Doctor of Laws at a ceremony celebrating the tercentenary of the University of Edinburgh School of Law.
He is an amateur bassoonist, and co-founder of The Really Terrible Orchestra. He has helped to found Botswana's first centre for opera training, the Number 1 Ladies' Opera House,Times article for whom he wrote the libretto of their first production, a version of Macbeth set among a troop of baboons in the Okavango Delta.(ISBN 1-85811-369-5) edited by Dr Michelle Tempest His use of the serial format, in his Edinburgh and Pimlico novels, has revived the nineteenth-century format used by authors including Charles Dickens and Armistead Maupin.
In 2009, he donated the short story Still Life to Oxfam's 'Ox-Tales' project—four collections of UK stories written by 38 authors. McCall Smith's story was published in the 'Air' collection.

Bibliography

The No. 1 Ladies' Detective Agency Series

44 Scotland Street Series

The Sunday Philosophy Club Series

also known as Isabel Dalhousie Mysteries

Corduroy Mansions

Professor Dr von Igelfeld Entertainments

Other novels

Short stories

=Anthologies=

Children's novels

=Akimbo=

=Harriet Bean=

=Max & Maddy=

=Young Precious Ramotswe=

Academic texts








