[[Dihydrogen monoxide hoax]]

CATEGORIES: 1989 introductions, Hoaxes in science, Professional humor, Water and society, 20th-century hoaxes, 21st-century hoaxes, Connotation

The dihydrogen monoxide hoax involves calling water (H2O) by an unfamiliar name, "dihydrogen monoxide", followed by a listing of the real effects of this chemical, often presented as an argument that this substance should be regulated, labeled as hazardous, or banned. The hoax is intended to illustrate how the lack of scientific literacy and an exaggerated analysis can lead to misplaced fears..
"Dihydrogen monoxide", shortened to "DHMO", is a name for water that is consistent with the basic rules of chemical nomenclature, but is not among the names published by IUPAC and is almost exclusively used as a joke or hoax.
A version of the hoax was created by Eric Lechner, Lars Norpchen and Matthew Kaufman, housemates while attending University of California, Santa Cruz in 1989,[ref]
[/ref] revised by Craig Jackson (also a UC Santa Cruz student) in 1994,. and brought to widespread public attention in 1997 when Nathan Zohner, a 14-year-old student, gathered petitions to ban "DHMO" as the basis of his science project, titled "How Gullible Are We?".
"Dihydrogen monoxide" may sound dangerous to those with a limited knowledge of chemistry or who hold to an ideal of a "chemical-free" life (chemophobia). The only familiar common usage of the term "monoxide" is in the highly toxic gas "carbon monoxide", and the simplified term "monoxide poisoning" is commonly used to refer to poisoning by this colorless and odorless substance.
The joke has been frequently extended over the years. For example, a material safety data sheet—a list of information about potentially dangerous materials used in research and industry—has been created for H2O.

Original internet appearance

The first appearance on the internet was attributed by the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette to the so-called Coalition to Ban Dihydrogen Monoxide,.
 
 Dihydrogen monoxide:
Despite the danger, dihydrogen monoxide is often used:

Terminology

The water molecule has the chemical formula H2O, meaning each molecule of water is composed of two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom. Literally, the term "dihydrogen monoxide" means "two hydrogen, one oxygen", consistent with its molecular formula: the prefix di- in dihydrogen means "two", the prefix mon- in monoxide means "one", and an oxide is a compound that contains one or more oxygen atoms..
Various names for water are commonly used within the scientific community. Some such names
Under the 2005 revisions of IUPAC nomenclature of inorganic chemistry, there is no single correct name for every compound.iupac.04. It is considered less important to ensure that each substance should have a single name, although the number of acceptable names is limited. Water is one acceptable name for this compound, even though it is neither a systematic nor an international name and is specific to just one phase of the compound. The other IUPAC recommendation is oxidane. J. et al. 1998. Principles of chemical nomenclature: a guide to IUPAC recommendations, p. 99. Blackwell Science Ltd, UK. ISBN 0-86542-685-6
The use of numerical prefixes is typical nomenclature for compounds formed by covalent bonds, which are present in water. J. et al. 1998. Principles of chemical nomenclature: a guide to IUPAC recommendations, p. 28. Blackwell Science Ltd, UK. ISBN 0-86542-685-6. are also commonly used both in industry and in universities, even though Li2O is ionic.
The "mono-" prefix is often dropped for the second-named element if it is the only common compound the elements form. J. et al. 1998. Principles of chemical nomenclature: a guide to IUPAC recommendations, p. 28. Blackwell Science Ltd, UK. ISBN 0-86542-685-6: "The multiplicative prefixes may not be necessary if the oxidation states are explicit or are clearly understood." Thus for instance the IUPAC name of H2S is hydrogen sulfide rather than hydrogen monosulfide.. However, since carbon and oxygen can form several compounds (carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, tricarbon dioxide, and dicarbon monoxide), the mono- prefix is kept, as it is with silicon monoxide and silicon dioxide. Indeed, hydrogen and oxygen do form another common compound, H2O2 (hydrogen peroxide). Using prefix nomenclature, H2O2 would be called dihydrogen dioxide. Thus, keeping the "mono-" in dihydrogen monoxide could in principle serve to distinguish it from another compound.

Public efforts involving DHMO

| last =
| first =
| authorlink =
| coauthors =
| title = Questions And Answers – Wednesday, September 12, 2007
| work =
| publisher = Scoop
| date = September 13, 2007
| url = 
| doi =
| accessdate =  }}[/ref]








