[[Cúcuta]]

CATEGORIES: Populated places in the Norte de Santander Department, Municipalities of the Norte de Santander Department, Cúcuta, Colombia–Venezuela border crossings, Capitals of Colombian departments

Cúcuta () is a Colombian city, capital of Norte de Santander, in the northeast of the country. The full name is San José de Cúcuta. Due to its proximity to the Colombia-Venezuela border, Cúcuta is an important commercial center. The city had the constitutional category of Special District.  It is located at the most active international border in South America and is connected by roads with Bogota, Caracas and Cartagena. Its air terminal, the Camilo Daza International Airport.
According to the 2005/2020 census it has a population of approx. 637,000, which ranks it as the 6th largest city in the country.  The Metropolitan Area of Cúcuta (conformed by other six municipalities) has a population of  833,816 habitants, having the same position in the conurbations. For several years it has had the lowest unemployment rate in the country, which nowadays is 8.6%.
It is situated in the Cordillera Oriental in the Andes and is connected with Venezuela through the Pan-American Highway. Its area (including rurality) of .
The city is bordered to the east by Venezuela and Puerto Santander, to the south by Villa del Rosario, Bochalema, and Los Patios, to the north by Tibú, and to the west by El Zulia and San Cayetano.
 

Etymology

The city of Cúcuta was called San José de Guasimales from 1733 to 1793, the year in which the name changed to San José de Cúcuta—"San José" (Saint Joseph) denotes the Virgin Mary's husband, and "Cúcuta" means "The House of Goblins", from the language of the Barí indigenous group.
In the city's seal, a legend states, Muy Noble, Valerosa y Leal Villa de San José de Cúcuta ("Very Noble, Valiant and Loyal Village of San José of Cúcuta").
The city has the nicknames "City Without Borders", "Gem of the North," and "City Forest.".[ref]
 [/ref]

History

Cúcuta was originally a pre-hispanic settlement. It was entrusted to Sebastian Lorenzo by Pedro de Ursua as an encomienda in 1550. Juana Rangel de Cuellar founded Cúcuta on June 17, 1733, and donated a further 
Several important events that forged Colombia as an independent republic took place in the city: one of these events was the Congress of 1821, where the Constitution of Cúcuta was written and approved. This constitution created the Greater Colombia, a nation conformed by the present-day territories of Colombia, Venezuela, Ecuador, and Panama. The city preserves places where these historical events took place: the Historical Church of Cúcuta, the House of Santander, and the Park of the Great Colombia.
As the site of the Battle of Cúcuta (February 28, 1813) the city was the beginning of the Admirable Campaign led by Simón Bolívar. This campaign resulted in the independence of Venezuela.

16th Century: First European incursions

The first European in the North Santander territories was the German conqueror Ambrosio Alfinger, who in 1530 came from Santa Ana de Coro (Venezuela) with a troop of adventurers and invaded the unexplored eastern region of the newly created Gobernation of Santa Marta.
Alfínger, in search of El Dorado, arrived in an area of indigenous settlements called Tamalameque along the Magdalena River, fighting and defeating several tribes. Alfinger was eventually killed in the outskirts of present-day Chinácota in a battle with Chimilas and Chitareros Indians. With Alfínger dead, Fedro St. Martin took command of the troops and returned to Coro, passing through the territory of Cúcuta.
The 1541 Hernan Perez de Quesada, reached the territory of Chinácota, but had to turn back the same year due to the resistance of indigenous people. Shortly thereafter, Alfonso Perez de Tolosa, left El Tocuyo (Venezuela) and went to Salazar de Las Palmas, through Cúcuta, but also had to turn back after losing a lot of soldiers in clashes with the natives.
In 1549 Spanish troops, commanded by Pedro de Ursúa and Ortún Velasco, invaded North Santander and reached the valleys of Pamplona. In tribute to the Spanish city of Pamplona, the Spaniards founded the city of Pamplona. The new town soon attracted numerous people because of its agreeable climate and gold mines that were discovered in the region. From this town came further expeditions which completed the conquest of the current territory of North Santander.
An expedition commanded by Diego de Montes founded the town of Salazar, but it was soon destroyed by the Cacique Cínera. In 1583 the town was rebuilt by Alonso Esteban Rangel (great-grandfather of the founder of Cúcuta) on a site more appropriate for its defense in the event of new attacks by the natives.
The second expedition commanded by captain Francisco Fernández de Contreras reached to the lands of the Hacaritamas indigenous group and on July 26, 1572 founded the city of Ocaña, calling it "Santa Ana de Hacarí", while some of his colleagues the named it New Madrid, and others Santa Ana of Ocaña. The next year, Antonio Orozco, subaltern of Fernandez, founded the town of Teorama, while the Friars Augustinians founded a convent in what is today the city of Chinácota.

17th Century: Foundation

In the early 16th century a great part of the valleys of Cúcuta belonged to Captain Christopher de Araque Ponce de Leon. The land passed through inheritance to his son Fernando Araque Ponce de Leon, who was owner of the entire territory from the Valley of Cúcuta to the village of San Jose; jurisdiction of the city of San Faustino. These fields had been donated to the master Araque by the Governor of the Province of New Mérida heading on September 9, 1630.
The constant hostility of the Motilones indigenous group with the whites who lived in the valley and their economic ambitions  were key factors to request the erection of a parish with the name "San José". Juana Rangel de Cuéllar donated  on June 17, 1783 for the construction of a church and land for Spanish families. Today this area is the neighbourhood of San Luis.

19th Century: Major events

=Battle of Cúcuta=

The Battle of Cúcuta was one of the most important events of the Spanish American wars of independence, due to its role in the independence of Colombia and Venezuela. This battle was the beginning of the Admirable Campaign of Simón Bolívar.
Colonel Simón Bolívar then launched a major offensive against the Spanish forces who were on the east bank of the Magdalena River and quickly achieved resounding victories that carried him to undertake a journey to liberate the Valleys of Cúcuta held by the command of royalist Colonel Ramon Correa.

=Congress of Cúcuta=

On August 30, 1821 the Congress of Cúcuta took place at the town of Villa del Rosario (today part of Cúcuta) in the church known today as the "Historic Temple of Cúcuta". The congress was established by Antonio Nariño and  participants included Francisco de Paula Santander, Simón Bolívar, and other leaders of Spanish America's struggle for independence from Spain.
The main objective of this congress was to unify the nations of the New Granada (Colombia and Panama) and Venezuela and thus create a huge state to be known as the Republic of Colombia (Gran Colombia). Ecuador subsequently joined Gran Colombia.
At 11 am on October 3, 1821,Simón Bolívar entered the meeting room  in the sacristy of the church. He took a seat next to the president of Congress and was sworn in as president of the fledgling Republic of Colombia.

=Earthquake of Cúcuta=

On 18 May 1875, Cúcuta was largely destroyed by the earthquake of Cúcuta, also known as the "Earthquake of the Andes". The earthquake occurred at 11:15 a.m.; it destroyed Villa del Rosario, San Antonio del Tachira and Capacho, seriously damaged the Venezuelan settlements of San Cristóbal, La Mulata, Rubio, Michelena, La Grita and Colón (among others), and was felt in Bogotá and Caracas.

=Industrial Revolution=

In the 19th century, the construction of a railroad set off an Industrial Revolution in the city. The railroad had four branches: North, East, South and West.[ref]
