[[Gordon Downie]]

CATEGORIES: 1964 births, Canadian male singers, Canadian rock singers, Canadian songwriters, Canadian people of Scottish descent, Living people, Musicians from Ontario, Writers from Ontario, Queen's University alumni, People from Kingston, Ontario, The Tragically Hip members, Zoë Records artists

Gordon Edgar Downie (born 6 February 1964) is a Canadian rock musician, writer, and occasional actor. He is the lead singer and lyricist for the Canadian rock band The Tragically Hip. He has released three solo albums: Coke Machine Glow in 2001, Battle of the Nudes in 2003, and The Grand Bounce in 2010. On each of these, he was backed by The Country of Miracles; The Grand Bounce is credited to "Gord Downie and The Country of Miracles".

Career

Gordon Downie (known widely as Gord Downie) grew up in a suburb of Kingston, Ontario, where he befriended the musicians that would become The Tragically Hip while attending the downtown Kingston high school, Kingston Collegiate and Vocational Institute.

Collaborations

Gordon Downie has collaborated with fellow Canadian and international artists. His most famous Canadian collaborations are with Richard Terfry (better known as Buck 65), Dallas Green of City and Colour, and The Sadies. These collaborations do not include the musicians who have helped Gordon Downie to create his solo albums. 
Richard Terfry collaborated with Gordon Downie on the song Whispers of the Waves off the album 20 Odd Years. Richard composed the track and with the help of Charles Austen, his co-writer, decided Gordon's vocals would be the best fit for their song.nme.com/nme-video/youtube/id/xN_CGw48nrE
In his solo project City and Colour, Dallas Green had Gordon Downie sing on the track Sleeping Sickness off City and Colour's hit album Bring Me Your Love.  The album debuted at number 11 of the Top Heatseekers chart in March 2008.
Gordon has begun a new project with The Sadies, a Toronto band most noted for their 2010 Polaris Music Prize nomination. Gordon commented on working with the Sadies, saying, "I enjoy getting together with those guys; it's a whole other universe. They're writing all the music and I'm writing all the lyrics and we're coming up with some neat stuff. You do it for the company but I'm genuinely shocked by the themes and things you touch on based on the music you're singing to. That's really compelling to me." He also says they are planning on creating ten songs together.

In other media

Downie has cameo appearances in Men with Brooms, in which The Tragically Hip play a curling team.

Social work

Environmental work

Gordon is heavily involved in environmental movements, especially regarding his work concerning water rights. He is an active member of Waterkeeper Alliance and is recognized as a valued member.

The Great Moon Gathering

In February 2012 in Fort Albany, Downie, with The Tragically Hip, played at the Great Moon Gathering, a yearly educational conference that takes place in various communities along Northern Ontario's James Bay coast. Its focus is on youth learning and combining Cree education with the contemporary world. The venue was small and not typical of the band. Author Joseph Boyden, who invited them, said their motivation was to "initiate a guerrilla act of love for a people who are so thoroughly underrepresented but now, somehow, overexposed for only their shortcomings. A guerrilla act of love to show the rest of the country what strength and artistry, grace and humour the Cree possess." In addition to the Tragically Hip's performance, Downie sang a song with a local band, Northern Revolution. The song "Goodnight Attawapiskat" from the album "Now For Plan A" was a result of this trip.

Discography

Studio albums

Compilations

Singles

Bibliography






