[[Roger Slifer]]

CATEGORIES: 1954 births, American screenwriters, Comic book editors, Living people, Pedestrian road accident victims, People from Shelby County, Indiana, People with brain injuries

Roger Allen Slifer (born November 11, is a writer of comic books, animation, and video games, well known for creating the character Lobo and a run on Omega Men in the 1980s.
Slifer was the victim of a hit-and-run accident in the summer of 2012 and has been in institutional care since then.

Biography

Slifer grew up in the small town of Morristown, Indiana, with his sister Connie. Slifer attended Morristown High School in the early 1970s.

Comics

Slifer started out in comics as a member of the so-called CPL Gang, a group of amateur comics enthusiasts based in Indianapolis, many of whom later went on to careers in the comics industry.
By the mid-1970s, Slifer was working as a freelance writer for Marvel Comics. Thanks to Marvel staffers (and former CPL Gang members) Duffy Vohland and Tony Isabella, in the late 1970s Slifer was hired as an assistant editor at Marvel,Roger Slifer (editor) at the Grand Comics Database where he continued to write a number of comic books including The Defenders.
Slifer moved to DC Comics in February 1981, ostensibly as the company's first sales manager to comic book specialty stores. Slifer served as an editor at DC from 1984-1985 and oversaw the Green Lantern/Green Arrow reprint series, New Talent Showcase, and World's Finest Comics. Slifer left DC after clashing with the company about its stance regarding creator's rights. "Screwed by DC," The Comics Journal #121 (April 1985), p. 25. Slifer had been involved in the creator's rights issue since the late 1970s. "Birth of the Guild: May 7, 1978," The Comics Journal #42 (October 1978), pp. 21-28."Ploog & Kirby Quit Marvel over Contract Dispute," The Comics Journal #44 (Jan. 1979), p. 11.

Animation

After leaving DC, Slifer found work in animation, where he latched on with Sunbow Entertainment, an animation studio with strong ties to Marvel Comics. Slifer eventually became a supervising producer, story editor, and writer for the animated television program Jem and the Holograms. He produced and story-edited many other animated series including G.I. Joe Extreme, Transformers, Street Fighter, Conan the Adventurer, and Bucky O'Hare. During his time at Sunbow, Slifer's colleagues included former Marvel Comics writers Steve Gerber and Marv Wolfman.
For 4KIDS Productions, Slifer co-produced the first season of Yu-Gi-Oh in the United States.

Video games

Slifer has worked as a writer and consultant in the video games industry.

Personal life

Prior to 2012, Slifer had lived in Santa Monica, California.

Hit-and-run accident

In the early morning hours of June 23, 2012, Slifer was hit by a car while walking in Santa Monica, after spending the evening with friends. The driver fled the scene. Slifer was seriously injured, suffering breaks to some ribs, his collar bone, and his shoulder. Most critically, due to head injuries, doctors had to remove a portion of Slifer's skull at Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center.
S.L.I.F.E.R., the Society for Legal, Investigative and Financial Empowerment and Recovery, was created in July 2012 to assist in bringing the hit-and-run driver to justice and providing updates on Slifer's condition."About," S.L.I.F.E.R. Needs You Facebook Page. Accessed Feb. 23, 2013. The nonprofit assistance organization The Hero Initiative is raising money to assist in Slifer's legal case and medical care.
Slifer's sister Connie Carlton took over his care, and in late July 2012, Slifer was moved from UCLA's Ronald Reagan Neuroscience/Trauma Intensive Care Unit to Barlow Respiratory Hospital in Los Angeles. At that point, he was still comatose. "Roger Medical Update 7/27/12," S.L.I.F.E.R. Needs You Facebook Page (July 27, 2012). Slifer's condition improved at Barlow, and he emerged from his coma. In late September 2012, he was transferred to the sub-acute care facility Goldstar Rehabilitation Services, in Santa Monica. "Roger Medical Update 10/8/12," S.L.I.F.E.R. Needs You Facebook Page (Oct. 8, 2012).
As of late February 2013, Slifer was awaiting surgery to replace the portion of his skull removed immediately after the accident. His sister Connie has arranged to transport Slifer to Indiana where he can be cared for during his presumed recovery and rehabilitation. "Roger Medical Update 2/15/13," S.L.I.F.E.R. Needs You Facebook Page (Feb. 15, 2013).

Tributes

Slifer has had three fictional characters named at least in part after him:

Bibliography

DC Comics

Marvel Comics








