[[Redman (rapper)]]

CATEGORIES: 1970 births, Living people, Male actors from New Jersey, American male film actors, African-American male rappers, American people of Korean descent, American male voice actors, Def Jam Recordings artists, East Coast hip hop musicians, People from Newark, New Jersey, Rappers from New Jersey, African-American male actors, African-American songwriters, Songwriters from New Jersey, American male television actors

Reginald "Reggie" Noble (born April 17, 1970), better known by his stage name Redman, is an American MC, rapper, DJ, record producer and actor. He came to fame in the early 1990s as an artist on the Def Jam label. He is also well known for his collaborations with Method Man, including their starring roles in films and sitcoms. He was also a member of the Def Squad in the late 1990s. Redman is one-half of the rap duo Method Man & Redman.

Music career

In 1990, Reginald "Reggie" Noble made his world debut on the EPMD album Business as Usual, appearing on tracks "Hardcore" and "Brothers On My Jock". In 1997  Redman was feature on Platinum Producer Frankie Cutlass Solo Gold Album title "Politic's & Bullshit".

Whut? Thee Album & Dare Iz a Darkside (1990–95)

In 1992 Redman released his debut album, Whut? Thee Album, which Allmusic noted for blending "reggae and funk influences" with a "terse, though fluid rap style". Redman Biography at Allmusic. Accessed 2007-06-02 The album peaked at number forty-nine on the Billboard 200 and was certified gold. He was named "Rap Artist of the Year" by The Source. Redman followed this up with his 1994 album, Dare Iz a Darkside. The first single, "Rockafella", samples Leon Haywood's "I Want'a Do Something Freaky to You" and George Clinton's "Flash Light", two of the most sampled songs in hip hop. Redman's second album was notable for having most of the tracks produced by the artist himself (later on Redman would let other producers make most of his beats). During this time he used former mentor Erick Sermon to produce his records, some of the stuff he did for Redman was "Pick it up" and "Whateva Man" from Muddy Waters.

Muddy Waters (1996–97)

On December 10, 1996 Redman released his third album Muddy Waters, which was highly praised by critics. The album featured two Billboard Hot 100 singles, "Whateva Man" and "It's Like That (My Big Brother)". The song "Do What You Feel" also appeared on the soundtrack to the popular video game Grand Theft Auto: Liberty City Stories. The album was certified gold by the RIAA on February 12, 1997. During this time, with new found friendships with Method Man and Tupac, They both appeared on Tupac's double album "All Eyez on Me" On the song "Got my Mind Made Up".

Doc's da Name 2000 & Blackout (1998–99)

In 1998 Redman released his first collaboration album El Niño with group Def Squad. His fourth studio album Doc's Da Name 2000. was a top seller, shipping platinum in sales and exceeding his previous record of gold. It peaked at #11 on The Billboard 200 and had three songs ("I'll Bee Dat", "Da Goodness", "Let Da Monkey Out") that charted. With his new formed close partnership with labelmate Method Man who, with him, made a featured appearance with him on the Doc's Da Name 2000 record on the song "Well All Rite Cha". In 1999 Method Man and Redman released a collaborative album called "Blackout!", Originally, the record was supposed to be advertised as "Amerika's Most Blunted", but changed to a more commercially friendly title called Blackout!.

Malpractice (2001)

In 2001 Redman released his fifth studio album Malpractice. It reached #4 on The Billboard 200 and was certified Gold by the RIAA on July 21, 2001. It boasted two singles "Let's Get Dirty (I Can't Get In Da Club)" and "Smash Sumthin'".

Mixtapes, Collaborations & Production (2002–2006)

Since the release of Malpractice, he has kept his fans happy by independently releasing the Ill At Will mixtapes, which feature various members of his new record label Gilla House members under Redman's Gilla House imprint include Saukrates, Icarus, Ready Roc, E3, Young Heat, and Melanie.
Redman had his best-known international hit with Christina Aguilera, when he was featured on her 2002 single "Dirrty". Around this time he was also featured on a popular remix of Pink's track Get This Party Started. He is cited in the song 'Till I Collapse as rapper Eminem's one of the most highly rated in the industry.
Under his birthname, Reggie Noble, Redman has done production for himself, many of his crew members, and even Shaquille O'Neal on his 'Shaq-Fu: Da Return' album.

Red Gone Wild (2007–08)

In March 2007, Redman released Red Gone Wild. He says that the reason for the long wait to drop the album is because of the fast-changing pace of Hip Hop on his MySpace interview. On March 27, 2007 Redman confirmed on BET's Rap City: Tha Bassment that the sequel to How High, How High 2, is currently being written. In an April 10, 2007 Onion AV Club interview, Redman hinted that there would be a second collaborative album with Method Man, with work beginning in midsummer or early September.

Blackout 2!, Reggie & Muddy Waters 2 (2009–present)

Blackout! 2 was announced in 2007 by Redman and was originally scheduled for release in 2008, but its release was pushed back a number of times due to numerous reasons. In early 2008, a remake of the  After a few push backs, Redman Presents... Reggie was finally released on December 7, 2010. The first official single is "Def Jammable" & a video was released for the single. It has been confirmed that Redman will appear on a remix along with French rapper Soprano of "Tranne Te" by Italian rapper Fabri Fibra. He has also confirmed work on Blackout! 3 with Method Man with recording starting summer 2012. In June 2013 Redman announced that his next studio album Muddy Waters 2 would be released in late 2013 and he would release an EP titled Muddy Waters 2 the Preload EP in August 2013

Other ventures

Film and acting career

In 2001, Redman co-starred with Method Man in the stoner comedy film How High, which featured the pair playing two marijuana-addled students attempting to survive at Harvard. Redman also stated at a recent concert (at the Soundset in Minneapolis) that he and Method Man are working on How High 2, a sequel to the first movie. Redman also played a major role in the horror film Seed of Chucky. He has been very selective of what movie roles he takes and wants to play starring roles with other notable actors. Method Man and Redman also appear in Def Jam Vendetta, Def Jam: Fight for NY and Def Jam: Icon video games, often as tag team partners, and briefly had their own television sitcom, Method & Red, on Fox during the 2003–2004 season. In the music video for The Offspring's single Original Prankster, Redman plays the part of the "conscience", telling the "Original Prankster" what pranks to pull.
In 2004, Redman again co-starred with Method Man in the Nickelodeon cartoon, The Fairly OddParents in School's Out! The Musical, rapping the Pixes's song or Pixes Rap as its called.The Fairly OddParents in School's Out! The Musical at imdb
Redman is featured in the 2006 video game True Crime: New York City. He provides the voice of himself in a mini-game where he tries to escape New York during a riot. This character also has a cameo in the main storyline. In the UK, Redman was featured in an MTV Cribs special on MTV and TMF. The special was titled Dope Luxurious Cribs. 

Personal life

Redman's cousin is rapper Tame One of the hip hop group Artifacts. He is also an alumnus of Montclair State University in New Jersey.
Redman  began boarding his four month old pit bull terrier Daddy with dog trainer Cesar Millan, with Daddy ultimately becoming Millan's "right-hand-man" on his TV show The Dog Whisperer.

Discography

Other media

Video games

Television shows

Filmography

Awards and nominations

Redman has been nominated for two Grammys:






