[[Transport in North Korea]]

CATEGORIES: Transport in North Korea

Transportation in North Korea is severely limited, as are entrances to the country. The standard route to and from North Korea is by plane or train from Beijing, People's Republic of China. Transport directly to and from South Korea has been possible on a limited scale from 2003 until 2008, when a road was opened (bus tours, no private cars). Freedom of movement in North Korea is also limited, as citizens are not allowed to move around freely inside their country.North Korea: Freedom of movement, opinion and expression - Information sheet, Amnesty International, PDF, pulbished 2 August 2009, accessed 2011-04-08

Roads

Fuel constraints and the near absence of private automobiles have relegated road transportation to a secondary role. The road network was estimated to be around 31,200 km in 1999 up from between 23,000 and 30,000 km in 1990, of which only 1,717 kilometers—7.5 percent—are paved; the rest are of dirt, crushed stone, or gravel, and are poorly maintained.
Unlike most countries, driving speeds are regulated by which lane a driver is in. The speed limits are 70 km/h(43 mph), 60 km/h(37 mph) and 40 km/h(24 mph) for the first, second, and third lanes from the left, respectively. Each lane is restricted to certain uses, the first lane (70 km/h) is designated for senior officials. The third lane is for average citizens; those in the third lane are not permitted to change lanes nor drive faster than the 40 km/h limit.     
Automobile transportation is further restricted by a series of regulations. According to North Korean exile Kim Ji-ho, unless a driver receives a special permit it is forbidden to drive alone (you must carry passengers). Other permits are: a military mobilization permit (to transport soldiers in times of war), a certificate of driver training (to be renewed every year), a fuel validity document (a certificate confirming that the fuel was purchased from an authorized source) and a mechanical certificate (to prove that the car is in working order).
Although it drives on the right, North Korea has imported various used RHD vehicles from Japan, from tourist buses to Toyota Land Cruisers.

File:DPRK Highway.jpg | A highway outside of Pyongyang
File:Roadworks in North Korea. The blue truck in the foreground is a Chinese-made Dongfeng
File:Pyongyang roadway.JPG| A main road in Pyongyang
File:Pyongyang side street.JPG| A side road in Kaesong

Public transport

There is a mix of locally built and imported trolleybuses and trams in the major urban centres of North Korea.
Earlier fleets were obtained from Europe and China, but a trade embargo has forced North Korea to build their own vehicles.

File:DPRK trolley.jpg|Pyongyang tram in 2009
Image:In front of Pyongyang Station DPRK.jpg|Trolleybus near Pyongyang Railway Station in 2007
File:Tram North Korea PY.jpg|Former Zurich type Be 4/4 tram on the Kumsusan Memorial Palace line
File:Pyongyang bus.jpg|A Pyongyang Trolleybus Works Chongnyonjunwi
File:Proton Wira taxi in Pyongyang, North Korea. 

Railways

The Korean State Railway is the only rail operator in North Korea. It has a network of over 6000 km of standard gauge and 400 km of narrow gauge (762 mm) lines; as of 2007, over 5400 km of the standard gauge (well over 80%), along with 295.5 km of the narrow gauge lines are electrified.Kokubu, Hayato, 将軍様の鉄道  (Shōgun-sama no Tetsudō), ISBN 978-4-10-303731-6

Water transport

Water transport on the major rivers and along the coasts plays growing role in freight and passenger traffic. Except for the Yalu and Taedong rivers, most of the inland waterways, totaling 2,250 kilometers, are navigable only by small boats. Coastal traffic is heaviest on the eastern seaboard, whose deeper waters can accommodate larger vessels. The major ports are Nampho on the west coast and Rajin, Chongjin, Wonsan, and Hamhung on the east coast. The country's harbor loading capacity in the 1990s was estimated at almost 35 million tons a year. There is a continuing investment in upgrading and expanding port facilities, developing transportation—particularly on the Taedong River—and increasing the share of international cargo by domestic vessels.

Merchant marine

In the early 1990s, North Korea possessed an oceangoing merchant fleet, largely domestically produced, of 68 ships (of at least 1,000 gross-registered tons), totalling 465,801 gross-registered tons (), which included fifty-eight cargo ships and two tankers. As of 2008, this has increased to a total of 167 vessels consisting mainly of cargo and tanker ships.

Air transport

North Korea's international air connections are limited in frequency and numbers.  As of 2011, scheduled flights operate only from Pyongyang's Pyongyang Sunan International Airport to Beijing, Dalian, Shenyang, Shanghai, Bangkok, Kuala Lumpur, Singapore, Moscow, Khabarovsk, Vladivostok and Kuwait International Airport.  Charters to other destinations operate as per demand. Prior to 1995 many routes to Eastern Europe were operated including services to Sofia, Belgrade, Prague, Budapest along with others.
Air Koryo is the country's national airline.  Air China also operates flights between Beijing and Pyongyang. In 2013, MIAT Mongolian Airlines Mongolian Airlines began operating direct charter services from Ulanbator to Pyongyang with Boeing 737-800 aircraft.  
Internal flights are available between Pyongyang, Hamhung, Haeju (HAE), Hungnam (HGM), Kaesong (KSN), Kanggye, Kilju, Najin (NJN), Nampo (NAM), Sinuiju (SII), Samjiyon, Wonsan (WON), Songjin (SON) and Chongjin (CHO). All civil aircraft are operated by Air Koryo, which has a fleet of 56 passenger and cargo aircraft, all of which were all Soviet and recently modern Russian models
As of 2013, the CIA estimates that North Korea has 82 usable airports, 39 of which have permanent-surface runways.cia.html








