[[Alan Fletcher (actor)]]

CATEGORIES: 1957 births, Living people, Male actors from Perth, Western Australia, Australian male television actors, Australian people of English descent, Participants in British reality television series, People educated at Wesley College, Perth, Australian male soap opera actors, 21st-century Australian male actors

Alan Fletcher (born  30 March 1957) is an Australian actor and musician, best known for his role as Karl Kennedy in long-running soap opera Neighbours. Fletcher was educated at Wesley College, Perth.

Career

Fletcher's first widely seen role was in police drama Cop Shop from 1982 until production ceased the following year. Prior to this, he appeared in a few episodes of the US series The Love Boat (1981) and various Australian feature films, TV movies, and miniseries including Fran and Mercy Mission. In 1994, Fletcher successfully auditioned for the role of Karl Kennedy in the soap, a role which he continues to play.
In 2005, Fletcher starred as Henry Higgins in a production of My Fair Lady at the Melbourne Comedy Theatre. He is also a prominent member of the Media, Entertainment and Arts Alliance, a role which saw him become a vocal critic of the 2004 US-Australia Free Trade Agreement, including an appearance on the political talk-show Meet the Press.
In 2008, Fletcher starred as Frank McGee in the workshop performance season of Call Girl the Musical and as Captain Hook in the Pantomime Peter Pan at His Majesty's Theatre, Aberdeen.
In 2011 Fletcher spent time in Old Melbourne Gaol to raise money for the charity Whitelion.  In order to break out, Fletcher and fellow Neighbours cast members Stefan Dennis, Jordy Lucas and Valentina Novakovic had to each raise $1,000.
In May 2013, along with Saskia Hampele, he presented the award of Best Newcomer to Joseph Thompson at the British Soap Awards.

Musical career

Fletcher is also the lead singer in a band called Waiting Room, with other members including Tommy Rando, Chris Hawker and drummer Jeff Consi. They have toured the United Kingdom several times. With a handful of their own songs they incorporate a selection of cover versions into their set. Fletcher also covers Smokie's "Living Next Door to Alice", substituting Alice, for "Susan", his on-screen wife (Jackie Woodburne). Their single, So Wrong, was released on iTunes on the 26 November 2007, followed by their new album, Live at the Elephant, on the 17 December 2007. On the 30 November 2007 Fletcher performed a cover of Oasis' "Wonderwall" for BBC Radio 1's Live Lounge.
In December 2008 Fletcher played a solo gig in Aberdeen, playing a mixture of covers and Waiting Room,  material. He followed this with a second gig in the city on the 3 January 2009 at The Lemon Tree.
On the 15 May 2009 Fletcher announced via his official website that he was to tour the UK with a new band, The X-Rays due to the economic situation of bringing Waiting Room with him. The tour took place in September and October 2009 and featured some original Waiting Room material. The X-Rays are UK based musicians Johnny Lucas, Chris Hanby and Martin Stewart. Fletcher continues to perform each week in Melbourne with Waiting Room.
In September 2010, Fletcher announced on his official website that he will be touring the UK with Tommy Rando in November and December of that year. On 28 November 2010, during his UK tour, Fletcher appeared on the The Xtra Factor to discuss the potential winners of the show.
In September 2012, Fletcher played a charity gig at the Shepherd's Bush branch of the pub chain Walkabout in aid of Blue September.
Fletcher was a contestant on the UK TV show Soapstar Superstar, in January 2007 finishing in sixth place. He performed the following songs:
In 2013, Fletcher released a Christmas single, If You Want A Happy Christmas, on which he collaborated with The Pacific Belles.

Personal life

Fletcher's wife is former Network Ten Melbourne newsreader Jennifer Hansen
Fletcher is an ambassador for Blue September, a charity that raises awareness of all cancers that can affect men.  In 2011, Fletcher helped launch the charity in Britain.
Fletcher was once a sea scout but has since admitted that he hates sailing.  The person he admires most is Nelson Mandela.






