[[Jimmy Johnstone]]

CATEGORIES: 1944 births, 1974 FIFA World Cup players, 2006 deaths, Association football wingers, Celtic F.C. players, Deaths from motor neurone disease, Dundee F.C. players, Elgin City F.C. players, League of Ireland players, North American Soccer League (1968–84) players, San Jose Earthquakes (1974–88) players, Scotland international footballers, Scottish Football League players, Scottish Sports Hall of Fame inductees, Sheffield United F.C. players, Shelbourne F.C. players, The Football League players, Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees, Scottish Football League representative players, Sportspeople from South Lanarkshire, Scotland under-23 international footballers

James Connolly "Jimmy" Johnstone (30 September 1944 – 13 March 2006), nicknamed "Jinky", was a Scottish football player. Johnstone was best known for his time with Celtic, and was voted their best ever player by the club's fans in 2002. He scored 129 goals for Celtic in 515 appearances.
Born in Viewpark, South Lanarkshire, the youngest of five children, Johnstone grew up at the family home on Old Edinburgh Road, directly across from Robertson Park, the home of local Junior side Thorniewood United FC. After being spotted by Celtic and Manchester United scouts at age 13, he chose to sign with Celtic.

Club career

Celtic

Johnstone was one of the "Lisbon Lions", the team that won the then European Cup for Celtic in 1967.
In the immediate aftermath of the Lisbon victory Celtic formed the opposition in the testimonial game for the Real Madrid player Alfredo Di Stéfano. Johnstone's performance was such that the Real supporters began to cry "Olé!" every time he dribbled past one of their own team's players.
In all he made 308 League appearances for The Bhoys, scoring 82 goals. He also played another 207 times for them in the Scottish Cup, League Cup and in Europe, for an overall total of 515 matches.

Later career

He later played for the San Jose Earthquakes, Sheffield United, Dundee, Shelbourne and Elgin City.

International career

Johnstone won 23 caps for the Scottish international side.

Later life

Johnstone's dry wit was in evidence when the Lisbon Lions were paraded at Celtic Park on the 25th anniversary of their triumph in the European Cup. In an aside, Paul McStay, the then Celtic captain, asked Johnstone who he thought would win if the 1967 team was to play the team of 1992. Johnstone paused to consider for a moment, then replied that he thought it would be a draw. McStay suggested that perhaps the veteran was being kind to the current team. Johnstone explained - "well, you've got to remember that we're all in our fifties now!" 
A documentary about Johnstone's life, narrated by Billy Connolly

Motor neurone disease and death

Johnstone was diagnosed with motor neurone disease in November 2001. To raise funds for charity and to raise awareness of the disease, he launched a new version of the song "Dirty Old Town" together with Jim Kerr of Simple Minds.
In June 2005, Carl Fabergé's great-granddaughter Sarah, produced 19 jewelled eggs related to Johnstone.
Johnstone died in March 2006. There was a minute of applause before the game and the entire Celtic squad wore the number 7 on their shorts in his honour.
In 2011 a statue of Jimmy Johnstone and a memorial garden were created on the site at his former school, close to his home, on the Old Edinburgh Road, Viewpark, Uddingston. The garden was opened by Jimmy Johnstone's wife, family and some of the surviving members of the 'Lisbon Lions' team. The bronze life size statue was made by sculptor John McKenna.

Honours






