[[Arte]]

CATEGORIES: Multilingual broadcasters, French television networks, French-language television stations, German-language television stations, Classical music television channels, German television networks, Television stations in Germany, Television channels in the Netherlands, Television channels in Belgium, Television channels in Flanders, Strasbourg, Television channels and stations established in 1992, Buildings and structures in Strasbourg

Arte (Association Relative à la Télévision Européenne) is a Franco-German TV network, a European channel, that promotes programming in the areas of culture and the arts. It is made up of three separate companies: the Strasbourg-based European Economic Interest Grouping Arte GEIE plus two member companies acting as editorial and programme production centres, Arte France in Paris (France) and Arte Deutschland in Baden-Baden (Germany). As an international joint venture (an EEIG), its programs cater technically to audiences from both France and Germany. This implies double-titling, opposite-language subtitling, dubbing, hosts who speak both languages alternately, and two separate audio tracks (through DVB-T, satellite television and digital cable).
Three-quarters of ARTE's programming are provided in equal proportion by the two member companies Arte France and Arte Deutschland while the remainder is being provided by Arte GEIE and the channel's European partners. 
Arte France was formerly known as La Sept (La Société d'édition des programmes de télévision, but also a play on words, given that the name means the seventh (network) and La Sept existed while the fifth network was still La Cinq; it made satellite television programs at the time) and by ARTE Deutschland GmbH, a subsidiary of the two main public German TV networks ARD and ZDF.
Arte has also an on-line radio web site, called Arte Radio.

History

Arte began transmission in 1992, filling frequencies left unused by the demise of La Cinq, the first French commercial television network (created in 1986).
Arte started out as an evening-only service. In the daytime, the frequencies were shared with other channels. A public channel called Télé emploi occupied the French frequencies for about a month during 1994, before the start of La Cinquième (now France 5) in December that year. For German viewers, Arte was assigned a frequency on the Astra 1D satellite in late 1994, and it was eventually shared with Nickelodeon Germany, later replaced by the new public children's channel Kinderkanal.
In 1996, it started offering an afternoon schedule with reruns for viewers on digital satellite and digital cable. A "proper" afternoon schedule with programmes between 2 p.m. and 7 p.m. was introduced on January 6, 2001.A R T E M a g a z i n e, January 6, 2001 The channel eventually got its own analogue frequency on the Astra satellites.

Transmission and reception

In France, in digital broadcast programming is available permanently on digital cable, digital satellite and digital terrestrial television.
Arte usually has more viewers in France than in Germany. Around 2002, its share of overall viewing was about 3-4% in France and about 1% in Germany. In France, Arte was available to almost everyone as one of six analogue terrestrial channels. Relatively few French households received cable and satellite television, and the other terrestrial channels didn't really compete with Arte. Meanwhile, thanks to widespread roll-out of cable television, the vast majority of German households had access to about three dozen channels, including several from the public broadcasters with content similar to Arte. Zehn Jahre arte, Jobst Plog, Die politische Meinung Nr. 390 · Mai 2002 After the introduction of digital terrestrial television in France, Arte's market share has fallen there, while it has been more or less flat in Germany.
On 1 July 2008, the German version of Arte began broadcasting in HDTV via DVB-S2 on Astra. Arte is now the second available 24-hour HDTV channel transmitting via satellite to their German and French audience, next to the German Sky pay TV HDTV channel.
Like the national channels of its own respective countries, the German HDTV version of Arte broadcasts in 720p50, while the French one broadcasts in 1080i25.
International=== 
Arte is also formally available in Belgium, Austria, Lebanon, Israel, the Netherlands, Portugal and Switzerland via cable. While viewers spanning from the UK to Iran take advantage of the ASTRA and HOTBIRD transmissions, Arte's SD channel on HOTBIRD is now encoded in MPEG-4, of which most SD receivers cannot decode the video, although the audio can still be heard. Hence ASTRA has become the primary ARTE source for non-HD viewers in Europe, North Africa and West Asia.
The Australian Special Broadcasting Service translates many Arte programs into English for broadcast on its own television network and overseas.
Many French-language Arte programs are also broadcast in Canada on the ARTV cable channel, partly owned by the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (85%) and Arte itself (15%).

Programming

www.tv

ARTE offers programmes on all sorts of screens that are free and without advertising. The new media formats complement the on-air programming.

ARTE-LIVE-ORANGE-RVB.svg|Logo Arte Live
ARTE-+7-ORANGE-RVB.svg|Logo Arte+7
ARTE-FUTURE-BLEU-RVB.svg|Logo ARTE Future
ARTE-CREATIVE-VERT-RVB.svg|Logo ARTE CREATIVE
ARTE-LIVEWEB-VIOLET-RVB.svg|Logo ARTE LIVE WEB

Logos

Arte-Logo.svg|1995–2004
Logo-arte-schief.svg|2004–2011
Arte 2011.svg|Since 2011
Arte Logo HD 2011.png|Arte HD logo








