[[Kryvyi Rih]]

CATEGORIES: Kryvyi Rih, Cities in Dnipropetrovsk Oblast, Populated places established in the 18th century

Kryvyi Rih (, Crooked Horn) is a city in central Ukraine. It is situated in Dnipropetrovsk Oblast, to the southwest of the oblast's administrative center, Dnipropetrovsk, at the confluence of the Inhulets and Saksahan rivers. The estimated population was 664,499 as of 2011.
Kryvyi Rih is arguably the main steel industry city of Eastern Europe, being a large globally important metallurgical center in the Kryvbas iron mining region.

History

The city was founded in the 18th century by Zaporozhian Cossacks. Kryvyi Rih in Ukrainian literally means Crooked Horn. According to local legend, the city was founded by a crooked (Ukrainian slang for one-eyed) Cossack named Rih.  However, records pre-dating the existence of the city refer to the area by the same name, due to the shape of the landmass formed by the merging of the river Saksagan into the Inhulets.
The area's industrial growth began in the 1880s, when European investment founded a mining syndicate.  The metallurgical works in the city, Kryvorizhstal, in particular, expanded through Soviet times, and now remain some of the largest in the world.
During the Russian Civil War, the city and its hinterland were at the nucleus of Nestor Makhno's anarchist insurgency.
During World War II, Kryvyi Rih was almost totally destroyed by the fleeing Red Army. After the war, people lived among the ruins while housing stocks were rebuilt. The housing shortage was met by innovative technological solutions, which meant temporary barracks and houses could be built quickly. The two kinds of cheap new materials  were used later for years afterwards.

image:Kalnysh.jpg|Postal station Kryvyy Rih tabernacle was built by order of Petro Kalnyshevsky
image:Kryvyi Rih center XXth century.jpg|The main street of Kryvyi Rih, the beginning of the twentieth century
image:Олександр_Поль.
image:Bundesarchiv Bild 102-10648, Entwurf eines Kraftwerks für Süd-Russland.

Modern Kryvyi Rih

The city extends for 126 km from north to south,Dnepropetrovsk Oblast 1:200,000 map, Ukraine 2004 and 2005.0 km2, and extends  in width." ("В настоящий момент город Кривой Рог занимает территорию площадью 430,0 км2 и имеет протяжность с севера на юг 126 км (наибольшая в Европе) и ширину до 20 км.:) Официальный сайт исполсома города Кривщгщ Рого (ru) (ua). paralleling the ore deposits. The city is set in the rolling steppe land surrounded by fields of sunflowers and grain. A short distance east of the city centre, there is an area along a small lake where glacial boulders were deposited. As a result, this area was never cultivated and contains one of the few remaining patches of wild steppe vegetation in the area. The city's environmental and construction safety is a growing problem due to abandoned mines and polluted ore-processing waste. According to the Scientific Hygienic Centre of Ukraine, the city is one of the most unfavourable places to live because of these problems.Библиотечный каталог авторефератов Украины, Scientific Hygienic Centre of Ukraine.
The city itself is laid out with broad avenues lined by wide sidewalks. Tram lines run down the centre of the major streets. Beside the sidewalks there are usually several rows of trees such as lindens and horse chestnuts. Many people live in rows of 5 to 9 story apartment buildings that are wrapped around large inner courtyards. Many of these courtyards are also filled with trees giving the overall impression that the entire city is built in a park.
Kryvyi Rih TV Mast is a 185m tall guyed tubular steel mast built in 1960, which carries in 2 levels 3 crossbars, which run from the mast structure to the guys. All three crossbars are equipped with gangways that carry additional smaller antennas.

image:Кривой-Рог-украина-часы-цветочные-часы-95804.jpeg|One of the biggest flower clocks in Europe
image:KRMetrotram.jpg|Kryvyi Rih Metrotram
image:Кривой-Рог-украина-Ночной-город-зима-95784.jpeg|Christmas lights near City Hall

Climate

Kryvyi Rih experiences a dry continental climate (Dfb/Dfa) according to the Köppen climate classification system. This tends to generate warm summers and cold winters with relatively low precipitation.
 
 

Demographics

Kryviy Rih had a population of 664,499 in 2011.

Economy

Viktor Yushchenko, the president of Ukraine since 2005, has accused his predecessor, Leonid Kuchma of selling off Kryvorizhstal to a political supporter for far below market value. This privatization was successfully challenged in court in 2005, and the same year the plant was re-privatized after an open bidding to the Dutch-Indian Mittal Steel for more than 5 times the initial value.

Tourism

Kryvyi Rih has few hotels. The Kryvyi Rih (also known as Lozuvatka) International Airport was renovated from 2002 to 2007 and handles charter flights, private planes and flights to Kyiv.

Sport

Kryvyi Rih is home to the football team Kryvbas Kryvyi Rih. It was also the birthplace of the Ukrainian tennis players Valeria Bondarenko, Alona Bondarenko and Kateryna Bondarenko.

Twin cities






