[[Paper football]]

CATEGORIES: Children's games, Individual sports, Paper folding, Variations of American football

Paper football (also called FIKI Football, Finger football, Chinese football, Flick football, or Tabletop Football) refers to a table-top game, loosely based on American football, in which a sheet of paper folded into a small triangle is slid back and forth across a table top by two opponents. This game is widely practiced for fun, mostly by boys of primary, middle school, and high school age in the United States and by bored employees.  It is also commonly referred to as "Polish Football" around the Chicago area. 

Paper football construction

Due to the audience and impromptu nature of the game, a paper football is often made out of a single sheet of paper.  The paper is folded similar to the way that an American flag is folded to form a triangle.  First fold the paper lengthwise two or three times to form a long rectangle.  Then repeatedly fold in a diagonal fashion, forming a triangle.   Finally, the end of the strip is tucked into the last fold, securing the final paper football in its iconic triangular shape.  In the absence of paper, sugar packets, matchbooks, and foil-wrapped cookies have also been used to substitute for a ball.

Game play

Many variations of the game exist, but generally paper football games vaguely emulate American football. The two opposing teams (usually two opposing players) sit facing each other over the play area. A coin (or, a specially-marked football) is flipped to see who kicks off to start the game. After the kickoff the teams advance the Ball by flicking it across the field. Each flick represents a drive in American football, with the goal being to score a touchdown. Games may be as simple as flicking the ball back and forth in a fashion similar to field goals, or as involved as including simulations of events from touchbacks to penalties to first downs.

Kick off

A kick off may start the game. The player holds the football under a fingertip of one hand on his end of the table and flicks (kicks) it with a finger from the other hand towards the opposing player's end of the table. The receiving team gets possession where the ball stops.  If any part of the ball is overhanging the end of the table a touchback has occurred. The receiving team gets an agreed distance away from their endzone and play continues.
There are a couple of other ways to perform the kick off; one is by placing' the ball on the edge of the table with one corner overhanging, and flicking it towards the opposing side of the table. Other players use a one-handed type of kick off: the ball is held resting in the palm, then it is tossed onto the table by hitting the fingers on the underside of the table. The method used should be agreed upon before playing.
Some play with a "wind" rule on kickoffs in which the opposing player can blow the ball backwards as "wind."

Advancing the ball

The primary activity of the game is to slide the paper football across the football field by flicking it. The legal flick or shot or throw is any method which advances the ball through flicking or hitting, but pushing the ball is disallowed. The ball is generally flicked either with the thumb and forefinger in a manner similar to shooting marbles, or another manner comfortable to the player. Striking with objects such as pencils is more rare.
Players have four chances (downs) to score a touchdown. They may attempt a field goal on fourth down.

Scoring

A team scores points by the following plays:

=Touchdown=

A touchdown (TD) is worth 6 points, as in American football. A touchdown is scored when a player advances the ball such that it comes to rest with part of the ball extending over the edge the opponent's end of the table without falling to the ground. If the ball falls to the ground it is considered a touchback, if on fourth down you feel that you are not close enough to have a good chance at scoring a touchdown then you can attempt a field goal for 3.
When the players are unsure whether a touchdown has been scored, a flat object can be slid across the edge of the table nearest the ball. If the object moves the ball, a touchdown is ruled.

=Extra points=

Following a touchdown, the scoring player usually kicks a field goal for 1 point (an extra point or point-after touchdown), or has the option to try for 2 points (a two-point conversion).
Play resumes with either a fresh kickoff by the scoring player, or a change of possession, based on house rules.

=Field goals=

A field goal is any attempt by a player to hold the ball in one hand (which in turn generally rests on the table), and to flick the ball using the other hand such that it travels through a goalpost formed by the fingers of the opposing player. Field goals generally score 3 points. Implementation of field goals varies widely, and in some variations the game consists entirely of players kicking field goals back and forth with no other plays in between. If this is the case, each successful field goal is worth only one point.
Variations:

=Safety=

A safety is worth two points. This occurs when a player scores a touchdown on his/her own end of the table and not his/her opponent's end. The opposing player earns these two points.

=Penalties=

Pushing the ball excessively, double flicking, kicking the ball so that it lands far away from the table, or disturbing the ball during an opponent's play may all result in penalties depending on game variation. Most often, a penalty moves the ball toward the offender's side of the table, to the opponent's advantage. If players are using downs, the offending player generally loses a down (or the opponent's play is considered not to have used a down), in addition to letting the opposing player move the ball to a more advantageous position.

Game length

Game length varies. A match may last a set amount of time such as 10 points or until the end of a class period in school. A match is often played until someone attains 21 points.  Games are generally played quite quickly, especially when played on shorter tables.
Various methods in turn or in combination can be used to break ties. One is "sudden death" - if the game is tied in a timed game, the match goes into sudden death, and the player who scores first wins the game.

Variations







 

