[[Bill Willingham]]

CATEGORIES: 1956 births, American comics artists, American comics writers, Dungeons & Dragons artists, Eisner Award winners for Best Writer, Fables (comics), Fabulists, Living people, Date of birth missing (living people)

Bill Willingham (born December 1956) is an American writer and artist of comics, known for his work on the series Elementals and Fables.

Career

William Willingham was born in Fort Belvoir, Virginia. During his father's military career the family also lived in Alaska, California, and finally three years in Germany."About". Bill Willingham (billwillingham. Retrieved February 15, 2014. Willingham got his start in the late 1970s to early 1980s as a staff artist for TSR, Inc., where he illustrated a number of their role-playing game products. He was the cover artist for the AD&D Player Character Record Sheets, Against the Giants, Secret of Bone Hill, the Gamma World book Legion of Gold, and provided the back cover for In the Dungeons of the Slave Lords. He was an interior artist on White Plume Mountain, Slave Pits of the Undercity, Ghost Tower of Inverness, Secret of the Slavers Stockade, Secret of Bone Hill, Palace of the Silver Princess, Isle of Dread, In the Dungeons of the Slave Lords, the original Fiend Folio, Descent into the Depths of the Earth, Assault on the Aerie of the Slave Lords, Against the Giants, Queen of the Spiders, Realms of Horror, and the second and third editions of Top Secret. He also wrote and illustrated a couple of 1982 adventures for the game Villains & Vigilantes for Fantasy Games Unlimited, Death Duel with the Destroyers and The Island of Doctor Apocalypse.
He first gained attention for his 1980s comic book series Elementals published by Comico, which he both wrote and illustrated; this series guest-starred the Destroyers from his V&V adventures. He contributed stories to Green Lantern and started his own independent, black-and-white comic book series Coventry which lasted only 3 issues. He also produced the pornographic series Ironwood for Eros Comix.
In the late 1990s, Willingham produced the 13-issue Pantheon for Lone Star Press and wrote a pair of short novels about the modern adventures of the hero Beowulf, and a fantasy novel Down the Mysterly River published by the Austin, Texas writer's collective, Clockwork Storybook, of which Willingham was a founding member. In the early 2000s, he began writing for DC Comics, including the limited series Proposition Player, a pair of limited series about the Greek witch Thessaly from The Sandman, and the series Fables.
He describes himself as "rabidly pro-Israel" and says that Fables "was intended from the beginning" as a metaphor for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, although he argues that Fables is not "a political tract. It never will be, but at the same time, it's not going to shy away from the fact that there are characters who have real moral and ethical centers, and we're not going to apologize for it."
Willingham worked on the Robin series from 2004 to 2006, and established Shadowpact, a title spun off his Day of Vengeance limited series. He also wrote Jack of Fables, an ongoing spin-off of his Fables series, co-written by Matthew Sturges. At the 2007 Comic Con International, he announced that he would be writing Salvation Run, a mini-series about supervillains who are banished to an inhospitable prison planet. Newsarama. July 27, 2007Baltimore Comic Con '07 – DC Universe Panel. Newsarama. September 9, 2007 He handed over the writing to Sturges after two issues because of illness."EXCLUSIVE: Willingham Explains 'Salvation Run' Departure". Comic Book Resources. January 28, 2008 He worked on DCU: Decisions, a four-issue mini-series that deals with Green Arrow's endorsement of a political candidate. Newsarama. May 9, 2008 Again with Sturges, he began writing the Vertigo series House of Mystery,Sturges & Willingham on the New House of Mystery. Newsarama. February 20, 2008 and DC's Justice Society of America with issue #29."Talking JSA With Willingham & Sturges". Comic Book Resources. January 19, 2009Willingham and Sturges Talk Justice Society of America. Newsarama. December 26, 2008
In 2009, Willingham agreed to write for Angel by IDW Publishing, initiated a new storyline titled "Immortality for Dummies".com, October 7, 2009
At 2013 NY Comic Con it was announced that Willingham will be writing a seven part mini series for Dynamite Entertainment (with art by Sergio Fernandez Davila). The series will be titled Legenderry: A Steampunk Adventure and include some of Dynamite's licensed characters in a steam punk setting. The series is set to be released in January 2014.comicbookresources.com/?page=article&id=48357

Works

As writer

The issues listed include those where writing credits are for at least one story included in the issue.






