[[Central European University]]

CATEGORIES: Central European University, 1991 establishments in Hungary, George Soros, Educational institutions established in 1991, Universities in Budapest, Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools

Central European University (CEU) is a graduate-level, English-language university promoting a distinctively Central European perspective. The university offers degrees in the social sciences, humanities, law, public policy, business management, environmental science, and mathematics. The university is located in Budapest, and is accredited in the United States and in Hungary.
CEU has more than 1500 students from 100 countries and 300 faculty members from more than 30 countries. CEU cultivates close ties with philanthropist George Soros, who has provided an endowment of US$880 million, making the university one of the wealthiest in Europe.

History

CEU evolved from a series of lectures held at the IUC in Dubrovnik, Yugoslavia, (now Croatia). In the Spring of 1989, as historical change was gathering momentum in the region the need for a new, independent, international university was being considered. The minutes of the gathering held in April 1989 records an inspirational discussion among scholars such as Rudolf Andorka, Péter Hanák, Márton Tardos, István Teplán, Tibor  Vámos and Miklós Vásárhelyi from Budapest, William Newton-Smith and Kathleen Wilkes from Oxford, Jan Havranek, Michal Illner and Jiří Kořalka from Prague, Krzysztof Michalski and Włodzimierz Siwiński from Warsaw.Central European University 1989-1999 - Ten Years in Images and Documents, ISBN 963 85230 4 2
The University was founded in 1991 in response to the fall of the Socialist Bloc. The founding vision was to create a university dedicated to examining the contemporary challenges of "open societies" and democratization. The initial aim was to create a Western-modeled yet distinctly Central European institution that would foster inter-regional cooperation and educate a new corps of regional leaders to help usher in democratic transitions across the region. It was originally located in Prague, but because of "political and financial battle between its founder and Czech government"
In its second decade, CEU broadened its focus from regional to global, with a special emphasis on democracy promotion and human rights around the world. CEU has since developed a distinct academic approach, combining regional studies with an international perspective, emphasizing comparative and interdisciplinary research in order to generate new scholarship and policy initiatives, and to promote good governance and the rule of law.hu - Welcome from the President and Rector CEU has extended its outreach and financial aid programs to certain areas of the developing world.bard.edu/about/ Bard College: About CEU and Budapest
CEU began the region's first master's degree programs in gender studies and environmental sciences.
On 14 October 2007 George Soros stepped down as Chairman of CEU Board. Leon Botstein (President of the Bard College, New York), who had previously served as the Vice-Chair of the Board, was elected as new Board Chairman for a two-year term. George Soros is a Life-CEU Trustee and serves as Honorary Chairman of the Board.George Soros Steps down as Chairman of CEU Board
On 1 August 2009 Rector Yehuda Elkana was succeeded by distinguished human rights leader and legal scholar John Shattuck.hu - John Shattuck Commences Term as New CEU President and Rector

Legal basis

CEU is organized as an American-style institution, governed by a Board of Trustees, with a charter from the Board of Regents of the University of the State of New York, for and on behalf of the New York State Education Department.ceu. In Hungary, CEU is officially recognized as a privately maintained and operated university. The university was accredited by the Hungarian Accreditation Committee in 2004.

Departments and programs

Departments

Degree programs

=One-year Master's degree programs=

• MSc Program: IT Management (business school )

=Two-year Master's degree programs=

=Doctoral programs=

Student support

To attract outstanding individuals — no matter their financial situation — CEU offers a wide range of financial aid packages to the majority of its students. CEU rewards financial aid primarily on the basis of academic merit. Decisions on aid may take into account priorities connected to the university mission as well as documented financial need.hu - Financial aid
In the 2011–12 academic year, 153 Hungarian students are attending CEU tuition-free and five others are receiving partial tuition waivers. Also, 123 of these students receive a full or partial scholarship.Central European University - Contributions to Hungary

CEU library and OSA

The CEU Library is one of the largest English-language libraries in Central Europe, with comprehensive on-site and digital collections in the social sciences and humanities. The library contains more than 255,000 documents in various formats and includes access to a range of academic databases.CEU Library Webpage: Mission Statement
The Open Society Archives at CEU (OSA) is a notable Cold War research facility, holding over 7,500 linear meters of material, 11,000 hours of audiovisual recordings and 12 terabytes of dataOSA About us related to communist-era political, social, economic and cultural life. OSA's collection includes an extensive archive of Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty transcripts and reports, along with the world's largest collection of underground samizdat literature and materials from Central and Eastern Europe under communism. The archive also houses a growing collection of documents and audiovisual materials on international human rights and war crimes.

Rankings

All of Central European University's programs are highly competitive. The university is placed 42nd worldwide in the field of politics and international studies,QS World University Rankings by Subject 2013 Social Sciences & Management - Politics & International Studies and among the top 51-100 worldwide in philosophyQS World University Rankings by Subject 2013 Arts & Humanities - Philosophy by the 2013 QS World University Rankings. Additionally, despite its small size and young programs (less than 100 students) the Economics department of the university has recently ranked #8 in Europe by ERC (European Research Council) based on research excellence. European Research Council - Economics
CEU Business School offers the 13th best MBA program in Europe according to the QS TOPMBA survey 2012.
According to a study published by German newspaper Die Zeit, the CEU Department of Political Science is among the top five political science departments in Europe.Excellence Group: Political ScienceCEU Ranked Before Oxford, Corvinus Ranked Before the University of Vienna
CEU's Department of Legal Studies was ranked first in Central Europe by the Czech newspaper, Lidové noviny. The survey included Austrian, Czech, German, Hungarian, Polish and Slovakian universities.lidovky.asp?c=A110221_000115_ln_noviny_sko&klic=241450&mes=110221_0
A recent report prepared by the Magyar Rektori Konferencia stated that CEU faculty has the highest number of international publications per capita (recorded in the Web of Science) among Hungarian universities. The same applies to the amount research support grants received in the framework of EU's Sixth and Seventh Framework Programmes for Research and Technological Development.  In the recent round of the European Research Council Starting Investigator Grant – the most prestigious grant for young researchers in Europe – Central-East European countries received a total of eight grants. Of the three that came to Hungary (the highest number of among C/EE countries), two were awarded to CEU faculty.

Summer University

CEU's Summer University is one of Central and Eastern Europe's most important academic programs for young scholars in the humanities and social sciences. Since 1996, CEU's Summer University has involved 269 Hungarian faculty members and 516 Hungarian participants. Tuition was waived for all but 3% of the Hungarian participants, most of whom were junior academics (graduate students, faculty, and researchers) who received guidance on their research, ideas for developing their own courses, exposure to a variety of teaching methodologies, and access to international and academic and professional networks.

CEU Press

CEU Press is the largest English-language publisher in Central and Eastern Europe. Since its founding in 1993, it has played an important role in publishing books on the economic, social, and political transformation of the region, including titles by Hungarians or on Hungarian themes. Four of its top-10 best-selling books worldwide are related to Hungary.

Distinguished faculty

Notable alumni

Notes






