[[Basilica of Our Lady of Peace (Yamoussoukro)]]

CATEGORIES: Churches in Ivory Coast, Roman Catholic churches in Ivory Coast, Basilica churches in Africa, Religious buildings completed in 1989, Yamoussoukro, Pallottines, Roman Catholic congregations established in the 20th century

The Basilica of Our Lady of Peace of Yamoussoukro (
The basilica is not a cathedral. The nearby Cathedral of Saint Augustine is the principal place of worship and seat of the bishop of the Diocese of Yamoussoukro.
Guinness World Records lists it as the largest church in the world, having surpassed the previous record holder, St. Peter's Basilica, upon completion. It has an area of 30,000 sq metres (322,917 sq ft) and is 158 m (518 ft) high.
The Basilica is administered by Polish Pallottines.

Architecture

While designing it after the Vatican Basilica, Lebanese architect Pierre Fakhoury constructed the dome to be slightly lower than the Basilica of Saint Peter, but ornamented with a larger cross on top. The finished height is  of contemporary stained glass from France. 
Columns are plentiful throughout the basilica but are not uniform in style; the smaller columns are there for structural reasons, while the bigger ones are decorative and contain elevators, rainwater evacuation from the roof and other building mechanical devices. There is enough space to seat 7,000 people in the nave, with standing room for an additional 11,000 people.
The basilica was met with some controversy globally when construction began.

Construction

The Basilica was built by Dumez, the French construction company.

Memorial

Côte d'Ivoire President Félix Houphouët-Boigny chose his birthplace of Yamoussoukro to be the future site of the new capital city of his country in 1983. As part of the plan of the city, the president wanted to memorialize himself with the construction of what he called the greatest church in the world. He is even pictured beside Jesus in one stained-glass panel."Côte d'Ivoire's capital: Better late than never: Africa's largest and most grandiose church gets a new neighbour", The Economist, dated 16 June 2012.



Notes

Further reading




