[[Izod Center]]

CATEGORIES: 1981 establishments in New Jersey, Basketball venues in New Jersey, Buildings and structures in Bergen County, New Jersey, Concert halls in the United States, Continental Airlines, Defunct college basketball venues in the United States, Defunct National Basketball Association venues, Defunct National Hockey League venues, East Rutherford, New Jersey, Event venues established in 1981, Indoor lacrosse venues in the United States, Indoor soccer venues in the United States, Music venues in New Jersey, New Jersey Devils arenas, New Jersey Nets arenas, Professional wrestling venues in the United States, Seton Hall Pirates basketball venues, Sports venues in New Jersey, Sports venues in the New York metropolitan area, North American Soccer League (1968–84) indoor venues

The Izod Center is an indoor sports and entertainment venue located in the Meadowlands Sports Complex in East Rutherford, New Jersey, USA. The arena is located on NJ 120 and is across the highway from MetLife Stadium and the Meadowlands Racetrack. A covered footbridge connects one of MetLife Stadium's parking lots with the Izod Center's lot. The arena has a maximum capacity of 20,049.
The Izod Center was originally known as the Brendan Byrne Arena and later was renamed Continental Airlines Arena after the airline, which had a hub at nearby Newark International Airport, purchased naming rights. In 2007 Phillips-Van Heusen, a clothing manufacturer, bought the naming rights after Continental Airlines elected not to retain them; PVH rebranded the venue with its Izod clothing label and the arena adopted its current name of Izod Center.
The arena was originally built to accommodate a move of the New York Nets basketball team to New Jersey and opened in 1981. In 1982, the Colorado Rockies hockey team joined the Nets in the new building and became known as the New Jersey Devils. The Nets and Devils were joined by Seton Hall University's men's basketball team in 1985.
In 2007, the Prudential Center opened in nearby Newark and the Devils, for whom the arena was built, moved out of what was still known as Continental Airlines Arena. Seton Hall, whose campus in South Orange is closer to Newark than East Rutherford, followed and moved their basketball games there. The Nets remained for three more seasons at what was now Izod Center before moving to Newark, where they played two seasons before departing New Jersey for Brooklyn and the Barclays Center.
The last team to call Izod Center home was the men's basketball team from Fordham University, who played most of their 2010-11 home schedule at the arena. 
Since the departure of all three of its major tenants, Izod Center has served as more of a concert venue and general entertainment venue than a sporting venue.

History

Construction on a new arena across Route 20 (now 120) from Giants Stadium and the Meadowlands Racetrack began in 1977, with the arena's initial purpose being to serve as the primary home for the Nets who had moved from Nassau Coliseum in Uniondale, New York to New Jersey. Whie the venue was being built, the Nets played their home games in Piscataway, New Jersey at the Rutgers Athletic Center.
The arena was designed by Grad Partnership and Dilullo, Clauss, Ostroki & Partners and was constructed at a cost of $85 million. Originally named after the sitting governor of New Jersey, the arena opened July 2, 1981 with the first of six concerts by New Jersey rock musician Bruce Springsteen. This was followed by an ice show later that month. While the official name of the arena was "Brendan Byrne Arena," on television it was usually referred to as "The Meadowlands."
The Nets moved into their new home on October 30, 1981, and lost to the New York Knicks in their inaugural home game by a score of 103–99. Byrne Arena also hosted the NBA All-Star Game later that season on January 31, 1982.
Another reason for the building of the arena in the Meadowlands was to potentially lure a National Hockey League team to New Jersey. Governor Byrne was a member of an ownership group that was looking to do so, and in 1978 businessman Arthur Imperatore purchased the Colorado Rockies of the NHL and announced that he would be moving the team out of McNichols Sports Arena in Denver and relocating them to New Jersey. The NHL initially rejected the move as the arena was yet to be completed and, unlike the situation when the Nets moved, there was no arena in New Jersey at that time that would fit NHL standards as even a temporary home. Imperatore sold the team to Houston Astros owner Dr. John McMullen in 1982. With the arena now completed McMullen, like Imperatore a native New Jerseyan, announced that he had big plans for the team including the long-planned move, and in the offseason the Rockies moved operations to New Jersey, where they became known as the Devils. The first NHL game played at Byrne Arena pitted the Devils against the Pittsburgh Penguins on October 5, 1982, and the game ended in a 3-3 tie. The next season, the NHL All-Star Game was hosted by the Devils at the arena.
On January 4, 1996, the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority announced a naming rights deal with Continental Airlines (now United Airlines) under which the airline, with a hub at nearby Newark Liberty International Airport, would pay the NJSEA $29 million over 12 years. As Continental Airlines Arena, it hosted the 1996 Final Four—the last Final Four to date that has been held in an arena specifically built for basketball. 
On May 5, 2007, the Devils played their last game at the arena, losing 3–2 to the Ottawa Senators, eliminating them from the Eastern Conference semifinals 4–1. Scott Gomez scored the final goal in the building. The Devils subsequently relocated to the newly constructed Prudential Center in nearby Newark, New Jersey at the beginning of the 2007–08 NHL season.
Following the Devils' final season at the arena in 2007, Continental Airlines opted out of the naming rights agreement. A new agreement was made with Izod, a  company, to rename the arena Izod Center. The company will pay $1.4 million per annum for the first two years of the agreement; when the Nets left, it dropped to $750,000 per year for the balance of the five-year deal. The columns of the arena's exterior were also repainted red as the arena assumed a new color scheme.
On February 18, 2010, the Nets finalized a deal that would move them to the Prudential Center in Newark until the Barclays Center opens. On April 12, 2010 the Nets played their final game at the arena, a 105–95 loss to the Charlotte Bobcats, with Terrence Williams making the final basket scored on the court.

Plans

There are plans in place to downscale the Izod Center in conjunction with several developments. Those plans have been cancelled. The arena will serve as a concert home, and possible undergo renovation in the near future hoping to lure another permanent tenant to the arena. 
In September 2006, the Nets and the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority announced an extension of their lease to keep the team in the Meadowlands until 2013, with a provision to leave as early as 2009 if the Brooklyn arena was completed. It was reported that Ratner was seeking to sell the Nets, thus thwarting any possible move to Brooklyn. 
In October 2009, a deal was brokered, for the Nets to play at the Prudential Center for two seasons, beginning in the 2010–11 NBA season. The deal also included a partnership with the Prudential Center hosting sporting events (Devils, Nets, Seton Hall), and the Izod Center handling concerts and family shows. The two arenas proposed a joint venture, Jersey Presents LLC, to wrestle leverage from promoters who had been playing the two against each other.
In February of 2014, the arena helped out their neighbor MetLife Stadium, who was the host of the Super Bowl, by hosting one of the pre-game expos on the arena floor and concourse. Fans got to hear free music and also take a look at many of the items on the concourse. The Meadowlands Racetrack also hosted the official tailgate party. 
The arena will continue to host year round shows and quite a few sporting events. It is rumored that the NJISSA, (New Jersey Interscholastic Athletic Association), the body who governs New Jersey High School sports, may be moving some of their championship games to the arena due to many scheduling conflicts at the Prudential Center the past few years. Those sports would most likely be Basketball, Hockey, Volleyball, and even the North Jersey Wrestling Tournament. This issue is yet to be determined.

Arena usage

Sports

The arena has primarily served as a sports venue in its history. The arena was the home of the NBA's New Jersey Nets basketball franchise from 1981 to 2010. It was the home arena for the NHL's New Jersey Devils hockey franchise from 1982 to 2007 and the NCAA's Seton Hall Pirates men's basketball team from 1985 to 2007 as well as continuing to play host to various regular season men's college basketball, most recently on December 8, 2012 between Duke University and Temple University. The Fordham Rams have taken over the former Nets' locker room and now use the arena as their secondary home. Izod Center uses two separate floors for NBA and NCAA basketball- a standard hardwood floor for Nets  and the arena's old parquet floor for regular season college basketball (since 2007, the NCAA has used a uniform floor for regional sites).
College basketball first arrived at the arena with the opening rounds of the 1984 NCAA basketball tournament. Seton Hall moved its Big East Conference men's basketball games to the arena for the 1985–1986 season, enhancing a tradition that would soon become rich. The arena hosted the NCAA Men's Final Four in 1996, the last traditional arena to do so to date. On eleven occasions (1986–91, 1993, 1995, 1999, 2004, 2007) the arena hosted the semifinals and finals of the tournament's East Regional. Only Kansas City's Municipal Auditorium, which hosted 13 regional finals from 1940 to 1952, has hosted more.
One of the most memorable moments in the venue's history came on January 22, 1987, when the "334 club" was formed. After New Jersey was hit with 20 inches of snow, only 334 fans attended the Devils' 7–5 victory over the Calgary Flames.nhl.htm?id=651845
Other teams that have called the arena home include the New Jersey Rockets of the Major Indoor Soccer League, the New Jersey Rockin Rollers of Roller Hockey International, and the New Jersey Red Dogs / Gladiators of the Arena Football League. Two different National Lacrosse League teams have played at the arena – the New Jersey Saints from 1987 to 1988, and the New Jersey Storm from 2002 to 2003. The New York Cosmos also used the arena to host indoor soccer games.
On February 12, 2011, the arena hosted Strikeforce: Fedor vs. Silva. In November 2011, the Izod Center was the host of the final round of the TicketCity Legends Classic. The UFC on Fox 3 event took place at the arena on May 5, 2012.

=Championships=

Izod Center has played host to the  The arena also saw the underdog Anaheim Bullfrogs win the 1997 Murphy Cup, the championship of Roller Hockey International, over the New Jersey Rockin' Rollers, the favorite. Izod Center is the most recent of five venues to host the Stanley Cup Finals and NBA Finals at the same time, the other four are Boston Garden, Madison Square Garden in New York, The Spectrum in Philadelphia and Chicago Stadium. 
The arena also hosted the NCAA Men's Final Four (basketball) in 1996, which was won by the University of Kentucky, and included Syracuse University, the University of Massachusetts, and Mississippi State University.
The parking lot of the Izod Center has also been the scene of the Devils' championship celebrations and Nets rallies. Tailgating before home games was very popular when the arena had tenants.

Concerts

The arena has been a popular site for concerts, due to having been designed with acoustics in mind and to it having a lesser facility fee for artists than competing venues, such as Madison Square Garden.
Jersey native Bruce Springsteen remains one of the most popular concert acts; his appearances have included a 10–night sold–out run in 1984, an 11–night run in 1992 and a 15–night sold–out run in 1999. This last feat is commemorated by a large banner hanging from the rafters, next to the banners representing the achievements of the resident sports teams.  
Queen performed their final New Jersey show, with lead vocalist Freddie Mercury and bass guitarist John Deacon, during their Hot Space Tour on August 9, 1982, with Billy Squier as their opening act. Queen + Paul Rodgers performed during their Queen + Paul Rodgers Tour on October 16, 2005, as one of the only two US dates that year. This marked the first live performance by Queen, in the US, in 23 years.
The Rolling Stones performed three consecutive shows, during their 1981 North American Tour, on November 5–7, 1981, with George Thorogood & The Destroyers and The J. Geils Band as their opening acts. The shows on the 5th and 6th were filmed and partially featured on their live concert film, entitled Let's Spend the Night Together.Let's Spend the Night Together (1983)
The Grateful Dead played 16 times from 1983 through 1989, and recorded Road Trips Volume 4 Number 2, on March 31–April 1, 1988 and Nightfall of Diamonds, on October 16, 1989.
Rush performed during their Hold Your Fire Tour on December 7, 1987, with Tommy Shaw as their opening act. The show was filmed and partially featured on their concert film, entitled A Show of Hands.
The Dave Matthews Band's performance on September 11, 1999 was recorded for a PBS special and subsequently released as a live album and DVD, entitled Listener Supported. 
KISS performed on June 27, 2000, during their Kiss Farewell Tour, which was filmed and is available on their Kissology Volume Three: 1992–2000 box set.
Cher performed two shows during her, then, Farewell Tour on July 2, 2002 and April 13, 2005. On her DVD Cher: Live at the MGM Grand in Las Vegas, there is a video of her rehearsing at the Izod Center.
Simon & Garfunkel performed two consecutive shows during their Old Friends Reunion Tour, on December 7–8, 2003, with The Everly Brothers as their opening act. They performed "Leaves That Are Green" in place of "Song for the Asking", which had been on their setlist for other concerts on this tour, following an announcement that they had not played it live since 1967.
The arena played host to the final show of the politically motivated Vote for Change Tour on October 13, 2004, featuring performances by Patti Scialfa, Jackson Browne and Bruce Springsteen & The E Street Band, with special guest John Fogerty and unannounced guest Eddie Vedder.
The Red Hot Chili Peppers performed two consecutive shows, during their Stadium Arcadium World Tour, on October 17–18, 2006, with The Mars Volta as their opening act. The band chose the arena as the venue to film the music video for their song "Snow (Hey Oh)", including shots of the stairwells and tunnels. It was the last music video to feature lead guitarist John Frusciante with long hair.
Prince & The New Power Generation kicked off their Welcome 2 American Tour, with two consecutive shows on December 15 and 17, 2010. They also performed two impromptu semi-private shows in the "Hospitality Room", where 50 fans attended the show on the 16th
The "Love for Levon" concert took place on October 3, 2012, as a tribute to late drummer/singer Levon Helm of The Band. The show featured a wide variety of musicians who had worked with Helm, as well as musicians who were influenced by him. Proceeds from the show went towards keeping Helm's Woodstock barn in his family's control, as well as continuing his Midnight Ramble concert series in the barn. The show's musical directors were Don Was and Levon Helm collaborator Larry Campbell.

Other events

The venue has hosted World Wrestling Entertainment events such as SummerSlam in 1989, 1997 and 2007, as well as the King of the Ring tournament in 2001 and No Mercy in 2004. Additionally, it has also hosted numerous episodes of WWE Raw and WWE SmackDown. Izod Center also hosted No Way Out on June 17, 2012 and returned on October 22, 2012 for Raw. World Championship Wrestling also held events at the arena from 1984 to 1992. At the 2007 SummerSlam event, WWE announced to the live crowd that the millionth fan in attendance was recorded that night in the arena; a banner now hangs from the rafters of the arena recognizing the achievement. During the week prior to WrestleMania XXIX in 2013, which was held at MetLife Stadium, WrestleMania Fan Axxess was held in the Izod Center. The latter also hosted the Raw live event the night following WrestleMania. On May 4, 2014 WWE will be hosting the WWE Extreme Rules event at the venue.
Fordham University's men's basketball team used the Izod Center as an alternate home court for four games in the 2010–11 season. 
Paramus Catholic High School holds their graduation ceremony at the Izod Center.  Paramus Catholic, a high school of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Newark, is the only high school in New Jersey to hold a graduation on this scale. The tremendous seating area in the arena allows for an unlimited number of guests per graduate, unlike any other high school graduation in the state.
American Idol held auditions at the Izod Center on September 22, 2011.

Other facilities

The center previously hosted a Continental Airlines ticketing office."Reservations > U.S. and Canada." Continental Airlines. April 12, 2010.

Sports Hall of Fame of New Jersey

The Sports Hall of Fame of New Jersey was established in 1988 to honor athletes, teams, events and contributors associated with the state of New Jersey. There is no physical site or structure for the hall, but its members are honored with plaques that are displayed at Izod Center.

Public perception

Izod Center was frequently cited near the bottom of arena polls. It is commonly referred to as "cold and dull" in appearance, as well as being "cavernous".






