[[Hucknall]]

CATEGORIES: Market towns in Nottinghamshire, Towns in Nottinghamshire

Hucknall, formerly known as Hucknall Torkard, is a town in Greater Nottingham, Nottinghamshire, England, in the district of Ashfield. The town was historically a centre for framework knitting and then for mining, but is now a focus for other industries as well as providing housing for workers in Nottingham. The town is notable as the site where Rolls-Royce made the first demonstration of vertical take-off (for a plane). It is also the final resting place of Lord Byron and his estranged daughter, the mathematician Ada Lovelace.

Statistics

Population 29,704 (14,572 (49%) male, 15,132 (51% female). Total households 12,427 (Census 2001, Nottinghamshire County Council). White (94%) Asian (3%) Afro-Caribbean (1%)

Geography

Hucknall is  north-west of Nottingham on the west bank of the Leen Valley, on land which rises from the Trent Valley in the south to the hills of the county north of Kirkby-in-Ashfield. The Whyburn or 'Town Brook' flows through the town centre, and Farleys Brook marks its southern boundary.
The town's highest point is Long Hill,(although Beauvale estate has a higher elevation and is situated at he base of Leivers Hill, commonly mistaken for Misk Hill) at  above sea-level, with views over the city and Trent Valley, which descends to between 22 and 24 metres AOD, flowing just beyond most of the city centre.Ordnance survey website
Apart from a narrow the southern contiguous development with regular road links to Nottingham, the town is surrounded by farmland or parkland. To the north-west lie Misk Hills and Annesley. To the north-east town are the villages of Linby and Papplewick beyond these two is Newstead Abbey and its grounds, once the residence of Lord Byron. To the west lies Eastwood, birthplace of D. H. Lawrence, and the inspiration for many of his novels.  To the east of the town is Bestwood Country Park.
The contiguous settlements of Butler's Hill and Westville often appear as distinct entities on maps, but are generally regarded as part of Hucknall, and are part of its historic and present-day Church of England parish, although the town itself has no civil parish council, however the identity is reinforced by being part of the post town and by being shared wards of Hucknall.

History

Hucknall was once a thriving market town.
Its focal point is the parish church of St. Mary Magdalene, next to the town's market square. The church was built by the Anglo-Saxons and completed after the Norman Conquest, though much of it has been restored during the Victorian era. The medieval church consisted only of a chancel, nave, north aisle and tower but it was considerably enlarged in the Victorian period. In 1872 the south aisle was added and in 1887 the unusually long transepts, while the rest of the building apart from the tower was thoroughly restored. The top stage of the tower is 14th century as is the south porch. There are 25 fine stained-glass windows by Charles Eamer Kempe which were added mostly in the 1880s. There is a modest memorial to Lord Byron. (1951) Nottinghamshire. Harmondsworth: Penguin; pp. 85-86
From 1295 until 1915, the town was known as Hucknall Torkard, taken from Torcard, the name of a dominant landowning family. Signs of the old name can still be seen on some of the older buildings.
During the 19th and 20th centuries, coal was discovered and mined heavily throughout the Leen Valley, which includes Hucknall. This brought increased wealth to the town along with the construction of three railway lines.
The first was the Midland Railway (later part of the LMS) line from Nottingham to Mansfield and Worksop, closed to passengers on 12 October 1964 though partly retained as a freight route serving collieries at Hucknall, Linby and Annesley. The Hucknall station on this line was known as "Hucknall Byron" in its latter years. In the 1990s this line was reopened to passengers in stages as the Robin Hood Line, the section through Hucknall in 1993 with a new station on the site of the old "Byron", though simply called "Hucknall".
The second line was the Great Northern Railway (later part of the LNER) route up the Leen Valley and on up to Shirebrook, serving many of the same places as the Midland south of Annesley. It closed to passengers on 14 September 1931 but remained in use for freight until 25 March 1968. The Hucknall station on this line was known as "Hucknall Town".
The third line was the Great Central Railway (also later part of the LNER), the last main line ever built from the north of England to London, opened on 15 March 1899. The stretch through Hucknall closed completely on 5 September 1966, but the Hucknall station here (known as Hucknall Central), had closed earlier, on 4 March 1963.
From 1894 until 1974 Hucknall was the seat of the Hucknall Urban District Council. Upon the abolition of the UDC, local government of the town was transferred to Ashfield.
In 1956 the Church of St. Peter and St. Paul, Hucknall was built to serve the area of west Hucknall.

Etymology

Hucknall was recorded as Hokeuhale (n.d.) and Hokenale (n.d.), suggesting "nook of land of Hōcanere (a tribe", from Old English halh (haugh). This same tribe's name occurs in Hook Norton, Oxfordshire. It has been suggested that the name Hucknall once referred to a larger area on the Nottinghamshire/Derbyshire border. Two other settlements in the locality are called Hucknall; Hucknall-under-Huthwaite, in Nottinghamshire, (known today as Huthwaite) and Ault Hucknall in Derbyshire. It is likely that Hucknall Torcard marked the Southern Boundary of this larger Hucknall Area.huthwaite-online
In the Domesday Book (AD 1086) the name appears as Hochenale (volume 1, pages 288-290).

Transport

The town is the northern terminus for the Nottingham Express Transit tram system as well as sharing a station on the Robin Hood Line. There is also a stop at Butler's Hill /Broomhill. The town used to be on the A611 but this has now bypassed the town to the west with a single-carriageway road with roundabouts, with access to junction 27 of the M1, some 3 miles away. The tram line was built from 2002–2004 and currently runs from Hucknall to the Station Street terminus next to Nottingham railway station.
Bus Services
Bus Services in Hucknall are served by Trent Barton, AOT Coaches & Littles Coaches
Trent Barton
Connect Blue - Hucknall Estates, Hucknall Tram Station (clockwise)
Connect Green - Hucknall Estates, Hucknall Tram station (Anti Clockwise)
The Threes (A,B,C) - Mansfield, Sutton, Newstead, Annesley, Hucknall, City Hostpital, Nottingham
141 - Sutton, Mansfield, Blidworth, Hucknall, City Hospital, Nottingham
Amberline - Derby, Heanor, Eastwood, Derby, Giltbrook, Hucknall
AOT Coaches
8AOT - Hucknall Estates, Hucknall High Street, City Hospital, Nottingham
Littles Coaches 
228 - Hucknall Market Place, Vaughan Estate, Bestwood Village, Bulwell

Education

The National School was founded in 1788 by Frederick Ward and originally located at the southern end of Annesley Road.National School Technology College
The National School has a large science block with 10 labs and an astro turf, both opened in 2004 by Princess Anne. An Eco Building is now open In the School.  It is now an Academy.
The Holgate Academy is on Hillcrest Drive in Beauvale, to the west of the bypass.athletics track  It uses one of the otherwise-unoccupied shops in the town centre to showcase pupils' artwork.

Shopping

Hucknall's Tesco superstore opened in 2003, which created a number of jobs for the town. In 2008, the store was extended to make it a Tesco Extra store. A Tesco Express store was opened in early January 2009 on Annesley Road.
Other popular shops in Hucknall are Wilkinsons, Card Warehouse, Argos, B&M Bargains, Jack Fultons, Homebargains, Boots, Iceland, Peacocks, Specsavers and many other types of shops.
On 14 February 2014 the Costa Coffee brand opened a store on the Hucknall High Street attracting over 1,300 applicants, it is currently situated in the south end of the High Street.
It is in close proximity (a bus or a tram ride) to Morrisons in Bulwell, Tesco Top Valley and Tesco Extra in Bulwell.

Industry

Mining

Hucknall was a colliery town from 1861 to 1986. The sinking of the coal mines caused the settlement to grow rapidly from a village to a market town in under a hundred years.
The Hucknall Colliery Company, formed in 1861 sank two shafts, Hucknall No. 1 colliery (known as "Top Pit") in 1861 (off Watnall Road) and Hucknall No. 2 colliery (known as "Bottom Pit") in 1866 (off Portland Road).
No. 1 closed by 1943, and No. 2 closed in 1986.

Rolls-Royce

Hucknall Airfield was built in 1916, which became RAF Hucknall. From 1927, Rolls-Royce began using the airfield for flight tests. During World War II, the aerodrome at Hucknall was the location of the first flight of a P-51 Mustang fitted with a Rolls-Royce Merlin Engine. The fitting of the Merlin, replacing the existing Allison V-1710 engine allowed the Mustang airframe to reach its full potential and achieve spectacular high altitude performance, something the Allison engine could not provide.
In the early 1950s, the Rolls-Royce site at Hucknall developed the world's first vertical-takeoff jet 'aircraft' - actually, a test rig, officially called the Thrust Measuring Rig, but soon nicknamed the "Flying Bedstead" because of its shape. The first untethered flight, piloted by Capt Ron Shepherd, took place on 3 August 1954 before a distinguished audience.
The rig rose slowly into the air and hovered steadily.  It then moved forward, made a circuit of the area, then demonstrated sideways and backwards movements before making a successful landing.
The flight was a tremendous success and during the next four months a number of free flights were made, up to a height of 50 ft.  There are pubs in Hucknall called The Flying Bedstead and The Harrier. Rolls-Royce's flight test centre closed in 1971, but engines were still tested there until late 2008.  There are still components manufactured at the site.
In December 1940, during World War II, a German prisoner-of-war, Franz von Werra attempted to escape by posing as a Dutch pilot and attempted to fly off in a Hurricane fighter.  He was arrested at gunpoint as he sat in the cockpit trying to learn the controls and sent back to his prisoner-of-war camp in Swanwick, Derbyshire.   Franz von Werra was eventually the only German to succeed in returning to Germany, when he escaped from Canada to the United States, then to Mexico and into South America before returning to Germany, during January - April 1941.  His exploits can be seen in the film The One That Got Away.

Textiles

Framework knitting was once the predominant industry in Hucknall.

Garden products

One of the most important local firms in Hucknall is Doff Portland. The company has grown to become the UK's largest independent manufacturer of insecticides, weedkillers, other pesticides, fertilisers and garden products sold nationally through garden centres, independent DIY retailers and large retail multiples. Doff is one of Europe's largest producer of premium slug killer pellets. In addition, Doff provides extensive contract formulating and packing opportunities for third parties.Doff site

People

Music

Brass Band

The town has its own band. The Hucknall and Linby Mining Community Brass Band was formed in late 2008 after players from the Newstead Abbey Brass Band wanted autonimity. After the Hucknall and Linby Miner's Welfare Band became Newstead Brass, the town no longer had its own band. After the decision to form the new band, liberaries from the old band and Riddings band were pooled to give the band the boost they needed. Under the careful instruction of conductor Mr Paul Whyley, the band has become an asset to the community, playing concerts at the parish church every Christmas, and around the local area throughout the year. The band also competes, and has enjoyed many successes since forming.

Sport

The town's senior football team is Hucknall Town F.C.. Founded in 1945 as a colliery team (Hucknall Colliery Welfare FC), it changed its name to Hucknall Town in 1987 after closure of the pit.Hucknall Town FC
They rose steadily through the non-league pyramid for many years, winning the Northern Premier League title in 2003/04 (and thus winning promotion to the Conference North, just two leagues below the Football League) and reached the final of the FA Trophy in 2005. But the club fell into financial difficulties in 2009, and were demoted to the Central Midlands Football League for the start of the 2013/14 season, five leagues below the Conference North.
The works football team of Rolls-Royce has also plied its trade in non-league football for many years. The club was formed in 1935, and have undergone many name changes through the years. In 2009 they re-formed as Hucknall Rolls Leisure F.C., and by 2013 they were competing in the Nottinghamshire Senior League, which lies at the same level in the English football league system as the Central Midlands League - the competition their more 'senior' rivals in the town play in.
Hucknall Cricket Club, founded 1890. The 1st, 2nd and 3rd XIs currently play in various leagues of the South Notts. Cricket League.Hucknall Cricket Club
Hucknall Sports Youth Club formed in 1977 is one of the largest youth football clubs in Nottinghamshire. Originally known as Riden Sports it changed its name in 1980. Original founder and now President of the Club Derek Day was awarded the Nottinghamshire FA Community award in 2012 for his contribution of more than 30 years service to junior football.

Local radio

Popular local DJ, Paul Jenner, and his schoolteacher brother, Steve, brought local commercial radio to Hucknall in the 1980s.  WHAM ("Wonderful Hucknall AM") operated for several 28-day periods on Restricted Service Licences.  The brothers are now part-owners of High Peak Radio and Ashbourne Radio, permanent independent local radio stations in Derbyshire.

Twin town






