[[Newton Mearns]]

CATEGORIES: Populated places established in 1832, Towns in East Renfrewshire

Newton Mearns (
The town is part of the Greater Glasgow conurbation. Its name derives from being a new town of the Mearns (from Scottish Gaelic "a' Mhaoirne" meaning a stewartry, cf The Mearns)
Newton Mearns is the largest settlement in East Renfrewshire.

History

Until the 20th century, the land around Newton Mearns was primarily agricultural. Ownership passed from the Pollocks (whose name is perpetuated in the nearby Glasgow housing estate of Pollok) to the Maxwells of Caerlaverock around 1300. It then passed to the Maxwells of Nether Pollok in 1648 and then the Stewarts of Blackhall in 1660. A new turnpike road from Eastwood Toll, now the main Ayr Road, was constructed in 1832. By the end of the 18th century quarrying had developed and more importantly numerous textile mills and finishing works became established availing themselves of the numerous rivers and lochs for water supply. In the 1930s, between speculative and local authority housing ventures, a further 6,000 houses were added to the area and after a lull during the war years, in the 1950s, house building began again in earnest. Unfortunately, the old core village suffered neglect during and after WW2 and was all but derelict by the 1960s. It was purchased and turned into a shopping centre which was later to become 'The Avenue at Mearns' in 1991.
Historical buildings in the area include the 15th century Mearns Castle, and the 1813 Mearns Kirk.

Governance

At national level, Newton Mearns forms part of the Eastwood constituency (since renamed to its original name of East Renfrewshire), and historically, it was one of Scotland's safest Conservative seats.  Since the 1997 general election, the seat has belonged to Labour.
Following the breakup of Strathclyde Regional Council in 1996, Newton Mearns became part of the new East Renfrewshire Council area. As part of this area, it is represented by Jim Murphy MP and Ken Macintosh MSP in the Parliament of the United Kingdom and the Scottish Parliament respectively.
On more than one occasion, Glasgow City Council has applied to the Scottish Boundaries Commission to have Newton Mearns re-allocated to its control.

Councillors

As a result of the introduction of the Single Transferable Vote system for Scottish local council elections, it was planned that, in time for elections taking place in and after 2007, the town would be divided into two multi-councillor wards: Liboside and Newton Mearns North and Newton Mearns South. The current councillors for the areas are as follows:

=Neilston, Uplawmoor and Newton Mearns North=

=Newton Mearns South=

Economy

Newton Mearns is a primarily a residential area, with most of its inhabitants travelling by car or public transport to Glasgow for employment and shopping. However, there are a number of small businesses in the area, as well as an indoor shopping centre.
The Avenue Shopping Centre is the only large retail centre in Newton Mearns. It comprises a total of 44 stores, currently including two supermarkets, five banks, nine clothing stores and two sandwich shops. The line of the main mall at the Avenue runs the course of the old Mearns high street.
The newly constructed Greenlaw Village also has 2 supermarkets, Tesco Express and Waitrose.
A Bleach Works was constructed at Netherplace, the site of which is still visible from the M77 motorway.

Transport

Traffic through the town was reduced significantly after the new M77 motorway extension was opened in the late 1990s. The motorway was completed despite strong opposition from campaigners in the nearby Darnley, Arden and Pollok districts of Glasgow, who saw their communities divided by the new road. Transport links improved further in May 2006 with the opening of the Glasgow Southern Orbital dual carriageway, and its connection to the M77.
As well as minor and major roads, the town has bus links with the centre of Glasgow, Kilmarnock, and Ayr. The town is served by two local railway stations, Patterton and Whitecraigs which both run trains to Glasgow Central station amongst others.

Education

One factor that has made the area popular with families is the variety and quality of local schools. Mearns is served by four Primary schools and three High schools,

Religion

Newton Mearns has numerous places of worship, notably four Church of Scotland churches, a Baptist church, a Roman Catholic church, two Jewish synagogues and a community Muslim hall.

Leisure

Newton Mearns contains a number of parks, most notably Broomburn Park and nearby Rouken Glen Park, and numerous golf clubs and rugby clubs. A public swimming pool and leisure centre is located at Eastwood Park in nearby Giffnock. Newton Mearns also has an amateur football club Newton Mearns Rovers A.F.C.; established in 1962, they are managed by Greig Taylor and compete in the Caledonian AFL League. Newton Mearns has a Freemason's lodge, who meet in the Fairweather Hall.

Literature

Newton Mearns was briefly mentioned in John McGrath's play Little Red Hen (1975, first publ. London: Pluto 1977, p. 34). More recently, the town appeared as the setting for the thriller novel Aztec Love Song (Weathervane Press 2009, ISBN 978-0-9562193-2-9) by Marty Ross, a Scottish author best known for his BBC radio plays who grew up in the town and studied at Mearns Castle High School.






