[[Arnold, Nottinghamshire]]

CATEGORIES: Places listed in the Domesday Book, Market towns in Nottinghamshire, Civil parishes in Nottinghamshire

Arnold is a market town, unparished area  and suburb of the city of Nottingham, in the English ceremonial county of Nottinghamshire. It is to the north-east of the Nottingham's boundary, and is in the local government district of Gedling Borough. It has had a market since 1968, and used to have numerous factories associated with the hosiery industry. According to data collected in 2000, the town has a population of 35,900.
Areas within Arnold include Daybrook, Woodthorpe, Redhill and Killisick.

History

Arnold was referred to as 'Ernehale' in the Domesday Book; this former name meant 'place frequented by eagles' or 'the valley of eagles'.
'A History of Arnold' by Rupert King and James Russell (1913) explains that the etymology of Arnold's name is thus:
  'Heron-hald', meaning the corner of the forest where Herons (large birds) live.  Which becomes over the centuries since 500 A.D. by 'lazy' pronunciation, Eron-ald, thence Ern-old and Arn-old. 
Due to the local topography Arnold can never have been a haunt of eagles, because they inhabit areas of rocky outcrops, which have formed cliffs; the nearest such location being Creswell Crags, some  south-east of Arnold, on the other side of the Mapperley Plains ridge.
These eagles would then have flown north-west in the evenings to roost in the ancient woodland area now known as Arnold.
The Anglo-Saxon migrant-invaders, when they arrived along the River Trent from the Humber Estuary 
Arnold is surrounded by a circular ridge from the north-west around to the south-east and raised ground to the west.
The town's bowl-like topography may have given it the etymological feature '-Halh' or '-Haugh'.
Arnold was a centre of the framework knitting industry in the 19th century. It was the site of the first framebreaking incidents of the Luddite riots, in March 1811, when 63 frames were smashed. The Luddite riots were a workers' response to decreasing pay, standard of living and conditions of employment in the industry as a result of changing fashions decreasing demand for their style of hosiery.
1968 saw the opening of Arnold Market in the town centre. Market days are on Tuesdays, Fridays and Saturdays.

Churches

St. Mary's Church, of the Church of England, is believed to date from 1176.
The Church of the Good Shepherd's current building on Thackerays Lane  was built in 1964. The Art Deco architecture won an award from the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1966. A history of everyday things in England. Vol. 5  p. 29. Marjorie Quennell, Charles Henry Bourne Quennell, S. E. Ellacott. 1965 It is a Roman Catholic church and 2014 marks its fiftieth anniversary – churchgoers are therefore celebrating its Golden Jubilee this year.
Arnold Methodist Church ('amc') is situated on Front Street. 
The King's Centre is located on Shirley Drive. 
St. Paul's Church in Daybrook was built between 1892 and 1896. Its spire is 
Daybrook Baptist Church, whose current building was completed in 1912, is situated on Mansfield Road.

Town centre

Arnold town centre has a diverse range of restaurants and bars and a choice of shops including supermarkets such as Sainsbury's and Asda as well as small independent businesses. As a market town, Arnold hosts a market on Tuesdays, Fridays and Saturdays. Construction of a new healthcare centre in central Arnold has—as of January 2014—almost been completed.

Education

Schools in the town include: Arnold Hill Academy; Christ the King Catholic Voluntary Academy; Coppice Farm Primary School; Good Shepherd Primary Catholic Academy; Redhill Academy; and Richard Bonington Primary School.

Housing

Arnold is a mixed area containing both privately owned and council housing. Since the early 2000s, a number of modern housing developments have been built around the town.

Railway

Arnold once had a railway station known as 'Daybrook and Arnold'. It was closed along with the rest of the line on 4 April 1960.  The station was located on Mansfield Road on what is now a retail park.  There is still evidence of the line in the form of remnants of the embankments on Arnot Hill Park (just behind the B&Q).  The Line was the Great Northern Main Line later nicknamed 'the back route', with trains to Gedling and Netherfield with the terminus being Nottingham Victoria. Just after those embankments a later built railway—the Nottingham Suburban—joined it and ran over Thackerays Lane on a bridge on its way to Woodthorpe Park and beyond. 

Home Brewery

The town's most notable landmark is probably the Home Ales building in Daybrook. Founded in 1875 by John Robinson,
Dating from 1936,
In 1950 the Home Brewery Company Ltd gave the land for Arnold's King George's Field, a permanent memorial to King George V and guaranteed for free public access in perpetuity for recreation.  The Charity Commission held an enquiry that closed in December 2005 into restricted public access.Charities Commission Enquiry: King George V Playing Field Arnold - Registered Charity No 700035
As of March 2014, Nottinghamshire County Council has been advertising the building for sale since February 2012 in an effort to save money.

Notable people

Bus services

Nottingham City Transport
Trent Barton

Gallery






