[[Neva River]]

CATEGORIES: Ingria, Karelian Isthmus, Neva basin, Rivers and canals of Saint Petersburg, Rivers of Leningrad Oblast

The Neva (
The Neva is the only river flowing from Lake Ladoga. It flows through the city Saint Petersburg, three smaller towns of Shlisselburg, Kirovsk and Otradnoye, and dozens of settlements. The river is navigable throughout and is part of the Volga–Baltic Waterway and White Sea – Baltic Canal. It is a site of numerous major historical events, including the Battle of the Neva in 1240 which gave Alexander Nevsky his name, the founding of Saint Petersburg in 1703, and the Siege of Leningrad by the German army during World War II.

Etymology

There are at least three versions of the origin of the name Neva: from the ancient Finnish name of Lake Ladoga ( – new river. St. Petersburg.: Informational and publishing agency LIC, 2002. Modern names for the distributaries of the river delta were settled only by the end of the 18th century.

Description

The history of the delta

In the Paleozoic, 300–400 million years ago, the entire territory of the modern delta of the Neva River was covered by a sea. Modern relief was formed as a result of glacier activity. Its retreat formed the Littorina Sea, the water level of which was some 7–9 metres higher than the present level of the Baltic Sea. Then, the Tosna River was flowing in the modern bed of the Neva, from east to west into the Litorinal Sea. In the north of the Karelian Isthmus, the Littorina Sea united by a wide strait with Lake Ladoga. The Mga River then flowed to the east, into Lake Ladoga, near the modern source of the Neva River; the Mga then was separated from the basin of the Tosna.
Near the modern Lake Ladoga, land rose faster, and a closed reservoir was formed. Its water level began to rise, eventually flooded the valley of Mga and broke into the valley of the river Tosna. The Ivanovo rapids of the modern Neva were created in the breakthrough area. So about 2000 BC the Neva was created with its tributaries Tosna and Mga. According to some newer data, it happened at 1410–1250 BC making the Neva a rather young river. The valley of Neva is formed by glacial and post-glacial sediments and it did not change much over the past 2500 years. The delta of Neva was formed at that time, which is actually pseudodelta, as it was formed not by accumulation of river material but by plunging into the past sediments.St. Petersburg: Encyclopedia. – Moscow: Russian Political Encyclopedia. 2006 ISBN 5-8110-0107-X

Topography and hydrography

Neva flows from Lake Ladoga near Shlisselburg, runs on the Neva Lowland and falls into the Gulf of Finland, Baltic Sea. Its length is 74 km and the shortest distance from the source to the mouth is 45 km. The river banks are low and steep, on average about 3–6 meters and 2–3 meters in the mouth. There are three sharp turns: the Ivanov rapids, at Nevsky Forest Park of the Ust-Slavyanka region (the so-called crooked knee) and near the Smolny Institute, below the mouth of the river Ohta. The average decline of the river is 4.27 meters. At one point the river crosses a moraine ridge and forms the Ivanov rapids. There, at the beginning of the rapids is the narrowest place of the river (210 m). The average flow rate in the rapids is about 0.8–1.1 m/s. The average width along the river is 400–600 m. The widest places (1000–1250 m) are in the delta, near the gates of Sea trading port, at the end of the Ivanovo rapids near the confluence of the river Tosna, and near the island Fabrinchny near the source. The average depth is 8–11 m; the maximum of 24 m is reached above the Liteyny Bridge and the minimum (4.0–4.5 m) is in Ivanov rapids.
In the area of Neva basin, rainfall greatly exceeds evaporation; the latter accounts for only 37.7% of the water consumption from Neva and the remaining 62.3% is water runoff. Because of the uniform water flow from Lake Ladoga to Neva over the whole year, there is almost no floods and corresponding water rise in the spring. Neva freezes throughout from early December to early April. The ice thickness is 0.3–0.4 m within Saint Petersburg and 0.5–0.6 m in other areas. Ice congestions may form in winter in the upper reaches of the river, this sometimes causes upstream floods. Of the total ice volume of Lake Ladoga (10.6 km³) only less than 5% is brought to Neva. Average summer water temperature is 17–20 °C. Swimming season is short and lasts only about 1.5 months. Water is fresh, with medium turbidity; the average salinity is 61.3 mg/L and the calcium bicarbonate content is 7 mg/L.

Flora and fauna

There is almost no aquatic vegetation in Neva. The river banks mostly consist of sand, podsol, gleysols, peat and boggy peat soils. Several centuries ago, the whole territory of the Neva lowland was covered by pine and spruce mossy forests. They were gradually reduced by the fires and cutting for technical needs. Extensive damage was caused during World War II: in St. Petersburg, the forests were reduced completely, and in the upper reaches down to 40–50%. V. (1975) Ленинградская область (Leningrad oblast). Lenizdat, pp. 48–49 Forest were replanted after the war with spruce, pine, cedar, Siberian larch, oak, Norway maple, elm, America, ash, apple tree, mountain ash and other species. The shrubs include  barberry, lilac, jasmine, hazel, honeysuckle, hawthorn, rose hip, viburnum, juniper, elder, shadbush and many others. and Milash, N. (1968) Невский лесопарк. (Nevsky Forest Park, in Russian). aroundspb.ru. 
Nowadays, the upper regions of the river are dominated by birch and pine-birch grass-shrub forests and in the middle regions there are swampy pine forests. In St. Petersburg, along the Neva, there are many gardens and parks, including the Summer Garden, Field of Mars, Rumyantsev, Smolny, Alexander Gardens, Garden of the Alexander Nevsky Lavra and many others.Историко-географический атлас «Ленинград» atlas "Leningrad". Moscow: GUGK CM USSR, 1977
Because of the rapid flow, cold water and lack of quiet pools and aquatic vegetation the diversity of fish species in Neva is small. Permanent residents include such undemanding to environment species as perch, ruffe and roaches. Many fish species are transitory, of which commercial value have smelt, vendace and partly salmon.Все о реке Неве: мосты, притоки, наводнения... (All of the Neva River: bridges, tributaries, flooding ..., in Russian). nevariver.ru

Floods

Floods in St. Petersburg are usually caused by the overflow of the delta of Neva and by surging water in the eastern part of Neva Bay. They are registered when the water rises above 160 cm with respect to a gauge at the Mining Institute. More than 300 floods occurred after the city was founded in 1703. However, a much larger flood of 760 cm was described in 1691.ПОЛНЫЙ ХРОНОЛОГИЧЕСКИЙ СПИСОК НАВОДНЕНИЙ В САНКТ-ПЕТЕРБУРГЕ (ПЕТРОГРАДЕ, ЛЕНИНГРАДЕ) – a list of floods in St. Petersburg (in Russian). nevariver.ru
Besides flooding as a result of tidal waves, in 1903, 1921 and 1956 floods were caused by the melting of snow.

