[[Quintinshill rail disaster]]

CATEGORIES: Railway accidents in Scotland, History of Dumfriesshire, Transport in Dumfries and Galloway, 1915 in Scotland, Railway accidents in 1915, Trials in Scotland, 1915 in law, Fatal accident inquiries

The Quintinshill rail disaster occurred on 22 May 1915 in Scotland near Gretna Green at Quintinshill, an intermediate signal box with loops on each side on the Caledonian Railway Main Line linking Glasgow and Carlisle (now part of the West Coast Main Line).
The crash, which involved five trains, killed a probable 226
The crash occurred when a troop train travelling from  collided with a local passenger train that had been shunted on to the main line, to then be hit by an express train to Glasgow which crashed into the wreckage a minute later. Gas from the lighting system of the old wooden carriages of the troop train ignited, starting a fire which soon engulfed the three passenger trains and also two goods trains standing on nearby passing loops. A number of bodies were never recovered, having been wholly consumed by the fire, and the bodies that were recovered were buried together in a mass grave in Edinburgh's Rosebank Cemetery. Four bodies, believed to be of children, were never identified or claimed and are buried in the Western Necropolis, Glasgow.
The cause of the accident was poor working practices on the part of the two signalmen involved, which resulted in their imprisonment for culpable homicide after legal proceedings in both Scotland and England.
A memorial to the dead soldiers was erected soon after the accident and there are a number of more recent memorials at various locations. An annual remembrance service is held at Rosebank Cemetery.

Sequence of events

The accident occurred owing to poor working practices on the part of the two signalmen involved; George Meakin, who had worked the night shift, and James Tinsley, who was to work the early day shift. If they had been working according to regulations, then Tinsley would have taken over from Meakin at 6.00 am. The two men, though, had developed an informal arrangement allowing whichever was working the early shift to arrive later. If the local passenger train from Carlisle to Beattock was due to be shunted at Quintinshill
On the morning of 22 May the night expresses were both running late so the local train had to be shunted at Quintinshill, and therefore Tinsley took advantage of the free ride on the local train to arrive there at about 6.30 am.
The laxity of the fireman of the local train, George Hutchinson, in carrying out his duties under Rule 55 meant that Tinsley's and Meakin's failures went unobserved.  Had Hutchinson carried out his duty correctly, he would have reminded the signalman that his train was standing on the Up main line and would have checked that a lever collar was in place before returning to his train. He did neither, and merely signed the train register, using a pen which Tinsley, who was intent on filling in the train register, handed over his shoulder without looking up, and left the signal box at 6.46 am.
At 6.34 am one of the signalmen (it was never established who) gave the "train out of section" bell to Kirkpatrick for the coal train which now stood in the up goods loop.
The troop train collided head on with the stationary local train on the up line at 6.49 am.

Fire

A great number of men on the troop train were killed as a result of the two collisions and the disaster was made much worse by a subsequent fire. The great wartime traffic and a shortage of carriages meant that the railway company had to press into service obsolete Great Central Railway stock. These carriages had wooden bodies and frames, so had very little crash resistance compared with steel framed carriages, and were gas-lit using the Pintsch gas system.
The troop train had consisted of 21 vehicles and apart from the rear six, which had broken away during the impact and rolled back along the line a short distance, the entire train was consumed in the fire, as were four coaches from the express train and some goods wagons.

Casualties

The overwhelming majority of fatalities were among the men of the Royal Scots and the precise number was not established as the roll list of the regiment was destroyed by the fire.  Col. Druitt's official report gives an estimated total of 215 deaths and a further 191 injured.
Considering the double collision and the fire, casualties in the other trains were lighter than might have been expected.  On the local train two passengers died, with none seriously injured; on the express seven passengers died, with a further 51 and 3 members of railway staff seriously injured.

Funerals

A number of bodies were never recovered, having been wholly consumed by the fire, and when the bodies of the men of the Royal Scots were returned to Leith on 24 May, they were buried together in a mass grave in Edinburgh's Rosebank Cemetery.
The bodies were escorted by the 15th and 16th Battalions Royal Scots, the Edinburgh Pals battalions recently assembled and still undergoing training. The cortege took four hours to complete its task. A memorial to the dead troops was erected in Rosebank Cemetery in 1916.
Of the troops, 83 bodies were identified, 82 were recovered but unrecognisable, and 50 were missing altogether,

Survivors

The surviving officers and men of the Royal Scots were taken to Carlisle on the evening of 22 May. The next morning they were redispatched on a new train to Liverpool, but on arrival at Liverpool they were medically examined and all the enlisted ranks plus one officer were declared unfit for service overseas and were returned to Edinburgh.

Investigations

Board of Trade inquiry

The first official investigation into the disaster commenced in Carlisle on 25 May and was conducted by Colonel E Druitt RE of the Railway Inspectorate on behalf of the Board of Trade.  Col Druitt had already spent some time at the accident site and spent the day in Carlisle interviewing witnesses including both Meakin and Tinsley.  Both men were honest about their failures to abide by the rules and their generally lax behaviour.  Col Druitt presented his report to the Board of Trade on 17 June 1915 and laid the blame squarely on Meakin and Tinsley.
 This disastrous collision was thus due to want of discipline on the part of the signalmen, first by changing duty at an unauthorised hour, which caused Tinsley to be occupied in writing up the Train Register Book, and so diverted his attention from his proper work, secondly by Meakin handing over the duty in a very lax manner; and, thirdly by both signalmen neglecting to carry out various rules specially framed for preventing accidents due to forgetfulness on the part of signalmen. 
Druitt was also critical of Fireman Hutchinson for his failure to comply properly with rule 55,
Druitt also concluded that even had all the trains been lit by electricity then fire would still have occurred as the wagons of the goods train in the down loop caught fire.

Coroner's inquest in England

The legal position was complicated by the fact that although the accident occurred in Scotland, some of the injured subsequently died in England where the law was different.  In Scotland, deaths were investigated by the Procurator fiscal who if he found culpability on the part of anyone could order their arrest and charge with culpable homicide.  He concluded his summing up with:
 If you find as a result of your deliberations that the rules and safeguards were broken by one or more of the railwaymen concerned, or in other words that they have been negligent, there remains one point which you must decide, and it is this. 
 Was that negligence of such a character—having regard to all the surroundings—as to be culpable negligence, or in other words gross negligence? 
If so it was manslaughter.
The jury retired and an hour later came back with a verdict that the 27 people who were the subject of the inquest had died due to the gross negligence of Tinsley, Meakin and Hutchinson.  The coroner therefore committed all three to the next sitting of Cumberland Assizes on a charge of manslaughter; all three were granted bail.
The verdict of the English inquest left Tinsley in an unusual position as he had already been arrested by the Scottish authorities and charged with culpable homicide and now faced a charge of manslaughter in England based on the same facts.  After discussion between the Law Officers of England and Scotland it was decided to proceed against the three men in Scotland.

Trial of Tinsley, Meakin and Hutchinson

The trial of the three men started on 24 September 1915 in the High Court in Edinburgh. The  Lord Justice General, Lord Strathclyde, presided over the trial;  the Lord Advocate, Robert Munro KC prosecuted and the three men were defended by Condie Sandeman KC.
After Sandeman's speech, Lord Strathclyde summed up to the jury, ending:
 At 6.43 on the morning of the day in question the men in the signal box at Quintinshill were asked to accept the troop train coming from the north.  They accepted it.  That meant that they gave the signal to the north that the line was clear and that the troop train might safely come on.  At that very moment when the signal was given there was before the very eyes of the men in the signal box a local train which was obstructing the line on which the troop train was to run.  One man in the signal box had actually left the train a few minutes before just at the time when it was being shunted on to the up line.  The other man had a few minutes before directed the local train to leave the down main and go on to the up main. 
 That is the staggering fact that confronts you. 
If you can explain that fact consistently with the two men having faithfully and honestly discharged their duties you should acquit them.  If you cannot explain that staggering fact consistently with the men having faithfully discharged their duties then you must convict them.
The jury retired to consider their verdicts at 12.40 pm and returned only eight minutes later finding Hutchinson not guilty as directed, but finding Tinsley and Meakin guilty as charged.

Fatal accident inquiry in Scotland

The final legal inquiry into the disaster was held on 4 November 1915 in Dumfries and was an inquiry under the Fatal Accidents Inquiry (Scotland) Act 1895 into the deaths of the crew of the troop train.  Presided over by Sheriff Campion it came to the same conclusion as the English inquest and the trial that if Meakin and Tinsley had followed the rules then the accident would not have happened.

After the trial

After release, Tinsley went straight back to working on the Caledonian railway as a lampman. He died in 1953.
The pair were not the first signalmen to be convicted for their part in causing an accident; James Holmes was tried for manslaughter following the Thirsk rail crash of 1892 but was given an absolute discharge;

Memorials

As well as the memorial in Rosebank Cemetery,
Annual remembrance services are held at Rosebank Cemetery attended  by the Lord Provost of Edinburgh, the Royal Scots association and others.

Similar accidents

The Hawes Junction rail crash of 1910 also involved a busy signalman forgetting about a train on the main railway line. Likewise, at the Winwick rail crash of 1934, an overworked signalman forgot about a train in his section, and was misled by a junior.








