[[Nasreddin]]

CATEGORIES: People from Eskişehir Province, Iranian culture, Persian culture, Turkish culture, Afghan culture, Pakistani literature, Humor and wit characters, History of Islam, Persian literature, Turkish literature, Rhetoric, Folkloristic characters, Urdu literature, Arabic literature, Sufi fiction, Turkish folklore, Iranian folklore, Uzbekistani culture, Uyghur literature, Chinese folklore, Ottoman literature

Nasreddin (Turkish: Nasreddin Hoca,  
The International Nasreddin Hodja fest is celebrated between 5 and 10 July in his hometown every year.aksehir.tr/portal/index.php/nasreddin-hoca/nasreddin-hoca-senligi

Origin and legacy

Claims about his origin are made by many ethnic groups.İlhan Başgöz, Studies in Turkish folklore, in honor of Pertev N. Boratav, Indiana University, 1978, p. 215. ("Quelle est la nationalité de Nasreddin Hodja – est-il turc, avar, tatar, tadjik, persan ou ousbek? Plusieurs peuples d'Orient se disputent sa nationalité, parce qu'ils considerent qu'il leur appartient.") John R. Perry, "Cultural currents in the Turco-Persian world", in New Perspectives on Safavid Iran: Majmu`ah-i Safaviyyah in Honour of Roger Savory, Taylor & Francis, ISBN 978-1-136-99194-3, p. 92.  Many sources give the birthplace of Nasreddin as Hortu Village in Sivrihisar, Eskişehir Province, present-day Turkey, in the 13th century, after which he settled in Akşehir, and later in Konya under the Seljuq rule, where he died in 1275/6 or 1285/6 CE. The alleged tomb of Nasreddin is in AkşehirSet of photos of the tomb by Faruk Tuncer on flickr.Aksehir's International Nasreddin Hodja Festival and Aviation Festival – Turkish Daily News 27 Jun 2005
According to Prof. Mikail Bayram who made an extensive research on Nasreddin Hoca, his full name is Nasir ud-din Mahmud al-Khoyi, his title Ahi Evran (as being the leader of the ahi organization). He was born in the city of Khoy in West Azerbaijan Province of Iran, had his education in Khorasan and became the pupil of famous Quran mufassir Fakhr al-Din al-Razi in Herat. He was sent to Anatolia by the Khalif in Baghdad to organize resistance and uprising against the Mongol invasion. He served as a kadı (an Islamic judge and ombudsman) in Kayseri. This explains why he is asked judicial problems in the jokes not only the religious ones. During the turmoil of the Mongol invasion he became a political opponent of Rumi, another great figure of the time who also lived in Konya. He was addressed in Masnavi by juha anecdotes for this reason. He became the vizier at the court of Kaykaus II in Konya. Mikail Bayram Having lived in numerous cities in vast area and being steadfastly against the Mongol invasion as well as having his witty character, he was embraced by various nations and cultures from Turkey to Arabia, and from Russia to China, most of which suffered from those invasions.
As generations have gone by, new stories have been added to the Nasreddin corpus, others have been modified, and he and his tales have spread to many regions. The themes in the tales have become part of the folklore of a number of nations and express the national imaginations of a variety of cultures. Although most of them depict Nasreddin in an early small-village setting, the tales deal with concepts that have a certain timelessness. They purvey a pithy folk wisdom that triumphs over all trials and tribulations. The oldest manuscript of Nasreddin dates to 1571.
Today, Nasreddin stories are told in a wide variety of regions, especially across the Muslim world and have been translated into many languages. Some regions independently developed a character similar to Nasreddin, and the stories have become part of a larger whole. In many regions, Nasreddin is a major part of the culture, and is quoted or alluded to frequently in daily life. Since there are thousands of different Nasreddin stories, one can be found to fit almost any occasion. Nasreddin often appears as a whimsical character of a large Albanian, Arabic, Armenian, Azerbaijani, Bengali, Bosnian, Bulgarian, Chinese, Greek, Gujarati, Hindi, Italian, Judeo-Spanish, Kurdish, Pashto, Persian, Romanian, Serbian, Russian, Turkish, and Urdu folk tradition of vignettes, not entirely different from zen koans.
1996–1997 was declared International Nasreddin Year by UNESCO.".....".

Name

thumb|right|210px|A Goha story cloth by Ahmed Yossery (2007) depicting a version of The miller, his son and the donkey, The Children's Museum of IndianapolisMany peoples of the Near, Middle East and Central Asia claim Nasreddin as their own (e.g., Turks,The outrageous Wisdom of Nasruddin, Mullah Nasruddin; accessed 19 February 2007.com, Mulla Nasreddin Stories, accessed 20 February 2007.com, Nasreddin Hoca Afghans, Iranians, and Uzbeks).[ref]
