[[Emmanuel Schools Foundation]]

CATEGORIES: Educational charities based in the United Kingdom, Educational institutions established in 1989, Emmanuel Schools Foundation

The Emmanuel Schools Foundation (ESF) is a charitable trust which has been involved in education since 1989.
ESF sponsored four schools: Emmanuel City Technology College in Gateshead (opened 1990), The King's Academy in Middlesbrough (2003), Trinity Academy in Thorne, Doncaster (2005) and Bede Academy in Blyth, Northumberland which opened in September 2009. In 2004, the Foundation's former chairman, Sir Peter Vardy, discussed an aim to sponsor seven schools in the North of England that would educate a total of 10,000 students. Retrieved 22 April 2009
Its four schools have been oversubscribed every year.
Although the Government allows academies to select 10% of pupils by ability, ESF Academies do not do so, being fully comprehensive schools for local children. They have a Christian ethos, but are not faith schools and welcome staff and students of all faiths and of none.

History

In 1988, Sir Peter Vardy responded to the then Government's appeal to local businessmen to become involved in the education of young people in the most socio-economically deprived parts of their home regions through sponsorship of the City Technology College initiative. The aim of the initiative was twofold:
The first ESF school, Emmanuel City Technology College, was founded in 1990 as Tyneside's City Technology College and opened with just 150 students in Year 7.  John Burn (Headteacher of Long Benton) had been instrumental in persuading Peter Vardy to engage in the CTC programme.  Originally specialising in Technology, the College was awarded a second specialism in Business and Enterprise (2005), allowing it to build upon its Beacon School and current Leading Edge Status through its extensive work in delivering specialist teaching programmes within Primary Schools.
ESF went on to open its next two schools in 2003 and 2005. However, the Foundation's approach was not universally welcomed, and in 2004 opponents blocked the Foundation's bid to take over Northcliffe School in Conisbrough, near Doncaster, which Ofsted had placed under special measures. Retrieved 1 April 2010
In September 2009 it was announced that David Wootton would join from the Grace Foundation to become ESF's first Chief Executive. In February 2010, the Foundation announced that Sir Peter Vardy was to step down as chairman, to be succeeded by his brother, David Vardy, who had previously been Project Director of the foundation, overseeing the building of the schools.
In September 2009 ESF also opened its fourth school, Bede Academy, which is its first covering the whole school age range of 3-18,Blyth academy proves popular a year in advance, The Journal, Blyth, 12 November 2008. Retrieved 1 April 2010 with Nursery, Primary and Secondary provision across two sites in Blyth on the Northumberland coast.  Specialising in Engineering and Enterprise, the school focuses on extending conventional perceptions of engineering by providing specialist insights into aspects of biotechnology, environmental science and recycling technologies, sound and computer network engineering, medical and animal science, and naval and automotive systems and design.
In October 2010 it was announced that Sir Peter Vardy was handing over management of the schools to the United Learning Trust. Retrieved 20 October 2010.

Academic successes

Emmanuel College claims that its students, taught as part of a mixed, non-selective comprehensive school, perform significantly above all value-add measures and their academic results have placed the College amongst the highest ranked schools in England for the past ten years.Emmanuel College on Emmanuel Schools Foundation website (retrieved 17 April 2009)
A 2009 report on The King's Academy by Ofsted referred to many improvements, with the school officially ranked as "good, with many outstanding features". Inspectors said the academy was exceptional when it came to boosting students' personal development and well-being, and offering them care, guidance and support.King's Academy praised in Ofsted report, Teesside Evening Gazette, 4 March 2009

Controversy

In 2002, a group of leading scientists including Richard Dawkins alleged that creationism was taught in biology classes at Emmanuel College.
After reviewing the material used to teach science at Emmanuel College, Mike Tomlinson, chief inspector of Ofsted, decided that the matter did not need to be pursued further. 
In 2005, John Harris in The Guardian accused Emmanuel Schools Foundation of promoting fundamentalist Christianity... The Guardian, 15 January 2005
In 2006 Rod Liddle interviewed ex-pupils for a Channel 4 Dispatches programme titled "The New Fundamentalists", alleging that their teachers had promoted creationism both in and out of class. 
However, in December 2006, a follow-up article by Martin Wainwright in The Guardian was strongly supportive of ESF, and said that associating its schools with creationism "couldn't be more wrong."They aren't faith schools and they don't select, The Guardian, 5 December 2006
Nevertheless, political opponents of academies continued to refer to the original accusation.E.g. Britain: The business of education under Labour, World Socialist Web Site, 27 March 2010. Retrieved 9 April 2010 After Tribune magazine published such an article in 2009, Peter Vardy took legal action against the magazine and its editor, who apologised, withdrew the allegations, and made an undisclosed payment to a nominated charity.






