[[Sweet Child o' Mine]]

CATEGORIES: 1988 singles, Guns N' Roses songs, Sheryl Crow songs, Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles, Glam metal songs, Music videos directed by Nigel Dick, Singles certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America, Songs written by Slash (musician), Songs written by Axl Rose, Song recordings produced by Rick Rubin, Rock ballads, 1980s ballads, Grammy Award for Best Female Rock Vocal Performance, Music videos directed by Stéphane Sednaoui, Black-and-white music videos

"Sweet Child O' Mine" is a song by American hard rock band Guns N' Roses, and the third single from their 1987 debut studio album, Appetite for Destruction. Released on August 17, 1988, the song topped the Billboard Hot 100 chart,

Background and composition

Lead guitarist Slash has been quoted as having an initial disdain for the song due to its roots as simply a "string skipping" exercise and a joke at the time.I. During a jam session at the band's house in the Sunset Strip,The Story Behind The Song - Guns N' Roses "Sweet Child O' Mine" Q, December 2005 drummer Steven Adler and Slash were warming up and Slash began to play a "circus" melody while making faces at Adler. Rhythm guitarist Izzy Stradlin asked Slash to play it again. Stradlin came up with some chords, Duff McKagan created a bassline and Adler planned a beat. In his autobiography, Slash said "within an hour my guitar exercise had become something else". Meanwhile lead singer Axl Rose was listening to the musicians upstairs in his room and was inspired to write lyrics, which became complete by the following afternoon. He based it on his girlfriend Erin Everly, and declared that Lynyrd Skynyrd served as an inspiration "to make sure that we'd got that heartfelt feeling." On the next composing session in Burbank, the band added both a bridge and a guitar solo to "Sweet Child O'Mine".
While the band was recording demos with producer Spencer Proffer, he suggested adding a breakdown at the song's end. The musicians agreed, but were not sure what to do. Listening to the demo in a loop, Axl started saying to himself, "Where do we go? Where do we go now?" and Proffer suggested that he sing that.
The song is composed in the key of D flat major and played in the key of D major tuned down a half step on guitars and bass (as all their songs are).

Music video

The "Sweet Child o' Mine" video depicts the band rehearsing in the Huntington Ballroom at Huntington Beach, surrounded by crew members. All of the band members' girlfriends at the time were shown in the clip. Rose was dating Erin Everly at the time, whose father was Don Everly of The Everly Brothers fame. Duff's girlfriend Mandy from the all-female rock band "The Lame Flames" was there, as was Steven Adler's girlfriend Cheryl and Slash's girlfriend Sally. Izzy Stradlin's dog was also featured. The video was extremely successful on MTV, and helped launch the song to success on mainstream radio.
In an effort to make "Sweet Child o' Mine" more marketable to MTV and radio stations, the song was cut from 5:56 to 4:12, with much of Slash's guitar solo removed. This move drew the ire of the band members, including Axl Rose, who commented on it in a 1989 interview with Rolling Stone: "I hate the edit of 'Sweet Child o' Mine.' Radio stations said, "Well, your vocals aren't cut." "My favorite part of the song is Slash's slow solo; it's the heaviest part for me. There's no reason for it to be missing except to create more space for commercials, so the radio-station owners can get more advertising dollars. When you get the chopped version of 'Paradise City' or half of 'Sweet Child' and 'Patience' cut, you're getting screwed."
The edit was released on the 7-inch vinyl format of the single as a 'Remix' while the 12" vinyl format contained the longer LP version.
On an interview on Eddie Trunk's New York radio show in May 2006, Axl Rose stated that his original concept for the video focused on the theme of drug trafficking. According to Rose, the video was to depict an Asian woman carrying a baby into a foreign land, only to discover at the end that the child was dead and filled with heroin. This concept was rejected by Geffen Records.
There is also an alternative video for "Sweet Child o' Mine" with different shots, all in black and white.

Reception

"Sweet Child o' Mine" placed #37 on Guitar Worlds list of the "100 Greatest Guitar Solos." It also came in at number three on Blenders 500 Greatest Songs Since You Were Born, and at #198 on Rolling Stones The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time.
The song came 1st in Kerrang!s Slash's top 30 guitar anthems.

Legacy

The opening riff can be heard briefly (at the end) of the Red Hot Chili Peppers song "Punk Rock Classic" from the Mother's Milk album.
A cover of the song is featured as a special encore in the music video game Guitar Hero II.
The song "S.C.O.M." from Fort Minor's mixtape We Major samples from the introductory riff of the song.
In Keith Urban and Brad Paisley's "Start a Band", a tribute to the main riff can be heard as the singers describe famous rock songs.
SR-71's song, "Axl Rose", contains part of the opening riff.
In the bridge of Dope song "Always", Edsel Dope's background vocals of "Where do we go now?" are a reference to the bridge
of Sweet Child o' Mine.

In film

The first time this song appeared in a movie was in 1988. It played as the credits were rolling for the movie Bad Dreams.Bad Dreams (1988)
"Sweet Child o' Mine" was featured in the 2008 film The Wrestler. The song is played when Randy "The Ram" Robinson (played by Mickey Rourke) makes his entrance to the ring at the end of the film. Rourke, who is friends with Axl Rose, convinced him to allow the song to be played in the film for a fraction of what would have been normally charged.
It is sung a cappella by Derek's family in the 2008 film Step Brothers.
The song is in the Sean Penn, Gary Oldman film State of Grace.
Sheryl Crow's cover of this song is featured in the Adam Sandler film, Big Daddy.
The Taken by Trees cover of this song appears at the end of the movie Life as We Know It. It also is used in the trailer for the 2009 remake of The Last House on the Left.
The introductory riff is heard in the 2010 film Gulliver's Travels, starring Jack Black.

Artist covers

In 1999, the song was covered by Sheryl Crow and re-recorded by the then-new Guns N' Roses members for the film Big Daddy and was later included in her third studio album The Globe Sessions. Crow's version earned her a Grammy Award for Best Female Rock Vocal Performance. The recording was produced by Rick Rubin and Crow. A music video for Crow's version was also released, directed by Stéphane Sednaoui. A separate Guns N' Roses version which morphed into a live version half way through was not featured on the original Big Daddy soundtrack album of the film, but can be heard during the film's ending credits. This Guns N' Roses version of the song was also featured in the 1990 film State of Grace, in a bar during a brawl.
The following artists have also notably covered the song:
The following artists have performed their versions of the song-

Use in live concerts

Other versions and notable performances

In 2008, during their tour, Projekt Revolution, Linkin Park mashed their song Bleed It Out with Sweet Child o' Mine, in which the intro was played while the lead singer, Chester Bennington would sing the first verse, then would change to Bleed it Out and the performance would go on to the drum solo, where Street Drum Corps would perform before the song would be finished.
It was performed on December 2, 2006 at the Nokia Theatre Times Square in New York City by jam band Umphrey's McGee.
Slash performed "Sweet Child o' Mine" with Black Eyed Peas' member Fergie at his 43rd birthday party in Las Vegas at the Mirage Hotel & casino on July 23, 2008.
During the 2008 Reading Festival, band Tenacious D announced they were going to perform a cover of one of Metallica's best known songs as a tribute. They then proceeded to play the opening riff to "Sweet Child o' Mine".
Irish dance act The Lazy Boyz recorded a trance version in 2004. It went on to appear on two Ministry of Sound compilations, Big Tunes and The Annual 2005.
Indie pop artist Victoria Bergsman, under the name Taken by Trees, also covered the song. Her version was used in the trailer for the remake of the Wes Craven film The Last House on the Left, and in a 2009 UK advert for department store John Lewis and announced would be released as their next UK single.
Malaysian Idol's first winner, Jaclyn Victor, performed this song in the competition and received positive reviews from the judges and voters.
Welsh rock band Lostprophets performed the first verse (without the intro riff) as an intro to their song "Where We Belong" at the BBC Radio One Big Weekend 2010.
Slash recorded an acoustic version of the song with singer Myles Kennedy for the deluxe edition of his 2010 solo album, Slash.
Limp Bizkit has played their own version of the song a number of times during their 2010 European tour.
Classically trained pianist Vika Yermolyeva has performed a piano cover which has garnered over three million unique views on YouTube.
American punk band blink-182's guitarist Tom DeLonge played a portion of the intro during the outro of the song "Depends".
During the Super Bowl XLV halftime show, which featured The Black Eyed Peas, Slash joined with vocalist Fergie to perform the song.
Green Day play a section of the song during some live performances.
The song was also included in the music video game Guitar Hero II
In 2013, a cover of Sweet Child o' Mine was performed, which included use of traditional/classical music instruments: (Tabla, sitar, sarangi etc), on "Nescafé Basement" (a Pakistani music television series which features live studio-recorded music performances by underground artists). The show was produced by the Nescafé. 

Use in sports

English football team Barnet FC uses the song when the team enters the pitch before a game.

Formats and track listing

Personnel

Charts and certifications

Peak positions

Certifications










