[[Chadlington]]

CATEGORIES: Civil parishes in Oxfordshire, Villages in Oxfordshire, West Oxfordshire

Chadlington is a village and civil parish in the Evenlode Valley about  south of Chipping Norton, Oxfordshire. The village has five neighbourhoods: Brookend, Eastend, Greenend, Millend and Westend.

Archaeology

There is a bowl barrow about 
Knollbury is a hill-fort 

Manors

Chadlington village existed by the time of Domesday Book in 1086 and may be named after Saint Chad. It is a Grade II* listed building.
Lower Court farmhouse was built in about 1700 as the manor house for Westend. It was altered in the mid- to late-18th century and remodelled in the 19th. The house has a Stonesfield Slate roof. It is a Grade II* listed building.

Churches and chapel

Church of England

The Church of England parish church of Saint Nicholas was originally Norman,
The bell tower was built early in the 14th century in the Decorated Gothic style.
The tower has a ring of six bells. Abraham I Rudhall of Gloucester William Taylor of Loughborough cast the fifth and tenor bells in 1846 at the bellfoundry he then had in Oxford. Thomas Bond of Burford cast the fourth bell in 1911. The Whitechapel Bell Foundry cast the present tenor bell in 2006. There is also a Sanctus bell that Thomas Bond cast in 1911.
In 2001 the Church of England Benefice of Ascott-under-Wychwood, Chadlington and Spelsbury merged with that of Enstone and Heythrop to form the Chase Benefice.
The Parsonage was designed by William Wilkinson and built in 1863.

Baptist

Chadlington Baptist chapel was built in 1840. It is now a private house.

Methodist

Chadlington has a Methodist church. It is a member of Chipping Norton and Stow on the Wold Methodist Circuit.

Social and economic history

Chadlington used to have three public houses, the Malt Shovel, the Tite Inn, and the Sandys Arms. 
Sir Henry Rawlinson (1810–95) and his brother Canon George Rawlinson (1812–1902) were born at Chadlington.

Amenities

Chadlington Football Club plays in the Witney and District League. It currently has two teams in Divisions One and Four.
Chadlington Cricket Club plays in the Oxfordshire Cricket Association League.Chadlington Sports Club Chadlington has also a primary school and a playgroup.Chadlington Playgroup
An annual fun run is held along Coldron Brook: The Great Brook Run. Proceeds of the race, which starts and ends at The Tite Inn, go to the parish primary school. Witney MP David Cameron has taken part in the event.



Sources and further reading




