[[International Institute of Information Technology, Bangalore]]

CATEGORIES: Universities and colleges in Karnataka, Engineering colleges in Bangalore, Deemed Universities in India, IIIT

The International Institute of Information Technology Bangalore (अंतरराष्ट्रीय सूचना प्रौद्योगिकी संस्थान,बैंगलोर), abbreviated to IIIT-B, is a graduate school  in India. Founded in 1999, it offers Integrated M., M., M.S. (Research) and PhD programs in the field of Information Technology. In February 2005, IIIT-B was conferred Deemed University status under Section 3 of the University Grants Commission (UGC) Act 1956. Annexure VII (b) of the report) IIIT-B a score of 41 (the most given to any deemed university).
IIIT-Bangalore is promoted by the government of Karnataka and the IT industry. IIIT-B is managed by a Governing Body with S Gopalakrishnan (Kris), executive co-chairman, Infosys Ltd., as the chairperson.Website of the International Institute of Information Technology, Bangalore

History

IIIT-B was instituted on 15 September 1999 as the Indian Institute of Information Technology, with its campus at International Tech Park (ITPL). In August 2003, IIIT-B relocated to its present campus in Electronics City. IIIT-B was founded after taking inspiration from other well-established Institutes of National Importance (INI) in India. These INIs include the Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs), National Institutes of Technology (NITs), and the Indian Institutes of Management (IIMs). It is now listed under the Institutes of National Importance in the AICTE website.
Initially, the institute offered post graduate diplomas in Information Technology. Upon being granted deemed-to-be university status in January 2005, the institute began conferring upon students the degree of Master of Technology (M.). The name of the institute was changed to International Institute of Information Technology before becoming a university (in 2004).

Location

IIIT-B is in Electronics City, Bangalore, which is one of India's largest electronic industrial parks and which houses major electronics and IT corporations that include Infosys, Wipro, Siemens, Hewlett-Packard, General Electric, and Flextronics, amongst others. The address is No. 26/C, Electronics City, Hosur Road, Bangalore 560100, Karnataka, India.

Computing Resources

The infrastructure for IIIT-B's fully wired campus consists of a high-speed fiber-optic backbone connected to the internal network through a high-end gigabit Ethernet switch. Dedicated network equipment includes printers, scanners, and other equipment. Connectivity in the campus is established at two levels. First, the local intranet implements a "virtual classroom," where all the visual material, such as presentation slides used by professors in class, are made available electronically to students. All assignments and projects are announced and submitted online.

Administration

IIIT-B is a not-for-profit society registered under the Government of Karnataka Act. The institute is governed by a board with S Gopalakrishnan, executive co-chairman, Infosys Ltd., as chairman.
Other eminent members of the board are:

Students

Every year about 5000 applications are received, out of which about 300 students (around 150 in each year) are enrolled in the two-year full-time M. program. Some of these students are selected through an All India Entrance Examination which is taken by about 2000 applicants.
The PhD program was started in August 2005. There are 37 PhD students and 26 M.S. (Research) students registered with IIIT-Bangalore.

Placements

Companies like Google, Amazon, CISCO, Yahoo!, Flipkart, Morgan Stanley and other giants visit the campus every year. College has a consistent 100% placement record.

Alumni

 Information on IIIT-B alumni is available on the official

Research activities

Government and industry funded labs functioning at IIIT Bangalore include Intel Planet Lab, Honeywell Control Lab, Intel Community PC Lab, HP IMS Lab, Siemens Vision Lab and HP Cluster Computing Lab.
Research projects funded by the government and by industry include ICT for development funded by the Department of Information Technology of the Government of India, the Telematics Project funded by the Department of Science and Technology of the Government of India, ICT for Development funded by Microsoft, ICT Cluster Study funded by the Liverhume Trust, Cluster Computing in University Environment funded by HP, Community PC Initiatives funded by Intel, and MONSOON & INCITE projects of the European Union.

Research labs

Programs

Degree programs

IIIT-Bangalore offers four degree programs.

Specialization

In M.Tech program, students can opt for specialization in any of the following streams:
Students must pursue at least three elective courses in the stream that they choose. There are a number of mandatory courses that a student needs to take irrespective of the student's specialisation. Students can choose from the electives from their second semester.

Admission

Scholarships

Scholarships are available for exceptional candidates who get selected for programs at IIIT-B, sponsored by industry.
Scholarship gets a new dimensionIn the news
Sponsors:

Outreach programs

Certificate courses






