[[Isola del Giglio]]

CATEGORIES: Islands of Tuscany, Arcipelago Toscano National Park

Isola del Giglio () is an Italian island and comune situated in the Tyrrhenian Sea, off the coast of Tuscany, and is part of the Province of Grosseto. The island is one of seven  that form the Tuscan Archipelago, lying within the Arcipelago Toscano National Park. Giglio means "lily" in Italian, and though the name would appear consistent with the insignia of Medici Florence, it derives from Aegilium, "Goat Island", a Latin transliteration of the Greek word for "little goat" (Ancient greek: Aigýllion, Αιγύλλιον).

Geography

The island is separated by a  long, made up of rocks, smooth cliffs and several bays: Arenella, Cannelle, Caldane and Campese, the biggest one with its small village of the same name.
The municipality is composed of the islands of Giglio and Giannutri. Three principal settlements are located on the main island: 

History

The modern island was formed probably 4.5 to 5 million years ago, and has been inhabited since the Stone Age. Later, it was probably an Etruscan military stronghold. Under the Roman dominion, Aegilium InsulaPrinceton Encyclopedia of Classical Sites: "Aegilium Insula" or Igillia InsulaChristoph Cellarius, Notitia orbis antiqui: sive geographia plenior, 1701-06:606. it was an important base in the Tyrrhenian Sea,  and was cited briefly by Julius Caesar in his De Bello Civili,De Bello Civili, book I, ch. xxxiv. by Pliny,Hist. Nat. III.12. by Pomponius Mela,Mela, book ii, ch. vii. and by the fifth-century AD poet Rutilius Claudius Namatianus, who celebrated Igilium's successful repulse of the Getae and safe harbor for Romans, in a time when Igilium's slopes were still wooded:
In 805, the island was donated by Charlemagne to the abbey of the Tre Fontane in Rome, and was later successively a possession of the Aldobrandeschi, Pannocchieschi, Caetani, and Orsini families, and of the municipality of Perugia. In 1241, the Sicilian fleet of Emperor Frederick II destroyed a Genoese fleet. From 1264, Isola del Giglio was a Pisan dominion, from which it passed to the Medici family. It suffered several Saracen attacks, which ended only in 1799.
On 14 June 1646, Grand Admiral Jean Armand de Maillé-Brézé was killed at the Battle of Orbetello, at sunset on his flag ship the Grand Saint Louis.
Alongside its history, the island was always renowned for its mineral ore: many columns and buildings in Rome were built with the Gigliese granite.

Main sights

The island houses the remains of a Roman villa of Domitius Ahenobarbus (1st-2nd century AD), in the area of Giglio Porto (Giglio port). No traces of the  once existing Temple of Diana  can be seen now. The church of San Pietro Apostolo in Giglio Castello (Giglio castle) has an ivory crucifix attributed to the sculptor Giambologna.
The island is also the site of an Etruscan shipwreck dating back to the early Iron age, c. 600 BC. The cargo of the ship included copper and lead ingots, iron spits, amphorae and a Corinthian helmet. Even a wooden writing tablet with stylus was preserved. The finds are almost completely lost now.

Transportation

Isola del Giglio is connected to Tuscany by ferries Toremar and Maregiglio ("sea lily"),  departing from Porto Santo Stefano.

Costa Concordia grounding incident

In 2012, the island received prolonged international media attention, following the 13 January 2012 running aground of the cruise liner Costa Concordia, just off the island's shore. Most of the more than 4,200 passengers and crew were rescued and taken to the island, as well as to the mainland. At least 30 people died and 64 were injured, with 2  missing (as of 20 December 2012).Concordia disaster: House arrest for Captain Schettino, BBC News
The people of the island rushed to help, providing hot drinks and blankets, and many opened their homes to the victims.
The ship removal work is planned (as of September 2013) to start on September 16, 2013 and end in early 2014. Floatation devices are to be attached to the ship to lift it, and then it is to be dismantled in another port.Resconto della presentazione del progetto di rimozione (Italian), Giglionews

In popular fiction

In the 2007 romantic bestselling Italian novel Scusa ma ti chiamo amore by Federico Moccia, the couple end up living in a lighthouse on this island.

Gallery

File:Giglio Porto.JPG|Giglio Porto
File:Giglio Castello.JPG|Giglio Castello
File:Giglio Campese.JPG|Giglio Campese
File:GiglioLighthouse.jpg|Old Lighthouse on north of the island
File:Giannutri runway.jpg|A disused grass runway by Giannutri's shore
File:Isola del Giglio01.jpg|A street in Giglio Castello
File:Aerial view of Isola del Giglio, 2006-06-04.jpg|Aerial view of the island

File:Collision of Costa Concordia DSC4191.jpg|Rock embedded in the port side of the damaged hull of the Concordia
File:Collision of Costa Concordia 24.
File:Collision of Costa Concordia 8.jpg|Rescued passengers huddle ashore






