[[Dahisar]]

CATEGORIES: Mumbai Suburban district, Suburbs of Mumbai

Dahisar () is a small and crowded suburb of Mumbai. It is also the name of a railway station on the Mumbai suburban railway on the Western Railway (India) railway line, situated in Dahisar suburb. Located on the city limits of Mumbai, Dahisar is the last suburb and railway station within the Mumbai Suburban District; past Dahisar lie the city's extended suburbs.

History

There is a record of continuous habitation since the 1630s, per parish records of the Our Lady of the Immaculate Conception Church
The original residents of Dahisar are the Panchkalshis, Agris, East Indians and Kolis, who still live primarily in the hamlets of Kandarpada and Gaothan and the tribes who lived in the hills surrounding Dahisar - the Warlis and Dublis.
With the construction of the railway line connecting Dahisar to the city of Mumbai in 1867, came the first lot of migrants, the people from Sindhudurg region of Konkan. These migrants established the first planned residential areas of Dahisar - Maratha Colony in Dahisar East and Mhatre Wadi in the West. The Railway authorities wanted to name the Railhead at Dahisar as Mount Poinsur, but the locals opposed this move and forced the authorities to name it as Dahisar.
Medina Manzil, Patel Colony, Zainab Baugh, Sanjeevani, Gol Building and Mankarnika were amongst the first apartment style residential areas of Dahisar. The 70s saw the setting up of residential areas of Gokul and Shailendra Nagar. Kachanar apartment is the first building in Dahisar facilitated with Elevator. Nand Dham in Dahisar West is the first building with 5 wings, a garden, elevators, chain of shops, etc.
The 80s and 90s saw a spurt in the development of residential complexes. Anand Nagar was the first of the very large residential complexes to be built in Dahisar Followed by Misquitta Nagar and Avdhooth nagar.
Dahisar was originally a part of Thane District; it became a part of Mumbai in the 1956, when Borivali taluka was merged with Bombay Suburban District.
Dahisar was once a popular spot for film shoots. There were numerous idyllic locations for film shoots like, the Dahisar River and the old bridge that now lies in the ruins, the small hillock with its orchards and the Bhoot Bangla which is now a film studio.

Geography

Dahisar is located on Salsette Island and is  bound by the scenic hills of National Park on the eastern side and the inlet of Manori creek and saltpans on the western side.
thumb|Dahisar, Maratha Colony of 1960s Dahisar was once an idyllic place to live in, with small hillocks, mango orchards, the Dahisar River and numerous lakes and ponds. But as of today, the river is now an extremely polluted stream of sewage, the orchards and hills have been obliterated by slums and lakes have now been filled over for building construction. The dense mangroves surrounding the inlet of Gorai creek however still remain and provide Dahisar with its last remaining stretch of wilderness. There was  a time just 30 years back, when the marshy area which is now the link road, was full of gigantic boulders, all of which baring a couple have been demolished. Currently Dahisar has undergone a complete transformation, with better pedestrian sidewalks, wider and smoother roads. Flyovers have been built over the Western Express Highway, with the aim of easing traffic during the peak hours.

Origins

The origin of the word Dahisar probably has something to do with the ten Hamlets that made up this village. "Dahi" stands for "ten" in the language of Warlis, Dublis, Kolis and Agris, the original residents of Dahisar. Gaothan, Kandarpada, Navagaon, Ovaripada, Ghartanpada, Ketakipada, Ravalpada, Dahivali, Bhagalipada, Wadarypada are the ten original Hamlets of Dahisar.

Landmarks

Dahisar is officially a very small area earlier recognised only because of the 'Check Naka', one of the two toll booths which connect Mumbai to rest of India, It consists of a number of landmarks or 'Addas' as the locals call. The following is the list of Landmarks:
The railway line divides Dahisar into two sections, East and West. The residential area of Mhatre Wadi on the western side and Maratha Colony on the eastern side, were the first planned residential areas of Dahisar. The Bhav Devi Temple atop Dahivali hill, the old Vithal Mandir near the river, the Gaon devi temple near the rail underpass and Bhatla Devi Temple near the S.V. Road and the bungalow of then zamindar or Khot of Dahisar, Haji Kasam, known as "Bhoot Bangla", which now houses the Trimurti studio are the original landmarks of Dahisar.
Some other landmarks in Dahisar include Dahisar Fish market, Dahisar Govthan, Siddhi Vinayak Mandir, Dahisar Bridge in Dahisar (West), Vitthal Rakhumai Temple, Havelli (Shreenathji Temple), Moviegem Cinema (earlier termed as Rajashree cinema), Tollnaka in Dahisar (East), Gokulanand Restaurant in Ashok Van. A place called Bhakti Complex in link road is a famous meeting and hangout place with places like Cafe Coffee Day, Subway and MacDonalds nearby in Dahisar (West). There is also a large stretch of land belonging to the Airports Authority of India in Dahisar (East) lying close to the nearby residential area of NL Complex and Ketkipada.

Temples

There are many temples in Dahisar. The main temples are Bhatladevi, Bhav Devi Mandir, Gaon Devi Mandir, Vithal Mandir, Shri Siddhi Vinayak mandir, Sri Datta Mandir, Sri Krishna Mandir, Khodiyar Mandir, Radhakrishan Mandir, Vital-Rukhmai Mandir, Shiv Mandir, Hanuman Mandir.

Bhatala Devi Mandir

Bhatala Mandir is one of the oldest temples in Dahisar,And been their since Pandavas i.e. since Mahabharat yuga,earlier used to be small temple located at Bharucha Road. Bhatala Mandir is temple of Goddess "Bhatala Mata". The Bhatala Mandir Trust celebrates the Navarati, Ganesh Utsav, Shiv Ratri, Hanuman Jayanti, Shiv Ratri and other All Hindu religious festivals. Few years back it was renovated and Beautified By the Temple's Trust.

Vitthal Mandir

Vitthal Mandir is one of the oldest temples in Dahisar, located near Dahisar bridge. It has various Idols installed in the temple. The temple celebrates Ganesh Utsav in a grand Manner, where huge award winning sets are erected every year with beautiful decorations. Sarvajanik Ganeshostav is the one of the oldest in suburbs which is celebrated every year in Vitthal Mandir. One more festivals celebrated is Navratri Utsav celebrated in Vitthal Mandir

Shri Siddhi Vinayak mandir

Siddhi Vinayak mandir is located on the banks of the Dahisar river since 1997 near Dahisar bridge. Every Tuesday, Sankashti Chaturthi and Angaraki huge crowd gatheres here.

Shiv Temple

The Shiva Temple is located in Anand Nagar nearby NL complex, which is also known as the Mughraneshwar Mahadev Mandir/Temple. There is a new Garden for kids and senior citizens to jog around. There is newly posted statue of Shri. Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj. A new Flyover Bridge has been constructed close to the temple which connects Dahisar West (Link Road) to the National Highway No. 8 near Checknaka.

Govardhan Nathji ki Haveli

This is a temple located near the Dahisar subway. It is a temple in relation of Vaishnavism. It houses several 'Murtis' statues of Gods with Shri GovardhanNath being the main. Govardhan Nath means The God of 'Govardhan' a mountain in Mathura, Uttar Pradesh in Northern India.

Sri Vittal Rakhumai Mandir

This Temple is located in the an area between Sudhindra Nagar and Shakti Nagar. It belongs to the GSB community of Sri Kashi Math Samsthan. Idols of Lord Vittal and Rakhumai are installed in this temple. The place is also rented out for Social Events.

Sri Bhavdevi Mandir

This temple of Bhavdevi Mata is located in area of Kandarpada, 1.1 km from dahisar Station on small hill from where you can see 180 degree view of kandarpada. Navratri festival is an attraction the temple. One More attraction about this place is that every year during Akshay Trithi there is grand Celebration where a Jatra is scheduled which follows Old traditions involving a Mirvanuk of Devi's Palkhi in Kandarpada Area.

Sports

Cricket is the dominant sport played in Dahisar, along with Football. Dahisar United Football Club which was started in 2003, is one of the leading clubs from Dahisar. With an aim to promote Football in Dahisar, the DUFC opened up its doors for every football lover and for the ones who were willing to learn the sport. Youngsters and adults from various parts of Dahisar and even beyond came to join hands in this noble cause. Determining the power of the young lot, DUFC took a step further. In June 2006, DUFC was associated with M.D.F.A. (Mumbai District Football Association). In 2009, DUFC was promoted to the 3rd Division of the MDFA citing their fine performance in the same season. A dream come true for all the well-wishers and the players of the club.
Football in Dahisar dates back to the year 1973. 15 football enthusiasts started playing on a small ground near Veer Hanuman Nagar. As the lot began to grow they shifted to another ground alongside Dahisar River. In 1977, The Haridas Park ground, which has now been renovated to a jogger's park, was then the home ground for these football lovers. They named the team Tempest Sports Club, Dahisar.
In the year 1980, Tempest Sports Club, Dahisar was registered with the W.I.F.A. (Western India Football Association). But later they changed the name to Dahisar Sports Club. Players from many areas started pouring in to make Dahisar Sports Club a formidable side.
Dahisar Sports Club participated in many tournaments in Mumbai as well as outside Mumbai. They played most of their matches on St. Francis D'Assissi High School Ground.
Outside Mumbai, Daman had a big fan base for the Dahisar Sports Club. The locals were always eager to know about the participation of D.S.C. as they were the local's favourite. D.S.C. made it to the finals many times but could not end the jinx of losing in the final.
Dahisar Sports Foundation (D.S.F) is also extremely popular with the masses. It is located opposite to the Vidya Mandir School and is a popular club for sports coaching.

Education

The Main Schools in Dahisar are:

Transportation

Dahisar is well connected by the Western Express Highway. The major bus stations in Dahisar are as follows:

Dahisar Bus Station

Dahisar Bus Station () is a BEST Bus Station in Dahisar East Area near Dahisar Checknaka. The buses starting from Dahisar Bus Station are as follows:

Dahisar Bridge Bus Station

Dahisar Bridge Bus Station () is a BEST Bus Station in Dahisar (West). The buses starting from Dahisar Bridge are as follows:



Save Dahisar Mangaroves

