[[Bank of America Stadium]]

CATEGORIES: National Football League venues, Sports venues completed in 1996, Carolina Panthers stadiums, College football venues, NCAA bowl game venues, Sports venues in Charlotte, North Carolina, American football venues in North Carolina, Bank of America buildings, Music venues in North Carolina, 1996 establishments in North Carolina, Soccer venues in North Carolina, ACC Championship Game

Bank of America Stadium (formerly known as Carolinas Stadium and Ericsson Stadium) is a 73,778-seat football stadium located on  The largest crowd to ever attend a football game at the stadium was November 18, 2013 when a crowd of 74,225 watched the Panthers defeat the New England Patriots 24-20 during a nationally televised Monday Night Football game.

Other sites considered for selection

The organization had considered several possible sites for the stadium's location before choosing the Charlotte center city site. Part of the site was occupied by the historic Good Samaritan Hospital.
One alternative was near NASCAR's Charlotte Motor Speedway and the University of North Carolina at Charlotte in northeast Mecklenburg County. Another was at the intersection of I-85 and US 74 in western Gaston County. A popular option was to locate the facility near Carowinds amusement park, with the 50 yard line being on the state border of North Carolina and South Carolina.

Naming

The stadium, originally known as Carolinas Stadium (this name is used when the stadium hosts FIFA events), opened in 1996, as Ericsson Stadium after the Swedish telecom company LM Ericsson purchased the naming rights to the stadium in a ten year, $25 million agreement.

Carolina Panthers

Inaugural season

The Panthers played their Inaugural Season at Clemson University's Memorial Stadium while the stadium was being completed. The Carolina Panthers played their first game at the stadium on September 14, 1996.

Playoff games

In 1996, on their way to their first NFC Championship Game, they defeated the defending Super Bowl Champion Dallas Cowboys. Again they defeated the Cowboys on their way to Super Bowl XXXVIII in Houston in 2004. They were handed their first ever home playoff loss to the Arizona Cardinals by a score of 33–13 on January 10, 2009.  The Panthers suffered another home playoff loss to the San Francisco 49ers 23-10 on January 12, 2014.

Impact on NFL venues

At the time of its construction in the early 1990s, the stadium was a pioneering project for the use of Personal Seat Licenses. It was the first large-scale project funded in the United States chiefly through securing PSLs. The strength of PSL pledges impressed NFL owners and resulted in the Carolinas receiving the first new expansion team in nearly two decades.
The stadium is also credited with being a major cause for the recent round of new stadium construction in the NFL. Only a decade after its construction, it is now the eleventh oldest among current NFL stadiums. However, the stadium was considered so far ahead of its time that no significant renovations have been made since it opened. There are only four older NFL stadiums which have not received major renovations. The last four to open before the stadium broke ground were Candlestick Park in 1960, Ralph Wilson Stadium in 1973,  Sun Life Stadium in 1987, and the Georgia Dome in 1992.
Another addition came in 2007, when the original scoreboards and replay screens were replaced with high-definition monitors and ribbon boards.
In 2013, the City of Charlotte and the Panthers agreed to spend $200 million for additional renovations to the stadium. This decision came shortly after Charlotte announced interest in hosting a Super Bowl game in the near future.

College football

Bank of America Stadium does not serve as the primary home stadium for any college football team. However, it has hosted several college football games.
The ACC Championship Game, first Saturday in December, pits the champion of the Coastal Division against the champion of the Atlantic Division; it has been held at the stadium since 2010.  In February 2014, the ACC announced a 6 year contract extension to keep the game in Charlotte and through 2019.
The Belk Bowl (formerly known as the Meineke Car Care Bowl and the Continental Tire Bowl), late-December, used to pit a team from the ACC versus a team from the American Athletic Conference.  Starting in 2014 the game with feature the ACC versus the SEC.  It has been held annually since 2002.
The stadium has also hosted several East Carolina Pirates games:  In 1996 and 2004 versus the NC State Wolfpack, 1999 versus the West Virginia Mountaineers, 2008 versus the Virginia Tech Hokies, and in 2011 versus the South Carolina Gamecocks. An additional Pirates-Gamecocks game was scheduled for 2014, however the game has since been relocated to Columbia, home of the Gamecocks.
In 2015 there will be a game of North Carolina Tar Heels versus the South Carolina Gamecocks on opening weekend during Labor Day.
Local schools, including Davidson College, Johnson C. Smith University, and UNC Charlotte, have not utilized or seek to use Bank of America Stadium.

Non-football uses

Though Bank of America Stadium is mostly used as a football facility, it has hosted events of all kinds throughout its history.
Other Sports
Concerts
Other Events








