[[Ueno Park]]

CATEGORIES: Ueno Park, Parks and gardens in Tokyo, Hanami spots of Japan, Meiji period



History

Ueno Park occupies land once belonging to Kan'ei-ji, founded in 1625 in the "demon gate", the unlucky direction to the northeast of Edo Castle.
Various proposals were put forward for the use of the site as a medical school or hospital, but Dutch doctor Bauduin urged instead that the area be turned into a park.
Later that year Ueno Park was established, alongside Shiba, Asakusa, Asukayama, and Fukugawa Parks., lit. "Ueno Imperial Gift Park".

Natural features

The park has some 8,800 trees, including Ginkgo biloba, Cinnamomum camphora, Zelkova serrata, Formosan cherry, Somei-Yoshino cherry, and Japanese cherry. There is a further 24,800 m2 of shrubs. Shinobazu Pond is a small lake with an area of 16 ha, extensive lotus beds, and marshland. It provides an important wintering ground for birds. Species commonly found include the Tufted Duck, Eurasian Wigeon, Northern Pintail, Common Pochard, Little Grebe, Great Egret, and Great Cormorant. The Baer's Pochard, Ring-necked Duck, and American Wigeon have also been recorded.
The central island houses a shrine to Benzaiten, goddess of fortune, modelled on Chikubu Island in Lake Biwa. The lotus pond was restored in 1949, although much of it was again accidentally drained in 1968 during work on a new subway line.
In all there are some eight hundred cherry trees in the park, although with the inclusion of those belonging to the Tōshō-gū shrine, temple buildings, and other neighbouring points the total reaches some twelve hundred. Inspired, Matsuo Bashō wrote "cloud of blossoms - is the temple bell from Ueno or Asakusa".

Cultural facilities

Ueno Park is home to a number of museums. The very words in Japanese for museum as well as for art were coined in the Meiji period (from 1868) to capture Western concepts after the Iwakura Mission and other early visits to North America and Europe.
The National Museum of Western Art was founded in 1959 based on the collection of Matsukata Kōjirō, returned by the French government after the Treaty of San Francisco.
Other museums include the Tokyo Metropolitan Art Museum, dating back to 1926, and Shitamachi Museum of 1980, which is dedicated to the culture of the "Low City".

Other points of note

Tokugawa Ieyasu is enshrined at Ueno Tōshō-gū, dating to 1651. After the Great Kantō earthquake in 1923, notices of missing persons were attached to the statue of Saigō Takamori. Ueno Park and its surroundings figure prominently in Japanese fiction, including The Wild Geese by Mori Ōgai.

Homeless

Many homeless people squat in Ueno Park.  Found among the park's treelines and wooded areas, homeless camps border on the size of small villages, with an internal structure, culture, and support system.  The long-term shelters are typically constructed of cardboard covered with blue tarps. The police occasionally tear down the camps and drive out or arrest the homeless, who return as soon as they can. While squatting is illegal in Japan, homelessness is seen as an endemic problem in Tokyo and other cities, and the presence of squatters is accepted as an inevitability.

Cultural facilities, monuments, and attractions

File:Tokyo National Museum, Honkan 2010.jpg|Tokyo National Museum
File:National museum of western art05s3200.jpg|National Museum of Western Art
File:NMNC01s3200.jpg|National Museum of Nature and Science
File:Shitamachi Museum.JPG|Shitamachi Museum
File:Tokyo metropolitan art museum01 1920.jpg|Tokyo Metropolitan Art Museum
File:Tokyo bunka kaikan02 2048.jpg|Tokyo Bunka Kaikan
File:The oldest Tokyo National University of Fine Arts and Music Concert Hall.jpg|Sōgakudō Concert Hall
File:International Library of Children's Literature.jpg|International Library of Children's Literature
File:Tokyo University of the Arts3.JPG|The University Art Museum, Tokyo University of the Arts
File:Ueno Royal Museum.JPG|Ueno Royal Museum
File:KaneijiPagoda1270.jpg|Pagoda of Kan'ei-ji
File:Kaneiji Main Temple.JPG|Kan'ei-ji Hondō
File:KiyomizuKannondo 04.JPG|Kiyomizu Kannondō
File:UenoToshogu1285.jpg|Ueno Tōshō-gū
File:Kaneiji Genyuin Mausoleum Gate.JPG|Tokugawa mausoleum
File:Ueno park bentendo lute.jpg|Bentendō
File:Hanazono-Inari-jinja (Ueno).jpg|Gojōten Jinja (Hanazono Inari Jinja)
File:SaigoTakamori1332.jpg|Statue of Saigō Takamori walking his dog
File:Komatsumiya akihito1024.jpg|Equestrian statue of Prince Komatsu Akihito
File:Statue of hideyo noguchi in ueno.jpg|Statue of Hideyo Noguchi
FIle:Ueno Daibutsu.JPG|Remains of the Ueno Daibutsu
File:Ueno Shogitai tomb.jpg|Monument to the Shōgitai
File:GeneralGrant20111121.jpg|Monument to Ulysses Grant
File:Dr A.F. Bauduin.jpg|Statue of Bauduin
File:Ueno park 2011.JPG|Shinobazu Pond
File:Osaru-densha.JPG|Ueno Zoo
File:Nishi Amane poststamp.jpg|Japan Academy
File:The japan art academy01 1024.jpg|Japan Art Academy
File:Kuroda memorial hall01s3200.jpg|Kuroda Memorial Hall, National Research Institute for Cultural Properties, Tokyo
File:UenoParkHanami.jpg|Hanami








