[[Tregaron]]

CATEGORIES: Tregaron

Tregaron is a market town in the county of Ceredigion, Wales, lying on the River Brenig (also Brennig), a tributary of the River Teifi. The town is twinned with Plouvien, in Finistere, France.8% spoke Welsh fluently.

History

Tregaron received its royal charter as a town in 1292. ISBN 1-84306-197-X
In the middle of the 18th century, Matthew Evans kept an inn in the town. He had two sons and a daughter who were celebrated robbers and collectively known as Plant Mat ( Matthew's children in English). They lived for several years in a cave near Devils Bridge which still bears their name. They terrorized the district and would give to their friends a glove to act as a passport and identify them to their brethren. It was difficult to apprehend the trio because of the narrowness of the entrance to the cave which made it impossible to storm. After several years of success, they committed a murder and, eventually being taken, were sentenced to death and executed. The History of Cardiganshire. S. A. Collard (1907]
Tregaron was a main gathering place for the drovers who, before the advent of rail transport, herded large numbers of cattle, sheep and even geese hundreds of miles to the markets of south-east England. Many Tregaron men were drovers and accumulated considerable wealth in the process. They acted as news carriers and unofficial postmen and some were adept at avoiding tollgates.
The Tregaron area had a number of water-driven woollen mills and was a centre for the manufacture of hosiery. Woollen socks were knitted at home by men, women and children and sold at the market, often to dealers who resold them in the industrial valleys of South Wales.

Culture and community

The church is dedicated to St Caron. He was a man of lowly origins but "his courage and generous deportment obtained him the sovereignty in Wales: he made war against the Romans, reigned seven years and was buried in Tregarron". The church has a tower and stands on a rocky eminence. It consists of a simple nave and chancel.
Other notable buildings in the town include the 13th-century Talbot Hotel, which supposedly has an elephant buried in its grounds.Operation Julie: How an LSD raid began the war on drugs BBC Magazine 12 July 2011)
Nearby Cors Caron (Tregaron Bog), is known for its adders, buzzards and red kites. The River Brenig is noted for its brown trout and eels. The river has been the subject of dredging and flood-protection works to provide 1-in-100-year flood protection to the town and improve the environment for wildlife along a stretch of river. Best Practice Awards 2010 at British Precast website
During the Second World War, the War Office used a site near Tregaron for training exercises. Continuation of such use after the war was the subject of protest by Plaid Cymru.

Music and the arts

An annual eisteddfod is held in the town each September, drawing performers from all parts of Wales and beyond. Eisteddfodau have been conducted at Tregaron for a century or more. The Caron Male Voice Choir was formed in 1969 and has performed in Europe and America as well as the UK.Caron Male Voice Choir at BBC Mid Wales

Sports

The town holds an annual festival of harness racing in August, which also attracts racegoers from across the UK. This was started in 1980 by the Tregaron Trotting Club.Tregaron Trotting Club Official site
The Tregaron Rugby Football Club plays in League Six West of the Welsh Rugby Union.SWALEC Leagues at Welsh Rugby Union
A soccer football team, Tregaron Turfs F.C., plays in the 'Cambrian Tyres Aberystwyth and District League 1'. Turfs' UEFA Cup campaign at BBC Mid Wales, 13 May 2008

Public transport

In 1860, government subsidisation was approved for the construction of a railway from Manchester to Milford Haven. At the urging of local people led by David Davies and supported by Joseph Jenkins, capital was subscribed for a station at Tregaron., Aberystwyth 2002) providing a boost to the economy of the town. 
Tregaron's train service was withdrawn and the station closed in 1965 after the line was badly damaged by flooding south of Aberystwyth.  There is an approximately two-hourly bus service to Aberystwyth and Lampeter and a more sporadic service to other neighbouring small towns and villages but, as with many rural areas, there are no buses after approximately 18.00 in the evening and none at all on Sundays and bank holidays.

Education

The Tregaron district has one secondary school, Tregaron Secondary School, and seven primary schools - Tregaron, Lledrod, Bronnant, Llangeitho, Penwuch, Pontrhydfendiagaid and Llanddewi Brefi,

Notable people

Notable people from Tregaron include:
The author Roy Clews , To Dream of Freedom , also lives in the town.

Image gallery

Image:Brenig.jpg|River Brenig at Tregaron
Image:talbot_ext.jpg|The Talbot Hotel
Image:talbot_int.jpg|Talbot Hotel interior
Image:StCaron.jpg|View of St Caron's church
Image:TregMainstreet.jpg|Main street 
Image:TregMemhall.jpg|Memorial Hall
Image:Tregaron_prof.jpg|Commercial/professional centre






