[[Foreign relations of the Czech Republic]]

CATEGORIES: Foreign relations of the Czech Republic, Government of the Czech Republic

Until the Velvet Revolution of 1989, the foreign policy of Czechoslovakia had followed that of the Soviet Union. Since the revolution and the subsequent mutually-agreed peaceful dissolution of Czechoslovakia into the Czech Republic and Slovakia, the Czechs have made integration with Western institutions their chief foreign policy objective. This goal was rapidly met with great success, as the nation joined NATO in 1999 and the European Union in 2004, and held the Presidency of the European Union during the first half of 2009.

Participation in international organizations

The Czech Republic participates in the United Nations (UN); World Trade Organization (WTO); International Monetary Fund (IMF); Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD); International Energy Agency (IEA); North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the International Whaling Commission.
Fundamental to this objective is Czech membership in the European Union. The Czech Republic became a member of the EU in May 2004. This followed signature of the Treaty of Accession with nine other candidate nations in 1993. Although there have been disagreements with established EU member nations over some economic issues, such as agricultural quotas and a recent amendment to the gaming law, relations are good.
The Czech Republic is a member of the United Nations and participates in its specialized agencies. It is a member of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. It maintains diplomatic relations with more than 85 countries, of which 63 have permanent representation in Prague. The Czech Republic became a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation, along with Poland and Hungary, on 12 March 1999. This membership represents a milestone in the country's foreign policy and security orientation.

International disputes

Liechtenstein

Liechtenstein claims restitution for  (which is ten times the size of Liechtenstein) of land in the Czech Republic confiscated from its princely family in 1918 by the then newly established state of Czechoslovakia, the predecessor of the Czech Republic; the Czech Republic insists that the power to claim restitution does not go back before February 1948, when the Communists seized power; Liechtenstein did not diplomatically recognize the Czech Republic until 2009, and the Czech Republic in turn did not diplomatically recognize Liechtenstein.
On 13 July 2009 the Czech Republic and Liechtenstein established diplomatic relations.

Placement of US National Missile Defense base

In February 2007, the US started formal negotiations with Czech Republic and Poland concerning construction of missile shield installations in those countries for a Ground-Based Midcourse Defense System.
The main government supporter Alexandr Vondra, Deputy Prime Minister for European affairs, used to be an ambassador to the USA. More problematic is that between 2004 and 2006 he was an executive director of a lobbying company Dutko Worldwide Prague. Dutko's and its strategic partner AMI Communications (PR company) customers are Boeing, Lockheed Martin, Nortrop Grumman, which are largest contractors for NMD development. AMI Communications also received (without a formal selection procedure) a government contract to persuade Czechs to support US radar base.

Europe

Americas









Diplomatic relations between Czechoslovakia and Mexico were established in 1922. Mexico re-recognised Czech independence in 1993 after its separation with Slovakia. 



U.S. President Woodrow Wilson and the United States played a major role in the establishment of Czechoslovakia on 28 October 1918.



Asia

Rest of world












