[[Future Boy Conan]]

CATEGORIES: 1978 anime television series, 1984 anime films, Adventure anime and manga, Bandai Visual, Drama anime and manga, Nippon Animation, Science fiction anime and manga, Steampunk anime and manga, Steampunk television series, Studio Ghibli

 is a post-apocalyptic science fiction anime series, which premiered across Japan on the NHK network between April 4 and October 31, 1978 on the Tuesday 19:30-20:00 timeslot. The official English title used by Nippon Animation is Conan, The Boy in Future. It is an adaptation of Alexander Key's novel The Incredible Tide.

Production

Spanning a total of 26 episodes, the series was produced by Nippon Animation and featured the directorial debut of Hayao Miyazaki, also contributing to character designs and storyboards. Other future prominent anime creators like Isao Takahata (storyboards, directing) and Yoshiyuki Tomino (storyboards) also worked on the series.

Story

The story begins in July 2008, during a time when humankind is faced with the threat of extinction. A devastating war fought between two major nations with ultra-magnetic weapons far greater than anything seen earlier brings about total chaos and destruction throughout the world, resulting in several earthquakes and tidal waves, the earth thrown off its axis, its crust being rocked by massive movements, and the five continents being torn completely apart and sinking deep below the sea.
An attempt by a group of people to flee to outer space failed, with their spaceships being forced back to earth and vanishing, thus shattering their hopes. But one of the spaceships narrowly escaped destruction and crash landed on a small island which had miraculously survived the devastation. The crew members of the spaceship settled there, as if they were seeds sown on the island.
Amidst these survivors, a boy named Conan is born on October 2010, bringing a new ray of hope to the earth. After several years, during which most of the other survivors had died and the only people left on the island were Conan and his grandfather, he meets a young girl named Lana, and their adventure begins. Between the different islands left in the world: Industria, High Harbor, Remnant, and others, the young group of adventurers travel and conflict rises between good and evil people. Throughout the series a pure love story develops between Conan and Lana.

Characters

Anime

Future Boy Conan first aired across Japan on the NHK TV network between April 4 and October 31, 1978, during the Tuesday, 7:30pm timeslot. It has been regularly broadcast across Japan on the anime satellite television network, Animax, who have also later translated and dubbed the series into English for broadcast across its respective English-language networks in Southeast Asia and South Asia, under the title Conan, The Boy In Future.
The series was also translated into numerous other languages, including Cantonese,  Mandarin,  French, Spanish, Italian, Catalan, Basque, Portuguese, Korean, Turkish, Kurdish and Arabic, being broadcast across Europe, Latin America, the Arab World, and numerous other regions.

Staff

Theme songs

Videogames

A video game version of the series by Telenet Japan was released in 1992 on NEC's PC Engine console. The game was released on the Super CD-Rom format and was only available in Japan. In January 2011, NewGin announced a pachinko game titled 
Another video game adaptation of the series was released for the Playstation 2 home console in August 25, 2005 only in Japan.

Influences and reception

In a 1983 interview, with Yōko Yomizawa, Hayao Miyazaki acknowledged that ratings for the show had not been very good, noting that episode twenty-five had received the highest rating, of 14 percent.
In her 1999 book, Hayao Miyazaki Master of Japanese Animation, Helen McCarthy identifies Conan as a "seminal" work and recognises themes and story elements in this production which Miyazaki would continue to explore throughout his career. McCarthy also notes continuity in the development of characters and their plight throughout Miyazaki's work. She sees Lana and Conan as precedents for his later heroines and characters and mentions, among others, Sheeta's rescue by Pazu, from Miyazaki's 1986 animated feature film Castle in the Sky, as an example.

Popularity in the Arab World

The show was very popular in the Arab World and still is today.  Conan's name was changed to Adnan. Lana's name was changed to Leena so that they could have names similar to Arabic names. A DVD version was released for most of the episodes with the anime dubbed into the Arabic language.






