[[Mary Stuart Masterson]]

CATEGORIES: 1966 births, Actresses from New York City, American child actresses, American film actresses, American film directors, American film producers, American musical theatre actresses, American television actresses, American women film directors, Dalton School alumni, Living people, New York University alumni, People from Manhattan

Mary Stuart Masterson (born June 28, 1966) is an American film, stage and television actor, and director.

Early life

Masterson was born in Manhattan to writer-director Peter Masterson and actress Carlin Glynn. She has two siblings: Peter Masterson Jr., and Alexandra Masterson, who are both involved in the entertainment industry. As a teen, she attended Stagedoor Manor Performing Arts Training Center in upstate New York with actors Robert Downey, Jr. and Jon Cryer. Later, she attended schools in New York, including eight months studying anthropology at New York University.Mary Stuart Masterson – Trailer – Showtimes – Cast – Movies – The New York Times

Early career

Masterson's first film appearance was in The Stepford Wives (1975) at the age of eight, playing a daughter to her real-life father. Rather than continue her career as a child actor, she chose to continue her studies, although she did appear in several productions at the Dalton School. In 1985, she returned to cinema in Heaven Help Us as Danni, a courageous teen running the soda shop of her gravely depressed Dad. She appeared with Sean Penn and Christopher Walken in the film At Close Range (1986) as Brad Jr's girlfriend Terry, a film based on an actual rural Pennsylvania crime family led by Bruce Johnston, Sr. during the 1960s and 1970s. She later starred as the tomboyish drumming Watts in the teenage drama Some Kind of Wonderful (1987). As a result, she is loosely connected with the Brat Pack.Mary Masterson – Yahoo! TV In 1989, she played in Chances Are alongside Cybill Shepherd, Ryan O'Neal and Robert Downey, Jr., and she starred as Lucy Moore, a teenage girl giving up her first baby to a wealthy couple, played by Glenn Close and James Woods in Immediate Family. For her work in that film she received a "Best Supporting Actress" award from the National Board of Review of Motion Pictures.

1990s

Masterson continued acting in both films and television during the 1990s. In 1991, she starred in Fried Green Tomatoes, a film based on the novel Fried Green Tomatoes at the Whistle Stop Cafe. The film was well-received, with film critic Roger Ebert applauding Masterson's work.com :: Reviews The following year she was invited to host Saturday Night Live. In 1993, she played opposite Johnny Depp in Benny & Joon as Joon, his mentally ill love interest. In 1994, she acted in Bad Girls, playing Anita Crown, a former prostitute, who joins with three other former prostitutes (played by Madeleine Stowe, Andie MacDowell and Drew Barrymore) in traveling the Old West. In 1996, Masterson acted alongside Christian Slater in the romantic drama Bed of Roses.

2000s

Although Masterson carried on her work in the film industry, by 2000 she had made a move towards television. In 2001, she produced her own television series, Kate Brasher. The show received mediocre reviews and was canceled by CBS after six episodes. In 2004, Masterson starred in the Emmy and Peabody Award-winning HBO biographical drama Something the Lord Made. In 2004, she began guest starring on Law & Order: Special Victims Unit as Dr. Rebecca Hendrix, a role for which one critic wrote that "Masterson is perhaps best known...."Barry, Mike. "Films Are the Stars," Anton News (July 11, 2008)
Masterson has appeared in Broadway theatre productions, and was nominated for a 2003 Tony Award as "Best Featured Actress in a Musical" in the Maury Yeston musical Nine: The Musical, directed by David Leveaux.L.A. Times
Masterson has narrated several audiobooks, including I See You Everywhere by Julia Glass, Book of the Dead by Patricia Cornwell, and Look Again by Lisa Scottoline.

Directing

By May 1993, Masterson revealed she had written a screenplay for a film tentatively entitled Around the Block, a romantic comedy about a "woman who conquers her fears by becoming a singer"; in a cover story about Benny & Joon
In 2001, she began her directing career with a segment titled "The Other Side" in the television movie On the Edge.
Masterson made her feature film directorial debut in 2007, with The Cake Eaters, which premiered at the Ft. Lauderdale International Film Festival as well as the Ashland Independent Film Festival where it received the 'Audience Award – Dramatic Feature' prize in 2008.ashlandfilm.asp?NavID=624 Of her move to directing, Masterson said in an interview, "When I signed to do this, I wasn't scared but, yes, it was scary. I'm already 40, although we don't want to talk about that. In '92, I wrote my first screenplay, which I then was to direct, but I ended up taking an acting job because it takes forever to get a movie made."Actress Goes In Film Direction – New York Post

Personal life

Masterson has been married three times. In 1990, she married George Carl Francisco; they divorced in 1992. Masterson gave birth to twins in August 2011."Is Sexy Delta Guy Jeremy Davidson Leaving Army Wives?", March 4, 2011, E Online Their fourth child was born in October 2012.

Filmography

Film

Television

Awards and nominations

Ashland Independent Film Festival
DVD Exclusive Awards
Ft. Lauderdale International Film Festival
Lone Star Film & Television Awards
MTV Movie Awards
National Board of Review of Motion Pictures
Satellite Awards






