[[Ainsi soit je...]]

CATEGORIES: 1988 albums, Mylène Farmer albums, Polydor Records albums, Albums certified diamond by the Syndicat National de l'Édition Phonographique

Ainsi Soit Je... (a play on ainsi soit-il, which can mean either "so be it" or "amen") is the second album by Mylène Farmer, released in April 1988. It contains the hit singles "Sans contrefaçon", "Pourvu qu'elles soient douces" and "Sans logique". Generally well received by critics, it was very successful and remains to date the second best-selling album of the singer.

Background

After the success of the album Cendres de Lune and the hits "Sans contrefaçon" and "Ainsi soit je...", Farmer had no problem releasing a second album that would be well received by the public, enabling her to consolidate her growing popularity, thus preventing her from slipping back into anonymity. The album took from five to six months to be finished. It was recorded at studio Mega, Avenue Maréchal-Maunoury, in Paris (XVIe arrondissement) under the leadership of Thierry Rogen, a renowned sound engineer who had already worked in particular with Michel Sardou. 93.
The cover of the album shows Farmer turned sideways, accompanied by the puppet used in the music video for "Sans contrefaçon". The photographs of the booklet were made by Elsa Trillat.
The album was released in April 1988 and met great success, both critically and commercially.

Lyrics and music

The texts, which contain many literary references to famous authors (such as Baudelaire, Poe, etc.), were written by Mylène Farmer, except "L'Horloge" (a poem by Charles Baudelaire), "Déshabillez-moi" (originally sung in 1966 by Juliette Gréco) and "The Farmer's Conclusion" (which is an instrumental song). The album has a melancholy and sad tone, and deals with death, suicide, madness with gloomy and desperate texts. Sexual ambiguity, sodomy and provocation are also tackled. 26. 28-29.

Critical reception

The album was generally well received in the media and remains sometimes considered as "one of the most successful",Bee, 2006, p. 362. even the singer's "best album". When the album was released, the press said: "Mylène shows an imagination and a new maturity in these charming libertine poems and her synthetic hits containing literary references" (20 Ans). The journalist Caroline Bee said this album is "an ambiguous, bright, romantic and beautifully produced gem".
Some criticisms were also made against Ainsi soit je... For example, according to L'Humanité, this album uses an "old-fashioned stylistic mannerism to reinvent poetry" (L'Humanité).

Chart performances

In France, the album debuted at number 8 on April 1988, but it dropped to number 26 five months later. However, thanks to the successful single "Pourvu qu'elles soient douces"  (number-one hit on December 1988), the album reached number one for two weeks on December 1988. The album managed to stay for eleven months in the top ten and about one year on the chart.
The album was also released in Germany, where it reached number 47.
On March 20, 2005, the album, then reissued in a digipack version, entered the French Top Mid' Price for four weeks, peaking at number 2.

Singles

Release history

Formats

1 Contains the CD maxi for "Sans contrefaçon", the CD single for "Ainsi soit je...", the biography of Farmer translated into the language of the country, a documentary on video cassette and a lighter.

Track listing

Personnel

Charts, certifications and sales



Notes




