[[Julius Lothar Meyer]]

CATEGORIES: 1830 births, 1895 deaths, People from Varel, German chemists, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology faculty, University of Tübingen faculty, Corresponding Members of the St Petersburg Academy of Sciences, University of Würzburg alumni, People from Oldenburg (state), Eberswalde Forestry Academy faculty

Julius Lothar von Meyer (August 19, 1830 – April 11, 1895) was a German chemist. He was contemporary and competitor of Dimitri Mendeleev to draw up the first periodic table of chemical elements. About five years apart, both Mendeleev and Meyer worked with Robert Bunsen.

Career

Julius Lothar von Meyer was born in Varel during the time when it used belong to the Duchy of Oldenburg, which is now part of Germany. He is the son of Friedrich August Meyer, a physician, and Anna Biermann. After attending to Altes Gymnasium Oldenburg AGO high school he went to study medicine at the Zürich University in 1851. Then, two years later, he studied at the University of Würzburg. This is where he had Rudolf Virchow as his teacher in Pathology. The influence of C. F. W. Ludwig, under who he studied at Zürich, decided he should devote his attention to physiological chemistry. Therefore, after his graduation (1854), he went to Heidelberg, where R. Bunsen held the chair of chemistry. There he was influenced by G. R. Kirchhoff's mathematical teaching that he took up the study of mathematical physics at Königsberg under F. E. Neumann. In 1859, he became privat-docent in physics and chemistry at Breslau.  In the preceding year, he had graduated as Ph.D. with a thesis on the action of carbon monoxide on the blood.
Meyer's contributions also included the concept that the carbon atoms in benzene were arranged in a ring, although he did not propose the alternation of single and double bonds that later became included in the structure by August Kekulé.
During the Franco-German campaign, the Polytechnic was used as a hospital, and he took an active part in the care of the wounded. In 1876, Meyer became the first Professor of Chemistry at the University of Tübingen, where he served until his death.

Periodic table

Meyer is best known for the share he had in the periodic classification of the elements. He noted, as did J. A. R. Newlands in England, that if each one is arranged in the order of their atomic weights they fall into groups in that similar chemical and physical properties are repeated at periodic intervals; and in particular he showed that if the atomic weights are plotted as ordinates and the atomic volumes as abscissae, the curve obtained presents a series of maxima and minima, the most electro-positive elements appearing at the peaks of the curve in the order of their atomic weights.
His book on Die modernen Theorien der Chemie, that was first published in Breslau in 1862 (The Internet Database of Periodic Tables. Hemogenesis web book) and 1864, has an early version of the periodic table containing 28 elements classified into six families by their valence — the first time that elements had been grouped and ordered according to their valence. Work on organizing the elements by atomic weight had hitherto been stymied by inaccurate measurements of the atomic weights.
Julius Lothar Meyer was the first to build the periodic table of elements. Each obtained evidence of the priority of a German doctor, a chemist and physicist  Julius Lothar von Meyer in the development of the Periodic Table. He has published articles on his classification table of the elements in a horizontal form (1862, 1864) and vertical form (1870), where the series of periods are properly ended by an element of the earth metal group (Makeyev A.K. Julius Lothar Meyer was first to build the periodic table of elements. // Eropean applied sciences, April, 2013, 4 (2) - pp. 49–61).
Mendeleev published his periodic table of all known elements (and predicted several new elements to complete the table, plus some corrected atomic weights) in 1869.  Working completely independently, a few months later, Meyer published a revised and expanded version of his 1864 table, virtually identical to that published by Mendeleev (Meyer had been sent a copy of Mendeleev's table earlier, Mendeleev sent it to all well known chemists of those times) and a paper showing graphically the periodicity of the elements as a function of atomic weight. As well as other chemists, Meyer was doubtful about Mendeleev's periodic law, and he criticized Mendeleev for 'changing existing elements' atomic weights, only regarding possibility of periodical law in its structure',  but Mendeleev's work provided significant support, particularly when the new elements were found as predicted and remeasured atomic weights accorded with those predicted.
In 1882, Meyer received from the Royal Society, at the same time as Mendeleev, the Davy Medal in recognition of his work on the Periodic Law.

Meyer table with a horizontal display of periods in 1864

Meyer table with vertical display of periods in 1870



Notes






