[[Meycauayan]]

CATEGORIES: Cities in Bulacan, Populated places established in 1578, 1578 establishments in the Philippines, Cities in Luzon

The City of Meycauayan is a third class, highly urban city in the province of Bulacan, Philippines. The city is located about , representing 1.17% of the total land area of the province of Bulacan. According to the 2010 census, it has a population of 199,154 inhabitants.
Meycauayan City is known for its jewelry and tanning industry. It is also home to several industrial parks, mostly located at Barangays Iba, Camalig and Pantoc.

Geography

Meycauayan City is generally surrounded with plain land and gentle rolling hills. Comfortably above sea level, this terrain is an interweaving of greenery and concrete road network. The slope of the land dips towards a west to north westerly direction. River, natural lake and drainage waterways envelope and criss-cross the area.
Meycauayan a province of its name in its antiquity, Is  found between 120° 58' 20" and the 127° 30' longitude, with a latitude of 14° 41' up to the 15°, the majority of the land, can be seen some mountains especially to the south east extension which do not exceed to same eleven leagues to the east or west and some six to the north and south. It is bordered to the east by the province of Nueva Ecija, and the district of Morong; to the South by Manila and her bay;  to the West by Manila bay and the province of Pampanga, and to the North by the Province of Pampanga.R.P. Felix de Huerta, Estado de la Provincia de San Gregorio Magno. Imprenta de N. Sanchez, Binondo Manila 1865 p 70.  Today it is bordered by  the town of Marilao to the north, Valenzuela City to the south, Northern part of Caloocan City to the east, and the town of Obando to the west.

Barangays

Meycauayan City is administratively subdivided into 26 urban barangays.

History

The name "Meycauayan" is derived from the Tagalog phrase "may kawayan" ("a place full of bamboo"). The foundation of this town is dated 1578 to 1579, in which epoch they stretched out to the apostolic work of Fray Juan de Plasencia and Fray Diego de Oropesa. 71  Both part of the 1st Franciscan mission that arrived the Philippines on the first day of July, 1577.Fr. Jesus Galindo OFM, Commemorative book, "400 years (1578-1978) Franciscans in the Philippines, , (San Miguel Manila. 1979) P. 13  Meycauayan was formerly the head of the province, and was situated like ½ league more to the east over a small hill.  The Church under the patronage of N.S. P. San Francisco de Asis, was at first made of bamboo and nipa, which was ruined by the typhoon in 1588. 72 A request was made to rebuilt the church, and on November 16, 1588,  Dr. Santiago de Vera, made justified by such request, instantly dispatch Secretary Gaspar de Azebo to Christoval de Asquera, Mayor of the Province of Meycauayan. Fr. Juan Francisco de S. Antonio, Chronicas de la Apostolica Provincia de S. Gregorio, Papa. El Magno…. Sampaloc, Extra-muros de la Ciudad de Manila , 1741 P. 317  By the order of St. Pedro Bautista, it was transferred to  a place called Lagolo, by R. P. Fr. Antonio de Nombela, Minister of the town.
As an early Spanish town  Meycauayan was  also known as Mecabayan. 84  In 1591 its status was Encomienda. H. Clark company, 1909, p. 569  "La encomienda de Mecabayan", which belongs to the minor son of La Rea (Captain Martin de la Rea), has about seven hundred tributes, or two thousand eight hundred persons. It has one Franciscan convent. It is in the jurisdiction of Bulacan. Impr. de la viuda de M. Minuesa de los Rios, 1898 P. 51  In the "Relación de las encomiendas existentes en Filipinas el 31 de mayo de 1591,Archivo Ibero-Americano, Franciscans, 1983 Franciscan-founded encomiendas include:  Dilao, Zapa y Pandaca, Mecabayan, Taitay, Pila, Mahaihai, Lumban, Panquil, Millarrit, Minalaua, Ynguinan, Linaguan, Nabua. ...  In a report of Philippine encomiendas on June 20, 1591, Meycauayan was included in the encomiendas of the province of Pampanga. H. Clark company, 1909, p. 101-104
"Spanish Governor Gomez Perez Dasmarinas reported to the King of Spain that La Pampanga's encomiendas were Bataan, Betis y Lubao, Macabebe, Candava, Apalit, Calumpit, Malolos, Binto, Guiguinto, Caluya (Balagtas), Bulacan and Mecabayan (Meycauayan). The encomiendas of La Pampanga at that time had eighteen thousand six hundred and eighty whole tributes."
Lagolo proved inhospitable at the time, so the town center again transferred to what is now known as Barangay Poblacion, where the Parish Church of St. Francis of Assisi still stands. P. Nicolas Santiago to the place it now occupied. It is made of simple material but strong, With 60 yard long and 12 ½ wide.
Meycauayan was then one of the largest municipalities in Bulacan. The towns of San Jose del Monte, Bocaue, Marilao, Valenzuela, Obando, Santa Maria, Balagtas and Pandi were once part of the political jurisdiction of the town. During the Spanish colonization in the Philippines, the Spanish authorities tapped Meycauayan's adobe (volcanic tuff rocks) reserves which were used for building stone houses and fortifications in and out of town. Majority of the adobe rocks that were used in building the walls of Intramuros, Manila's "old walled city", were imported from Meycauayan.

20th and 21st century

On April 4, 1949, a large fire razed the town, destroying its market center and its centuries-old church. It took years to recover from the destruction, aided by the provincial and national governments as well as by the contributions of its own citizens.
On March 5, 2001, the municipality was declared as a component city by virtue of Republic Act 9021, but its conversion was rejected by the voting people of Meycauayan in a plebiscite.
In 2005, the newly erected City Hall was moved from Barangay Poblacion to a newer structure in Barangay Camalig. The former municipal town hall now houses the Mariano Quinto Alarilla Polytechnic College.
On December 10, 2006, by virtue of Republic Act 9356, voters in Meycauayan ratified the conversion of Meycauayan into a component city of Bulacan through another plebiscite. 
It became the province's third city, joining San Jose del Monte and Malolos.

Demographics

Economy

Meycauayan City is very famous for its jewelry and leather industries. For years, Meycauayan has been the hub of jewelry production in the Philippines and in Asia. It is famous for its very affordable jewelries.
Meycauayan also prides itself on its leather goods. Shoes, bags and every kind of leather product has been traditionally manufactured here. A number of leather tanneries still operate in Meycauayan, which over the years have converted the city into a hub for leather goods.
Meycauayan City is the economic, industrial, commercial, financial and educational centre of southern Bulacan.

Industrial compounds and parks

Meycauayan is also home to many industrial parks and compounds.

Commercial complex

Issues and controversy

Mayoralty dispute (1995-2008)

The succession of the city's administration was put into question by a series of legal cases between two former mayors.gov. Comelec and Alarilla, G.R. No. 180164, June 17, 2008 Florentino Blanco, town mayor from 1987 to 1992, ran in 1995 but was disqualified by the Supreme Court for vote buying on July 21, 1997. Blanco was replaced by Vice Mayor Eduardo Nolasco in an acting capacity, serving out the remainder of his term.
Blanco ran again in 1998 but lost to Eduardo Alarilla; Blanco attempted to file an election protest against Alarilla but the COMELEC dismissed the case. He attempted to run again in 2004 but later withdrew his candidacy. In 2007, he ran once more but lost to Eduardo Alarilla's wife, Joan Alarilla (Mr. Alarilla has then reached the 3-term limit imposed by law). The former mayor Alarilla then attempted to disqualify Blanco; the COMELEC ruled in favor of Alarilla, but the Supreme Court reversed this decision, stating that Blanco is still eligible to run for public office.

Heirs of Anacleto Nieto vs. Meycauayan, Bulacan

On December 13, 2007, the Supreme Court of the Philippines ordered Meycauayan, Bulacan to surrender peaceful possession to the Heirs of Anacleto Nieto, and vacate the 3,882 square meters lot, at Poblacion, Meycauayan, TCT No. T-24.055 (M) which it used and even constructed an extension of the public market therein. Meycauayan was also ordered to pay the reasonable value of the property and P 1,716,000.00 as reasonable compensation for the use of the property from 1966 until the filing of the complaint on December 28, 1994.gov. NIETO vs. MUNICIPALITY OF MEYCAUAYAN, BULACAN, 3rd Div., G.R. No. 150654

Meycauayan, part of the World's "Dirty 30" polluted cities in 2007

In 2007, The City of Meycauayan and the town of Marilao in Bulacan province share a slot in the list of the world's 30 most polluted places in the developing world drawn up by a private New York-based institute. In its report, "The World's Worst Polluted Places" for 2007, the Blacksmith Institute said: "Industrial waste is haphazardly dumped into the Meycauayan, Marilao and Obando River system, a source of drinking and agricultural water supplies for the 250,000 people living in and around"Inquirer. Meycauayan also shares border with Caloocan City.

Feasts

Education

Meycauayan City has its own division of schools since January 2013. The City Schools Division of Meycauayan has 2 districts, Meycauayan West District and Meycauayan East District.
Public Schools
Private Schools

Images

File:Meycollegejf.mcgraduates.net/
File:Francisjf. Francis of Assisi and the patio
File:Municmeycjf.JPG|2005 Meycauayan City Hall (Camalig)
File:Old Municipal Hall of Meycauayan, Bulacan.
File:Rivermeycjf-cr.JPG|The Meycauayan River






