[[The Great Caruso]]

CATEGORIES: 1951 films, 1950s classical albums, American films, English-language films, Films directed by Richard Thorpe, Films shot in Technicolor, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer films, Musical films based on actual events, Films about classical music and musicians, Films about opera, American biographical films, Films that won the Best Sound Mixing Academy Award, Biographical films about musicians

The Great Caruso is a 1951 biographical film made by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and starring Mario Lanza in the title role. It was directed by Richard Thorpe and produced by Joe Pasternak with Jesse L. Lasky as associate producer from a screenplay by Sonya Levien and William Ludwig. The original music was by Johnny Green and the cinematography by Joseph Ruttenberg. Costume design was by Helen Rose and Gile Steele.
The film is a highly fictionalized biography of the life of tenor Enrico Caruso.

Cast

Mario Lanza stars in the title role as Caruso and Ann Blyth stars as his wife Dorothy; the cast also includes Richard Hageman, Carl Benton Reid, Eduard Franz, Ludwig Donath and Nestor Paiva. It features a large number of Metropolitan Opera stars, notably sopranos Dorothy Kirsten, Teresa Celli, Lucine Amara, Marina Koshetz and Jarmila Novotná, mezzo-soprano Blanche Thebom, baritone Giuseppe Valdengo and bass Nicola Moscona. A couple of the duets Lanza sang for the film's soundtrack were recorded with soprano Elaine Malbin. 

Factual discrepancies

The film, while following the basic facts of Caruso's life, is largely fictional. The Caruso family successfully sued MGM for damages because of this. Here are a few of the factual discrepancies:

Reception

Box Office

The Great Caruso was a massive commercial success. According to MGM records it made $4,309,000 in the US and Canada and $4,960,000 elsewhere, resulting in a profit of $3,977,000. It was the studio's biggest success of the year and the most popular movie at the British box office in 1951.

Critics

Newsweek wrote that, "Lanza brings to the role not only a fine, natural and remarkably powerful voice, but a physique and personal mannerisms reminiscent of the immortal Caruso."
Nearly 40 years after its release, Caruso's son, Enrico Jr. reminisced that, "Vocally and musically The Great Caruso ..."

Awards

The film was nominated for three Academy Awards; at the 24th Academy Awards ceremony,  Douglas Shearer and the MGM Studio Sound Department won for Best Sound.
The film was also Oscar-nominated for its costume design and its score.

Soundtrack

A tie-in record album, also called The Great Caruso was issued by RCA Victor on the 45, 78 RPM and LP formats. It featured several popular opera arias sung by Lanza and was the first operatic LP to sell over one million copies. It remained continuously available after its original 1951 release and was reissued by RCA Victor on compact disc in 1989.



Specific references:
General references:




