[[Mark Vaile]]

CATEGORIES: 1956 births, Living people, Australian monarchists, People from Sydney, National Party of Australia politicians, Deputy Prime Ministers of Australia, Members of the Cabinet of Australia, Members of the Australian House of Representatives for Lyne, Members of the Australian House of Representatives, Recipients of the Centenary Medal, Officers of the Order of Australia, Australian Roman Catholics

Mark Anthony James Vaile  (born 18 April 1956) is a former Deputy Prime Minister of Australia and former leader of the National Party of Australia. Vaile is currently a non-executive director of a number of public listed corporations.

Early life

Vaile was born in Sydney and worked as a farm machinery retailer and stock and station and real estate agent before entering politics. He was a member of the Greater Taree City Council 1985–93, including three years as Deputy Mayor.

Parliamentary career

Vaile was a member of the Australian House of Representatives between March 1993 and July 2008, representing the Division of Lyne, New South Wales.   He was Assistant National Party Whip 1994–96 and National Party Whip 1996–97.  In 1997 he was appointed Minister for Transport and Regional Development, and in 1998 he became Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry. In July 1999, following the resignation of Tim Fischer and the election of John Anderson as National Party leader, he was elected the party's Deputy Leader and became Minister for Trade.  When John Anderson resigned in 2005, Vaile was elected Leader unopposed.  On 6 July 2005 he was sworn in as Deputy Prime Minister.
As Trade Minister, Vaile was involved in the negotiation of the U.S.-Australia Free Trade Agreement, which was opposed by some traditional National Party constituencies such as the sugar industry.  
There was much controversy over the intellectual property chapter of the U.S.-Australia Free Trade Agreement. The chapter contains elements modelled on the Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act 1998 (US) and the Digital Millennium Copyright Act 1998 (US) In December 2003, Trade Minister Mark Vaile pledged to defend the copyright term in Australia: "It is a very important issue, particularly in terms of cost to libraries, educational institutions and the like here in Australia." Two months later, Australia agreed to a copyright term extension, as part of the deal with the United States. There was also much criticism of the adoption of a US-style technological protection measures - particularly as the High Court of Australia was considering the matter of Stevens v Sony. There was also controversy over the evergreening of pharmaceutical drug patents and access to essential medicines under the U.S.-Australia Free Trade Agreement.
During 2005 he also conducted negotiations for the proposed Australia-China Free Trade Agreement.  In late 2005 he had an operation to remove a malignant melanoma from his back.
Since Vaile took on the leadership of the Nationals in 2005, there were increasing suggestions for Vaile to take on a domestic portfolio as the trade portfolio requires frequent overseas travel. Throughout 2006, Vaile's position in the trade portfolio came under increasing scrutiny due to his handling of the AWB kickbacks scandal and Australia's worsening trade performance. He also faced the difficult task of placating his back bench, with Queensland Senator Barnaby Joyce having crossed the floor on more than one occasion. On 24 September 2006 he switched portfolios with deputy Nationals leader Warren Truss and became Minister for Transport and Regional Services. His new position had a greater focus on regional Australia, the Nationals party's main constituency. 
Following the coalition's defeat at the 2007 federal election, Vaile resigned his position as Nationals leader and moved to the backbench.

Post-parliament career

In September 2008, Vaile was appointed to the board of Virgin Australia Holdings (

Honours

On 1 January 2001, he was awarded the Centenary Medal for "service as Minister for Trade".

Personal

A Roman Catholic, Vaile is married with three children. He lives on a , New South Wales.






