[[Potassium cyanide]]

CATEGORIES: Cyanides, Photographic chemicals, Potassium compounds

Potassium cyanide is a compound with the formula KCN. This colorless crystalline salt, similar in appearance to sugar, is highly soluble in water. Most KCN is used in gold mining, organic synthesis, and electroplating. Smaller applications include jewelry for chemical gilding and buffing. 
KCN is highly toxic. The moist solid emits small amounts of hydrogen cyanide due to hydrolysis, which tastes like bitter almonds

Production

Modern Production

KCN is produced by treating hydrogen cyanide with a 50% aqueous solution of potassium hydroxide, followed by evaporation
of the solution in a vacuum:Pradyot Patnaik. Handbook of Inorganic Chemicals. McGraw-Hill, 2002, ISBN 0-07-049439-8
or by treating formamide with potassium hydroxide:
Approximately 50,000 tons of potassium cyanide are produced yearly.

Historical Production

Prior to 1900AD, before the invention of the Castner process, potassium cyanide was the most important source of alkali metal cyanides. In this historical process potassium cyanide was produced by decomposing potassium ferrocyanide:
K4Fe(CN)6 → 4 KCN + FeC2 + N2

Structure

In aqueous solution, KCN is dissociated into hydrated potassium (K+) ions and cyanide (CN−) ions. The common form of solid KCN, stable at ambient pressure and temperature, has the same cubic crystal structure as sodium chloride, with each potassium ion surrounded by six cyanide ions, and vice versa.  Despite the cyanide ions being diatomic, and thus less symmetric than chloride, they rotate so rapidly that their time averaged shape is spherical.  At low temperature and high pressure this free rotation is hindered, resulting in a less symmetric crystal structure with the cyanide ions arranged in sheets. 
Crystallography Open Database,  Structure of KCN.

Applications

KCN and its close relative sodium cyanide (NaCN) are widely used in organic synthesis for the preparation of nitriles and carboxylic acids, particularly in the von Richter reaction. It also finds use for the synthesis of hydantoins, which can be useful synthetic intermediates, when reacted with a carbonyl compound such as an aldehyde or ketone in the presence of ammonium carbonate.

Potassium gold cyanide

In gold mining, KCN forms the water-soluble salt potassium gold cyanide (or gold potassium cyanide) and potassium hydroxide from gold metal in the presence of oxygen (usually from the surrounding air) and water:
A similar process uses sodium cyanide (NaCN, a close relative of potassium cyanide) to produce sodium gold cyanide (NaAu(CN2)).
Very few other methods exist for this extraction process.

Toxicity

KCN can be detoxified most efficiently with hydrogen peroxide or with a solution of sodium hypochlorite. Such solutions should be kept basic whenever possible so as to eliminate the possibility of generation of hydrogen cyanide:
Cyanide is a potent inhibitor of cellular respiration, acting on mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase and hence blocking oxidative phosphorylation. This prevents the body from oxidizing food to produce useful energy. Lactic acidosis then occurs as a consequence of anaerobic metabolism. Initially, acute cyanide poisoning causes a red or ruddy complexion in the victim because the tissues are not able to use the oxygen in the blood. The effects of potassium and sodium cyanide are identical. The person loses consciousness, and death eventually follows over a period of time. During this period, convulsions may occur. Death occurs not by cardiac arrest, but by hypoxia of neural tissue.
The lethal dose for potassium cyanide is 200–300 mg. Criminal Poisoning - Investigational Guide for Law Enforcement, Toxicologists, Forensic Scientists, and Attorneys (2nd edition). pg 119  The toxicity of potassium cyanide when ingested depends on the acidity of the stomach, because it must react with an acid to become hydrogen cyanide, the deadly form of cyanide. Grigori Rasputin may have survived a potassium cyanide poisoning because his stomach acidity was unusually low. The Elements of Murder: A History of Poison. pg 73
A number of prominent persons were killed or committed suicide using potassium cyanide, including members of the Young Bosnia and members of the Nazi Party, such as Hermann Göring and Heinrich Himmler, World War II era British agents (using purpose-made suicide pills), computer scientist Alan Turing, and various religious cult suicides such as by the Peoples Temple and Heaven's Gate. Danish writer Gustav Wied and members of the LTTE involved in the assassination of Indian prime minister Rajiv Gandhi also committed suicide using potassium cyanide.
It is used by professional entomologists as a killing agent in collecting jars, as insects succumb within seconds to the HCN fumes it emits, thereby minimizing damage to even highly fragile specimens.






