[[John Williams (Tennessee)]]

CATEGORIES: United States Senators from Tennessee, People from Knoxville, Tennessee, People of the Creek War, United States Army officers, Ambassadors of the United States to Guatemala, 1778 births, 1837 deaths, Tennessee Democratic-Republicans, Democratic-Republican Party United States Senators, American people of Huguenot descent, 19th-century American diplomats

John Williams (January 29, 1778 – August 10, 1837) was an American lawyer, soldier, and statesman, operating primarily out of Knoxville, Tennessee, in the first part of the 19th century.  He represented Tennessee in the United States Senate from 1815 to 1823, when he lost reelection to Andrew Jackson.
Williams later distanced himself from Jackson, and aligned himself with John Quincy Adams and Henry Clay.  Adams appointed him chargé d'affaires to the Central American Federation in 1825.

Early life

Williams was born in what is now Forsyth County, North Carolina (then part of Surry County), the third of twelve children of Joseph and Rebekah Lanier Williams.  Two of Williams' brothers, Lewis Williams and Robert Williams, served as U.S. congressmen in the 19th century.  His other brother, Thomas Lanier Williams, was a prominent Tennessee judge.  Williams was also the cousin of Congressman Marmaduke Williams.  Retrieved: September 13, 2011.
Williams studied law in Salisbury, North Carolina, in the late 1790s, and served as a captain in the 6th U.S. Infantry, from 1799 to 1800.  Shortly afterward, he relocated to Knoxville, Tennessee, where he was admitted to the bar in 1803.  Around 1805, he married Melinda White, daughter of Knoxville's founder, James White.
In 1807, Williams was appointed Tennessee's attorney general, and served in this capacity until the following year.  In 1811, he led a mass meeting of Knox County citizens that condemned Archibald Roane for resigning from the state legislature to run for circuit court judge.

Military activities (1812–1815)

In late 1812, at the outbreak of the War of 1812, Williams raised a small company of some 200 to 250 volunteers, primarily from Tennessee and Georgia, with the intention of invading Florida and attacking the Seminole tribe.
In June 1813, Williams was commissioned in the U.S. Army as a colonel, and ordered to recruit and organize the 39th U.S. Infantry for the purpose of engaging the hostile Red Stick Creeks.
On March 27, Jackson attacked the Red Stick camp on the Tallapoosa River, initiating the Battle of Horseshoe Bend.  At the height of this battle, Williams and the 39th, which comprised Jackson's main line, charged and captured the log barricade with which the Creeks had fortified the riverbend, forcing the Creeks to flee.  In his report on the battle, Jackson commended the actions of Williams and several other officers of the 39th.  Soldiers who fought under Williams at this battle included future Arkansas senator Thomas Hart Benton and future Tennessee and Texas governor, Sam Houston.
Following the Battle of Horseshoe Bend, Williams went to Washington, D.C., to raise money for the 39th, and gradually acquired a sizable cache of weapons.

United States Senate

In 1815, Williams was chosen to fill the Senate seat left vacant by the resignation of Jesse Wharton (who had been appointed to the seat a few months earlier following the resignation of George W. Campbell).  In 1817, Williams was reelected to a full six-year term.  Williams voted in favor of the Second Bank of the United States in 1816,
In 1819, following Jackson's invasion of Florida (then part of Spain), another dispute erupted between Williams and Jackson.  Jackson accused Williams of spreading a rumor that Jackson had launched the invasion to protect personal land investments in the Pensacola area, and argued that Williams was assailing his character in private conversations in Washington.
In 1823, Williams made it clear that he was going to support William H. Crawford (another enemy of Jackson) for the presidency, leading Jackson's allies in Tennessee to seek Williams' removal from the Senate.

Later life

After losing his U.S. Senate seat, Williams ran for Knox County's state senate seat in 1825, but lost to James Anderson by a vote of 982 to 931.
In 1827, Williams again ran for Knox County's state senate seat.  In spite of staunch opposition from Jackson's allies (including Williams' brother-in-law, Hugh Lawson White, who referred to Williams as a "mean politician who can get no man to lye upon him"),  He retired from the state senate in 1829.
Williams spent his later years practicing law and advocating railroad construction.  He rejected several invitations to run for Congress, stating he had no desire to go to Washington and serve at the "bow of the emperor," in reference to then-President Jackson.  Williams died on August 10, 1837, and was interred in the First Presbyterian Church Cemetery in Knoxville.

Family and legacy

In 1816, Williams made plans to develop a subdivision, "Williamsburg," on what was then the outskirts of Knoxville (now part of the Downtown area).  This subdivision was bounded by what is now Henley Street (which at the time was the city's western boundary), Main Street, the riverfront, and Second Creek. Heiskell, Andrew Jackson and Early Tennessee History (Nashville: Ambrose Printing Company, 1918), pp. 62, 355–368.  The area is now occupied by Maplehurst Park and the Church Street Methodist Church.
In 1826, while Williams was in Guatemala, his wife oversaw the construction of a new family home in East Knoxville, now known as the Colonel John Williams House.  The house is still standing, and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
Williams' son, Joseph Lanier Williams, served three terms in the U.S. House of Representatives (1837 to 1843). and the great-great-grandfather of noted playwright, Tennessee Williams."Ask Doc Knox," A Rare Antebellum Manse on Riverside Drive, Metro Pulse, April 12, 2010.  Retrieved: September 12, 2011.




