[[Keely Smith]]

CATEGORIES: 1932 births, American female pop singers, American people of Irish descent, Native American singers, American female jazz singers, Dot Records artists, Frank Sinatra, Grammy Award-winning artists, Living people, Musicians from Virginia, People from Norfolk, Virginia, Musicians from Palm Springs, California

Keely Smith (born Dorothy Jacqueline Keely, March 9, 1932) is an American jazz and popular music singer who enjoyed popularity in the 1950s and 1960s. She collaborated with, among others, Louis Prima and Frank Sinatra.

Career

Smith showed a natural aptitude for singing at a young age. At age 14, she started singing with a naval air station band led by Saxie Dowell. At 15, she got her first paying job with the Earl Bennett band.
Smith made her professional debut with Louis Prima in 1949 (the couple were married in 1953); Smith played the "straight guy" in the duo to Prima's wild antics and they recorded many duets. These include Johnny Mercer's and Harold Arlen's "That Ol' Black Magic", which was a Top 20 hit in the US in 1958. In 1959, Smith and Prima were awarded the first-ever Grammy Award for Best Performance by a Vocal Group or Chorus for "That Ol' Black Magic". Her "dead-pan" act was a hit with fans. The duo followed up with the minor successes "I've Got You Under My Skin" and "Bei Mir Bist Du Schoen", a revival of the 1937 Andrews Sisters hit. Smith and Prima's act was a mainstay of the Las Vegas lounge scene for much of the 1950s.
Smith appeared with Prima in the 1959 film, Hey Boy! Hey Girl!, singing "Fever", and also appeared in and sang on the soundtrack of the previous year's Thunder Road. Her song in Thunder Road was "Whippoorwill". Her first big solo hit was "I Wish You Love" in 1957. In 1961, Smith divorced Prima. She then signed with Reprise Records, where her musical director was Nelson Riddle. In 1965, she had Top 20 hits in the United Kingdom with an album of Beatles compositions, and a single, "You're Breaking My Heart". 
, her Reprise recordings have never been made available on CD.
In 1985, she made a comeback with I'm In Love Again (Fantasy Records) . Her albums, Swing, Swing, Swing (2002), Keely Sings Sinatra (2001) for which she was Grammy nominated, and Keely Swings Count Basie Style with Strings (2002) garnered critical and fan acclaim.
In 1998, a Golden Palm Star on the Palm Springs, California, Walk of Stars was dedicated to her.Palm Springs Walk of Stars by date dedicated

Later career

Smith released Vegas '58 – Today a compilation album of her best known songs, all recorded live. Smith has re-recorded a number of songs from her Prima years, including a modified version of "Oh Marie," which has been renamed "Oh Louis" in tribute. By her own admission, she has never had a singing lesson and cannot read music.
She works a light touring schedule. She was booked at the Cafe Carlyle in New York City in 2007. On February 10, 2008, Smith performed "That Old Black Magic" with Kid Rock at the 50th Grammy Awards.

Personal life

Smith is of Irish and Native American ancestry.I Wish You Love album liner notes (1958) Smith married Louis Prima in 1953 and divorced him in 1961. They had two children - Toni Elizabeth, Luanne Francis and Keely later adopted Paul Randolph Johnson (Randy) in 1983. Luanne is a successful documentary film and music producer, Toni Elizabeth tours the US and Great Britain annually as a featured vocalist with the Band Jive Aces in Europe and her own band domestically. Randy is a Broadway Director and Writer.
In 1961, columnist Dorothy Kilgallen reported that Smith had dated and broken up with music executive Morris Levy.
In 1965, she married Jimmy Bowen. The couple divorced in 1969.
Smith married musician Bobby Milano (real name Charles Caci) in 1975 in Palm Springs. Frank Sinatra gave the bride away.
In 1986, she faced legal problems for failing to withhold employee personal income and disability insurance taxes in connection with vending companies she owned in Palm Springs.

Musical

In 2008, Vanessa Claire Smith and Jake Broder wrote and starred in the new musical, Louis & Keely Live at the Sahara, which premiered at Los Angeles' Sacred Fools Theater Company and went on to be nominated for four Ovation Awards, including the Franklin R. Levy Award for Musical in an Intimate Theatre, which it won. Smith herself attended a performance.

Discography (solo)

Discography (others)

Soundtracks
Keely Smith
Keely Smith with Nelson Riddle and His Orchestra
Louis Prima and Keely Smith
Louis Prima and Keely Smith with Sam Butera and the Witnesses
Appears on (various artist compilations)

Film and television appearances






