[[Michael Sweet]]

CATEGORIES: American heavy metal bass guitarists, American heavy metal guitarists, American heavy metal singers, American male singers, American rock singers, American performers of Christian music, American Christians, Converts to Christianity, Musicians from Whittier, California, People from Cathedral City, California, 1963 births, Living people, Boston (band) members

Michael Sweet (born 4 July 1963) is a singer from Whittier, California, United States. Sweet is best known as co-founder, writer, lead guitarist, lead vocalist and front man of the Christian rock band Stryper. He was also co-lead vocalist and  guitarist for Boston from 2007-2011.

Biography

Stryper

In the early 1980s, Sweet and his brother started a band called Roxx Regime and played in small venues. They were a trio for a period of time with Sweet being the only guitar player in the band. This band would later become Stryper. The band challenged the stereotype of heavy metal being satanic and took Christian rock into mainstream.
With the band, Sweet was not only the lead vocalist and shared lead guitar duties, but he also wrote most of the music for the band as well as co-producing and arranging the music as well. the band recorded five successful studio albums. The band's reputation declined in the 1990s.

Solo

After nine years as the lead singer/lead guitarist of Stryper, Sweet left the band in 1992 in order to pursue a solo career. He first released a demo album titled Unstryped, which featured several songs allegedly intended for the band. Sweet later included some of these on his first full-length album.
His self-titled debut album was released in 1994 and sold over 250,000 copies. Soon after the release of Real, Sweet left Benson Records, with whom he had released those two albums.
During this time, Sweet and his wife Kyle moved to Massachusetts, where Sweet worked at his father-in-law's campground/cranberry business, Maple Park. In 1998, he released an independent demo album titled Truth which received critical acclaim. He was signed to Restless Records and re-released Truth in 2000 with a new song-list and new artwork.
On August 19, 2007, Sweet was asked by Boston's Tom Scholz to be one of the lead singers and guitarists for Come Together: A tribute to Brad Delp at the Bank of America Pavilion in Boston, MA.

Boston

Sweet performed lead vocals, background vocals, and guitar work for Boston. Sweet was asked to be a part of what was supposed to be Boston's last performance on 8/19/07. It was a benefit/tribute show and names such as Sammy Hagar, Mickey Thomas and Ann Wilson were among the invited guests. Tom Scholz was moved by what Sweet had written about the late Brad Delp and then heard Sweet sing and play guitar. Scholz was so impressed with Sweet's talents that he invited him to join the band and become a permanent member.

Stryper reunited

In 1999, Sweet reunited with former Stryper bandmates Oz Fox and Tim Gaines during a concert in Puerto Rico.
Although original bassist Tim Gaines left the group in 2005 and was replaced by Tracy Ferrie, the band has continued to work together, releasing a new album titled Reborn, produced by Sweet.
The death of Sweet's wife, Kyle, was announced on March 5, 2009, after her two-year battle with ovarian cancer. During this time Sweet released an album called Touched in honor of Kyle.
In September 2009, Stryper embarked on its 25th anniversary world tour, "Rocking the Hell Out of You for 25 years" with the original members.
On February 15, 2011 Stryper released a new record entitled The Covering, produced by Sweet. 

Solo discography

Guest appearances

Projects produced








