[[Sādhanā]]

CATEGORIES: Meditation, Buddhist practices, Tibetan Buddhist practices, Spiritual practice

Sādhanā (), literally "a means of accomplishing something",V. S. Apte. A Practical Sanskrit Dictionary. p. 979. is an ego-transcending spiritual practice.  An Introduction to Hinduism. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, 1996. pp. 92, 156, 160, 167. ISBN 0-521-43878-0. It includes a variety of disciplines in Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist 
The historian N. Bhattacharyya provides a working definition of the benefits of sādhanā as follows:
 ... religious sādhanā, which both prevents an excess of worldliness and molds the mind and disposition (bhāva) into a form which develops the knowledge of dispassion and non-attachment. Sādhanā is a means whereby bondage becomes liberation. N. History of the Tantric Religion. Second Revised Edition. (Manohar: New Delhi, 1999) p. 174. ISBN 81-7304-025-7
  
Iyengar (1993: p. 22) in his English translation of and commentary to the Yoga Sutras of Patanjali defines sādhanā in relation to abhyāsa and kriyā: 
 
 Sādhanā is a discipline undertaken in the pursuit of a goal. Abhyāsa is repeated practice performed with observation and reflection. Kriyā, or action, also implies perfect execution with study and investigation. Therefore, sādhanā, abhyāsa, and kriyā all mean one and the same thing. A sādhaka, or practitioner, is one who skillfully applies...Iyengar, B.K.S. (1993, 2002). Light on the Yoga Sūtras of Patañjali. Hammersmith, London, UK: Thorsons. ISBN 978-0-00-714516-4 p.22

Paths

The term " sādhanā" means spiritual exertion towards an intended goal. A person undertaking such a practice is known as a sādhu or a sādhaka. The goal of sādhanā is to attain some level of spiritual realization, which can be either enlightenment, pure love of God (prema), liberation (moksha) from the cycle of birth and death (saṃsāra), or a particular goal such as the blessings of a deity as in the Bhakti traditions. 
Sādhanā can involve meditation, chanting of mantra (sometimes with the help of a japa mala), puja to a deity, yajna, and in very rare cases mortification of the flesh or tantric practices such as performing one's particular sādhanā within a cremation ground. 
Anthony de Mello, an Indian Jesuit priest and founder of the Sadhana Institute in Pune, India, wrote a book of Christian meditations with the title Sadhana: A way to God.
Traditionally in some Hindu and Buddhist traditions in order to embark on a specific path of sādhanā, firstly a guru may be required to give the necessary instructions.  This approach is typified by some Tantric traditions, in which initiation by a guru is sometimes identified as a specific stage of  sādhanā. cit., p. 317.  On the other hand, individual renunciates may develop their own spiritual practice without participating in organized groups.  An Introduction to Hinduism. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, 1996. .

Kinds

Sādhanā or spiritual practice need not be directed towards a higher cause like enlightenment or moksha. Sādhanā can be done by individuals for lower aims like obtaining worldly pleasures. Sādhanā is also done by a group for the society at large.

Sakām sādhanā

Sakām sādhanā (Devanagari सकाम, sa = yes / with, kām = desire) is spiritual practice done for worldly pleasures. This is the lowest form of sādhanā. There is no spiritual progress with sakām sādhanā. Examples of sakām sādhanā are praying for any worldly goals like getting money, a job, marriage or any other aim which are temporary and will not last beyond death.Valmiki Ramayana - translated by RALPH T. H. GRIFFITH, M. A 
The fruits of this kind of spiritual practice are used to fulfill the worldy desires of the individual and no spiritual progress takes place. Thus it is not possible to reach enlightenment, moksha or even heaven as the merits needed to achieve this are used up. sakām sādhanā .Table 3, Point 15

Niṣkām sādhanā

Niṣkām (Devnagari = निष्काम, niṣ = no / without, kām = desire) sādhanā is spiritual practice done for higher aims. It is done to achieve the aim of enlightenment or moksha. It is done for the spiritual upliftment of the individual so that he is taken out of the cycle of life and death (saṃsāra).Nishkam Sadhana :- Sanatan Sanstha

=Vyaṣṭi sādhanā=

This is niṣkām sādhanā done for one's own spiritual upliftment. No one else is benefitted except the person doing vyaṣṭi sādhanā. Thus this form of spiritual practice is an individualistic practice. This form of sādhanā is very important if one wants to do samaṣṭi sādhanā. Jayant Balaji Athavale p10

==Examples of vyaṣṭi sādhanā==

==Benefits of vyaṣṭi sādhanā==

==Pitfalls of vyaṣṭi sādhanā==

=Samaṣṭi sādhanā=

This is the kind of niṣkām sādhanā which is done collectively for the spiritual progress of entire humanity. It is the highest level of sādhanā. For samaṣṭi sādhanā to be maintained, vyaṣṭi sādhanā is a must. The same logic that a teacher must read the book first before teaching the students can be applied to this. Jayant Balaji Athavale p39  
In Kali Yuga, samaṣṭi sādhanā is important as the people do not know the significance of sādhanā. This kind of sādhanā is more difficult and increases the sātvikta of the entire area. Samaṣṭi sādhanā is not possible without a guru.

==Examples of samaṣṭi sādhanā==

==Benefits of samaṣṭi sādhanā==

Samaṣṭi level sādhanā is more difficult compared to vyaṣṭi but it has added benefits.

==Pitfalls of samaṣṭi sādhanā==

Tantric sādhanā

The tantric rituals are called "sādhanā". Some of the well known sādhanās are:

Buddhism

In the Vajrayāna Buddhism of Tibet and East Asia and following the Nalanda tradition of India-Tibet-China, there are fifteen major tantric sādhanas: 1. Śūraṅgama Sitātapatrā, 2. Nīlakaṇṭha, 3. Tārā, 4. Mahākāla, 5. Hayagrīva, 6. Amitābha Amitāyus, 7. Bhaiṣajyaguru Akṣobhya, 8. Guhyasamaja, 9. Vajrayoginī Vajravarāhi, 10. Heruka Cakrasaṃvara, 11. Yamāntaka Vajrabhairava, 12. Kālacakra, 13. Hevajra 14. Chod, 15. Vajrapāṇi.  All of these are available in Tibetan form, many are available in Chinese and some are still extant in ancient Sanskrit manuscripts.Digital Sanskrit Buddhist Canon - University of the West Archives of Ancient Sanskrit Manuscripts
In the sādhana of Buddhism and Vajrayāna in particular, the upāya of the dedication of merit (Sanskrit: pariṇāmanā) is a component.
Kværne (1975: p. 164) in his extended discussion of sahajā, treats the relationship of sādhana to mandala thus:

Islam

Islam itself could be understood as a "sadhana". Some more specialized practices include dhikr and chilla-nashini as well as the way of self chosen poverty as a derwish or mendicant as well as the Sama (Sufism) of the various Sufi orders.

Meher Baba's teachings

The spiritual teacher Meher Baba stated that one participates in part of the goal of sadhana in the spiritual practice itself: "In the spiritual field it is not possible to maintain an unbridgeable gulf between Sadhana and the end sought through it. This gives rise to the fundamental paradox that, in the spiritual field, the practising of a Sadhana in itself amounts to a partial participation in the goal."Baba, Meher (1967). Discourses. 2. San Francisco: Sufism Reoriented. . According to Baba, the goal of sadhana is God-realization: "It aims at bringing about a radical change in the quality of life so that it permanently becomes an expression of the Truth in the eternal NOW. Sadhana is spiritually fruitful if it succeeds in bringing the life of the individual in tune with the divine purpose, which is to enable everyone to enjoy consciously the God-state."Baba, Meher (1967). Discourses. 2. San Francisco: Sufism Reoriented. .

Sādhaka

A sādhaka is a practitioner of a particular sādhanā. The term "sādhaka" is often synonymous with "yogini" or "yogi".



Notes


