[[Rolando Blackman]]

CATEGORIES: 1959 births, Living people, AEK Athens B.C. players, African-American basketball players, American expatriate basketball people in France, American expatriate basketball people in Greece, American expatriate basketball people in Italy, College basketball announcers in the United States, Dallas Mavericks assistant coaches, Dallas Mavericks draft picks, Dallas Mavericks players, Kansas State Wildcats men's basketball players, Limoges CSP players, Olimpia Milano players, National Basketball Association All-Stars, National Basketball Association players from Panama, National Basketball Association players with retired numbers, New York Knicks players, People from Panama City, Shooting guards, Sportspeople from Brooklyn

Rolando Antonio Blackman (born February 26, 1959) is a retired professional basketball player. He was an All-Star who spent most of his career with the Dallas Mavericks. In 2010 he joined the Turkey national basketball team as an assistant coach.Turkey bring in Blackman as assistant

Playing career

College basketball

After being raised in Brooklyn, New York, Blackman attended Kansas State University where he played basketball under coach Jack Hartman.  At Kansas State, Blackman had a number of noteworthy achievements:
Finally, prior to his senior season, Blackman also was a starter for the 1980 Summer Olympics basketball team that did not participate because of the U.S. Olympic boycott.
Long after his departure from school, in 1996, when the Big Eight Conference expanded to the Big 12, Blackman was named to the AP all-time All-Big Eight basketball team.
Blackman's number 25 jersey was retired by Kansas State in a ceremony at halftime of a game against Iowa State on February 17, 2007.

NBA

Rolando Blackman was drafted by the Mavericks in the first round (9th overall) of the 1981 NBA Draft. He became the first Panamanian-born to play in the NBA. In eleven seasons with the Mavericks, Blackman was named to the NBA All-Star Team four times and played on six Maverick playoff teams.  Blackman scored 16,643 points (which was a franchise record he held for 18 years until being broken by Dirk Nowitzki on March 8, 2008)and 6,487 field goals with the Mavericks. In his 865 games with the Mavericks, Blackman never fouled out of a game.
Blackman spent his final two seasons in the NBA with the New York Knicks, reuniting with former Dallas teammate Derek Harper, and the team made the Finals in his final year, losing to the Houston Rockets.  When he retired from the league following the 1993–94 NBA season, he had career totals of 17,623 points, 3,278 rebounds and 2,981 assists.  Blackman's points total ranks as the 60th-best in NBA history (directly behind Magic Johnson).  His number 22 was retired by the Mavericks on March 11, 2000.com History: This Date in History - March

Europe

Rolando Blackman signed with the Greek League team AEK Athens BC in the middle of the 1994-95 season. The next season he played for Stefanel Milano in the Italian League, and helped them to win both the Italian National Championship and the Italian Cup of the 1995-96 season by averaging 15.3 points per game. His Italian club also reached the final game of the Korać Cup championship that season, which they lost to Efes Pilsen Istanbul.

Post-playing career

In 2000, Blackman was tapped to be the defensive coordinator for the Mavericks under coach Don Nelson. The next year he served as an assistant coach for the German National team and helped lead them to a bronze medal at the 2002 World Basketball Championships in Indianapolis. During the 2004-05 NBA season, Blackman was hired as one of the Mavericks' television analysts, along with Matt Pinto and Bob Ortegel. For the 2005-06 NBA season, Blackman returned to the Mavericks' bench, serving his first season as a full-fledged assistant coach. In July 2006 he was promoted to the position of Director of Player Development.
In August 2010, Blackman was hired on as an assistant coach by Turkey head coach Bogdan Tanjevic in advance of the 2010 FIBA World Championship tournament.ballineurope.com: Turkiye'ye hosgeldiniz, Rolando Blackman! Blackman stated that he took the job specifically to work again with Tanjevic, who had been his coach in Milan.fiba.html FIBA: Turkey bring in Blackman as assistant
During the 2006 NBA Finals, Blackman's former coach with the New York Knicks, Pat Riley, admitted, publicly for the first time, that sitting Rolando Blackman in favor of John Starks during Games 6 and 7 of the 1994 NBA Finals was the biggest coaching mistake in his career and that he has never forgiven himself for it.nydailynews.com/2006-06-08/sports/18322204_1_knicks-pat-riley-patrick-ewing

Personal life

He has four children and resides in Dallas, Texas. 
Blackman is on the Board of Directors of the Assist Youth Foundation. The foundation's goal is to advance opportunities for underprivileged kids in the Dallas/Fort Worth Metroplex and across the globe.
Blackman is a member of Kappa Alpha Psi fraternity. Blackman continues to contribute to his chapter, Beta Psi, as well as the Kansas State University community.

Notes




