[[Some Kind of Wonderful (film)]]

CATEGORIES: 1987 films, 1980s romantic drama films, 1980s teen films, American coming-of-age films, American romantic drama films, American teen drama films, American teen romance films, English-language films, Films directed by Howard Deutch, Paramount Pictures films

Some Kind of Wonderful is a 1987 American romance film starring Eric Stoltz, Mary Stuart Masterson, and Lea Thompson. It is one of the several successful teen dramas written by John Hughes in the 1980s, although this one was directed by Howard Deutch.

Plot

The film is set against the strict social hierarchy of an American public high school. The tomboyish Watts (Mary Stuart Masterson) has always considered working class misfit Keith Nelson (Eric Stoltz) her best friend. But when Keith asks out the most popular girl in school, Amanda Jones (Lea Thompson), Watts realizes she feels something much deeper for him. Meanwhile, Hardy Jenns (Craig Sheffer), Amanda's Corvette-driving ex-boyfriend from the rich section of town, plans to cause trouble for Keith; although he has no real feelings for Amanda, he feels humiliated at losing her to a social inferior. However, Keith cunningly manages things to his own and Amanda's advantage and gives Hardy his well-deserved comeuppance. In the end, Amanda realizes that she needs time alone and Keith clues into Watts's feelings for him. Realizing that he loves her too, he gives her the diamond earrings he had originally bought as a present for Amanda.

Cast

Production

The production was filmed almost entirely on location in San Pedro, California. The high school scenes are from San Pedro Senior High School (S. Leland St. between 14th St. and 17th St.). Keith Nelson's house outside scenes was filmed at 1441 W I St, Wilmington, CA 90744. Amanda Jones' house was actually located in Wilmington (corner of West E. ST & Frigate Ave.); it's still white with green trim to this very day.
Outside shots of Watt's house were filmed at 1443 Emden Street, Wilmington, Los Angeles, CA 90744.
Mall scenes were shot at 717 Deep Valley Drive, Rolling Hills Estates, CA 90274.
Hardy Jenns' house is located at 516 South Hudson Avenue, Hancock Park, CA 90020.
Gas Station where Keith worked (no longer exists), was located at 8927 West Pico Boulevard, Los Angeles, CA 90035.
The last scene in the movie where Keith and Watts are walking away was shot on S. Hudson Avenue, heading South, starting about 50 feet from the corner of W 6th Street and S. Hudson Avenue. 
Eric Stoltz and Lea Thompson almost worked together in the hit 1985 film Back to the Future. Stoltz was dropped from the film in favor of original choice Michael J. Fox. The two worked together in the 1984 teen comedy The Wild Life.
Thompson had originally turned down the role, but changed her mind when the role was offered to her a second time as the film she did do - Howard the Duck - had turned out to be a major bomb.
Thompson met her future husband, Deutch, while filming this picture. They married in 1989.

Reception

The film was generally well received by critics. Review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported that 80% of critics gave it a positive rating, based on 35 reviews.

Soundtrack






