[[Crathes Castle]]

CATEGORIES: Castles in Aberdeenshire, Houses in Aberdeenshire, Category A listed buildings in Aberdeenshire, Listed castles in Scotland, National Trust for Scotland properties, Inventory of Gardens and Designed Landscapes, Gardens in Aberdeenshire, Historic house museums in Aberdeenshire, Reportedly haunted locations in Scotland

Crathes Castle is a 16th-century castle near Banchory in the Aberdeenshire region of Scotland. This harled castle was built by the Burnetts of Leys and was held in that family for almost 400 years. The castle and grounds are presently owned and managed by the National Trust for Scotland and are open to the public.

History

Crathes sits on land given as a gift to the Burnett of Leys family by King Robert the Bruce in 1323.
In the 14th and 15th century the Burnett of Leys built a fortress of timbers on an island they made in the middle of a nearby bog. This method of fortification, known as a crannog, was common in the Late Middle Ages. Construction of the current tower house of Crathes Castle was begun in 1553 but delayed several times during its construction due to political problems during the reign of Mary, Queen of Scots.
It was completed in 1596 by Alexander Burnett of Leys, and an additional wing added in 18th century. Alexander Burnett, who completed the construction of Crathes, began a new project, the early 17th-century reconstruction of nearby Muchalls Castle. That endeavour was completed by his son, Sir Thomas Burnett. Crathes Castle served as the ancestral seat of the Burnetts of Leys until gifted to the National Trust for Scotland by the 13th Baronet of Leys, Sir James Burnett in 1951. A fire damaged portions of the castle (in particular the Queen Anne wing) in 1966.  Another historically important structure in this region linked to the Burnett of Leys family is Monboddo House.

Interior

The castle contains a significant collection of portraits, and intriguing original Scottish renaissance painted ceilings survive in several Jacobean rooms:  A green smoke or mist is said to have been seen by visitors. The ancient jewelled ivory residing in the great hall above the fireplace, was gifted to the Burnetts by the king along with the castle grounds in 1323.

Garden and grounds

The castle estate contains 530 acres (2.1 km²) of woodlands and fields, including nearly four acres (16,000 m²) of walled garden. Crathes and its grounds are open to tourists throughout the year. A visitors centre provides information about the castle and its surroundings. There is a tea shop on site and a car park for any size of car.

Mesolithic calendar

During 2004 excavations uncovered a series of pits believed to date from about 10,000 years ago. The find was only analysed in 2013 and is believed to be the world's oldest known lunar calendar. It is believed that it was used from 8,000 BC to about 4,000 BC.  It is believed to pre-date by up to five thousand years  previously known time-measuring monuments in Mesopotamia.
The site in Warren Field was discovered from the air when unusual crop marks were seen by the  Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland.








