[[History of alternative medicine]]

CATEGORIES: Alternative medicine

The term alternative medicine refers to systems of medical thought and practice which function as alternatives to or subsist outside of conventional, mainstream medicine. Alternative medicine cannot exist absent an established, authoritative and stable medical orthodoxy to which it can function as an alternative. Such orthodoxy was only established in the West during the nineteenth century through processes of regulation, association, institution building and systematised medical education.

Alternative medicine

The concept of alternative medicine is problematic as it cannot exist autonomously as an object of study in its own right but must always be defined in relation to a non-static and transient medical orthodoxy.

Before the "fringe"

Prior to the nineteenth century European medical training and practice was ostensibly self-regulated through a variety of antique corporations, guilds or colleges.
Outside of these formal medical structures there were myriad other medical practitioners, often termed irregulars, plying a range of services and goods.

Medical professionalisation

In the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries regular and irregular medical practitioners became more clearly differentiated throughout much of Europe.
France provides perhaps one of the earliest examples of the emergence of a state-sanctioned medical orthodoxy – and hence also of the conditions for the development of forms of alternative medicine – the beginnings of which can be traced to the late eighteenth century. 

Nineteenth-century non-conventional medicine

From the late eighteenth century and more robustly from the mid-nineteenth century a number of non-conventional medical systems developed in the West which proposed oppositional medical systems, criticised orthodox medical practitioners, emphasised patient-centredness, and offered substitutes for the treatments offered by the medical mainstream.

Mesmerism

Mesmerism was the eponymous medical system proposed by the Viennese-trained physician, Franz Anton Mesmer, (1734-1815) in the late eighteenth century.
By 1775 Mesmer's Austrian practice was prospering and he published the text Schrieben über die Magnetkur an einen auswärtigen Arzt which first outlined his thesis of animal magnetism.
Popular caricature of mesmerism emphasised the eroticised nature of the treatment as spectacle: "Here the physician in a coat of lilac or purple, on which the most brilliant flowers have been painted in needlework, speaks most consolingly to his patients: his arms softly enfolding her sustain her in her spasms, and his tender burning eye expresses his desire to comfort her".Jean-Jacques Paulet, Mesmer justifié (Paris, 1784), quoted in 
In England mesmerism was championed by John Elliotson, Professor of Practical Medicine at University College London and the founder and president of the London Phrenological Society.
Two Irish-born charity patients, the adolescent O'Key sisters, emerged as particularly important to Elliotson's increasingly popular and public demonstrations of mesmeric treatment. Initially, his magnetising practices were used to treat the sisters' shared diagnosis of hysteria and epilepsy in controlling or curtailing their convulsive episodes. By the autumn of 1837 Elliotson had ceased to treat the O'Keys merely as suitable objects for cure and instead sought to mobilise them as diagnostic instruments.
This set-back, while excluding Elliotson from the medical establishment, ended neither his mesmeric career nor the career of mesmerism in England. From 1842 he became an advocate of phreno-mesmerism – an approach that amalgamated the tenets of phrenology with animal magnetism and that led to a split in the Phrenological Society.
The 1840s in Britain also witnessed a deluge of travelling magnetisers who put on public shows for paying audiences to demonstrate their craft.
Such displays of the anaesthetic qualities of mesmerism inspired some medical practitioners to attempt surgery on subjects under the spell of magnetism.
Although a few surgeons and dentists had undertaken fitful experiments with anaesthetic substances in the preceding years, it was only in 1846 that use of ether in surgery was popularised amongst orthodox medical practitioners.
A feature of the dissemination of magnetism in the New World was its increasing association with spiritualism. 

Osteopathy and chiropractic manipulation

Deriving from the tradition of 'bone-setting', both osteopathy and chiropractic developed in the USA in the late 19th century.  The British School of Osteopathy was established in 1917Nash, K. & Tyreman, S. (2005).  An account of the development of the conceptual basis of osteopathy course at the British School of Osteopathy.  International Journal of Osteopathic Medicine, 8, pp 29–37 but it was the 1960s before the first chiropractic college was established in the UK.  History of chiropractic.  Available from:   While chiropractic theories and methods (which are concerned with subluxations or small displacements of the spine and other joints) do not accord with orthodox medicine's current knowledge of the biomechanics of the spine, osteopathy has been largely subsumed into conventional medicine in the USA.  The passing of the Osteopaths Act (1993) and the Chiropractors Act (1994), however, created for the first time autonomous statutory regulation for two CAM therapies in the UK. (2005).  Regulation of CAM practitioners: reflecting on the last 10 years.  Complementary Therapies in Clinical Practice, 11, pp 5–10

Cross-cultural medical exchange

Ayurvedic medicine

Ayurveda or ayurvedic medicine has more than 4,000 years of history. It is an irrational system of medicine based on a humoral interpretation of disease and health. Although the hymns of the Atharvaveda and the Ṛgveda mention some herbal medicines, protective amulets, and healing prayers that recur in later ayurvedic treatises, the earliest historical mention of the main structural and theoretical categories of ayurvedic medicine occurs in the Buddhist Pāli Tripiṭaka, or Canon. Ayurveda originally started as the name suggests, a science of life in Sanskrit. Ayu means life, and veda means science. It was founded on the mythical principles of yama (time) and niyama (regulated) . Regularity is not the rule. It directs that habits should be regulated to coincide with the demands of the body rather than the mind or intelligence. Thus, for the follower of ayurvedic medicine, food should only be taken when they are hungry rather than at an arbitrarily set meal-time. Ayurveda teaches that when a person is tired, it is not wise to eat food or drink, but to rest. The same principles of regulated living direct that work is the justification for rest and in order to get sufficient sleep, one should subject the body to rigorous exercise. Periodic fasting, or abstaining from all food and drink for short durations of one or two days helps regulate the elimination process and prevents illness. It is only in later years that practitioners of this system saw that people were not paying for their services, and in order to get their clients to pay, they introduced herbal remedies to begin with and later even started using metals and inorganic chemical compositions in the form of pills or potions to deal with symptoms. Then it became similar to any other medical system.
Ayurveda can be defined as the system of medicine described in the great medical encyclopedias associated with the names Caraka, Suśruta, and Bheḷa, compiled and re-edited over several centuries from about 200 BC to about AD 500 and written in Sanskrit. These discursive writings were gathered and systematized in about AD600 by Vāgbhaṭa, to produce the Aṣṭāṅgahṛdayasaṃhitā ('Heart of Medicine Compendium') that became the most popular and widely used textbook of ayurvedic medicine in history. Vāgbhaṭa's work was translated into many other languages and became influential throughout Asia.
Immigration from the Indian sub-continent in the 1850s brought practitioners of Ayurveda ('Science of Life').  Ayurveda.  Available from:  A  pseudoscience medical system dating back over 2,500 years, its adoption outside the Asian communities was limited by its lack of specific exportable skills and English-language reference books until an adapted and modernised form – New Age Ayurveda – came under the umbrella of CAM in the 1970s.  In Britain, practitioners are known as hakims.  Having its origins in the Ayurveda, Indian Naturopathy incorporates a variety of holistic practices and natural remedies and became increasingly popular after the arrival of the post-Second World War wave of Indian immigrants.  Unani medicine uses similar materials but is based on a philosophy which owes as much to Greek and Arab sources as to Ayurveda.  Exiles fleeing the war between Yemen and Aden in the 1960s settled nearby the ports of Cardiff and Liverpool and today practitioners of this Middle Eastern medicine are known as vaids.

Chinese culture

Traditional Chinese medicine has more than 4,000 years of history as a system of medicine that is based on a philosophical concept of balance ( yin and yang, Qi, Blood, Jing, Bodily fluids, the Five Elements, the emotions, and the spirit) approach to health that is rooted in Taoist philosophy and Chinese culture. As such, the concept of it as an alternative form of therapeutic practise is only found in the Western world.
The arrival into Britain of thousands of Chinese in the 1970s introduced Traditional Chinese Medicine – a system dating back to the Bronze Age or earlier that used acupuncture, herbs, diet and exercise. (2006).  Integrated traditional Chinese medicine.  Complementary Therapies in Clinical Practice, 12, pp 132–140  Today there are more than 2,000 registered practitioners in the UK.

Alternative medicine since the 1970s

The terms 'alternative' and 'complementary' tend to be used interchangeably to describe a wide diversity of therapies that attempt to use the self-healing powers of the body by amplifying natural recuperative processes to restore health.  In ancient Greece the Hippocratic movement, commonly regarded as the fathers of medicine, actually gave rise to modern naturopathy and indeed much of today's CAM. (1979). Natural medicine. London, Collins  They placed great emphasis on a good diet and healthy lifestyle to restore equilibrium; drugs were used more to support healing than to cure disease.
Complementary medicines have evolved through history and become formalised from primitive practices; although many were developed during the 19th century as alternatives to the sometimes harmful practices of the time, such as blood-lettings and purgation.  In the UK, the medical divide between CAM and conventional medicine has been characterised by conflict, intolerance and prejudice on both sides and during the early 20th century CAM was virtually outlawed in Britain: healers were seen as freaks and hypnotherapists were subject to repeated attempts at legal restriction. (1996).  The handbook of alternative and complementary medicine - 3rd edition.  London, Vermilion  The alternative health movement is now accepted as part of modern life, having progressed from a grass-roots revival in the 1960s reacting against environmental degradation, unhealthy diets and rampant consumerism.
Until the arrival of the Romans in AD43, medical practices were limited to a basic use of plant materials, prayers and incantations.  Having assimilated the corpus of Hippocrates, the Romans brought with them a vast reparatory of herbal treatments and introduced the concept of the hospital as a centralised treatment centre.  In Britain, hydrotherapy (the use of water either internally or externally to maintain health and prevent disease) can be traced back to Roman spas.  What is hydrotherapy?  Available from: 
During the Catholic and Protestant witch-hunts from the 14th to the 17th centuries, the activities of traditional folk-healers were severely curtailed and knowledge was often lost as it existed only as an oral tradition.  The widespread emigration from Europe to North America in the 18th and 19th centuries included both the knowledge of herbalism and some of the plants themselves.  This was combined with Native American medicine and then re-imported to the UK where it re-integrated with the surviving herbal traditions to evolve as today's medical herbalism movement. (1991).  Green pharmacy: a history of herbal medicine.  Rochester, Healing Arts Press
The natural law of similia similibus curantur, or 'like is cured by like', was recognised by Hippocrates but was only developed as a practical healing system in the early 19th century by a German, Dr Samuel Hahnemann.  Homeopathy was brought to the UK in the 1830s by a Dr Quinn who introduced it to the British aristocracy, whose patronage continues to this day.  Despite arousing controversy in conventional medical circles, homeopathy is available under the National Health Service, and in Scotland approximately 25% of GPs hold qualifications in homeopathy or have undergone some homeopathic training.  Written answers. Available from: 
The impact on CAM of mass immigration into the UK is continuing into the 21st century.  Originating in Japan, cryotherapy has been developed by Polish researchers into a system that claims to produce lasting relief from a variety of conditions such as rheumatism, psoriasis and muscle pain. (2007).  Cryotherapy.  Available from:      Patients spend a few minutes in a chamber cooled to −110 °C, during which skin temperature drops some 12 °C.
The use of CAM is widespread and increasing across the developed world.  The British are presented with a wide choice of treatments from the traditional to the innovative and technological.  Section 60 of the Health Act 1999 allows for new health professions to be created by Order rather than primary legislation.  Complementary and alternative medicine – Select Committee on Science and Technology, sixth report.  Available from:   This raises issues of public health policy which balance regulation, training, research, evidence-base and funding against freedom of choice in a culturally diverse society

Notes and references

Notes

Footnotes

Sources

=Printed sources=

=Online sources=


