[[Russell Tribunal]]

CATEGORIES: International criminal law, Vietnam War, Opposition to the Vietnam War, War crimes in Vietnam, Bertrand Russell

The Russell Tribunal, also known as the International War Crimes Tribunal or Russell-Sartre Tribunal, was a private body organized by British philosopher Bertrand Russell and hosted by French philosopher and playwright Jean-Paul Sartre. Along with Ken Coates, Ralph Schoenman, Julio Cortázar and several others, the tribunal investigated and evaluated American foreign policy and military intervention in Vietnam, following the 1954 defeat of French forces at the Battle of Dien Bien Phu and the establishment of North and South Vietnam.
Bertrand Russell justified the establishment of this body as follows:
The formation of this investigative body immediately followed the 1966 publication of Russell's book, War Crimes in Vietnam. The tribunal was constituted in November 1966, and was conducted in two sessions in 1967, in Stockholm, Sweden and Roskilde, Denmark. It was largely ignored in the United States.
Further tribunals were set up in the following decades on the same model, using the denomination Russell Tribunal.

Composition and origin

Representatives of 18 countries participated in the two sessions of this tribunal, formally calling itself the International War Crimes Tribunal. The tribunal committee consisted of 25 notable personages, predominantly from leftist peace organizations.  Many of these individuals were winners of the Nobel Prize, Medals of Valor and awards of recognition in humanitarian and social fields.  There was no direct representation of Vietnam or the United States on this 25 member panel, although a couple of members were American citizens.
More than 30 individuals testified or provided information to this tribunal.  Among them were military personnel from the United States, as well as from each of the warring factions in Vietnam. Financing for the Tribunal came from many sources, including a large contribution from the North Vietnamese government after a request made by Russell to Ho Chi Minh.
It was followed by another Tribunal, known as Russell Tribunal II on Latin America, that held three meetings in Rome (1974), Brussels (1975) and Rome again (1976), dealing predominantly with Brazil and Chile.
At the closing session of the Russell Tribunal II the creation of three new institutions was announced: the International Foundation for the Rights and Liberations of Peoples, and the International League for the Rights and Liberations of Peoples, and the Permanent Peoples' Tribunal.
The Permanents People's Tribunal was established in Bologna on 23 June 1979.  Between its founding and April 1984, the tribunal pronounced two advisory opinions on Western Sahara and Eritrea and held eight sessions (Argentina, Philippines, El Salvador, Afghanistan I and II, East Timor, Zaire and Guatemala). The latter was concluded in January 1983 in Madrid.
A special hearing was conducted in Paris on April 13–16, 1984 to investigate the Armenian Genocide. The Tribunal's thirty-five member panel included three Nobel Prize winners—Seán MacBride, Adolfo Pérez Esquivel and Professor George Wald— and ten eminent jurist, theologians, academics and political figures. The jury delivered a verdict of guilty to the state of Turkey for the crime of genocide against the Armenian people.
More than three decades later, the Russell Tribunal model was followed by the World Tribunal on Iraq, which was held to make a similar analysis of the Project for the New American Century, the 2003 Invasion of Iraq and subsequent occupation of Iraq, and the links between these.

Tribunal members

Aims of the Tribunal

The Tribunal aims were stated as follows:

Evidence Presented at the Tribunal

During the First Tribunal Session in Stockholm, testimony and evidence was produced by the following witnesses:

Conclusions and Verdicts of the Tribunal

The Tribunal stated that its conclusions were:
Prompted in part by the My Lai Massacre, in 1969 the Bertrand Russell Peace Foundation organized Citizens Commissions of Inquiry (CCI) to hold hearings intended to document testimony of war crimes in Indochina.  These hearings were held in several American cities, and would eventually form the foundation of two national investigations: the National Veterans Inquiry sponsored by the CCI, and the Winter Soldier Investigation sponsored by the Vietnam Veterans Against the War.

Subsequent Tribunals

1973: On Latin America

1974-76: On Chile's military coup d'état (Rome)

It was a part of the Tribunal Russell II on Latin America 
Other sessions of the Tribunal Russell II on Latin America ensued in Brussels (1975) and again in Rome 1976.

2001: On Human Rights in Psychiatry (Berlin)

In 2001, Thomas Szasz and others  took part in a Russell Tribunal on Human Rights in Psychiatry held in Berlin between June 30 and July 2. The Tribunal brought in the two following verdicts: the majority verdict claimed that there was "serious abuse of human rights in psychiatry" and that psychiatry was "guilty of the combination of force and unaccountability"; the minority verdict, signed by the Israeli Law Professor Alon Harel and Brazilian novelist Paulo Coelho, called for "public critical examination of the role of psychiatry."

2004: On Iraq (Brussels)

In 2004 the BRussells Tribunal took place in Brussels as a continuation of the tradition of the Russell Tribunal as part of the World Tribunal on Iraq. Philosopher Jacques Derrida praised this event, stating that "to resuscitate the tradition of a Russell Tribunal is symbolically an important and necessary thing to do today."

2009-2012: On Palestine (Barcelona, London, Cape Town, New York)

The Russell Tribunal on Palestine (RToP) was created in March 2009.
In April 2011, the association converted to a non-profit organisation, with legal status in Brussels, by  The former non-elected PS senator, Pierre Galand, was appointed president of the association.
The first session of the Tribunal took place in Barcelona in March 2010 This session's objective was to consider the complicities and omissions of the European Union and its member states in the Palestinian-Israel crisis.
The second international session of the RToP took place in London in November 2010. It examined international corporate issues in Israel and human rights law.
The third international session of the RToP took place in Cape Town in November 2011. It asked the question: "Are Israeli practices against the Palestinian people in breach of the prohibition on apartheid under international law?"
Pierre Galand pointed out that the Cape Town session of the tribunal had a budget of €190,000; €100,000 was donated by Editions Indigene, the publisher of the book Time for an outrage.
After the Cape Town session, Israeli MK Otniel Schneller filed a complaint with the Knesset's Ethics Committee against MK Hanin Zoabi, who testified at the Tribunal that "Israel is an apartheid state".
A group of Jewish South Africans protested against the court, and the organizer of the protest called it a "Kangaroo Court."Israel slammed at Russell Tribunal
A fourth international session of the RToP took place in New York in October 2012.

Criticisms of the Tribunals

Incidents like the Russell Tribunal were described by historian Guenter Lewy as part of a "veritable industry publicizing alleged war crimes"
Staughton Lynd, chairman of the 1965 "March on Washington", was asked by Russell to participate in the tribunal and rejected the invitation. Lynd's objections and criticism of the Tribunal were based on the fact that Russell planned to investigate only non-North Vietnamese and National Liberation Front conduct, sheltering Hanoi from any criticism for their behavior. Lynd wrote that "in conversation with the emissary who proffered the invitation, I urged that the alleged war crimes of any party to the conflict should come before the Tribunal. After all, I argued, a "crime" is an action that is wrong no matter who does it. Pressing my case, I asked, "What if it were shown that the National Liberation Front of South Vietnam tortures unarmed prisoners?" The answer, as I understood it, was, "Anything is justified that drives the imperialist aggressor into the sea." I declined the invitation to be a member of the Tribunal."
David Horowitz, who was then a member of the Bertrand Russell Peace Foundation, also said that the Russell Tribunal never held any intention of investigating alleged Communist atrocities. In his memoirs, Horowitz described overhearing Jean-Paul Sartre insist that the North Vietnamese and National Liberation Front were, by definition, incapable of committing war crimes. "I refuse to place," said Sartre, "in the same category the actions of an organization of poor peasants... and those of an immense army backed by a highly organized country."David Horowitz, Radical Son: A Generational Odyssey, page 149. Horowitz's position does not address the fact that Sartre believed the U.S. was engaged in a genocidal war in Vietnam.Jean-Paul Sartre, "On Genocide", November 1967
For example, John Gerassi was an investigator for the Tribunal and documented that the United States was bombing hospitals, schools and other civilian targets in Vietnam.  He offers first hand and documentary evidence about U.S. war crimes in contrast to the claims of Lewy.  His book provides many details of U.S. atrocities and shows the larger motivation for the Tribunal, i.e. to expose war crimes, not to create a show trial in contrast to the claims of Podhoretz and Horowitz.
Judge Richard Goldstone, writing in The New York Times in October 2011, said of the Russell Tribunal on Palestine that "It is not a 'tribunal.' The 'evidence' is going to be one-sided and the members of the 'jury' are critics whose harsh views of Israel are well known. In Israel, there is no apartheid. Nothing there comes close to the definition of apartheid under the 1998 Rome Statute."Israel and the Apartheid Slander RICHARD J. GOLDSTONE. New York Times, October 31, 2011
South African journalist and human rights activist Benjamin Pogrund, now living in Israel, described the Cape Town Session of the Russell Tribunal on Palestine as "It's theatre: the actors know their parts and the result is known before they start. Israel is to be dragged into the mud."





Further reading

Films




