[[Keelikōlani]]

CATEGORIES: Heirs to the Hawaiian throne, 1826 births, 1883 deaths, Hawaiian princesses, House of Kamehameha, Royalty of the Kingdom of Hawaii, Women of the Victorian era, Burials at the Royal Mausoleum of Hawaii, Hawaiian women in politics, Members of the Hawaiian Kingdom Privy Council, Members of the Hawaiian Kingdom House of Nobles, Governors of Hawaii (island), Recipients of the Royal Order of Kamehameha I, Hawaiian adoptees (hānai)

Her Highness Ruth Luka Keanolani Kauanahoahoa Keelikōlani retained traditional Hawaiian cultural practices. 
Her name Keʻelikōlani means leaf bud of heaven.

Family

Ke
Keahumanu, who acted as regent under kings Kamehameha II and III.
Although her paternity was questionable, Mataio Kekūanāoahumanu's death and included her in his will and inheritance. This made her the half-sister of King Kamehameha IV and King Kamehameha V and Princess Victoria Kamāmalu.
Her first husband, from 1841, was William Pitt Leleiohoku I (1821–1848), Governor of Hawaiena, and son of High Chief William Pitt Kalanimoku the Prime Minister of Kamehameha I, and Chiefess Kiliwehi.
Soon after she married Leleiohoku, her 27-year-old husband died in a measles epidemic.
In June 2, 1856, she married her second husband, Isaac Young Davis (c. 1826–1882), son of George Hueu Davis and his wife Kaha
Their marriage was an unhappy one, and they divorced in 1868. The early loss of their son did not help.

Sons

She bore two sons, who both died young. John William Pitt Kīna
Her adopted son, called Leleiohoku II after her first husband, was born January 10, 1854, became Crown Prince of Hawaii, but died April 9, 1877, when only 23 years old. On the death of her adopted son, she demanded that Kalākaua and his family relinquish all rights to the estates she had bequeathed their brother, and that they be returned to her by deed. Her relations with King Kalākaua were distant, although she had close friendships with his sister, Queen Lili

Kaiulani

She was godmother to Princess Kaiulani would witness in her short life.

Defender of Tradition

Ruth was a staunch defender of ancient Hawaiian traditions and customs. While the kingdom became Christianized, Anglicized, and urbanized, she preferred to live as a noble woman of antiquity. While her royal estates were filled with elegant palaces and mansions built for her family, she chose to live in a large traditional stone-raised grass house. While she understood English and spoke it well, she used the Hawaiian language exclusively, requiring English-speakers to use a translator. Although trained in the Christian religion and given a Christian name, she honored practices considered pagan, such as patronage of chanters and hula dancers.
She continued to worship the traditional gods and various aumakua, or ancestral spirits. When Mauna Loa erupted in 1880, threatening the city of Hilo with a lava flow, her intercession with the goddess Pele was credited by Hawaiians with saving the city. When the ruling monarchs asked her to pose for official photographs, she often refused. Only a dozen photographs of Ruth are known to exist.

Appearance

Considered a beauty in her youth, she gained weight as she grew older, and a surgery for nasal infection disfigured her nose, although rumors circulated that it was her second husband Davis who had broken her nose in one of their many fights.
She came to adopt some modern ways, such as Victorian fashions in hairstyle and dresses. Christian missionaries caused Hawaiian royal women to become self-conscious about their Hawaiian looks. They were uncomfortable with their dark skin and large bodies which had been considered signs of nobility for centuries. No matter how Westernized their manners, they were seen as a "Hawaiian squaw." By the last half of the 19th century, Hawaiian women were going in two different directions. Many European men married Hawaiian women they found exotic, favoring those who were thin and had pale complexions.
Ruth defied this ideal, weighing i dismissed the princess as a "woman of no intelligence or ability." In addition to her giant size, she rejected English and the Christian faith. Her clear defense of the old ways caused Westerners to think she was backward and stupid.

Government and business

On the contrary, as Governor of Hawai She was a shrewd businesswoman. In a notorious case, she sold Claus Spreckels her claims to the Crown Lands for $10,000. The lands were worth $750,000, but she knew her claims to them were worthless, since it had been decided in previous court cases that the lands were only entitled to whoever held the office of monarch.
In 1847 she was appointed to the Privy Council of Kamehameha III, and served from 1855 through 1857 in the House of Nobles. January 15, 1855 she was appointed to be the Royal Governor of the Island of Hawai
When her last half-brother Kamehameha V died in 1872 leaving no heir to the throne, her controversial family background prevented her from being a serious contender to be monarch herself. Although she was considered a member of the royal family, along with Queen Emma and the king's father. In 1874, King Lunalilo then died, and the legislature elected Kalākaua as king, the first to be not descended from Kamehameha I. Keʻelikōlani was not declared as a member of the royal family, merely as a high chiefess by the new king. The young William Pitt Leleiohoku was named Crown prince, and history might have been very different if he had lived past 1877 and became a wealthy king. Instead, the increased reliance of the royal family on the treasury and governmental pensions to fund their lavish expenses is generally considered one factor that led to the overthrow of the Kingdom of Hawaii in 1893.
She died at Huliheʻe Palace, Kailua Kona, Hawai This totaled nearly nine percent of the land in the Hawaiian Islands.

Legacy

During her life, Ruth was the greatest and richest woman in Hawaii. She owned most of the land passed down by her Kamehameha relatives including estates once owned by Queen Kaiulani Hotel, Royal Hawaiian Hotel, among others, were built.
A documentary film was made of her life in 2004. As a tribute to her traditionalism, a version of the film was produced in the Hawaiian language.

Honours








