[[James Pavitt]]

CATEGORIES: 1946 births, Living people, People from St. Louis, Missouri, People from McLean, Virginia, People of the Central Intelligence Agency, University of Missouri alumni, United States Army officers, Recipients of the Distinguished Intelligence Medal

James L. Pavitt (born February 19, 1946) was Deputy Director for Operations (DDO) for the CIA from 1999 until June 4, 2004. His sudden resignation – as well as that of his chief, DCI George Tenet the previous day – led to speculation that it was over the controversy surrounding Iraq weapons of mass destruction or 9-11 intelligence issues.

Background

Pavitt was born in St. Louis, Missouri and graduated from the University of Missouri (B.A., 1968) in Columbia, MissouriDana Priest, Retired Official Defends the CIA's Performance,   After graduation, he was a National Defense Education Act fellow at Clark University (1969). He is currently a Principal of The Scowcroft Group, an international business advisory firm,James L. Pavitt Bio, 
He is married with two children (from a previous marriage) and resides in McLean, Virginia.
His hobbies include collecting art, especially primitive American art.

Intelligence career

Pavitt served in the United States Army from 1969-1971 as an intelligence officer and was a legislative assistant with the House of Representatives from 1971 until 1973.
Pavitt joined the CIA in 1973 as a Career Trainee with postings to Europe, Asia and Washington.  In 2003, the CPD took down the nuclear black market being operated by Abdul Qadeer Khan.
After September 11, 2001, Pavitt was responsible for sending Special Activities Division teams to Afghanistan, Pakistan, Indonesia, Thailand, and Somalia to capture Al Qaeda members.  The first Hellfire missiles fired from drones were under his command.  They were aimed at an Al Qaeda convoy in Sudan in which all occupants, including an American citizen, were killed.
In April 2004 he appeared before the 9/11 Commission. The BBC called his 9/11 commission appearance 'unprecedented'. The commission's report said that shortly after Bush's election, Pavitt told the President-elect that Osama bin Laden was one of the gravest threats to the country. He also added that killing the Al Qaeda leader would have an effect but not stop the threat posed by the terrorist organization.
When Bush put Porter Goss in charge of the agency, Pavitt reportedly opposed the internal reorganizations announced by Goss, on the ground that they might "do damage to a strategic effort that has produced excellent work on terrorism and a variety of other important issues." The CIA says Pavitt's decision was unconnected with Tenet's departure. Pavitt was succeeded by his deputy, Stephen Kappes.  On June 21, 2004, Pavitt delivered one of his last speeches as DDO to the Foreign Policy Association. Pavitt at the Foreign Policy Association.  June 21, 2004
Pavitt is a recipient of the CIA's Distinguished Intelligence Medal.  He is also a recipient of the CIA Distinguished Career Intelligence Medal, the CIA Director's Medal and the Donovan Award.
He is an advisor to the Patriot Defense Group, LLC,a defense and intelligence contracting company that directly supports the traiing requirements of the defense and intelligence communities.  to Olton Solutions Ltd. in the United Kingdom and to The Scowcroft Group.forbes.com/profile/james-pavitt/, Forbes, retrieved 2013-03-13
He is a director of CACI International, Inc.
Some former operations officers are critical of Pavitt, citing 4 international postings over 10 years in a 30 year career as insufficient experience for a Deputy Director of Operations.



| url=
| title=James Pavitt
| publisher=The Center for Torture Accountability
| author=
| date=
| accessdate=2009-05-26
| quote=
}}

Speeches

References


