[[Natural number]]

CATEGORIES: Cardinal numbers, Elementary mathematics, Integers, Number theory, Numbers

In mathematics, the natural numbers are those used for counting ("there are six coins on the table") and ordering ("this is the third largest city in the country"). These purposes are related to the linguistic notions of cardinal and ordinal numbers, respectively (see English numerals). A later notion is that of a nominal number, which is used only for naming.
Properties of the natural numbers related to divisibility, such as the distribution of prime numbers, are studied in number theory. Problems concerning counting and ordering, such as partition enumeration, are studied in combinatorics.
There is no universal agreement about whether to include zero in the set of natural numbers.  In 1763 W. Emerson's Method of Increments contains, on page 113, the phrase "To find the product of all natural numbers from 1 to 100 ... ."  But the Peano axioms (1889) begin the natural numbers with zero.   Today some textbooks, especially college textbooks, define the natural numbers to be the positive integers }. 

History of natural numbers and the status of zero

The most primitive method of representing a natural number is to put down a dot for each object. Later, a set of objects could be tested for equality, excess or shortage, by striking out a dot for each object in the set.
The first major advance in abstraction was the use of numerals to represent numbers. This allowed systems to be developed for recording large numbers. The ancient Egyptians developed a powerful system of numerals with distinct hieroglyphs for 1, 10, and all the powers of 10 up to over 1 million. A stone carving from Karnak, dating from around 1500 BC and now at the Louvre in Paris, depicts 276 as 2 hundreds, 7 tens, and 6 ones; and similarly for the number 4,622. The Babylonians had a place-value system based essentially on the numerals for 1 and 10.
A much later advance was the development of the idea that 
The first systematic study of numbers as abstractions (that is, as abstract entities) is usually credited to the Greek philosophers Pythagoras and Archimedes. Many Greek mathematicians did not consider 1 to be "a number", so to them 2 was the smallest number.
Independent studies also occurred at around the same time in India, China, and Mesoamerica.
Several set-theoretical definitions of natural numbers were developed in the 19th century. With these definitions it was convenient to include 0 (corresponding to the empty set) as a natural number. Including 0 is now the common convention among set theorists, logicians, and computer scientists. Many other mathematicians also include 0, although some have kept the older tradition and take 1 to be the first natural number. See, for example, Carothers (2000) p.3 or Thomson, Bruckner and Bruckner (2000), p.2. The term counting number is also used to refer to the natural numbers (either including or excluding 0). Likewise, some authors use the term whole number to mean a natural number including 0; some use it to mean a natural number excluding 0; while others use it in a way that includes both 0 and the negative integers, as an equivalent of the term integer.

Notation

Some authors who exclude 0 from the naturals may distinguish the set of nonnegative integers by referring to the latter as the natural numbers with zero, whole numbers, or counting numbers, denoted W. notation is to use a script P for positive integers (which extends to using script N for negative integers, and script Z for 0).

Algebraic properties

The addition (+) and multiplication (×) operations on natural numbers have several algebraic properties:

Properties

One can recursively define an addition on the natural numbers by setting  for all a, b. Here S should be read as "successor". This turns the natural numbers (N, +) into a commutative monoid with identity element 0, the so-called free object with one generator. This monoid satisfies the cancellation property and can be embedded in a group (in the mathematical sense of the word group). The smallest group containing the natural numbers is the integers.
If 1 is defined as S(0), then  is simply the successor of b.
Analogously, given that addition has been defined, a multiplication × can be defined via . These properties of addition and multiplication make the natural numbers an instance of a commutative semiring. Semirings are an algebraic generalization of the natural numbers where multiplication is not necessarily commutative. The lack of additive inverses, which is equivalent to the fact that N is not closed under subtraction, means that N is not a ring; instead it is a semiring (also known as a rig).
If the natural numbers are taken as "excluding 0", and "starting at 1", the definitions of + and × are as above, except that they begin with .
For the remainder of the article, juxtaposed variables such as ab indicate the product a × b, and the standard order of operations is assumed.
A total order on the natural numbers is defined by letting . An important property of the natural numbers is that they are well-ordered: every non-empty set of natural numbers has a least element. The rank among well-ordered sets is expressed by an ordinal number; for the natural numbers this is expressed as ω.
While it is in general not possible to divide one natural number by another and get a natural number as result, the procedure of division with remainder is available as a substitute: for any two natural numbers a and b with  there are natural numbers q and r such that
The number q is called the quotient and r is called the remainder of division of a by b. The numbers q and r are uniquely determined by a and b. This Euclidean division is key to several other properties (divisibility), algorithms (such as the Euclidean algorithm), and ideas in number theory.

Generalizations

Two generalizations of natural numbers arise from the two uses:
For finite well-ordered sets, there is one-to-one correspondence between ordinal and cardinal numbers; therefore they can both be expressed by the same natural number, the number of elements of the set. This number can also be used to describe the position of an element in a larger finite, or an infinite, sequence.
Hypernatural numbers are part of a non-standard model of arithmetic due to Skolem.
Other generalizations are discussed in the article on numbers.

Formal definitions

Historically, the precise mathematical definition of the natural numbers developed with some difficulty. The Peano axioms state conditions that any successful definition must satisfy. Certain constructions show that, given set theory, models of the Peano postulates must exist.

Peano axioms

The Peano axioms give a formal theory of the natural numbers. The axioms are:
It should be noted that the "0" in the above definition need not correspond to the number zero. "0" simply means some object that when combined with an appropriate successor function, satisfies the Peano axioms. All systems that satisfy these axioms are elementarily equivalent in first-order logic, however, there exists models for the Peano axioms which are uncountable; these are called non-standard models for arithmetic and are guaranteed by the Upward Löwenheim-Skolem Theorem. The name "0" is used here for the first element (the term "zeroth element" has been suggested to leave "first element" to "1", "second element" to "2", etc.), which is the only element that is not a successor. For example, the natural numbers starting with 1 also satisfy the axioms, if the symbol 0 is interpreted as the natural number 1, the symbol S(0) as the number 2, etc. In fact, in Peano's original formulation, the first natural number was 1.

Constructions based on set theory

=A standard construction=

A standard construction in set theory, a special case of the von Neumann ordinal construction, is to define the natural numbers as follows:
When a natural number is used as a set, this is typically what is meant. Under this definition, there are exactly n elements (in the naïve sense) in the set n, and  (in the naïve sense) if and only if n is a subset of m.
Also, with this definition, different possible interpretations of notations like Rn (n-tuples versus mappings of n into R) coincide.
Even if one does not accept the axiom of infinity and therefore cannot accept that the set of all natural numbers exists, it is still possible to define what it means to be one of these sets. For a set n to be a natural number means that it is either 0 (empty) or a successor, and each of its elements is either 0 or the successor of another of its elements.

=Other constructions=

Although the standard construction is useful, it is not the only possible construction. For example:
It is also possible to define 0 = 
The oldest and most "classical" set-theoretic definition of the natural numbers is the definition commonly ascribed to Frege and Russell under which each concrete natural number n is defined as the set of all sets with n elements. Breslau. Principia Mathematica, 3 vols, Cambridge University Press, 1910, 1912, and 1913. Second edition, 1925 (Vol. 1), 1927 (Vols 2, 3). Abridged as Principia Mathematica to *56, Cambridge University Press, 1962. This may appear circular, but can be made rigorous with care. Define 0 as  will be the set of all sets with two elements, and so forth. The set of all natural numbers can be defined as the intersection of all sets containing 0 as an element and closed under S (that is, if the set contains an element n, it also contains S(n)). One could also define "finite" independently of the notion of "natural number", and then define natural numbers as equivalence classes of finite sets under the equivalence relation of equipollence. This definition does not work in the usual systems of axiomatic set theory because the collections involved are too large (it will not work in any set theory with the axiom of separation); but it does work in New Foundations (and in related systems known to be relatively consistent) and in some systems of type theory.



Notes






