[[Marcy Walker]]

CATEGORIES: American soap opera actresses, People from Paducah, Kentucky, 1961 births, Living people, Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series winners

Marcy Lynn Walker (born November 26, 1961), also known as Marcy Smith, is an American minister and former actress known for her television appearances on daytime soap operas. Her most famous roles are those of Liza Colby on All My Children, which she played from 1981–1984 and again 1995–2005, and as Eden Capwell on  Santa Barbara from 1984–1991.

Personal life

Walker was born in Paducah, Kentucky and traveled the world during her youth. In 1979, she graduated from Triad High School in Troy, Illinois, where she was active in the drama club.
Marcy has one son, Taylor, from her third husband, Stephan Collins. In 1999, she married Doug Smith and goes by the name Marcy Smith in her private life.  At one point, she was romantically involved with former All My Children costar Michael E. Knight, who played Tad Martin on the show.people.html  She was briefly engaged to actor Bronson Pinchot during the mid-1980s.nndb. In a 1998 interview with Soap Opera Digest, she explained the breakup.

Acting background

In 1981, Walker was cast in her first acting job on a daytime serial as Liza Colby on the ABC Television soap opera, All My Children. (She had turned down an offer to join the cast of As the World Turns.  The Official All My Children Trivia Book.  New York:  Hyperion, 1998.)  She was honored with two Outstanding Supporting Actress Daytime Emmy nominations in 1983 and 1984. After a successful three-year run, she decided to leave the show for other opportunities. She was replaced promptly with actress Alice Haining, as Liza Colby on the show.
In 1984, Walker created another popular soap opera role in the form of Eden Capwell on Santa Barbara. Her character, partnered with A Martinez's character, Cruz Castillo, became one of the show's most popular supercouples. She was nominated for Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series in 1987 and 1988, and finally won in 1989 for an emotional storyline in which her character was brutally attacked and raped. She left the show in 1991.
In 1993, she started playing the role of Tangie Hill on Guiding Light. While the role was created specifically for Walker, the character didn't catch on with the audience.  The actress declined to renew her contract in mid-1995 and left the show. "SABATINO OF 'B&B' A SOAP VETERAN." Sun-Sentinel 29 Jul. 1995, ALL, LIFESTYLE: 4D. NewsBank. Web. 3 Jul. 2013.  Walker then made a long-awaited comeback appearance as Liza Colby on All My Children in September 1995. In 2001, she was nominated for another Outstanding Lead Actress Daytime Emmy award.
On August 5, 2004, The Wilton Bulletin, a Connecticut newspaper, reported Walker's intention to become a full-time children's ministry director at Hope Church in Wilton, Connecticut upon the expiration of her ABC Television contract the following September. "From TV to church work - Soap star begins new role as children's ministry director." Wilton Bulletin, The (CT) 5 Aug. 2004, News: A001. NewsBank. Web. 11 Aug. 2013.  The actress had been interviewed for the article on July 20, 2004.  On August 20, 2004, soapcentral.
The exit of Liza Colby occurred amid rumor that Walker would return to the show on a recurring basis. This rumor was fueled by the fact that her exit was very open-ended. She was not killed off, like some notable fan favorites like Jesse Hubbard, played by Darnell Williams, but rather assumed a new identity. Her character simply decided to take her daughter to live out of reach from her controlling ex-husband Adam Chandler, played by David Canary.
According to Soap Opera Digest magazine, Walker was at first hesitant to go on a recurring basis, but later warmed to the idea. In December 2004, the writers created a scene where Liza appeared making a phone call. Walker appeared again in January 2005, when her character assisted Babe Carey Chandler and Jamie Martin, in their attempt to flee from Adam's wrath. The characters of Babe and Jamie were played by Alexa Havins and Justin Bruening.
Former head writer Megan McTavish spoke to the soap media and publicly thanked Walker for working without a contract, but also hinted that she did not intend for Liza to return to the show any time soon. However, in 2009, the character of Liza returned, albeit played this time by actress Jamie Luner.
After Walker left All My Children, she decided to accept a position in Christian ministry, based in Huntersville, North Carolina, where she remains working with youth.
In addition to her work with daytime soap operas, Walker has starred in several movies of the week, including The Return of Desperado, Bar Girls, Midnight's Child, and Terror In the Shadows.

Filmography

Awards and honors

Ministry background

In early 2005, after juggling two roles, one as an actress and another working part-time in her home church, Hope Church, in Wilton, Connecticut, she decided to pursue Christian ministry on a full-time basis. In 2005, she began working at Lake Forest Church in Huntersville, North Carolina as their Director of Children's Ministry. On July 22, 2010, she announced on her Facebook page that she was resigning her position on staff with the church to take a position at another Charlotte-area church. The Mission Pastor of her former church once said "Marcy is the coolest."
In 2011, Marcy joined the staff of LifeChurch.






