[[Nicole Kidman]]

CATEGORIES: 1967 births, Living people, 20th-century Australian actresses, 21st-century Australian actresses, Actresses from Sydney, Australian child actresses, Australian female singers, Australian film actresses, Australian emigrants to the United States, Australian people of Irish descent, Australian people of Scottish descent, Australian television actresses, Australian Roman Catholics, American child actresses, American female singers, American film actresses, American people of Irish descent, American people of Scottish descent, American television actresses, American Roman Catholics, American people of Australian descent, BAFTA winners (people), Best Actress Academy Award winners, Best Actress Empire Award winners, Best Drama Actress Golden Globe (film) winners, Best Musical or Comedy Actress Golden Globe (film) winners, Companions of the Order of Australia, People from Honolulu, Hawaii, UNICEF people, Australian Living Treasures, Tom Cruise, Best Actress BAFTA Award winners, Silver Bear for Best Actress winners, People educated at North Sydney Girls High School, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, Actresses from Hawaii, Keith Urban, American voice actresses, Australian voice actresses

Nicole Mary Kidman, AC (born 20 June 1967) is an Australian actress, singer and film producer. Kidman's breakthrough film role was in the 1989 thriller Dead Calm. Following several films in the early 1990s, she came to worldwide recognition for her performances in Days of Thunder (1990), Far and Away (1992), and Batman Forever (1995). She followed these with other successful films in the late 1990s. Her performance in the musical Moulin Rouge! (2001) earned her second Golden Globe Award and first Academy Award nomination for Best Actress. Her performance as Virginia Woolf in the drama film The Hours (2002) received critical acclaim and earned Kidman the Academy Award for Best Actress.
Kidman's other notable films include To Die For (1995), Eyes Wide Shut (1999), The Others (2001), Cold Mountain (2003), The Interpreter (2005) and Australia (2008). Her performance in 2010's Rabbit Hole (which she also produced) earned Kidman further accolades, including a third Academy Award nomination for Best Actress.  In 2012, she earned her first Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie for her role in Hemingway & Gellhorn. Kidman has been a Goodwill Ambassador for UNICEF since 1994 and for UNIFEM since 2006."UNIFEM Goodwill Ambassador Nicole Kidman". Unifem. January 2006. In 2006, Kidman was made a Companion of the Order of Australia,Stafford, Annabel: Kidman and the Kennedys honoured for their service, The Age, 14 April 2007. and was also the highest-paid actress in the motion picture industry. Kidman founded and owns the production company Blossom Films.

Early life

Nicole Kidman was born in Honolulu, Hawaii, while her Australian parents were temporarily in the United States on educational visas. Kidman can therefore claim citizenship in Australia and the United States. Nicole Kidman, Citadel Press, 2003, p.1 Her father, Antony David Kidman, is a biochemist, clinical psychologist, and author.
Kidman attended Lane Cove Public School and North Sydney Girls' High School. She was enrolled in ballet at three and showed her natural talent for acting in her primary and high school years.

Career

1983–1994

In 1983, aged 16, Kidman made her film debut in a remake of the Australian holiday season favourite Bush Christmas. By the end of 1983, she had a supporting role in the television series Five Mile Creek and began gaining popularity in the mid-1980s after appearing in several film roles, including BMX Bandits, Watch the Shadows Dance, and the romantic comedy Windrider (1986), which earned Kidman attention due to her racy scenes. Also during the decade, she appeared in several Australian productions, including the soap opera A Country Practice She also made guest appearances on Australian television programs and TV movies. She also appeared in Sesame Street.
In 1988, Kidman appeared in Emerald City, based on the play of the same name. The Australian film earned her an Australian Film Institute for Best Supporting Actress. Kidman next starred in Dead Calm (1989) as Rae Ingram, playing the wife of a naval officer. The thriller garnered strong reviews and brought Kidman to international recognition; Variety commented: "Throughout the film, Kidman is excellent. She gives the character of Rae real tenacity and energy."Dead Calm. Variety. 1 January 2007. Retrieved 10 March 2007. Meanwhile, critic Roger Ebert noted the excellent chemistry between the leads, stating, "Kidman and Zane do generate real, palpable hatred in their scenes together."Ebert, Roger (7 April 1989). "Dead Calm". Retrieved 10 March 2007. She followed that up with the Australian miniseries Bangkok Hilton. She next moved on to star alongside her then-boyfriend and future husband, Tom Cruise, in the 1990 auto racing film Days of Thunder, playing a young doctor who falls in love with a NASCAR driver. This was Kidman's American debut and was among the highest-grossing films of the year.
In 1991, she co-starred with former classmate and friend Naomi Watts and Thandie Newton in the Australian independent film Flirting. Kidman and Watts portrayed two high school girls in this coming of age story, which won the Australian Film Institute Award for Best Film.

1995–2003

In 1995, Kidman appeared in her highest-grossing live-action film (as of 2011),Kidman at Box Office Mojo playing Dr. Chase Meridian, the damsel in distress, in the superhero film Batman Forever, opposite Val Kilmer as the film's title character. That same year Kidman appeared in Gus Van Sant's critically acclaimed To Die For, earning praise, including winning her first Golden Globe for her portrayal of murderous newscaster Suzanne Stone Maretto. To Die For. Retrieved 28 April 2008.
In 1999, Kidman reunited with then husband, Tom Cruise, to portray a married couple in Eyes Wide Shut, the final film of Stanley Kubrick. The film opened to generally positive reviews but was subject to censorship controversies due to the explicit nature of its sex scenes.
In 2003, Kidman won critical praise for her portrayal of Virginia Woolf in Stephen Daldry's The Hours, which also featured Meryl Streep and Julianne Moore. Kidman wore prosthetics that were applied to her nose making her almost unrecognisable playing the author during her time in 1920s England, and her bouts with depression and mental illness while trying to write her novel, Mrs. Dalloway. The film earned positive notices and several nominations, including for an Academy Award for Best Picture. The New York Times wrote that, "Kidman tunnels like a ferret into the soul of a woman besieged by excruciating bouts of mental illness. As you watch her wrestle with the demon of depression, it is as if its torment has never been shown on the screen before. Directing her desperate, furious stare into the void, her eyes not really focusing, Ms. Kidman, in a performance of astounding bravery, evokes the savage inner war waged by a brilliant mind against a system of faulty wiring that transmits a searing, crazy static into her brain".Tomatoes "The Hours (2002), FILM REVIEW; Who's Afraid Like Virginia Woolf?" The New York Times
Kidman won numerous critics' awards, including her first BAFTA, third Golden Globe, and the Academy Award for Best Actress. As the first Australian actress to win an Academy Award, Kidman made a teary acceptance speech about the importance of art, even during times of war, saying, "Why do you come to the Academy Awards when the world is in such turmoil? Because art is important. And because you believe in what you do and you want to honour that, and it is a tradition that needs to be upheld."Memorable Moments From Oscar Night. ABC News. 23 March 2003. Retrieved 10 March 2007. Following her Oscar win, Kidman appeared in three very different films in 2003. The first, a leading role in Dogville, by Danish director Lars von Trier, was an experimental film set on a bare soundstage. The second was an adaptation of Philip Roth's novel The Human Stain, opposite Anthony Hopkins. Her third film, Anthony Minghella's war drama Cold Mountain, was a critical and commercial success. Kidman appeared opposite Jude Law and Renée Zellweger, playing Southerner Ada Monroe, who is in love with Law's character and separated by the Civil War. TIME magazine wrote, "Kidman takes strength from Ada's plight and grows steadily, literally luminous. Her sculptural pallor gives way to warm radiance in the firelight".

2004–2009

In 2004 she appeared in the film, Birth, which received controversy over a scene in which Kidman shares a bath with her co-star, 10-year-old Cameron Bright. At a press conference at the Venice Film Festival, Kidman addressed the controversy saying, "It wasn't that I wanted to make a film where I kiss a 10-year-old boy. I wanted to make a film where you understand love".
In conjunction with her success in the film industry, Kidman became the face of the Chanel No. 5 perfume brand. She starred in a campaign of television and print ads with Rodrigo Santoro, directed by Moulin Rouge! director Baz Luhrmann, to promote the fragrance during the holiday seasons of 2004, 2005, 2006, and 2008. The three-minute commercial produced for Chanel No. 5 made Kidman the record holder for the most money paid per minute to an actor after she reportedly earned US$12million for the three-minute advert.
Kidman portrayed photographer Diane Arbus in the biography Fur (2006), opposite Robert Downey, Jr.. Though the film was released to mixed reviews, both Kidman and Downey Jr. received praise for their performances. She also lent her voice to the animated film Happy Feet (2006), which grossed over US$384 million worldwide. In 2007, she starred in the science-fiction movie The Invasion directed by Oliver Hirschbiegel, a remake of the 1956 Invasion of the Body Snatchers that proved a critical and commercial failure. She also played opposite Jennifer Jason Leigh and Jack Black in Noah Baumbach's comedy-drama Margot at the Wedding, released to positive reviews and earning Kidman a Satellite Award nomination for Best Actress – Musical or Comedy. She then starred in the commercially successful fantasy-adventure, The Golden Compass (2007), playing the villainous Marisa Coulter.
In 2008, she reunited with Moulin Rouge! director Baz Luhrmann in the Australian period film Australia, set in the remote Northern Territory during the Japanese attack on Darwin during World War II. Kidman played opposite Hugh Jackman as an Englishwoman feeling overwhelmed by the continent. Despite the film's mixed reviews, the acting was praised and the movie was a box office success worldwide. Kidman appeared in the 2009 Rob Marshall musical Nine, portraying the Federico Fellini-like character's muse, Claudia Jenssen. She was featured alongside fellow Oscar winners Daniel Day-Lewis, Judi Dench, Marion Cotillard, Penélope Cruz and Sophia Loren. Kidman's, whose screen time was brief compared to the other actresses, performed the musical number "Unusual Way" alongside Day-Lewis. Although the film was released to mixed reviews, it received several Golden Globe and Academy Award nominations, and earned Kidman a fourth Screen Actors Guild Award nomination, as part of the Outstanding Cast.

2010–present

In 2010, she starred with Aaron Eckhart in the film adaptation of the Pulitzer Prize-winning play Rabbit Hole, for which she vacated her role in the Woody Allen picture You Will Meet a Tall Dark Stranger."Kidman bolts from Woody Allen film." Variety. 12 May 2009 Her work on Rabbit Hole earned her critical acclaim, and received nominations for the Academy Awards, Golden Globe Awards and Screen Actors Guild Awards. She lent her voice to a promotional video that Australia used to support its bid to host the 2018 World Cup. TV Guide reported in 2008 that Kidman will star in The Danish Girl, a film adaptation of the novel of the same name, playing Lili Elbe, the world's first postoperative transsexual."Nicole Kidman to Star as Transsexual, Marrying Charlize Theron in New Film" TV Guide. 10 November 2008. Retrieved 12 November 2008 Screen Daily reported that shooting would begin in Germany in July 2011."Hallstrom set to start The Danish Girl shoot in July", Screen Daily, 14 February 2011 However the project has been delayed following the exit of the director, Lasse Hallström and Kidman's co-star Rachel Weisz. 15 May 2011 In 2009, Variety  said that she would produce and star in a film adaptation of the Chris Cleave novel Little Bee, in association with BBC Films. 10 July 2009
In June 2010, TV Guide announced that Kidman and Clive Owen will star in an HBO film about Ernest Hemingway and his relationship with Martha Gellhorn. entitled Hemingway & Gellhorn. The film, directed by Philip Kaufman, began shooting in March 2011, with an air date scheduled for 2012. 10 March 2010 She also starred alongside Nicolas Cage in director Joel Schumacher's action-thriller Trespass, with the stars playing a married couple taken hostage."Nicole Kidman and Nicolas Cage to co-star for first time in 'Trespass'", The Guardian, 16 June 2010
On 17 September 2010, ContactMusic. com said Kidman would return to Broadway to portray Alexandra Del Lago in David Cromer's revival of Tennessee Williams' Sweet Bird of Youth, with Scott Rudin producing."Kidman Returning To Broadway", ContactMusic.'Sweet Bird' Won't Fly on Broadway This Fall; Franco No Longer Involved in Revival The New York Times. 30 August 2011
In June 2011, Kidman was cast in Lee Daniels' adaptation of the Pete Dexter novel, The Paperboy;Nicole Kidman in Talks to Join Lee Daniels' 'Paperboy' Amid Cast Shuffle (Exclusive) The Hollywood Reporter. 27 June 2011 she began filming on the thriller on 1 August 2011, and The Paperboy was released in 2012. In the film, she portrayed death row groupie Charlotte Bless, and performed sex scenes that she claims not to have remembered until seeing the finished film. "I was like okay, so that's what I did," she said. In April 2012, various sources, including Variety, announced that Kidman was in talks to star in upcoming Grace Kelly biopic Grace of Monaco. The film will focus on the 1962 crisis, in which Charles de Gaulle blockaded the tiny principality, angered by Monaco's status as a tax haven for wealthy French subjects.Nicole Kidman in talks to play Grace Kelly" The Daily Telegraph 6 April 2012
In 2012, Kidman's audiobook recording of Virginia Woolf's To the Lighthouse was released at Audible.
In April 2013 she was selected as a member of the main competition jury at the 2013 Cannes Film Festival.

Singing

Her collaboration with Ewan McGregor on "Come What May" peaked at No.27 in the UK Singles Chart. Retrieved 30 May 2011 Later she collaborated with Robbie Williams on "Somethin' Stupid", a cover version for Williams' swing covers album Swing When You're Winning. It peaked at No.8 in the Australian ARIAnet Singles Chart, and at No.1 for three weeks in the UK. Retrieved 30 May 2011]
In 2006, while voicing a role in the animated movie Happy Feet, she provided vocals for Norma Jean's "heartsong," a slightly altered version of "Kiss" by Prince.

Personal life

Relationships and children

Kidman has been married twice: first to actor Tom Cruise, and now to country singer Keith Urban. She has an adopted son and daughter with Cruise as well as two biological daughters with Urban. Kidman met Cruise in November 1989 on the set of their 1990 movie Days of Thunder. She and Cruise were married on Christmas Eve 1990 in Telluride, Colorado. The couple adopted a daughter, Isabella Jane (born 1992),Tom Cruise Biography from People. On 5 February 2001, the couple's spokesperson announced their separation. In the June 2006 issue of Ladies' Home Journal, she said she still loved Cruise: "He was huge; still is. To me, he was just Tom, but to everybody else, he is huge. But he was lovely to me and I loved him. I still love him." In addition, she has expressed shock about their divorce."Nicole Kidman: Still Loves Tom Cruise". ABC News. 8 May 2006. Retrieved 10 March 2007.
Prior to marrying Cruise, Kidman lived with Australian stage actor Marcus Graham in the late 1980s. In the mid-1980s, she dated her Windrider co-star Tom Burlinson,"Best wishes for Kidman" 7 May 2006, The Sydney Morning Herald"Other Tom gives Nic saddle tips" 16 April 2007, The Age whom she lived with on and off for three years, according to biographer Andrew Morton."Love went cold with Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman" 20 January 2008, Herald Sun Robbie Williams stated that he had a short romance with Kidman on her yacht in 2004.
Kidman met her second husband, Australian country singer Keith Urban, at G'Day LA, an event honouring Australians, in January 2005. They married on 25 June 2006, at Cardinal Cerretti Memorial Chapel in the grounds of St Patrick's Estate, Manly in Sydney.

Religious and political views

Kidman is a Roman Catholic. Kidman has donated to U.S. Democratic party candidates."Nicole Kidman's Federal Campaign Contribution Report", NewsMeat. Retrieved 22 October 2006.

Wealth, philanthropy and honours

In 2002, Kidman first appeared on the Australian rich list published annually in the Business Review Weekly with an estimated net worth of A$122 million.
In the 2006 Australia Day Honours, Kidman was made a Companion of the Order of Australia (AC) for "service to the performing arts as an acclaimed motion picture performer, to health care through contributions to improve medical treatment for women and children and advocacy for cancer research, to youth as a principal supporter of young performing artists, and to humanitarian causes in Australia and internationally."
In the beginning of 2009, Kidman appeared in a series of postage stamps featuring Australian actors. She, Geoffrey Rush, Russell Crowe and Cate Blanchett each appear twice in the series: once as themselves and once as their Academy Award-winning character.

Filmography

Film



Television

Producer

Awards

In 2003, Kidman received a Star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. In addition to her 2003 Academy Award for Best Actress, Kidman has received Best Actress awards from the following critics' groups or award-granting organisations: the Hollywood Foreign Press (Golden Globes), the Australian Film Institute, Blockbuster Entertainment Awards, Empire Awards, Golden Satellite Awards, Hollywood Film Festival, London Critics Circle, Russian Guild of Film Critics, and the Southeastern Film Critics Association. In 2003, Kidman was given the American Cinematheque Award. She also received recognition from the National Association of Theatre Owners at the ShoWest Convention in 1992 as the Female Star of Tomorrow and in 2002 for a Distinguished Decade of Achievement in Film.

Discography



Further reading

  | last =Ellis
  | first =Lucy  
  | authorlink = 
  | title = Nicole Kidman: The Biography
  | publisher=  Aurum Pr Ltd
  | year = 2002
  | isbn = 978-1-85410-859-3
  | ref = 
  }}
  | last =Dickerson
  | first = James 
  | authorlink = 
  | title = Nicole Kidman
  | publisher= Citadel
  | year = 2003
  | isbn = 978-0-8065-2490-0
  | ref = 
  }}
  | last = Thomson
  | first = David
  | authorlink = David Thomson (film critic)
  | title = Nicole Kidman
  | publisher=Knopf
  | year = 2006
  | isbn = 978-1-4000-4273-9
  | ref = harv
 }}




