[[Lisa Rinna]]

CATEGORIES: 1963 births, Actresses from Oregon, American soap opera actresses, American television actresses, American television personalities, American television talk show hosts, American people of Italian descent, Living people, People from Medford, Oregon, Participants in American reality television series, Dancing with the Stars (U.S. TV series) participants, The Apprentice (U.S. TV series) contestants, North Medford High School alumni

Lisa Deanna Rinna (born July 11, 1963) is an American television host and actress. She is best known for her roles as Billie Reed on Days of our Lives, Taylor McBride on Melrose Place, and as the host of SoapNet's Soap Talk.

Career

Acting

At age 22, Rinna appeared in the 1985 John Parr "Naughty Naughty" music video as the passenger in Parr's car. Rinna later appeared as the girlfriend to Jason Bateman's character in several episodes of The Hogan Family in 1990. In 1992, she received national recognition when she first starred on NBC's Days of our Lives as Billie Reed. She departed in 1995, though reprised the role from 2002 to 2003. She later switched from daytime to primetime, portraying Taylor McBride on Aaron Spelling's Melrose Place from 1996 to 1998. Rinna has starred in two projects opposite husband Harry Hamlin, the teen crime-drama Veronica Mars, and the Lifetime movie Sex, Lies & Obsession. Her previous Lifetime movie, Another Woman's Husband, boasted one of the highest ratings for a movie on Lifetime since 1999. She has also appeared in Hannah Montana in the role of Mr. Dontzig's cousin Francesca. She also guest-starred on an episode of Movie Stars for the WB, the first ever on-screen appearance she shared opposite her husband. Rinna got her first role in the feature film Good Advice, starring Charlie Sheen and Jon Lovitz, and recently appeared in an episode of HBO's Entourage. Rinna recently announced that she would love to reprise her role of Taylor McBride on CW's revival Melrose Place, if given the offer.
In February 2009, Rinna starred in the Broadway production of Chicago, portraying the role of Roxie Hart, alongside her husband, who played the role of Billy Flynn.

Hosting and reality television

In 2002, Rinna was named co-host of Soap Talk, the daily lifestyle show that airs on SOAPnet, for which she received a Daytime Emmy Award nomination. In June 2006, SoapNet announced that it was canceling Soap Talk after four seasons due to low ratings.
In August 2007, Rinna  replaced Joan Rivers as the host of TV Guide Network's red carpet coverage.  Rinna has recently guest-hosted Live with Regis and Kelly. Lisa Rinna also hostead the TV makeover program Merge on Lifetime.
She competed in the second season of Dancing with the Stars with professional Louis van Amstel and was eliminated in Round Seven based on audience voting, despite having higher marks from the judges than fellow celebrity dancer Jerry Rice. Lisa was also featured as a guest judge on the fourth episode of RuPaul's Drag Race.
In 2008, TV Guide reported that Rinna and Hamlin signed a deal to create a reality TV series based around their family life. December 4, 2008. The series is called Harry Loves Lisa and it premiered on TV Land on October 6, 2010.
In 2011, Rinna participated in Season 4 of Celebrity Apprentice. She was eliminated after being the project manager on the 2nd task, writing and performing a children's book. Rinna returned to the show in its sixth season as one of the "All-Stars" contestants. After being eliminated, she appeared on the May 13, 2013 episode of Late Night with Jimmy Fallon with Lil Jon to talk about their time on the show.

Modeling

In 1998, Rinna, while six months pregnant, posed for a nude pictorial and cover shoot for the September issue of Playboy magazine. She later recounted the instructions given to her by Playboy photographer Deborah Anderson: " "I do not want you long and sinewy and angular and muscular. I want you soft...' This was really hard for me because being 35 years old and posing for Playboy, you want to amp it up."
In May 2009, she posed again for Playboy and was its cover model."Lisa Rinna to Pose Nude", OK! magazine, December 19, 2008
In 2012 to benefit the charity Dress for Success, she modeled an adult incontinence brief made by Depend under a tight fitting evening gown.

Business owner

Rinna owns a Belle Gray clothing boutique in Sherman Oaks, California.

Personal life

Rinna was born in Medford, Oregon, the daughter of Lois and Frank Rinna.com/html/living/2002227643_lisarinna03. They have two daughters, Delilah Belle (born June 10, 1998) and Amelia Gray (born June 13, 2001). They have performed together in a number of television and film productions, including the commercial for Depend (undergarment), as well as portraying a married couple on the first season of the television series Veronica Mars.
She has acknowledged having plastic surgery and having silicone, botox and Juvéderm injections; although she remains fond of botox, she has said that using Juvéderm was a mistake."Lisa Rinna: I Am "No Longer" Speaking About Plastic Surgery", US magazine, February 22, 2010 She made the announcement on Kathie Lee & Hoda (2013) that she had most of the silicone in her lips removed because it became 'hard'.

Filmography






