[[Bob Carolgees]]

CATEGORIES: 1948 births, Living people, People from Birmingham, West Midlands, English puppeteers, British comedy puppets

Bob Carolgees (born Robert Johnson, 12 May 1948 in Birmingham, United Kingdom) is a comedy entertainer who  appeared on the Saturday morning TV series Tiswas and then later in its adult versions O.T.T. and Saturday Stayback. He is best known for appearing with a puppet named Spit the Dog.

Career

In the early 1970s Carolgees ran a DJ and modelling school at 11A Lord Street in Liverpool. After a five-week course, DJs and models were tested in front of an audience at the Sportsmans Club in Central Liverpool.
Carolgees first appeared in a guest spot on Tiswas on 31 March 1979. Carolgees, in pyjamas and headband, was also the Tiswas character Houdi Elbow, a comedy 'psychic' and  small time magician.
As well as gaining national fame with these and Spit the Dog, he was also part of The Four Bucketeers who made the UK Top 30 in 1980, even making a Top of the Pops appearance.
Carolgees went on to work for eight years alongside Cilla Black in Surprise, Surprise and he was for nearly two decades entertained British armed forces around the world.
In the 1980s, and at the height of his popularity, he featured in a series of Hellmann's Mayonnaise press and television commercials for eight years dressed as an overgrown schoolboy. 
Carolgees now owns a candle shop — Carolgees Candles — in Frodsham, Cheshire.R (2011) 'Two wheels - lots of tweets', The Guardian, Travel p.5, 2011-06-11. He temporarily came out of show business retirement to appear with all his old colleagues in Tiswas Reunited on ITV on 16 June 2007.
Carolgees made a surprise return to show business by agreeing to appear in pantomime at Hull New Theatre for the 2013 run of Jack and the Beanstalk. Carolgees was quoted as saying ""What I had missed most was panto".hulldailymail.co.html

Spit The Dog auction

An early Spit the Dog puppet raised over £5,000 at a Christie's auction in 2004.

Stage Name

The name Carolgees comes from friends Carole and George Dunmore who owned a record shop called Carolgees Records & Cassettes. Carole and George also operated a mobile disco called Carolgees Cabaret Disco which became extremely popular around Merseyside and was where Carolgees developed his act.

In popular culture

Carolgess is mentioned in episodes of That Peter Kay Thing, and appeared in a couple of episodes.






