[[American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics]]

CATEGORIES: Organizations established in 1963, American engineering organizations, Aerospace engineering organizations, Professional associations based in the United States, Fellows of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA) is the professional society for the field of aerospace engineering. The AIAA was founded in 1963 from the merger of two earlier societies: the American Rocket Society (ARS), founded in 1930 as the American Interplanetary Society (AIS), and the Institute of the Aerospace Sciences (IAS), founded in 1932 as the Institute of the Aeronautical Sciences.
AIAA is the U.S. representative on the International Astronautical Federation and the International Council of the Aeronautical Sciences. , AIAA has more than 35,000 members. Despite its name, the society has members among aerospace professionals worldwide, although the majority are American and/or live in the United States. Some AIAA seminars and conventions are restricted to U.S. citizens, due to security issues.
AIAA is split to seven regions, North-East, South-East, Central, South-Central, Mid-West, West, and International.  The regions are subdivided into Sections, usually based in major cities.  Universities with programs in aerospace engineering or related fields may form Student Branches, which are overseen and in part funded by their parent Section.
Another aspect of AIAA is their standards writing activities.  In the past, AIAA standards for aeronautics have been incorporated into broader standards and public laws.  These standards help transition innovative aeronautical ideas to everyday usage.

Journals

As a major activity AIAA currently publishes several technical journals. The AIAA Journal is published on a monthly basis and serves as the flagship journal of the society. The other journals are published bi-monthly and have more specialized topics:
A monthly general interest magazine called Aerospace America is sent to all members. AIAA also produces several series of technical books ranging from education to progress in advanced research topics.

Quality

Till 2012 AIAA Jl and Jl of Aircraft had kept clear distinction by having editors with highly diversified background. Currently both journals have editors with almost identical backgroundJournal of Aircraft, May–June, 1993, pp. 387-394; AIAA Journal of Guidance, Control, and  Dynamics, Vol. 15, No. 4, July–August 1992, pp. 985-993;AIAA Journal, Vol. 30, No. 5, May 1992, pp. 1171-1179.mae.edu that can lead to  conflict of interest situation and result in poor quality papers.

Review Papers

One of the important contributions of these Journals is review and survey papers by experts. Review and survey papers are written by those who have conducted extensive research for decades. One of the best example is by Prof. DugundjiJohn Dugundji 'Personal Perspective of Aeroelasticity During the Years 1953-1993'  Volume 40, Issue 5 2003. of MIT.  Of recent routine reports on literature search are presented as survey/review papers by those who have conducted marginal research in the related field. AIAA Journal, 51(9):2049–2075, Sep 2013'Aeroelastic and Aerothermoelastic Analysis in Hypersonic Flow: Past, Present, and Future ' AIAA Journal, 2011, Vol.49: 1089-1122"A survey of recent developments in rotorcraft design optimization" 2004/5 Journal of Aircraft Volume 41 Issue 3, 2004 They read like a company progress reports. Such papers often accepted because 'whom they know next door' (e.g Ref 2-Editor and author are collegues, Ref 4- Author is  Former student of Associate Editor) will have adverse impact on quality.

The AIAA Foundation

AIAA formed the AIAA Foundation to devote more attention and more resources to the education of both practicing and future aerospace professionals.
Specifically, the Foundation: funds programs including assistance, research, and professional societies that recognize the outstanding individual contributions of educators and students provides additional educational services to aerospace professionals. The AIAA Foundation funds numerous scholarships for both undergraduate and graduate students. Undergraduate scholarships range from $2,000 to $2,500. Graduate scholarships are $5,000 or $10,000.

Student branches

AIAA has recognized that the U.S. aerospace industry is facing a rapidly aging workforce, and recently has begun pushing to recruit new students to the field.  Student Branches tend to be on the front lines of this task, with many Sections offering funding or incentives for their Student Branches to increase membership.  AIAA currently has over 6,500 student members.
AIAA currently has over 160 active student branches, including 12 foreign student branches, with a total active membership of over 6,500 students worldwide.
The student branches also host annual conferences in each of its nine branches. AIAA Student Conference site All the conferences vary in character from one another, but essentially their purpose is to provide a forum for AIAA Student Members at colleges and universities within the region to present technical papers in public competition. Cash prizes of US$500, US$300 and US$250 are awarded for 1st, 2nd, and 3rd place prizes in the undergraduate and graduate (masters candidates only) categories. The conferences serve to indoctrinate students into the practice of presenting technical work at AIAA meetings.
The fundamental objective of AIAA Regional Student Conferences is to provide student members with an educational experience that prepares them for their future as practicing aerospace engineers. Although regional conferences vary in character, students attend and present technical work as they would at a professional AIAA meeting. In addition, they establish professional relationships, learn from others, and hone their communication skills. Their work, both written and oral, is evaluated by professional members serving as judges, with the primary intent of providing substantial feedback on the quality of their work. The highest scoring papers are also recognized with awards and prize money.
Any AIAA member, student or professional, is invited to participate in a conference. Only undergraduate and Masters' level student papers are accepted for competition. Ph.D. student papers are NOT eligible to compete for awards or prize money. Their work may be presented for review only; it would be more appropriate for them to present at AIAA professional technical meetings.

Technical committees

AIAA has formed a number of Technical Committees on topics of interest to its members.  These committees are formed under major topic headings which identify their common interests.  Additionally the Technical Committees develop and manage their own conferences and other events to promote, educate, or professionally develop skills and interest in their topic of interest.  The technical committees listed by the Institute are:


Space Colonization Technical Committee

The AIAA's Space Colonization Technical Committee was formed under the major group of Space and Missile systems.

Since its formation it has issued two papers: SCTC Statement on Robust Implementation of Lunar Settlements and SCTC Recommendations for Robust Implementation of Lunar Settlements.

Honors and awards

AIAA recognizes persons who have contributed significantly to the fields of Aeronautics and/or Astronautics via issuing a variety of Honors and Awards. These include special memberships grades, such as:

Goddard Astronautics Award

AIAA's highest award for astronautics. It was endowed by
Mrs. Robert Goddard in commemoration of her husband's pioneering efforts that led to the development of the fields of astronautics.

Reed Aeronautics Award

AIAA's highest award for aeronautical science and engineering. It is named for Dr.
Sylvanus A. Reed pioneer of the use of metal in propellor blades.

Holt Ashley Award for Aeroelasticity

Initiated by the founder of Zonatech" and given every 4 years for those who have contributed significantly to the area of aeroelasticity. It is named after famous aeroelastician Prof. Holt Ashley who served as a faculty member at MIT and Stanford. Selection is monitored/coordinated by the awards sub-committee of AIAA Structural Dynamics technical group.

=Controversies=

Holt Ashley. "Role of Shocks in the "Sub-Transonic" Flutter Phenomenon", Journal of Aircraft, Vol. 17, No. 3 (1980), pp. 187-197.[/ref] In that article he cited works from many others who deserved the award.

Lectureships

Missile Systems Award

The AIAA Missile Systems Award may be presented in two categories, Technical and Management. The Technical Award is presented for a significant accomplishment in developing or using technology that is required for missile systems. The candidate must have demonstrated expertise in aerodynamics, guidance, thermophysics, navigation, control, propulsion, or other fundamental technical disciplines that has led to substantial improvement in missile systems. The Technical and Management award are presently alternatively at the biannual Missile Sciences Conference. Thus, the awards are presented once every four years. The 2008 Technical Award winner was Ernest Ohlmeyer. The award is administred by the AIAA Missile Systems Technical Committee.

Wyld Propulsion Award

This award is presented annually to honor "outstanding achievement in the development or application of rocket propulsion systems". The award honors James H. Wyld.

Other awards

Conferences

As of 2010, AIAA will be taking over the organisation of the annual International Conference on Environmental Systems, a technical conference which focuses on manned space systems. Prior to this, the conference was organized by the Society of Automotive Engineers.








