[[Dungarvan]]

CATEGORIES: Dungarvan, County towns in the Republic of Ireland, Towns and villages in County Waterford, Parishes in Diocese of Waterford and Lismore

Dungarvan () is a seaside resort town and harbour on the south coast of Ireland in the province of Munster. Dungarvan is the county town and administrative centre of County Waterford.waterfordcoco. The town lies on the N25 road (European route E30), which connects Cork, Waterford and Rosslare Europort.
Dungarvan is at the mouth of the Colligan River, which divides the town into two parts connected by a causeway and bridge of a single arch. Both bridge and causeway were built by the Dukes of Devonshire. The neighbouring parish is called Abbeyside, where portions of an Augustinian friary founded by the McGraths family in the fourth century survive incorporated with a Roman Catholic church. In Dungarvan proper, a castle built by King John of England stands by the harbour. Of the walls John built at the same time to fortify the town, no traces remain.

History

Dungarvan was incorporated in the 15th century, was represented by two members in the Irish Parliament until the Act of Union in 1801, and returned one member to the Westminster Parliament until 1885. Unlike nearby Waterford and Duncannon, Dungarvan surrendered without a siege in the Cromwellian conquest of Ireland (1649–53).
The 1921 Burgery ambush, an incident in the Irish War of Independence, took place near the town.

File:Dungarvan Bay.jpg|Dungarvan Bay
File:Dungarvan ireland church.JPG|The old cemetery in Dungarvan
File:Dungarvan ireland bridge.jpg|The Bridge in Dungarvan (1816)
File:Dungarvan Port.jpg|Dungarvan Port
File:Dungarvan Castle.jpg|Dungarvan Castle
File:Dungarvan Church.jpg|Dungarvan Church
File:Dungarva Sea View.jpg|Dungarvan View
File:Dungarva Bay View.jpg|Dungarvan Bay
File:Dungarvan Lighthouse.jpg|Dungarvan Lighthouse
File:Dungarvan Bay in Blue.jpg|Dungarvan Bay

Geography

Dungarvan is situated at the mouth of the Colligan River. Dungarvan Harbour as such is formed by The Quay (on the town side) and The Causeway. A single span bridge was built in the late 18th century by Lord Devonshire to link Dungarvan with Abbeyside and indeed Waterford via said causeway. Outside the harbour, a 3 km sandbar, "The Cunnigar" (Irish An Coinigéar) defines the western limit of the 4 km-wide Dungarvan Bay. The Cunnigar encloses the estuary of the River Brickey which flows out to sea at Abbeyside without actually joining the Colligan. The two estuaries are separated by "The Point".

Transport

It is positioned on the N25 national primary road and the R672 and R675 regional roads.
The town is separated from the open ocean by a shallow, eastward-facing bay. At its mouth, the bay is about two miles wide, with Dungarvan lying about four miles from the mouth. A meandering navigation channel marked by red/green buoys leads into Dungarvan from the ocean. For most vessels (except small dinghies) this channel is not navigable at low tide. Even at high tide, cruising yachts and larger vessels must be careful to remain in the buoyed channel. There is a well-maintained concrete slipway in Dungarvan town, suitable for launching vessels up to eight metres in length. However, larger vessels should only use it up to three hours either side of high tide.  Moorings are usually made available to visiting yachts by Dungarvan Harbour Sailing Club, often free of charge.
The nearest airports are Waterford Airport, which is 50km away and the larger Cork Airport, which is 80km away.

Industry

One of the few major manufacturing facilities for GlaxoSmithKline consumer products is located in Dungarvan, employing more than 700 people. The town is also the home of Radley Engineering, the company responsible for manufacturing the Spire of Dublin. In days now gone Dungarvan had a thriving tannery, a distillery a gasworks, a fishing fleet and in the latter 20th century, a major source of trade and employment was Dungarvan Cooperative(Creamery) which firmly bonded the town of Dungarvan with its agricultural hinterland.

International relations

Twin towns – Sister cities

In March 2007, the town became a sister city of Erie, Pennsylvania in the United States. Mercyhurst College, located in Erie, hosts the Global Intelligence Forum held annually in Dungarvan.

Literature

The British Poet Laureate, Sir John Betjeman (who lived in Ireland from 1941 to 1943) mentions Dungarvan in his poem, "The Irish Unionist's Farewell to Greta Hellstrom". Each stanza closes with the line, "Dungarvan in the rain".
Also mentioned in the collection of short stories "Labyrinths" by Jorge Luis Borges: "He was Irish, from Dungarvan. Having said this, he stopped short, as if he had revealed a secret"
Poet Mai O'Higgins was born on St. Mary St. in the town centre.Waterford News & Star –  Friday, October 08, 2004 – "Mai O'Higgins back on song"
Dungarvan is also mentioned in the Novel, The Story of Lucy Gault.

People








