[[Canonical commutation relation]]

CATEGORIES: Quantum mechanics, Mathematical physics

In quantum mechanics (physics), the canonical commutation relation is the fundamental relation between canonical conjugate quantities (quantities which are related by definition such that one is the Fourier transform of another). For example,
between the position   .
This relation is attributed to Max Born (1925), to imply the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.

Relation to classical mechanics

By contrast, in classical physics, all observables commute and the commutator would be zero. However, an analogous relation exists, which is obtained by replacing the commutator with the Poisson bracket multiplied by :
This observation led Dirac to propose that the quantum counterparts    satisfy
In 1946, Hip Groenewold demonstrated that a general systematic correspondence  between  quantum commutators and Poisson brackets could not hold consistently. However, he did appreciate that such a systematic correspondence does, in fact, exist between the quantum commutator and a deformation of the Poisson bracket, the Moyal bracket, and, in general, quantum operators and  classical observables and distributions in phase space. He thus finally elucidated the correspondence mechanism, Weyl quantization, that underlies an alternate equivalent mathematical approach to quantization known as deformation quantization.

Representations

The group , is called the Heisenberg group.
According to the standard mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics, quantum observables such as   can be arbitrarily large. Utilizing the Weyl relations, below, it can actually be shown that both operators are unbounded.
These canonical commutation relations can be rendered somewhat "tamer" by writing them in terms of the (bounded) unitary operators , which do admit finite-dimensional representations. The resulting braiding relations for these are the so-called Weyl relations 
The corresponding group commutator is then 
The uniqueness of the canonical commutation relations between position and momentum is then guaranteed by the Stone–von Neumann theorem.

Generalizations

The simple formula
This definition of the canonical momentum ensures that one of the Euler–Lagrange equations has the form
The canonical commutation relations then amount to
where  is the Kronecker delta.
Further, it can be easily shown that

Gauge invariance

Canonical quantization is applied, by definition, on canonical coordinates.  However, in the presence of an electromagnetic field, the canonical momentum  is not gauge invariant.  The correct gauge-invariant momentum (or "kinetic momentum") is
where  is the "physical momentum", in that it is the quantity to be identified with momentum in laboratory experiments, it does not satisfy the canonical commutation relations; only the canonical momentum does that. This can be seen as follows.
The non-relativistic Hamiltonian for a quantized charged particle of mass  in a classical electromagnetic field is (in cgs units)
where , the Maxwell equations and the Lorentz force law are invariant under the gauge transformation
where
and Λ=Λ(x,t) is the gauge function.
The angular momentum operator is
and obeys the canonical quantization relations 
The gauge-invariant angular momentum (or "kinetic angular momentum") is given by
which has the commutation relations
where
is the magnetic field. The inequivalence of these two formulations shows up in the Zeeman effect and the Aharonov–Bohm effect.

Angular momentum operators

From , etc, it follows directly from the above that 
All such nontrivial commutation relations for pairs of operators lead to corresponding uncertainty relations,, etc.
Then 
where  is the anticommutator.
This follows through use of the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality, since
. (cf. Uncertainty principle derivations.)
Judicious choices for , as usual.
Here, for , among others.






