[[Spokane River]]

CATEGORIES: Geography of Spokane, Washington, Rivers of Idaho, Rivers of Washington (state), Tributaries of the Columbia River, Landforms of Spokane County, Washington, Landforms of Lincoln County, Washington, Landforms of Stevens County, Washington, Landforms of Kootenai County, Idaho

The Spokane River is a tributary of the Columbia River, approximately  long, in northern Idaho and eastern Washington in the United States. It drains a low mountainous area east of the Columbia, passing through the city of Spokane, Washington.

Description

The Spokane River drains the northern part of Lake Coeur d'Alene in the Idaho Panhandle, emptying into the Columbia River at Franklin D. Roosevelt Lake, approximately 180 km downstream. 92Soltero et al, 1994: p. 460 
From Lake Coeur d'Alene, the Spokane River traverses the Rathdrum Prairie until reaching Post Falls, Idaho where it passes over a dam, and a natural 40-foot waterfall. Continuing westward it passes over 5 more dams, four of which are located in the city of Spokane. In Spokane, it flows over the Spokane Falls, which are located in the heart of Downtown Spokane, approximately one third of the way down the rivers length.
The Spokane River's entire drainage basin is about .

Human use

Until the 18th century, the Coeur d'Alene (Schḭtsu'umsh) and Spokane Indians (along with other Salish peoples) used to live and travel along the banks of the Spokane River.
Today, the metropolitan area of the city of Spokane, Washington (population 425,000) is the largest human settlement on the banks of the Spokane River. The metropolitan areas of Coeur d'Alene and Post Falls, Idaho (pop. 200,000) are also seated alongside the river. The Spokane River and Lake Coeur d'Alene area the primary sources of recharge for the Spokane aquifer, which is the primary source of drinking water for each of these settlements. 93

Pollution

The Spokane River contains some of the highest concentrations of heavy metals of any river in the state, resulting from pollution coming from Lake Coeur D'Alene and traveling from the Bunker Hill Mine and Smelting Complex Superfund Site.F., Science of the Total Environment, Volume: 303   Issue: 1-2, Pages: 15–23, Published: February 15, 2003
Spokane's sewage treatment facilities empty their outflow into the Spokane River. In 1889, Spokane built a sewage system that dumped raw sewage directly into the river, which was visibly noticeable by 1920. In 1957 a primary treatment facility was installed; however, this was soon deemed inadequate by the Washington State Department of Ecology. This led to the construction of a more advanced treatment plant that utilized chemical precipitation technology, which was connected in 1975, and operational by 1977.

Fish habitat

After the Northern Pacific Railway lines arrived in Spokane in 1882, there was rapid growth in milling operations along the river. Many of these mills required dams to provide power for their machinery. As a result of the dams blocking the river, salmon populations in the Spokane plummeted, leading to complaints from many of the people living upstream. After the construction of Long Lake Dam in 1915 by Washington Water Power blocked upstream passage, the river's salmon populations disappeared completely.4 (October 1991), 122–131.
Steelhead were also abundant on the Spokane River, prior to pollution and the construction of the dams. Today, the Spokane River system is one of the two largest unoccupied stretches of steelhead habitat within their former range.
Today, the Spokane River supports populations of rainbow trout, northern pikeminnow, and Bridgelip Suckers (Catostomus columbianus), as well as several non-native species. Many of the remaining fish, however, are not suitable for human consumption due to the chemical pollution in the river, with signs alongside the river warning that the fish are contaminated with PCBs.





Notes

Bibliography

Further reading




