[[Citroën Dyane]]

CATEGORIES: Citroën 2CV, Citroën vehicles, Subcompact cars, Automobiles powered by boxer engines, 1960s automobiles, 1970s automobiles, 1980s automobiles

The Citroën Dyane is an economy car/supermini produced by the French automaker Citroën from 1967 to 1983. The design was based on the Citroën 2CV. 1,443,583 were manufactured.  
A panel van version called the Acadiane derived from the Dyane.

Market context

The Dyane was a development of the Citroën 2CV, and was intended as an answer to the increasingly popular Renault 4, which after its introduction in 1961 had affected 2CV sales. The Renault 4 incorporated many ideas copied from the Citroën Traction Avant, but on a smaller scale. Like the Renault 4, the Dyane was designed from the outset as a hatchback with some other styling differences, such as conventional round headlamps set into the front fender with a squared stainless steel trim ring – as opposed to the old-fashioned separate units found on the 2CV – and stainless steel wheel embellishments as standard. It was and is often asserted that the Dyane was intended to replace the 2CV, but it was nevertheless aimed slightly higher in the Citroën range – between the 2CV and the Ami – and attracted a different clientele seeking the versatility offered by the Dyane's hatchback.

Panhard connections

At the time of the Dyane's development, the Citroën design department was busy on updates of the key DS and Ami models: design of the Dyane was therefore initially subcontracted to the Panhard design department, Panhard's non-military business having in 1965 been absorbed into Citroën's car business. The Panhard team under Louis Bioner (who had designed every Panhard model introduced between the late 1920s and the mid 1960s) produced a proposal that at a detailed level proved controversial with Citroën's design chief, Robert Opron: the car was significantly reworked ahead of launch. The Dyane's Panhard associations are also reflected in its name, Panhard having registered a copyright on the name Dyane along with Dyna, Dynavia and Dynamic.

The car

Equipment levels

At launch the car was offered with two levels of equipment and trim.   The "Luxe" version was differentiated from the outside through the inclusion of hub-caps on the wheels.  The spare wheel was mounted in a special cradle under the bonnet/hood (rather than simply being placed loose on the floor of the luggage area at the back).   The interior of the "Luxe" was slightly less basic, and the steering wheel less "rustic" than that which the less expensive "Confort" version of the Dyane shared with the Citroën 2CV.   The extra 615 francs in the 1967 domestic market listed price for the Dyane "Luxe" represented a supplement of just over 10% when compared to the list price for the more basic "Confort".

Engine and running gear

As with the 2CV, the engine was air-cooled, with a hemispherical combustion chamber and flat-topped pistons. The Dyane was launched on its home market in August 1967, and for the first five months only the 2CV's 425cc engine was fitted. 

=More Power=

The "Dyane 6" was announced at the Brussels Motor Show in January 1968, fitted with the Ami's 602cc M4 engine.   This came with an advertised maximum output of 
The 602cc engined Dyane did not replace the original 425cc engined car.   However, two months later, in March 1968,  the 425cc unit was replaced, in a car now described as the "Dyane 4",  by an improved 435cc engine providing  (SAE).   The extra power came from changes including not merely the slightly claimed cylinder dimensions, as well as an extra 2 mm of carburetor diameter and a raised compression ratio.  Although there was a price to be paid in terms of higher fuel consumption, the listed top speed went up to 105 km/h (66 mph) and acceleration was measurably less anæmic.
In September 1968 the M4 was replaced by an improved 602cc engine featuring higher compression pistons and forced induction from the engine fan giving slightly more power. As with the 2CV and Ami, cooling air was ducted straight to the heater, giving excellent demisting and heating. Mechanical contact-breakers were mounted to the crankshaft and seated behind the cooling fan. The Fan was mounted on a tapered shaft and secured with a bolt at the bottom of a deep tube (the top of which engaged the starter handle). As the location of the points was not obvious to the uninformed, there were often neglected. The Coil fired both cylinders simultaneously (wasting one spark) and the spark plug wear was faster than it ought to have been; 6000 miles was not uncommon for a spark plug.
Cylinder heads were held on with three studs and barrels slipped over the pistons. No Cylinder-head gasket was used, and since the wings unbolted in a few minutes, it was possible to remove the cylinder heads and barrels, change the pistons or piston-rings and reassemble the top end very quickly, using only a few tools.
It was based on the same platform chassis as the Citroën 2CV, sharing its advanced independent front to rear interconnected suspension. This comprised a central springing unit, running fore-and-aft in a tube on each side; each suspension arm on that side was linked to the spring, by a tie-rod and a 'knife-edge' pivot-pin. Early cars did not have conventional shock absorbers. See Citroën 2CV for detailed information. The squeak you hear from most 2CVs and Dyanes as they go by over bumps is due to lack of lubrication either inside the spring tubes or to the 'knife-edges'. The front hubs kingpins need to be greased every 600 miles. Since this is often overlooked, the king-pins can be prone to wear, although some movement is acceptable.
The Dyane was also available with the "trafficlutch" - a centrifugal clutch which helped avoid stalling whilst in slow moving urban traffic.

Specifications

Market reaction

The Dyane was conceived to fill a small niche between the manufacturer's 2CV and  Ami models, and in due course to replace the former.   The 2CV had been developed and, in 1948, launched at a time of austerity and low wages.   More than twenty years later, with the much more modern Renault 4 selling strongly against the Citroën offerings, it was thought that buyers must be ready for a less aggressively basic approach.  During the years since 1948 production technology had become more streamlined, as auto-industry wages grew ahead of the overall growth in the French economy, and production of the 2CV was, by the standard of more recent models, a very labour-intensive process.   
During the Dyane's first full year of production, supported by the interest and marketing activity generated by new-car launch, 98,769 Dyane's were produced which meant that it was indeed produced, even at this stage, in greater volumes than the 2CV with just 57,473 cars produced.   In 1969 the Dyane was again produced at a higher rate, this time with 95,434 units as against 72,044 for the older car.   However, the 2CV refused to die, and with 121,096 2CVs produced in 1970, the older car was back in front.   The Dyane soldiered on, with French production rates remaining more than respectable, for more than another decade.   However, the Dyane's annual volumes would never again beat those of the 2CV.

Production figures

These figures indicate that any plans for the Dyane to take over from the 2CV in customers' affection were short-lived.

UK press reaction

In the UK, a  Citroën Dyane 6 tested by the British "The Motor" magazine in July 1969 had a top speed of 

Iranian manufacture

The Dyane was also built in Iran from 1968 to 1980, where it was called the Jyane - a Persian word meaning "fierce" or "ferocious". Unique van and pick-up versions were also manufactured there.






