[[Natacha Atlas]]

CATEGORIES: 1964 births, Arab people, Arabic-language singers, Belgian female singers, Belgian Muslims, Belgian people of Moroccan descent, English-language singers of Belgium, French-language singers of Belgium, Living people, Natacha Atlas, Belgian people of Egyptian descent, Belgian people of Jewish descent, Belgian people of Palestinian descent, People from Schaerbeek

Natacha Atlas () is a Belgian singer known for her fusion of Arabic and  Western electronic music, particularly hip-hop. She once termed her music "cha'abi moderne" (modern popular music). Her music has been influenced by many styles including Arabic,  hip hop,  drum 'n' bass and reggae.
Atlas began her career as part of the world fusion group Transglobal Underground. In 1995, she began to focus on her solo career with the release of Diaspora. She has since released seven solo albums and been a part of numerous collaborations. Her version of  "Mon Amie La Rose" became a surprise success in France, reaching 16 on the French Singles Charts in 1999. She is a Goodwill Ambassador for the United Nations Conference Against Racism.

Early life

Atlas was born to a father of Moroccan, Egyptian, and Palestinian ancestry
Atlas grew up in Laken, a neighborhood of Brussels, Belgium with a large Moroccan population. After her parents separated, Atlas went to live in Northampton, England with her mother. and has used them all in the course of her career.

Early career and Transglobal Underground

Atlas returned to Belgium at age 24 and began her career with two jobs:  belly dancing and the lead singer of a Belgian salsa band.  In April 1989, she made her recording début as guest vocalist on Balearic beat-band ¡Loca!'s "Encantador" (Nation Records).  In 1991, Atlas co-wrote/recorded the ¡Loca! single "Timbal" and co-wrote/guested with Jah Wobble's Invaders of the Heart composing five tracks for their Rising Above Bedlam album (Oval Records).  Through recording with ¡Loca!, she met Nation-labelmates Transglobal Underground (TGU), a British ethnic electronica band with a Middle Eastern/South Asian focus.  At the time, TGU had a top 40 hit, "Templehead", and Atlas became their lead singer / belly dancer.

Solo career

Most of Atlas' albums have been produced by TGU. She continues to focus on her Middle Eastern roots, as the titles of her albums imply: Diaspora (1995), Halim (1997) (in honour of Egyptian singer Abdel Halim Hafez), Gedida (1998) and Ayeshteni (2001).
In 1999, Atlas collaborated with David Arnold on the song "One Brief Moment".  The single featured a cover version of the James Bond theme song from the film You Only Live Twice. Two years earlier, Atlas had collaborated with Arnold on the album Shaken and Stirred, recording the song "From Russia with Love" for the eponymous film (originally performed by Matt Monro).
2000 saw her collaborate with Jean Michel Jarre for the track "C'est La Vie" on his album Métamorphoses. The track was released as a single.
Due to her French-language tracks, Atlas is now quite popular in France. In the U.K., on the other hand, she has not experienced the same amount of success. She is not very happy about the way her music is perceived in the UK: "Someone from the New Musical Express rang us about a feature we're to do with them and said 'We don't want it to be about the multi-cultural angle'. In other words that fad is over. And I'm personally insulted... what other... angle is there for us? I get sick of it all."
In 2003, Atlas provided vocals for the Kolo folk dance song "'Ajde Jano" on Nigel Kennedy and Kroke's album, East Meets East.[ref]
</ref><ref name="Artistdirect">
