[[Linda Dano]]

CATEGORIES: American soap opera actresses, American non-fiction writers, American romantic fiction writers, 1943 births, 20th-century American actresses, Living people, Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series winners

Linda Dano (born Linda Rae Wildermuth on May 12, 1943) is an American soap opera actress. A longtime performer in daytime dramas and a bestselling author and businesswoman, Dano was married for over 20 years to advertising executive Frank Attardi.

Personal life

Dano was born Linda Rae Wildermuth in Long Beach, California to parents Evelyn and Ted Wildermuth. Dano was married to advertising executive Frank Attardi for over 20 years until his death in 2004. She has two stepchildren,  three step grandchildren, Jenna, Hannah, and Abigail,and
a niece and nephew, Rebekah,and Stephen.

Career

Daytime series

After years of being on contract to 20th Century Fox alongside such actors as Tom Selleck, Dano joined the ABC soap opera One Life to Live in the role of Gretel Cummings from 1978 to 1980. From 1981 to 1982 she played Cynthia Haines on the CBS soap opera As the World Turns.
Dano next portrayed romance novelist Felicia Gallant on Another World from 1982 until the show's cancellation on June 25, 1999,
On June 28, 1999, Dano returned to One Life to Live as Gretel, now calling herself "Rae" Cummings.  The character also appeared on the three other ABC soap operas at the time — All My Children, General Hospital, and Port Charles — in a crossover storyline which was the first time a daytime character had ever appeared on four series. and left One Life to Live on March 13, 2004. In 2005, Dano appeared briefly as Lena Kendall on CBS's Guiding Light. Dano was also impersonated on NBC's Saturday Night Live in the late 1980s by Nora Dunn.

Other genres

Lifetime Television dedicated an episode of its Intimate Portrait celebrity biography series to Dano in 2000. From 1987 until 1992, she co-hosted the Lifetime talk show Attitudes, and she has both been a guest and guest-host on The View. Dano hosted an Another World reunion special on SOAPnet in 2003 for which she was later nominated for a Daytime Emmy for Outstanding Special Class Special.
Dano has written a style and fashion column for Soap Opera Digest on and off for years, and has had her own merchandise lines on QVC. In 1999 she won the Accessories Council of Excellence (ACE) Award for outstanding contributions to consumer awareness.
During and since her run in daytime Dano has guest-starred on television series like Homicide: Life on the Street (1997), Desperate Housewives (2005), and What I Like About You (2006), as well as the 2007 film Reservation Road. In 2005 Dano appeared as the title character in Mame at Pennsylvania's Bucks County Playhouse.

Books

=Romance novels=

During her run on Another World, Dano co-wrote at least one romance novel under her character's name, Felicia Gallant.

=Style guides=

Causes

For several years, Dano has worked with organizations to tackle medical conditions such as depression and Alzheimer's disease. Her father's life was taken by the effects of Alzheimer's and she would battle depression later after the double loss of her husband as well as her mother, Evelyn, a week-and-a-half afterward, with mother showing signs of dementia before her death. Dano is active in such groups as HeartShare, the National Osteoporosis Foundation, the National Alzheimer's Association and Support Partners, among others. Dano is also a patron of the Catholic Guardian Society of New York.






