[[Monte Carlo Resort and Casino]]

CATEGORIES: Casinos completed in 1996, Hotel buildings completed in 1996, Hotels established in 1996, Casinos in the Las Vegas Valley, Skyscraper hotels in the Las Vegas Valley, Skyscrapers between 100 and 149 meters, Las Vegas Strip, Buildings and structures in Paradise, Nevada, Resorts in the Las Vegas Valley, MGM Resorts International

The Monte Carlo Resort and Casino is a megaresort hotel and casino on the Las Vegas Strip in Paradise, Nevada, USA. The hotel, with a height of 
The hotel, named to invoke the Place du Casino in Monte Carlo, features chandelier domes, marble floors, neoclassical arches, ornate fountains, and gas-lit promenades.

Facilities and attractions

The resort includes 
On October 7, 2010, the JabbaWockeeZ - described as a "modern dance/hip-hop crew" - began performance of their permanent headline show at Monte Carlo, entitled "MÜS.I.C". In 2012, the JabbaWockeeZ show moved to the 800-seat Monte Carlo Pavilion.
On October 10, 2012, Blue Man Group opened a new show at the Monte Carlo in the renamed Blue Man Theatre, after previously performing at Luxor and The Venetian in Las Vegas.

Advertising

The hotel seeks to provide an "unpretentiously luxurious" experience. As of 2009, the Monte Carlo print advertising campaign features humorously misspelled French words ("tray sheek") coupled with glamorous images. The campaign's tagline is "Unpretentiously luxurious".

History

Construction and opening

Ground was broken for the hotel in March 1995. It was originally known as the "Grand Victoria". The palatial style was a reminiscent of the Belle Epoque, which is how the French refer to the architecture of the Victorian era in England. After much criticism by MGM Grand officials, it was shortened to "Victoria" and then changed to "Monte Carlo". 
Monte Carlo was built as a joint venture between Mirage Resorts and Circus Circus Enterprises, and cost US$344 million to build. The resort sits on 
The Monte Carlo opened to the public on June 21, 1996, at 12:01 a.m., following invitation-only VIP pre-opening celebration the prior day, including a fireworks show.

2008 fire

On January 25, 2008, at 10:57 AM, a three-alarm fire was reported on the exterior of the top six floors and roof of the casino. Portions of the hotel facade's Exterior Insulation Finishing System burned with some debris falling off and starting smaller secondary fires on ledges three floors below. The fire was fully contained an hour after it began. It was an exterior fire, although there was water damage to parts of several floors.

Hotel 32

Hotel32 is an ultra-luxury, boutique hotel located on Monte Carlo's top floor. The new extension opened on August 10, 2009.

In popular culture

Monte Carlo Resort and Casino has figured in several feature films and television series. Major release films partially filmed at Monte Carlo include the 2000 film Get Carter It was also featured in the season six episode "Three of a Kind" of The X-Files.

Gallery






