[[Field lacrosse]]

CATEGORIES: Variations of lacrosse, Team sports

Field Lacrosse, sometimes referred to as the "fastest sport on two feet," is a full contact outdoor men's sport played with ten players on each team. The sport originated among Native Americans, and the modern rules of field lacrosse were initially codified by Canadian William George Beers in 1867. Field lacrosse is one of three major versions of lacrosse played internationally. The other versions, women's lacrosse (established in the 1890s) and box lacrosse (which originated in the 1930s), are played under significantly different rules.
The object of the game is to use a long handled racket, known as a lacrosse stick or crosse, to catch, carry, and pass a solid rubber ball in an effort to score by ultimately hurling the ball into an opponent's goal. The triangular head of the lacrosse stick has a loose net strung into it that allows the player to hold the lacrosse ball. In addition to the lacrosse stick, players are required to wear a certain amount of protective equipment. Defensively the object is to keep the opposing team from scoring and to dispossess them of the ball through the use of stick checking and body contact.  The rules limit the number of players in each part of the field and require the ball to be moved continuously towards the opposing goal.
Lacrosse is governed internationally by the 31-member Federation of International Lacrosse, which sponsors the World Lacrosse Championships once every four years. A former Olympic sport, attempts by the international governing body to reinstate it to the Games has been hampered by insufficient international participation and by the existence of separate governing bodies for the men's and women's versions of the sport until 2008. Field lacrosse is played professionally in North America by the Major League Lacrosse. It is also played on a high amateur level by the National Collegiate Athletic Association in the United States, the Australian Senior Lacrosse Championship series, and the Canadian University Field Lacrosse Association.

History

Known as the "fastest sport on two feet", lacrosse is a traditional Native American game. 9Liss, p. 13.  According to Native American  beliefs, playing lacrosse is a spiritual act used for healing and giving thanks to the "Creator". They would also play the game to resolve minor conflicts between tribes, that were not worth going to war for. Thus the name little brother of war. 183
The first Europeans to observe it were French Jesuit missionaries in the St. Lawrence Valley, in the 1630s. The name "lacrosse" comes from their reports, which described the players' sticks as like a bishop's crosier—la crosse in French. The Native American tribes used various names: in the Onondaga language it was called dehuntshigwa'es ("they bump hips" or "men hit a rounded object"); da-nah-wah'uwsdi ("little war") to the Eastern Cherokee; in Mohawk, tewaarathon ("little brother of war"); and baggataway in Ojibwe. Variations in the game were not limited to the name.  In the Great Lakes region, players used an entirely wooden stick, while the Iroquois stick was longer and was laced with string, and the Southeastern tribes played with two shorter sticks, one in each hand.
In 1867, Montreal Lacrosse Club member William George Beers codified the modern game. He established the Canadian National Lacrosse Association and created the first written rules for the game, Lacrosse: The National Game of Canada. The book specified field layout, lacrosse ball dimensions, lacrosse stick length, number of players, and number of goals required to determine the match winner. 8-10
Women's lacrosse, a non-contact version of the sport originating in Scotland during the 1890s, is played by twelve players per side, on longer fields and with less protective equipment than the men's game requires. In the 1930s Canadian businessmen established a version called box lacrosse to create business for ice hockey arenas during the summer months. Box lacrosse is played indoors, with smaller nets, between two teams of six players, and strongly resembles the game its areas were designed for. 120

Rules

Field lacrosse involves two teams, each competing to shoot a lacrosse ball into the opposing team's goal. A lacrosse ball is made out of solid rubber, measuring 7.75 to 8 inches (19.7–20 cm) in circumference and weighing 5 to 5.25 ounces (140–149 g). Each team plays with ten players on the field: a goalkeeper; three defenders in the defensive end; three midfielders free to roam the whole field; and three attackers attempting to score goals in the offensive end. Players are required to wear some protective equipment, and must carry a lacrosse stick (or crosse) that meets specifications. Rules dictate the length of the game, boundaries, and allowable activity. Penalties are assessed by officials for any transgression of the rules.
The game has undergone significant changes since Beers' original codification. In the 1930s, the number of players on the field per team was reduced from twelve to ten, rules about protective equipment were established, and the field was shortened. 131-132Pietramala, p. 14

Playing area

A standard lacrosse field is NCAA Rulebook, Rule 1
Field lacrosse goals are centered between each sideline, positioned  in diameter.
If a player enters the "crease" while shooting toward the goal, the referee will call a foul and the ball gets turned over to the other team.
A pair of lines,  from each sideline connecting each endline to the nearer restraining line, creating the "restraining box."Morris, p. 29 If an official deems that a team is "stalling," that is not moving with offensive purpose while controlling the ball, the possessing team must keep the ball within the offensive restraining box to avoid a loss-of-possession penalty.NCAA Rulebook, Rule 6
Field markings dictate player positioning during a face-off. A face-off is how play is started at the beginning of each quarter and after each goal. During a face-off, there are six players (without considering goalkeepers) in each of the areas defined by the restraining lines. Three midfielders from each team occupy the midfield area, while three attackmen and three of the opposing team's defensemen occupy each offensive area. These players must stay in these areas until possession is earned by a midfielder or the ball crosses either restraining line. Wing areas are marked on the field on the midfield line  from each sideline. This line indicates where the two nonface-off midfielders per team lineup during a face-off situation. These players may position themselves on either side of the midfield line.  During a face-off, two players lay their sticks horizontally next to the ball, head of the stick inches from the ball and the butt-end pointing down the midfield line. Once the official blows the whistle to start play, the face-off midfielders scrap for the ball to earn possession and the other midfielders advance to play the ball. If possession is won by the face-off player, he may move the ball himself or pass to a teammate.
The rules also require that substitution areas, a penalty box, coaches area, and team bench areas be designated on the field.

Equipment

A field lacrosse player's equipment includes a lacrosse stick, and protective equipment, including a lacrosse helmet with facemask, lacrosse gloves, and arm and shoulder pads. Players are also required to wear mouthguards and athletic supporter.
Each player carries a lacrosse stick measuring 
Beginning January 1, 2010, measurements for the crosse shall include the following, in addition to current specifications:
From the 1.25-inch measurement to the top of the crosse, the distance between the sidewalls of the crosse must be at least 3 inches.
Most modern sticks have a tubular metal shaft, usually made of aluminum, titanium or alloys while the head is made of hard plastic. Metal shafts must have a plastic or rubber cap at the end. The heads are strung with string, leather, and mesh. The strings in the pocket are called shooting, accuracy, or "v" strings.
The sport's growth has been hindered by the cost of a player's equipment—a uniform, helmet, shoulder pads, hand protection, and lacrosse sticks. Many players have at least two lacrosse sticks prepared for use in any contest. 163 Traditionally players used sticks made by Native American craftsman. These were expensive and, at times, difficult to find. 258Vennum, p. 286  The introduction of the plastic heads in the 1970s gave players an alternative to the wooden stick, and their mass production has led to greater accessibility and expansion of the sport. 262

Players

=Goalkeeper=

The goalkeeper's responsibility is to prevent the opposition from scoring by directly defending the Pietramala, p. 130
Goalkeepers have special privileges when they are in the crease, a circular area surrounding each goal with a radius of . Offensive players may not play the ball or make contact with the goalkeeper while he is in the crease. Once a goalkeeper leaves the crease, he loses these privileges.NCAA Rulebook, Rule 4
A goalkeeper's equipment differs from other players'. Instead of shoulder pads and elbow pads, the goalkeeper wears a chest protector. He also wears special "goalie gloves" that have extra padding on the thumb to protect from shots. The head of a goalkeeper's crosse may measure up to  wide, significantly larger than field players'.

=Defensemen=

A defensemen is a player position whose responsibility is to assist the goalkeeper in preventing the opposing team from scoring. Each team fields three defensemen. These players generally remain on the defensive half of the field. A defensemen carries a long crosse which provides an advantage in reach for intercepting passes and checking. 39Pietramala, p. 154
Tactics used by a defensemen include body positioning and checking. Checking means attempting to dispossess the opposition of the ball through body or stick contact. A check may include a "poke check", where a defensemen thrusts his crosse at the top hand or crosse of the opponent in possession of the ball (similar to a billiards shot), or a "slap check", where a player applies a short, two-handed slap to the hand or crosse of the opponent in possession of the ball. 113 A "body check" is allowed as long as the ball is in possession or a loose ball is within five yards of the opposing player and the contact is made to the front or side of the torso of the opposing player. There are also many other checks including the Rusty Gate or Kayak Check which take much more skill and practice to master.

=Midfielders=

Midfielders contribute offensively and defensively and may roam the entire playing area. Each team fields three midfielders at a time. One midfielder per team may use a long crosse, and in this case is referred to as a "long-stick midfielder." Long-stick midfielders are normally used for defensive possessions and face-offs but can participate in offense as long as he is not subbed off.
Over time, the midfield position has developed into a position of specialties. During play, teams may substitute players in and out freely, a practice known as "on the fly" substitution. The rules state that substitution must occur within the designated exchange area in front of the players' bench. Teams frequently rotate the midfielder specialists off and on the field depending on the ball possession. Some teams have a designated face-off midfielder, referred to as a "fogo" midfielder (an acronym for "face-off and get-off"), who takes the majority of face-offs and is quickly substituted after the face-off. Some teams also designate midfielders as "offensive midfielders" or "defensive midfielders" depending on their strengths and weaknesses.

=Attackman=

Each team fields three attackmen at a time, and these players generally remain on the offensive half of the field.

Duration and tie-breaking methods

Duration of games depends upon the level of play. In international competition, college lacrosse, and Major League Lacrosse, the total playing time is sixty minutes, composed of four fifteen-minute quarters.  High school games typically consist of four twelve-minute quarters but can be played in 30min halves, while youth leagues may have shorter games.  The clock typically stops during all dead ball situations such as between goals or if the ball goes out of bounds.  The method of breaking a tie generally consists of an overtime period of 5 minutes in which the first team to score a goal is awarded a sudden victory. A quicker variant of the sudden victory is the Braveheart method in which each team sends out one player and one goalie; it is then sudden victory.e-lacrosse.html  International lacrosse plays two five-minute overtime periods, and then applies the sudden victory rule if the score is still tied.

Ball movement and out of play

Teams must advance the ball or be subjected to loss of possession. Once a team gains possession of the ball in their defensive area, they must move the ball over the midfield line within 20 seconds. If the goalkeeper has possession of the ball in the crease he must pass the ball or vacate the area within four seconds. Failure by the goalkeeper to leave the crease will result in the opposite team being given possession just outside the restraining box. Once the ball crosses the midfield line, a team has 10 seconds to move the ball into the offensive area designated by the restraining box or forfeit possession to their opponents. The term used to define moving the ball from the defensive to offensive area is to "clear" the ball. Offensive players are responsible for "riding" opponents, in other words attempting to deny the opposition a free "clear" of the ball over the midfield line.
If a ball travels outside of the playing area, play is restarted by possession being awarded to the opponents of the team which last touched the ball, unless the ball goes out of bounds due to a shot or a deflected shot. In that case, possession is awarded to the player that is closest to the ball when it leaves the playing area.

Penalties

For most fouls, the offending player is sent to the penalty box and his team has to play without him and with one less player for a short amount of time. Penalties are classified as either personal fouls or technical fouls. Personal fouls are of a more serious nature and are generally penalized with a 60 second player suspension. Technical fouls are violations of the rules that are not as serious as personal fouls, and are penalized for 30 seconds or a loss of possession. Occasionally a longer penalty may be assessed for more severe infractions. Any player who is penalized for more than five personal fouls is ejected from the game. The penalized team is said to be playing man down defense while the other team is on the man up, or playing "extra man offense."  During a typical game, each team will have three to five extra man offense opportunities. 151

=Personal fouls=

Personal fouls (PF) include slashing, tripping, illegal body checking, cross checking, unsportsmanlike conduct, unnecessary roughness, and equipment violations. While a stick-check (where a player makes contact with the opposition player's stick in order to knock the ball loose) is legal, a slashing violation is called when a player viciously makes contact with an opposing player or his stick. An illegal body check penalty is called for any contact where the ball is further than  from the contact, the check is from behind, above the shoulders or below the knees, or was avoidable after the player has released the ball. Cross checking, where a player uses the shaft of his stick to push the opposition player off balance, is illegal in field lacrosse. Both unsportsmanlike conduct and unnecessary roughness are subject to the officiating crew's discretion, while equipment violations are governed strictly by regulations.NCAA Rulebook, Rule 5

=Technical fouls=

Technical fouls include holding, interference, pushing, screening, "warding off", stalling, and off-sides. A screen, as employed in basketball strategy, is a blocking move by an offensive player, by standing beside or behind a defender, to free a teammate to shoot, or receive a pass. Warding off occurs when an offensive player uses his free hand to control the stick of an opposing player.
Offside has a unique implementation in field lacrosse. 35 Instituted with rule changes in 1921, it limits the number of players that are allowed on either side of the midfield line. Offside occurs when there are fewer than three players on the offensive side of the midfield line or when there are fewer than four players on the defensive half of the midfield line (note: if players are exiting through the special-substitution area, it is not to be determined an offside violation).NCAA Rulebook, Rule 4
A technical foul requires that the defenseman who fouled a player on the opposing team be placed in the penalty box for 30 seconds.  As with a personal foul, until the penalty time expires, no replacement for the player is allowed and the team must play one man short.  The player (or a replacement) is allowed to reenter the game once the time in the penalty box is over and the team is thus once again at full strength.

Domestic competition

College lacrosse, a spring sport in the United States, saw its earliest program established by New York University in 1877. 4
Lacrosse was first witnessed in England, Scotland, Ireland and France in 1867 when a team of Native Americans and Canadians traveled to Europe to showcase the sport. The year after, the English Lacrosse Association was established. In 1876, Queen Victoria attended an exhibition game and was impressed, saying, "The game is very pretty to watch." The country sponsors various competitions among its states and territories that culminate in the annual Senior Lacrosse Championship tournament.
In 1985, the Canadian University Field Lacrosse Association (CUFLA) was established, with twelve universities in the Ontario and Quebec provinces competing in the intercollegiate league. The league plays its season during the autumn. Unlike the NCAA, the CUFLA allows players that are professional box lacrosse players in the National Lacrosse League to participate, stating that "although stick skills are identical, the game play and rules are different".
Professional field lacrosse made its first appearance in 1988 with the formation of the American Lacrosse League, which folded after five weeks of play. 289-290  In 2001, professional field lacrosse resurfaced with the inception of Major League Lacrosse (MLL),

International competition

The Federation of International Lacrosse (FIL) is the international governing body of lacrosse and it oversees field, women's and box lacrosse competitions. In 2008, the International Lacrosse Federation and the International Federation of Women's Lacrosse Associations merged to form the FIL. The former International Lacrosse Federation was founded in 1974 to promote and develop the game of men's lacrosse throughout the world.  The FIL now sponsors the World Lacrosse Championship and Under-19 World Lacrosse Championships which are played under field lacrosse rules. It also oversees the World Indoor Lacrosse Championship played under box lacrosse rules, and the Women's Lacrosse World Cup and an under-19 championship under women's lacrosse rules.

Olympics

Lacrosse at the Olympics was a medal earning sport in the 1904 Summer Olympics and the 1908 Summer Olympics.
In the 1928 Summer Olympics, 1932 Summer Olympics, and the 1948 Summer Olympics, lacrosse was a demonstration sport.
There are obstacles to reestablishing lacrosse as an Olympic sport. One hurdle was resolved in 2008, when the international governing bodies for men's and women's lacrosse merged to form Federation of International Lacrosse.

World Lacrosse Championships

The World Lacrosse Championship began as a four-team invitational tournament in 1967 sanctioned by the International Lacrosse Federation. The 2006 World Lacrosse Championship featured a record twenty-one competing nations. The 2010 World Lacrosse Championship took place in Manchester, England. Only United States, Canada, and Australia have finished in the top two places of this tournament. Since 1990, the Iroquois Nationals, a team consisting of the Six Nations of the Iroquois Confederacy members, have competed in international competition. This team is the only Native American team sanctioned to compete in any men's sport internationally.[ref]
 [/ref]
Other regional international competitions are played including the European Lacrosse Championships, sponsored by the twenty-one member European Lacrosse Federation, and the eight team Asian Pacific Lacrosse Tournament.

Attendance records

Lacrosse attendance has grown with the sport's popularity.
At the 1932 Olympics in Los Angeles, California, over 145,000 spectators watched the three game series between the United States and Canada, including 75,000 people who witnessed the first game of the series while in attendance to watch the final of the marathon. 201-202



Footnotes

Bibliography




