[[Elizabeth Clare Prophet]]

CATEGORIES: 1939 births, 2009 deaths, Apocalypticists, American spiritual writers, New Age spiritual leaders, Antioch College alumni, Boston University alumni, New Age writers, People from Bozeman, Montana, People from Red Bank, New Jersey, Deaths from Alzheimer's disease, People with dementia, American Christian Scientists, People with epilepsy

Elizabeth Clare Prophet (née: Wulf) (April 8, 1939 – October 15, 2009) was an American New Age minister and religious figure, self-proclaimed prophet. Elizabeth, just 33 years of age at the time of husband Mark's death on February 26, 1973, assumed control of The Summit Lighthouse at that time. DeHaas, Jocelyn H. "The Mediation of Ideology and Public Image in the Church Universal and Triumphant," in Lewis, James R., and J. Gordon Melton, eds. (1994). Church Universal and Triumphant in Scholarly Perspective. Center for Academic Publication. pp. 21–37. ISBN 978-0-8191-9634-7.[ref]
</ref> 
In 1975, Prophet founded Church Universal and Triumphant, which became the umbrella organization for the movement, and which she expanded worldwide. Prophet controversially called on her members in the late 1980s to prepare for the possibility of nuclear war at the turn of the decade, encouraging them to construct fallout shelters. In 1996, Prophet handed day-to-day operational control of her organization to a president and board of directors, maintaining her role as spiritual leader until her retirement due to health reasons in 1999.
During the 1980s and 1990s, Prophet appeared on Larry King Live, Donahue and Nightline, among other television programs. "The Mediation of Ideology and Public Image in the Church Universal and Triumphant," in Lewis, James R., and J. Gordon Melton, eds. (1994). Church Universal and Triumphant in Scholarly Perspective. Center for Academic Publication. pp. 31–32. ISBN 978-0-8191-9634-7. Earlier media appearances included a feature in 1977 in "The Man Who Would Not Die," an episode of NBC's In Search Of... series. "The Man Who Would Not Die." In Search Of... series. NBC. She was also featured in 1994 on NBC's Ancient Prophecies. Ancient Prophecies. Coast to Coast Productions. ASIN B0027PIA6M.

Biography

Early years

Elizabeth Clare Prophet was born Elizabeth Clare Wulf at Monmouth Memorial Hospital in Long Branch, New Jersey on April 8th, 1939, to Hans and Fridy Wulf. She grew up with her family in Red Bank, New Jersey during the Second World War.
One of the major difficulties in her early life was her father's addiction to alcohol. He verbally abused her mother and had a violent temper which he directed towards them and the destruction of his beloved fish tanks. 
In Prophet's early life she periodically blacked out. This happened in the third grade when she was about to say her lines in a Christmas play, and continued after that throughout her life. Her condition was first diagnosed as petit mal epilepsy, know more commonly today as absence seizures. She did not find medication helpful, and discontinued using it. 
Elizabeth Wulf claimed mystical experiences while growing up. When she was about 4, she claims that she had a vision of herself playing on the sands of the Nile river in Egypt (her mother told her it was a past life). 

Influences

Betty Clare grew up in a home that was mainly non-religious except for major holidays. Her father was Lutheran, her mother Catholic. Yet it was her mother's interests in Theosophy, the I AM Activity, and Christian Science that had the most influence on Elizabeth.

Education

Elizabeth Clare Wulf spent her junior year studying French in Switzerland in 1956 and a year later graduated from Red Bank Regional High School second in her class. She attended Antioch College in Ohio from September 1957 to March 1959 majoring in political science and economics. She transferred to Boston University in September 1959, from where she graduated with a bachelor of arts degree in political science in August 1961.

Career

In summer of 1958 Prophet took a co-op job as a camp counselor in a French immersion school in Vermont. She was in charge of a number of high school girls between 15 and 16 years old and her role was to discipline them. She described the experience as frustrating and said she ended up praying to God that she never be put in an position of authority over others. 
In fall 1958 she served an internship at the United Nations as secretary for Leo Rosenthal, a UN photographer. Her experience at the UN showed her that many of the ambassadors were not there to solve the world's problems but rather were engaged in power politics and manipulation of the world's economies. Leaving after three months made her depressed, with the opinion that to solve the world's problems people would need to change their concept of themselves and of God. 
After moving to Boston in 1959 she worked as a secretary for the Christian Science church and the Christian Science Monitor. According to Prophet, this is where she learned much about the publishing operations, organization, and administration of a church on a worldwide scale which was to help her later on in running her own church.  
Prophet claimed that she realized that she was intended to be a messenger while meditating with Mark L. Prophet at a public meeting in Boston on April 22nd, 1961. He had come to teach about what he called "the Ascended Masters." She later claimed to have received a vision while meditating with him that her role in life was to pass on a higher teaching to further humanity's spiritual evolution. She confided to Mark the next day that like him, she was also to be a messenger; he accepted her as a student at his mystical school, The Summit Lighthouse. She said she received another vision in June of that year in the way of a visitation by the Ascended Master El Morya who told her to go to Washington, DC to be trained as messenger. 
After attending her first conference in Washington in July, Mark Prophet returned to Boston in August to help her move to Washington to begin her training under him.

Ministry and Expansion

In 1965 the Prophet family relocated to Fairfax, Virginia, and in 1966 to Colorado Springs, Colorado.
In 1970, the Prophet family founded Montessori International, a school based on the principles of educator Maria Montessori. Classes were offered for students ranging from preschool age to high school. Montessori information courses were also offered to parents and students.  Staff were trained at Montessori organizations such as the Association Montessori Internationale and the Pan-American Montessori Society, 
In 1970 the Prophets went to India with their family and several dozen church members. (Elizabeth traveled again in the early 1980s and established the ASHRAM OF THE WORLD MOTHER in New Delhi, India.)  They toured the country, meeting with Indira Gandhi as well as with the Dalai Lama. They also met with Mother Teresa of Calcutta. 
In 1974 the headquarters of the Church were moved to Santa Barbara, California, where Elizabeth Prophet founded Summit University, a 12 week program of instruction in her teachings. In 1975, she founded Summit University Press.
The church eventually became the umbrella organization for Prophet's work, with The Summit Lighthouse becoming the publishing arm of the church.
In the summer of 1976, the church's headquarters were again relocated to the campus of Pasadena College, in Pasadena. Summit University, Montessori International, and quarterly church conferences were held there. About 300 staff members were then in residence.
In 1977 the church purchased a former Claretian seminary in Calabasas, a  campus near Los Angeles, and moved its operations there in 1978.
In 1981 the Church Universal and Triumphant purchased the 

Final years in the ministry

In 1986, Prophet relocated her headquarters to Montana near the Yellowstone National Park. She was diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease in November 1998.

Retirement and death

She retired in 1999 and died on October 15, 2009.

Teachings

The dogma of The Summit Lighthouse included a doctrine called the Path of Personal Christhood, or the way of the soul's one-on-one relationship with God through Christ consciousness.  Elizabeth Clare Prophet believed that she shared the gift of the word, both written and spoken. She claimed to be in constant communion with God. 
The Science of the Spoken word, as Elizabeth and Mark taught it, was thought to be a gift of sound combined with meditation, prayer and visualization.  Prophet, Elizabeth Clare.  Climb the Highest Mountain, Church Universal and Triumphant, 1995. They believed that a Divine Gift (The Ascension) of union with God was possible. 9  

"Mother as Messenger"

Some of Prophet's ideas are published in her book Fallen Angels and the Origins of Evil and in Paths of Light and Darkness, the sixth book in her Climb the Highest Mountain series.

Family

Prophet was survived by her five children.



Additional references

Publications

Works by Mark and Elizabeth Prophet (See full list of books published by Summit University Press, Corwin Springs, Montana):
By Elizabeth Clare Prophet (published independently)
By Alex and Margaret Reichardt




