[[Cassidy (rapper)]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, African-American male rappers, American people convicted of manslaughter, American prisoners and detainees, Central High School (Philadelphia) alumni, East Coast hip hop musicians, J Records artists, Prisoners and detainees of Pennsylvania, Rappers from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Ruff Ryders artists, 1982 births

Barry Adrian Reese (born July 7, 1982), better known by his stage name Cassidy,  is an American hip hop recording artist from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Music career

2002–04: Split Personality

Cassidy signed to Full Surface in 2002. On November 29, 2003, he released "Hotel", featuring R. Kelly. It reached the top ten of the Billboard Hot 100.

2004–05: I'm A Hustla

On March 14, 2005, Cassidy released the single "I'm A Hustla". The next single, "B-Boy Stance", featured Swizz Beatz. On June 28, Cassidy released his second studio album, I'm A Hustla. It debuted at #5 on the U.S. Billboard 200, with 93,000 copies sold in the first week.

2006–07: B.A.R.S. The Barry Adrian Reese Story

In 2006, after his release from prison and recovering from an auto accident, Cassidy began work on his third studio album, B.A.R.S. The Barry Adrian Reese Story. It contained the single "My Drink n My 2 Step", featuring and produced by Swizz Beatz.

2009–10: C.A.S.H. (Cass A Straight Hustla)

In late 2009 Cassidy signed with Carmelo Anthony's label Kross Over Entertainment.com/2008/11/07/carmelo-anthony-signs-cassidy-to-krossover-label/ While preparing his fourth studio album, he released a mixtape series entitled Apply Pressure. On August 24, 2010, Cassidy released the 5-track EP Face 2 Face, with the promotional single "Face 2 Face". "Drumma Bass" was the only official single from the album.

2012-present: Mayhem Music: AP3 & Feud with Meek Mill

On May 21, 2012, Cassidy hosted a release party for his mixtape Mayhem Music. On July 8, 2012, he released the mixtape Mayhem Music: AP3. After fellow Philly rapper Meek Mill said he would battle Cassidy, which Cassidy later said he would accept if the money was right. They participated in a "twitter beef" after which Cassidy released "The Diary of a Hustla" which was originally thought to be a diss towards Meek. This was later refuted by Cassidy.Meek Mill Wants To Battle Cassidy Or Murda Mook, Asks For $100,000 Or More | Get The Latest Hip Hop News, Rap News & Hip Hop Album Sales | HipHop DXCassidy Says A Rap Battle With Meek Mill Would Be "Good For Hip Hop" | Get The Latest Hip Hop News, Rap News & Hip Hop Album Sales | HipHop DX However after Meek Mill dissed Cassidy's song "Condom Style" (a remake of Psy's "Gangnam Style") Cassidy released a formal diss track towards Mill with "Me, Myself & iPhone".comCassidy Disses Meek Mill On "Me, Myself, & iPhone" | Get The Latest Hip Hop News, Rap News & Hip Hop Album Sales | HipHop DX Afterwards, Meek Mill responded with the diss track "Repo" which Mill later said would be the final diss record he would release against Cassidy.Cassidy Says He Used To Help Meek Mill Write Raps | Get The Latest Hip Hop News, Rap News & Hip Hop Album Sales | HipHop DX On January 6, 2013 Cassidy released a 10 minute long diss response titled "Raid".Cassidy - Raid (Meek Mill Diss) | New Hip Hop Music & All The New Rap Songs 2011 | HipHop DX

Other ventures

In 2007, Cassidy signed a deal as the "new face" for Lot 29's fall clothing line. In 2009, Cassidy appeared in the movie Next Day Air.
The song "Condom Style" has reportedly earned Cassidy a seven-figure endorsement deal with Trojan.A.R.S: The Authorized Biography of Cassidy" 

Personal life

Murder case

On April 15, 2005 three men, including Cassidy, armed with .45, .40 and 9mm caliber pistols, and an AK-47 variant rifle, fired on three unarmed men during an argument that occurred in the West Oak Lane neighborhood in Northwest Philadelphia. Desmond Hawkins was killed by a shot in the back. Hawkins' two other friends were treated at hospitals for gunshot wounds and released.
On June 9 a warrant was issued for Cassidy's arrest on charges of murder, attempted murder, reckless endangerment, aggravated assault, conspiracy and weapons possession. Cassidy surrendered to Philadelphia police on the afternoon of June 17.Cassidy Denied Bail, Booked Into Medium-Security Prison
Cassidy's murder case took a turn when the primary witness withdrew his confession. This resulted in the judge stating that Cassidy would stand trial for 3rd degree murder. On August 16, 2005, Municipal Judge Marsha Neifield ruled that prosecutors had sufficient evidence to charge Cassidy with third-degree murder, attempted murder charges, and weapons offenses. This was later overturned to the original, first degree charge - negating the possibility of parole. On January 25, 2006 Cassidy was convicted of involuntary manslaughter, two counts of aggravated assault and possession of an instrument of crime for his involvement in the shooting. He was sentenced to 11 to 23 months in prison plus probation and was credited with the 7 months he had already served.Cassidy Denied Bail, Booked Into Medium-Security PrisonJudge Reinstates First-Degree Murder Charge Against Cassidy
Cassidy was released from Pennsylvania's Curran-Fromhold Correctional Facility on March 2, 2006 after serving eight months.Murder Case
Cassidy talks about his arrest and time in prison in the 2011 film Rhyme and Punishment, which documents various Hip-Hop artists who have done county jail or state/federal prison time.

Car accident

Cassidy was seriously injured in a vehicle accident on the night of October 5, 2006  when a commercial truck collided with his SUV while he was a passenger. He was taken to the Jersey City Medical Center, where he was diagnosed with a fractured skull and several broken bones on the left side of his face. He still has visible scars from the accident.Rapper Cassidy In Critical Condition After Car Accident MTV News, October 5, 2006Rapper injured in Jersey City crash Michaelangelo Conte and Jeff Theodore, October 9, 2006 Kenny Rodriguez, October 11, 2006 

Discography

Filmography







