[[Likelike]]

CATEGORIES: Hawaiian songwriters, 1851 births, 1887 deaths, Royalty of the Kingdom of Hawaii, House of Kalākaua, Hawaiian princesses, Women of the Victorian era, Burials at the Royal Mausoleum of Hawaii, Governors of Hawaii (island), Hawaiian women in politics, Recipients of the Royal Order of Kamehameha I, Recipients of the Royal Order of Kalākaua, Recipients of the Royal Order of the Crown of Hawaii, Hawaiian adoptees (hānai)

Miriam Kapili Kekāuluohi Likelike (1851–1887) was a Princess of the Kingdom of Hawaiiulani, last heir to the throne, and mistress of the ʻĀinahau estate.

Life

She was born January 13, 1851 in Honolulu, Oiulani, and the older sister of William Pitt Leleiohoku II. Because Likelike was not in the best of health as a child, she was sent to live in the dry climate of Kona on the island of Hawaii where she was hānai  to a chiefly couple there. Like many of her siblings, she was most likely given in hānai to a family in Kona. At the age of 6, she returned to Honolulu and remained there until her marriage. 
Originally betrothed to Albert K. Kunuiakea, an illegitimate son of Kamehameha III, she broke off the engagement to marry someone else.
On September 22, 1870 she married Archibald Scott Cleghorn, a businessman from Scotland almost twice her age. The wedding was at her sister's house, Washington Place. Archibald was 35 and Likelike was 19. Like her sister Lydia's marriage to John Owen Dominis, her marriage with Cleghorn did not always run smoothly. Victorian gentlemen expected to be the lord of their castle, their servants, their children, and even their wives. But Hawaiian nobility, ali
In August 1883 she wrote the strongest letter to her husband from her Big Island retreat:
 "You always blame me in everything and I am getting tired of it. I will have to kill myself then you won't have me to growl at all the time. I think we are better separated..." 
As dramatic as the letter sounds, she returned to Oiulani wrote:
 "Dear Mama Nui,

 Thank you for the nice hat you sent me. It fits so nicely Mama wanted it, but I would not let her have it. Thank you for the corn and watermelons, they do taste so good. Are you well? With much love from your little girl, Kaiulani.

PS. I want you to give Miss Barnes (her governess) a native name"
Not surprisingly another letter followed, the angry Kaiulani wrote:
 "Dear Mama Nui,

 I want another hat. Mama Likelike has taken the one you sent me. Are you better now? When are you coming coming home? With much love. From your little girl, Kaiulani."
Likelike was third-in-line to the throne behind her brother William Pitt Leleiohoku II and her sister Liliuokalani until Leleiohoku's death which elevated her to second-in-line to the throne and her daughter as third-in-line.
Likelike was vivacious and well-liked, and her home was opened to important people from all over the world. She had a reputation of being a kindly, gracious hostess in almost every country of Europe and almost every state of the union. She would always be up with the latest fashions, ordering dresses and clothing from Paris. Princess Likelike, Liliuokalani, Leleiohoku and Kalākaua were known as "Hawaii's First Family of Musicians." She could be quite imperious and quick-tempered. For example she once smacked a groom with a whip for not keeping the carriage properly polished.
The cause of the princess' death is still unknown; she is said to have simply taken to her bed and refused all food. In mid January 1887, a large school of fish called 'āweoweo was seen off the coast of the island of Hawaii. The massing of the bright red fish close to shore was considered an omen of death for members an ali

Legacy

Likelike Highway, historic Likelike Drive Inn and Likelike Elementary School bear the late princess' name.

Compositions

Ancestry






