[[Andrea M. Ghez]]

CATEGORIES: American astronomers, Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences, Women astronomers, Recipients of the Annie J. Cannon Award in Astronomy, Living people, 1965 births, California Institute of Technology alumni, Massachusetts Institute of Technology alumni, University of California, Los Angeles faculty, University of Chicago Laboratory Schools alumni, MacArthur Fellows

Andrea Mia Ghez (born June 16, 1965) is an American astronomer and professor in the Department of Physics and Astronomy at UCLA.  In 2004, Discover magazine listed Ghez as one of the top 20 scientists in the United States who have shown a high degree of understanding in their respective fields.

Early life

Growing up in Chicago, Ghez first wanted to be a ballerina. The moon landings inspired her to want to become the first female astronaut and her mother supported her goal. Her only female role model was her high school chemistry teacher.

Career

Her current research involves using high spatial resolution imaging techniques, such as the adaptive optics system at the Keck telescopes,
In 2004, Ghez was elected to the National Academy of Sciences.

Black Hole at the Galactic Center (Sgr A *)

By imaging the Galactic Center at infrared wavelengths, Ghez and her colleagues have been able to peer through heavy dust that blocks visible light, and to produce images of the center of our galaxy.  Thanks to the 10m aperture of the W.M. Keck Telescope and the use of adaptive optics to correct for the turbulence of the atmosphere, these images of the Galactic Center are at very high spatial resolution and have made it possible to follow the orbits of stars around the black hole, which is also known as Sagittarius A * or Sgr A*. The partial orbits of many stars orbiting the black hole at the Galactic Center have been observed.  Since 1995, object SO-2 has made almost a complete elliptical orbit.  Several decades more will be required to completely document the orbits of some of these stars; these measurements may provide a test of the theory of general relativity. In October 2012, a second star was identified by her team at UCLA, S0-102, orbiting the Galactic Center.ucla.aspx  Using Kepler's law, Ghez's team has used the orbital motion to show that the mass of Sgr A* is 4.1±0.6 million solar masses.org/abs/0808.2870  Because Sgr A* is one hundred times closer than the next nearest known supermassive black hole M31* (located at the center of M31) it is now one of the best demonstrated cases for a supermassive black hole.

Personal life

Ghez is married to Tom LaTourrette who is a geologist and research scientist at the RAND corporation.  They have two sons, Evan born in 2001 and Miles born in 2005.  Ghez is a passionate swimmer in the Masters Swim Club which she uses to take a break from science.Poster Project Biographies

Awards

[/ref]

Selected publications






