[[Amy Brenneman]]

CATEGORIES: 1964 births, Actresses from Connecticut, American feminists, American film actresses, American people of Jewish descent, American television actresses, Harvard University alumni, Living people, People from Glastonbury, Connecticut, American pro-choice activists, American people of English descent, American people of Irish descent, American people of Swiss descent, American Episcopalians, Christian feminists, Christians of Jewish descent, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, American gun control advocates

Amy Frederica Brenneman (born June 22, 1964) is an American actress and producer. She is best known for her roles as Detective Janice Licalsi in the ABC series NYPD Blue (1993–1994), as Judge Amy Gray in CBS drama Judging Amy (1999–2005), and as Violet Turner in ABC medical series  Private Practice (2007–2013). In film, Brenneman starred in Heat, Fear, Daylight, Nine Lives, The Jane Austen Book Club and 88 Minutes. She was nominated for five Primetime Emmys and three Golden Globe Awards.

Early life

Brenneman was born in New London, Connecticut, the daughter of Frederica Joanne (née Shoenfield), a judge of the Connecticut State Superior Court, and Russell Langdon Brenneman, Jr., an environmental lawyer. Brenneman was raised in Glastonbury, Connecticut, where she participated in theatre as a teenager, both in school and with a local theater group. She graduated from Harvard University, where she majored in comparative religion, in 1987. While at Harvard, she co-founded Cornerstone Theatre Company, with which she traveled for several years after graduation.

Career

Brenneman began her career in short-leved CBS series Middle Ages in 1992. The next year she was cast in her first major role as mob-connected uniformed officer Janice Licalsi on the ABC police drama series NYPD Blue. Her story arc, which included a romantic relationship with David Caruso's character, ran through the show's first season (1993–1994) and the first few episodes of the second season. She was nominated for an Emmy Award for Best Supporting Actress in a Drama Series in 1994 and for Outstanding Guest Actress the following year.
After leaving NYPD Blue, Brenneman began her career in film. In 1995, she appeared in Bye Bye Love and Casper, and most notably, in critically acclaimed crime drama Heat. In 1996, Brenneman had the female lead role opposite Sylvester Stallone in disaster thriller Daylight, and also starred in Fear (1996). In 1997 she played the leading role in the independent drama film Nevada. The next year she starred in Your Friends & Neighbors directed by Neil LaBute.rottentomatoes.
In 1999, Brenneman became creator and executive producer of her own television series Judging Amy, in which she played the title character. In 2002, she was awarded the Women in Film Lucy Award in recognition of her excellence and innovation in her creative works that have enhanced the perception of women through the medium of television.Past Recipients
Brenneman starred in ensemble cast film Things You Can Tell Just by Looking at Her directed by Rodrigo García in 2000. In 2005, she starred in another Rodrigo García's independent drama, Nine Lives. In 2007, Brenneman played the role of ylvia Avila in The Jane Austen Book Club based on 2004 novel of the same name by Karen Joy Fowler.
In March 2007, Brenneman was cast as Violet Turner in the Grey's Anatomy spin-off, Private Practice. She later starred in films The Face of Love and Words and Pictures, and was cast in HBO drama series The Leftovers opposite Justin Theroux.

Personal life

In 1995, Brenneman married director Brad Silberling in the garden at the home of her parents. They have two children: Charlotte Tucker (b. March 20, 2001) and Bodhi Russell (b. June 8, 2005). She's heavily involved in her children's school, CHIME because she favors its unique approach to education by blending together typical kids, like Bodhi, and kids with disabilities, like daughter, Charlotte, who has cognitive academic special needs.
Brenneman, who is very actively pro-choice, signed the "We Had Abortions" petition which appears in the October 2006 issue of Ms. Magazine. The petition contains signatures of over 5,000 women declaring that they had an abortion and were "unashamed of the choice they made."
In the February 28, 2007, all-star benefit reading of "The Gift of Peace" at UCLA's Freud Playhouse, she portrays an entrepreneur, alongside actors Ed Asner, Barbara Bain, George Coe, Wendie Malick, and James Pickens, Jr.. The play was an open appeal and fundraiser for passage of U.S. House Resolution 808, which sought to establish a Cabinet-level "Department of Peace" in the U.S. government, funded by a two percent diversion of The Pentagon's annual budget.
In July 2008, Brenneman was nominated as a candidate on the 'Unite for Strength' slate for a place on the national governing board of the Screen Actors Guild (SAG) in elections scheduled for 18 September 2008.
Brenneman is also a strong supporter of more restrictive gun control laws, and in 2009 she hosted the Target for a Safe America gala at the Riviera Country Club in Los Angeles for the Brady Center to Prevent Gun Violence, a gun control group that favors restrictive gun laws and supports gun bans.

Filmography

Film

Television

Awards and nominations






