[[Chynna Phillips]]

CATEGORIES: 1968 births, American Christians, American female singers, American film actresses, American people of English descent, American people of Cherokee descent, American pop singers, American television actresses, Living people, Musicians from California, Actresses from Los Angeles, California, Wilson Phillips members, Dancing with the Stars (U.S. TV series) participants

Chynna Phillips (born February 12, 1968) is an American singer and actress, known for being a member of Wilson Phillips.  She is the daughter of The Mamas & the Papas band members John and Michelle Phillips and the half-sister of Mackenzie Phillips and Bijou Phillips.

Early life and film work

Phillips was born Chynna Gilliam Phillips in Los Angeles. Phillips began her career in acting. She appeared in films such as 1987's Some Kind of Wonderful, 1988's Caddyshack II,1988's Moving Target, 1989's Say Anything and as the title character Roxanne Pulitzer in the 1989 television biographical film Roxanne: The Prize Pulitzer.
In 1995, she returned to acting appearing as Kim MacAfee in the television movie Bye Bye Birdie. In 2004, she voiced the character of Kitty along with her husband William Baldwin as Johnny 13 in Danny Phantom.
Phillips was a contestant on the 13th season of Dancing with the Stars. Her professional partner was two-time finalist Tony Dovolani. While she seemed to be one of the frontrunners to win, Phillips was unexpectedly eliminated in the fourth week of competition. Despite her early exit, Phillips held a much higher average of scores compared to celebrities who lasted much longer than she did.

Music career

In the late 1980s, Phillips formed the trio Wilson Phillips with her childhood friends Carnie and Wendy Wilson. The group released their self-titled debut album in 1990. The album would go on to sell eight million copies.
In 1995, Phillips released her debut solo album, Naked and Sacred, but failed to recapture the success she found with Wilson Phillips.  In 2004, Wilson Phillips reunited to record their third album California, which featured cover tunes from West Coast singers from the 1960s and '70s.
In the October 15, 2007 issue of People magazine, she was said to be writing songs for a Christian album.

Personal life

Phillips had a drug and alcohol addiction in the late 80s.
She became a Christian in 2003.
Phillips met actor William Baldwin of the acting Baldwin family in 1991 and has been married to him since 1995. The couple have three children: daughter Jameson (born 2000), son Vance (born 2002), and daughter Brooke (born 2004).
In September 2009, Chynna's half-sister Mackenzie Phillips alleged in her memoirs that she and her father had a "consensual" ten-year incestuous relationship. Chynna Phillips stated on the record that she did believe Mackenzie was telling the truth.
On Feb 12, 2010, her 42nd birthday, Chynna Phillips was treated for anxiety. In a statement made on February 27, her manager Lizzie Grubman said, "After successfully completing her in-patient treatment for anxiety, Chynna Phillips has happily returned home to celebrate her daughter's birthday with her family."  Manager Lizzie Grubman claimed Phillips was "happy to be home with her family. She is in great spirits."

Filmography

Dancing with the Stars performances

Chynna Phillip's partner was Tony Dovolani.

Discography

Albums

Singles






