[[Naas]]

CATEGORIES: Naas, County towns in the Republic of Ireland

Naas ( Naas is a major commuter suburb, with many people residing there and working in Dublin. The nearby N7 Naas Dual Carriageway connects Naas with Dublin and the M50 Motorway. The M7 Motorway Connects Naas with the South and South West.

History

The Irish language name for Naas, Nás na Ríogh literally means Meeting Place of the Kings, as the place historically hosted meetings of pre-Norman Irish kings from the Kingdom of Leinster.
In the Middle Ages, Naas became a walled market town, occasionally raided by the O'Byrne and O'Toole clans based in the nearby area which became County Wicklow. Naas features on the 1598 map by Abraham Ortelius as "Nosse". (It is worth noticing the "O Byrne" and "O Tolo" (O'Toole) names appearing prominently on the map).
A mayor and council were selected by the richer merchants and landowners; the mayor was titled the "Sovereign of Naas" and carried a ceremonial mace until the post was abolished in 1840.
In the former Parliament of Ireland that was established in 1297 and ended in 1800, the constituency of Naas had 2 seats.
One of the first battles of the rebellion of 1798 took place in Naas on 24 May 1798 when a force of about 1,000 rebels were defeated in an unsuccessful attack on the town.
In 1898, the Local Government Act established Naas Urban District Council (now Naas Town Council). Its jurisdiction had a circular boundary with a 2.4 km (1.5 mi) radius from the new town hall on the main street.
Today, Naas is the 15th largest town in Ireland.

Media

Places of interest

Amenities in the town include: a library, tax office, a new Gaelic Athletic Association club, athletics club, a range of schools, Naas General Hospital, horse racecourse, soccer club, tennis club, soccer club, hockey club, rugby club, two major nightclubs including the infamous 'Time', five-screen 3D cinema, several pubs, five supermarkets, county council offices, a number of hotels and the new Moat Theatre.
A large new public swimming pool and leisure centre opened on Carragh Avenue in 2009 and the old swimming pool site is now a public car park.
The town has two Roman Catholic churches, one Church of Ireland church, and one Presbyterian church. David's Church, is used by the Church of Ireland.  The Roman Catholic parish church, the Church of Our Lady and St. David, dates from 1827.
There are two racecourses near Naas. Punchestown Racecourse is just to the south east of the town, in the parish of Eadestown, and Naas Racecourse is about 1 km from the town centre. The annual Punchestown Race Festival is a major event for a whole week in April. The Oxegen music festival is also held at Punchestown in the second weekend of July.
Naas has one of the largest scouting groups in Ireland, with 2 Beaver nights, 3 cub nights, 3 Scout nights, a very large Venture group and a rover group.

Economy

Local industrial enterprises include Kerry Group,A Tesco Metro store is located on the Blessington Road. A second Aldi store is located on Monread Rd near Tesco Extra.
Recently a lot of proposed stores and retail have been announced for Naas such as, Superquinn will be moving onto the Limerick Road along with plans for an Eight-Screen Cinema and leisure centre.
A new Penney's (Primark) superstore will be located on the old Superquinn site in the town centre.  Under construction is the new Naas Shopping Mall at Corbans Avenue which has seen work postponed due to the economic downturn and lack of funding.
The town of Naas is surrounded by commercial parks with stores such as Harvey Norman, Smyths Toy's, Clery's, PC World, Halfords and Heatons. The largest commercial park is located near the Newhall Interchange. A major business park is under construction at Osberstown.
On 9 October 2012, the largest creation of jobs in the history of the Naas area was announced. Kerry Group is to set up a €100 million, 28-acre campus on Millennium Blvd at Millennium Park in the NW of the town. Construction started in August 2013 and hundreds of jobs are to be created during construction and when completed.

Transport

Naas railway station opened on 22 June 1855, closed for passenger traffic on 27 January 1947 and for goods traffic on 10 March 1947, and finally closed altogether on 1 April 1959. The railway station at Sallins is now used by many residents of Naas and the surrounding area for the daily commute to Dublin, with frequent trains throughout the day and travel times less than 30 minutes to Dublin city centre.
Naas is connected to other main towns and cities by bus services. The main carriers are Bus Éireann and JJ Kavanagh and Sons.Bus Eireann, Dublin Coach, Rapid Town Link and web siteSchedule JJ Kavanagh web site
The N7 Naas Road, which connects Naas to Dublin, was upgraded in 2006 with a six-lane carriageway with grade-separated interchanges. Plans have been laid out to construct a large interchange at the Osberstown-Millenium Park as part of the M7 upgrade.

Roads

Education

Naas has three secondary schools, St. Mary's, a girls convent school, the Christian Brothers School, for boys, and Pipers Hill College (formerly St. Patrick's Community College), a mixed school.
Naas has a large public library which is located in the canal harbour area.Nass Library web site

Mayoral remarks

Mayor Darren Scully resigned from office on 22 November 2011 over remarks he made.

People

Sport

Twinning

Naas is twinned with the following places:





Sources




