[[Djurgårdens IF]]

CATEGORIES: Sports teams in Sweden, Djurgårdens IF, Multi-sport clubs in Sweden

Djurgårdens Idrottsförening, usually shortened as Djurgårdens IF – commonly known as Djurgården () – is a Swedish sports club with several departments, located in Stockholm.

History

The club was founded in 1891 by a group of young athletes living on the royal island Djurgården in central Stockholm. With an original focus on winter sports and athletics, the club quickly branched into other sports, becoming one of Sweden's most successful sports clubs of the 20th and 21st century. the so called tvillingderbyt.
Today the most popular sections are ice hockey and football, with 16 and 11 Swedish national championship titles respectively. Other popular sections are bandy, handball and floorball. The club has won 418 Swedish championships through 2011.

Logo and colours

The first logo of the club was a four pointed silver star in saltire, which had a shield on it with the letters DIF. This star pre-dates the similar star which Idrottsföreningen Kamraterna adopted and is using to this day. The present logo in the form of a shield in yellow, red and blue with the text D.I.F. was adopted in 1896. According to an often quoted poem by Johan af Klercker from 1908, blue and yellow stand for Sweden and red stands for love. Blue and yellow are also the colours of Stockholm.
Yellow, red and blue are the club colours. The logo is registered as a trademark and the colours are set to Pantone, CMYK and web colour values.

Sections

Djurgårdens IF has a number of member sections, all of which legally are their own clubs with their own financial and sporting responsibilities but share the common name, logo and values and support eachother.

Major sections

Other sections

Fans and fan culture

While the club has a considerable fan base all over Sweden, the strongest concentration of Djurgården fans is found in the affluent urban districts of Östermalm and Vasastan (eastern and northern parts of the inner city) and in many of the suburbs of the nation's capital.  In 1981 the main supporter club "Blue Saints" was formed, but due to its notorious fans and their bad reputation, the supporter club changed its name to Järnkaminerna, literally "The Iron Furnices" (an old nickname for Djurgården from the 1950s).  Since 2005, Fabriken is Djurgården's TIFO group; they have two ultras groups: UCS (Ultra caos Stockholm) and Ultras Sthlm.
Djurgården is probably one of a few clubs in the world who is represented both in space (by Christer Fuglesang)
Through the years, many types of souvenirs and memorabilia has been made for the club.  Stuffed toys in the form of a rabbit called Järnkanin ("Iron Rabbit") are sold, the name a pun on the word Järnkamin.  
Club beers=== 


Famous Djurgården supporters

Organisations in close cooperation

The following non-profit organisations are independent bu has a close official cooperation with Djurgårdens IF:






