[[Dulce de leche]]

CATEGORIES: Latin American cuisine, Spreads (food), Confectionery

Dulce de leche () is a confection prepared by slowly heating sweetened milk to create a product that derives its taste from the caramelization of the product, changing flavor and color.  Literally translated, it means "candy of milk" or "candy made of milk", "milk candy", or "milk jam" in the same way that dulce de frutilla is strawberry jam. It is popular in South America, notably in Mexico, Paraguay, Peru,  Argentina, Chile, Uruguay, Brazil, Colombia, Bolivia and Venezuela. The dulce de leche of El Salvador has a soft, crumbly texture, with an almost crystallized form. In Colombia and Venezuela it's known as "Arequipe". A Mexican version called cajeta is made from goat's milk. In the Dominican Republic it is made with equal parts milk and sugar with cinnamon, and the texture is more like fudge. In Puerto Rico dulce de leche is sometimes made with unsweetened coconut milk.
A French version, known as confiture de lait, is very similar to the spreadable forms of dulce de leche. 
The Norwegian HaPå spread is a commercial variant that is thicker and less sweet. The name is an abbreviation of "Hamar" where it originally was made and "Pålegg"(spread). "Ha på" literally means "put on" as a reference to putting it on a slice of bread. HaPå originated during the Second World War when, due to the scarcity of supplies, housewives would boil Viking-melk (a type of condensed milk) to a very similar type of spread. After the war the production was commercialized and continues to this day.

Preparation and uses

The most basic recipe calls for slowly simmering milk and sugar, stirring almost constantly, although other ingredients such as vanilla may be added for flavor. Much of the water in the milk evaporates and the mix thickens; the resulting dulce de leche is usually about a sixth of the volume of the milk used.  The transformation that occurs in preparation is caused by a combination of two common browning reactions called caramelization and the Maillard reaction.
A home-made form of dulce de leche is sometimes made by boiling an unopened can of sweetened condensed milk for two to three hours (or 30 to 45 minutes in a pressure cooker), particularly by those living in countries where it cannot be bought ready-made.  It is dangerous to do this on a stove: if the pot is allowed to boil dry, the can will overheat and explode.
Dulce de leche is used to flavour candies or other sweet foods, such as cakes, churros, cookies (see alfajor), crème caramel (known as flan in Spanish and Portuguese-speaking regions), and ice creams; it provides the "toffee" part of English Banoffee pie and is also a popular spread on pancakes and toast, while the French confiture de lait is commonly served with fromage blanc.
A solid candy made from dulce de leche, similar to the Polish krówka and named Vaquita ("little cow"), was manufactured by the Mu-Mu factory in Argentina until the company went out of business in 1984. Subsequently, other brands began to manufacture similar candies, giving them names such as "Vauquita" and "Vaquerita" in an effort to link their products to the original.
A similar recipe is used to prepare basundi in India, which resembles a less condensed dulce de leche, flavoured with cardamom and eaten as a dessert.
The Philippines also has dulce de leche, where it is usually paired with cakes or breakfast rolls. As in other places, it has also found its way into other desserts such as cakes and ice cream.
In 1997, the ice cream company Häagen-Dazs introduced a dulce de leche-flavoured ice cream. In the same year,Google books Orange Coast Magazine Nov 1998 Starbucks began offering dulce de leche-flavoured coffee products.  In October 2012 Herbalife released a limited edition dulce de leche flavored nutritional shake mix.Limited Edition Formula 1 Healthy Meal Nutritional Shake Mix, Dulce de Leche 









