[[Eileen Davidson]]

CATEGORIES: 1959 births, Actresses from California, American film actresses, American soap opera actresses, American television actresses, Living people, People from Los Angeles County, California, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses

Eileen Davidson (born June 15, 1959) is an American actress, best known for her roles in soap operas as Ashley Abbott on The Young and the Restless and The Bold and the Beautiful and as Kristen Blake DiMera on Days of Our Lives.

Career

Davidson started her career as a model in Mexico City and California, eventually adding commercials and print work in Europe.  Her agent had recommended that she take acting classes to get work in commercials, but she took to acting so well that she was sent out to auditions for acting roles. She originated the role of Ashley Abbott on The Young and the Restless in March 1982, beating out more than 100 candidates. The character of Ashley became a front-burner character, and Davidson became an integral part of the show. She quit the show in December 1988 and the producers took her recommendation of hiring a look-alike actress named Brenda Epperson Doumani, whom Davidson had discovered waiting tables at a charity function.
Davidson then appeared in primetime television, but her show, Broken Badges (1990–1991), was canceled. She returned to daytime when she assumed the role of Kelly Capwell on Santa Barbara from May 1991 until the soap's cancellation in January 1993. She next appeared as Kristen Blake on Days of Our Lives beginning in May 1993. As originally conceived, Kristen was a heroine, who had an Achilles' heel in that the show's supervillain, Stefano, had raised her after the death of her parents. James E. Reilly, who assumed head writing reins in 1993, began to make Kristen more of a villainess. Reilly eventually developed an outrageous second role for Davidson, having her play Susan Banks, a Kristen look-alike. Reilly eventually penned three more roles for Davidson (Sister Mary Moira, Thomas, and Penelope). Her character, Kristen, intended to keep her other character, Susan, prisoner on an island, but Susan ultimately prevailed and Kristen remained on the island until she returned to Salem in 2013. All other related characters were last seen in May 1998.  Davidson's five roles earned her a Daytime Emmy nomination for Outstanding Lead Actress in 1998.
After a year-long vacation, she returned to her role on The Young and the Restless in March 1999. After a successful return as Ashley Abbott, which included Davidson's second Daytime Emmy nomination for Outstanding Lead Actress, Davidson was fired from the show.  In December 2006, Davidson told TV Guide that she was fired from The Young and the Restless due to lack of storyline.com Ken Corday called Davidson about a week before she was fired from The Young and the Restless to get permission to use a picture of her on Days of Our Lives. The picture, which featured Davidson as Susan, was shown in December 2006.
After she was fired from The Young and the Restless but before being cast in The Bold and the Beautiful, her niece Devon Martt, a fashion designer, approached her about designing clothes together.  Davidson liked the idea and formed a clothing company called Femmeology.
Davidson co-wrote her first novel with author Robert J. Randisi, a mystery set in the soap opera world titled Death in Daytime, released in October 2008.  She followed it up with three sequels: Dial Emmy for Murder (2009), Diva Las Vegas (2010), and Swinging in the Rain (2011).com/content/index.asp
In July 2008, Eileen was downgraded to recurring status at The Bold and the Beautiful. She returned to The Young and the Restless full-time as Ashley on September 26, 2008. In 2012, Nelson Branco announced that Sony Pictures Entertainment wanted Davidson on both The Young and the Restless and Days of Our Lives, but that Y&R would not share the actress, leading Sony to terminate her contract with them. Thus, it was announced that Davidson would reprise her role as Kristen Blake DiMera on Days of Our Lives.
Davidson made a brief appearance on The Young and the Restless in February 2013 for the soap's 40th anniversary.
In January 2014, it was announced that Davidson would return to the role of Kristen DiMera in the summer of 2014.tvguide.aspx?fb_action_ids=720944471273615&fb_action_types=og.recommends%22&action_ref_map=
On May 1, 2014, it was formally announced that Davidson was nominated for a Daytime Emmy Award in the category of Outstanding Lead Actress In A Drama Series. It's her third Daytime Emmy Award nomination, her second for Days. The award ceremony is due to take place on June 22, 2014.

Personal life

Davidson was born in Artesia, California, daughter of Charlotte, a homemaker, and Richard Davidson, an airplane parts manufacturer.
Davidson has been married three times: first to actor Christopher Mayer from 1985–1986. Her second husband was former General Hospital, Port Charles,  and As the World Turns actor Jon Lindstrom, to whom she was married from 1997 to 2000. Christopher Mayer and Jon Lindstrom were both stars of TV-series Santa Barbara, a show where Davidson also spent two years. None of them appeared on the show at the same time,though.
She is currently married to actor Vince Van Patten. They have 1 child together: Jesse (born in 2003). They met when he briefly appeared as her "boyfriend" on a cruise on The Young and the Restless.

Filmography

Film

Television

Awards and nominations






