[[KSL-TV]]

CATEGORIES: Television stations in Utah, Media in Salt Lake City, Utah, NBC network affiliates, Bonneville International, Deseret Management Corporation, Channel 5 virtual TV stations in the United States, Channel 38 digital TV stations in the United States, Television channels and stations established in 1949, American Basketball Association flagship television stations

KSL-TV, virtual channel 5 (UHF digital channel 38), is an NBC-affiliated television station located in Salt Lake City, Utah, United States.  It is the sole television property of Bonneville International, the for-profit broadcasting arm of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church). KSL-TV maintains studio facilities located at the Broadcast House building in Salt Lake City's Triad Center, and its transmitter is located on Farnsworth Peak in the Oquirrh Mountains, southwest of Salt Lake City. The station has a large network of broadcast translators that extend its over-the-air coverage throughout Utah, as well as portions of Arizona, Idaho, Nevada and Wyoming.
A sister station to KSL radio (1160 AM and 102.7 FM), KSL-TV is also related to KBYU-FM and KBYU-TV in Provo through Brigham Young University (BYU), also owned by the LDS Church.

History

As a primary CBS affiliate

The station first signed on the air on June 1, 1949, operating from studios in the Union Pacific Building on Main Street. It was owned by the Deseret News, who also owned KSL radio (1160 AM and 100.3 FM, now KSFI). It originally operated as a CBS affiliate, owing to its sister radio station's longtime affiliation with the CBS Radio Network. In addition to its primary CBS affiliation, the station also shared ABC programming with NBC affiliate KDYL-TV (channel 4, now KTVX). The two stations continued to share ABC programming until KUTV (channel 2) signed on in September 1954 as the market's full-time ABC affiliate. The station also broadcast some programming from the DuMont Television Network, and during the late 1950s, the station was also briefly affiliated with the NTA Film Network.
A few months after its sign-on, KSL moved its operations to studio facilities at the Broadcast House on Social Hall Avenue. In 1952, a 
KSL-AM-FM-TV operated as a division of the Deseret News until 1964, when Bonneville International was formed as the parent company for the LDS Church's broadcasting holdings. Soon afterward, channel 5 began broadcasting its programming in color. In 1984, the station moved its Broadcast House facilities to the Triad Center.

As an NBC affiliate

In 1995, KSL-TV became an NBC affiliate, after the network sold KUTV (which swapped affiliations with what is now KTVX in 1960) to a partnership of CBS and Westinghouse Broadcasting as part of a swap involving stations in Denver, Miami and Philadelphia. Initially, NBC sought to reaffiliate with KTVX; but after that station renewed its affiliation agreement with ABC, NBC then secured an affiliation deal with KSL-TV.
On January 14, 1999, a shooter entered the station's Broadcast House facility, allegedly looking for a KSL-TV reporter. Anne Sleater, an employee of another company that was housed in the building, AT&T Wireless Services, was shot during the incident and later died from her injuries. De-Kieu Duy, a 24-year-old female, was arrested in connection with the shooting. Duy was later found mentally incompetent to stand trial and is currently housed in the Utah State Hospital.
In 2002, Bruce Christensen was named the president of KSL-TV; Christensen was a former president of PBS, the former dean of the BYU College of Fine Arts and Communications, as well as a former KSL-TV reporter. In July 2010, KSL-TV entered into a local marketing agreement (LMA) with independent station KJZZ-TV (channel 14), after the LMA between that station and KUTV concluded after five years. During the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City, KSL-TV was very influential in bringing coverage and technology to NBC. The station heavily lobbied to NBC that the ceremonies be broadcast live.

Digital television

Digital channels

The station's digital channel is multiplexed:
On January 1, 2009, KSL discontinued its affiliation with NBC Weather Plus on its 5.3 subchannel due to the service's discontinuation by NBC, and relaunched the subchannel as a locally-compiled automated weather channel, the Live 5 Weather Channel, which was one of the first local digital weather subchannels in the country to be presented in 480i widescreen. KSL-TV also carried Universal Sports on its 5.2 subchannel until it began to be exclusively distributed through cable and satellite television in January 2012; it was replaced by Live Well Network in 2013. On January 1, 2014, KSL replaced Live Well Network with Cozi TV on digital subchannel 5.2.

Analog-to-digital conversion

KSL-TV shut down its analog signal, over VHF channel 5, on June 12, 2009, the official date in which full-power television stations in the United States transitioned from analog to digital broadcasts under federal mandate. The station's digital signal remained on its pre-transition UHF channel 38. Through the use of PSIP, digital television receivers display the station's virtual channel as its former VHF analog channel 5.

Programming

In addition to locally produced news and sports programs, and syndicated shows, KSL broadcasts most of the programs seen on NBC's schedule; although it airs Today in two blocks – with Rachael Ray, a locally-produced lifestyle program called Studio 5 and the station's hour-long noon newscast airing after the first three hours of Today – the fourth hour of the program then follows those programs.
Due to its ties to the LDS church, KSL-TV also airs programs relevant to Mormonism, such as History of the Saints, Music and the Spoken Word and Mormon Times, and pre-empts regularly scheduled programming to carry the bi-annual LDS General Conference.
As a CBS affiliate, KSL-TV aired the drama Picket Fences at 11 p.m. on Saturdays instead of 9 p.m. on Fridays in the mid-1990s."NBC finalizes Salt Lake station deal." - Adweek Western Edition 2 Jan 1995. The station has also been known to occasionally preempt some programs due to content that station management deems objectionable (many of these preempted programs are picked up for broadcast on CW affiliate KUCW, channel 30). The station has in the past declined to air the short-lived sitcom Coupling because of its sexual content, as well as much of NBC's poker programming such as Poker After Dark (which has since been canceled due to legal complications) due to ownership, Church and viewership objections against gambling. KSL-TV also preempted The Playboy Club upon its October 2011 debut (replacing it with the locally-produced newsmagazine We Are Utah, which resembles WCVB-TV/Boston's Chronicle in format),
On August 24, 2012, KSL-TV announced it would not air The New Normal due to objections regarding the sitcom's storyline surrounding gay parenting, crude dialogue and potentially offensive characterizations. The New Normal instead ran on KUCW, which aired the show on Saturday nights, while KSL-TV aired the Live Well Network series My Family Recipe Rocks! in the sitcom's Tuesday timeslot.
The only preemption that did not necessarily involve objectionable program content was the long-running Saturday Night Live, which the station had preempted since joining NBC; the station carried all primetime "best-of" compilations, actor tributes, and documentary programming involving the series offered by the network, along with primetime repeats. KSL elected to keep its popular local sports discussion and highlight program, SportsBeat Saturday, with SNL airing on KUCW instead. However, in June 2013, after revealing that SportsBeat
On September 4, 2013, KSL announced it was moving Days of our Lives from 2 p.m. (NBC's designated alternate timeslot for the soap opera) to a late-night 1:05 a.m. timeslot starting on September 9. While the station's reasoning was not explicitly stated, it was speculated that a storyline involving openly-gay and romantically involved characters Will Horton and Sonny Kiriakis prompted the move. 
Even with its tradition of screening possibly objectionable programs, some, such as The Book of Daniel (which was not shown by several other NBC affiliates, especially in Bible Belt states) and a paid political message criticizing the Iraq War (which featured Cindy Sheehan) have been aired by the station.

News operation

KSL-TV presently broadcasts 24 hours of locally produced newscasts each week (with 4½ hours on weekdays, and 1½ hours on Saturdays and Sundays). Despite its roots in the Deseret News and its link to KSL radio, channel 5 was initially an also-ran in news. That changed in 1965, when the station poached sportscaster Paul James (better known as the voice of BYU football and basketball) and weatherman Bob Welti from KCPX-TV and teamed them with anchor Dick Nourse. Within a few months, channel 5 had rocketed into first place. It would be the dominant news station in Utah for most of the next 45 years, garnering some of the highest ratings in the country. Nourse, James and Welti would remain together until 1991, with Nourse staying on as top anchorman until 2007. In 2008, KSL-TV became the second television station in the Salt Lake City market (after KUTV, which converted in April of that year) to begin broadcasting its local newscasts in high definition.
In November 2010, KUTV, long a distant runner-up, unseated KSL-TV in most timeslots, though channel 5 remained ahead at 10 p.m. However, in February 2011, KSL-TV lost the lead at 10 p.m. for the first time in recent memory. In December 2011, KSL-TV restored its lead in every time slot in the Nielsen ratings except one – the early morning news slot on Monday-Fridays (in the 25-54 year old demographic), where the station finished in third place.

News/station presentation

=Newscast titles=

=Station slogans=

News team

=Current on-air staff=

=Notable former on-air staff=

Translators

KSL-TV extends its coverage throughout Utah, plus parts of Arizona, Idaho, Nevada and Wyoming, using a network of more than 115 community-owned translator television stations listed below.






