[[Dragon Warrior II]]

CATEGORIES: 1987 video games, Android games, Chunsoft games, Dragon Quest video games, Enix games, Game Boy Color games, IOS games, Mobile games, MSX games, Nintendo Entertainment System games, Super Nintendo Entertainment System games, Video game sequels, Wii games

Dragon Warrior II, known as 
Dragon Quest II is set 100 years after the events of the first game. The game's story centers on the prince of Midenhall, who is ordered to stop an evil wizard named Hargon after Hargon destroys Moonbrooke Castle. On his adventure, he is accompanied by his two cousins; the prince of Cannock and the princess of Moonbrooke. Dragon Quest II greatly expands on the series formula from the first game by having a larger party, more areas to explore, multiple heroes and enemies in a battle, and a sailing ship.
Dragon Warrior II was successful in Japan; the original Famicom version shipped 2.4 million copies. Later, the game was remade for the Super Famicom and the Game Boy Color with Dragon Warrior as Dragon Quest I & II. A version of the game for Android and iOS has been announced for release in Japan in Winter 2014. The third title in the series, Dragon Quest III: And Into the Legend..., was released in 1988 in Japan. Dragon Warrior III is the prequel of the first two games; it follows the ancestor of the main characters, the legendary hero Erdrick;

Gameplay

This game allows the player to control more than one character, each of whom has their own characteristics, and it is the first game in the Dragon Quest series to do so. Nintendo of America, Tokuma Shoten Publishing, 67. The game introduced a party system where, instead of beginning the game with an entire party like in previous computer RPGs, the player begins the game with only one character and gradually recruits more party members during the course of the game. The player controls his or her characters as they move in the game world. They can search treasure chests, talk and trade with villagers, equip themselves with weapons and armor, and cast spells.
While wandering fields, towers, caves, seas, and dungeons, the player encounters battles that happen randomly. The game's battle mode introduces groups of monsters, which is an upgrade from the one-on-one battles of Dragon Warrior. In the battle mode, the player gives orders to the characters on how to fight the monsters. Once the player defeats all of the monsters, the characters gain experience points and gold. The experience points raise the characters' experience levels. This improves the characters' attributes, and they may also learn new spells.
To win, the player must fight monsters to improve the characters' experience levels and get gold to buy better weapons and armor. Eventually, the player's characters become strong enough to make it to the next town or dungeon. This repeats until the player reaches the final boss and defeats him. However, the gameplay is not necessarily linear, especially after the player gets the boat. Exploration is a key component of the game. The game offers a few spots to save the game. In most of the towns, talking to a king or minister saves the game. It also allows for the deletion and moving of saved games. This was an upgrade from the Japanese version, which utilized a password system to restore progress.
Dragon Warrior II is noted for greatly expanding upon the gameplay from the previous game, Dragon Warrior. Dragon Warrior II is the first game in the series to feature multiple heroes and enemies in a battle, as well as a sailing ship. Unlike Final Fantasy released that same year, which only allowed the player to dock the ship at ports, Dragon Quest II allowed the player to land the ship anywhere, allowing the entire game world to be explored in an open-ended manner. It was also the first to have weapons which cast spells when used in battles.

Plot

Story

Dragon Warrior II is set one hundred years after Dragon Warrior. Nintendo of America, Tokuma Shoten Publishing, 66.
The Prince begins his quest alone, but is later joined by two cousins: the Prince of Cannock and the Princess of Moonbrooke. After finding the Prince of Cannock, who began a similar journey at the same time as the Prince of Midenhall, Erdrick and Cannock save the Princess of Moonbrooke from Hargon's assault on Moonbrooke Castle. As the trio quest to find and defeat Hargon, they secure a ship which allows them to travel across oceans to reach new continents, including Alefgard, which is where Dragon Quest took place. There they meet the grandson of Dragonlord, the villain from the previous game, who gives the party valuable information...  He tells them that by collecting the five crests hidden around the world, the party can create the Charm of Rubiss, allowing them to defeat Hargon and his illusions.

Setting

The early part of the game takes place on land. From a few magical tiles or tunnels, the player can visit a few tiny islands in the beginning, but only upon reaching a major port and fulfilling a specific task does the player get a ship which allows the player to explore much more of the world by sea. Magical teleportation is the last means of transport that the player must use. Architecturally, some castles are presented as ruins.
The game world of Dragon Warrior, Alefgard, is included on the world map in Dragon Warrior II (albeit in slightly reduced scale), although it is possible to win the game without ever setting foot there.

Characters

Development

Like other main games in Dragon Quest series, Yuji Horii wrote the story, Akira Toriyama did the artwork, and Koichi Sugiyama composed the music. Co-creator Koichi Nakamura, Chunsoft's president, directed the game and did half of the programming. Compared with its predecessor, the game was better in nearly all aspects. Yuji Horii believed many players would play Dragon Warrior II without first playing Dragon Warrior and thus had players search for the other party members.
In original Japanese Famicom version, passwords were used for saving, but the NES version featured a save feature without passwords. The storyline introduction in Moonbrooke is present exclusively in Dragon Warrior II. In Dragon Quest II, the game starts right with the injured soldier from Moonbrooke entering Midenhall castle, seeking help from its king. Like Dragon Warrior, the American version of Dragon Warrior II was censored in some aspects; for example, it used one ghost-like sprite instead of the original defeated character's coffin with cross sprite.
The world of Dragon Quest II was later used as the setting of Dragon Quest Monsters: Caravan Heart on the Game Boy Advance. It starred Kiefer, a hero from Dragon Warrior VII.

Remakes

Dragon Quest II was ported for MSX in February 1988,
On December 18, 1993, Both remakes added a few new scripts.
Dragon Quest II was remade for Japanese cell phones in 2005.
Both the Famicom and Super Famicom versions of this game, along with Dragon Quest and Dragon Quest III, were re-released under the Dragon Quest 25th Anniversary Collection compilation for the Wii in Japan on September 15, 2011. The compilation also included original copies of the strategy guides for the games, along with original artwork and material on the games' development.

Other media

Similar to other main games in the series, Dragon Quest II was novelized and adapted to game books. The Dragon Quest II Novel was written by Hideo Takayashiki and published in 1989; it was reprinted in 1991 and 2000. The Dragon Quest II Game Book series was also published in 1989.

Music

Koichi Sugiyama composed and directed the music for the game.
The first album of Dragon Quest II, Suite Dragon Quest II ~Gods of the Evil Spirits~, was released in February 1987. It covers ten orchestra version soundtracks with a twenty-five minutes "original sound story"; this suite was performed by Tokyo Strings Ensemble. Some of them are classical and some are jazz-style.
The song that is played when wandering the fields of Dragon Warrior, "Unknown World", is also played when the Hero is in that area. "Only Lonely Boy", the background music in the game's name and password input interface, is a single by Anna Makino,

Reception

The Famicom version of Dragon Warrior II was a financial success in Japan, having shipped approximately 2.4 million copies.
Dragon Quest II is generally known for fixing problems found in the first game, including improvements such as allowing parties of three characters, having a larger world, better graphics, and the ability to carry more items.
Japanese reviews highlighted the Famicom versions difficulty, stemming from issues such as the many traps in the Cave of Rhone, and the final boss's ability to cast a "Healall" spell, and this has lead to some critics calling the game "the most difficult Dragon Quest".
Famitsu awarded the Japanese Super Famicom remake a 35/40. While Game Boy Color remake got a 30/40 from Famitsu, Dragon Warrior I + II received fairly high marks in America. These including a 8.0 out of 10 from IGN, a 9.6 out of 10 from GameSpot, and 8 out of 10 from Nintendo Power. It also received the RPGamer's Game Boy Color Award of the Year for 2000.
Together, both the Super Famicom and Game Boy Color remakes shipped in excess of 1.92 million copies worldwide. With the success of this game, Enix released Dragon Warrior III for Game Boy Color in 2001, which was based on a previously unreleased Super Famicom update of the original Famicom Dragon Quest III.






