[[Šar Mountains]]

CATEGORIES: Šar Mountains, Geography of Southeastern Europe, Mountain ranges of Albania, Mountains of Kosovo, Mountains of the Republic of Macedonia, National parks of Kosovo, Protected areas established in 1986, Mountain ranges of Europe

The Šar Mountains, also known as the Sharr Mountains (Serbian and  and the northwest of the Republic of Macedonia, to northeastern Albania.

Etymology

In Antiquity, the mountains were known as Scardus, Scodrus, or Scordus (το Σκάρδον ὂρος in Polybius and Ptolemy);. 928 The modern names come from the ancient ones.
Sometimes the range is called Carska planina ("Tsar's mountain"), as a reference to the capitals (Prizren and Skopje), courts (Nerodimlje, Pauni, Svrčin, etc.) and monasteries (Monastery of the Holy Archangels) of the Serbian Empire located in the region.

Borders

The mountain borders extend from the city of Prizren, following the two rivers of the Prizren Lumbardhi and the Lepenac. In the east it passes by the town of Kačanik through the Kačanik Gorge and into Macedonia via the Polog valley. The border passes near the Vardar spring called Vrutok and enters near the valley of Mavrovo. There the Radika river separates the mountain massif from the higher Mount Korab. After that, the border is mounting, reaching the point of junction of three state borders: Kosovo, Macedonia and Albania. The border now follows the road to the small, mountainous, town of Restelica, the rivers of Globocica, Plava and the White Drin and finally reaches the city of Prizren.

Geographical characteristics

The Šar Mountains have a total area of 1600 km.  56,25% of that area is in the Republic of Macedonia, 43.12% in Kosovo, and 0,63% in Albania.
The system is about  wide.
The mountain massif has been formed in the Tertiary Period. The most upper parts of the mountains have been frozen with large amounts of ice and snow.
It includes several high peaks:
The Šar Mountains extend to Mount Korab () in the southwest, and pass into northeastern Albania with very small part (0.63% of the entire length).
Vegetation on the mountains includes crops up to around . The Šar Mountains are the largest compact area covered with pastures on the European continent. They are most known as the origin of the dog breed Šarplaninac, which was bred on these pastures.
The snowy peaks of the Šar Mountains are depicted on the coat of arms of the city of Skopje, which in turn is incorporated in the city's flag. – Retrieved on 13 May 2009.

Šar Mountains in Kosovo

The Šar Mountains are located in the south and south-east of Kosovo, where 43.12% of the range is located. Many alpine and glacial mountain lakes are found on the Kosovar part of the Šar Mountains, especially south of the village of Dragaš, the area of Shutman and the region north of Vraca. The ski resort of Brezovica, with an elevation of  above sea level, is located north-east of the mountains.
The mountain range in Kosovo  is divided into three main zones:The zone of Ljuboten and Brezovica, the central zone of Prizren and the zone of Opoja and Gora.
The mountains border the Kosovo Plain to the north-east and the Dukagjini Valley in the north- west. Kosovo consists of the most eastern tip and the most northern part of the Mountain ridge. The Ljuboten peak and the mountain of Skopska Crna Gora create the Kačanik Gorge in Kosovo. The Šar Mountains are split from the Nerodimka Mountain by the Sirinić Valley. The Šar National Park is located in Kosovo. Villages and towns that are found near the mountain are:
Lakes in the Kosovo part of the Šar Mountains are:

National Park

The Šar Mountains National Park is in the territory of Kosovo  and spreads on , on the northern slopes of the Šar Mountains as well as the mountains of Ošljak and Jezerce mountains. The National Park "Šar-Planina Mt." was proclaimed in 1993 within the temporary boundaries of 39,000 ha and began activity in 1995. What this national park boasts in particular are the endemic relict Macedonian Pine and white-bark pine, as well as the Alpine rose. As for game, this is the habitat of the lynx, bear, chamois, wolf, roe deer, wild boar and other species including this areas richness in bird species. The national park contains 720 chamois while the Opoja and Gora region contains 600 chamois.

Gallery

File:Sharr.JPG
File:Sharr1.JPG
File:Sharr2.JPG



Notes






