[[New York Stock Exchange]]

CATEGORIES: New York Stock Exchange, National Historic Landmarks in New York City, Buildings and structures on the National Register of Historic Places in Manhattan, Companies established in 1817

The New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), sometimes known as the "Big Board",169 billion in 2013.
The NYSE trading floor is located at 11 Wall Street and is composed of four rooms used for the facilitation of trading. A fifth trading room, located at 30 Broad Street, was closed in February 2007. The main building, located at 18 Broad Street, between the corners of Wall Street and Exchange Place, was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1978,National Park Service, National Historic Landmarks Survey, New York, Retrieved May 31, 2007. as was the 11 Wall Street building.
The NYSE is operated by NYSE Euronext (), which was formed by the NYSE's 2007 merger with the fully electronic stock exchange Euronext. In December 2012, it was announced that the company was being sold to Intercontinental Exchange (ICE), a futures exchange headquartered in Atlanta, Georgia, United States, for $8 billion, a figure that is significantly less than the $11 billion bid for the company tendered in 2011.[ref]
</ref>  NYSE and Euronext now operate as divisions to IntercontinentalExchange.
The NYSE has been the subject of several lawsuits regarding fraud or breach of duty and was sued by its former CEO for breach of contract and defamation.washingtonpost.html

History

The Stock Exchange Luncheon Club was situated on the seventh floor from 1898 until its closure in 2006.
The NYSE announced its plans to merge with Archipelago on April 21, 2005, in a deal intended to reorganize the NYSE as a publicly traded company. NYSE's governing board voted to merge with rival Archipelago on December 6, 2005, and become a for-profit, public company. It began trading under the name NYSE Group on March 8, 2006. A little over one year later, on April 4, 2007, the NYSE Group completed its merger with Euronext, the European combined stock market, thus forming the NYSE Euronext, the first transatlantic stock exchange.
Wall Street is the leading US money centre for international financial activities and the foremost US location for the conduct of wholesale financial services. "It comprises a matrix of wholesale financial sectors, financial markets, financial institutions, and financial industry firms" (Robert, 2002). The principal sectors are securities industry, commercial banking, asset management, and insurance.
Presently, Marsh Carter is Chairman of the New York Stock Exchange, having succeeded John S. Reed and the CEO is Duncan Niederauer, having succeeded John Thain.

Notable events

The exchange was closed shortly after the beginning of World War I (July 31, 1914), but it partially re-opened on November 28 of that year in order to help the war effort by trading bonds, and completely reopened for stock trading in mid-December.
On September 16, 1920, a bomb exploded on Wall Street outside the NYSE building, killing 33 people and injuring more than 400. The perpetrators were never found. The NYSE building and some buildings nearby, such as the JP Morgan building, still have marks on their façades caused by the bombing.
The Black Thursday crash of the Exchange on October 24, 1929, and the sell-off panic which started on Black Tuesday, October 29, are often blamed for precipitating the Great Depression. In an effort to try to restore investor confidence, the Exchange unveiled a fifteen-point program aimed to upgrade protection for the investing public on October 31, 1938.
On October 1, 1934, the exchange was registered as a national securities exchange with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, with a president and a thirty-three member board. On February 18, 1971 the non-profit corporation was formed, and the number of board members was reduced to twenty-five.
One of Abbie Hoffman's well-known publicity stunts took place 
