[[Kirsten Storms]]

CATEGORIES: 1984 births, American child actresses, American soap opera actresses, American television actresses, American voice actresses, Baptists from the United States, Living people, Actresses from Orlando, Florida, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses

Kirsten Renee Storms (born April 8, 1984) is an American actress. She played Isabella "Belle" Black on the NBC soap opera Days of our Lives from 1999 to 2004. In 2005, Storms was cast as the character Maxie Jones on the ABC soap opera General Hospital and its spin-off General Hospital: Night Shift. She departed the series in September 2011 upon being diagnosed with endometriosis and was replaced in the role by Jen Lilley. After nearly a year off-screen, Storms returned as Maxie on September 5, 2012. Storms took maternity leave on January 2, 2014.

Early life and career

Storms was born in Orlando, Florida. She has a younger sister named Gretchen, a brother named Austin and a stepbrother named Chris. She is the daughter of Karen Storms and CBS affiliate sportscaster Mike Storms. According to Storms, she always knew she wanted to be a soap opera actress. At age five she announced:
After visiting her father at work, Storms convinced her parents to enroll her in acting classes, leading to her discovery by a talent scout at the age of five. The talent scout suggested she be enrolled in an intensive children's acting camp in the Catskills, New York.
Storms' first role was a commercial for Galoob Baby Doll. After appearing in a handful of other commercials, her television career included a recurring role on ABC's Second Noah plus a lead role in Sing Me a Story with Belle. At age twelve, she moved with her family to Los Angeles, California. Soon after that, she landed the recurring role of Laura Cummings on The WB's long-running program 7th Heaven. She appeared in three episodes between 1998 and 2001, in which she played a girlfriend of Simon (played by David Gallagher). She was later chosen to play the title character in Disney Channel's original movie Zenon: Girl of the 21st Century. The movie had the largest rating for any Disney Channel original movie at the time. She later reprised the role in two more sequels. Storms continued to appear in a string of family shows and television movies, including The Trojan Horse, a Hallmark production. She also took a supporting role in Disney's Johnny Tsunami and voiced Bonnie Rockwaller in the Disney Channel animated series Kim Possible.

Television

Days of our Lives

On August 5, 1999, Storms signed on to play Isabella "Belle" Black on the NBC daytime drama Days of our Lives. Although she initially faced viewer upset at the sudden SORAS aging her casting brought to the character, Storms soon was popular with the audience. as Storms' character was promoted heavily as a major character within the show.
At the end of her five-year contract, Kirsten opted to not renew her contract with the series, one reason being her pilot had been picked up for the primetime show Clubhouse.

Clubhouse

Clubhouse was a prime-time television series that aired on CBS starting the fall of 2004, created by Daniel Cerone and produced by Aaron Spelling. The series revolved around Pete Young (Jeremy Sumpter) and his dream of becoming a professional baseball player. Storms played Pete's sister, Betsy. Unlike the innocent character of Belle that Kirsten had just left, Betsy was a rebellious teenager often finding herself in trouble over such issues as sex, drugs, and alcohol. Storms embraced the new role, stating, "I can relate to a lot of things Betsy does. I've sat and talked with the executive producer about my first tattoo and the first time I ever had a drink of alcohol, things that she's going to be experiencing too." The show ended up being cancelled after 5 episodes. It shot 11 episodes, and can be viewed on "Brilliant, But Cancelled" on cable TV.

General Hospital

Storms returned to familiar territory on May 23, 2005, becoming the third actress to portray Mariah Maximiliana "Maxie" Jones on the ABC soap opera General Hospital. In 2008, Storms was reunited with Jason Cook, who joined the soap as Matt Hunter. She received an Emmy nomination for her role in 2009.
Storms vacated the role in fall 2011 due to medical reasons, later revealed to be endometriosis.

Personal life

On September 7, 2007, Storms was pulled over on a Los Angeles freeway by California Highway Patrol for tossing a lit cigarette out of the window of her Mercedes. After failing sobriety tests, she was arrested for a DUI.
Storms is close friends with General Hospital co-star Kelly Monaco, featured in the E! Entertainment reality show Dirty Soap, On January 7, 2014, Barash confirmed on his official Twitter account that Storms had given birth to a baby girl, Harper Rose Barash.usmagazine.com/celebrity-moms/news/kirsten-storms-brandon-barash-baby-daughter-harper-rose-picture-2014101

Filmography

Awards and nominations






