[[Copenhagen interpretation]]

CATEGORIES: Concepts in physics, Interpretations of quantum mechanics, Quantum measurement, University of Copenhagen

The Copenhagen interpretation is one of the earliest and most commonly taught interpretations of quantum mechanics.  It holds that quantum mechanics does not yield a description of an objective reality but deals only with probabilities of observing, or measuring, various aspects of energy quanta, entities that fit neither the classical idea of particles nor the classical idea of waves. The act of measurement causes the set of probabilities to immediately and randomly assume only one of the possible values. This feature of mathematics is known as wavefunction collapse.  The essential concepts of the interpretation were devised by Niels Bohr, Werner Heisenberg and others in the years 1924–27.
According to John Cramer, "Despite an extensive literature which refers to, discusses, and criticizes the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics, nowhere does there seem to be any concise statement which defines the full Copenhagen interpretation."

Background

Classical physics draws a distinction between particles and energy, holding that only the latter exhibit waveform characteristics, whereas quantum mechanics is based on the observation that matter has both wave and particle aspects and postulates that the state of every subatomic particle can be described by a wavefunction—a mathematical expression used to calculate the probability that the particle, if measured, will be in a given location or state.
In the early work of Max Planck, Albert Einstein, and Niels Bohr, the existence of energy in discrete quantities had been postulated in order to explain phenomena (such as the spectrum of black-body radiation, the photoelectric effect, and the stability and spectrum of atoms). These phenomena had eluded explanation by classical physics and even appeared to be in contradiction with it. While elementary particles show predictable properties in many experiments, they become highly unpredictable in others, such as when attempting to measure individual particle trajectories through a simple physical apparatus.
The Copenhagen interpretation is an attempt to explain the mathematical formulations of quantum mechanics and the corresponding experimental results.  Early twentieth-century experiments on the physics of very small-scale phenomena led to the discovery of phenomena which cannot be predicted on the basis of classical physics, and to the development of new models that described them very accurately. These models could not easily be reconciled with the way objects are observed to behave on the macro scale of everyday human life. Their predictions often appeared counter-intuitive and disturbing to many physicists, including the developers of those models.

Origin of the term

Werner Heisenberg had been an assistant to Niels Bohr at his institute in Copenhagen during part of the 1920s, when they helped originate quantum mechanical theory.  In 1929, Heisenberg gave a series of invited lectures at the University of Chicago explaining the new field of quantum mechanics.  The lectures then served as the basis for his textbook, The Physical Principles of the Quantum Theory, published in 1930.J. Mehra and H. Rechenberg, The historical development of quantum theory, Springer-Verlag, 2001, p. 271.  In the book's preface, Heisenberg wrote:
 On the whole the book contains nothing that is not to be found in previous publications, particularly in the investigations of Bohr.  The purpose of the book seems to me to be fulfilled if it contributes somewhat to the diffusion of that 'Kopenhagener Geist der Quantentheorie' Copenhagen spirit of quantum theory if I may so express myself, which has directed the entire development of modern atomic physics. 
The term 'Copenhagen interpretation' suggests something more than just a spirit, such as some definite set of rules for interpreting the mathematical formalism of quantum mechanics, presumably dating back to the 1920s. However, no such text exists, apart from some informal popular lectures by Bohr and Heisenberg, which contradict each other on several important issues. It appears that the particular term, with its more definite sense, was coined by Heisenberg in the 1950s,) that had been developed.H. Kragh, Quantum generations: A History of Physics in the Twentieth Century, Princeton University Press, 1999, p. 210. ("the term 'Copenhagen interpretation' was not used in the 1930s but first entered the physicist's vocabulary in 1955 when Heisenberg used it in criticizing certain unorthodox interpretations of quantum mechanics.")  Lectures with the titles 'The Copenhagen Interpretation of Quantum Theory' and 'Criticisms and Counterproposals to the Copenhagen Interpretation', that Heisenberg delivered in 1955, are reprinted in the collection Physics and Philosophy.Olival Freire Jr., "Science and exile: David Bohm, the hot times of the Cold War, and his struggle for a new interpretation of quantum mechanics", Historical Studies on the Physical and Biological Sciences, Volume 36, Number 1, 2005, pp. 31–35.  ("I avow that the term 'Copenhagen interpretation' is not happy since it could suggest that there are other interpretations, like Bohm assumes. We agree, of course, that the other interpretations are nonsense, and I believe that this is clear in my book, and in previous papers. Anyway, I cannot now, unfortunately, change the book since the printing began enough time ago.")

Principles

Because it consists of the views developed by a number of scientists and philosophers during the second quarter of the 20th Century, there is no definitive statement of the Copenhagen interpretation. Bohr once distanced himself from what he considered to be Heisenberg's more subjective interpretation Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Thus, various ideas have been associated with it; Asher Peres remarked that very different, sometimes opposite, views are presented as "the Copenhagen interpretation" by different authors."There seems to be at least as many different Copenhagen interpretations as people who use that term, probably there are more. For example, in two classic articles on the foundations of quantum mechanics, Ballentine (1970) and Stapp(1972) give diametrically opposite definitions of 'Copenhagen.'",   Nonetheless, there are several basic principles that are generally accepted as being part of the interpretation:

Meaning of the wave function

The Copenhagen Interpretation denies that the wave function is anything more than a theoretical concept, or is at least non-committal about its being a discrete entity or a discernible component of some discrete entity.
The subjective view, that the wave function is merely a mathematical tool for calculating the probabilities in a specific experiment, has some similarities to the Ensemble interpretation in that it takes probabilities to be the essence of the quantum state, but unlike the ensemble interpretation, it takes these probabilities to be perfectly applicable to single experimental outcomes, as it interprets 
them in terms of subjective probability.
There are some who say that there are objective variants of the Copenhagen Interpretation that allow for a "real" wave function, but it is questionable whether that view is really consistent with some of Bohr's statements. Bohr emphasized that science is concerned with predictions of the outcomes of experiments, and that any additional propositions offered are not scientific but meta-physical. Bohr was heavily influenced by positivism. On the other hand, Bohr and Heisenberg were not in complete agreement, and they held different views at different times. Heisenberg in particular was prompted to move towards realism. This attitude changed drastically with his paper in which he introduced the uncertainty relations – there he put forward the point of view that it is the theory which decides what can be observed. His move from positivism to operationalism can be clearly understood as a reaction on the advent of Schrödinger's wave mechanics which, in particular due to its intuitiveness, became soon very popular among physicists. In fact, the word anschaulich (intuitive) is contained in the title of Heisenberg's paper.", from 
</ref>
Even if the wave function is not regarded as real, there is still a divide between those who treat it as definitely and entirely subjective, and those who are non-committal or agnostic about the subject. An example of the agnostic view is given by Carl Friedrich von Weizsäcker, who, while participating in a colloquium at Cambridge, denied that the Copenhagen interpretation asserted "What cannot be observed does not exist." He suggested instead that the Copenhagen interpretation follows the principle "What is observed certainly exists; about what is not observed we are still free to make suitable assumptions. We use that freedom to avoid paradoxes."

Nature of collapse

All versions of the Copenhagen interpretation include at least a formal or methodological version of wave function collapse,"To summarize, one can identify the following ingredients as being characteristic for the Copenhagen interpretation(s)... The Copenhagen interpretation has always treated wave function collapse as a fundamental, a priori principle. In 1952 David Bohm developed decoherence, an explanatory mechanism for the appearance of wave function collapse. Bohm applied decoherence to Louis DeBroglie's pilot wave theory, producing Bohmian mechanics,David Bohm, A Suggested Interpretation of the Quantum Theory in Terms of "Hidden Variables", I, Physical Review, (1952), 85, pp 166–179David Bohm, A Suggested Interpretation of the Quantum Theory in Terms of "Hidden Variables", II, Physical Review, (1952), 85, pp 180–193 the first successful hidden variables interpretation of quantum mechanics.  Decoherence was then used by Hugh Everett in 1957 to form the core of his many-worlds interpretation.  However decoherence was largelyH. Dieter Zeh, On the Interpretation of Measurement in Quantum Theory, Foundation of Physics, vol. 1, pp. 69-76, (1970). ignored until the 1980s. Zurek, Pointer Basis of Quantum Apparatus: Into what Mixture does the Wave Packet Collapse?, Physical Review D, 24, pp. 1516–1525 (1981)Wojciech H. Zurek, Environment-Induced Superselection Rules, Physical Review D, 26, pp.1862–1880, (1982) Those who hold to the Copenhagen interpretation are willing to say that a wave function involves the various probabilities that a given event will proceed to certain different outcomes. But when an observer obtains one of those outcomes, no probabilities or superposition of the others linger.
Some argue that the concept of the collapse of a "real" wave function was introduced by Heisenberg and later developed by John von Neumann in 1932."the "collapse" or "reduction" of the wave function. This was introduced by Heisenberg in his uncertainty paper 3 and later postulated by von Neumann as a dynamical process independent of the Schrodinger equation",   However, Heisenberg spoke of the wavefunction as representing our knowledge of a system, and did not use the term "collapse" per se, but instead termed it "reduction" of the wavefunction to a new state representing the change in our knowledge which occurs once a particular phenomenon is registered by the experimenter (i.e. when a measurement takes place).W. Heisenberg "Über den anschaulichen Inhalt der quantentheoretischen Kinematik und Mechanik," Zeitschrift für Physik, Volume 43, 172-98 (1927), as translated by John Wheeler and Wojciech Zurek, in Quantum Theory and Measurement (1983), p. 74.  ("The determination of the position selects a definite "q" from the totality of possibilities and limits the options for all subsequent measurements.  ... The results of later measurements can only be calculated when one again ascribes to the electron a "smaller" wavepacket of extension λ (wavelength of the light used in the observation).  Thus, every position determination reduces the wavepacket back to its original extension λ.")

Acceptance among physicists

Throughout much of the twentieth century the Copenhagen interpretation had overwhelming acceptance among physicists.  Although astrophysicist and science writer John Gribbin described it as having fallen from primacy after the 1980s,Gribbin, J. Q for Quantum according to a poll conducted at a quantum mechanics conference in 1997,C. Sommer, "Another Survey of Foundational Attitudes Towards Quantum Mechanics", arXiv:1303.2719T. Norsen, S. Nelson, "Yet Another Snapshot of Foundational Attitudes Toward Quantum Mechanics", arXiv:1306.4646

Consequences

The nature of the Copenhagen Interpretation is exposed by considering a number of experiments and paradoxes.
1. Schrödinger's Cat
2. Wigner's Friend
3. Double-Slit Diffraction
4. EPR (Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen) paradox

Criticism

The completeness of quantum mechanics (thesis 1) was attacked by the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen thought experiment which was intended to show that quantum physics could not be a complete theory.
Experimental tests of Bell's inequality using particles have supported the quantum mechanical prediction of entanglement.
The Copenhagen Interpretation gives special status to measurement processes without clearly defining them or explaining their peculiar effects. In his article entitled "Criticism and Counterproposals to the Copenhagen Interpretation of Quantum Theory," countering the view of Alexandrov that  (in Heisenberg's paraphrase) "the wave function in configuration space characterizes the objective state of the electron." Heisenberg says,
Many physicists and philosophers have objected to the Copenhagen interpretation, both on the grounds that it is non-deterministic and that it includes an undefined measurement process that converts probability functions into non-probabilistic measurements. Einstein's comments "I, at any rate, am convinced that He (God) does not throw dice.""God does not throw dice" quote and "Do you really think the moon isn't there if you aren't looking at it?"A. Pais, Einstein and the quantum theory, Reviews of Modern Physics 51, 863-914 (1979), p. 907. exemplify this. Bohr, in response, said, "Einstein, don't tell God what to do."Bohr recollected his reply to Einstein at the 1927 Solvay Congress in his essay "Discussion with Einstein on Epistemological Problems in Atomic Physics", in Albert Einstein, Philosopher-Scientist, ed. Paul Arthur Shilpp, Harper, 1949, p. 211: "...  On his side, Einstein mockingly asked us whether we could really believe that the providential authorities took recourse to dice-playing ("ob der liebe Gott würfelt"), to which I replied by pointing at the great caution, already called for by ancient thinkers, in ascribing attributes to Providence in everyday language."  Werner Heisenberg, who also attended the congress, recalled the exchange in Encounters with Einstein, Princeton University Press, 1983, p. 117,: "But he Einstein still stood by his watchword, which he clothed in the words: 'God does not play at dice.'  To which Bohr could only answer: 'But still, it cannot be for us to tell God, how he is to run the world.'"
Steven Weinberg in "Einstein's Mistakes", Physics Today, November 2005, page 31, said:

The problem of thinking in terms of classical measurements of a quantum system becomes particularly acute in the field of quantum cosmology, where the quantum system is the universe.[ref]'Since the Universe naturally contains
all of its observers, the problem arises to come up with an interpretation of
quantum theory that contains no classical realms on the fundamental level.', [/ref]
E. T. Jaynes, from a Bayesian point of view, argued that probability is a measure of a human's information about the physical world.  Quantum mechanics under the Copenhagen Interpretation interpreted probability as a physical phenomenon, which is what Jaynes called a Mind Projection Fallacy.  A similar view is adopted in  quantum information theory.

Alternatives

The Ensemble interpretation is similar; it offers an interpretation of the wave function, but not for single particles. The consistent histories interpretation advertises itself as "Copenhagen done  right". Although the Copenhagen interpretation is often confused with the idea that consciousness causes collapse, it defines an "observer" merely as that which collapses the wave function.  Quantum information theories are more recent, and have attracted growing support.
If the wave function is regarded as ontologically real, and collapse is entirely rejected, a many worlds theory results. If wave function collapse is regarded as ontologically real as well, an objective collapse theory is obtained. For an atemporal interpretation that "makes no attempt to give a 'local' account on the level of determinate particles", the conjugate wavefunction, ("advanced" or time-reversed) of the relativistic version of the wavefunction, and the so-called "retarded" or time-forward versionThe non-relativistic Schrödinger equation does not admit advanced solutions. are both regarded as real and the transactional interpretation results.2,May2010 Dropping the principle that the wave function is a complete description results in a hidden variable theory.
Many physicists have subscribed to the instrumentalist interpretation of quantum mechanics, a position often equated with eschewing all interpretation. It is summarized by the sentence "Shut up and calculate!". While this slogan is sometimes attributed to Paul Dirac



Notes and references

Further reading




