[[Excalibur Hotel and Casino]]

CATEGORIES: Casinos in the Las Vegas Valley, Skyscraper hotels in the Las Vegas Valley, Las Vegas Strip, Buildings and structures in Paradise, Nevada, Novelty buildings in the United States, Casinos completed in 1990, Hotel buildings completed in 1990, Resorts in the Las Vegas Valley, Hotels established in 1990, Arthurian legend, MGM Resorts International

The Excalibur Hotel and Casino is a hotel and casino located on the Las Vegas Strip in Paradise, Nevada, in the United States.  It is owned and operated by MGM Resorts International.
Excalibur, named for the mythical sword of King Arthur, uses the Arthurian theme in several ways.  Its facade is a stylized image of a castle.  Until 2007, a wizard-like figure representing Merlin looked out from a high turret (since replaced by a figure advertising Dick's Last Resort).
Excalibur is situated at the Tropicana - Las Vegas Boulevard intersection. The hotel is linked by overhead pedestrian bridges to neighboring casinos to the north (New York-New York, across Tropicana Avenue) and to the east (Tropicana, across the Strip). There is a free tram that connects Excalibur to its sister MGM Resorts International properties to the south, Luxor and Mandalay Bay.

Facilities and attractions

The 
Excalibur is home to two permanent shows: the all-male revue Thunder From Down Under and the medieval themed dinner show Tournament of Kings. Thunder From Down Under moved to Excalibur in July 2001 and since then has received recognition as one of the best all-male strip shows in Las Vegas.
Dick's Last Resort restaurant opened at Excalibur in June 2007. Dick's is known for its unusual dining experience in which servers purposefully act obnoxious towards guests. Employee "Taco" is considered Dick's mascot and entertains guests with his own version of the Bellagio fountain show using water dispensers behind the bar.
It currently houses the second of only 2 McDonald's in the world to vend Pepsi instead of Coke. (first being Luxor)

History

The land on which the Excalibur sits was originally the proposed site of the Xanadu Resort envisioned in the 1970s.  The 1730 room Asian-tropical themed resort would have been the first mega resort in Las Vegas.  The project was never built when the developers could not secure a deal with the county on the sewer infrastructure such a large project would have required.Paradise Misplaced: Cost Approach to Value
Excalibur opened on June 19, 1990 and was originally built by Circus Circus Enterprises, which was purchased in 2005 by MGM Resorts International.  When it opened, Excalibur was the largest hotel in the world with over 4,000 rooms and covering over 70 acres.[ref]
</ref><ref name="Excalibur Size"></ref>
Excalibur was originally designed in line with the "theme resort" strategy popular among some casino operators during the 1990s which included the traditional Las Vegas gaming experience coupled with family-oriented elements.
On March 21, 2003, the largest Megabucks Jackpot at the time was hit at Excalibur. The winning jackpot was for US$39.7 million.

In popular culture

Excalibur has been featured in several video game and television productions since opening in 1990. Excalibur itself or a hotel resembling Excalibur makes appearances in the video games Driver 2 and Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas. In television productions, Excalibur was the setting for a stunt on the Las Vegas edition of Fear Factor and was featured in an episode of South Park called "It Hits the Fan". Also, season six of Top Chef contestant Jennifer used Excalibur as the inspiration for one of her meals.

Gallery






