[[Skeptic (U.S. magazine)]]

CATEGORIES: Magazines established in 1992, Atheism in the United States, Scientific skepticism media, Science and technology magazines, Quarterly magazines, American magazines, Criticism of religion, 1992 establishments in the United States

Skeptic is a quarterly science education and science advocacy magazine published internationally by The Skeptics Society, a nonprofit organization devoted to promoting scientific skepticism and resisting the spread of pseudoscience, superstition, and irrational beliefs.skeptic.html Founded by Michael Shermer, founder of the Skeptics Society,
Shermer remains the Publisher and Editor-in-Chief of the magazine and the magazine's Co-publisher and Art Director is Pat Linse. Other noteworthy members of its editorial board include Oxford University evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins, Pulitzer Prize-winning scientist Jared Diamond, magician and escape artist-turned educator James "The Amazing" Randi, and actor, comedian, and Saturday Night Live  alumna Julia Sweeney.
Skeptic has an international circulation with over 50,000 subscriptions and is on major newsstands in the U.S. and Canada as well as Europe, Australia, and other countries.

History, format and structure

The cover story of the magazine's very first issue paid tribute to scientist and science-fiction writer Isaac Asimov.skeptic.mvc?Session_ID=17bff9925fe9f38dfdd933f5470bd5ea&Screen=PROD&Store_Code=SS&Product_Code=magv01n1&Category_Code=BIA The cover of volume 12, #2 (2006) depicts a robot sitting on a park bench reading that issue.skeptic.mvc?Session_ID=17bff9925fe9f38dfdd933f5470bd5ea&Screen=PROD&Store_Code=SS&Product_Code=magv12n2&Category_Code=BIF (Asimov wrote a number of stories featuring robots and coined the term "robotics".)
Every issue of the magazine opens with a description of The Skeptics Society and its mission statement, which is to explore subjects such as creationism, pyramid power, Bigfoot,  pseudohistorical claims (as in the examples of Holocaust denial and extreme Afrocentrism), the use or misuse of theory and statistics, conspiracy theories, urban myths, witch-hunts, mass hysterias, genius and intelligence, and cultural influences on science, as well as controversies involving protosciences at the leading edge of established science, and even fads like cryonics and low-carb diets.  In addition to publishing the magazine, the Society also:

The magazine's page count varies between 104 and 114 pages.

Typical topics

The first text piece in each issue is an editorial by James Randi, often made in reaction to stories from the mainstream news media, such as the 2005 story by the ABC newsmagazine Primetime Live on a Brazilian faith healer, João Teixeira. Other times he will examine other topics that he has investigated in the past, such as alleged dowsers, alleged psychics like Sylvia Browne, and UFOs.
The magazine also features a large correspondence section called "Forum" that includes not only letters from lay readers but also in-depth comments and rebuttals from professionals for extended academic debate across issues from past editions.
The bulk of the magazine is devoted to a variety of topics. Its cover stories have ranged from examination of alleged UFOs in religious iconsvolume 10 and theories of the likelihood of artificial intelligence to tributes to luminaries such as Isaac Asimov and Ernst Mayr.skeptic.mvc?Session_ID=17bff9925fe9f38dfdd933f5470bd5ea&Screen=PROD&Store_Code=SS&Product_Code=magv11n4&Category_Code=BIF Some editions feature special sections devoted to a particular topic or theme that is examined through multiple articles by different authors, such as Intelligent design, a frequently recurring topic in the magazine, given the ongoing creation vs. evolution controversy.

Junior Skeptic

Bound into most issues is a 10-page young-readers' section called Junior Skeptic.  Heralded by a cover printed on glossy paper (the rest of the magazine is printed on non-glossy stock), Junior Skeptic focuses on one topic, or provides practical instruction written and illustrated in a style more appealing to children.
Daniel Loxton is the Editor of Junior Skeptic. He writes and illustrates most issues.
The first edition of Junior Skeptic appeared in volume 6, #2 of Skeptic (2000).

Official podcasts

In 2006, an independent, skeptical talk program called Skepticality was relaunched as Skepticality: The Official Podcast of Skeptic Magazine. New episodes of the show are released on a biweekly basis. The show is produced by the original, continuing show hosts (Robynn McCarthy and Derek Colanduno) in collaboration with staff of Skeptic magazine.
In 2009, a second official podcast was added.  MonsterTalk critically examines the science behind cryptozoological and legendary creatures, such as Bigfoot, the Loch Ness Monster and
werewolves.

Collections








