[[Colleen Zenk]]

CATEGORIES: 1953 births, American musical theatre actresses, American soap opera actresses, American people of Hungarian descent, Cancer survivors, Actresses from Illinois, Living people, People from Barrington, Illinois, The Catholic University of America alumni, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, American film actresses, American television actresses

Colleen Zenk (born January 20, 1953) is an American actress best known for her role as Barbara Ryan on the daytime drama As the World Turns, a role she began portraying in September 1978 until the show left the air in September 2010.

Television career

For much of Zenk's run on As the World Turns, her character, Barbara, was tormented by her criminal ex-husband, James Stenbeck (played by Anthony Herrera). For a brief period in the mid-1980s, the character of Barbara was taken in a different direction by head-writer, Douglas Marland, and became a romantic vixen. But for the most part, Barbara was a beleaguered heroine who faced one trial and tribulation after another. 
Sheffer was quoted in an 2006 interview in a cover-feature article in The New Yorker that he wanted to give Zenk, who he felt was an "under-utilized gem of an actress", more to do than just pour coffee with children underfoot.  Viewers were impressed that Zenk, who so consistently played the put-upon heroine, was so believable as a villainess, and so were critics; she was nominated for a Lead Actress Daytime Emmy Award in 2001 and 2002. She was named Best Villain by Soap Opera Digest in 2003. In 2011, she was nominated for a third time for a Daytime Emmy in the Outstanding Lead Actress category. 
As a veteran diva on the show, Zenk was prominently featured in the show's special 50th anniversary episode "Seven Divas on a Bus" in April 2006, and also in the "special" comedy episodes over the years.
Zenk remained the show's women-you-love-to-hate-yet-really-love in the show's last years. Her character, Barbara, finally finding happiness and marrying for the 9th time as the show came to an end in September 2010.

Theatrical roles

Originally a musical theater actor with a background mostly in dance, in 1980, while working during the day on As the World Turns, at night, Zenk co-starred on Broadway alongside musical theatre legends Chita Rivera and Donald O'Connor in the sequel to Bye Bye Birdie titled Bring Back Birdie, the biggest, most expensive flop to ever hit Broadway. She was then featured, singing and dancing with Albert Finney and Carol Burnett, in the movie musical Annie directed by John Huston.
Her musical theater career was then put on hold for over two decades while she raised her family and continued to work on As the World Turns. 
In the summer of 2005, Zenk came out of her self-imposed musical theater retirement and starred as Dolly Levi in a regional tour of Hello Dolly! at the Academy Theater in Meadville, Pennsylvania and the Pocono Playhouse. Due to overwhelming audience response, she was asked to reprise the role for a Fall '05 run at the Bucks County Playhouse in New Hope, Pennsylvania.
In June 2007, three weeks after her initial three surgeries for Oral Cancer, in the 50th anniversary production at Little Theatre on the Square of Chicago, she starred as Phyllis Stone in Stephen Sondheim's "FOLLIES". Recovering from tongue reconstruction and on heavy pain medication for radiation burning and side effects, Zenk sang and danced with the 35 piece orchestra and brought down the house.
In April 2011, only 4 months after more cancer surgery to her tongue, she debuted her one-woman show "Colleen Zenk: LIVE" at Bob Egan's New Hope, to great critical acclaim. She was featured in the new Off-Broadway show from the Araca Group, "Odyssey, the epic musical" at the American Theatre of Actors, October, 2011. Then, the long-awaited NY debut of her one-woman show "Still Sassy" premiered at Feinstein's at the Regency in New York City October-November, 2011.
She is one of the many producers of the Broadway revival of "GODSPELL". In the winter of 2012, she starred in the Off-Broadway World Premiere of the stage version of the bestselling memoir, "Marrying George Clooney, Confessions from a Mid-life Crisis". She recently kicked-off the 2012-2013 theatre season for CAP21 in their "Concerts for CAP21" Benefit Series with a "standing room only" night of her one-woman show "Still Sassy".
In the summer of 2013, Zenk portrayed Tallulah Bankhead to rave reviews in the Regional Premiere of Matthew Lombardo's play "LOOPED" at STAGEWORKS/Hudson becoming only the third actor to play the demanding and hilarious celebrity after Valerie Harper on Broadway and Stephanie Powers in the National Tour.

Personal life

She was born in Barrington, Illinois, studied drama at The Catholic University of America returning to her alma mater many times over the years to perform and headline scholarship fundraising events..
In 1987, she married actor Mark Pinter, whom she met on the set of ATWT. Together, they raised 6 children (four from previous marriages and two from their union). They made their home in Fairfield County, Connecticut. Her step-daughter, Siri, is engaged to Carson Daly.
In May 2010, it was announced that after 23 years of marriage, Zenk had sued for divorce earlier in the year. Rumors were that the marital disintegration resulted from her husband's decades' long philandering and ultimate abandonment. The divorce was finalized in August 2010.

Cancer diagnosis

In 2007, Zenk was diagnosed with oral cancer. Through a series of four surgeries including brachytherapy radiation, Zenk's stage II cancer was treated. In October 2007, Zenk appeared on CBS's The Early Show to publicize the risk factors of oral cancer and to stress early screening. Colleen has partnered with The Oral Cancer Foundation to do additional interviews in print and TV media as well as produce public service TV announcements (PSA) on the importance of early detection. In January 2008 Zenk's oral cancer was integrated into As the World Turns story line, with her character Barbara Ryan receiving the same diagnosis. This happened as the Oral Cancer Foundation was looking for low cost ways to inform the American public about the risks from oral cancers. While a difficult role to play having just come out of treatment for the disease herself, she and the producers of As the World Turns agreed to the storyline. In spring of 2008, CBS donated approximately $500,000 in airtime minutes on their national affiliates for the PSA to play. In November 2008, her cancer returned. She had neck dissection surgery to remove 22 lymph nodes and then underwent five weeks of daily IMRT radiation ending in late February 2009. Like the character of Barbara Ryan, Zenk is also now cancer free. In 2009, Hollywood, Health and Society honored her and As The World Turns for her courageous, truthful storyline. She underwent more surgery in December 2010, August 2012 and January 2013 resulting in good outcomes, with the pathology negative. She remains in remission.






