[[Siletz River]]

CATEGORIES: Rivers of Oregon, Landforms of Lincoln County, Oregon, Landforms of Polk County, Oregon

The Siletz River flows about 

Course

The river begins slightly east of the Polk–Lincoln county border in the Siuslaw National Forest of the Central Oregon Coast Range. Flowing west, it crosses into Lincoln County, returns to Polk County, then re-enters Lincoln County for the last time about  later, the river turns west and soon receives Wildcat Creek from the right. For parts of its course along its upper reaches, the river flows near non-contiguous parcels of land belonging to the Siletz Reservation.
Turning southwest and then south, the Siletz receives Palmer Creek from the right, flows by Moonshine County Park, then receives Baker Creek and Mill Creek from the left before reaching Logsden, about  from the mouth. Passing under Rock Creek Road and receiving Rock Creek from the left, the river turns west again and soon receives Scott Creek from the right, Sam Creek from the left, and Bentilla and Baker creeks, both from the right. Continuing south and then west parallel to Upper Siletz Road, the river passes a United States Geological Survey (USGS) stream gauge and reaches Siletz at about RM 41 (RK 66). At Siletz, the river receives Mill and Dewey creeks from the left. Following a series of meanders that carry it under Oregon Route 229 twice and almost completely around the city of Siletz, the river heads north, roughly parallel to Route 229, which runs near it all the way to Siletz Bay. In the next stretch, the river receives Tangerman, Spencer. and Thompson creeks, all from the right.
Turning west about , the river again doubles back on itself, flowing west, then north, then east until it is near Roy Creek again, then turns north. It receives Roots, Skalada, Townsend, and Stemple creeks in quick succession, all from the right, near RM 15 (RK 24). Shortly thereafter, Scare Creek enters from the left.
Butterfield Creek enters from the left just before the river makes another sharp turn to the east, receiving Foster Creek from the left and Reed Creek from the right about  receives Bear, Skunk, Barhaven, and Anderson creeks, all from the right. A distributary, Millport Slough, branches to the left from the main stem as the river nears Siletz Bay and the Siletz Bay National Wildlife Refuge. The river reaches Kernville, passes under U.S. Route 101 and enters the bay.

Discharge

The USGS monitors the flow of the Siletz River at a station east of Siletz and  of the river.

Fishing

The river has been described as "a fine all-around stream" with good accessibility. Sport fish include fall chinook salmon, summer and winter steelhead, and coastal cutthroat trout. Fishing by boat is most common between Moonshine Park and Jack Morgan Park. The city of Siletz has a boat ramp, parking, and a picnic area along the river, and the lower river and bay have many moorages offering boats and fishing equipment.






