[[Low-alcohol beer]]

CATEGORIES: Non-alcoholic beverages, Prohibition, Types of beer

Low-alcohol beer (also called light beer, non-alcoholic beer, small beer, small ale, or near-beer) is beer with low alcohol content or no alcohol, which aim to reproduce the taste of beer without the inebriating effects of standard alcoholic brews. Most low-alcohol beers are lagers, but there are some low-alcohol ales.
In the United States, beverages containing less than 0.5% alcohol by volume (ABV) were legally called non-alcoholic, according to the now-defunct Volstead Act. Because of its very low alcohol content,  non-alcoholic beer may be legally sold to minors in many American states.
In the United Kingdom, the following definitions apply by law (correct as of May 2007):What Is Meant By Alcohol-Free? : The Alcohol-Free Shop
In some parts of the European Union, beer must contain no more than 0.5% ABV if it is labelled "alcohol-free".
In Australia, the term "light beer" refers to any beer with less than 3% alcohol.

History

Low-alcoholic brews dates back to at least Medieval Europe, where it served as a less risky alternative to water (which often was polluted by feces and parasites) and less expensive than the full strength brews used at festivities.
In the more modern forms, the temperance movements and general regard of certain tasks like driving being unsuitable when intoxicated led to the development of beers which could be drunk without intoxicating effects.
In the United States, the conceptualization of non-alcohol brews took place during Prohibition according to John Naleszkiewicz. President Wilson had proposed limiting the alcohol content in malt beverages to 2.75% in 1917 in an effort to appease avid prohibitionists.  In 1919 Congress approved the Volstead Act, which limited the alcohol content of any beverage to less than 0.5%.  These beverages became known as tonics and many breweries began brewing these extremely low alcohol content beverages in order to keep from going out of business during Prohibition.  Due to the fact that removing the alcohol from the beer requires the addition of one simple step, many breweries saw this as an easy transition.  In 1933, when Prohibition was repealed, removing this single step again was easily done by many breweries. 
By the dawn of the 21st century, alcohol-free beer has seen a rise in popularity in the Middle East (which now makes up a third of the market).The Economist: "Sin-Free Ale"

Pros and cons

There are both up sides and down falls to converting traditional brews to non-alcoholic brews. Some positive aspects of converting standard brews to non-alcoholic brews include the ability to drive after consuming several drinks, the reduction of kidney/liver damage, and less intense hangover symptoms . making people feel "drunk" when they physically are not.

Categories

Light (reduced alcohol) beer

Light beer is  beer that is reduced in alcohol content or in calories, compared to regular beer. The spelling "lite beer" is also commonly used.
Light beers may be chosen by beer drinkers who wish to manage their alcohol consumption or their calorie intake. However, these beers are sometimes criticized for being less flavorful than full-strength beers, being "watered down" (whether in perception or in fact), and thus advertising campaigns for light beers generally advertise their retention of flavor.
In Australia, regular beers have approximately 5% ABV; reduced-alcohol beers have 2.2%–3.2%.
In Canada, a reduced-alcohol beer contains 2.6%–4.0% ABV, and an "extra-light" beer contains less than 2.5% ABV.brewers.asp?id=19
In the United States, most reduced-alcohol beers, including Bud Light, Coors Light, and Miller Lite have 4.2% ABV. This is a 16% reduction in alcohol compared to beer that has 5% ABV.

Low-point beer (3.2%)

Low-point beer, which is often known in America as "three-two beer" or "3 point 2 brew", is beer that contains 3.2% alcohol by weight (equivalent to 4.2% ABV).
The term "low-point beer" is unique to the United States, where some states limit the sale of beer, but beers of this type are also available in countries (such as Sweden and Finland) that tax or otherwise regulate beer according to its alcohol content. 
In Sweden, beer containing up to 3.5% ABV (called Folköl or "Peoples Beer") may be legally sold in any convenience store to people over 18 years of age, whereas stronger beer may only be sold in state-run liquor stores to people older than 20. In addition, businesses selling food for on-premises consumption do not need an alcohol license to serve 3.5% beer. Virtually all major Swedish brewers, and several international ones, in addition to their full-strength beer, make 3.5% folköl versions as well.
The states of Colorado, Kansas, Minnesota, Oklahoma, and Utah permit general establishments such as supermarket chains and convenience stores to sell only low-point beer."What's On Tap - The California Craft Beer Newsletter: July 2005 archive"Oklahoma's 3.2 beer laws unlikely to change anytime soon", Modern Brewery Age, September 29, 2003USA Today - Travel: Salt Lake City"Getting to the bottom of Minnesota's liquor laws"Beer Travelers: Beer along Route 66 In these states, all alcoholic beverages containing more than 3.2% alcohol by weight (ABW) must be sold from state-licensed liquor stores. Oklahoma additionally requires that any beverage containing more than 3.2% ABW must be sold at normal room temperature.37 Oklahoma Statutes § 534.
Missouri also has a legal classification for low-point beer, which it calls "nonintoxicating beer".S.Mo.) Unlike Colorado, Kansas, Minnesota, Oklahoma, and Utah, however, Missouri does not limit supermarket chains and convenience stores to selling only low-point beer. Instead, Missouri's alcohol laws permit grocery stores, drug stores, gas stations, and even "general merchandise stores" (a term that Missouri law does not define) to sell any alcoholic beverage;Section 311.200, R.S.Mo. consequently, 3.2% beer is rarely sold in Missouri.

Near beer

Originally, "near beer" was  a term for malt beverages containing little or no alcohol (less than 0.5% ABV), which were mass-marketed during Prohibition in the United States. Near beer could not legally be labeled as "beer" and was officially classified as a "cereal beverage".
The most popular "near beer" was Bevo, brewed by the Anheuser-Busch company. The Pabst company brewed "Pablo", Miller brewed "Vivo", and Schlitz brewed "Famo". Many local and regional breweries stayed in business by marketing their own near-beers. By 1921 production of near beer had reached over 300 million US gallons (1 billion L) a year (36 L/s).
A popular illegal practice was to add alcohol to near beer. The resulting beverage was known as spiked beer or needle beer,We Want Beer: National Prohibition, Part 1 so called because a needle was used to inject alcohol through the cork of the bottle or keg.
Food critic and writer Waverley Root described the common American near beer as "such a wishy-washy, thin, ill-tasting, discouraging sort of slop that it might have been dreamed up by a Puritan Machiavelli with the intent of disgusting drinkers with genuine beer forever."AmericanHeritage.com / BEER AND AMERICA
Today, the term "near beer" has been revived to refer to modern non-alcoholic beer. 
A drink similar to "near beer", "bjórlíki" was quite popular in Iceland before alcoholic beer was made legal in 1989. The Icelandic variant normally consisted of a shot of vodka added to a half-a-litre glass of light beer.

Small beer

Small beer (also, small ale) is a beer/ale that contains very little alcohol. Sometimes unfiltered and porridge-like, it was a favoured drink in Medieval Europe and colonial North America as opposed to the often polluted water and the expensive beer used for festivities. Small beer was also produced in households for consumption by children and servants at those occasions.

Alcohol-free beer

Alcohol-free beer contains 0% ABV. As such, it is permitted by Islam, and alcohol-free beers such as Holsten, Barbican and Moussy are often available in stores and restaurants that cater to an Islamic customer base. They are also popular in countries that enforce alcohol prohibition, such as Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Iran. They are often available with added flavors such as apple, strawberry, and peach. The Middle East accounts for almost a third of worldwide sales of alcohol-free beer.economist.com/news/business/21582531-non-alcoholic-beer-taking-among-muslim-consumers-sin-free-ale Brewers in the Middle East: Sin-free ale
Kirin Free, produced by Kirin Brewery Company of Japan, is an alcohol-free beer produced without fermentation.

Legal drinking age

Beers that are labeled "non-alcoholic" still contain a very small amount of alcohol. Thus, some US states require the purchaser to be of a legal drinking age.  Exceptions include:
In Sweden, beer below or equaling 2.25% ABV (lättöl) is not legally subject to age restrictions;Alkohollag (2010:1622) | Lagen.30 -åring med pappa fick inte köpa lättöl | Nyheter | Aftonbladet

Brewing process

According to the Birmingham Beverage Company, the basic brewing process of traditional brews consists of eight basic steps, nine for brewing non-alcoholic brews.

How low-alcohol beer is made

Low-alcohol beer starts out as regular alcoholic beer, which is then cooked in order to evaporate the alcohol. This is possible because alcohol has a lower boiling point than water, making it easier to boil off. As opposed to water, which boils at 100 °C (212 °F), alcohol will boil at 78.3 °C (173.5 °F).  Most modern breweries also utilize vacuum evaporation to preserve flavor and speed up the boiling process. In essence, the beer is placed under a light vacuum to facilitate the alcohol molecules going into gaseous phase. If a sufficient vacuum is applied, it may not even be necessary to cook the beer. 
An alternative process called reverse osmosis does not require heating. The beer is passed through a filter with pores small enough that only alcohol and water (and a few volatile acids) can pass through. The alcohol is distilled out of the alcohol-water mix using conventional distillation methods. After adding the water and remaining acids back into the syrupy mixture of sugars and flavor compounds left on the other side of the filter, the process is then complete.How Are Nonalcoholic Beer and Wine Made? - Nagging Question - Food News - CHOW

How non-alcoholic beer is made

The conversion from a traditional alcoholic beer to a non-alcoholic beer takes place after the seventh step and preceding the finishing step. The un-carbonated beer is brought up to the boiling point of alcohol.  Alcohol boils around 78.3 °C (173.5 °F). This temperature will vary slightly with altitude "barometric pressure"; higher temperature at lower altitude and lower temperature at higher altitude.  Another method of removing the alcohol is to decrease the pressure so the alcohol boils at room temperature.  This is the preferred method because the addition of heat this late in the brewing process can greatly affect the flavor of the brew.  If brewers decide to convert their brew to a non-alcoholic brew they must consider the volume of liquid they have lost from the removal of the alcohol.  Typically the volume is reduced by roughly 4%, to compensate simply add water.  Because water is a key ingredient in beer it will not alter the flavor.  Another tip would be avoiding using corn sugars; corn sugars simply increase the alcohol content without adding to the flavor or body of the beer.  Once the alcohol is removed proceed with the normal finishing process where the beer is carbonated and bottled.






