[[Canary Wharf railway station]]

CATEGORIES: Canary Wharf, Railway stations served by Crossrail, Railway stations in Tower Hamlets, Proposed railway stations scheduled to open in 2018, Proposed railway stations in London

Canary Wharf is a railway station currently under construction on the Isle of Dogs in east London, being built as part of the Crossrail project. It was known as Isle of Dogs station during the project's development. Construction began in May 2009 and it is expected to open in 2018.
The station will cost £500-million to build.asce.aspx?id=23622321942#.UiXQ9tJkPng 

Station design and layout

The station is to be constructed beneath and within the West India North Dock. The station will be constructed within a .
Progress update
Throughout 2009 the main focus was on installing 293 interlocking steel piles  wide into the dock floor using ten-storey high piling cranes and Giken piling machines to form a cofferdam. As part of this 38 metre deep reinforced concrete piles have been placed through each of the 293 steel tubes. A further 160 temporary anchor piles and ties have been installed to provide restraint for the cofferdam wall.
On 11 February 2010 Transport Minister Sadiq Khan switched on pumps designed to drain nearly 100 million litres (
A station 'box' will then be constructed in a dry environment - a similar technique to that used in the construction of the nearby Canary Wharf tube station.

Original design by CLRL

The main access point for Crossrail station would have been the rebuilt Great Wharf Bridge. From this entrance there would have been a set of escalators to the concourse level which will be located underwater. Another bank of escalators would take passengers to the platforms.
Construction of the station was to predominantly take place on Hertsmere Road, which runs parallel to West India North Dock. This would involve digging a  below the dock water-level to enable crew and equipment to begin boring the box that will form the station. The construction including fit-out and commissioning of the Hertsmere Road shaft was expected to take approximately four years whilst the same would take five years for the station.

Canary Wharf Group and Fosters redesign

In December 2008 an extra £150m worth of funding from the Canary Wharf Group was announced. Work was due to commence in January 2009. As part of the deal Canary Wharf Group substantially redesigned the station, incorporating a large shopping centre and a park above the platforms situated in the middle of North Dock.
A groundbreaking ceremony for the station was held on 15 May 2009. It was also announced the station would be named "Canary Wharf" instead of "Isle of Dogs".

Connections

The station will connect to the DLR at Poplar DLR station and the London Underground Jubilee line at Canary Wharf tube station. It will also have indirect interchanges with Canary Wharf and West India Quay DLR stations.

Gallery

Construction gallery

File:Crossrail works at West India Quay July 2007 GJ3.jpg|July 2007
File:Crossrail works at West India Quay July 2007 GJ4.jpg|July 2007
File:Construction of crossrail gets underway, Canary Wharf.jpg|July 2009
File:Crossrail's coming - Canary Wharf.jpg|June 2010
File:Canary Wharf Crossrail Station August 2013.jpg|August 2013






