[[Zachariah Selwyn]]

CATEGORIES: 1975 births, Living people

Zachariah "Zach" Selwyn (born on April 23, 1975), also known as simply Zachariah, is an American singer-songwriter, actor, host and writer best known for his appearances on the series Dream Job, Attack of the Show! Catch It Keep It and "Punkin Chunkin".
Following the release of his country-rock CD "Ghost Signs" in 2003, Selwyn beat out a potential crowd of over 20,000 and appeared on the first season of the ESPN's reality show Dream Job. Selwyn debuted on the show in its second episode on February 29, 2004.  Selwyn also hosted Fanarchy, a weekly sports debate series that aired on Versus.

Early career and Dream Job

While he was reading a SportsCenter "Top Ten" highlights segment on the show, all eyes were on Selwyn's long hair, beard and his 70s Outlaw country western leisure suit. ESPN Vice-President of Talent, Al Jaffe, one of the show's judges, told him he was not credible because of his looks. Selwyn cleaned up his look (meaning he cut his beard into a goatee) in time for episode three. He went on to finish in third place on the show. Aaron Levine finished second to the eventual winner, Mike Hall. Tony Kornheiser later apologized for not picking Selwyn on his popular show "Pardon the Interruption" and admitted he had made a mistake. Zach appeared on "Pardon the Interruption" in June 2004 and read viewer mail with Kornheiser.
Selwyn appeared as the backwoods country-rap singing gas station attendant Randall Keith Randall in the film Dead and Breakfast released in early 2005.
Selwyn recorded three songs with pop singer and The Black Eyed Peas member Fergie from 2001 – 2002. Two of those songs, "Will The Ink Fade" and "No Place at All (Baby I'm a Drifter)" appear on Zachariah's first cd "Ghost Signs." The other song, "Other Side" is on the "C.I.L.F." ep from 2006.

Post-Dream Job career

Beginning on June 15, 2004, Selwyn debuted as a color commentator on the Game Show Network series Extreme Dodgeball. He also returned to ESPN, guest-hosting Around the Horn a week before Extreme Dodgeball debuted, with a somewhat love him or hate him reception. Ultimately, his sarcastic take on sports was deemed a little too off-color for the show's ultimate fans. Selwyn did shoot an un-aired ESPN2 pilot called Holla Back in September 2005 with former BET host Free that was not picked up by the network.
On April 17, 2006, Selwyn became the newest correspondent on G4's Attack of the Show!.  He has written and starred in numerous comedic sketches for their network. He also did a pilot for Bravo called This Evening With These People
Selwyn has a Los Angeles based band called Zachariah and the Lobos Riders, who, after Dead and Breakfast, performed their song "I Ain't Gonna Do (Walk Away)" on Attack of the Show! on July 13, 2006. Selwyn has written and performed jingles for commercials for Coors beer. He also made guest appearances on Chicago Hope, Sabrina, the Teenage Witch "Stargate: Atlantis" and That '70s Show.
Selwyn released his first EP in 2006 titled Cartoons I'd Like to F***, which features a new single with Fergie called "Other Side".  The video for Cartoons I'd Like to F*** made waves upon its release on youtube.
He was named one of the "Heeb 100" by Heeb Magazine in September 2007.
His band's new record Alcoholiday was recently released.
He was on G4 TV's appearance at the AEE (Adult Entertainment Expo), as he performed as "Reggie Cupid" in the "Cupid University of Movie Making" sketch.
In May 2007 he appeared as a guest host for the internet video game show Epileptic Gaming.  In July 2007 Selwyn served as floor reporter for G4's coverage of the three-day event E3, the Electronic Entertainment Expo.
He performed his song "I Wanna be a Lawnmower (Cause They're Always on Grass)" on "Attack of the Show!" on September 10, 2007
His song "I'm in Edukashun" was specifically written and composed for the 2008 film "Lower Learning."
He appears as "Buck" in the 2009 film "Tenure" alongside Luke Wilson and David Koechner.
He appeared in a Budweiser commercial during the 2009 Super Bowl (the one where the Horse fetches the tree).
He hosts the series Fanarchy which debuted on Versus on June 7, 2009.
In 2009, he began hosting the series Catch It Keep It with Mike Senese, which appears on The Science Channel.
In 2009, he will began hosting the American version of the Argentinian humor series Caiga Quien Caiga along with Dominic Monaghan and Greg Giraldo.
He wrote a rap song to promote the third season of ABC Family's "Greek" in 2009, and shot a music video with the cast of the show.hulu.com/watch/104392/greek-the-greek-rap
He recently launched his production company Selwyn Brothers with brother Jesse Selwyn, with whom he frequently collaborates. (They did the hit viral videos "White People Problems" "Chick Drinks" "Porky Piggin it" "Hello, Beautiful Homeless Girl" for "Atom TV" on "Comedy Central")
in 2010 Selwyn Brothers also wrote, directed, starred in and produced the "Stand Up 2 Cancer" music video with actor Jim Parsons of "The Big Bang Theory" called "Up 2 You."
In September 2010, he appeared in a promo for Conan O'Brien's new show Conan. He appeared in commercials for Bud Light, Cellular South, KFC and Ally Bank.
He had a recurring role on "Greek" and "Glory Daze" on TBS
In 2011 he began hosting the special "America's Secret Slang" for the History Channel.
In 2013 he became the comedic play-by-play host of "Guinness World Records Gone Wild" for truTV.

CD releases

Other appearances






