[[Bocconi University]]

CATEGORIES: Bocconi University alumni, Bocconi University, Business schools in Italy, Universities in Italy, Educational institutions established in 1902, Universities in Milan, Economics schools, Economics organizations, 1902 establishments in Italy

Bocconi University () is a private university in Milan, Italy. Bocconi provides undergraduate, graduate and post-graduate education, in addition to a range of double degree programs, in the fields of economics, management, finance, law and public administration.
The university is considered to be among the top 10 best business schools in Europe according to the 2013 Financial Time's European Business School Rankings  It is also among the top 25 best institutions in the world in the fields of Economics, Econometrics, Accounting and Finance in the latest QS World University Rankings,. Furthermore, it ranked 29th worldwide in the 2013 QS  'Social Sciences and Management' Faculty Rankings.viasarfatti25.eu/notizia. 
SDA Bocconi, the university's business school, offers MBA and Executive MBA programs. Its MBA program was ranked 31st in the Financial Times Bocconi complements its research through several dedicated research centers."Universita' Bocconi: Transformation in the New Millennium" , Harvard Business School Case, 7 July 2008. Prod. #: 709406-PDF-ENG.

History

Bocconi University was founded in 1902 by Ferdinando Bocconi and was named after his son, who died in the Battle of Adwa during the First Italo-Ethiopian War.
The university was initially affiliated to the engineering school Politecnico di Milano and the teaching model based on that at the École Supérieure of Antwerp.
Bocconi is an internationally oriented institution in business, economics, and law. It is also a research university, receiving funds for its research projects from national and supranational institutions.
Bocconi University is structured around five schools: Undergraduate School, Graduate School, Law School, PhD School, and SDA Bocconi School of Management, its graduate business school. Bocconi presently offers Bachelor Degrees, Masters of Science, MBAs and PhDs in Finance, Economics, Management, Statistics, Law and other disciplines. It also has a number of post-experience programs, and administers many customized executive education courses.
The university also provides activities for high school students in Italy, such as mathematics competitions,Matematica - Giochi - Gare Model United Nations simulationsLiceo Manzoni - Bocconi University Model United Nations and other major events aimed at orienting them during their secondary education.

Campus

The campus was originally located in Via Statuto near the Pinacoteca di Brera, where its first building was inaugurated in 1902. The current campus is now located beside Parco Ravizza, between Via Sarfatti and Viale Bligny and consists of several buildings, all within walking distance to Porta Ticinese, the Basilica of Sant'Eustorgio:
Several other administrative and research offices of Bocconi's individual institutes are scattered across the area, especially around Parco Ravizza and Viale Isonzo.

Dormitories

Bocconi University provides off-campus students with about 1500 places in dorms.
Residences for students are Bocconi Residence, Javotte Residence, Kramer Residence, the more modern Arcobaleno Residence, Spadolini Residence and the latest Dubini Residence (inaugurated in 2010). The type of accommodation varies between the residences and the choice is among single rooms in apartments for either one, two or four people. The residences offer also services to students such as cleaning services, laundry rooms, study rooms, parking spaces. Many students, however, choose to rent private apartments which are easy to find around the university area.

Academics

Undergraduate programs

The university offers four three-year undergraduate courses in Economics which share a common basis in the first three semesters and then distinguish themselves from one another by focusing on either Finance (CLEF),
A fifth separate three-year undergraduate course in Economics focuses on the economics and management of Arts, Culture and Communication (CLEACC).
The University also offers a five-year course in Law, which incorporates the Italian equivalents of the Bachelor of Laws  and the Master of Laws.
Both the Bachelors in Finance, in Italian (CLEF) and in English (BIEMF), have been recognized by the Chartered Financial Analyst Institute (CFA Institute).
In a joint venture with the Central European University of Budapest, Bocconi also offers a four-year Dual Degree in International Business, the first two years of which are spent in Budapest and the latter in Milan.Dual Degree in International Business from Università Bocconi and Central European University: Program
Moreover, Bocconi University, together with University of Southern California and Hong Kong University of Science and Technology offers the 'World Bachelor in Business', the first bachelor programme where students are able to study in three continents over the four years of bachelor and obtain three diplomas from the three universities.

Graduate programs

Bocconi has the following  graduate programs entirely taught in the English language: International Management; Marketing Management; Finance; Economics and Management in Arts, Culture, Media and Entertainment; Economics and Social Sciences; Economics and Management of Innovation and Technology; Quantitative Finance and Risk management; Public Management; International Health Care Management, Economics and Policy.
Bocconi has concluded a number of partnerships with regard to its Master of Science: the Master of Science in Finance was among the first six programs in the world to conclude a partnership with the CFA institute and the first in continental Europe,Italian CFA Society - University Resources while the Masters of Science in Management and International Management enable a selected number of students to take part in the CEMS Master of International Management, of which Bocconi is a founding member, along with HEC, ESADE and University of Cologne. The Master of Science in International Management and Master of Science in Finance programs were ranked 17th and 19th worldwide respectively by the Financial Times in 2013 
Recently Bocconi has been adding top institutions in Economics and Social Sciences to its network of international partner schools, enabling DES/ESS students to spend the entire 2nd year at Yale University or University of Minnesota, attending their Ph.D. program in Economics.
In addition, selected MSc. students can participate in double degree programs with other prestigious institutions in the world such as:

School of Law

Bocconi University School of Law was established in 2006, consolidating the tradition of legal studies at Bocconi under the aegis of the "A. The School of Law currently offers a combined B.Sc. and M.Sc. in Law, runs the Specialization School for Legal professions in cooperation with the University of Pavia, and hosts a Summer Academy in cooperation with the University of Trento, as well as with the Sant'Anna School of Advanced Studies.

PhD School

The Bocconi PhD School offers the following 4-year PhD programmes:

SDA Bocconi

SDA Bocconi (SDA standing for "Scuola di Direzione Aziendale" = School of Management) is the graduate business school of the University and offers internationally recognized MBA Programs highly ranked by Financial Times and Forbes Magazine.
The SDA also offers professional education to executives and managers and publishes E&M (Economia & Management), a popular Italian business and management review.
Apart from the MBA, the SDA offers further Master of Science programs in Corporate finance and Banking, Real estate management, Fine food and beverage management, Fashion Management, Design management, Sports law and Sport management, and a Master in Stage and show management in a joint venture with the Academy for the Performing Arts of the opera house La Scala.
SDA Bocconi also has a combined MBA and Master of Arts in International Affairs (MAIA) with the Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies (SAIS) in Johns Hopkins University's Bologna Center.

Research and endowment

In 2006, research was mainly funded by Bocconi itself (€1,510,571), the European Union (€1,400,000) and the Italian Ministry of Education, Universities and Research (€295,636), in addition to other external sources (€10,573,000).Press Room - Università Bocconi
In 2011, €4,965,000 were assigned by the European Research Council to 5 projects in the area "social science and humanities" of 5 Bocconi professors.
As of 2007, the University has 20 permanent research centers and four research project centers.
Yearly, approximately 200 international publications and 300-400 national publications are done in the university.
Bocconi is a member of the Offshoring Research Network, an international network researching the offshoring of business processes and services.

Departments

Permanent Research Centers

Services to students

Student scholarships

ISU Bocconi coordinates and provides students with grants and services.
They have a Graduate Merit Award and also need-based Graduate Bocconi Scholarship. The Merit Award provides a tuition waiver and either a €3500 stipend or free housing.

Bocconi sport teams

Bocconi's students actively participate at and host different official national and international tournaments in athletics, men's and women's soccer,men's Lacrosse, men's and women's basketball, men's and women's volleyball, water polo, sailing and other individual sports such as golf, swimming, skiing, snowboarding, and skeet shooting.
The pelican is Bocconi's official sport mascot.

Library

The Bocconi Library supports the educational and research mission of the University. The vastness of its collections make the Library an important institution for the economic academic community in Italy and Europe.

Bocconi alumni

The Bocconi Alumni Association (BAA) was created to allow alumni to keep in contact with each other and with their alma mater, this office offers a series of activities organized and promoted by former students. It is dedicated to the University's more than 80,000 graduates and holders of MBA, Master and PhD degrees.

Language Center

Multimedia classroom are used for interactive multimedia teaching as well as assessment tests, exams and international certificates. Students can communicate with each other and with the instructor one-to-one, and one-to-many to encourage collaborative learning. They can also use digital audio files (video and text) to record their voice and compare it with the original.
In the Self-study laboratories each student place has a computer with a University intranet and Internet connection, a CD and DVD reader, and headset for listening and recording. The software on each computer is especially designed for language learning.

IT services

Bocconi uses a platform for e-learning on which teaching materials are posted by professors, moreover most of the administrative functions such as payments, enrollment to exams, study plan choices are made through the students' online agenda.
A computer lab with computers, printers and internet-intranet connection is available for students in the main building. `The Bocconi campus is entirely covered by free wireless connection.

Student life

Student associations

The University is home to a number of societies, some of which are directly involved in facilitating students' integration into the campus life environment and in organizing special events ranging from business games to excursions. Selected organizations are as follows:
In addition to these there are many local branches of external associations, for example AIESEC and Erasmus Student Network.

Student publications

The University hosts several student run publications:

Recreational activities

Bocconi lies in the very center of Milan and therefore its students have easy access to all the main landmarks and activities of the city.

Traditions

In the atrium of the oldest building of the university there are three sets of doors. The central doors, which are larger than the others, have two lions to either side of them. There is a superstition within the university that students who pass in-between the two lions via the central doors risk not being able to graduate. This derives from the old adage "Chi passa tra i Leoni non si laurea alla Bocconi.".
The three main buildings of Bocconi, if seen from the top, seem to spell "30L" (30 cum Laude), the maximum achievable grade in any exam. The building in via Roentgen is the "3", the velodromo is the "0" and the main building is a cross of two "L"s. It is not clear whether it was planned to have such a shape or was just by chance, anyway it is considered a good omen to the students.

Notable people

Alumni

Other

Alumnus of the Year

The title of Alumnus of the Year was given for the first time in 2011 to Fabrizio Saccomanni, former general director of Bank of Italy, and replaced the prizes for Bocconian of the Year (given since 1988) and Master of Masters (given since 2007).
The prize is given to an alumnus of any of the five schools (Undergraduate School, School of Law, Graduate School, PhD School and SDA Bocconi School of Management) who has distinguished himself following the Bocconian values of professionality, entrepreneurship, integrity, responsibility and openess.
The prize is given by the Bocconi Alumni Association (BAA).
Recipients of the previous editions of the prize are: Diego Piacentini e Laura Cioli, Nouriel Roubini e Giovanni Castellucci, Alberto Cribiore e Gaetano Micciché, Enrico Cucchiani e Paolo Cuccia, Vittorio Grilli, Claudio Costamagna, Vittorio Colao, Paolo Scaroni, Marco Drago, Corrado Passera, Renato Soru, Emma Bonino, Alessandro Profumo, Emma Marcegaglia, Isabella Ventura, Carlo Scognamiglio, Marco Tronchetti Provera, Giovanni Giudici, Lucio Stanca, Jody Vender, Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, Giordano Zucchi, Roberto Mazzotta.








