[[Yemeni Arabic]]

CATEGORIES: Arabic languages, Languages of Yemen

Yemeni Arabic is a cluster of Arabic varieties spoken in Yemen, southwestern Saudi Arabia, Somalia,Somalia | Ethnologue and Djibouti.
Yemeni Arabic can be divided roughly into several main dialect groups, each with its own distinctive vocabulary and phonology. The most important of these groups are San'ani, Ta'izzi-Adeni (South Yemeni Arabic or Djibouti Arabic), Tihami and Hadhrami (Hadrami).  The independent languages of Mahri (Mehri) and Suqutri (Socotri, Soqotri), as well as a couple of smaller languages, are not Arabic dialects at all, but form a group of its own, confusingly called Modern South Arabian languages, although they are not descended from Old South Arabian (also called Sayhadic). Yemeni Arabic is used for daily communications and has no official status, instead, Modern Standard Arabic is used in official purposes, in education, commerce, and media, especially in countries where Arabic is not the lingua franca.

Transliteration

Below is a table showing the transliteration system of some consonants together with their IPA values (Note that some phonetic symbols may not appear in some versions of web browser):

San'ani Arabic dialect

Phonology

The Sanaani dialect is distinguished among Yemeni dialects by its use of the ).  

Morphology

Along with these phonological similarities to other dialects, San'ani Arabic also has several unique features.  It uses the classical mā in the meaning of "what", as well as in negations. Unlike the classical usage, this mā is used without distinction in verbal and nominal sentences alike.  San'ani Arabic represents the future aspect with a complex array of prefixes, depending on the person of the verb.  For first-person verbs the prefix (ša-) or ('ad) is used.  The derivation of (ša-) is apparently related to the classical (sa-), and ('ad) is likely an abbreviation of (ba'd), meaning "after".  For all other persons in San'a proper the simple prefix ('a-) is used, although many of the villages around San'a extend the use of (ša-) for all persons.

Syntax

San'ani syntax differs from other Arabic dialects in a number of ways.  It is one of few remaining Arabic dialects to retain the mā af'al exclamatory sentence type with the meaning "how (adjective)".  For instance, mā ajmal, is used to mean "how beautiful", from the adjective jamīl, meaning "beautiful"; a construction it shares with Libyan Arabic and Levantine Arabic.

Vocabulary

The San'ani vocabulary is also very distinct and conservative.  The classical verb sāra, yasīr is retained with the meaning of "to go" (similar to Moroccan).  Shalla, yashill is used to mean "to take/get". E. Watson, Sbahtu! A Course in San'ani Arabic. Semitica Viva: Series Didactica, 3. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1996. xxvii, 324 pp., glossary, index ISBN 3-447-03755-5
As an example of its distinctiveness, during an appearance of the would-be parliament speaker of Yemen, Abdullah Alahmar, on Al-Jazeera TV some years ago, viewers and the TV host needed a translation of his Yemeni dialect into Standard Arabic in order to understand what he said.

Loanwords

Ta'izzi Arabic dialect

The Ta'izzi Arabic Dialect is spoken in Taiz, Aden, parts of Ibb.

Ta'izzi-Adeni Arabic dialect

The Adeni dialect is also very distinct from the rest of the Yemeni dialects.  Like the majority of Yemeni dialects, Adeni uses the hard uvular .

Tihami Arabic dialect

The Tihami dialect has many aspects which differentiate it from all other dialects in the Arab world.  Phonologically Tihami is similar to the majority of Yemeni dialects, pronouncing the  pronunciation is also shared with Egyptian Arabic).  Grammatically all Tihami dialects also share the unusual feature of replacing the definite article (al-) with the prefix (am-).  The future tense, much like the dialects surrounding Sanaa, is indicated with the prefix (š-), for all persons, e.g. ša-būk am-sūq "I will go to the Souq".  Some Tihami dialects, such as that spoken in Al-Hodeida, are otherwise fairly similar to other Yemeni dialects in grammar and syntax, differing mainly in vocabulary, while others can be so far from any other Arabic dialect that they are practically incomprehensible even to other Yemenis.

Zabidi dialect

Of all the dialects of the Tihami tihama region, the dialect of Zabid displays the most innovations.  It shares the transformed definite article of (am-) with the rest of the Tihami dialects, but it is unique in retaining certain of the declensional suffixes in the nominative case.  Indefinite masculine nouns in nominal sentences as well as the subjects of verbal sentences are suffixed with the sound (-ū), which stems from the classical suffix (-un/-u).  Likewise the phonology of the Zabidi sub-dialect is perhaps unique among all Arabic dialects in that it replaces the sound ('ain)  (ء).  In terms of vocabulary, the Zabidi dialect shares very little with other Arabic dialects, in many respects it seems to be a different language. Zabidis use the verb bāka, yabūk to mean "to go." The word goh#d and goh#da mean man, and woman, respectively.  And the word fīaym to mean "where", hence the phrase: fīaym bāyku? meaning "Where are you going?", which is grammatically parallel to the more familiar: fayn rāyih# of more mainstream dialects.

Hadhrami Arabic dialect

Phonology

The Hadhrami dialect in many towns and villages in the Wādī (valley) and the coastal region is characterised by its pronunciation of the voiced palatal plosive (or affricate) (ج) as the semi-vowel  (ي) (y) () in some lexical items.
The ق  for others.
Wādī HA makes  ث / ت  ) respectively.
In non-emphatic environments, (ā) is realised as an open front (slightly raised) unrounded vowel. Thus
(θānī)  "second; psn. name", which is normally realised with an  quality in HA.
This dialect is characterised by not allowing final consonant clusters to occur in final position. Thus Classical  Arabic  bint  "girl" is realised as binit.  In initial positions, there is a difference between the Wādī and the coastal varieties of HA. Coastal HA has initial clusters in (bġā) "he wants", () and (barīd) respectively.

Morphology

When the first person singular comes as an independent subject pronoun, it is marked for gender, thus (anā) for masculine and (anī) for feminine. As an object pronoun, it comes as a bound morpheme, thus (–nā) for masculine and (–nī) for feminine. The first person subject plural is ().
The first person direct object plural is () in HA.
Stem VI, (tC1āC2aC3), can undergo a vowel stem shift to (tC1ēC2aC3), thus changing the pattern vowel (ā) to (ē). This leads to a semantic change as in (tšāradaw) "they ran away suddenly" and (tšēradaw) "they shirk, try to escape"
Intensive and frequentative verbs are common in the dialect. Thus /kasar/ "to break" is intensified to /kawsar/ as in  () "he made a series (lit. breaks) of giggles or laughs".

Syntax

The syntax of HA has many similarities to other Peninsular Arabic dialects. However, the dialect contains a number of unique particles used for coordination, negation and other sentence types. Examples in coordination include (kann, lākan) "but; nevertheless, though", (mā)  (Classical Arabic ammā)  "as for…" and (walla)  "or".
Like many other dialects, apophonic or ablaut passive (as in /kutib/ "it was written") is not very common in HA and perhaps is confined to clichés and proverbs from other dialects including Classical Arabic.
The particle  /qad/  developed semantically in HA into /kuð/ or  /guð / "yet, already, almost, nearly" and /gad/ or /gid/  "maybe, perhaps".

Vocabulary

There are a few lexical items that are shared with Modern South Arabian languages, which perhaps distinguish this dialect from other neighbouring Arabian Peninsula dialects. The effect of Hadrami migration to Southeast Asia (see Arab Singaporean), the Indian subcontinent and East Africa on HA is clear in the vocabulary especially in certain registers like types of food and dress, e.g. () "sarong".  Many loan words were listed in al-Saqqaf (2006): Al-Saqqaf (2006): Co-referential devices in Hadramî Arabic, pp. 75-93 Zeitschrift für Arabische Linguistik Issue 46.uni-hd.htm

Yafi'i Arabic dialect

While there is much about the Lower Yafa'i dialect that has not been thoroughly studied, it does have a very interesting phonological shift. Along with the southern bedouin dialects, in Abyan and Lahej, with which it shares much in common, Yafi'i pronounces the classical jīm (ج) as gīm, but unlike all other dialects, Yafi'i systematically pronounces the classical sound ġayn ( as qain and qāf as ġāf, effectively switching the pronunciation of the one letter for the other.  An illustration of this phonemic interchange can be seen in the Yafi'i words baġar "cow" and qanam "goat", which correspond to the classical words baqar "cow" and ġanam "goat".
Although a similar phonological shift occurs in certain words in the Sudan as well, the similarities are rather misleading.  Whereas the shift is systematic in Yafi', occurring at every instance of the relevant phonemes, in the Sudan it is usually a form of hypercorrection which takes place only in certain classical words.  In the Sudan, the phoneme  occurring as a hypercorrection in words such as istiqlāl "independence", pronounced istighlāl (meaning "exploitation" in Standard Arabic).

Notes




