[[Jason Statham]]

CATEGORIES: 1967 births, English male film actors, English male models, English male voice actors, Hollywood United players, British practitioners of Brazilian jiu-jitsu, British karateka, English kickboxers, British wushu practitioners, Living people, People from Sydenham, 21st-century English male actors, People from Shirebrook, Male actors from Kent



Jason Statham ( and is noted for being typecast as an  antihero.

Early life

Statham was born in Shirebrook, Derbyshire, England, the son of Eileen (née Yates), a dancer, and Barry Statham, a street seller and lounge singer.
Statham's life in the media began when he was spotted by the agency Sports Promotions specialising in sports modelling while he was training at London's Crystal Palace National Sports Centre. Afterwards, he became a model for the clothing brand French Connection. A spokesperson for the high street clothing chain said: "We chose Jason because we wanted our model to look like a normal guy. His look is just right for now: very masculine and not too male-modelly." However, he was still forced to follow in his father's footsteps as a street seller to make ends meet, selling "fake perfume and jewellery on street corners" according to Statham. He made small appearances in a few music videos including Comin' On Strong by The Shamen in 1993, Run to the Sun by Erasure in 1994 and Dream a Little Dream of Me by The Beautiful South in 1995.

Career

While working as a model for French Connection, he was introduced to fledgling British director Guy Ritchie The movie was well received by both critics and audiences, and helped catapult Statham into the public eye. Statham's second collaboration with Ritchie came in the 2000 film Snatch, playing the role of "Turkish". Cast alongside popular actors Brad Pitt, Dennis Farina and Benicio del Toro, and with the movie earning more than $80 million in box-office revenue, Statham was able to break into Hollywood and appeared in two movies in 2001: Ghosts of Mars and The One.
Statham was offered more film roles, and in 2002 he was cast as the lead role of driver Frank Martin in the action movie The Transporter, in which he was responsible for his own stunts (Statham has made this choice for all of his films). He has studied Wing Chun kung fu, karate, and kickboxing.com, 10 October 2002. The film spawned two sequels, Transporter 2 (2005) and Transporter 3 (2008).
He also played supporting roles in Mean Machine (2002), The Italian Job (2003) (in which he played Handsome Rob), and Cellular (2004) in which he played the lead villain. In 2005, Statham was once again cast by Ritchie to star in his new project, Revolver, which was a critical and box office failure.
He played a dramatic role in the independent film London in 2006. That same year he played the lead role as Chev Chelios in the action film Crank which spawned the sequel Crank: High Voltage (2009).
In 2008, Statham starred in the British crime thriller The Bank Job and Death Race, a remake of Death Race 2000 (1975). American film critic Armond White hailed Statham's ascension as the leading international action film star. On the occasion of Death Race, White championed Statham's "best track record of any contemporary movie star." Later in 2008, White praised Statham's Transporter 3 as a great example of kinetic pop art.
In 2009, Statham started to develop a new movie written by David Peoples and Janet Peoples (12 Monkeys). Statham stated "We've got a movie we're trying to do, written by David Peoples and Janet Peoples, in the vein of an old film, The Treasure of the Sierra Madre. It's not a remake or anything, but it's a little bit like that, about relationships and how greed contaminates the relationships these three people have. The working title is The Grabbers."
In 2010, Statham appeared alongside fellow action stars Sylvester Stallone, Jet Li and Mickey Rourke, among others in The Expendables. Statham plays Lee Christmas, a former SAS soldier and expert at close quarters combat using knives. In 2011, Statham starred in the remake of the 1972 Charles Bronson film, The Mechanic, and returned to British film in the police drama Blitz.
He also starred in the action film Killer Elite. The film was based on real events, which were the subject of Sir Ranulph Fiennes' fictional novel The Feather Men. Statham played an assassin named Danny who comes out of retirement to save an old friend, who was played by Robert De Niro.
His 2012 releases were The Expendables 2, in which he reprised his character Lee Christmas, and Safe. Statham had a cameo in Fast & Furious 6 (2013). He may portray the main antagonist of Fast and Furious 7, Ian Shaw, the brother of the antagonist in Fast & Furious 6, Owen Shaw.
Statham has advocated for stunt performers to be given their own category at the Oscars.Jason Statham calls for stunt Oscars

Influence in popular media

In the comic book series Ultimate Spider-Man, that series' version of the villain Vulture was rendered by artist Mark Bagley to resemble actor Statham, as per writer Brian Michael Bendis' instructions. "Ultimate Spider-Man". Wizard Xtra!. p. 117.

Personal life

Statham was in a seven-year relationship with model  Kelly Brook, until 2004.

Filmography

Film

Video games

Box office performance

Since 1998, Statham has appeared in over thirty films. Several have been box office hits, such as Snatch and The Bank Job. He has starred in three film series, The Transporter, Crank and The Expendables. The films he has been in have grossed a total of more than $1 billion USD at the box office, with the highest individual film being The Expendables.






