[[Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago]]

CATEGORIES: Art museums in Illinois, Contemporary art galleries in the United States, Art museums established in 1967, Museums in Chicago, Illinois, National Performance Network Partners, Visitor attractions in Chicago, Illinois, Modern art museums in the United States, 1967 establishments in the United States

The Museum of Contemporary Art (MCA) Chicago is a contemporary art museum near Water Tower Place in downtown Chicago in Cook County, Illinois, United States.  The museum, which was established in 1967, is one of the world's largest contemporary art venues.  The museum's collection is composed of thousands of objects of Post-World War II visual art.
The museum has hosted several notable debut exhibitions including Frida Kahlo's first U.S. exhibition and Jeff Koons' first solo museum exhibition.  Koons later presented an exhibit at the Museum that established the museum's current attendance record for an exhibition. Its collection, which includes Jasper Johns, Andy Warhol, Cindy Sherman, Kara Walker, and Alexander Calder, contains historical samples of 1940s–1970s late surrealism, pop art, minimalism, and conceptual art; notable holdings 1980s postmodernism; as well as contemporary painting, sculpture, photography, video, installation, and related media.  The museum also presents dance, theater, music, and multidisciplinary arts.
The current location at 220 East Chicago Avenue is in the Streeterville neighborhood of the Near North Side community area. The museum was originally located at 237 East Ontario Street, which was originally designed as a bakery. The building is known for its signature staircase leading to an elevated ground floor, which has an atrium, the full glass-walled east and west façades giving a direct view of the city and Lake Michigan.

History

The Museum of Contemporary Art (MCA) Chicago was created as the result of a 1964 meeting of 30 critics, collectors and dealers at the home of critic Doris Lane Butler to bring the long-discussed idea of a museum of contemporary art to complement the city's Art Institute of Chicago, according to a grand opening story in Time.
Initially, the museum was conceived primarily as a space for temporary exhibitions, in the German kunsthalle model. However, in 1974, the museum began acquiring a permanent collection of contemporary art objects created after 1945.
In 1991, the museum's Board of Trustees contributed $37 million ($

In 1996, the MCA opened its current museum at 220 East Chicago Avenue, which was the site of a former National Guard Armory between Lake Michigan and Michigan Avenue from 1907 until it was demolished in 1993 to make way for the MCA. Grossman, James R., Keating, Ann Durkin, and Reiff, Janice L., 2004 Encyclopedia of Chicago, p. 39. The University of Chicago Press, ISBN 0-226-31015-9 The four-story   The physical structure is said to reference the modernism of Mies van der Rohe as well as the tradition of Chicago architecture.

Operation

The museum operates as a tax-exempt non-profit organization, and its exhibitions, programming, and operations are member-supported and privately funded.
The museum operates with three programming departments: curatorial, performance, and education.  Peter Taub is the director of performance programs, Erika Hanner is the Beatrice C. Mayer Director of Education, and Janet Alberti is the Chief Financial Officer and Deputy Director for Operations.
The museum is closed Mondays. While the museum has no mandatory admission charge and operates with a suggested admission ($12 general, $7 students and seniors, free for MCA members, members of the military, and children 12 and under), it currently provides free admission every Tuesday, when it has extended hours of operation from 10 a.m. to 8 p.m.

Exhibitions

Past

In its first year of operation, the museum hosted the exhibitions, Pictures To Be Read/Poetry To Be Seen, Claes Oldenburg: Projects for Monuments, and Dan Flavin: Pink and Gold, which was the artist's first solo show. In 1969, the museum served as the site of Christo's first  building wrap in the United States. It was wrapped in more than 8,000 square feet (700 m²) of tarpaulin and rope. The following year it hosted one-person shows for Roy Lichtenstein, Robert Rauschenberg, and Andy Warhol.
The MCA has also played host to the first American and solo exhibitions of prominent artists such as Frida Kahlo in 1978. Additional highlights of exhibitions organized or co-organized by the MCA include:

Recent

In 2006, the MCA was the only American museum to host Bruce Mau's Massive Change exhibit, which concerned the social, economic, and political effects of design. Additional 2006 exhibitions featured photographers Catherine Opie and Wolfgang Tillmans as well as Chicago-based cartoonist Chris Ware.  The 2008 Koons retrospective broke the attendance record with 86,584 visitors for the May 31 – September 21, 2008 show. which celebrated the 40th anniversary of the museum.
In 2009, the MCA presented Jeremy Deller's exhibition It Is What It Is: Conversations About Iraq.  The exhibition was organized by the New Museum, and it was a new commission by the New Museum, New York; the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago; and the Hammer Museum, Los Angeles.
Co-organized by the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art and the Wexner Center for the Arts, the MCA presented Luc Tuymans from October 2010 – January 2011.

Recurring programs

After a 10-year run, the exhibition series UBS 12x12: New Artists/New Work is moving from the second floor to the third floor, into a larger gallery space and will change its name to "Chicago Works."  The exhibition series will still feature Chicago-area artists.  Rather than each artist being displayed for one month, each exhibition in the series will now be displayed for three months.
Starting in 2002, the MCA began commissioning artists and architects to design and construct public art for the front plaza.  The goal of the program is to link the museum to its neighboring community by extending its programmatic, educational, and outreach functions.  While artists have been exhibited intermittently on the MCA plaza since 2002, the summer 2011 plaza exhibit showcasing four works by Miami-based sculptor Mark Handforth marks a revitalization of the plaza project.
From October through May, the MCA hosts monthly Family Days, which feature artistic activities for all ages.

Performance

In 2011, the MCA celebrated its 15th anniversary of the MCA Stage. The MCA Stage has featured local, national, and international theater, dance, music, multimedia, and film performances in its 15-year history.  It is known as the "most active interdisciplinary arts presenter in Chicago" and partners with local community organizations for the co-presentations of performing arts.
Notable past stage appearances include performances by Trisha Brown Dance Company, Abbey Theater of Ireland, Olafur Arnalds, and Elevator Repair Service.[ref]
 [/ref]

New structure

The new five-storey limestone and cast-aluminum structure was designed by Berlin architect Josef Paul Kleihues. The building, which opened in 1996, contains 
The building's main entrance, which is accessed by scaling 32 steps, uses both symmetry and transparency as themes for its large central glass walls that compose the majority of both the east and west façades of the building.  Two additional entrances—into the education center and into the museum store—are located on either side of the main staircase.  The monumental staircase with projecting bays and plinths that may be used as the base for sculpture is reminiscent of the propyleia of the Acropolis in Athens.   The main level entry hall has an adjacent  The building is known for its hand-cast aluminum panels adjoined to the facade with stainless steel buttons.  The building has two two-story gallery spaces and a smaller one-story gallery space on the second floor.  The third floor has a gallery and exhibition space in its northwest section, and the forth floor has two large galleries, an exhibition space on the west side of the building, and a gallery in the southwest section.
The museum has a 296-seat multi-use theater with a proscenium-layout stage.  The seats are laid out in 14 rows with two side aisles.  The stage is 

Critical review

Complaining that the structure has a more fortress-like exterior than its predecessor, Kamin viewed the architectural attempt as a fumbled work.  However, he considered the interior to be serene and contemplative in a manner that complements the contemporary art and compact and organized in a manner that is an improvement on the more traditional mazelike museums.  Comparing the building to the Sullivan Center and the Art Institute of Chicago Building, Kamin describes the museum as an homage to two of Chicago's architectural influences: Ludwig Mies van der Rohe and Louis Sullivan.  Other critics also note the presence of Mies van der Rohe's spirit in the architecture.
Chicago-based architect Douglas Garofalo has described the building as stark, intimidating and "incongruous with contemporary sensibilities".  The interior atrium, which the architect claims links the city to the lake is part of a transcendent space that benefits from the sunlight that enters through the high glass walls.  The building is said to be designed to separate the art from other distracting services and functions of the venue. Kamin was also pleased with the separate entrances on the main floor for the museum store and accessibility entrances.

New Vision

Announced by the Chicago Tribune in June 2011, the MCA is in the process of reinventing its identity with new curators, a new floor plan, and a new vision.  MCA Director Madeleine Grynsztejn says the museum seeks to be 50/50 artist-activated/audience-engaged.  The main floor's north and south galleries will present exhibitions showcasing the museum's permanent collection and work by post-emerging contemporary artists.  The third floor will be for the "Chicago Works" series.  The fourth floor will have gallery spaces for the MCA Screen and MCA DNA series, while the main barrel-vaulted galleries will be for special exhibitions.

Collection

The museum's collection consists of about 2,700 objects, as well as more than 3,000 artist's books.  The collection includes works of art from 1945 to the present.
Former MCA Chief Curator Elizabeth Smith provided a narrative of the museum's collection.

Notable Works

During the 2008 fiscal year the MCA celebrated its 40th anniversary, which inspired gifts of works by artists such as Dan Flavin, Alfredo Jaar, and Thomas Ruff.  Additionally, the museum expanded its collection by acquiring the work of some of the artists it presented during its anniversary celebration such as Carlos Amorales, Tony Oursler, and Adam Pendleton.








