[[I Am My Own Wife]]

CATEGORIES: Autobiographical plays, 1995 books, 2003 plays, Broadway plays, Plays by Doug Wright, Drama Desk Award winning plays, LGBT-related plays, Off-Broadway plays, Docudrama plays, Plays based on books, Plays for one performer, Monodrama, Pulitzer Prize for Drama winning works, Tony Award winning plays, Metafictional works, Lambda Literary Award winning works

I Am My Own Wife is a play by Doug Wright based on his conversations with German Charlotte von Mahlsdorf. The one-man play premiered Off-Broadway in 2003 at Playwrights Horizons.  It opened on Broadway later that year.  The play was developed with Moisés Kaufman and his Tectonic Theater Project, and Kaufman also acted as director.  Jefferson Mays starred in the Broadway and Off-Broadway productions, playing some forty roles. Wright received the 2004 Pulitzer Prize for Drama for the work.
I Am My Own Wife (or I Am My Own Woman) is also the English title of Charlotte von Mahlsdorf's autobiography, first issued in 1992, translated in 1995.

Plot synopsis

I Am My Own Wife is an examination of the life of German antiquarian Charlotte von Mahlsdorf, born Lothar Berfelde, who killed her father when she was a young child and survived the Nazi and Communist regimes in East Berlin as a transgender person.

Productions

In 2004, the play had its European premiere at Stockholms Stadsteater, Stockholm, starring Björn Kjellman. In 2006, the play was staged in Hudson, New York at Stageworks/Hudson starring Broadway actor Jeffrey Kuhn, in Toronto, Ontario at CanStage, with Stephen Ouimette in the starring role, in Vancouver, British Columbia, at the Playhouse Theatre with Canadian actor Tom Rooney, at the Saidye Bronfman Centre in Montreal with actor Brett Christopher, in Portland, Oregon at the Gerding Theater starring actor Wade McCollum, in Portland, Maine at the Portland Stage Company starring actor Tom Ford, and in Ann Arbor, Michigan at the Performance Network Theatre starring actor Malcolm Tulip.  In January 2007, the San Pedro Playhouse in San Antonio, Texas successfully mounted the play.  It was also performed at the George Street Playhouse, New Brunswick, New Jersey from Jan 16, 2007 to Feb 11, 2007.  It featured Mark Nelson, and was directed by Anders Cato. A French translation (Ma femme, c'est moi) was performed in February 2009 at Théâtre du Rideau Vert in Montreal.  It also ran at the Signature Theatre in Arlington, Virginia,  starring Helen Hayes award winner Andrew Long, and directed by Alan Paul, and at  Theater Three in Port Jefferson, New York, featuring Jeffrey Sanzel.
Between May 6 and May 23, 2009 it played in Tasmania at the Earl Arts Centre and featuring Robert Jarman.
In the Czech Republic, the play was premiered in 2008 by Divadlo Letí with Libor Ulovec in the role.  The latter was awarded the Best Czech Non-Professional Drama Performance 2009 and Libor Ulovec received (among others) the Best Czech Non-Professional Actor Prize 2009.
In Mexico it is starring by the actor Hector Bonilla who, on January 23, 2010, accomplished 100 performances, with 89 standing ovations by that time. It was also performed in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, at Gettysburg Stage starring actor Eric Jones.
In Greece, I Am My Own Wife theatre, in Athens and opening in November 2011 for the second run. It has received great acceptance and outstanding critiques both for the whole of the show but for Haris Attonis' exceptional performance, as well. The play itself and the story of Charlotte are very well-timed with the political and social situation in Greece. The staging itself is very minimal and it's been considered to be one of the most emotional presentations, internationally and there have been innovations like the beard and the lack of the head scarf, for the very first time. Haris Attonis won the 2012 Best Male Theatre Performance Award for I Am My Own Wife in Athens Voice Best Choice and Audience Awards and Marietta Fafouti won the 2012 Best Original Theatre Music for I Am My Own Wife in the Gay Theatre Awards.
Awards and nominations== 





Further reading




