[[North London Railway]]

CATEGORIES: North London Railway, Pre-grouping British railway companies, London Overground, Transport in Camden, Transport in Islington, Transport in Tower Hamlets, Transport in the City of London, Transport in Hackney, History of rail transport in London, LMS constituents

The North London Railway (NLR) company had lines connecting the north of London to the East and West India Docks. The main east to west route is now part of the North London Line. Other lines fell into disuse, but were later revived as part of the Docklands Light Railway, and the East London Line of the London Overground. The company was the East & West India Docks & Birmingham Junction Railway until 1853.

History

The NLR's headquarters and locomotive works were initially at Bow. At first it ran trains from Camden TownCamden Town was renamed Camden Road on 25 September 1950 to Poplar, and from there via the London and Blackwall Railway to Blackwall and the East India Docks; a connection at Bow allowed trains to run to Fenchurch Street. This arrangement lasted until 1865, when an extension from Dalston Junction to Broad Street was opened; Broad Street became the main terminus, and the Poplar line became a branch.
In the meantime, the line had been extended westwards to Hampstead RoadHampstead Road station was renamed Chalk Farm on 1 December 1862, Primrose Hill on 25 September 1950 in 1851 to join the London and North Western Railway (LNWR). In 1858 the line was extended along the North and South Western Junction Railway (a joint enterprise by the LNWR, Midland Railway and the NLR) from Willesden Junction to a London and South Western Railway branch to Richmond. A bypass line from Camden to Willesden Junction via Gospel Oak and West Hampstead opened in 1860. Meanwhile, at the eastern end, a spur line connecting the NLR to Stratford from Victoria Park opened in 1854 but was not used by passenger services.
The LNWR took over the working of the railway on 1 February 1909. The last board meeting and last shareholder meeting were both held on 23 November 1922, the latter giving the shareholders' approval to the absorption. The board minutes were signed by A Holland-Hibbert, the chairman, who added 'Goodbye!'
Beneath this was typed, 'This was the last Board Meeting of the North London Railway Company, the Undertaking being absorbed under "The London and North Western Railway (North London Railway and Dearne Valley Railway) Preliminary Absorption Scheme 1922" by the London and North Western Railway Company as from 1 January 1922.'The National Archives RAIL 529/34 NLR Board Meeting 22 November 1922
The LNWR, which half-owned Broad Street station, was responsible for fourth-rail electrification of the Broad Street to Richmond and Kew Bridge services in 1916. The latter was cut as a wartime economy measure in 1940 and not resumed.
The line from Dalston Junction to Poplar was heavily damaged during The Blitz. Passenger service from Broad Street to Poplar via Victoria Park and Bow was not reinstated at the end of the war (its official closure was 14 May 1944). Broad Street to Dalston Junction closed on 30 June 1986.

Present day

In 1979 the line between Richmond and Dalston via Gospel Oak and the extension to Stratford was joined with the former Eastern Counties and Thames Junction Railway to form the North London Line. The line between Willesden Junction and Camden via Primrose Hill is now primarily used (in 2014) for empty coaching stock movements between the North London Line and Willesden Depot, freight trains and, during  engineering work, diverted passenger services to and from the Watford DC Line.  Primrose Hill station has been closed.
The Docklands Light Railway follows the path of the long-disused North London Railway from Bow Church to Poplar, and the northern section of the East Cross Route (A12) built in the late 1960s used the route between Old Ford and Victoria Park stations,  demolished for the road's construction.
The East London Line Extension took over the abandoned stretch between Dalston and Shoreditch.

Stock

Among the first locomotives bought by the railway from outside contractors were five 0-4-2ST saddle tanks. After that, all were constructed at Bow, London.  

Workshop

Bow railway works was built in 1853 and had a sizeable wagon repair shop. When the railway was merged into the LMS it was the smallest of 15 workshops. It repaired NLR locomotives and from 1927 those from the former London, Tilbury and Southend Railway (LTSR).
In the 1930s the works developed and manufactured the Hudd automatic control system for the LTSR, which led to a British Rail (BR) team from the national headquarters setting up in Bow to develop BR's standard Automatic Warning System. The workshop was badly damaged during the blitz and the wagon workshop destroyed. 
In 1956 the workshop repaired diesel-electric locomotives for the motive power depot at Devons Road (the first to become all-diesel). After a while it was receiving locos in the morning and turning them round by the evening, which initially confused the statistical returns since locos were entering and leaving the works on the same day. The works closed in 1960.

Stations

Richmond to Willesden Junction (joined NLR 1856):
Willesden Junction to Camden via Primrose Hill  (opened 1851-2, passenger services withdrawn 1992):
Willesden Junction to Camden via West Hampstead & Gospel Oak (opened 1860):
Camden Road to Dalston (opened 1850):
Dalston to Broad Street (opened 1865, closed 1986, mostly re-opened 2010):
Dalston to Poplar (opened 1850, closed to passengers 1944, Dalston- Stratford reopened 1980):
At Poplar, the line connected to Millwall Junction, allowing goods trains to run to Blackwall and the East India Docks), or along the Millwall Extension Railway, which served the West India Docks.

Notes




