[[Snoqualmie Falls]]

CATEGORIES: Landforms of King County, Washington, Hydroelectric power plants in Washington (state), Waterfalls of Washington (state), National Register of Historic Places in Washington (state), Visitor attractions in King County, Washington, Energy infrastructure completed in 1898, Energy infrastructure completed in 1910, Plunge waterfalls

Snoqualmie Falls is a 268 ft (82 m) waterfall on the Snoqualmie River between Snoqualmie and Fall City, Washington, USA. It is one of Washington's most popular scenic attractions, but is perhaps best known internationally for its appearance in the cult television series Twin Peaks. More than 1.5 million visitors come to the Falls every year, where there is a two acre (0.8 ha) park, an observation deck, and a gift shop. 
Most of the river is diverted into the power plants, but at times the river is high enough to flow across the entire precipice, which creates an almost blinding spray. High water occurs following a period of heavy rains or snow followed by warm rainy weather. This can occur during the rainy season which lasts from November through March. During high water, the falls take on a curtain form.
For the Snoqualmie People, who have lived for centuries in the Snoqualmie Valley in western Washington, Snoqualmie Falls is central to their culture, beliefs, and spirituality. A traditional burial site, to the Snoqualmie, the falls are "the place where First Woman and First Man were created by Moon the Transformer" and "where prayers were carried up to the Creator by great mists that rise from the powerful flow." The mists rising from the base of the waterfall are said to serve to connect Heaven and Earth.
The falls were first nominated for the National Register of Historic Places in 1992 as a traditional cultural property for its association with the beliefs of the Snoqualmie people. However, the property owner, Puget Sound Energy, objected to the listing. The falls were subsequently determined eligible for listing in the National Register. The owners rescinded their objection and on September 2, 2009, the falls were formally listed in the National Register.

Power plants

thumb|right|250 px|Cutaway diagrams of Power Plant 1There are two hydroelectric power plants at Snoqualmie Falls, both currently operated by Puget Sound Energy. Power plant 1 was built in 1898 and operates at the base of the falls embedded in the rock 
The 1898 generating system was designated an ASCE Civil Engineering Landmark in 1981.

Namesake town

The town of Snoqualmie Falls was located near the waterfall.  It was associated with the Weyerhaeuser mill there.  It had many structures, including an hospital, a school, community center, and many homes.  When the town disbanded, many houses were moved to the nearby town of Snoqualmie.

Salish Lodge & Spa

thumb|right|250px|The Salish LodgeThe historic Salish Lodge & Spa overlooks Snoqualmie Falls. The original building on the site was erected in 1919. For 70 years, a small inn known as the Snoqualmie Falls Lodge catered to travelers to the falls with comfort foods. Generations of Puget-Sound area residents took family outings to the Lodge to enjoy the scenic view, country hospitality, and famous
In July 1986, the real estate subsidiary of Puget Sound Energy (which owned the land) terminated the lodge's lease as part of a major redevelopment project in conjunction with Salish Resorts. The 1919 lodge structure was completely remodeled and reopened in 1988 as the 89-room Salish Lodge & Spa. The fireplace is the only remaining part of the original structure.  The dining room continues to be recommended worldwide for its lodging, spa, and multi-course country breakfast.
In Twin Peaks, the building stands in for exterior shots of the Great Northern Hotel.

Hiking

The top of the waterfall is less than , the trail is expected to be closed until fall of 2013.

Gallery

File:BrinkofSnoqualmieFalls1890FJHaynes.jpg|Brink of falls, Spring 1890 - Frank Jay Haynes
File:Snoqualmie Falls Postcard Circa 1910.
Image:Snoqualmie Falls pano 1.
Image:snoqualmiefallsspring.jpg|Snoqualmie Falls in mid-March
Image:Snoqualmie Falls Top August 2120px.jpg|The falls in August
Image:Snoqualmie_Falls_0536.
Image:Snoqualmie falls on christmas day 2008.
File:Snoqualmie Falls in June 2008.








