[[Pontifical Catholic University of Chile]]

CATEGORIES: Pontifical Catholic University of Chile, Roman Catholic Church in South America, Pontifical Universities, Universities in Chile, Nursing schools in Chile, Educational institutions established in 1888, Roman Catholic universities and colleges in Chile, Universities in Santiago Metropolitan Region, 1888 establishments in Chile

The Pontifical Catholic University of Chile (UC or PUC) ( Since it is a Pontifical University, it has always had a strong and very close relationship with the Vatican. It was founded on June 21, 1888 through a decree issued by the Santiago Archbishop. Its first chancellor was Monsignor Joaquín Larraín Gandarillas, and at the very beginning, the university only taught two subjects, law and mathematics. It is part of the Universities of the Rectors' Council of Chilean Universities, and although it is not state-owned, a substantial part of its budget is given by state transferences under different concepts.

Campuses

UC has four campuses in Santiago and one campus in Villarrica. The campuses in Santiago are:
These four campuses have a total of 223,326.06 m2 constructed in a 614,569.92 m2 area. The Villarrica campus has 1,664 m2 constructed in a 2,362.5 m2 area.

History

UC was founded on June 21, 1888, to offer training in traditional professions (law) and in technological and practical fields such as business, accounting, chemistry, and electricity. On February 11, 1930, Pope Pius XI declared it a pontifical university, and in 1931 it was granted full academic autonomy by the Chilean government. It is a private, urban, multi-campus university. It is one of the eleven Chilean Catholic universities, and one of the twenty-five institutions within the Rectors' Council (Consejo de Rectores), the Chilean state-sponsored university system.
UC's 18 faculties are distributed through four campuses in Santiago and one regional campus located in southern Chile. The technical training centers affiliated with the University are: DUOC, the Rural Life Foundations, the Baviera Foundation, the Catechetical Home and the San Fidel Seminary. These centers carry out technical-academic extension activities in rural and agricultural areas. Other UC activities are a Sports Club, a nation-wide television network, and a Clinical Hospital dependent on the Faculty of Medicine.
UC 's Graduates of the School of Architecture (one of the most prominent in Latin America) have also made important contributions to the country with such work as the Central Building ("Casa Central") of UC, and the National Library.
Two of its most important alumni are the Jesuit Saint Alberto Hurtado and Eduardo Frei Montalva, a Chilean president. Both of them studied in the School of Laws. Sebastián Piñera, previous Chilean president, graduated from the university's School of Economics.

Collaborations

The Department of Industry and System Engineering is engaging Stanford Technology Venture Program of Stanford University on a collaboration on innovation and technology ventures.
In December 2011, the schools of engineering of PUC and the University of Notre Dame signed an agreement to establish a dual graduate degree in civil engineering and the geological sciences,
In April 2013, PUC and the University of Notre Dame also signed a memorandum of understanding to strengthen scholarly engagement and expand their long-standing relationships.nd.

World rankings

PUC ranks among the first 10 Latin-American Universities according to the Shanghai ranking, and is 2nd according to the QS ranking.usnews.com/education/worlds-best-universities-rankings/best-universities-in-latin-america

Faculties and subjects

Notable Alumni

Architecture

Art

Economy

Religion

Both studied law in the university.

Politics

Knowledge Transfer, Service & Consultancy






