[[Nine-ball]]

CATEGORIES: Pool (cue sports), Sports originating in the United States

Nine-ball (sometimes written 9-ball) is a contemporary form of pool (pocket billiards), with historical beginnings rooted in the United States and traceable to the 1920s. The game may be played in social and recreational settings by any number of players (generally one-on-one) and subject to whatever rules are agreed upon beforehand, or in league and tournament settings in which the number of players and the rules are set by the sponsors. During much of its history, nine-ball has been known as a "money game" in both professional and recreational settings, but has since become established as a legitimate alternative to eight ball, straight pool and other major competition games. 
In recent decades, nine-ball has become the dominant tournament game in professional pool, in the World Pool-Billiard Association, Women's Professional Billiard Association and United States Professional Poolplayers Association. Matches proceed quickly, suitable for the time constraints of television coverage, and the fast-paced games tend to keep the audience engaged. 

Play

The game is played on a pocket billiards table with six pockets and with ten balls. The ), each of these balls are distinctly colored and numbered 1 through 9. The object of the game is to legally pocket the 9-ball.
In nine-ball, except when a push-out has been invoked, a legal shot consists of striking the cue ball into the lowest numbered object ball on the table and subsequently either pocketing an object ball, or driving any ball (including the cue ball) to any rail, otherwise the shot is a  game. The 9-ball itself can be legally pocketed for a win at any turn in the game, intentionally or by chance, including the break shot. Conversely, a player could potentially pocket all of the object balls numbered one through eight during the course of the game and lose after his opponent pockets only the nine-ball.
Players alternate , able to place the cue ball anywhere on the table prior to shooting. 
Nine-ball is a relatively fast-paced game and is rarely played by the rack. Instead, players normally play a match (or ) to a set number of games, often five, seven or nine. The first player to win that set number of games wins the match.

The rack

The object balls are placed in a diamond-shaped configuration, with the 1 ball positioned at the front (toward the position of the breaking player) on the foot spot, and the 9 ball placed in the center. The physical rack used to position the balls is typically triangle-shaped, usually wood or plastic, and capable of holding all fifteen object balls, although diamond-shaped racks that hold only nine balls are sometimes used. The placement of the remaining balls is generally considered to be random. However, in some , the player assigned the break may demand a re-rack. (See also "European alterations", below, for a recently devised "template-trained" racking system.)

The break

One person is chosen to shoot first, by  for the break shot. If the player who breaks fails to make a legal break, the opponent can either demand a re-rack and become the breaker, or continue to play as if it had been an ordinary foul, depending upon the rules of the event. If the breaker pockets a ball and commits no foul, it remains the breaker's turn.  If the breaker pockets the 9 ball on the break (without fouling), this is an instant win. (See also "European alterations", below, for recent moves to change the breaking rules.)

The push-out

After the break (regardless of its result), before the second shot of the game, the player at the table may call a "." A push-out can be called by the breaking player if he legally pocketed a ball on the break, or the non-breaking player if no ball was pocketed on the break. Calling a push-out for the shot after the break allows the player taking the shot to legally hit the cue ball in almost any fashion with no foul, with the exception that the cue ball must stay on the table and illegal shots such as double-hitting the cue ball or a "scoop jump shot" should still be called a foul. The main purpose of the push-out shot is to alleviate an unlucky lie after the break, where it is difficult to make a legal shot. Unlike any other shot of the game, for a push-out shot, the cue ball is not required to contact any object ball and if an object ball is contacted, it is not required to be the lowest numbered ball. If the nine-ball is pocketed on a push-out shot it is spotted,meaning if the ball is pocketed no matter if the object ball is contacted or not it sill remains spotted, however any other pocketed object ball stays down. A push-out should be called so that the opponent or referee hears the call, and it is customary for the opponent or referee to confirm that he heard the push-out call, so that there is no controversy surrounding the shot. After a push-out shot was called and played, the incoming player has the choice of accepting the table as it lies, or forcing the pushing-out player to take the next shot of the game (always the third shot of the game). Only one push-out is allowed per game, and it must be immediately after the break. (See also "The rise of 'Texas express' rules", below, for the historical multi-push-out rule variation.) If the pushing-out player has a particular type of shot he feels comfortable with, such as a jump shot, or two-rail bank shot, it may be strategical to leave that type of shot after the push-out. The ideal push-out shot leaves a lie that the opponent believes likely to be makeable, and will accept, but will fail to actually make, giving control of the table back to the pusher-out, and which the pusher-out is confident to make if the shot is passed back to him. Thus nine-ball players aim for a push-out that has about a 50/50 chance of being accepted or returned.

Winning

Winning a game occurs any time a player hits the lowest numbered ball first and pockets the 9-ball without committing a foul. When only the 9-ball is on the table, this is straightforward and obvious; however, when other balls remain on the table, any number of events can result in victory so long as the above requirements are met. Loss of game can occur if three successive fouls are committed and the fouling player is warned audibly or visually after the 2nd foul during the third inning.
In most rule systems, including those of the World Pool-Billiard Association and its national affiliates like the Billiard Congress of America, if a player fouls and pockets the 9 ball, or knocks the 9 ball off the table, the 9 ball is placed on the foot spot, and the incoming player receives .

Rule variations and governing bodies

The general rules the game is played under are fairly consistent and usually do not stray too far from the format set forth in the Billiard Congress of America (BCA) BCA World Standardized Rules for Nine Ball, which have merged with those of the World Pool-Billiard Association (WPA), to form the World Standardised Rules, although amateur league play may be governed by similar but slightly different rules promulgated by the American Poolplayers Association (APA) and other organizations.

The rise of "Texas express" rules

For much of its history nine-ball rules allowed participants to "" rules, so called because of the supposed US state of origin and the speeding up of the game. Today, Texas express push-out rules dominate the way nine-ball is played and is the variant incorporated into the official rules maintained by the WPA and its affiliates like the BCA.

European alterations

As of the 2000s, the rules have been somewhat in flux in certain contexts, especially in Europe.  The European Pocket Billiard Federation (EPBF), BCA's WPA-affiliate counterpart in Europe, has done away with standardized racking techniques, and instead relies upon 
Another Euro-Tour innovation is a new requirement that the break shot be taken from a ". This change defeats the common break-from-the-side-rail technique for pocketing the 9 ball on the break and winning the game instantly.  While 9 ball breaks are still possible, they are much more difficult under the new rule. This requirement was recently added to the Europe vs. US all-star team event, the Mosconi Cup, but has not otherwise been seen much by North Americans.
Yet a third EPBF change, used on the Euro-Tour for several years, is the " of short shots.  By effectively banning the soft break, wins "on a silver platter" are much less likely.  One problem with this "three above the line" break requirement is that very careful attention must be paid to whether or not particular balls cross the head string, such that even professional referees have had to resort to video playback, as happened several times at the Mosconi Cup, when this rule, too, was introduced in 2007 by the MC's organizers, Matchroom Sport, in an effort to make the event more competitive and interesting to audiences, and more even (the US has mostly dominated the annual event since its inception, and they did in fact lose the 2007 match).
Another Mosconi Cup rule change in 2007 called for racking such that the 9 ball rather than the 1 ball is on the  (i.e. the racker rolls the balls forward farther; the balls remain in the same position in the rack), which further thwarts pocketing a wing ball easily.

Derived games

Three-ball (historical)

While the modern folk game of three-ball bears no resemblance to nine-ball, the earliest-known version of three-ball was essentially nine-ball played with only three balls, racked in a triangle,

Six-ball

Six-ball is essentially identical to nine-ball but with three fewer balls, and racked in a three-row triangle, with the 6 ball (or more often the 15 ball; see below) as the  players, using coin-operated tables that deliver a full set of fifteen balls. 

Seven-ball

thumb|left|150px|) in the center of the hexagon. This game is not particularly common, and is primarily known because of ESPN's Sudden Death Seven-ball which aired in the early 2000s. Though hardly necessary, specialized equipment for the game can be purchased, including a unique black-striped seven ball and a hexagonal rack. 

Ten-ball

Ten-ball is a more stringent variant of the game, using ten balls (racked in a triangle with the 10 ball, the  and in which the money ball cannot be pocketed on the break for an instant win. Due to its more challenging nature, and the fact that there is no publicly known technique for reliably pocketing specific object balls on the break shot, there have been suggestions among the professional circuit that ten-ball should replace nine-ball as the pro game of choice, especially since the rise of the nine-ball soft break, which is still legal in most international and non-European competition.  Regardless of the future of the nine-ball versus ten-ball debate, there are already hotly contested professional ten-ball tournaments. 

9-Ball Kiss

9-Ball Kiss (also carom nine) is played with the usual nine-ball rack, but breaking with the 1 ball, with the cue ball placed at the head of the rack (in the usual place of the 1 ball). As in regular 9-ball, play progresses from the lowest-numbered ball on the table; however a legal shot is made by shooting the object ball rather than the cue ball. The object ball must make first contact with the cue ball to count as a legal shot, the goal being to carom the object ball into a pocket (a kiss-shot) or into another ball.  Once a legal shot has been performed, any ball then sunk counts for that player; the winner is the player to first pocket the 9-ball after a legal shot.

3-6-9 nine-ball

A gambling version of nine-ball played with group of people. The game is played like regular 9 ball with a player order. Heckling the shooters is allowed but no touching may occur. Money balls are the three, six, and nine ball. Values of the money balls are 1-1-2 where each player pays out to the person who sunk a money ball. If the nine ball is sunk, the payout is the nine ball value and what ever money balls are left on the table. If a money ball is pocketed and the cue ball is scratched, that player must pay out that value to each of his opponents. Winner of the game has break on the next game, player before winner racks the next game.








