[[Footscray railway station]]

CATEGORIES: Premium Melbourne railway stations, Railway stations in Melbourne, Railway stations opened in 1859, Victorian Heritage Register

Footscray railway station is located on the Sunbury, Werribee and Williamstown lines in Victoria, Australia. It serves the western Melbourne suburb of Footsccray opening on 17 January 1859.Footscray VicsigFootscray Station Rail Geelong
It is also serviced by V/Line Ballarat, Bendigo and Geelong services. It is the sixth busiest station on Melbourne's metropolitan network, with 4.2 million passenger movements recorded in 2011/12.Station Patronage Research Public Transport Victoria
A disused signal box is located on the island platform at the Flinders Street end of platform 5, and a pair of dual gauge tracks form the mainly freight only South Kensington-West Footscray line under the station, running in a cutting before entering the Bunbury Street tunnel. providing a rail link to the Port of Melbourne and other freight terminals, as well as access to Southern Cross for the NSW TrainLink XPT, The Overland, and standard gauge V/Line trains to Albury.

History

On 17 January 1859 the railways arrived in Footscray when the new Williamstown line opened with trains running from Spencer Street in Melbourne to the important cargo port of Williamstown. This railway connected to the 18-month old Geelong railway at the junction near where the current Newport station lies. The railway between Melbourne and Footscray, via the new station at North Melbourne, had been made possible with the construction of a railway bridge over the Maribyrnong River. The first station to open in Footscray opened on this line on the opening day of service; it was not, however, where the current Footscray station lies, but was situated on Napier Street.
Shortly afterwards, Footscray became a junction station when a second railway, branching at Footscray, was opened to Sunbury. By 1862 this railway had been extended to Sandhurst (later renamed Bendigo). Therefore, on 1 March 1859, less than two months after the first, Footscray's second railway station opened on Nicholson Street, not far from the other one, for services on the new railway line.
On 16 September 1900 the current station opened, located at the precise point of junction of the two lines.nla.au/ndp/del/article/73250527 The two original stations were closed.
A number of sidings once existed at the station, now covered by car parking on the eastern side of the Newport bound lines.
The two tracks under the station were opened on 21 October 1928 as part of the South Kensington - West Footscray line, and were dual-gauged in the early 1960s as part of the construction of the Melbourne-Albury standard gauge line. Quadruplication of the tracks towards Melbourne in November 1976 put an end to the junction and closed the signal box. The building is listed on the Victorian Heritage Register.
It was upgraded to a Premium station on 31 May 1996, although the enclosed waiting area and ticket facilities were built in 1993 as part of the 'Travel Safe' program in the early 1990s.
In 2010, as a part of the Brumby State Government's Footscray renewal program,
As part of the Regional Rail Link, an additional two platforms have been built to the north of the existing platforms, that will separate Metro Trains Sunbury services from V/Line services to Ballarat and Bendigo. In January 2014 platforms 1 to 4 were renumbered 3 to 6 with the new platforms commissioned as platforms 1 and 2.

Platforms & services

Footscray has four platforms. It is serviced by Metro Trains' Sunbury, Werribee and Williamstown servicesSunbury Line timetable Public Transport VictoriaWerribee Line timetable Public Transport VictoriaWilliamstown Line timetable Public Transport Victoria and V/Line Ballarat, Bendigo and Geelong services.Ballarat - Melbourne timetable Public Transport VictoriaBendigo - Melbourne timetable Public Transport VictoriaGeelong - Melbourne timetable Public Transport Victoria
Platform 1:
Platform 2:
Platform 3:
Platform 4:
Platform 5: 
Platform 6: 

Transport links

Sita Buslines operate three routes via Footscray station:
Transdev Melbourne operate three routes via Footscray station:
Westrans operate six routes via Footscray station:
Yarra Trams operates one route to and from Footscray station:






