[[Norman Foster, Baron Foster of Thames Bank]]

CATEGORIES: Norman Foster buildings, 1935 births, Living people, Stirling Prize laureates, Alumni of the University of Manchester, English architects, English designers, Modernist architects, Pritzker Architecture Prize winners, Chartered designers, Foreign Members of the Russian Academy of Arts, Crossbench life peers, Members of the Order of Merit, People from Reddish, Knight Commanders of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany, Recipients of the Pour le Mérite (civil class), Prince Philip Designers Prize, Norman Foster (architect), High-tech architecture, Knights Bachelor, Recipients of the Royal Gold Medal, Members of the European Academy of Sciences and Arts, Recipients of the Praemium Imperiale

Norman Robert Foster, Lord Foster of Thames Bank, OM (born 1 June 1935) is an English architect whose company, Foster + Partners, maintains an international design practice famous for high-tech architecture.
He is one of Britain's most prolific architects of his generation. In 2009 Foster was awarded the Prince of Asturias Award in the Arts category. In 1994 he received the AIA Gold Medal.

Biography

Early life in Manchester

Foster was born to Robert Foster and Lilian Smith
Foster's parents were diligent, hard workers - so diligent that Foster, as an only child, felt their heavy workload restricted his relationship with them and he was often looked after by neighbours or other family members.
Manchester was 'one of the workshops of the world' during his childhood, and 'the embodiment of a great city'.
Foster's father convinced him to take the entrance exam for Manchester Town Hall's trainee scheme
Foster returned to Manchester, not wanting to return to the town hall as his parents wished and unsure of which path to follow.

Education

After failing to gain a job, Foster was led to John Beardstow, a local architect in Manchester. After a successful interview, he gained a job as an assistant to a contract manager at the practice. However after trying to convince Foster to stay and learn his trade as an architect at Beardstow's, Foster declined and wanted to pursue a place at an architecture school.
After he was discharged, in 1956 Foster won a place at the University of Manchester School of Architecture and City Planning. Foster failed to get a grant to help fund his studies, and being from a working-class background money was at a minimum. He took up a number of part-time jobs to fund his studies in Architecture. Foster took a keen interest in the works of Frank Lloyd Wright, Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, Le Corbusier and Oscar Niemeyer and graduated from Manchester in 1961.
Foster won the Henry Fellowship to the Yale School of Architecture, where he met future business partner Richard Rogers and earned his Master's degree. Vincent Scully encouraged Foster and Rogers to travel in America for a year. Foster?, Sternstunde Kultur, Schweizer Fernsehen, 4 December 2011. After returning to the UK in 1963 he set up an architectural practice as Team 4 with Rogers and the sisters Georgie and Wendy Cheesman. Georgie (later Wolton) was the only one of the team that had passed her RIBA exams allowing them to set up in practice on their own. Team 4 quickly earned a reputation for high-tech industrial design.

Foster and Partners

After Team 4 went their separate ways, Foster and Wendy Cheesman founded Foster Associates, which later became Foster and Partners in 1967. A long period of collaboration with American architect Richard Buckminster Fuller began in 1968 and continued until Fuller's death in 1983. They collaborated on several projects that became catalysts in the development of an environmentally sensitive approach to design – including the Samuel Beckett Theatre project.
Originally they concentrated on industrial buildings. The turning point was the 1969 administrative and leisure center for Fred. Olsen Lines in London Docklands, where workers and managers are not separated any more. Foster and Partners' breakthrough building in the UK was the Willis Faber & Dumas headquarters in Ipswich, of 1974. The client was a family run insurance company which wanted to restore a sense of community to the workplace. Foster created open plan office floors long before open-plan became the norm. In a town not over-endowed with public facilities, the roof gardens, 25 metre swimming pool and gymnasium enhanced the quality of life for the company's 1200 employees. The building has a full-height glass facade moulded to the medieval street plan and contributes drama, subtly shifting from opaque, reflective black to a glowing backlit transparency as the sun sets. The design was inspired by the Daily Express Building in Manchester a work Foster admired in his youth. The building is now Grade II* listed.
Foster gained a reputation for designing office buildings. In the 1980s he designed the HSBC Main Building in Hong Kong for HSBC. The building is marked by its high level of light transparency, as all 3500 workers have a view to Victoria Peak or Hong Kong bay and the Chinese mainland. Foster said that if the firm had not won the contract it would probably have been bankrupted. Foster believes that attracting young talent is essential, and is proud that the average age of people working for Foster and Partners is 32, just like it was in 1967.

Present day

Foster was assigned the brief for a development on the site of the Baltic Exchange in the 1990s. The Exchange was damaged beyond repair by a bomb left by the IRA. Foster + Partners submitted a plan for a 385 metre tall skyscraper, the London Millennium Tower, but its height was seen as excessive for London's skyline. The proposal was scrapped and instead Foster proposed 30 St Mary Axe, "the gherkin" due to its design which alluded to its shape. Foster worked with engineers to integrate complex computer systems with the most basic physical laws, such as convection. Green, sustainable energy ideas include the complex facade which lets in air for passive cooling and vents it as it warms and rises.
Foster's earlier designs reflected a sophisticated, machine-influenced high-tech vision. His style has evolved into a more sharp-edged modernity. In 2004, Foster designed the tallest bridge in the world, the Millau Viaduct in southern France, with the Millau Mayor Jacques Godfrain stating; "The architect, Norman Foster, gave us a model of art."
In January 2007, The Sunday Times reported that Foster had called in Catalyst, a corporate finance house, to find buyers for Foster + Partners. Foster does not intend to retire, but sell his 80–90% holding in the company valued at £300M to £500M.
In 2007, he worked with Philippe Starck and Sir Richard Branson of the Virgin Group for the Virgin Galactic plans., 2008, p. 134
Foster currently sits on the Board of Trustees at architectural charity Article 25 who design, construct and manage innovative, safe, sustainable buildings in some of the most inhospitable and unstable regions of the world. He has also been on the Board of Trustees of The Architecture Foundation.

Recognition

In 1986, he was awarded an honorary degree (Doctor of Science) from the University of Bath.
Foster was knighted in 1990London Gazette no. 52543. p. 8207 and appointed to the Order of Merit in 1997. 54962. p. 13399 On 19 July 1999, he was created a life peer, as Baron Foster of Thames Bank, of Reddish in the County of Greater Manchester. 55565. p. 8128 Foster last spoke in the Lords in 2003 before his resignation in 2010.
He is the second British architect to win the Stirling Prize twice: the first time for the American Air Museum at the Imperial War Museum Duxford in 1998, and the second for 30 St Mary Axe in 2004. In consideration of his whole portfolio, Foster was awarded the Pritzker Architecture Prize in 1999. He is a Fellow of the Chartered Society of Designers and winner of the Minerva Medal, its highest award. Foster is a Senior Fellow of the Design Futures Council.di.net/about/senior_fellows/
Foster received the The Lynn S. Beedle Lifetime Achievement Award from the Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat in 2007 to honor his contributions to the advancement of tall buildings.
He was awarded the Aga Khan Award for Architecture, for the University of Technology Petronas in Malaysia, and in 2008 he was granted an honorary degree from the Dundee School of Architecture at the University of Dundee. In 2009 he received the Prince of Asturias Award in the category Arts.

Personal life

Norman Foster is married to Elena Ochoa, a Spanish publisher and art curator, 23 years his junior, Founder and CEO of Ivory-press. They have two children together, but Norman Foster has five himself, four sons and one daughter: Jay Foster (son), Ti Foster (son), Cal Foster (son), Eduardo Foster (son), and Paola Foster (daughter).

Works





Footnotes
Bibliography






