[[Hood Canal]]

CATEGORIES: Fjords of Washington (state), Landforms of Jefferson County, Washington, Landforms of Kitsap County, Washington, Landforms of Mason County, Washington, Landforms of Puget Sound

Hood Canal is a fjord forming the western lobe, and one of the four main basins,Environmental History and Features of Puget Sound, see also: Map of subareas of Puget Sound, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and National Marine Fisheries ServiceFeatures Of Puget Sound Region: Oceanography And Physical Processes, Chapter 3 of the State of the Nearshore Report, King County Department of Natural Resources, Seattle, Washington, 2001. of Puget Sound in the state of Washington. Hood Canal is not a canal in the sense of being a man-made waterway—it is a natural waterway.

Geography

Hood Canal is long and narrow with an average width of  to Belfair, where it ends in a shallow tideland called Lynch Cove.
Along its entire length, Hood Canal separates the Kitsap Peninsula from the Olympic Peninsula of Washington. The U.S. Navy's Naval Base Kitsap, Bangor Annex, is located on the eastern shore of Hood Canal near the town of Bangor. Hood Canal has several internal bays, the largest of which is Dabob Bay. Most of Dabob Bay is a Naval Restricted Area, and is used by the submarines stationed at the Bangor Base. Quilcene Bay is an inlet extending northwest from Dabob Bay. Near the north end of Hood Canal is Port Gamble, a bay and a town of the same name.
Several rivers flow into Hood Canal, mostly from the Olympic Peninsula, including the Skokomish River, Hamma Hamma River, Duckabush River, Dosewallips River, and Big Quilcene River. Small rivers emptying into Hood Canal from the Kitsap Peninsula include the Union River, Tahuya River, and Dewatto River.

Geology

Hood Canal and the rest of Puget Sound were created about 13,000 years ago, during the Late Pleistocene, by the Puget Lobe of the Cordilleran Ice Sheet.Olympic Mountains, USGS Cascades Volcano Observatory

History

Hood Canal was named by the Royal Navy Captain George Vancouver on May 13, 1792, in honor of Admiral Lord Samuel Hood of that navy. Vancouver used the name "Hood's Channel" in his journal, but wrote "Hood's Canal" on his charts. The United States Board on Geographic Names decided on "Hood Canal" as its official name in 1932. 

Roads and bridges

U.S. Route 101 runs along the west shore of Hood Canal, south of Quilcene.
Hood Canal is spanned by the Hood Canal Bridge, the third longest floating bridge in the world at  although there are others, such as Nordhordland Bridge and Bergsøysund Bridge. The Hood Canal Bridge accommodates sixteen and a half foot tides.

Recreation

State parks on the shores of Hood Canal including Belfair, Twanoh, Potlatch, Triton Cove, Scenic Beach, Dosewallips, and Kitsap Memorial. Prominent shoreside activities include swimming, boating, fishing and shellfish gathering.explorehoodcanal.html
Theler Wetlands is located at the tip of the Canal in Belfair. It provides a few miles of trails and a protected environment for marsh and estuary birds and plants. Theler Community Center & Wetlands
There are many small towns located along the length of the Hood Canal, mostly on the western shore. Information and maps on recreation along the great bend of the Hood Canal can be found in the picturesque town of Union,Union, WA which was voted one of America's twenty prettiest small towns by Forbes Traveler.Forbes Traveler

Low oxygen levels

September 2006 marked the discovery of the largest dead zone in the history of Hood Canal. The dead zone may have been caused by low oxygen levels due to algal blooms. In Hood Canal, eutrophication has led to unwanted algae blooms. Nitrogen combined with sunlight triggers algal growth. A lack of sufficient consumers has resulted in a mass overgrowth of algae in the basin. When the algae die, bacteria feed and their populations explode, robbing the water of oxygen. A state of hypoxia is created.
The fish kill may also be part of a natural 50-year cycle of oxygen levels in the canal,Associated Press; "Study suggests natural oxygen cycle in Hood Canal"; (Seattle) KOMONews. Natural causes of hypoxia in Hood Canal include the timing of freshwater inflows, water layer stratification resulting from seasonal changes in surface temperature, and climate change. The oxygen level may also be partially due to a change in wind direction. The prevailing north wind generally pushes oxygenated water into the oxygen-depleted area. A sustained south wind will cut off this source of oxygen. Coastal upwelling from the Strait of Juan de Fuca bring in a surplus of nutrients into the Puget Sound, but fail to circulate oxygen through Hood Canal. Chronic hypoxia is observed year-round. This area of low-oxygen is often seen in Lynch Cove, but has been spreading towards the mouth of Hood Canal.
In May 2006, divers searching for invasive species discovered a mat of marine bacteria covering a  Other notable cases of hypoxia and its adverse effects on biodiversity include the large-scale hypoxic zone that appears in the Gulf of Mexico each summer.
The Hood Canal Dissolved Oxygen Program (HCDOP), a partnership of 38 organizations, has been formed to combat the problem.HCDOP Goals, Hood Canal Dissolved Oxygen Program; May 24, 2004 The HCDOP-Integrated Assessment and Modeling study was started in 2005 to quantify marine processes and watershed loadings, assess biota-oxygen interactions, model key processes to measure drivers of oxygen, and to evaluate potential corrective actions. Government agencies, such as Puget Sound Partnership and the United States Geological Survey, have used HCDOP's publicly available information to conduct their own assessment and modeling studies of Hood Canal. Puget Sound Partnership is a Washington state agency responsible for protecting and restoring life in the Sound. The group is required to produce a "State of the Sound" report every two years. As of 2009, the Sound has recently shown signs of increased stress and degradation from human activity. A noticeable drop in spawning rates has had a negative effect on the ecosystem's biodiversity and available habitats continue to decline. But the abundance of some species, like the Chinook salmon, have advanced and limited loadings of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAHs) to Elliott Bay has improved water quality there.
Though difficult to regulate, a majority of proposed solutions have recommended the regulation of harmful, nearby anthropogenic practices. Human development has caused the most significant damage to Hood Canal's ecosystem. The runoff from septic tanks dumps large quantities of nitrogen into the canal following each rainfall.

Icing Over

During a week of record-breaking cold temperatures in December 2009, parts of Hood Canal developed a thin layer of ice, thicker near the shoreline.nwcn.html, Watch: Ice on Hood Canal, KING 5 TV; December 10, 2009



32.^ 1, Watch: Ice on Hood Canal, KING 5 TV; December 10, 2009





