[[Volkswagen Fox]]

CATEGORIES: Volkswagen vehicles, Euro NCAP superminis, Cars of Brazil, 2000s automobiles, Vehicles introduced in 2004, City cars, Hatchbacks

The Volkswagen Fox is a city car produced and designed by Volkswagen of Brazil and sold in Latin America since 2004 and Europe since 2005. Currently the Fox is produced as a three-door and five-door hatchback. There is also a mini SUV version called CrossFox, and a mini MPV/station wagon model called Suran, SpaceFox, SportVan or Fox Plus depending on the market.
In South America, it fits between its two supermini brothers, the low cost Gol and the Polo. In Mexico it was called the Lupo, due to the last name of then-current President Vicente Fox. VW of Mexico dropped the Lupo after a short run of 2009 models due to poor sales and replaced it along with the aged Pointer and Derby by the VW Novo Gol. The SportVan has also been quietly discontinued starting February 2010 in Mexico due to poor sales leaving only the CrossFox.
In the European market, the Fox replaced the Lupo city car as the entry-level car in the lineup.
However now Volkswagen has stopped making the Fox in 2011 and it has now been replaced by the Volkswagen Up.
Like the contemporary Polo, the Fox is based on Volkswagen's PQ24 platform.
Volkswagen acquired the rights to the name in 1969 by purchasing NSU.   The original NSU Fox was a motor-bike first seen in 1949, and Volkswagen had subsequently used the "Fox" name in some markets for special edition Volkswagen Polos. The Audi 80 produced in the 1970s also used the name Fox on vehicles sold in Australia and the USA.
In November 2009 the new Fox 2010 was revealed in Brazil and later also in Argentina.



South America

=Specifications=

Europe

The Fox was introduced to Europe at the AMI Leipzig Motor Show in 2005, on debut in Europe the Fox was only available as a three-door hatchback and with three engine options: the 1.2 L 40 kW (55 hp) I3 and 1.4 L 55 kW (75 hp) I4 petrol engines and the 1.4 L 51 kW (69 hp) TDI engine.
The Fox was sold with a long options list to reduce its tag price, therefore letting the European customer specify the Fox to their liking. It did come with standard twin airbags and anti-lock braking system for safety measures. Upon its debut the Fox scored four stars in EuroNCAP's crash rating system.

=Specifications=

Variants

CrossFox

The Volkswagen CrossFox is a mini SUV version which sets it apart from the standard Fox. As is the case for other similar models, it is available only with front-wheel drive.
It is produced in Brazil and sold in Latin American markets; there are plans to export it to European markets to compete in the expanding mini SUV market (see Ford EcoSport and Fiat Idea Adventure).
This version contains mixed-use tires and a suspension raised slightly beyond a spare tire on the outside of the trunk.

Suran

A mini MPV/station wagon version of the Fox was presented in April 2006. It is named Suran in Argentina, Chile and Uruguay, SpaceFox in Brazil
Because of its 360 mm-extended tail (4,165 mm vs. 3,805 mm), it has a larger boot and more rear leg room than the hatchback versions. Its main competitors are the Peugeot 206 SW and Fiat Palio Weekend.
The initial version has the same wheelbase of , depending on the fuel version (petrol or blend of ethanol and petrol).
In 2009, it was facelifted, gaining slightly enlarged dimensions:  in height.

United States

The Fox was a variant of the Gol manufactured by Volkswagen do Brasil and marketed by Volkswagen in North America as an entry level subcompact from 1987 to 1993.  Initially offered as a two-door and four-door sedan as well as a two-door wagon, the wagon was discontinued in 1991 along with the two-door for the Canadian market, the same year the four-door sedan (as well as the two-door, in the US) received a mild restyling.  
The Fox featured a longitudinal mounted 1.8L,  4-cylinder gasoline engine, sharing components with the VW Golf — along with a 4-speed transmission for the standard 2- and 4-door sedan and a 5-speed transmission for the "GL" sport model — and  no automatic transmission.  There was no power steering or power brakes ever in the Fox and it came with manual steering and drum brakes in the back and disk in the front.
According to the U.S. EPA the 4-speed version averaged  with the 4-speed transmission. 
Early models (1987–1989) featured the Bosch CIS-E also known as KE-Jetronic electro-mechanical fuel injection, using an oxygen sensor to assist in fuel management.  Later models featured (1990–1993) Bosch Digifant electronic fuel injection. In Canada the Fox from 1987 to 1989 was offered with the simpler Bosch CIS fuel injection (K-Jetronic) without an oxygen sensor for the engine fuel management system. 
Originally, the Fox's squared off front end featured sealed beam halogen headlamps; after 1991 models received revised sheet metal with flush glass headlamps.
In the United States and Australia the Audi 80 was badged as the Audi Fox during the 1970s, but the two have very little in common. The Australian version was assembled locally by Volkswagen Australasia Ltd.

Notes






