[[Dhirubhai Ambani]]

CATEGORIES: 1932 births, 2002 deaths, Indian billionaires, Indian businesspeople, Deaths from stroke, Indian Industrialists, Ambani family, People from Mumbai, People from Junagadh, Reliance Industries people, Gujarati people

Dhirajlal Hirachand Ambani (28 December 1932 – 6 July 2002), better known as Dhirubhai Ambani, was an Indian business tycoon who founded Reliance Industries in Bombay with his cousin. He figured in The Sunday Times list of top 50 businessmen in Asia.com Ambani took Reliance Industries public in 1977, and by 2007 the combined fortune of the family was $60 billion, making the Ambanis the second richest family in the world. Ambani died on 6 July 2002. Diffen. Retrieved on 2013-07-28.

Early career

Ambani started by working with a firm in Yemen in the 1950s and moved to Mumbai in 1958 to start his own business in spices. After making modest profits, he moved into textiles and opened a mill in Naroda industrial area of Ahmedabad. He founded Reliance Industries in 1966, and as of 2012, the company has over 85,000 employees and provides almost 5% of the Central Government's total tax revenue. As of 2012, Reliance Industries was listed among top  Fortune 500 list of world's biggest companies by revenues.,Indian Oil, Reliance Industries in Fortune 500 companies list - The Times of India. Timesofindia.com. Retrieved on 2013-07-28.

Majing Corporation

Dhirubhai ambani returned from Yemen to India and started "Majin" in partnership with Champaklal Damani, his second cousin,Ambani: From a gas station attendant to Reliance owner | Arab News — Saudi Arabia News, Middle East News, Opinion, Economy and more. Arabnews. Retrieved on 2013-07-28. who lived with him in Aden, Yemen. Majin was to import polyester yarn and export spices to Yemen. While Damani was a cautious trader and did not believe in building yarn inventories, Ambani  was a known risk-taker and believed in building inventories, anticipating a price rise, and make lots of profit.

Ambani's control over stock exchange

Extensive marketing of the brand "Vimal" in the interiors of India made it a household name. Franchise retail outlets were started and they used to sell "only Vimal" brand of textiles. In the year 1975, a Technical team from the World Bank visited the Reliance Textiles' Manufacturing unit.
In 1982, Reliance Industries came up against a rights issue regarding partly convertible debentures. It was rumored that the company was making all efforts to ensure that their stock prices did not slide an inch. Sensing an opportunity, The Bear Cartel, a group of stock brokers from Calcutta, started to short sell the shares of Reliance. To counter this, a group of stock brokers until recently referred to as "Friends of Reliance" started to buy the short sold shares of Reliance Industries on the Bombay Stock Exchange.
The Bear Cartel was acting on the belief that the Bulls would be short of cash to complete the transactions and would be ready for settlement under the "Badla" trading system operative in the Bombay Stock Exchange. The bulls kept buying and a price of 
To find a solution to this situation, the Bombay Stock Exchange was closed for three business days. Authorities from the Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE) intervened in the matter and brought down the "Unbadla" rate to  2 with a stipulation that the Bear Cartel had to deliver the shares within the next few days. The Bear Cartel bought shares of Reliance from the market at higher price levels and it was also learnt that Dhirubhai Ambani himself supplied those shares to the Bear Cartel and earned a healthy profit out of The Bear Cartel's adventure. 4000 Crore by S.K. Barua and J.S. Verma (ISBN 81-70941288) P 16 & 17
After this incident, many questions were raised by his detractors and the press. Not many people were able to understand as to how a yarn trader until a few years ago was able to get in such a huge amount of cash flow during a crisis period. The answer to this was provided by the then finance minister, Pranab Mukherjee in the Parliament. He informed the house that a Non-Resident Indian had invested up to 

Death

Dhirubhai Ambani was admitted to the Breach Candy Hospital in Mumbai on 24 June 2002 after he suffered a major stroke. It was his second stroke, the first one had occurred in February 1986 and had paralyzed his right hand. He was in a coma for more than a week and a number of doctors were consulted. He died on 6 July 2002.


Reliance after Ambani

Following a Stroke in 1986, Ambani  handed over control of Reliance to his sons Mukesh and Anil. Ambani died after a Major Stroke on 6 July 2002 in Breach Candy Hospital. Timesofindia.com. Retrieved on 2013-07-28.
In November 2004, Mukesh Ambani in an interview, admitted to having differences with his brother Anil over 'ownership issues.' He also said that the differences "are in the private domain."
After the death of Dhirubhai Ambani, the group was split into Reliance Industries Limited, headed by Mukesh Ambani, and Reliance Anil Dhirubhai Ambani Group (Reliance ADA Group), headed by Anil Ambani.
Kundapur Vaman Kamath, the Managing Director of ICICI Bank was seen in media, as a close friend of the Ambani family who helped to settle the issue.

Popular in media

In an unauthorized biography of Dhirubhai Ambani, published in 1998 by Hamish McDonald with the title The Polyester Prince, all his political and business conquests are outlined. HarperCollins didn't sell the book in India, because the  Ambani threatened legal action. In 2010, an updated version went on sale in India, called Ambani and Sons; there has been no legal action against the publisher so far.
A Hindi film said to be loosely inspired by the life of Dhirubhai Ambani was released on 12 January 2007. Guru, directed by film maker Mani Ratnam, cinematography by Rajiv Menon and music by A.R. Guru stars Abhishek Bachchan, Mithun Chakraborty, Aishwarya Rai, R. Madhavan and Vidya Balan. Bachchan plays Gurukant Desai, a character implicitly based on Dhirubhai Ambani. The character is popularly known as "Gurubhai", similar to the real-life "Dhirubhai". Mithun Chakraborty portrays Manikda who bears an uncanny resemblance to the real life Ramnath Goenka and Madhvan portrays S. Gurumurthy, who gained national fame twenty years ago, spearheading virulent attacks against the Reliance group in one of India's bloodiest corporate wars.

Awards and recognitions

Reference and notes




