[[Elk River (Oregon)]]

CATEGORIES: Landforms of Curry County, Oregon, Rivers of Oregon, Wild and Scenic Rivers of the United States

The Elk River is in southwestern Oregon in the United States. About  area of the Coast Range into the Pacific Ocean.
Rising in the mountains in northern Curry County, in the Siskiyou National Forest at confluence of its north and south forks, the river initially flows generally west along the south edge of the Grassy Knob Wilderness. It then flows northwest, approaching the coast north of Port Orford and entering the Pacific between Cape Blanco to the north and The Heads to the south.

Course

From the confluence of its two forks, Elk River flows generally west and northwest for about  by water from the mouth of the river.
In its first stretch, Elk River receives McCurdy and Blackberry creeks from the left, then Bungalow Creek from the right before Milbury Creek enters from the left at river mile (RM) 26 or river kilometer (RK) 42. About  from the river mouth. Below this, Red Cedar and Slate creeks enter from the right and Platinum Creek from the left.
After turning more sharply northwest, the river receives Bald Mountain Creek from the left, leaves the wilderness, and reaches the Elk River State Fish Hatchery. At this point, Anvil Creek enters from the right. Below the hatchery, Chapman Creek enters from the left, the river turns sharply north and meanders along the national forest border, crossing it a total of five times and leaving it on the final crossing. At this point, Rock Creek enters from the right  further downstream, Bagley Creek enters from the left, and below that Indian Creek enters from the right. After Elk River flows under Route 101, it meanders across the coastal flatland and turns north behind sand dunes. It enters the Pacific Ocean between Cape Blanco on the north and Port Orford on the south. In the ocean opposite the mouth are Orford Reef and a portion of the Oregon Islands National Wildlife Refuge.

Recreation

thumb|left|The Elk River at a high water level in 1999 Fishing, camping, hiking, swimming, and wildlife viewing are among the forms of recreation pursued in the Elk River watershed. The river and its tributaries support native chinook salmon, coastal cutthroat trout, winter steelhead, and coho salmon. Fishing is permitted within the national forest boundaries only on the  of the river that flows by private land is open for fishing from drift boats.
In 1988, parts of the Elk River and its north fork were designated Wild and Scenic. The lower  segment of the main stem from the confluence of the river's north and south forks to Anvil Creek is classified "recreational." 
Three national forest campgrounds—Sunshine Bar and Butler Bar near the main stem and Laird Lake near the south fork— are along Forest Road 5325. The river has many pools that are big enough for swimming.
Whitewater enthusiasts sometimes run all or part of a 
In 2009, 








