[[IFEX (organization)]]

CATEGORIES: Freedom of expression organizations, International human rights organizations, International journalism organizations, International nongovernmental organizations, International non-profit organizations, Organizations established in 1992, Freedom of speech

IFEX (formerly the International Freedom of Expression Exchange) is a global network of 80 independent non-governmental organisations

History

IFEX was founded in 1992 in Montreal, Canada, by a group of organisations responding to free expression violations around the world.

Operations

The day-to-day operations of the organisation are run by IFEX staff based in Toronto, Canada, and managed by IFEX member Canadian Journalists for Free Expression.
IFEX's mandate is to raise awareness by sharing information online and mobilising action on issues such as press freedom, Internet censorship, freedom of information legislation, criminal defamation and insult laws, media concentration and attacks on the free expression rights of all people, including journalists, writers, artists, musicians, filmmakers, academics, scientists, human rights defenders and Internet users.

Campaigns and Advocacy

IFEX works with its members by creating and participating in advocacy coalitions and working groups and releasing joint statements and petitions. 
In 2011, IFEX launched the International Day to End Impunity, marked annually on 23 November.
The Tunisia Monitoring Group (IFEX-TMG), launched in 2004 by 21 IFEX members to raise awareness of censorship and other human rights violations in Tunisia, is IFEX's largest campaign to date. IFEX-TMG was dissolved in January 2013 in response to an improved conditions for local NGOs, media independence and free expression rights.

Online Information

IFEX brings attention to free expression stories and events through its website, e-newsletters and special reports. The content is available in multiple languages (English, French, Spanish and Arabic), and addresses pressing free expression stories. The website hosts a searchable online archive of free expression violations going back to 1995.








