[[Exceptionalism]]

CATEGORIES: Critical theory, Philosophical theories, Theories of history, Nationalism, Exceptionalism

Exceptionalism is the perception that a country, society, institution, movement, or time period is "exceptional" (i.e., unusual or extraordinary) in some way and thus does not need to conform to normal rules or general principles.  Used in this sense, the term reflects a belief formed by lived experience, ideology, perceptual frames, or perspectives influenced by knowledge of historical or comparative circumstances.

History

The German romantic philosopher-historians, especially Johann Gottfried Herder (1744-1803) and Johann Gottlieb Fichte (1762-1814), dwelt on the theme of uniqueness in the late 18th century. They de-emphasized the political state and instead emphasized the uniqueness of the Volk, comprising the whole people, their languages and traditions.  Each nation, considered as a cultural entity with its own distinctive history, possessed a "national spirit", or "soul of the people" (in German: Volksgeist).  This idea had a strong influence in the growth of nationalism in 19th-century European lands — especially in ones ruled by élites from somewhere else. Schmidt, "Cultural Nationalism in Herder," Journal of the History of Ideas, Vol. 17, No. 3 (Jun., 1956), pp. 407-417 in JSTOR
[/ref][ref]
Hans Kohn, "The Paradox of Fichte's Nationalism," Journal of the History of Ideas, Vol. 10, No. 3 (Jun., 1949), pp. 319-343 in JSTOR
[/ref]
Many countries of all kinds have claimed exceptionality, including France, Germany, India, Pakistan, Imperial Japan, Iran, North Korea, Spain, Britain, United States, and the USSR. Historians have added many other cases, including historic empires such as China, the Ottoman Empire, and ancient Rome, along with a wide range of minor kingdoms in history. See Christopher K. Chase-Dunn, Thomas D. Hall, and E. Susan Manning, "Rise and Fall: East-West Synchronicity and Indic Exceptionalism Reexamined," Social Science History, Volume 24, Number 4, Winter 2000, pp. 727-754 in Project Muse In each case, proponents have presented a basis
[/ref]

Separateness

Commentators often use the term "exceptionalism" to describe surprising developments in economic progress, such as the economic growth of post-World War II Western Europe 
Exceptionalism can represent an error analogous to historicism in assuming that only peculiarities are relevant to analysis, while overlooking meaningful comparisons. "What is seemingly exceptional in one country may be found in other countries." As indigenous peoples explore their respective cultural heritages, their seeking to be separately classified or newly-understood may be a form of exceptionalism.english.edu/CFP/archive/2003-10/0254.html
In ideologically-driven debates, a group may assert exceptionalism, with or without the term, in order to exaggerate the appearance of difference, perhaps to create an atmosphere permissive of a wider latitude of action, and to avoid recognition of similarities that would reduce perceived justifications. If unwarranted, this represents an example of special pleading, a form of spurious argumentation that ignores relevant bases for meaningful comparison. 
Groups likewise may be accused of exceptionalism, perhaps for avoiding normal terms of analysis.el-comandante.htm The term may be a marker for an implication that a point of view is widely misunderstood, such as the notion that Islamic jihad is misunderstood.iiie.html 
The term "exceptionalism" can imply criticism of a tendency to remain separate from others. For example, the reluctance of the United States government to join various international treaties is sometimes called "exceptionalist", 
In editorial language, the term "exceptionalism" may be a marker for "the extent to which a region or group is justifiably or factually distinct."

Medical exceptionalism

Use of the term "HIV exceptionalism" implies that AIDS is a contagious disease that is or should be treated differently from other contagions 
Genetic exceptionalism is a policy program that medicalizes genetic information.  Like the exceptionalism surrounding HIV testing, genetic exceptionalism is based on the belief that the average person needs a licensed health professional to guide and support him through the discovery of information with health implications, even if this information is common knowledge, such as that he has red hair, which is associated with a higher risk of sunburns and skin cancer.  In countries with strong genetic exceptionalism laws, the individual must have permission from a physician to obtain information about his genes.



Notes




