[[Rita Levi-Montalcini]]

CATEGORIES: 1909 births, 2012 deaths, Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences, Foreign Members of the Royal Society, History of neuroscience, Recipients of the Great Cross of the National Order of Scientific Merit (Brazil), Members of the European Molecular Biology Organization, Italian atheists, Italian exiles, Italian centenarians, Italian Jews, Italian Life Senators, Italian neuroscientists, Italian Nobel laureates, Jewish atheists, Members of the French Academy of Sciences, Members of the Pontifical Academy of Sciences, National Medal of Science laureates, Nobel laureates in Physiology or Medicine, People from Turin, Sephardi Jews, Twin people from Italy, University of Turin alumni, Washington University in St. Louis faculty, Women biologists, Women neuroscientists, Women Nobel laureates, Levites, Recipients of the Albert Lasker Award for Basic Medical Research, Italian women scientists, Neurologists

Rita Levi-Montalcini (
Rita Levi-Montalcini had been the oldest living Nobel laureate and the first ever to reach a 100th birthday.

Early life and education

Born on 22 April 1909 at Turin
to a wealthy Italian Jewish family, Rita Levi-Montalcini she and her twin sister Paola were the youngest of four children. Her parents were Adamo Levi, an electrical engineer and mathematician, and Adele Montalcini, a painter.
In her teenage years, she considered becoming a writer and admired Swedish writer Selma Lagerlöf. While attending, she was taught by neurohistologist Giuseppe Levi who introduced her to the developing nervous system. After graduating with an M.D. in 1936, she went to work as Giuseppe Levi's assistant, but her academic career was cut short by Benito Mussolini's 1938 Manifesto of Race and the subsequent introduction of laws barring Jews from academic and professional careers.

Professional life

Levi-Montalcini lost her assistant position in the anatomy department after a 1938 law was passed, barring Jews from university positions., 1996, p. 29, ISBN 0-8160-3173-8 During World War II, Levi-Montalcini would conduct experiments from a home laboratory, studying the growth of nerve fibers in chicken embryos, which laid the groundwork for much of her later research. She described this experience decades later in the science documentary film Death by Design/The Life and Times of Life and Times (1997), which also features her identical twin sister Paola, who had entered a decades-long career in the arts. Her first genetics laboratory was in her bedroom at her home. In 1943, to escape the German occupation of Italy, her family fled south to Florence, and she set up a laboratory there also, using the corner of a shared living space. During this time she also volunteered her medical expertise for the Allied health service. Her family returned to Turin in 1945.
In September 1946, Levi-Montalcini accepted an invitation to Washington University in St. Louis, under the supervision of Professor Viktor Hamburger. Although the initial invitation was for one semester, after she repeated the exciting results from her home laboratory, Hamburger offered her a research associate position. She stayed in St. Louis for thirty years. It was there that, in 1952, she did her most important work: isolating the nerve growth factor (NGF) from observations of certain cancerous tissues that cause extremely rapid growth of nerve cells. The nerve growth produced by the tumor was unlike anything she had seen before – the nerves took over areas that would become other tissues and even entered veins in the embryo. But nerves did not grow into the arteries, which would flow from the embryo back to the tumor. This suggested to Montalcini that the tumor itself was releasing a substance that was stimulating the growth of nerves. 
She was made a Full Professor in 1958, and in 1962, established a research unit in Rome, dividing the rest of her time between there and St. Louis.
From 1961 to 1969 she directed the Research Center of Neurobiology of the CNR (Rome), and from 1969 to 1978 the Laboratory of Cellular Biology.
Rita Levi-Montalcini founded the European Brain Research Institute in 2002, and then served as its president.
Controversies were raised about the cooperation of Levi-Montalcini with the Italian pharmaceutical industry Fidia . While working for Fidia, she improved the understanding of gangliosides. Beginning in 1975, the scientist supported the drug Cronassial (a particular ganglioside) produced by Fidia from bovine brain tissue. Independent studies showed that the drug actually could be successful in treatment of intended diseases (periphrastic nervous system neuropathies).
In the 1990s, she was one of the first scientists pointing out the importance of the mast cell in human pathology. This line of research led to using this endogenous compound as an analgesic and anti-inflammatory drug.omicsgroup.org pdf

Political activity

On 1 August 2001, she was appointed as Senator for Life by the President of Italy, Carlo Azeglio Ciampi.
On 28–29 April 2006, Levi-Montalcini, aged 97, attended the opening assembly of the newly elected Senate, at which the President of the Senate was elected. She declared her preference for the centre-left candidate Franco Marini. Due to her support of the government of Romano Prodi, she was often criticized by some right-wing senators, who accused her of "saving" the government when the government's exiguous majority in the Senate was at risk. She was insulted by politician Francesco Storace.
On 17 January 2010, she was present in Rome's main synagogue, during the official visit of Pope Benedict XVI. The New York Times, 17 January 2010.

Death

Rita Levi-Montalcini died in her home in Rome on 30 December 2012 at the age of 103.
Upon her death, the Mayor of Rome, Gianni Alemanno, stated it was a great loss "for all of humanity." He praised her as someone who represented "civic conscience, culture and the spirit of research of our time." Italian astrophysicist Margherita Hack told Sky TG24 TV in a tribute to her fellow scientist, "She is really someone to be admired." Italy's premier, Mario Monti, paid tribute to Levi-Montalcini's "charismatic and tenacious" character and for her lifelong endeavor to "defend the battles in which she believed." Vatican spokesman Federico Lombardi praised Levi-Montalcini's civil and moral efforts, saying she was an "inspiring" example for Italy and the world.

Family

Levi-Montalcini had an older brother Gino, who died after a heart attack in 1974. He was one of the most well known Italian architects and a professor at the University of Turin.
She had two sisters: Anna, five years older than Rita, and Paola, her twin sister, a popular artist who died on 29 September 2000, aged 91.

Awards and honors

In 1968, she became the tenth woman
In 1974, although a professed atheist,
In 1983, she was awarded the Louisa Gross Horwitz Prize from Columbia University.
In 1986, Levi-Montalcini and collaborator Stanley Cohen received the Nobel Prize in Medicine, as well as the Albert Lasker Award for Basic Medical Research. This made her the fourth Nobel Prize winner to come from Italy's small (less than 50,000 people) but very old Jewish community, after Emilio Segrè, Salvador Luria (a university colleague and friend) and Franco Modigliani.
In 1987, she received the National Medal of Science, the highest American scientific honor.
In 1991, she received the Laurea Honoris Causa in Medicine from the University of Trieste, Italy. On that occasion, she expressed her desire to formulate a Carta of Human Duties as necessary counterpart of the too much neglected Declaration of Human Rights. The vision of Rita Levi-Montalcini came true with the issuing of the Trieste Declaration of Human Duties and the foundation in 1993 of the International Council of Human Duties, ICHD, at the University of Trieste.
In 1999, Levi-Montalcini was nominated Goodwill Ambassador of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) by FAO Director-General Jacques Diouf.
In 2001, she was nominated Senator-for-life by the Italian President Carlo Azeglio Ciampi.
In 2006, Levi-Montalcini received the degree Honoris Causa in Biomedical Engineering from the Polytechnic University of Turin, in her native city.
In 2008, she received the PhD Honoris Causa from the Complutense University of Madrid, Spain.
She was a founding member of Città della Scienza.

Publications





For further reading

|last=Sandrone
|first=Stefano
|authorlink=
|date=Mar 2013
|title=Rita Levi-Montalcini (1909–2012)
|journal=Journal of Neurology
|volume=260
|issue=3
|pages=940–941
|doi = 10.1007/s00415-013-6864-8
| bibcode = | oclc =| id = | url = | language = eng| format = | accessdate = | laysummary = | laysource = | laydate = | quote =
 }}

Sources




