[[North Melbourne railway station]]

CATEGORIES: Heritage listed buildings in Melbourne, Premium Melbourne railway stations, Railway stations in Melbourne, Railway stations opened in 1859, Railway stations opened in 1886

North Melbourne railway station is located on the northern edge of the central business district of Melbourne, Australia. The station is a major interchange point with the Craigieburn, Flemington Racecourse, Sunbury, Upfield, Werribee and Williamstown lines all servicing the station. It opened on 6 October 1859.

Station overview

Facilities

Located in West Melbourne, the main station entrance is at the south end of the platforms at the intersection of Adderley and Dryburgh Streets. This building contains the main booking office, public toilets and a kiosk, with platform access via escalators and lifts. From the north end brick ramps links the platforms, and platforms 2 through 6 have heritage listed verandas and brick waiting rooms.
At the north end of the station are 1970s era brown brick buildings built over the former Dynon Road overpass, which contains public toilets and a former railway parcels office. Until November 2009 this building also housed the main exit to Ireland Street and Railway Place, along with the booking office and kiosk, until they were moved to the current concourse at the south end. The north end also has exit leading west to the Melbourne Yard rail freight terminal, which is not open to public access.

History

The first railway through the site of North Melbourne station was today's Williamstown line and the first section of the Melbourne, Mount Alexander and Murray River Railway Company line (to Sunbury), both opened on 13 January 1859. The first passenger station with two platforms was opened on 6 December 1859, and the present six platform station was opened on 9 June 1886.
The new station was of free classical architecture, with red brick was used with cream brick banding, along with verandas and cast iron lace work. As built in 1886 North Melbourne had six platforms, with four platform buildings containing ladies toilets and a ladies waiting room. The main booking office, waiting room, and station master's office was located near the ramp to platform 1, and men's toilets and porters' offices were located under the ramps themselves.
The suburban train stabling yard near the station was opened in December 1973 as part of the City Loop project. The washing plant and additional sidings in Melbourne Yard were made operational in May 1995, as part of the Jolimont Yard rationalisation. 
The station buildings on the northern concourse were constructed in 1974, and in the 1980s as part of the construction works for the City Loop the ramps to Platforms 1 and 2 were altered, and the platform extended north. 
It was upgraded to a Premium station on 19 July 1996.
In May 2006, it was announced that the station is to be redeveloped as part of a $36 million project.
In March 2008 Sita Buslines' route 401 commenced operating from North Melbourne station to the Royal Melbourne Hospital and University of Melbourne in Carlton and Parkville, enabling commuters to avoid travelling via the City Loop.North Melbourne Shuttle Service a Hit with Commuters Minister for Public Transport 13 March 2008
The new southern concourse opened for interchange use only on 7 September 2009 with the new entry to the station opened on 16 November 2009. In December 2013, V/Line Geelong and Warrnambool services ceased calling at the station following the opening of the first stage of the Regional Rail Link.Changes to Geelong line services from Sunday 22 December 2013 Public Transport Victoria 

Platforms & services

North Melbourne has six platforms.
Platform 1:
Platform 2:
Platform 3:
Platform 4:
Platform 5:
Platform 6:
Sita Buslines operates one route to and from North Melbourne station:




