[[Gluten-free diet]]

CATEGORIES: Diets, 2010s fads and trends

A gluten-free diet (GF diet) is a diet that excludes foods containing gluten. Gluten is a protein composite found in  wheat (including kamut and spelt), barley, rye and triticale. A gluten-free diet is the only medically accepted treatment for celiac disease. Dermatitis herpetiformis (DH) is a form of celiac disease in which gluten causes the immune system to attack the skin; therefore a gluten-free diet is essential. People with these diseases are considered gluten intolerant. There is a minority of people who suffer from wheat intolerance alone and are tolerant to gluten. Gluten sensitivity is another reason people will choose to go gluten-free. 
Despite the health claims for gluten-free eating, there is no published experimental evidence to support such claims for the general population. Peter H.R. Green, MD, director of the Celiac Disease Center at Columbia University stated that the gluten-free market is expanding greatly. This expansion is extremely valuable for those with celiac disease or other medical reasons, such as gluten intolerance or sensitivity. However, a gluten-free diet does not hold the same benefits for the general public. Unless care is taken, a gluten-free diet may lack vitamins, minerals, and fiber. 
A gluten-free diet might also exclude oats. Medical practitioners are divided on whether oats are acceptable to celiac disease sufferers or whether they become cross-contaminated in milling facilities by other grains."The Gluten-Free Diet", CeliacSociety.
The exact level at which gluten is harmless for people with celiac disease is uncertain. A 2008 systematic review tentatively concluded that consumption of less than 10 mg of gluten per day for celiac disease patients is unlikely to cause histological abnormalities, although it noted that few reliable studies had been conducted.

Gluten-free food

Gluten-free food is normally seen as a diet for celiac disease, but people with a gluten allergy (an unrelated disease) should avoid wheat and related grains.
Meat, fruits, vegetables, potato, and rice are gluten-free foods.   
Several grains and starch sources are considered acceptable for a gluten-free diet. The most frequently used are corn, potatoes, rice, and tapioca (derived from cassava). Other grains and starch sources generally considered suitable for gluten-free diets include amaranth, arrowroot, millet, montina, lupin, quinoa, sorghum (jowar), taro, teff, chia seed, almond meal flour, coconut flour, pea flour, cornstarch and yam. Sometimes various types of bean, soybean, and nut flours are used in gluten-free products to add protein and dietary fiber.
Almond flour has a low glycemic index. Despite its name, buckwheat is not related to wheat. Pure buckwheat is considered acceptable for a gluten-free diet, however, many commercial buckwheat products are mixtures of wheat and buckwheat flours, and thus, not gluten-free. Gram flour, derived from chickpeas, is gluten-free (this is not the same as Graham flour made from wheat).
Gluten may be used in foods in some unexpected ways, for example it may be added as a stabilizing agent or thickener in products such as ice-cream and ketchup.
A gluten-free diet rules out all ordinary breads, pastas, and many convenience foods; it also excludes gravies, custards, soups, and sauces thickened with wheat, rye, barley, or other gluten-containing flour. Gluten-free bakery and pasta products are available from specialty retailers.

Cross-contamination issues

A gluten-free diet allows for fresh fruits, vegetables, meats, and many dairy products. The diet allows rice, corn, soy, potato, tapioca, beans, sorghum, quinoa, millet, pure buckwheat, arrowroot, amaranth, teff, Montina, and nut flours and the diet prohibits the ingestion of wheat, barley, rye, and related components, including triticale, durum, graham, kamut, semolina, spelt, malt, malt flavouring, or malt vinegar.eatright.aspx? Dec. 2009
The finding of a 2010 study indicates that some inherently gluten-free grains, seed, and flours not labeled gluten-free are contaminated with gluten. The consumption of these products can lead to inadvertent gluten intake. June 2010;939 The use of highly sensitive assays is mandatory to certify gluten-free food products. The European Union, World Health Organization, and Codex Alimentarius require reliable measurement of the wheat prolamins, gliadins rather than all-wheat proteins.Codex Alimentarius (2003) Draft revised standards for gluten-free foods, report of the 25th session of the Codex Committee on Nutrition and Foods for Special Dietary Uses, November 2003
There is no general agreement on the analytical method used to measure gluten in ingredients and food products. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 23(5):5590575 The ELISA method was designed to detect w-gliadins, but it suffered from the setback that it lacked sensitivity for barley prolamins.
In the processing of gluten-containing grains, gluten is removed as shown in the processing flow below:
Since ordinary wheat flour contains approximately 12% gluten, even a tiny amount of wheat flour can cross-contaminate a gluten-free product, therefore, considerable care must be taken to prevent cross-contamination in commercial and home food preparation.
Many so-called gluten-free products, such as chicken bouillon, corn cereal, and caramel ice cream topping, have been found to have been contaminated with gluten. For example, in an investigation reported by the Chicago Tribune on November 21, 2008, Wellshire Farms chicken nuggets labeled "gluten-free" were purchased from a Whole Foods Market and samples were sent to a food allergy laboratory at the University of Nebraska.
Pure chocolate is gluten free but additives with gluten or contamination from the use of machines which previously processed gluten containing food is possible. Several vendors produce chocolate labeled "gluten free".Is chocolate gluten-free, Gluten free dark chocolate
Some non-foodstuffs such as medications and vitamin supplements, especially those in tablet form, may contain gluten as an excipient or binding agent. People with gluten intolerances may therefore require specialist compounding of their medication.

Cross-contamination problems

A growing body of evidence suggests that a majority of people with celiac disease and following a gluten-free diet can safely consume pure oats in moderate amounts.
Special care is necessary when checking product ingredient lists since gluten comes in many forms: vegetable proteins and starch, modified food starch (when derived from wheat instead of maize), malt flavoring, unless specifically labeled as corn malt. Many ingredients contain wheat or barley derivatives. Maltodextrin is gluten-free since it is highly modified, no matter what the source.

Oats

The suitability of oats in the gluten-free diet is somewhat controversial. Some research suggests that oats in themselves are gluten-free, but they are virtually always contaminated by other grains during distribution or processing. Recent research, however, indicated that a protein naturally found in oats (avenin) possessed peptide sequences closely resembling wheat gluten and caused mucosal inflammation in significant numbers of celiac disease sufferers. Some examination results show that even oats that are not contaminated with wheat particles are nonetheless dangerous, while not very harmful to the majority. Such oats are generally considered risky for children with celiac disease to eat, but two studies show that they are completely safe for adults with celiac disease to eat.
People who merely are "gluten-sensitive" may be able to eat oats without adverse effect,
Given this conflicting information, excluding oats appears to be the only risk-free practice for celiac disease sufferers of all ages, however, medically approved guidelines exist for those with celiac disease who do wish to introduce oats into their diet.
Unless manufactured in a dedicated facility and under gluten-free practices, all cereal grains, including oats, may be cross-contaminated with gluten. Grains become contaminated with gluten by sharing the same farm, truck, mill, or bagging facility as wheat and other gluten-containing grains.

Alcoholic beverages

Several celiac disease groups report that according to the American Dietetic Association's Manual of Clinical Dietetics,"ADA Publishes Revised GF Diet Guidelines""Which alcoholic beverages are safe?" Celiac. Although most forms of whiskey are distilled from a mash that includes grains that contain gluten, distillation removes any proteins present in the mash, including gluten. Although up to 49% of the mash for Bourbon and up to 20% of the mash for corn whiskey may be made up of wheat, or rye, all-corn Bourbons and corn whiskeys do exist, and are generally labeled as such. Spirits made without any grain such as brandy, wine, mead, cider, sherry, port, rum, tequila, and vermouth generally do not contain gluten. While some vineyards use a flour paste to caulk the oak barrels in which wine is aged,StaVin Barrel Inserts Inc.  Tolin, and Pasini, March 4, 2011 "Immunochemical and Mass Spectrometry Detection of Residual Proteins in Gluten Fined Red Wine," Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry Therefore, some people with celiac or strong gluten sensitivity may wish to exercise caution. Liqueurs and pre-mixed drinks should be examined carefully for gluten-derived ingredients.
Almost all beers are brewed with malted barley or wheat and will contain gluten. Sorghum and buckwheat-based gluten-free beers are available, but remain a niche market. Some low-gluten beers are available, however, there is disagreement over the use of gluten products in brewed beverages: Some brewers argue that in certain beers the proteins from such grains as barley or wheat are converted into amino acids during the clarification step of the brewing process and are therefore gluten-free, However, they also found that many beers have extremely high levels of gluten so. If unsure, coeliacs are advised to avoid beer.

Gluten-free bread

Bread, which is a staple in many diets, typically is made from grains such as wheat that contain gluten. Wheat gluten contributes to the elasticity of dough and is thus an important component of bread. Gluten-free bread is made with ground flours from a variety of materials such as almonds, rice (rice bread), sorghum (sorghum bread), corn (cornbread), or legumes such as beans (bean bread). Since these flours lack gluten it can be difficult for them to retain their shape as they rise and they may be less "fluffy". Additives such as xanthum gum, guar gum, hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (HPMC), corn starch, or eggs are used to compensate for the lack of gluten. Gluten-free baking: what is happening inside the bread? USDA.

"Gluten-free" labels

In commerce, the term 'gluten-free' is generally used to indicate a supposed harmless level of gluten rather than a complete absence. The exact level at which gluten is harmless is uncertain and controversial. A recent systematic review tentatively concluded that consumption of less than 10 mg of gluten per day is unlikely to cause histological abnormalities, although it noted that few reliable studies had been done.
Several organisations, such as the Gluten-Free Certification Organization (GFCO), the Celiac Sprue Association (CSA), and the National Foundation for Celiac Awareness (NFCA), certify products and companies as gluten-free.

Regulations

Many countries do not require labeling of gluten containing products, but in several countries (especially Australia and the European Union) new product labeling standards are enforcing the labeling of gluten-containing ingredients.
Regulation of the label gluten-free varies. The current international Codex Alimentarius standard allows for 20 parts per million of gluten in so-called "gluten-free" foods for foodstuffs that are considered naturally gluten-free and 200 ppm for foodstuffs rendered gluten-free.

Celiac disease and other medical reason

Celiac disease is the primary reason that one would switch to a gluten-free diet. Celiac disease is an autoimmune disease, affecting about 1% of all Americans. In patients with celiac disease, gluten causes the immune system to attack the intestinal lining of the small intestine. Over time this then triggers the small intestine to lose the ability to absorb nutrients into the body, such as fiber and vitamins. If gone untreated the lack of nutrients can initiate other health problems that include osteoporosis, iron-deficiency anemia, other autoimmune disorders, extreme fatigue, infertility, neurological problems and, in rare cases, lymphoma of the small intestine. Symptoms rarely occur, but if they do, they include diarrhea, anemia, bone pain, and a severe skin rash called dermatitis herpetiformis. Because of the lack of symptoms, it is believed only five to ten percent of people with celiac disease are diagnosed.
Dermatitis herpetiformis (DH) is a type of celiac disease that causes the immune system to attack the skin rather than the small intestine. When it attacks the skin it produces inflammation, irritation, redness. This creates a chronic itchy and bumpy rash to appear. Typically, this appears after the intake of gluten. People with DH are advised to adhere to a gluten-free diet. 
Gluten sensitivity is the inability and trouble for a person to metabolize gluten. This results in digestive distress, which can cause symptoms such as diarrhea, gas, bloating, constipation, and bowel discomfort. These digestive symptoms occur after the intake of gluten. Gluten sensitivity is far less severe and does not appear to have any long term effects. A reduced-gluten or gluten-free diet is suggested to prevent the discomfort.

Popularity and nonceliac health effects

Gluten-free fad diets have become popular. This may be because celiac disease was under diagnosed or because people are "unnecessarily turning to the diet as a food fad". There appears to be an increased incidence of celiac disease, with one study which looked for antibodies from 1950s American blood samples finding that celiac disease is about four times more common now as it was then. Many are adopting gluten-free diets to treat celiac disease-like symptoms in the absence of a positive test for celiac disease.
A 2011 panel of celiac experts concluded that there is a condition related to gluten other than celiac disease and named it "non-celiac gluten sensitivity". New York Times. However, for those without celiac disease or gluten sensitivity, the diet may be unnecessary.
Despite some advocacy, evidence of the diet's efficacy as an autism treatment is poor. Despite vigorous marketing, a variety of studies, including a study by the University of Rochester, found that the popular autism diet does not demonstrate behavioral improvement and fails to show any genuine benefit to children diagnosed with autism who do not also have a known digestive condition which benefits from a gluten-free diet.
In addition to false diagnoses, the gluten-free diet fad has become misunderstood in the eyes of the average person. Many believe that a gluten-free diet is healthier for them. Gluten alone does not contain specific nutritional value, however, many grains, especially whole grains, that have gluten in them are beneficial. These whole grains are enriched with minerals, vitamins, and fiber. Carbohydrates make up just over half of a healthy diet. A healthy diet recommends that half of a person's carbohydrates should come from whole grains. There are some whole grains that do not contain gluten, such as quinoa or millet. Although gluten-free foods may have some fiber and/or nutrients that are found in their gluten versions, they tend have fewer fiber and nutrients, while using sugar and fat to make up for the absence of gluten. People may also take supplements for the lack of nutrients. Yet, food is the best source for the body to absorb nutrients. People also believe that a gluten-free diet will help them to lose weight. While cutting out any food group allows someone to lose weight more quickly, it cuts out the healthy nutrients for a balanced diet.

Deficiencies linked to maintaining a gluten-free diet

Many gluten-free products are not fortified or enriched by such nutrients as folate, iron, and fiber as traditional breads and cereals have been during the last century. Additionally, because gluten-free products are not always available, many gluten-sensitive enteropathy (GSE) patients do not consume the recommended number of grain servings per day. People who change their standard gluten-free diet to implement gluten-free oats at breakfast, high fiber brown rice bread at lunch, and quinoa as a side at dinner have been found to have significant increases in protein (20.6 g versus 11 g), iron (18.4 mg versus 1.4 mg), calcium (182 mg versus 0 mg), and fiber (12.7 g versus 5 g). The B vitamin group did not have significant increases, but were still found to have improved values of thiamine, riboflavin, niacin, and folate. These dietary changes can greatly reduce a GSE patient's risk for anemia (especially iron deficiency anemia) and low blood calcium levels or poor bone health.
Oats can increase intakes of vitamin B1, magnesium, and zinc in celiac disease patients in remission.
Selenium deficiency in gluten-free diet, combined with malabsorption of selenium in patients with uncontrolled celiac disease is considered a direct factor in the development of comorbid autoimmune thyroid diseases for celiac patients.



General






