[[Brig o' Balgownie]]

CATEGORIES: Listed bridges in Scotland, Bridges completed in 1320, Category A listed buildings in Aberdeen

The Brig o' Balgownie (originally Bridge of Don) is a 13th-century bridge spanning the River Don in Old Aberdeen, Aberdeen, Scotland.
Construction of the bridge was begun in the late 13th century by Richard Cementarius, although its completion was not until 1320 at the time of the Scottish War of Independence. After falling into disrepair in the mid 16th century it was extensively renovated in 1605.
Throughout its history the bridge has been considered an important asset. For five centuries possession of the bridge was the only way to move large armies quickly along the eastern coast of Aberdeenshire. It also provided a trade route to the wealthy areas of the north-east of Scotland.
The bridge is constructed of granite and sandstone. Its single gothic arch has span of over 12 metres and at low tide the apex of the arch lies over 17 metres above the water-line.
The bridge ceased to be a major route in 1830 when the new Bridge of Don was built five hundred yards downstream. Today it is open to foot and bicycle traffic only and is infamous throughout the student population of Aberdeen University where students jump off the bridge at high tide during the summer. However, rowdy students can still jump at low tide as the river is still deep enough at a fair 17 ft deep at low tide.

History

The text below is taken from the notes of a public talk History of the Brig o'Balgownie given by Dr. Christopher P. Croly from the Archaeological Unit at Aberdeen City Council.

Origin of the bridge's name

The name Balgownie comes from the surrounding area, which from an early time was a barony. The name itself is of Gaelic origin, but is a source of some debate. Some authorities believe that the first part of the name is derived from Baile and means town. but it is in all likelihood older.

Who built the bridge

The familiar story is that the stone bridge was commissioned by either Bishop Henry Cheyne or Robert the Bruce, or indeed was begun by the former and completed by the latter, and that the work was done by Richard Cementarius. It is said that Cheyne started the work but fled Bruce's troops, and then Bruce finished the work later on. However, the earliest written version of the origins of the bridge is slightly at odds with later ones. The first written history of the bridge was by Sir Alexander Hay, in a charter of 1605. In the charter he wrote that the bridge "was built by command, and at the expense of, the deceased most invincible prince, Robert Bruce, king of the Kingdom of Scotland." It was perhaps first stated by W. Douglas Simpson.
Richard Cementarius is often cited as the first Provost of Aberdeen, or rather the first Alderman. However, that can not be correct: what would be correct would be to say that he is the first person whose name has been connected with that office in some official document, and that therefore he is the first recorded Provost of Aberdeen. So from these it is probable that he was alive in 1277 but dead by 1294, therefore any involvement that he had with building the bridge would have to have been before 1294. As we do not know when the bridge was built it is unclear if he could have been involved. But it is a modern story whose only real prop is the similarity between the arch in the bridge and an arch in Drum Castle, also ascribed to Cementarius, but not proved and that certainly needs more research. However, it may simply have reflected a common building style.

Footnotes

 
 | pages = xliii | nopp = true }} See also, 
 | last = Keith | year = 1980 | title = A Thousand Years of Aberdeen | pages = 31 | publisher = Aberdeen }} Keith quotes the following from Boerce, 'out of joy that he was received into the King's favour, upon his return home, he applied all the rents of his see, which during his absence had accresced to a considerable sum, towards building the stately bridge over the River Don'. However in 
, in the part where he deals with Cheyne there is no mention whatsoever of his part in the building of the bridge suggesting Keith's quote is entirely fraudulent. Curiously in the 20th Century the 1320s seem to have taken precedence over the 1280s as having been when the bridge was built, see  who gives the date 1329 without footnote.


