[[Mark Owen]]

CATEGORIES: 1972 births, Living people, Big Brother (UK) winners, Celebrity Big Brother (UK) contestants, Chadderton F.C. players, English footballers, English male singers, English songwriters, Ivor Novello Award winners, Music in Oldham, Musicians from Greater Manchester, People from Oldham, Take That members

Mark Anthony Patrick Owen (born 27 January 1972), is an English singer-songwriter. He is a member of pop band Take That. As a solo artist, Owen had sold over 500,000 records worldwide and 45 million with Take That.

Early life

Owen was born in Oldham, Lancashire, England. He lived in a small council house with his mother Mary, his father Keith, brother Daniel and sister Tracy in Oldham, Lancashire. His father was a decorator, later getting a job at a police station. His mother was a supervisor in a bakery in Oldham. Owen was educated at the Holy Rosary Primary and St Augustine's Catholic School in Oldham. Owen's first ambition was to be a professional footballer; he starred in school plays but showed no interest in music at school, preferring football. He played for Chadderton F.C. for a brief period. He also had trials for Manchester United, Huddersfield Town and Rochdale, but damaged his groin and was unable to pursue a career in the sport. During the Take That "quiet" years, Owen spent some time back in Lancashire and was often spotted at musical events put on and performed by local boarding school, "Casterton School". He used the school gymnasium on Tuesday evenings for football practice with mates.

Take That

1989–1996: Early Success

After selecting Gary Barlow as the group's lead singer in 1989, Nigel Martin-Smith introduced Owen, Howard Donald, Jason Orange and finally Robbie Williams to the fold. The group were signed to RCA records, and after a number of top 40 hits, eventually secured their first number one with Barlow's "Pray". Previous hits included "A Million Love Songs", "It Only Takes a Minute" and "Could It Be Magic".
The band's debut album Take That & Party was released on 17 August 1992. It reached number two on the UK Album Chart. The following year saw the release of their second album, Everything Changes. It went straight in at number one on the UK Albums Chart and spawned four number-one singles, as well as "Why Can't I Wake Up with You" and "Love Ain't Here Anymore" hitting number two and three respectively. Owen also sang lead vocals on "The Day After Tomorrow" from the album. A Greatest Hits collection followed again reaching number one. The album featured the band's eighth number-one single "How Deep Is Your Love". This was to be the first single released by Take That as a four piece (without Williams) and it was their last single until they reformed in 2005.
Although Owen's vocal contributions were limited in Take That's original run, he was arguably the most popular member of the group, on account of his boyish good looks and sweet demeanour,

2005–present: Reunion

Owen returned to the limelight in the TV documentary, Take That: For the Record in 2005. Following this success and renewed interest, Take That experienced a career renaissance in 2005 when the post-Williams line-up reformed for a sell-out stadium tour. The band released their comeback single "Patience" which went to number 1 for four weeks while also topping the charts across Europe. Patience was also voted The Record of the Year in 2006 and won a Brit for single of the year. It was re-released as a tour edition with hit single "Rule the World" in 2007 and peaked again at number 1.
In 2008, the band were nominated for four BRIT Awards (Best British Group, Best British Album, Best British Single and Best British Live Act). They won Best British Single and Best British Live Act. Take That released the single "Greatest Day" which went straight to number 1 and became their eleventh number 1 single in the UK. The week after they released their second album since their reunion in 2006, The Circus which was the most preordered album of all time.
It was announced that the group was in the process of writing Take That's sixth studio album, set for release in late 2010.
The lead single from Progress was announced as "The Flood". The single debuted at number 2, selling over 500,000 copies since release. On the first day of the release of Progress, the album sold over 235,000 copies across the UK, making it the fastest selling record of the century.
On 21 November 2010, Progress debuted at number one in the United Kingdom, becoming the band's seventh number-one album. and has achieved similar chart success across Europe. In June 2011, Take That released their first extended play collection entitled Progressed which returned the band to number 1 in the UK on its first week of release as well as charting across Europe.

Solo career

1996-1997: Green Man

After Take That split, Owen became the first of the band's ex-members to release a solo record. He reached number three in the UK Singles Chart with his debut single, "Child". His second single, "Clementine", also went to number three. In 1997 his album Green Man was released, charting at a number 33. After another single, "I Am What I Am", charted at number 29, Owen was dropped by BMG Records in late 1997.

2002-2003: Celebrity Big Brother & In Your Own Time

Owen won the second series of Celebrity Big Brother in November 2002 with 77% of the public vote against television presenter Les Dennis. Owen broke down in tears, overwhelmed by the fans' support. After being invited to perform on stage with Robbie Williams at Knebworth, he returned to the spotlight and signed a deal with Island/Universal Records. In August 2003, Owen returned to the charts with the Top 5 hit, "Four Minute Warning", which remained in the Top 40 for eight weeks. His second album, In Your Own Time, was released in November 2003, entering the charts at number 59. After a second single, "Alone Without You", charted at number 26, Owen was dropped by Island/Universal Records.

2004-2006: How the Mighty Fall

In April 2004 he established his own record company, Sedna Records. One report around 2004 even alleged that Owen was looking for a day job, but he simply said "Doing it properly isn't cheap. These are my indulgences. I don't have a Ferrari, I have two albums."
Mark released his first single "Makin' Out" which charted at #30 in the UK charts, making it his highest charted single released in an independent label. He released his third solo album, How the Mighty Fall in 18 April 2005, which was recorded at Sunset Studios, Los Angeles in 2004. It charted at #56 in the German charts. According to Mark, he said that this is more "his" album than the last couple because he has had full control over every aspect of the record and it is a true representation of where he is at in his life right now. On the strength of this release, he was picked up by Caroline Elleray (Coldplay, Keane), resulting in him signing his publishing deal to BMG Music Publishing. Mark released his second single "Believe in the Boogie", charting at #57 in the UK charts, making it his lowest charting single of his whole solo career. Although it didn't chart well, his second single has been added to the European soundtrack of the American film Mr. and Mrs. Smith starring Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie. In February 2006 he released "Hail Mary" as a single from the album.

2012-present: The Art of Doing Nothing

In March 2012,  according to a report by The Sun Mark was planning to relaunch his solo career. A source said: "Mark has already made serious headway. He has put together new material in the studio with top writers and is planning more sessions over the next few months. All the lads are behind him. Success in his own right and his own writing material have always been a massive motivation, so he's a happy man."
In March 2013, further details of the album emerged, including the album title, "The Art of Doing Nothing". The album was then mixed in New York at the Electric Lady Studios by Michael Brauer, Charlie Russell, Ben Mark and Jamie Norton. He confirmed the album would feature a collaboration with singer-songwriter Ren Harvieu, and production from Alt-J producer Charlie Russell. The album will be released on June 10, 2013.
On May 1, 2013, Owen uploaded new photographs and videos to his official website, including the deluxe album artwork, which depicts Mark in a white room, scribbling on the wall, whilst wearing a dapper hat. A tagline to accompany the artwork reads: "Every idea has a starting place. Nothing begins in an empty space." The two videos consist of a montage video, picturing the photo shoot that shot the album cover, and the second, which is a short interview with Owen, in which he discusses the album's contents and cover.

Solo numbers in Take That

Mark Owen has also featured vocals on "Never Forget", "The Garden", "Said It All", "Man" and "Aliens", amongst others, where his distinct voice can be recognised.

Personal life

Owen lives in Wandsworth, London. They have a son, Elwood Jack, born in 2006; a daughter, Willow Rose, born in 2008; and a second daughter, Fox India, born in 2012. He is a Patron for the charity Beyond Autism 
In March 2010 Owen said he had an affair from late 2004 until September 2009.
In June 2012, it was revealed that along with Take That band-mates Howard Donald and Gary Barlow, Mark Owen had invested £26 million in music industry investment schemes. The news attracted controversy when it was understood that the schemes could serve as tax shelters for high net worth people. Lawyers responded to the claims, stating the band members 'paid significant tax, and that they believed the schemes were not for tax avoidance purposes but were legitimate commercial enterprises.'
In 2014, Mark Owen was announced as an Ambassador for Amber Run on Channel 4's 'Launched'.dailymotion.unicef.uk/Latest/News/take-that-and-man-utd-legend-join-soccer-aid-2012/ participating for the second time.

Discography

Albums

Singles

List of songs






