[[Royal Academy of Engineering]]

CATEGORIES: Organizations established in 1976, Learned societies of the United Kingdom, Engineering societies, Scientific societies, National academies, Science and technology in the United Kingdom, Fellows of the Royal Academy of Engineering, 1976 establishments in the United Kingdom, Royal Academy of Engineering

The Royal Academy of Engineering is the UK's national academy of engineering. The Academy brings together engineers from across the engineering sectors for a shared purpose: to advance and promote excellence in engineering.
The Academy was founded in June 1976 as the Fellowship of Engineering with support from Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, who became the first senior Fellow and 
The Royal Fellows of the Academy comprise Prince Philip, the Duke of Kent, and Anne, Princess Royal. Raeng.uk. Retrieved on 2013-08-13.
The Fellowship currently stands at over 1,400 engineers from across the sectors and disciplines, who lead, guide and contribute to the Academy's work and provide expertise. Raeng.uk. Retrieved on 2013-08-13. Up to 60 engineers are elected each year by their peers, distinguished by the title 'Fellow of The Royal Academy of Engineering' and the postnominal designation 'FREng'. Honorary and International Fellows who have made exceptional contributions to engineering are also elected.  The Immediate Past President is Lord Browne of Madingley.
The Academy's activities are focused on positioning engineering at the heart of society by:
It is a national Academy with a global outlook and conducts a number of international activitiesInternational Raeng.uk. Retrieved on 2013-10-21 with partners across the world.
The Academy is also an instrumental player in two policy alliances set up in 2009 to provide coherent advice for engineering education and policy across the profession: Education for EngineeringEducation for Engineering educationforengineering.uk. Retrieved 2013-10-21.   and Engineering the Future.engineeringthefuture.co.uk. Retrieved 2013-10-21.

Activities of the Academy

Driving economic growth

The Academy invests in world class research, supporting the best people and focusing on areas that address specific issues and challenges.  It also encourages and builds strong links between academia and industry, opening up opportunities for research to be translated into real world applications, products and services which in turn will generate wealth and jobs.
Academy activities also focus on how the UK can create the right climate in which innovation, entrepreneurship, business and industry can flourish.
Example activities:
Engineering Enterprise FellowshipsSchemes for Engineers in Research and Development - Enterprise Fellowships www.org.uk. Retrieved 2013-10-21. 
and RAEng Research Fellowships.raeng.uk. Retrieved 2013.10-21.

Foster better education and skills

The Academy works with the engineering profession and other partners to increase the diversity and number of people that study science, technology, engineering and mathematics and focuses on enriching the experience by bringing real-world engineering practice into schools, further education colleges and universities.
The Academy also hosts the professional engineering alliance Education for EngineeringEducation for Engineering www.org.uk. Retrieved 2013-10-21. which provides a unified voice in education debates and advice on all aspects of engineering education policy.

Lead the profession

The Academy harnesses the collective pan-engineering expertise of its Fellowship to act as an advisor to the British government by providing recommendations, analysis and solutions on a number of topical policy areas. At present, the Academy's policy work focuses on energy, infrastructure, transport, sustainability, innovation, education and skills in addition to the issues that concern business and industry and rebalancing the economy.
The Academy is also host to the professional engineering alliance Engineering the FutureEngineering the Future www.co.uk. Retrieved 2013-10-22. to provide a unified voice for engineering on matters that require expertise and advice from a number of engineering bodies.
Example activities include the reports Making green growth real: UK offshore wind supply chain www.org.uk. Retrieved 2013-10-21.
and Heat: degrees of comfort?.raeng.uk/news/publications/list/reports/RAE_Heat_Booklet.raeng.uk. Retrieved 2013-10-21

Promoting engineering at the heart of society

The Academy organises a number of events and debatesAcademy Events www.org.uk. retrieved 2013-10-21. in addition to the production of a quarterly magazine, Ingenia,Ingenia Online - Home Page  www.org.uk. Retrieved 2013-10-21 to reach a variety of difference audiences and enhance awareness of engineering and how it influences the wider world.
The Academy also recognises and celebrates the most talented engineers by awarding prestigious prizes, including the annual MacRobert Award, Britain's top prize for engineering innovation. Raeng.uk. Retrieved on 2013-08-13.
The Academy's public spaces in its building at 3 Carlton House Terrace have undergone renovation works and were re-opened in spring 2012 to provide a central platform for the UK to become the Forum for engineering engagement, debate, discussion and celebration.raeng.uk. Retrieved 2013-10-22.

Carlton House Terrace and Prince Philip House

The Academy's premises at 3-4 Carlton House Terrace are housed in a Grade I listed building overlooking St James' Park, designed by celebrated architect John Nash and owned by the Crown Estates. The Academy shares the Terrace with two of its sister academies, the British Academy and the Royal Society as well as other institutes.
The building was renamed Prince Philip House,Central London conference and business meeting venue; offering major rooms suited to events and receptions on elegant Carlton House Terrace and St James - Prince Philip House www.com. Retrieved 2013-10-22. in honour of the Senior Fellow, after renovation works were completed in 2012. Prince Philip House is also available for venue hire for meetings or events.

History

Conceived in the late 1960s, during the Apollo programme and Harold Wilson's 'white heat of technology', the Fellowship of Engineering was born in the same year as Concorde's first commercial flight. Britishairways. Retrieved on 2013-08-13.
The Fellowship met for the first time on 11 June 1976 at Buckingham Palace where 126 of the UK's finest engineers were enrolled, including jet engine genius Air Commodore Sir Frank Whittle, structural engineer Sir Ove Arup, radar pioneer Sir George MacFarlane, bouncing bomb inventor  
Sir Barnes Wallis, father of the UK computer industry Sir Maurice Wilkes, and the Fellowship's first President, Lord Hinton, who had driven the UK's supremacy in nuclear power. Raeng.uk (1976-06-11). Retrieved on 2013-08-13.
The Fellowship focused on championing excellence in all fields of engineering and activities began in earnest in the mid-1970s when the Distinction lecture series, now known as the Hinton lectures, was founded; the Fellowship was asked to advise the Department of Industry for the first time and the Academy became host and presenter of the MacRobert prize. Raeng.uk. Retrieved on 2013-08-13.
In the 1980s, the Fellowship acquired its own Royal Charter, its first government grant-in-aid in addition to significant industrial funding, initiated its research programme to build bridges between academia and industry and opened its doors to International and Honorary Fellows. Raeng.uk. Retrieved on 2013-08-13.
The Academy's first major education initiative, Engineering Education Continuum began in 1990 and has now evolved into the BEST Programme Retrieved 2013-10-21. and Shape the Future and Tomorrow's Engineers. Retrieved 2013-10-21.
The Academy's increasing level of influence – both in policy, research and education – was recognised when it was granted a royal title and became The Royal Academy of Engineering in 1992. Raeng.uk (1992-07-02). Retrieved on 2013-08-13.

Diversity

The Academy strives to ensure that the pool of candidates for election to The Fellowship better reflects the diverse make-up society within which it exists. It set up the Proactive Membership Committee Retrieved 2013-10-21. in 2008 to identify and support the nomination of candidates from a range of underrepresented areas, aiming to boost the number of women candidates, engineers from industry and Small and Medium Enterprises, those from emerging technologies and ethically diverse backgrounds. Raeng.uk. Retrieved on 2013-08-13.

The logo

The Academy's current logo is inspired by human's first technological advance: the Neolithic hand-axe, which was taken to be a symbol appropriate to the Academy, representative of the ever-changing relationship between humanity and technology. Raeng.uk. Retrieved on 2013-08-13.








