[[At sign]]

CATEGORIES: Punctuation, Typographical symbols

The at sign, @, normally read aloud as "at", also commonly called the at symbol or commercial at, and less commonly a wide range of other terms,"ASCII", The Jargon File (version 4.4.7)"@: 'Commercial at' doesn't sound sexy", Tom Angleberger, The Roanake Times""New York's Moma claims @ as a design classic", Jemima Kiss, 28 March 2010, The Observer"The at symbol a la mode." is originally an accounting and commercial invoice abbreviation meaning "at the rate of" (e.g. 7 widgets @ £2 = £14). In recent years, its meaning has grown to include the sense of being "located at" or "directed at", especially in email addresses and social media, particularly Twitter.
It was not included on the keyboard of the earliest commercially successful typewriters, but was on at least one 1889 model"The @-symbol, part 2 of 2", Shady Characters ⌂ The secret life of punctuation and the very successful Underwood models from the "Underwood No. 5" in 1900 onward. It is now universally included on computer keyboards. The mark is encoded at .
The fact that there is no single word in English for the symbol has prompted some writers to use the French arobase"Short Cuts", Daniel Soar, Vol. 31 No. 10 · 28 May 2009 page 18, London Review of Books or Spanish and Portuguese arroba—or to coin new words such as asperand, ampersat"… Tim Gowens offered the highly logical "ampersat" …", 05 February 1996, The Independent or apetail—but none of these has achieved wide usage.

History

Origin theories

There are several theories about the origin of the commercial at character.

Historical use

Whatever the origin of the @ symbol, the history of its usage is more well-known: it has long been used in Spanish and Portuguese as an abbreviation of arroba, a unit of weight equivalent to 25 pounds, and derived from the Arabic expression of "a quarter" (الربع pronounced ar-rubʿ).). Currently, the word arroba means both the at-symbol and a unit of weight. In Italian, the symbol represents one amphora, a unit of weight and volume based upon the capacity of the standard amphora jar, and entered modern meaning and use as "at the rate of" or "at price of" in northern Europe.
Until now, the first historical document containing the @ symbol as a commercial one is the Spanish "Taula de Ariza", a registry to denote a wheat shipment from Castile to Aragon in the year 1448.

Modern use

Commercial usage

In contemporary English usage, @ is a commercial symbol, called at site or at rate meaning at and at the rate of. It has rarely been used in financial documents or grocers' price tags, and is not used in standard typography. The Elements of Typographic Style (version 2.5), p.272. Vancouver: Hartley & Marks. ISBN 0-88179-133-4.
Since 23 October 2012, the At-sign is registered as a trade mark by the German Patent and Trade Mark Office – DPMA (registration number 302012038338) for @T.E.L.L. While company promoters have claimed that it may from now on be illegal for other commercial interests to use the At-sign, this only applies to identical or confusingly similar goods Article 5 Trade Marks Directive, as interpreted in Case C-251/95 Sabel BV v Puma AG 1997 ECR I-6191 and no court, German or otherwise, has yet ruled on this purported illegality.

Contemporary usage

A common contemporary use of @ is in email addresses (transmitted by SMTP), as in jdoe@example.com domain). BBN Technologies' Ray Tomlinson is credited with introducing this usage in 1971.bbn.html This idea of the symbol representing located at in the form user@host is also seen in other tools and protocols; for example, the Unix shell command ssh jdoe@example.net using the username jdoe.
On web pages, organizations often obscure email addresses of their members or employees by omitting the @. This practice, known as address munging, makes the email addresses less vulnerable to spam programs that scan the internet for them.
Another contemporary use of the @ symbol in American English is adding information about a sporting event. Opposing sports teams sometimes have their names separated by a v. (for versus). However, the "v." may be replaced with "@" when also conveying at which team's home field the game will be played. In this case, the away team is written first.nfl.com/schedules
On some online forums without threaded discussions, @ is used to denote a reply; for instance: "@Jane" to respond to a comment Jane made earlier. Similarly, in some cases, @ is used for "attention" in email messages originally sent to someone else. For example, if an email was sent from Catherine to Steve, but in the body of the email, Catherine wants to make Keirsten aware of something, Catherine will start the line "@Keirsten" to indicate to Keirsten that the following sentence concerns her. This also helps with mobile email users who cannot see bold or color in email.
In microblogging (such as Twitter and StatusNet-based microblogs), @ before the user name is used to send publicly readable replies (e.g. "@otheruser: Message text here"). The blog and client software can automatically interpret these as links to the user in question. This use of the @ symbol was also made available to Facebook users on September 15, 2009.
@ is also used on many wireless routers/modems, where a solid green @ symbol indicates the router is connected and a solid amber @ indicates there is a problem.

Computer programming

@ is used in various programming languages although there is not a consistent theme to its usage. For example:

[/ref]

Gender-neutrality in Spanish and Portuguese

In Portuguese and Spanish, as well in other West Iberian languages where many words end in '-o' when in the masculine gender and end '-a' in the feminine, @ can be used as a gender-neutral substitute for the default 'o' ending, which some advocates of gender-neutral language-modification feel indicates implicit linguistic disregard for women. These languages do not possess a neutral gender and the masculine forms are also used traditionally when referring to groups of mixed or unknown sex. The at-sign is intended to replace the desinence '-o', including its plural form '-os', due to the resemblance to a digraph of an inner letter 'a' and an outer letter 'o'.
As an example of the @ being used for gender-inclusive purposes, we can consider the Spanish and Portuguese word amigos. When the word represents not only male friends, but also female ones, the proponents of a gender-inclusive language replace it with amig@s. In this sense, amigos would be used only when the writer is sure the group referred to is all-male. Usage of amigas is the same in traditional and such new forms of communication. Alternative forms for a gender-inclusive at-sign would be the slash sign (amigos/as) and the circle-A, (amigⒶs). However, it is more common to use the masculine ending first and include the feminine in parentheses, as in amigos(as). For more about this, see Satiric misspelling.
The Real Academia Española disapproves of the use of the at-sign as a letter.DPD 1ͺ ediciσn, 2ͺ tirada

Other uses and meanings

Names in other languages

In many languages other than English, although most typewriters included the symbol, the use of @ was less common before email became widespread in the mid-1990s. Consequently, it is often perceived in those languages as denoting "the Internet", computerization, or modernization in general.

Unicode variants

In culture

August 17, 2007", People's Daily Online[/ref]"Couple try to name baby @", August 17, 2007, NZ Herald








