[[Alsea River]]

CATEGORIES: Rivers of Oregon, Landforms of Lincoln County, Oregon, Landforms of Benton County, Oregon

The Alsea River flows  The map quadrants include river mile (RM) markers for the river's entire length. The river flows generally west-northwest in a winding course through the mountains of southern Benton and Lincoln counties, passing near the unincorporated community of Tidewater and through the Siuslaw National Forest. Its drainage basin extends into Lane County, along the headwaters of the South Fork Alsea River.
The Alsea River supports runs of chinook and coho salmon, as well as steelhead and coastal cutthroat trout. The Alsea River Fish Hatchery is located on one of its tributaries, the North Fork Alsea River.

Course

The Alsea River begins in the Central Oregon Coast Range near the unincorporated community of Alsea, and flows generally west about  from the mouth.
During its first  from the mouth, the river leaves Benton County, and enters Lincoln County.
Passing Little Digger Mountain on the right, the river receives Fall Creek from the right, Cow Creek and Minotti Creek from the left, and Wolf Creek, Phillips Creek, Cedar Creek, and Butter Creek from the right as it passes Trenholm Saddle, a mountain gap at coordinates 
Flowing around Stoney Mountain, the Alsea River receives Bear Creek and Lake Creek from the left, passes Blackberry Campground on the left, receives Grass Creek and Brush Creek from the left and Schoolhouse Creek from the right, passes Mike Bauer Picnic Grounds on the right and, shortly thereafter, a USGS gauging station on the right  from the mouth.
Between Tidewater and Alsea Bay, the river receives Mill Creek and Squaw Creek from the right, Canal Creek from the left, Risley Creek from the right, passes under Oregon Route 34, which then parallels the river on the south or left, and receives Arnold Creek from the left at about  from the mouth and enters Alsea Bay. As part of the bay, it receives Lint Creek from the left, passes Waldport on the left, flows under U.S. Route 101, and enters the Pacific Ocean at the mouth of the bay.



Notes and references




