[[National Law School of India University]]

CATEGORIES: Law schools in Karnataka, Education in Bangalore, National Law Universities

The  National Law School of India University (NLSIU) is a  institution constituted by the Karnataka Legislative Assembly for undergraduate and graduate legal education in India. It was the first ever National Law University to be established.  By popular estimates, the school consistently ranks as the most prestigious law school in India.in/tags/business/2008/02/17/top-best-20-indian-law-colleges-institutes-courses/
Located in Bangalore, NLSIU was established by a statute passed by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Karnataka.   The school was officially founded on August 29, 1987.  The statute provides that the Chief Justice of India serves as the school's Visitor.  The Vice-Chancellor, currently R.Rao, serves as the school's chief administrator.

History

In 1987, NLSIU was established under the stewardship of its founder, then Vice-Chancellor N. R. Madhava Menon.  The University has since had four more Vice-Chancellors, namely N. L. Mitra, A. Jayagovind, G. Mohan Gopal, and incumbent R. Venkata Rao, who took over in 2009.
The first batch of law students joined the school's undergraduate program on July 1, 1988.  Interestingly, classes commenced before the school's buildings had been fully constructed; thus, NLSIU actually began instruction at the premises of the Central College of Bangalore University and continued therein until November 1991.  The school then formally moved to its present-day location in Nagarbhavi, a suburb of Bangalore.

Admissions

Admissions to NLSIU were originally done on the basis of a separate entrance exam conducted by the University itself. After a Supreme Court ruling directing that all law entrance examinations must be clubbed together, the Common Law Admission Test(CLAT) was introduced in 2008. The first CLAT was conducted by NLSIU. As of now, all admissions in NLSIU, for both undergraduate and postgraduate programs are made on the basis of performance in the CLAT. In 2012, for the Undergraduate CLAT, a total of 26000 students contested for a mere 65 seats, making the examination one of the most competitive in India.

Academics

Undergraduate

NLSIU offers undergraduates a five-year integrated B.A./LL.B. program which, upon completion, qualifies the student to sit for the bar to practice law in India.
The LL.B. is the standard undergraduate degree in law offered in most common law countries. Langbein, "Scholarly and Professional Objectives in Legal Education: American Trends and English Comparisons," Pressing Problems in the Law, Volume 2: What are Law Schools For?, Oxford University Press, 1996.  The United States is the only common law nation that no longer offers the LL.B. degree.  While the LL.B. was conferred by Yale University until 1971, all U.S. law schools have since conferred the professional doctorate J.D. Glossary of Terms for Graduate Education. Accessed May 26, 2008; National Science Foundation (2006). "Time to Degree of U.S. Research Doctorate Recipients," ''InfoBrief, Science Resource Statistics NSF 06-312, 2006, p. 7. (under "Data notes" mentions that the J.D. is a professional doctorate); San Diego County Bar Association (1969). ''Ethics Opinion 1969-5. Accessed May 26, 2008. (under "other references" discusses differences between academic and professional doctorate, and statement that the J.D. is a professional doctorate); University of Utah (2006). University of Utah – The Graduate School – Graduate Handbook. Accessed May 28, 2008. (the J.D. degree is listed under doctorate degrees)
The undergraduate B.A./LL.B. curriculum at NLSIU consists of a mix of social science and legal subjects.  In the first two years, the law student attends courses on history, political science, sociology and economics alongside standard legal subjects, such as torts, contracts and constitutional law.  In the latter three years, legal subjects dominate the curriculum.  Students are selected by merit through the nationally-administered Common Law Admission Test (CLAT).

Postgraduate

NLSIU offers both coursework and research degrees at the postgraduate level.  The LL.M. is a two-year coursework degree.  The M., LL.D. and/or Ph.D. degrees, all aim at producing leading research scholars in all forms of legal academic pursuit, from legal history to jurisprudence.  Therefore, postgraduate students are designated Research Scholars by the school.
For LL.M. postgraduate students, NLSIU presently offers two lines of specialization: Business Law and Human Rights Law.  There are currently 25 seats for Human Rights Law and 25 seats for Business Law. Two seats are reserved for foreign nationals.  A detailed prospectus can be obtained from NLSIU on payment of the requisite fee or downloaded free from the university's website.
In addition to the above full-time programs, NLSIU also offers several part-time distance learning programs, including a Masters Degree in Business Law and Postgraduate Diploma programs in Human Rights Law, Medical Law, Environmental Law and IP Law.

Rankings

 
NLSIU was ranked first on both the Outlook India Top 10 Law Colleges of 2011 and Mint  Top 15 Law Colleges of 2009, and first on the India Today India's Best  law Colleges 2012.
However a recent School Review Commission appointed by the Chief Justice of India, and headed by former Supreme Court judge Justice K.T. Thomas and having Prof. Virendra Kumar Director Academics of the Chandigarh Judicial Academy (CJA, Chandigarh) and Prof. Mahendra Pal Singh former Vice Chancellor of the West Bengal National University of Juridical Sciences, Kolkata to review the 24-year old University strongly criticized the "dismal state of affairs" at NLSIU, and found evidence of just 4–6 hours of classroom teaching a week, rising instances of drug abuse and indifference to plagiarism in student project reports and decline in serious research pursuit and academic rigour.

Melgiri Memorial National Law Library

The Narayan Rao Melgiri Memorial National Law Library at NLSIU is the largest law library in the country, housing a collection of over 40,000 bound volumes in addition to periodical holdings.studybot.in/collaborate.keralaeducation.php?fid=609&arid=33
The Melgiri Library was inaugurated by Chief Justice of India R.C. Lahoti on August 27, 2005.

UNHCR Chair for Refugee Law

In 1995, the first UNHCR Chair for Refugee Law was inaugurated at NLSIU. N. Subramanya worked on issues pertaining to refugees during his tenure as researcher under the UNHCR Chair and in 2004 two of his books about refugees were published.V. C. Keshava, Exploring Mysore: a complete data map in a special style, V.S.R. Prakashana, 2004

Student activities

The Student Bar Association

The Student Bar Association (SBA) is the umbrella body that coordinates all student activities; all students are de facto members of the SBA. The SBA has created various Activity-Based Committees (ABCs) which are in charge of specific student activities.
NLSIU has a total of twelve ABCs which coordinate the activities of the Student Bar Association (SBA). These committees are re-constituted every year. The Co-ordination Council consists of the Convenors/Joint Convenors of the ABCs. This Council is responsible for ensuring that the various ABCs function coherently. A wide range of internal as well as inter-institutional activities throughout the academic year are organized by the ABCs and the Co-ordination Council.

Competitive Debating

NLSIU plays an active role in promoting Parliamentary Debate in India.  The school regularly participates in many international competitions and is currently the highest-ranking Indian team in the World rankings.  NLSIU teams have also performed extremely well in the inaugural Asians BP Tournament held in Chulalongkorn University, with all three of its teams reaching the semi finals of the tournament, and two out of the top ten speakers (and four in the top 20). Since then, NLS has reached the Semi-finals of the United Asian Debating Championships held at Assumption University, Bangkok, in 2010.
NLSIU also hosts South Asia's biggest Parliamentary Debate Competition,.

Moot Courts

As regards its performance in Moot Court competitions, NLSIU is the only law school in South Asia to have won the Philip C. Jessup International Law Moot Court Competition after winning the India Rounds organised by Surana and Surana Moots.  It has won the Jessup Cup twice, in 1999 and 2013. Raag Yadava was named Best Oralist at the 2013 tournament.

Journals published

NLSIU in Fiction

NLSIU forms part of the setting of Satyajit Sarna's 2012 bestselling novel The Angel's Share. NLSIU is described in the following terms:
"To understand why, I suppose you have to look at the
epistemology of the institution. Take one part AngloAmerican
liberal arts college, with its homoerotic GraecoRoman
heritage and interminable quest for the Truth. Add
one
part German technical institute, with its Teutonic
backbone
and commitment to producing professionals. Toss
in
two tablespoons of post-Nehruvian idealism and a pinch
of
postmodernism as seasoning, bake for fifteen years and
garnish
with the southern sunshine. Serve hot with
cold
lager.
Even after the lunar sadness of the end game, I cannot
think of Law School with anything but warmth. It was still
a young institution, vibrating with the different strokes it
accommodated, when Sasha and I were there. Poverty and
development activists, who were arrested for protesting big
dams, coal mines, nuclear plants. Gay rights activists, trying
to get the courts to read down Section 377 of the Indian
Penal Code and allow them to joyfully bugger each other
without being arrested for it. Constitutional and
governmental theoreticians, feverishly rejigging concepts so
big it was hard to see how they related to anything on the
temporal plane. Feminists like Rohini, with her voluptuous
body and melancholy eyes, so beautiful that she would
make women angry and boys guilty. Corporate and
commercial nuts so determined to serve money that they
made it look noble. Even with all this in the air, it was a
dreamy world, a paradise of pot, beer and sunshine, a
culture of dissent and idiosyncratic actions, of practical jokes"
The Angel's Share. Satyajit Sarna. (HarperCollins India, New Delhi, 2012)
The Angel's Share attracted controversy upon its publication due to its frank descriptions of sex and drugs on the campus of India's premier law school as well as its outspoken criticism of corporate law firms.









