[[Bhairava]]

CATEGORIES: Hindu gods, Aspects of Shiva, Newar, Hindu tantra, Dogs in Hinduism

Bhairava (Sanskrit:  as one of the eight forms of Shiva, and translation of the adjectival form as "terrible" or "frightful" see: Apte, p. 727, left column.), sometimes known as Kaala Bhairava,  Kal Bhairab, Annadhaani Bhairava (In Karnataka)( ಭೈರವ) Bhairo or Bhairon or Bhairadya or Bheruji (In Rajasthan), Kaal Bhairava,  Kaala Bhairavar (கால பைரவர்) or Vairavar (In Tamil), is the fierce manifestation of Lord Shiva associated with annihilation. 471.  He is one of the most important deities in Nepal, Rajasthan, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Uttarakhand, who originated in Hindu mythology and is sacred to Hindus, Buddhists and Jains alike.

Legends

The origin of Bhairava can be traced to the conversation between Brahma and Vishnu recounted in the Shiv Mahapuran where Vishnu asks Brahma who is the supreme creator of the Universe. Arrogantly, Brahma tells Vishnu to worship him because he (Brahma) is the supreme creator. One day Brahma thought, "I also have five head, Shiva also has five head. I can do everything whatever Shiva does and I am Shiva" Brahma has become little egoistic. Not only he had became egoistic, he started doing forgery work of Shiva. Whatever Shiva is supposed to do and Brahma started interfering; just Mahadeva threw a small nail from His finger and that nail assumed the form of Kala Bhairava, went and cut the head of Brahma, just like that casually. And that skull only is in the hands of Kala Bhairava; Brahma Kapala in the hands of Kala Bhairava and Brahma's ego was destroyed and he became enlightened. Then onwards he became useful to himself and to the world and deeply grateful to Shiva.
In the form of the Kaala Bhairava, Shiva is said to be guarding each of these Shaktipeeths. Each Shaktipeeth temple is accompanied by a temple dedicated to Bhairava.

Worship

His temples or shrines are present within or near most Jyotirlinga temples, the sacred twelve shrines dedicated to Shiva across India, including Kashi Vishwanath Temple, Varanasi and the Mahakaleshwar Temple at Ujjain, where at the Kal Bhairav Temple, he is worshipped by the Kapalika and Aghori sects of Shaivism, here one can also find the Patal Bhairav and Vikrant Bhairav shrines.
Kaal Bhairava temples can also be found around Shakti Peethas, as it is said Shiva allocated the job of guarding each of 52 Shakti Peethas to one Bhairava. As such it is said there are 52 forms of Bhairava, which are in fact considered as manifestation of Shiva himself.
Traditionally Kal Bhairav is the Grama devata in the rural villages of Karnataka, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu, where he is referred to as "Bhaivara/Annadhani" Vairavar. In Karnataka, Lord Bhairava is the supreme God for the Vokkaliga community commonly referred as "Gowdas", especially for the Gangadikara Gowda caste he is considered as the care taker and punisher.
Also another set of people in Kashmir that have their origin from Gorat, or the minister of Mata Sharika worship Bhairava during Shivratri

The Hindu reformer Adi Sankara has written a hymn on Kala Bhairava of Kashi which is called as Kala Bhairav Ashtakam.blogspot.html

Observances

Bhairava Ashtami commemorating the day Kal Bhairav appeared on earth, is celebrated on Krishna paksha Ashtami of the Margashirsha month of Hindu calendar with a day special prayers and rituals.

Iconography

He is depicted ornamented with a range of twisted serpents, which serve as earrings, bracelets, anklets, and sacred thread (yajnopavita). He wears a tiger skin and a ritual apron composed of human bones. Accessed August 11, 2007.  Bhairava has a dog (Shvan) as his divine vahana (vehicle). Bhairavi is a fierce and terrifying aspect of the Devi who is virtually indistinguishable from Kali, with the exception of her particular identification as the consort of Bhairava.
Bhairava himself has eight manifestations i.e. Ashta Bhairava:
Kala Bhairava is conceptualized as the Guru of the planetary deity Shani (Saturn). Bhairava is known as Bhairavar or Vairavar in Tamil where he is often presented as a Grama devata or village guardian who safeguards the devotee on all eight directions (ettu tikku). Known in Sinhalese as Bahirawa, he protects treasures. Lord Bhairava is the main deity worshipped by the Aghora sect.

Temples

Bairavar koil,Thirupattur,Sivaganga district .Tamil Nadu

In the Kathmandu valley

Bhairava is an important deity of the Newars. All the traditional settlements of Newars have at least a temple of Bhairava. Most of the temples of Bhairava in Nepal are maintained by Newar priests. There are several Bhairava temples in the Kathmandu valley.com/?page_id=2024 Some of them are:

Bhairava temple in Brazil

Images of Bhairava

Image:Kali and Bhairava in Union.jpg|Kali and Bhairava in Union, 18th century, Nepal
Image:Bhairava Adityavarman.








