[[Natural Law Party]]

CATEGORIES: Natural Law Party, Defunct political parties in Australia, Defunct political parties in Germany, Defunct political parties in the Republic of Ireland, Defunct political parties in Israel, Defunct political parties in the Netherlands, Defunct political parties in New Zealand, Defunct political parties in the United Kingdom, Political parties established in 1992

The Natural Law Party (NLP) was a transnational party founded in 1992 on "the principles of Transcendental Meditation", It was active in up to 74 countries. It continues in India and some parts of the United States. The party defined "natural law" as the organizing intelligence which governs the natural universe. The Natural Law Party advocated using the  Transcendental Meditation technique and the TM-Sidhi program as tools to enliven natural law and reduce or eliminate problems in society.
Prominent candidates included John Hagelin for U.S. president and Doug Henning as representative of Rosedale in Toronto, Ontario . In the USA its organization was reported to rival that of other "established third parties".

History and platform

According to the Maharishi, the Natural Law Party (NLP) was first founded in the United Kingdom in March 1992 and was later established in the United States, France, Austria, Germany, Croatia, Israel, Japan, Spain, the Netherlands, Italy, Australia, Norway, Sweden, New Zealand, Chile, Thailand and Canada..
The party had its foundation in the principles of Transcendental Meditation and was committed to "prevention oriented government and conflict free politics" through holistic health programs and the practice of the Transcendental Meditation technique. In Scotland and Wales, party advertisements proclaimed that "natural law which silently governs the whole universe in perfect order and without a problem." The Scotland and Wales branch of the party promised reduced pollution, the elimination of genetically modified crops and an increase in sustainable agriculture. They also supported free college education and the use of the Transcendental Meditation technique in the school system. In the UK, NLP candidate Geoffry Clements advocated the use of Transcendental Meditation and the TM-Sidhi program's yogic flying practice to reduce crime and war deaths. In the U.S.A. its platform included clean energy, labeling of genetically modified foods, a ban on the construction of nuclear energy plants, and an end to political action committees.

National branches

The Natural Law Party was reported to be active in 74 countries including Australia, Belgium, Canada, Croatia, Finland, France, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, New Zealand, Northern Ireland, the Netherlands, Trinidad and Tobago, the United Kingdom and the United States.

Australia

In 1993, Bevan Morris campaigned for a seat in a district in suburban Adelaide for the Australian House of Representatives on the NLP ticket.

Canada

The Natural Law Party was active in the Canadian federal elections of 1993, 1997 and 2000 and in provincial elections in Ontario and Quebec during this period, before it was deregistered in 2003.

Croatia

In Croatia a party member was elected to a regional assembly in 1993.

France

Benoît Frappé of France was the party's candidate for the European Parliament.

India

The Natural Law Party in India is known as the Ajeya Bharat Party (AJBP) or Invincible India Party. It promotes a Vedic way of life.

Ireland

The Natural Law Party became active in Republic of Ireland in 1994 and was based in Dublin. The party leader was John Burns who was one of nine Natural Law Party candidates in the General Election of 1997. In addition, there were four candidates in the European elections of 1999.  Burns endorsed the alternative health system of Maharishi Vedic Approach to Health and the five European candidates who ran were able to attract almost 7000 votes. However, after that election, the party ceased to field candidates in Ireland..

Israel

The Natural Law Party of Israel (.

Italy

The Natural Law Party in Italy (Partito della Legge Naturale, PLN) took place to several (both general and local) elections in the nineties. In the 1994 general elections it won 24,897 votes (0.06%) for the Chamber of Deputies

New Zealand

The Natural Law Party of New Zealand was formed in 1995.

Northern Ireland

According to the NLP, they prepared a 70-page report in response to the "1996 Framework Document of the British and Irish governments." The report was presented to leaders in Ireland, Northern Ireland and the U.S. Afterwards, NLP representatives participated in the "special elections to the Northern Ireland Forum", but withdrew before the election.

Trinidad and Tobago

The Natural Law Party in Trinidad and Tobago contested the 1995 general elections. It received 1,590 votes, but failed to win a seat.Nohlen, D (2005) Elections in the Americas: A data handbook, Volume I, pp 641–42 ISBN 978-0-19-928357-6

United Kingdom

The Natural Law Party was founded in the United Kingdom in March 1992. Geoffrey Clements was its leader.
The UK manifesto, as published on its website, listed 5 key aspects of a successful government including 
In the 1992 general election, held on 9 April, the NLP contested 310 seats  in the UK, garnering 0.19% of the vote, with every candidate losing their deposit for failing to receive at least 5% of the vote.
George Harrison performed a fund-raising concert at the Royal Albert Hall in London for the NLP on 6 April 1992, his first full concert in the UK since 1969. According to Harrison, a week before the general election, Maharishi Mahesh Yogi suggested to Harrison that he, Paul McCartney and Ringo Starr stand for election as MPs for Liverpool as NLP candidates, but they declined..
In the 1997 general election, the NLP ran 197 candidates for Parliament in the UK, garnering 0.10% of the vote, with every candidate losing their deposit.
The NLP ran 16 candidates in the 20 by-elections held between 1992 and 1997, with every candidate losing their deposit.

United States

The Natural Law Party (United States) ran John Hagelin as its presidential candidate in 1992, 1996, and  2000. He was on ballots in 48 states and received 110,000 votes (0.12%) in 1996. The party also ran congressional and local candidates.  In California, psychiatrist Harold H. Bloomfield ran as candidate for Governor in 1998..








