[[BonziBuddy]]

CATEGORIES: 1999 introductions, 2005 disestablishments, Adware, Freeware, Spyware

BonziBuddy (officially distributed as BonziBUDDY) was a piece of adware, though claims of spyware capabilities have been made against it. It was distributed by Bonzi Software between 1999 and 2004.
It gained access to users systems by including an on-screen "intelligent" software agent which supposedly would help a user surf the Internet by using Microsoft Agent technology. In 1999, the software used a green parrot called Peedy licensed from Microsoft, and in later versions, Bonzi Software made their own fictional character, a purple gorilla. The on-screen agent would tell jokes, facts, manage downloading using its download manager, sing songs and other functions. The user would command the character by right clicking on the character's stomach on which a menu would appear. Bonzi's homepage remained open after the discontinuation of BonziBuddy and the website disappeared at the end of 2008.



BonziBuddy was typical of most trojan adware of the era, displaying advertising over the top of legitimate web content, amongst other functions.
The software used Microsoft Agent technology similar to Office Assistant,

First run

The software was distributed from www.com, and contained in a file named bbsetup. Once the file was downloaded, the installer would download files directly to the hard drive and install the Microsoft Agent program. During the installation, a diagram would appear, expressing the text, "BonziBUDDY is coming to life!" and as the installation would near its completion, the image of the BonziBUDDY logo without the text as shown would add a bit of color. After the installation, the program would launch and Bonzi would say the following:
 "Well, hello there! I don't believe we have been properly introduced."
 "I'm Bonzi! What is your name?"
(User enters the nickname or name they prefer to be called at this point to continue.)
"Nice to meet you, (Name!)"
"Since this is the first time we have met, I would like to tell you a bit about myself."
"I am your friend, and BonziBUDDY! I have the ability to learn from you. The more we browse, search, and travel together, the smarter I'll become!"
(The BonziBuddy does an animation before continuing.)
"Not that I'm not already smart!"
Bonzi then would ask the user if they would like to set their homepage to www.com, but if not, it will then say: "Now, let's give it a whirl! Go ahead and click on me with your right mouse button!"
A menu would appear with many different things that the specific BonziBuddy could do.

Release history

Below is a summary of the releases of BonziBuddy and how they have changed. During 2005, BonziBuddy was no longer available.

Criticism

In April 2007, PCWorld readers voted BonziBuddy 6th on a list of "The 20 Most Annoying Tech Products".  One reader was quoted as criticizing the program because it "kept popping up and obscuring things you needed to see."
One of the last newspapers to write about BonziBuddy while it was still in distribution described it as spyware and a "scourge of the Internet".

Adware or spyware

A number of sources identify BonziBuddy as spyware, a claim the company disputes. In 2002 an article in Consumer Reports Web Watch labelled BonziBuddy as spyware, stating that it contains a Backdoor Santa in that it collects information from users. Among the activities the program is said to engage in include constantly resetting the user's web browser homepage to bonzi.
The Spyware Removal Database at Safer Networking (makers of Spybot – Search & Destroy) states "BonziBuddy is an Internet Explorer toolbar that may change your web browser settings, change your home page, and launch pop-up advertisements while tracking your web browsing habits."
Spyware Guide's entry on the program states that it is adware.
Anti-virus company Trend Micro classifies the software as adware in their spyware/grayware listings, but not malware.archive.trendmicro.asp?GNAME=ADW_BONJING.A
[/ref]
Anti-virus company Symantec classifies BonziBuddy as Adware.

Legal

There were two legal cases about the software.






