[[Antique (band)]]

CATEGORIES: Antique (band), Bonnier Amigo Music Group artists, Greek Eurovision Song Contest entrants, Eurovision Song Contest entrants of 2001, Swedish musical duos, Elena Paparizou, Greek contemporary laïko singers, Greek laïko singers, Greek dance musicians, Greek pop music groups, Musical groups established in 1999, Musical groups disestablished in 2003, V2 Records artists

Antique was a Swedish-Greek singing duo consisting of Elena Paparizou (Έλενα Παπαρίζου in Greek) and Nikos Panagiotidis (Νίκος Παναγιωτίδης in Greek) originating from Sweden which combined Greek popular music and lyrics with a Nordic dance pop beat. Both Paparizou and Panagiotidis were born and raised in Sweden by Greek parents. They were the first ever to be nominated for a Swedish Grammis in the category modern dance with a Greek song. In 2001, Antique were selected to represent Greece at the Eurovision Song Contest in Copenhagen with the song "Die for You", sung in a blend of English and Greek, ending with a third place – only behind Estonia and hosts Denmark.

Career

In 1999, some DJ friends of Elena Paparizou's brother asked her to make a demo of the Notis Sfakianakis hit "Opa Opa". making them the first act to enter into the Swedish top five with a song sung in Greek. Their later singles "Dinata Dinata","Follow Me", and "Moro Mou" also charted well.
Despite being relatively unknown in Greece, the duo entered the national final to be Greece's representatives in the Eurovision Song Contest 2001 in Copenhagen, Denmark with the song "(I Would) Die for You", written by Nikos Terzis with lyrics by Antonis Pappas, placing joint first, but being named the winners by default as they had won the public vote. The song placed third in the actual contest with 147 points; although equaled by the 2004 entry, it was the best placing Greece had ever received until Paparizou won the contest as a solo artist in 2005. London Greek Radio. Retrieved on April 8, 2008

Discography

Tours

Awards

Grammis
Eurovision Song Contest
''Pop Corn'' Music Awards
''Planeta TV Music Awards
MAD Video Music Awards









