[[Neon Genesis Evangelion]]

CATEGORIES: 1995 anime television series, 2015 in fiction, ADV Films, Ancient astronauts in fiction, Anime featured in the Super Robot Wars series, Anime with original screenplays, Apocalyptic fiction, Cartoon Network programs, Drama anime and manga, Existentialist works, Gainax, Judeo-Christian mythology in popular culture, Studio Ghibli, Mecha anime and manga, Metafictional works, Neon Genesis Evangelion, Science fantasy anime and manga, Tatsunoko Production, Television series set in the 2010s, Toonami

, commonly referred to as NGE, Evangelion or Eva, is a Japanese science-fantasy mecha dystopia genre animation series that first aired from October 1995 to March 1996. The 26 episode series was created by the anime studio Gainax and was both directed and written by Hideaki Anno. The original Japanese cast of the show includes the voice actors and singers Megumi Ogata as Shinji Ikari, Megumi Hayashibara as Rei Ayanami, and Yūko Miyamura as Asuka Soryu. The music was composed by Shirō Sagisu and would top the Oricon charts upon release; the theme song continues to receive recognition for its lasting impact in the decades after its release. The Evangelion franchise also includes a movie tetralogy called Rebuild of Evangelion, as well as several other spin-off anime, manga and video game series. 
Evangelion is an apocalyptic anime in the mecha genre. The series is set in a futuristic Tokyo, fifteen years after a worldwide cataclysm. The main story centers around Shinji, a teenage boy who is recruited by the shadowy organization NERV to pilot a giant bio-machine called an Evangelion in combat against monstrous beings known as Angels. The series explores the experiences and emotions of other Evangelion pilots and members of NERV as they attempt to prevent another catastrophe. Evangelion prominently features religious symbolism and themes throughout the series, including Kabbalah, Christianity, Judaism, and Shinto imagery.
Evangelion is one of the most successful and critically acclaimed anime television series of the 1990s. Considered both a critique and deconstruction of the mecha genre, the series has become a cultural icon and has resulted in the artistic and technical revival of the anime industry. The show's characters, music and individual scenes have been recognized by the Japanese public, and homage to its controversial ending resulted in the creation of two movies; each provided an alternate ending for the abstract and psychological analysis of the characters for episodes 25 and 26. The subsequent film, manga, home video and other products in its franchise have achieved record sales in Japan and strong sales in overseas markets, with revenues grossing over 150 billion yen by 2013.

Plot

The show begins fifteen years after a global cataclysm, known as Second Impact, with the arrival of fourteen-year-old Shinji Ikari in the futuristic city of Tokyo-3 in response to the summons of his estranged father Gendo Ikari, the director of the special paramilitary force NERV. Upon reaching the city, Shinji witnesses the NERV forces battling an Angel, one of a race of large monstrous beings whose awakening was foretold by the Dead Sea Scrolls. NERV's giant Evangelion bio-machines, controlled from within by pilots whose nervous systems must be synched to the Evangelions, are the only weapons capable of keeping the Angels from annihilating humanity. NERV officer Misato Katsuragi escorts Shinji into the NERV complex beneath the city, where his father pressures him into deploying the Evangelion Unit-01 against the Angel. Without training Shinji is quickly overwhelmed in the battle, causing the Evangelion to go berserk and savagely kill the Angel on its own. Following a hospitalization, Shinji moves in with Misato to recover and begins settling in to life in Tokyo-3. In his second battle Shinji violently destroys an Angel but is later overcome with emotion and attempts to run away. Misato confronts Shinji, who ultimately decides to remain a pilot. Meanwhile, Evangelion Unit-00 is repaired and Shinji tries to befriend its pilot, a mysterious and emotionally cold teenage girl named Rei Ayanami. A strategy developed by Misato, termed the Yakushima Plan, is implemented to successfully defeat another Angel, but Shinji is nearly killed in the battle.
Ritsuko Akagi, NERV's chief scientist, reveals to Shinji that the global cataclysm known as the Second Impact was not caused by a meteor strike as officially reported, but instead resulted when the first Angel to arrive on Earth, code named Adam, exploded in the Antarctic. The pilot of Evangelion Unit-02, teenage girl Asuka Langley Soryu, comes to live with Misato and Shinji and joins her copilots in defeating the Angels as they appear. A boy named Toji Suzuhara is selected to pilot Unit-03 but during his first test synchronization with the Evangelion, Unit-03 morphs into an Angel. When Shinji refuses to destroy the rogue unit, his control over Unit-01 is cut off and supplanted by a separate Dummy Plug system that causes his Evangelion to savagely rip apart Unit-03 and crush the internal cockpit containing Toji. Shinji is traumatized by the attack on his friend and temporarily quits piloting the Evangelion, but is forced to return in order to destroy an Angel that has overcome both Asuka and Rei. Asuka loses her self-confidence following her defeat and spirals into a deep depression. In the next battle, Rei self-destructs Unit-00 and dies to save Shinji's life. Misato and Shinji later visit the hospital where they find Rei alive but claiming to be "the third Rei". Misato forces Ritsuko to reveal the dark secrets of NERV, the Evangelion graveyard and the Dummy Plug system which operates using clones of Rei.
Asuka is reduced to a catatonic state by her depression and Kaworu Nagisa replaces her as pilot of Unit-02. Kaworu, who initially befriends Shinji, is soon revealed to be the final Angel. Kaworu fights Shinji, then realizes that he must die if humanity is to thrive and asks Shinji to kill him. Shinji hesitates, then kills Kaworu. This act triggers the forced evolution of humanity, termed the "Human Instrumentality Project", in which the souls of all mankind are merged into one. In the final scenes of the last episode, Shinji's soul mentally grapples with the reason for his existence and reaches an epiphany, enabling him to destroy the wall of negative attitudes and emotions that tormented him throughout the series. The episode ends with all the characters applauding him, as Shinji smiles and thanks everyone.

Characters

Anno attempted to create characters for the Neon Genesis Evangelion series that reflected different parts of his own personality.
Shinji Ikari is the main protagonist of the series and the designated pilot of Evangelion Unit-01. After witnessing his mother's death as a child, Shinji was abandoned by his father, Gendo Ikari. Shinji is emotionally fragile and does as instructed out of fear of rejection. Throughout the series he repeats "I mustn't run away!", but habitually withdraws in response to traumatic events. Anno has described Shinji as a boy who "shrinks from human contact" and has "convinced himself that he is a completely unnecessary person".
Asuka Langley Soryu and Rei Ayanami are the two female protagonists and are presented with their own flaws and difficulty relating to other people.
Misato Katsuragi serves as the caretaker and commanding officer for Shinji and Asuka. Her professional demeanor at NERV contrasts dramatically with her carefree and irresponsible behavior at home. Character designer Yoshiyuki Sadamoto conceived her as an older "girl next door" and promiscuous loser who failed to take life seriously. Misato has an Electra complex and is consumed with conflicting love and hate for her father, which manifests as a driving force in her decision to work at NERV and her attempts to "seek her father in Kaji's embrace."Neon Genesis Evangelion Episode 26 Anno described Shinji and Misato as "afraid of being hurt" and "unsuitable—lacking the positive attitude—for what people call heroes of an adventure."
The teenaged Evangelion pilots are ordered into battle by the steely Gendo Ikari, Shinji's father and the commander of NERV. He abandoned Shinji and recalled him only to serve as an Evangelion pilot. Gendo salvaged the remains of his dead wife's soul and body to create Rei, whom he viewed as a mere tool at his disposal to defeat the Angels. He is depicted as relentless in his drive to win, a man who "takes drastic and extreme measures, by fair means or foul, or by hook or by crook, in order to accomplish his own purpose." According to Sadamoto, the characters of Gendo and Fuyutsuki are based on Ed Straker and Alec Freeman of the television series UFO.
Yoshiyuki Sadamoto designed the visual appearance of the characters so that their personalities "could be understood more or less at a glance".

Cast

Production

Anno fell into a deep depression following completion of work on Nadia: The Secret of Blue Water
Early into the production, Anno stated his intent to have Evangelion increase the number of otaku (anime fans) by attracting interest in the medium.
Evangelion borrowed certain scenarios and the use of introspection as a narrative device from a previous Anno project entitled Gunbuster, which was developed around the concept of conflict between humans and the gods.
The final version of the story reflects inspiration drawn from numerous other anime and fictional works. and Ultra Seven.
The development of the Neon Genesis Evangelion series ran close to deadlines throughout its production run. The initial cuts of the first two episodes were screened at the second Gainax festival in July 1995, only three months before they were aired on television.

Themes

The Evangelion series is permeated with references to Kabbalah, Christianity, Judaism, Shinto, and Gnosticism, complicating viewers' attempts to form an unambiguous interpretation of the series.
The series contains numerous allusions to the Kojiki and the Nihongi, the sacred texts of Shinto. The Shinto notion of Black and White Moons is referenced in the series, and the mythical lances of the Shinto deities Izanagi and Izanami are used as weapons in battles between Evangelions and Angels.
Evangelion has been interpreted as a deeply personal expression of Hideaki Anno's own emotional struggles. The series invokes psychological themes in character dialogue and the phrases used on intercut title screens throughout each episode; movements of the original score also derive many of their titles from psychological theory. Examples of both include "Thanatos", "Oral stage", "Separation Anxiety", and "Mother Is the First Other".

Related media

Music

Shiro Sagisu composed most of the original music for the series. The soundtracks released to high rankings on the Oricon charts, with Neon Genesis Evangelion III reaching the number one slot for highest sales in 1997; Additional classical works and original symphonic compositions were used to score later movies produced within the Neon Genesis Evangelion franchise. In total, the series' discography includes 21 full studio, live, compilation and soundtrack albums and six CD singles.
The series' opening theme was "A Cruel Angel's Thesis", performed by Yoko Takahashi. It ranked on two TV Asahi polls, reaching #55 for best anime theme songs of all time, and #18 for best anime theme songs of the 1990s.

Films

In May 1996, Gainax announced an Evangelion film
The End of Evangelion, which premiered on July 19, 1997, provided a complete retelling of the final two episodes of the television series. Rather than depicting series' climax within the characters' minds, the film provides a more conventional, action-based resolution to the series' plot lines. The film won numerous awardsCarl Horn, "My Empire of Dirt" (2002), for Viz Communications Animation Kobe 1997: An Attendee's Report and grossed 1.45 billion yen within six months of its release.90
On September 9, 2006, Gainax confirmed a new animated film series called Rebuild of Evangelion. Consisting of four movies, Rebuild of Evangelion presents an alternate retelling of the TV series that includes new characters and a different conclusion to the story.

Manga

Ten months prior to the television broadcast of Evangelion, Anno worked with author and illustrator Yoshiyuki Sadamoto to publish a manga version of the story designed to generate popular interest in the upcoming anime series. The first installment of the manga was published in the February issue of Shōnen Ace in December 1994 with subsequent installments produced on an irregular basis over an eighteen-year period. The final installment was published in June 2013.

Other media

Several video games based on the series have been developed, ranging from RPG and adventure games to mahjong and card games. The series has also spawned numerous art books and visual novels, one of which inspired the derivative manga series Angelic Days. The story has been adapted into two other manga series in addition to the original Sadamoto project: Petit Eva: Evangelion@School, a parody series which received its own original net animation serial show, and Campus Apocalypse, a character-focused story that omits the Evangelion robots. Several radio dramas have been released on CD and cassette to make the material more accessible to non-traditional audiences.

Releases

The original home video releases in Japan included VHS and Laserdisc sets using a release structured around "Genesis 0:(volume number)", with each of the first 12 releases containing two episodes each. "Genesis 0:13" and "Genesis 0:14" contained the original and the Neon Genesis Evangelion: Death & Rebirth versions of episodes 25 and 26.
The series is distributed in North America and Europe by ADV Films and licensed by Manga Entertainment.

Reception


The Neon Genesis Evangelion television series has received great popularity
Following the conclusion of the series' original television broadcast, the public and critical reception to Neon Genesis Evangelion was polarized,
Neon Genesis Evangelion has scored highly in numerous popularity polls. In 1995, the series won first place in the "Best Loved Series" category of the Anime Grand Prix, a reader-polled award series published in Animage magazine.
In the August 1996 issue of Animage, Evangelion characters placed high in the rankings of best characters with Rei ranked first, Asuka third, Kaworu fourth and Shinji sixth. Rei Ayanami won in the Female Character category in 1995 and 1996 and Shinji Ikari won the Male Character category in 1996 and 1997.
The series has captured the attention of cultural theorists inside and outside of Japan, and many critics have analyzed or commented on it, including Susan J. Napier, William Rout, Mick Broderick, Mari Kotani,

Influence and legacy

Evangelion has had a significant impact on Japanese popular culture. The series also had a strong influence on anime, at a time when the anime industry and televised anime series in particular were in a slump period. CNET reviewer Tim Hornyak credits the series with revitalizing and transforming the giant mecha genre. In the 1980s and 1990s, Japanese animation knew a period of crisis and decreased production
Evangelion has influenced numerous subsequent anime series, including Serial Experiments Lain, RahXephon, Texhnolyze, Gasaraki, Boogiepop Phantom,
The design and personality traits of the character Rei Ayanami were reused for many anime characters of the late 1990s, such as Ruri Hoshino of Nadesico, Ruriko Tsukushima (The Droplet),
According to Keisuke Iwata, the global spread of Japanese animation dramatically expanded due to the popularity of Evangelion.

Merchandising


The popularity of Neon Genesis Evangelion extends to its merchandising which exceeded $400 million within two years of its release. The series has established itself greatly on the Japanese market, developing a varied range of products for adult consumers, such as digital phones, laptop computers,
The commercial exploitation of the series for the home video market achieved record sales and remained strong over a decade later.

Notes



Further reading



Official websites

Articles and information


