[[Chip Tsao]]

CATEGORIES: 1958 births, Living people, Alumni of the University of Warwick, Hong Kong columnists, Hong Kong writers

Chip Tsao (born 17 August 1958), also known by his pen name To Kit, is a multilingual Hong Kong-based columnist, broadcaster, and writer. His writings are mostly in Chinese. He is well known for his sarcasm and wry sense of humour.

Family and education

Tsao's family traces their roots back to Guangxi province. However, he states that he never thought about becoming a writer in his youth, and that his parents discouraged him from this career because they felt it would be dangerous.
Tsao is married and has two children. He enjoys reading Chinese poetry to his children. However, Hong Kong media have reported on his alleged infidelity to his wife. The proprietor of an hourly motel in Kowloon Tong claims Tsao is a regular customer there, and in 2004, a reporter for East Week tailed Tsao and an unidentified young woman to said hotel and took pictures of them. Tsao reportedly attempted to flee the scene with his head wrapped in toilet paper to obscure his face while the woman stood in front of the reporter's car to block pursuit.

Career

Tsao began his journalism career in the United Kingdom as a reporter for the BBC and Radio Television Hong Kong. Then, famous writer Jin Yong (Louis Cha) invited him to write a regular column for Ming Pao about his experiences living abroad. It was at this time that he began to use his pen name To Kit. The name of his column in Ming Pao,"'The Golden Venture", derives from the name of a vessel that took Chinese illegal immigrants to the United States in 1993. His first book, Alongside Thames, was published in 1995.
Tsao later he joined a team of broadcasters to host a weekly current affairs programme on RTHK named 'Free as Wind' (
Tsao currently writes for Apple Daily and HK Magazine.
Tsao is not without his controversies. His status as a premier writer of Hong Kong is often challenged, one example being a piece by Rosetta Lui and Perry Lam in the December 2007 issue of Muse: "Some 15 or 20 years from now, the books of Chip Tsao... if they are talked about at all, will most probably be used as anecdotal evidence to illustrate how dumbed-down our city's culture has become since the 1997 return to Chinese sovereignty. His essays are always funny, sometimes lyrical but almost never ruminative." Tsao 's status as a "premier" writer is  self-proclaimed.  He is neither a scholar nor an essayist of any substnce.

Political viewpoints

Hong Kong politics

Tsao first began writing about Hong Kong public affairs in a column for English-language newspaper Eastern Express. He is often perceived as pro-British, and has been accused of looking down on China. Some people say I'm an Anglophile but I don't consider myself one. I just admire beautiful things and good values, and that includes Tibetan culture. There are bad things about the Brits too – they can be hypocrites and racists."

Accusations of racism

Tsao has faced various accusations of racism for his English-language writings. In October 2005, an article he wrote for the South China Morning Post entitled "Have Hong Kong girls stopped looking for Mr White?" sparked accusations that he promoted discrimination and was jealous of white men in Hong Kong. Tsao responded that he was merely being sarcastic and provocative, repeating themes which were often discussed in Chinese media, and accused his critics themselves of being racist and lacking the ability to "read between the lines". 
On 27 March 2009, an article of Tsao's entitled "The War at Home" was published in the free HK Magazine.

Works

Tsao's work, both on radio and in his columns, concentrates on the following subjects:

Publications

Major works by Chip Tsao:




