[[Canadian Federation of Students]]

CATEGORIES: Students' associations in Canada, Groups of students' unions, Student political organizations, 1981 establishments in Canada, Organizations established in 1981

The Canadian Federation of Students (CFS) is the largest student organization in Canada. Founded in 1981, the stated goal of the CFS is to work at the federal level for high quality, accessible post-secondary education.

Structure

The name "Canadian Federation of Students" is generally used to designate three legally distinct organizations: the national CFS, one of the provincial components of the CFS, or CFS-Services.
CFS and CFS-Services share the same bylaws In October 2009 CFS-Quebec ceased to operate as a recognized provincial affiliate of the CFS.archive.theconcordian.710352

History

The CFS was officially formed on October 18, 1981, from the merger of two national organizations - the National Union of Students in Canada and the Association of Student Councils - and student federations from five Canadian provinces (Alberta, British Columbia, Nova Scotia, Ontario and Saskatchewan).ca/cfs/1981/1981-10-minutes. Part of the impetus to organize came from the federal government's announcement of $2 billion of cuts from Established Program Financing (including cuts to federal transfer payments for health and education).

Founding conference

The founding conference was held at Carleton University between October 14–19, 1981. Mike McNeil was elected as the organization's first Chairperson, along with Mike Walker (Treasurer), former NUS treasurer Kirk Falconer (International Affairs Commissioner), Kathie Cram (Women's Commissioner), Brian Robinson (Graduate Student Representative), Ben Freedman (Member at Large), and Leslie Neilson (Member at Large).  The Federation's bylaws and constitution were finalized and over 50 motions were passed during the plenary. After hearing speeches by Salvadoran and Chilean students, delegates passed motions condemning human rights violations and anti-student policies in those countries.Ben Schaub "International policy workshop focuses on human rights", The Charlatan, October 22, 1981
A campaign strategy was also launched to oppose the federal government's planned cut to Established Program Financing (EPF). The slogan for the campaign was "Access not axe us" and it called for an establishment of an all-grant system and a public inquiry into the future of post-secondary education.  The campaign also called for alliance building with community groups and public sector workers to gain support and fight against cutbacks to social programs. The campaign was named after a research report of the same name, by Bruce Tate. The report focused on effects of the Government of Canada's cutback to education and highlighted issues such as access and tuition fee levels.Bob Cox, "Access not axe us" The Charlatan, October 22, 1981
The conference ended with a student presence in Question Period in the Canadian House of Commons, a meeting with Secretary of State Gerald Regan, and a one-on-one debate between Chairperson Mike McNeil and Member of Parliament John Evans (parliamentary secretary to Finance Minister Allan MacEachern) in the Snake Lounge at Carleton University.Susan Sherring, "Students not welcome to sit in House of Commons" The Charlatan, October 22, 1981  Mike McNeil and delegates were not satisfied with the outcome of the meeting with Gerald Regan."CFS unites Student Voice" The Ubyssey, October 22, 1981

Evolution of membership

=1992-1995=

In 1992, six students' unions decertified from the CFS to create the Ontario Undergraduate Student Alliance, due in part to CFS' lobbying on social issues.
The CFS reached a membership of 440,000 students from 65 member students' unions in 1993-1994. In the following year, many students' unions organized votes to decertify from the CFS. For example, the executive of the Student Federation of the University of Ottawa (SFUO) argued that the CFS's stance for the abolition of tuition fees was unrealistic, and criticized the CFS' involvement in social justice issues. Guy Caron (Current New Democratic Party member of parliament for the riding of Rimouski-Neigette—Témiscouata—Les Basques), the chairperson of the CFS at the time and former SFUO president, argued that broader economic issues such as free trade have an impact on public post-secondary education. FCÉÉ", La Rotonde, November 21, 1994  Executive members from the SFUO, the Carleton University Students' Association and the Ryerson Students' Union signed a letter stating that these criticisms of the CFS had motivated students' unions from 20 universities to found the Canadian Alliance of Student Associations., "Pour une nouvelle alliance étudiante canadienne", La Rotonde, January 16, 1995
Overall, 20 membership votes were held in 1994-1995, with the net result that 59 member students' unions formed the CFS in September 1996, the latest being the York University Graduate Students' Association (Local 84).

=1995-2007=

Between 1995 and 2007, over twenty students' unions joined the CFS, including many graduate students' associations and part-time students' associations.cfs-fcee.php
Several large undergraduate students' associations voted to certify during the same period. In 2002, the University of Toronto Students' Administrative Council, which had never been part of a national students' union before, voted to join the CFS. At the November 2005 Annual General Meeting of the Federation, the positive result of certification votes at both University of Manitoba Students' Union and the University of Saskatchewan Students' Union were ratified. The latter vote result was challenged by former USSU director, and in 2007, the courts ruled the vote to be of no force or effect. The CFS website continues to list the USSU as Local 17. In October 2007, USSU voted to keep prospective membership in the CFS and hold a referendum in the next two years; however, in September 2009 the USSU voted to rescind that motion and claims that its certification is void.

=2008=

In March 2008, students at four campuses (Cape Breton University, Simon Fraser University, Kwantlen University-College, and Graduate students at University of Victoria) held votes to decertify with the CFS. The negative media coverage of the CFS was one of the reasons listed by the Kwantlen Student Association representatives for calling the decertification votes. Members at CBU, the SFU and the UVic (graduate students) voted to decertify. CFS representatives did not participate in the Cape Breton referendum, noting that the CBUSU failed to give proper notice. Fellow CFS members from other campuses participated in the Simon Fraser decertification vote, but then national chairperson Amanda Aziz stated that problems with the voting process could result in the outcome not being recognized by the CFS. The UVGSS result was not contested by the CFS.
In the fall of 2008, the largest bilingual student association in Canada, the Student Federation of the University of Ottawa, re-joined the CFS.

=2009=

In October 2009 students at Carleton, Guelph, and Concordia organized a decertification drive, resulting in petitions meeting the threshold necessary to initiate decertification votes.archive.ca/viewarticle.archive.theconcordian.793401 Students at the University of Victoria Students' Society, and the Graduate Student Association at the University of Calgary collected enough signatures to initiate a decertification vote.ca/cfs/media/The%20Martlet%20-%20UVic%20referendum%20petition%20off%20to%20CFS%20national%20office%20-%20Oct%2029,%202009.archive.ca/story/13886

=2010=

In the spring of 2010, undergraduate students at the University of Guelph and the Alberta College of Art and Design and graduate students at the University of Calgary and McGill University attempted to hold decertification votes. Only the Alberta College of Art and Design vote followed the CFS bylaws for decertification. Several irregularities in the conduct of the students' unions at McGill and Calgary were citied by the CFS as reasons for invalidating the decertification votes.archive.ca/articles/news/2010/03/29/seven-students-associations-motion-leave-canadian-federation-students

=2011=

In March 2011, undergraduate students at the University of Victoria voted to decertify from the CFS. (April 1, 2011). UVic students vote no to CFS. The Martlet
 Retrieved from 

=2012=

In January 2012, students of Laurentian University at Georgian College in Barrie joined the CFS as the Laurentian Students' Union (Local 111).facebook.8 million in unpaid membership dues going back as far as the 1990s.com/2012/02/canadian-federation-of-students-demanding-1-8-million/ Lex Gill, then-president of the CSU firmly denied the CFS's claim.

Membership Disputes

Concordia University

The CFS is a defendant in a suit launched by the Concordia Students' Union seeking recognition of a decertification vote in 2011.ca/article/1254  The National Executive refused to grant a decertification vote before $1.8 million in alleged outstanding membership fees were remitted. The then-president of the Concordia Students' Union, Lex Gill, firmly denied this claim: "I am completely firm in my conviction that we do not owe the CFS $1.8 million and never have."

Simon Fraser University

The CFS is currently the defendant in a case brought by the Simon Fraser Student Society (SFSS) at Simon Fraser University over the validity of a decertification vote in March 2008. After a summary trial was rejected, the judge ruled that the SFSS had the option of holding another vote or continuing to resolve the legality of the disputed decertification through a trial.  The judge urged both parties to consider settling the matter out of court before spending large amounts of money on a full length trial.archive.the-peak.archive.the-peak. In early January, 2012, the CFS/CFS-Services/CFS-British Columbia and the SFSS agreed to an undisclosed settlement and ceased all court action.ca/cases/sfu/SFSS-CFS-joint-press-release-January-4-2012.pdf

University of Guelph

The Central Student Association representing undergraduate University of Guelph students submitted an injunction on February 16, 2010 against the CFS and its affiliates  for denying the student association a decertification vote as a result of a dispute over the validity of a petition required to initiate decertification.theontarion.com/2010/02/cfs-o-referendum-denied-to-student-organizers/
Without providing reasons for judgement, Justice O'Connor of the Ontario Superior Court of Justice ordered that a decertification vote be conducted and administrated by a referendum oversight committee (ROC) based on CFS bylaws (consisting of two representatives selected by the CFS and two representatives selected by the student association).  Justice O'Connor modified the committee by appointing former Ontario Superior Court Justice James Chadwick as a fifth member of the committee to act as an independent third party to break deadlocks should the two parties disagree on administration of the vote.thecannoncontest.ca/CFS/CFS_ruling
The court-ordered decertification vote was conducted online in early April 2010.uoguelph.html  Guelph students allegedly voted 73.5% in favour of decertification in an online poll conducted by the university administration.ca/news/story/students_say_no_to_cfs On CFS and CFS-O appealed Justice O'Connor's decision and the matter was held on May 31, 2011.thecannon.  The Appeals Court Judges ordered the matter be heard by a different Judge.ontariocourts.htm

University of Victoria

The  University of Victoria Students' Society (UVSS) representing undergraduate University of Victoria students submitted legal action against the CFS in November 2010 to seek a vote on decertification. The dispute centered around a petition submitted by UVic student Jose Barrios in the Fall of 2009 that had the required 10% of signatures needed to initiate decertification.  In Spring 2010, the CFS National Executive rejected this petition because hundreds of students signed a second petition calling for their names to be removed from Barrios decertification petition list. In November 2010, Barrios initiated legal action against the CFS.
Mr. Justice Malcolm D. Macaulay of the Supreme Court of British Columbia heard oral arguments from both sides on January 6 and 7, 2011.  On February 1, 2011, Justice Macaulay ruled that the use of a 'counterpetition' to nullify the original petition 'must fail' and ordered that the process to hold a referendum on continued membership must move forward.canlii.html  On the applicability of the second 'counterpetition', Justice Macaulay wrote: "The national executive of the CFS invoked a process that was not contemplated by the bylaws in effect at the time and, as a result, applied an irrelevant consideration in determining that the petition was not in order. The adoption of a process outside the bylaws amounted to an excess of jurisdiction."
The CFS refused to grant a decertification vote until the UVSS paid $100,000+ in outstanding membership dues. The UVSS rejected the claim that it owed money  and took the CFS to court on February 17.martlet.  Justice Macaulay ruled for the vote to take place regardless of outstanding dues. In March 2011 UVic undergraduate students voted to decertify the Canadian Federation of Students, although they continue to remain members of the CFS-BC.martlet.ca/martlet/article/uvic-students-vote-no-cfs/

Legal Cases (Advocacy)

Student loan bankruptcy

In 1999 the CFS challenged the legality of the student loan bankruptcy prohibition in the Superior Court of Canada.sciencemag.13670956662566289732

Translink and Free Speech

The legally separate but closely related affiliate, the Canadian Federation of Students-British Columbia (CFS-BC), in participation with the British Columbia Civil Liberties Association and British Columbia Teachers' Federation, won a case against Translink for refusing to put CFS-BC Vote Education advertising on buses that Translink deemed to be partisan advertising during an election.  The case was appealed all the way to the Supreme Court of Canada, where it ruled that Translink's actions violated the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, and in doing so, the Court set the precedent that "arms-length" government agencies such as Translink do come under Charter scrutiny.ca/Blogs/TheHook/Rights-Justice/2009/07/10/SupremeCourtTranslink/

Government relations

A large part of the CFS' mandate is to lobby the federal government from its national office in Ottawa. Over the years, CFS representatives have testified to dozens of House of Commons committees, including the Standing Committee on Finance and the Standing Committee on Humans Resources Development and Persons with Disabilities (student loans).parl.gc.aspx?Language=E&Mode=1&Parl=40&Ses=2&FltrParl=40&FltrSes=2 In 2009, the CFS national chairperson was invited to deliver a workshop on lobbying policy-makers at a conference hosted by the Federated Press.archive.federatedpress.pdf
In addition to the ongoing testimonies and meetings, the CFS holds an annual Lobby Week that brings together dozens of students from across Canada to meet with their local Members of Parliament and Senators. In 2010, over 175 meetings were held to lobby for more affordable post-secondary education.archive.thedailyplanet.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=3900:students-lobby-for-changes-to-post-secondary-education&catid=42:on-campus-news&Itemid=225

Current political positions

Social Issues

In 2004, the CFS joined the coalition Canadians for Equal Marriage.ctv.ca/servlet/ArticleNews/story/CTVNews/1083176018076_9/?hub=Canada

Current campaigns

Tuition freezes/cuts

The CFS actively lobbies on tuition-related issues, including holding rallies and national "days of action" to address such issues as tuition freezes and reductions in student loans. In Newfoundland and Labrador, the only province where all public college and university students' are members of the CFS, students pay the second-lowest average undergraduate tuition fees in Canada.
In British Columbia, the CFS lobbied the former New Democratic Party (NDP) government to introduce tuition fee freezes and reductions.

Rock the Vote

The CFS has also been involved with attempting to increase turnout (particularly among students and young people) in elections. For example, in 2005 CFS-British Columbia (the provincial chapter of the CFS), the Langara Students' Union and the Corus Entertainment owned radio station C-FOX led a "non-partisan" campaign registering young voters in BC called Rock the Vote BC, based on the Rock the Vote campaign drives used by the Republican and Democratic parties in the 2004 US election to register young voters. Elections BC did not endorse the initiative because of concerns of partisanship.
The CFS was one of several groups admonished by the Commissioner of Canada Elections in October 2002 for having failed to submit an elections advertising report by the established deadline. The Commissioner notes that the report was filed by CFS in May 2002.

Aboriginal student issues

The National Aboriginal Caucus is the mechanism with the CFS by which Aboriginal students can organize campaigns. The Caucus has its own budget and runs campaigns such as Where's the Justice for Aboriginal Peoples.cfs-fcee.php

Graduate student issues

The Canadian Federation of Students is the only student organization in Canada with a distinct graduate caucus that elects its own directors and operates with its own budget. Known as the National Graduate Caucus (NGC), 60,000 graduate students at 31 campuses across Canada currently comprise the NGC. Accessed July 27, 2008:

=Commercialization of research=

The NGC campaigns to oppose commercialization of university research because its research shows that pressures from industry partners can threaten academic freedom and the public interest.Alex Kazia, Naushad Ali Husein, Jade Colbert, "Welcome to your corporate campus," The Varsity, Accessed July 27, 2008: 

=Whistleblowers campaign=

In 2006 the NGC began working with Christopher Radziminski, alumnus from the University of Toronto, to support his battle with the University of Toronto and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) over research conducted with ERCO Worldwide. The former student alleges that a drinking water experiment in Wiarton, Ontario was not accurately reported in scholarly journals, posing a serious health risk to Canadians.CFS - Media

=Post-residency fees=

The NGC has an active campaign to reduce fees charged to graduate students after their residency period. Graduate student unions affiliated to the NGC urge graduate students to sign pledges that they will not make alumni donations until their university reduces post-residency fees.

=Copyright renewal=

The NGC has been lobbying the federal government in partnership with several organizations over current reform of the Canadian Copyright Act. This involves a letter writing campaign to MPs and participation in developing the Creative Commons project."Canadian Federation of Student on Copyright Reform", The Creator's Copyright Coalition, April 29, 2008 
=Research funding=

The NGC advocates for increased graduate student funding in the form of scholarships and training programmes.

Services

The Canadian Federation of Students-Services (CFS-Services) is a legally separate branch of the Federation, founded in the early 1980s as the successor organization to the Association of Students' Councils Canada (AOSC). Services made available to individual student members or member students' unions of the CFS include:CFS - Services

Travel CUTS

Travel CUTS (Canadian Universities Travel Service) is a travel agency that was majority-owned and operated by CFS-Services (CFS-S), which operates in Canada and the United States. In 2009, Travel CUTS was sold to Merit Travel Group.merit.asp?opt=about_us
As a member of the International Student Travel Confederation, Travel CUTS is the Canadian issuing agent for the International Student Identity Card (ISIC), an internationally recognized student identification that also provides access to discounts on travel. Services at Travel CUTS are not restricted to members of the CFS, but full members can obtain an ISIC at no charge. The ISIC is considered  to be the most direct financial benefit associated with CFS membership.
In 1996, the University Students' Council at the University of Western Ontario initiated a lawsuit against CFS-Services, to be later joined by three other student societies (Alma Mater Society of the University of British Columbia, Queen's Alma Mater Society and University of Alberta Students' Union). The plaintiffs "alleged the CFS-Services illegally transferred assets from the AOSC, including Travel CUTS, to itself at a 1987 meeting".






