[[American Liberty League]]

CATEGORIES: New Deal, Political organizations in the United States, Old Right (United States)

The American Liberty League was an American political organization formed in 1934, primarily by conservative Democrats to oppose the New Deal of Franklin D. Roosevelt. It was highly active for just two years. Following the landslide re-election of Roosevelt in 1936, it sharply reduced its activities and disbanded entirely in 1940. 

History

Formation and leadership

The creation of the League was announced in Washington, D.C., on August 22, 1934, by a group of Democrats and a smaller number of Republicans. Jouett Shouse, who had been prominent in Democratic politics and the anti-Prohibition movement, became the group's first chairman. The makeup of the League's executive committee was designed to demonstrate its bipartisan nature. It included: John W. Davis and Al Smith, former Democratic candidates for president; wealthy businessman Irénée du Pont, who left the Republicans to support Al Smith in 1928 and Roosevelt in 1932; and two New York Republicans, Nathan L. Miller, the state's former governor, and Representative James W. Wadsworth.Wolfskill, 21, 25
Reaction to the League formation was generally skeptical of its non-partisan nature."Wolfskill, 34-5 Arthur Krock wrote a few weeks later, just after the November election, that the League was prepared to announce more eminent members of its leadership group "to eradicate the purely political and anti-administration tinge that colored the league in the beginning."New York Times: Arthur Krock, "American Liberty League Soon to Begin Activities," November 10, 1934, accessed December 9, 2010 
The League proceeded to name a National Executive Committee of 25 and a National Advisory Council of about 200. Those named constituted a geographically diverse group, almost all drawn from the upper echelons of American industry. Among the notable exceptions were Hollywood movie producer Hal Roach and naval hero Richmond Pearson Hobson. More typical were Alfred P. Sloan, Jr. of General Motors and J. Howard Pew of Sun Oil Company.Wolfskill, 58-60; Rudolph, 21-2
Membership exceeded 36,000 in July 1935, only 27% of whom were contributors. It doubled by January 1936, peaked at 125,000 in the middle of 1936, and then declined rapidly following the 1936 election.Wolfskill, 61-2
The League targeted college students for membership and had particular success at state universities. There were 345 chapters with more than 10,000 members by April 1936. Academics played a variety of roles. For example, New York University economist Walter Spahr gave speeches that the League reproduced in pamphlet form, though an attempt to organize a committee of academic economists failed.Wolfskill, 68-9

Under attack

The League came under heavy attack from the Left. An investigation in Congress in 1934 examined allegations from Smedley Butler about a purported coup plot.

1936 campaign

Roosevelt's campaign manager accused the Liberty League of being an "ally of the Republican National Committee" which would "squeeze the worker dry in his old age and cast him like an orange rind into the refuse pail."Phillips-Fein, 20, available online, accessed December 9, 2010
The Republican campaign, not content with the League's declaration of non-partisanship, asked it to "stay aloof from too close alliance with the Landon campaign."Rudolph, 31 FDR's campaign manager used that information as the basis for saying that the League had behaved so badly that it "had to be repudiated by the regular Republican organization," further drawing the League into protestations of nonpartisanship that highlighted its partisan role.

Dissolution

Following the 1936 elections in which FDR won by a landslide and his party expanded its majorities in both houses of Congress, the League eliminated its public activities and restricted itself to reviewing legislation and sending its assessments to members of Congress. A small national staff remained, but all state and local offices closed. Only the three du Pont brothers, Irénée, Lammot and Pierre, financed the organization, until the du Ponts decided to devote as much of their financial resources as possible to Republican Willkie's 1940 campaign.Wolfskill, 248; New York Times: "New Deal Foe Folds Up," September 24, 1940, accessed December 9, 2010

Goals

The League said in its founding statement that it was a "nonpartisan organization founded to defend the Constitution and defend the rights and liberties guaranteed by that Constitution."New York Times: "Partisan Aim Denied by Liberty League," April 20, 1936, accessed April 20, 2011 It eschewed participation in elections. Its stated goal was:Wolfskill, 22
It proposed to educate the public and legislators on legislative issues. In particular, it proposed to help the Roosevelt administration with its research and denied it was anti-Roosevelt either at present or with regard to the 1936 presidential election.Rudolph, 29

Education programs

The League produced 135 pamphlets during its first two years, printed for easy distribution by mail. Half of them originated as speeches or radio addresses delivered by League officers or its most prominent supporters. A total of more than five copies went to newspapers and government agencies, public and college libraries, all members of Congress, and other political groups, often generating new stories and reports in other publications.Wolfskill, 66-7 A different promotional tactic that downplayed the role of the League itself was the creation of a syndicated news service. Before its discontinuation near the end of 1936, the League reached 1600 newspapers through the Western Newspaper Union.

Positions

Regarding the controversial National Recovery Administration (NRA), the League was ambivalent. Jouett Shouse, the League president commented that "the NRA has indulged in unwarranted excesses of attempted regulation"; on the other, he added that "in many regards NRA has served a useful purpose."Shamir, 22 Shouse said that he had "deep sympathy" with the goals of the NRA, explaining, "While I feel very strongly that the prohibition of child labor, the maintenance of a minimum wage and the limitation of the hours of work belong under our form of government in the realm of the affairs of the different states, yet I am entirely willing to agree that in the case of an overwhelming national emergency the Federal Government for a limited period should be permitted to assume jurisdiction of them."Shamir, pp 24-25
The League labeled Roosevelt's Agricultural Adjustment Administration "a trend toward Fascist control of agriculture" and supported the Farmers Independence Council of America to oppose the administration. "Anti-New Dealers backed farm group", The New York Times. April 14, 1936. Page 1. Social Security was said to "mark the end of democracy." 
Lawyers for the American Liberty League challenged the validity of the Wagner Act (National Labor Relations Act), but in 1937, the United States Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the statute. The American Federation of Labor accused the League of hiring detectives to infiltrate labor unions and incite strikes and violence. "Links labor 'spies' to Liberty League", The New York Times. April 15, 1936. Page 7.

Funding

On the national level, the League's total expenditures over its six-year life amounted to $1,200,000, with more than a million of that being spent during its most active months before the 1936 election. The next year, 30 donors provided two-thirds of the funds and the du Ponts' share of the total exceeded 25%. Few continued to contribute after the 1936 elections.Wolfskill, 63-4: Rudolph, 20n
During the 1936 campaign, Postmaster General James Farley, FDR's campaign manager, mocked it as the "du Pont Liberty League."New York Times: "'Nonpartisan' Fight on Roosevelt is Opened by the Liberty League," July 1, 1936, accessed December 12, 2010

Legacy

In 1940, Pulitzer Prize-winning Washington reporter and later columnist Thomas L. Stokes looked back on the American Liberty League and called it "a very vulnerable straw man" for New Deal Democrats. FDR wanted to run in 1936, he wrote, without emphasizing his Democratic identity. The League's alliance of conservative Democrats "in whom the rank and file long ago had lost confidence" like Al Smith with "conservative Republicans, among whom were lawyers for great corporations" helped President Roosevelt's backers to present him as a man independent of traditional politicians and political alliances. Stokes, Chip Off My Shoulder (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1940), 456-7
In 1950, Roosevelt's successor Harry Truman branded critics who labelled his programs "socialism" as the heirs of the Liberty League of the 1930s.New York Times: "Wold News Summarized," June 7, 1950, accessed December 12, 2010





Sources




