[[Saint Eunan's College]]

CATEGORIES: Saint Eunan's College, Boarding schools in Ireland, Boys' schools in the Republic of Ireland, Educational institutions established in 1906, Religion in Letterkenny, Roman Catholic secondary schools in Ireland, Schools in Letterkenny, Secondary schools in County Donegal



Saint Eunan's College ( It was designed by renowned Irish architect Thomas Francis McNamara. Noted also for the peculiar nature of its architecture, with four turreted round towers and flying buttresses modelled on the nearby Cathedral, it is divided by a capacious central courtyard, adjoined to an immense stone chapel and home to some unusual flora, fauna and fungi, completed by the conspicuous presence of a large monkey puzzle tree on its front lawn. Named after the Abbot of Iona Saint Eunan, a native of Donegal and patron saint of the Diocese of Raphoe, it celebrated its centenary in 2006. Retrieved 6 July 2008. Saint Eunan's College is a prolific sporting institution, having produced numerous footballers who have gone on to play for the Donegal senior football team at the highest level of the game. Current Donegal captain Michael Murphy and former captain Neil Gallagher, who led the team to the 2007 National Football League title, are among these. Among the current staff are All-Ireland winning Gaelic football All Star Colm McFadden, football manager Gary McDaid (currently of Glenswilly), football manager and former Donegal selector Mickey Houston and Ollie Horgan, who has managed Finn Harps and the Republic of Ireland schoolboys.

History

Saint Eunan's College was founded as a boarding school in 1906 by the then Bishop of Raphoe, Patrick O' Donnell. Originally intended as a minor seminary, it was designed to prepare students for the Roman Catholic priesthood. Diocesan colleges became an increasingly popular feature at the time and were designed to give the best possible Catholic education to boys of every class.
The student population expanded in the 1920s and it was necessary to build a new extension to the College in the early 1930s. The current recreation hall was built in 1958 and the science block in 1968. The College Chapel was designed by J.J. Robinson, the architect of Galway Cathedral. It was completed in 1961 at a cost of £42,000.Did You Know, Published in the 1995 edition of the Letterkenny and District Christmas Annual
The 'new building' was opened in 1979 to cater for the 500 students enrolled at the time. Due to the growth of other second level schools in the area the number of boarders dropped extensively and in 1992, the boarding wing was finally shut down. Saint Eunan's College continues to this day as a Catholic School under the trusteeship of the Bishop of Raphoe.
The school currently serves approximately 900 students from Letterkenny and its surrounding area, and is one of the few remaining all-male schools in the north-western part of Ireland. The president, since 2009, is Christopher Darby and the vice principal, since 2010, is Mary Cunningham.
In 2007, the school came to the attention of the national media. Retailers were urged not to sell eggs and flour to students following a spate of attacks on passing cars.
In 2009, Christopher Darby became the first lay person to become president of the college, taking over from Father Michael Carney.

Centenary celebrations

Centenary celebrations began on Friday 6 October 2006 with an exhibition of photographs and the launch of the centenary booklet. The photographic exhibition included photographs from down through the years. It included photos of past and present staff and students as well as sports teams from the past one hundred years. Books, uniforms and other memorabilia were on display. The exhibition was opened by Séamus Hegarty, Bishop of Derry, a past student and a former patron of the school. On Saturday a sporting exhibition took place on the pitch. A veterans soccer match was organised along with a veterans gaelic football match. Mass was celebrated on Sunday by Philip Boyce, Bishop of Raphoe in St. Eunan's Cathedral. A dinner dance was held in the Mount Errigal Hotel later that evening.
On Sunday 8 April 2007, golfer Paul McGinley launched the College Centenary Golf Classic. It was the final event in the centenary year celebrations and was played at Letterkenny Golf Club.

Proposed extension

In recent years there has been an attempt to build a new extension.
In meeting with planning regulations, the school has installed a series of ramps and two chair-lifts for the benefit of those attending or visiting the school who may need them. Three prefabs were installed in the Summer of 2008 as well as four more Prefabs that were installed in the Summer of 2010 to cater for the growing number of incoming first-years.

Allegations of child abuse

In his autobiography, which was released in 2010, internationally renowned chef Conrad Gallagher told of the abuse he received at the college. He discussed how the Christian Brothers would feel him up and attempt to interfere with him. However he has decided not to press charges against the abusers. He expressed his wish to put it all behind him.

List of Presidents

Foreign exchange

The college has taken part in a number of foreign exchange programmes involving schools in France and Austria. Every year a selection of teachers and students head for the European ski-slopes during the holidays. The aborted flight was covered by the media.

Academic

In common with the vast majority of secondary schools in the Republic of Ireland, St Eunan's currently provides the qualifications of the Junior Certificate and the Leaving Certificate. It also provides the facilities for Transition Year which includes two work experience allotments and a choice between Computer or Sport GCSEs. The college is one of only 18 schools in the county that offers the LCA programme.Schools in Donegal providing the LCA, Leaving Certificate Applied website
At Junior Certificate level, the school offers art, woodwork and technical drawing. The college currently offers two foreign languages, French and German, at Junior Certificate and Leaving Certificate levels, but Irish is also compulsory, subject to some exemptions, as in all other secondary schools in Ireland. Spanish is offered during Transition Year along with French and German.
Transition Year modules (taken on a Friday afternoon) include first-aid, cooking, car maintenance, tourism and electronics. Yoga and juggling were introduced in 2007. Towards the end of the year, more diverse modules are offered such as tennis, karate, and drama (at An Grianán Theatre).
Junior and Leaving Certificate students usually undertake pre-test exams every February or March or April whilst the real exams follow swiftly in June.

Gaelic football

Physical education and team activities are important to the school, with a prolific record and several national titles in Gaelic football. Among the more important teachers to be found in the College are All-Ireland winning footballer Colm McFadden, Glenswilly manager Gary McDaid,

MacLarnon Cup

The senior Gaelic football team has in the past eight years won the MacLarnon Cup twice, the latest occasion being 2007. On Sunday 25 March 2007, the College, beat Rathmore by 1-09 to 2-03 at Casement Park in Belfast, having travelled there six days earlier only for the match to be postponed. The senior team then went on to beat Rice College of Westport in the All-Ireland B Colleges semi-final but were beaten themselves by St. Mary's of Edenderry in the All-Ireland Final at Breffni Park, County Cavan on Saturday 21 April 2007. The match went to extra time after a penalty save by Saint Eunan's goalkeeper John Carr, but the College eventually lost by 2-12 to 0-14. The team reached the semi-final of the MacRory Cup in 2008, only to be defeated by St. Michael's College of Enniskillen 1-17 to 0-7 on 22 February 2008.
Saint Eunan's College, with future inter-county footballers Rory Kavanagh and Colm McFadden part of the team, (indeed McFadden himself was to become a future teacher at the school) also won the MacLarnon Cup in 2000 for the first time since 1979,MacLarnon Cup, Saint Eunan's College Website as well as the Ulster Herald Cup in 2004.

MacRory Cup

Saint Eunan's College also has a history in the MacRory Cup, going back to finals in the 1950s and 1960s. The College made it as far as the semi-final as recently as 2008.

All Stars

Three students have achieved Ulster All Stars while playing for the college, Mark McGowan,Mark McGowan, Saint Eunan's College Website Hugh Brendan Kerr and Sean McEwen.Gaelic Football, Saint Eunan's College Website

Other sports

The college has several national titles in soccer. It is now also the number one athletics and basketball school in the county, with many county titles in various age groups. GolfGolf Pages, Saint Eunan's College Website and swimmingSwimming, Saint Eunan's College Website are also popular. Even hurling teams, a sport which is not seen as very popular in Donegal, have reached the semi-finals of some competitions.

Extra-curricular activities

The college offers chess to its students every Wednesday after school hours.
The college's musical tradition can be seen every year in the annual Saint Eunan's College Rock Concert - held every May since 2002 in the local An Grianán Theatre.Musical/Concerts, Saint Eunan's College Website
The college library is open to students during lunch hours on certain days of the week.
The college has long sent debating teams to competitions across Ireland while maths and science students have taken part in national and international competitions.

Distinguished guests

Selected past pupils



Footnotes




