[[Addie Joss]]

CATEGORIES: 1880 births, 1911 deaths, American League ERA champions, American League wins champions, Baseball players from Wisconsin, Cleveland Bronchos players, Cleveland Naps players, Deaths from meningitis, Major League Baseball pitchers, Major League Baseball pitchers who have pitched a perfect game, National Baseball Hall of Fame inductees, People from Beaver Dam, Wisconsin, People from Dodge County, Wisconsin, Toledo Mud Hens players, Toledo Swamp Angels players, Wisconsin Badgers baseball players, Sportspeople from the Milwaukee metropolitan area

Adrian "Addie" Joss (April 12, 1880 – April 14, 1911), nicknamed "The Human Hairpin,"Hall of Fame Pitchers at America's Library/The Library of Congress was an American pitcher in Major League Baseball (MLB). He pitched for the Cleveland Bronchos, later known as the Naps, between 1902 and 1910. Joss, who was , pitched the fourth perfect game in baseball history. His 1.89 career earned run average (ERA) is the second-lowest in MLB history.
Joss was born and raised in Wisconsin, where he attended St. Mary's College and the University of Wisconsin. He played baseball at St. Mary's and then played in a semipro league where he caught the attention of Connie Mack. Joss did not sign with Mack's team, but he attracted further major league interest after winning 19 games in 1900 for the Toledo Mud Hens. Joss had another strong season for Toledo in 1901. 
After an offseason contract dispute between Joss, Toledo and Cleveland, he debuted with the Cleveland club in April 1902. Joss led the league in shutouts that year. By 1905, Joss had completed the first of his four consecutive 20-win seasons. Off the field, Joss worked as a newspaper sportswriter from 1906 until his death. In 1908, he pitched a perfect game during a tight pennant race that saw Cleveland finish a half-game out of first place; it was the closest that Joss came to a World Series berth. The 1910 season was his last, and Joss missed most of the year due to injury. 
In April 1911, Joss became ill and he died the same month due to tuberculous meningitis. He finished his career with 160 wins, 234 complete games, 45 shutouts and 920 strikeouts. Though Joss played only nine seasons and missed significant playing time due to various ailments, the National Baseball Hall of Fame's Board of Directors passed a special resolution for Joss in 1977 which waived the typical ten-year minimum playing career for Hall of Fame eligibility. He was voted into the Hall of Fame by the Veterans Committee in 1978.

Early life

Addie Joss was born in Woodland, Dodge County, Wisconsin.
Connie Mack also sent a scout to watch Joss and later offered the young pitcher a job playing on his Albany club in the Western League, which Joss declined. He started the Mud Hens' season opener on April 28 and earned the win in the team's 16–8 victory. He won 19 games for the club in 1900.

Contract dispute

Midway through the 1901 season, the Boston Americans of the upstart American League offered $1,500 ($
After the season ended, Joss returned to Wisconsin where he led Racine to the 1901 Wisconsin baseball state championship against Rube Waddell's Kenosha squad. He also enrolled at Beloit College and played American football.) advance in February 1902.
In March 1902, Joss signed with Cleveland. Toledo sportswriters took exception to Joss, one writing that "he voluntarily signed a contract Toledo for this season but when Bill Armour of Cleveland showed him the $500 bill he forgot his pledge and sneaked off like a whipped cur."

Major league career

Cleveland Bronchos/Naps (1902–1907)

Joss made his major league debut with the Cleveland Bronchos (also known as the Bluebirds) against the St. Louis Browns. The Browns' Jesse Burkett hit a shallow pop fly in the direction of right fielder Zaza Harvey. Home plate umpire Bob Caruthers ruled that Harvey did not make a clean catch, so Burkett was credited with a hit. Joss finished his major league debut with a one-hitter.
Joss compiled a 17–13 record and 2.77 ERA during his major league rookie season. He led the American League with five shutouts.
On October 11, 1902, Joss married Lillian Shinivar in Monroe, Michigan. Shinivar was in attendance when Joss made his professional debut with the Mud Hens in 1900. The couple had a son, Norman, and a daughter, Ruth. season, the Cleveland organization changed the team's name to the "Naps" in honor of shortstop Nap Lajoie. In Joss' second year, he went 18–13 and lowered his ERA from the season before to 2.19. His walks plus hits per inning pitched (WHIP) was a MLB-low 0.948. 
For the 

1908 season and perfect game

Before the 1908 season started, the Naps' home field, League Park, was expanded by about 4,000 seats. The Detroit Tigers, Chicago White Sox, and Naps were engaged in a race for the post-season described as "one of the closest and most exciting known."
For the season, Joss averaged 0.83 walks per nine innings, becoming one of 29 pitchers in MLB history to average less than one walk per nine innings. It was the closest Joss ever got to a World Series appearance.

Final years with Naps (1909–1910)

After amassing four consecutive 20-win seasons, he struggled in 1909 as a result of fatigue; by September he was shut down for the season. Joss finished the year with a 14–13 record in 
He pitched a second no-hitter on April 20, 1910 against the White Sox, becoming the only pitcher in MLB history to no-hit the same team twice.

Career marks

Of his 160 major league wins, 45 were shutouts. Joss' 1.89 career ERA is ranked second all-time (to Ed Walsh), while his 0.97 WHIP is the lowest career WHIP in MLB history. He finished with a 160–97 record, 234 complete games, and 920 strikeouts.
Joss's repertoire included a fastball, a "slow ball" (today known as a changeup), and an "extremely effective" curve. Shortstop Roger Peckinpaugh described his windup: "He would turn his back toward the batter as he wound up, hiding the ball all the while, and then whip around and fire it in."Honig, Donald (1977). The Man in the Dugout. Chicago: Follett Publishing Company.
Illness and injury accompanied Joss throughout much of his professional career. In 1903, a high fever forced him to miss the last month of the season. He contracted malaria in April 1904 and then missed several starts with a back injury in 1905.

Journalism and engineering interests

Joss was concerned about supporting his family after his baseball career ended; many players of the day had little education and few marketable job skills beyond their abilities on the diamond. As sportswriter Franklin Lewis wrote, "Only a handful of players in the rough, stirring, early days of the major leagues arrived from campuses. And when they did, sometimes the shock was too great for them. Some grizzled holdovers from the 1890's were around and they bore down heavily on the eardrums of the so-called college-boy set."
He later also wrote for the Cleveland Press and covered the World Series for the News-Bee and Press from 1907–1909. The Press introduced Joss in columns this way: "Of all the baseball players in the land, Addie Joss is far and away the best qualified for this work. A scholarly man, an entertaining writer, an impartial observer of the game." Biographer Scott Longert wrote that "the writer was becoming as well-known as the ballplayer." An editorial in the Toledo Blade said, "In taking his vocation seriously, Joss was, in return, taken seriously by the people, who recognized in him a man of more than usual intelligence and one who would have adorned any profession in which he had elected to engage."
During the 1908–1909 offseasons, Joss worked on designing an electric scoreboard that would later be known as the Joss Indicator. The Naps decided to install the scoreboard, which allowed spectators to monitor balls and strikes at League Park.

Death and benefit game

Joss attended spring training with Cleveland before the start of the  The disease had spread to Joss' brain and he died on April 14, 1911 at age 31.
Joss was well-liked by his peers and baseball fans. Upon hearing of his death, the Press wrote "every train brings flowers" and "floral tributes by the wagonload are hourly arriving at the Joss home from all sections of the country."
The first "all-star" game was played as a benefit for Joss's family on July 24, 1911.

Recognition

Boston Globe sports editor Jason Nason campaigned for Joss' induction into the Hall of Fame starting in the 1950's.
In 1981, Lawrence Ritter and Donald Honig included him in their book The 100 Greatest Baseball Players of All Time. They described what they called "the Smoky Joe Wood Syndrome," where a player of truly exceptional talent has a career curtailed by injury or illness. They argued that such a player should still be included among the greatest all-time players, in spite of career statistics that would not quantitatively rank him with the all-time greats. They believed that Joss' career ERA was proof enough of his greatness to be included. Baseball author John Tierney wrote: "Joss is remembered for a remarkably low career ERA, but it should be noted that he pitched in a time before earned runs were compiled as an official statistic, and his career ended in 1910, before the American League introduced its new baseball in 1911, leading to a nearly 25 percent increase in runs scored."
Joss was inducted into the Cleveland Indians Hall of Fame on July 29, 2006. He was inducted in the same class as Ray Chapman, Rocky Colavito, Al Lopez, Sam McDowell, Al Rosen and Herb Score.

Footnotes








