[[Martin Balsam]]

CATEGORIES: 1919 births, 1996 deaths, Actors Studio members, American male film actors, American military personnel of World War II, American male stage actors, American male television actors, Best Supporting Actor Academy Award winners, Deaths from myocardial infarction, DeWitt Clinton High School alumni, Jewish American male actors, Male actors from New York City, Tony Award winners, Cardiovascular disease deaths in Italy, American Jews in the military, United States Army Air Forces soldiers, 20th-century American male actors, Burials in New Jersey, People from the Bronx, The New School alumni

Martin Henry Balsam (November 4, 1919 – February 13, 1996) was an American actor.  He is known for his Oscar-winning role as Arnold Burns in A Thousand Clowns and his role as private investigator Milton Arbogast in Psycho.

Early life

Martin Balsam was born in Bronx borough of New York City to Jewish parents, Lillian (née Weinstein) and Albert Balsam, who was a manufacturer of ladies sportswear. He studied at the Dramatic Workshop of The New School in New York with the influential German director Erwin Piscator and then served in the United States Army Air Forces during World War II.

Career

Martin Balsam made his professional debut in August 1941 in a production of The Play's the Thing in Locust Valley. Balsam would go on to perform in several episodes of the Studio's dramatic television anthology series, broadcast between September 1948 and 1950. He appeared in many other television drama series, including Decoy with Beverly Garland, The Twilight Zone (episodes "The Sixteen Millimeter Shrine" and "The New Exhibit"), as a psychologist in the pilot episode, Five Fingers, Target: The Corruptors!, The Eleventh Hour, Breaking Point, Alfred Hitchcock Presents, The Fugitive, and Mr. Broadway, as a retired U.N.C.L.E. agent in The Man from U.N.C.L.E. episode, "The Odd Man Affair", and guest starred in the two-part Murder, She Wrote episode, "Death Stalks the Big Top". He also appeared in the "Route 66" episode, "Somehow it Gets to be Tomorrow".
Balsam appeared in such films as On the Waterfront, 12 Angry Men (as Juror #1), Time Limit, Breakfast at Tiffany's, The Carpetbaggers, Seven Days in May, The Anderson Tapes, Hombre, Catch-22, Tora! Tora! Tora! (as Admiral Husband E. Kimmel), Little Big Man, The Taking of Pelham One Two Three, All the President's Men, Murder on the Orient Express,The Delta Force, and The Goodbye People.
In 1960, he appeared in one of his most famous roles as Detective Arbogast in the Alfred Hitchcock classic Psycho.
Along with Gregory Peck and Robert Mitchum, Martin Balsam appeared in both the original Cape Fear (1962), and the 1991 Martin Scorsese remake.
In 1965, he won an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his role as Arnold Burns in A Thousand Clowns. In 1968, he won a Tony Award for his appearance in the 1967 Broadway production of You Know I Can't Hear You When the Water's Running.
Balsam played Washington Post editor Howard Simons in the 1976 blockbuster All the President's Men. In 1973, he played Dr. Rudy Wells when the Martin Caidin novel Cyborg was adapted as the TV-movie, The Six Million Dollar Man, though he did not reprise the role for the subsequent weekly series. He appeared as a spokesman/hostage in the 1976 TV movie Raid on Entebbe and as a detective in the 1977 TV movie Contract on Cherry Street.  He also appeared on an episode of Quincy ME.  Balsam starred as Murray Klein on the All in the Family spin-off Archie Bunker's Place for two seasons (1979–1981).  He even filled in for Charles Nelson Reilly on Match Game for one question when Reilly was late for a taping.

Filmography

Personal life

In 1951, Balsam married his first wife, actress Pearl Somner. They divorced three years later. His second wife was actress Joyce Van Patten. This marriage lasted for four years (from 1958 until 1962) and had one daughter, Talia Balsam. He married his third wife, Irene Miller, in 1963.  They divorced in 1987 and had two children, Adam and Zoe Balsam.

Death

On February 13, 1996, Balsam died of a sudden stroke in his hotel room in Rome, Italy, while on vacation. He was 76. Balsam is interred at Cedar Park Cemetery, in Emerson, New Jersey. He was survived by his three children and Renee Landau, his companion.

Awards

National Board of Review –
Academy Awards –
Tony Awards –
Golden Globe Awards –
BAFTA Awards –
Primetime Emmy Awards –






