[[Vice (magazine)]]

CATEGORIES: Cultural magazines, Monthly magazines, Atlantic Records, Magazines established in 1994, Magazines published in New York, American lifestyle magazines, VICE Media

Vice is an international magazine focused on arts, culture, and news topics. Founded in 1994 in Montreal, Quebec, Canada, in later years the company expanded into Vice Media, with divisions including the magazine, a website, a film production company, a record label, and a publishing imprint. As of March 2013, the magazine's editor-in-chief is Rocco Castoro and its global editor is documentary filmmaker Andy Capper.
The magazine's editors have championed the "Immersionist" school of journalism, regarded as a DIY antithesis to the methods practiced by mainstream news outlets, and the monthly publication is frequently focused on a single theme.

History

Established by Suroosh Alvi, Shane Smith, and Gavin McInnes, the magazine was launched in 1994 as the Voice of Montreal with government funding, and the intention of the founders was to provide work and a community service.
When the editors later sought to dissolve their commitments with the original publisher Alix Laurent, they bought him out and changed the name to Vice in 1996. In search of more streetwear advertising income, the magazine's personnel relocated to New York City in 1999. Andy Capper co-founded the UK division of Vice with Andrew Creighton.
Numerous media sources reported in mid-August 2013 that Rupert Murdoch's corporation 21st Century Fox had invested US$70 million in Vice Media, resulting in a 5 percent stake. Following the announcement, Smith explained, "We have set ourselves up to build a global platform but we have maintained control."

Core staff

Content

Scope

VICE includes the work of journalists, columnists, fiction writers, graphic artists and cartoonists, and photographers. Vice's content has shifted from dealing mostly with independent arts and pop cultural matters to covering more serious news topics. The magazine's editors have championed the "Immersionist" school of journalism, regarded as something of a DIY antithesis to the methods practiced by mainstream news outlets, and has published an entire issue of articles that were written in accordance with the ethos. Entire issues of the magazine have also been dedicated to the concerns of Iraqi people, Native Americans, Russian people, people with mental disorders, and people with mental disabilities. Vice also publishes an annual guide for students in the United Kingdom.
In 2007, a Vice announcement was published on the Internet: "After umpteen years of putting out what amounted to a reference book every month, we started to get bored with it. Besides, too many other magazines have ripped it and started doing their own lame take on themes. So we're going to do some issues, starting now, that have whatever we feel like putting in them."

Politics

In a March 2008 interview with The Guardian, Smith was asked about the magazine's political allegiances and he stated, "We're not trying to say anything politically in a paradigmatic left/right way ... We don't do that because we don't believe in either side. Are my politics Democrat or Republican? I think both are horrific. And it doesn't matter anyway. Money runs America; money runs everywhere."
Founder Smith has stated: "I grew up being a socialist and I have problems with it because I grew up in Canada and I've spent a lot of time in Scandinavia, where I believe countries legislate out creativity. They cut off the tall trees. Everyone's a C-minus. I came to America from Canada because Canada is stultifyingly boring and incredibly hypocritical. Thanks, Canada."

Website

VICE originally founded their website as Viceland.com was already owned. In 2007, they started VBS. In 2011, both Viceland.tv were combined into VICE.
The website has expanded and diversified to include a network of online video channels, including TheCreatorsProject.tv and Fightland.com and Thu.mp.

Vice News

Vice news is a global news channel where Vice broadcasts documentaries about the world's most important, current topics. It was created by Vice in December 2013.

VICE Books

The magazine has published the collections The DOs and DON'Ts Book and The Vice Guide to Sex and Drugs and Rock and Roll. In 2008, the photograph compilation The Vice Photo Book was released and featured published works from previous editions of the magazine. March/April 2008

VICE Music

VICE Records or VICE Music, founded in 2002, has released albums and singles by the following artists through various major label distributors:

VICE Film, VBS.tv,

Vice releases documentaries and television shows through Vice Films, many of which have won awards or been aired on major channels such as HBO. The channel and website VBS. In March 2007, the VBS. The videos and documentaries, such as the Vice Guide to Travel (2006), are accessible on the Internet-based Vice channel.
According to Vice co-founder Suroosh Alvi, "traditional journalism always aspires to objectivity, and since day one with the magazine we never believed in that... I don't think you see that on CNN." Vice Films released the feature length rockumentary Heavy Metal in Baghdad in 2008, which follows the thrash metal band Acrassicauda in Iraq. The New York Times praised the production and reporting, calling it a "splendid feat of D.I.Y. reportage..."
Vice Films had its first theatrical release White Lightnin' in 2009, and a documentary on professional bull riders, entitled The Ride, in 2010.
Swansea was featured in a television documentary "Swansea Love Story" as part of the Rule Britannia series on VBS.tv. The episode covers a heroin epidemic in the UK.CNN: Swansea Love Story by Andy Capper
Reincarnated, a documentary film on Snoop Dogg's transformation into reggae artist and Rastafarian Snoop Lion, was released in 2013.
Vice, a news series featuring founder Smith, debuted on HBO on April 5, 2013. Lil Bub & Friendz, a feature documentary about meme cats such as Grumpy Cat, premiered at the Tribeca Film Festival on April 18, 2013 and won the Tribeca Online Festival Best Feature Film.

Vice (MTV series)

The MTV series The Vice Guide to Everything premiered in December 2010 and features Vice films, as well as new material.

Vice (HBO series)

In 2013, HBO aired the first 10-episode season of a Vice TV series.  A second season is currently airing on HBO.

Acquisitions

Carrot Creative

VICE acquired the Brooklyn-based digital agency, Carrot Creative in December 2013.

Old Blue Last pub

VICE runs a pub and music venue in Shoreditch, east London named The Old Blue Last, in which a live music program entitled "Live at the Old Blue Last" is filmed. After VICE bought the Old Blue Last in 2004 it underwent a series of improvements, with most taking place in 2010. Bands who have played at the venue include Arctic Monkeys, Amy Winehouse, Chromeo, Black Lips, and Florence + the Machine.

i-D magazine''

VICE integrated with the British fashion magazine i-D in December 2012, with VICE CEO Andrew Creighton calling it "one of the only fashion publications in the world we actually respect."








