[[OpenTV]]

CATEGORIES: Digital television, Interactive television, Companies established in 1994

OpenTV is a global software technology company for interactive and digital television. OpenTV was founded in 1994 through the merge of Thomson Multimedia and Sun Microsystems. Its primary business involves the sale of set-top-box operating systems and software as well as advanced advertising products.
On March 28, 2010 OpenTV became a fully owned subsidiary of the NAGRA Kudelski Group - Nagravision - and was officially delisted from the NASDAQ, where it was previously listed under the symbol OPTV."Kudeslski Group Completes Acquisition of OpenTV" March 29, 2010 - Cheseaux, Switzerland The name NAGRA is often used for the content protection and encryption systems solution commonly used by digital television operators globaly.
Today, OpenTV refers to a product line within the Nagra Digital Television Products & Services offering.Nagra Digital Television

OpenTV 2 Middleware - Broadcast & Digital Television Platform

OpenTV's flagship product is OpenTV 2 (formerly known as OpenTV Core), a widely deployed digital television middleware. OpenTV 2.x software technology contains a hardware abstraction layer to enable hardware independence, TV libraries, a broadcast stack (DVB-T/DVB-C/DVB-S, ISDB, ATSC...), a selection of application execution environments, and Personal Video Recorders (PVRs) to create a digital television environment for set-top box.
Nagra offers OpenTV 2 middleware bundled with the award winning nX2 guide and user interface with their Quickstart solution.Nx2 QuickStart Solution - An Advanced UI, Easy to Adapt, Simple to use
OpenTV 2 middleware has shipped more than 160 million set-top boxes worldwide. It passed the 100 million mark in February 2007. "OpenTV found in 100 million enabled devices" BroadBandTVNews. February 20, 2008 The OpenTV 2 middleware was deployed at BSkyB (UK), Sky Italia (Italy), Digital+ (Spain), Télévision Par Satellite TPS (France), Numericable (France), EchoStar (USA), Bell ExpressVu (Canada), Foxtel (Australia), Austar (Australia), Sky New Zealand (New Zealand), Showtime (Saudi Arabia), Evision (Dubai), Cablecom (Switzerland), Euskaltel (Spain), Auna (Spain), StarHub (Singapore), TrueVisions (Thailand), Viasat (Nordic), HOT (Israël), Net Serviços de Comunicação (Brazil), Zee Dish TV of Essel Group (India), TV Cabo (Portugal), Cabovisão (Portugal), Digiturk (Turkey), Etisalat (UAE), NTV-Plus (Russia), Liberty Global UPC Broadband (Europe), Nova (Greece), DStv (South Africa), among many other pay-TV operation globally
OpenTV 2 was ported on more than 40 different types of television set-top boxes such as the one from Pace, ADB, Amstrad, Daewoo, EchoStar, Grundig, Humax, Hyundai, Matsushita, Motorola, Nokia, Philips, Sagemcom, Samsung, Cisco/Scientific Atlanta, Sony, Toshiba and Thomson (now Technicolor).

OpenTV Virtual Machine Execution Environment

OpenTV applications are written in C, using the compiler, gcco, which outputs o-code, which is then run on many set-top boxes. The OpenTV API wraps all the hardware functions, including data transmission (one-way satellite broadcasts, full bi-directional links such as a modem or hard-wired serial port and high-speed broadband networks).
The OpenTV 2 SDK is available on the NAGRA OpenTV Application Community web site.

OpenTV 4 Middleware - Internet Streaming Platform

OpenTV 4 client middleware leverages the Linux OS capabilities."EchoStar Europe Integrates OpenTV's Linux Client Solution from Nagravision" September 11, 2010 - EchoStar It supports HTTP Live Streaming (also known as HLS) adaptive streaming with NAGRA PRM for secure over-the-top delivery of both live and On Demand content. The software was deployed at Jazztel in Spain in Q4 2011.

OpenTV 5 Connectware - Media Convergence Platform

OpenTV 5 is a next generation television and media convergence platform.nagra.g. Set-top box, Residential gateway, Television), within the home-cloud, as well as bridge broadcast environment with IP based internet services NAGRA :: OpenTV 5: Bringing multi-service TV to Life It is built on the Linux kernel operating system and internet technologies, such as HTML5 and SVG, combined with core digital television components. The product is designed for portability, modularity, and security. It includes a broadcast and service information (SI) stack (DVB-T/DVB-C/DVB-S, ISDB) with an advanced digital video recorder (DVR) and home networking module (Digital Living Network Alliance - DLNA) for sharing media content across the home, while enabling Internet video with adaptive bitrate streaming capabilities (Progressive download, HTTP Live Streaming, Microsoft Smooth Streaming). The solution also supports on demand (Video on demand) and IPTV.
The middleware components are implemented as Linux services, each in a separate process. It uses standard Linux for inter-process communication (via D-Bus), which insulates services and facilitates adding third party modules. This enables television service operators to quickly deploy applications using industry standard tools and programming languages without any fear that new applications will interfere with their core TV services or network infrastructure. OpenTV 5's porting interface abstracts the driver interface, and reduces the complexity of driver development.
In addition to the SVG / HTML environment and TV centric API (CCOM), OpenTV 5 provides a JavaScript application framework (JSFW) for rapid UI and business logic development. OpenTV 5 is performance optimized for embedded television systems and can scale from a thin TV set-top-box devices up to a residential gateway solution.NAGRA :: HomEdge Gateways & Devices
STMicroelectronics was the first to announce availability of OpenTV 5 drivers for the STi7105 and STi7108, Orly, Cannes, Liege and ST's latest-generation powerful broadband system-on-chip IC. Broadcom has also developed and deployed OpenTV 5 solutions on a wide range of their SoC families (e.g. on BCM7356, 7231, 7425, 7430, 7435, 7445, 7251/7252, 7383/7384…). OpenTV 5 drivers are available to hardware manufacturers through the SoC vendor.
OpenTV 5 has won numerous awards including the prestigious "Best Middleware & CPE" at the Connected World TV Awards at the recent IBC conference in Amsterdam.   
OpenTV 5 has launched in various regions including Latin America where its been deployed on the Telefonica network along with other award winning NAGRA Pay-TV service solutions. 

Gravity Guides

Nagra also offers their Gravity Guides product portfolio in conjunction with OpenTV 5. Gravity guide and navigation is video centric, uses minimal design, and is based on menu structure with consistent navigation. The key paradigms are the centered focus, hover focus, control list scrolling and the depth gauge.
Gravity Ultra is an optimized Ultra high definition television (4K) media user interface leveraging HTML5 and OpenGL. The Product is build on top of the OpenTV 5 platform and offers new navigation schemes to content discovery and consumption.NAGRA :: The User Interface: A Game-Changer for Pay-TV Service Providers
During the latest IBC conference Gravity Ultra was presented for public viewing. Key features include new ways of discovering content, the possibility of eliminating traditional grid EPGs and a new integration of social features 

OpenTV Advertising

OpenTV supports interactive advertising and advanced advertising. OpenTV purchased CAM Systems in 2005, an advertising, traffic, and billing package for a US cable. The EclipsePlus product provides system for allocation, scheduling, traffic, verification, and billing of television advertising. The solution is deployed at Comcast Spotlight, Time Warner Cable, New York Interconnect / Cablevision, Bright House Networks, Suddenlink Communications, Charter, Midcontinent, UPC Broadband among other operations.
OpenTV Advertising pioneered addressable advertising with local ad insertion, ad targeting at the head-end as well as ad insertion from the set-top box. The product line also offers on-demand advertising, ad telescoping using VOD and PVR, enhanced TV for consumer call-to-action and audience measurement.
In October 2011, NAGRA acquired Sigma Systems' SCTE-130 Subscriber Information Service platform (SIS) business for response management and audience qualification as to deliver customized messages to the audience."Nagra and Sigma partnered on advanced advertising" October 3, 2011 - Cheseaux, Switzerland, and Toronto, Canada
The EclipsePlus line of campaign management solutions schedule more than 100 million spots per month, and manage some $2.5 billion of annual advertising revenue (March 2012)."NAGRA-OpenTV and Time Warner Cable Media Extend Advanced Advertising Partnership" March 5, 2012 - Cheseaux, Switzerland








