[[Surfin' U.S.A.]]

CATEGORIES: 1963 albums, Albums produced by Nick Venet, The Beach Boys albums, Capitol Records albums, English-language albums

Surfin' U.S.A. is the second album released by American rock band the Beach Boys. The majority of the album's recording commenced in the first week of 1963, three months after the release of Surfin' Safari. Like the group's debut album, production was credited to Capitol's representative for Artists and Repertoire, Nick Venet.
Surfin' U.S.A. reached number two in the US, lasting 78 weeks on the albums chart.  It reached number 17 in the UK in late 1965.

Impact, details and featured instrumentals

Surfin' U.S.A. is notable for giving The Beach Boys their first widespread success with its title track, and for Brian Wilson's increasing prowess in songwriting, as well as vocal arrangement.  The fuller-sounding vocals were achieved using double tracking, creating The Beach Boys' own unique sound.  As with Surfin' Safari, some have speculated that Surfin' U.S.A. was not produced by Nick Venet, the officially-listed producer, but by Brian Wilson. The title track, "Surfin' U.S.A.", was speculated to be plagiarized from Chuck Berry's "Sweet Little Sixteen" though both chords and melodies did differ between the two songs. A lawsuit years later officially granted Berry writing credit and royalties from the record.
What is also interesting about this particular album is that five of its twelve tracks are surf instrumentals, "Stoked" being Brian Wilson's first of many instrumental songs he composed over the years for The Beach Boys.  In addition, "Surf Jam" marks the first time Carl Wilson, aged 16 at the time, received a songwriting credit.

Notable vocal tracks

While the title track of the album was the center of attention (with its B-side "Shut Down" receiving some notice in the process), there were other highlights to be found.  "Farmer's Daughter", the first of many Brian Wilson falsetto lead vocals, was affecting enough that Fleetwood Mac covered it live in 1980. "Lonely Sea" is a melancholic ballad Wilson wrote with Gary Usher. It was first recorded on the 19th of April 1962 at Western Studios and was included on the demo track that resulted in the band getting signed to Capitol Records. That recorded performance appears on Surfin' U.S.A. accompanied with overdubbed harmonies added during the recording of the rest of Surfin' U.S.A. "Lana" and "Finders Keepers" (with its Four Seasons-esque hook) are also acclaimed tracks from Surfin' U.S.A.
The title track became the Beach Boys' first big hit in the US and took its parent album into gold record status and the Top 10, peaking at number 2.  In 1965, upon re-release in the UK, Surfin' U.S.A. would reach number 17.

Live Performances

Half the album has been performed live by the Band. However only Surfin' U.S.A. and Shut Down have become concert regulars. Surfin' U.S.A. has often been played during the encore of Beach Boys shows, while Shut Down has become a regular in the "Car Medley"
The other 4 songs played (Farmer's Daughter, Honky Tonk, Lana and Let's Go Trippin') were only played once or twice following the release of the album however not since. Stoked has been played by original guitarist David Marks on several tours.
The band recorded live versions of "Surfin' U.S.A." on several Beach Boys albums. It was first released on The Beach Boys in Concert album. A concert from Anaheim Stadium on July 3, 1976 which featured the song was filmed and produced by Lorne Michaels for a Beach Boys television special which first aired in the United States in August, 1976. The TV special was later released on video and DVD as Good Vibrations Tour. In 1980, a live rendition was recorded, though not released until 2002 on the Good Timin': Live at Knebworth England 1980 live album. Footage from the concert was also released on video and DVD format. A live version was also released on the band's 1993 box set Good Vibrations: Thirty Years of The Beach Boys and well as on Live – The 50th Anniversary Tour, on which both Shut Down and Surfin' U.S.A appear.

Front cover artwork

The photograph that adorns the front sleeve was taken by artist/photographer/surfer John Severson during January 1960, showing California-based waverider Leslie Williams riding the winter swell at Sunset Beach (Oahu) in Hawaii. Intended for the front cover of Severson's Surfer magazine, the original negative was damaged during the color separation process and couldn't appear in print.  When Capitol Records requested a suitable photograph for the new Beach Boys album Severson fixed the damaged image and sold it to them.

Track listing

Sales chart positions

Personnel

The Beach Boys



Sources


