[[Construction Time Again]]

CATEGORIES: Depeche Mode albums, 1983 albums, Mute Records albums, Albums produced by Daniel Miller

Construction Time Again is the third studio album by the British electronic group Depeche Mode, released in 1983 and supported by Construction Time Again Tour. This was the first Depeche Mode album with Alan Wilder, who composed the songs "Two Minute Warning" and "The Landscape Is Changing" (as well as the B-side "Fools"). The title comes from the second line of the first verse of "Pipeline".
The album was recorded at John Foxx's Garden Studios in London, engineered by Gareth Jones (who had also engineered Foxx's seminal electronic album, Metamatic). It was mixed in the Hansa Tonstudio in Berlin.
The album's cover artwork features the Matterhorn mountain.

Background and themes

In January 1983, shortly before the release of the "Get the Balance Right!" single, songwriter Martin Gore attended an Einstürzende Neubauten concert, giving him the idea to experiment with the sounds of industrial music in the context of pop. This experimentation hinged on the band's first use of a Synclavier, a synthesizer that not only contained a large number of pre-programmed sounds, but also allowed for samples to be imported.  With this, the band proceeded to travel around the neighbourhood where they could tape "found" sounds and feed them into the Synclavier, then manipulate the noises to fit into their songs.  These sounds consisted mainly of hammering anvils, clanging pipes, running water, and the like. The song "Pipeline" was entirely recorded in a derelict Shoreditch building site where the band sampled various of these random objects. Martin Gore's vocal takes for the song even include an accidentally recorded passing train which made it onto the final version.
That spring, the band converged in London to begin recording their third album, Construction Time Again, and changed recording studios as well.  For the previous two albums, the band had recorded at Blackwing Studios, but would switch to John Foxx's "The Garden" studio.  This change, along with the addition of Gareth Jones to the production team facilitated the band's transition from the hook-driven pop songs of their past (a transition that had begun to take shape in 1982 with the more noticeably melancholy "Leave in Silence").  The band continued perfecting their industrial formula over their next two albums, 1984's Some Great Reward and 1986's Black Celebration.
This album introduced a transition in lyrical content for the group.  Construction Time Again would include a bevy of political themes, sparked by the poverty Gore had seen on a recent trip he had taken to Thailand. These themes were in stark contrast from the love-themed pop numbers of the band's early career.

Critical reception

NME hailed the album, saying that "Everything Counts" "is Mode's best ever single, and undeniably one of their biggest hits. ... It sold because it combines edgy and poignant melodies held in thrilling tension; a tough, urgent dancebeat; and a gleamingly modern sound with an element of quirkiness to mark it out in the crowd. And the same goes for every other track on the album." Reviewer Matt Snow qualified Alan Wilder's composition "Two Minute Warning", as "a haunting melody whose transition from verse to chorus explodes in one of those breathtakingly uplifting moments."  He concluded with this sentence: "Depeche Mode have made a bold and lovely pop record. Simple as that."

Rerelease

In 2007, Construction Time Again was re-released with a bonus DVD. The first CD was remastered and (except in the USA) was released on a CD/SACD hybrid. The bonus DVD includes B-sides in addition to the single and B-side for "Get the Balance Right", a one-off single recorded prior to the album. The album is released as originally intended and does not include the bonus extended mix of "Everything Counts" (as it was released in the USA, Canada, Japan & Brazil in 1983), but does keep the reprise.
The DVD includes a documentary on the album. The double-documentary discusses both "Get the Balance Right" and Construction Time Again, its two singles, the making of the cover, the lyrics, and the sampling technology used during the album's production. It also discusses Alan Wilder and Gareth Jones, a new member and a new engineer (respectively) and their impact on the band's sound. It also includes footage of the Construction Time Again tour from 1983, as well as excerpts from the music video for "Get the Balance Right".
The remastered album was released on "deluxe" vinyl in April 2007 in Europe only.

Track listing

1983 release

=LP: Mute / Stumm 13 (United Kingdom)=

=CD: Sire / 9 23900-2 (United States)=

2007 re-release

=CD: Mute / DM CD 3 (CD/SACD + DVD)=

Bonus Tracks (in PCM Stereo):
Additional Material:

Credits

Charts and certifications

Charts

Certifications






