[[Military satellite]]

CATEGORIES: Military satellites, Military equipment, Satellites by type

A military satellite is an artificial satellite used for a military purpose. The most common missions are intelligence gathering, navigation and military communications. Some attempts were made to develop satellite based weapons but this work was halted in 1967 following the ratification of international treaties banning the deployment of weapons of mass destruction in orbit. As of 2013, there are 950 satellites of all types in Earth orbit. It is not possible to identify the exact number of these that are military satellites partly due to secrecy and partly due to dual purpose missions such as GPS satellites that serve both civilian and military purposes.

Military reconnaissance satellites

The first military use of satellites was for reconnaissance.
In the United States the first formal military satellite programs, Weapon System 117L, was developed in the mid 1950s. but these remain classified and therefore many details remain speculative.
The Soviet Union began the Almaz (

Navigation satellites

The first satellite navigation system, Transit, used by the United States Navy, was tested in 1960.  It used a constellation of five satellites and could provide a navigational fix approximately once per hour.
During the Cold War arms race, the nuclear threat was used to justify the cost of providing a more capable system. These developments led eventually to the deployment of the Global Positioning System (GPS). The US Navy required precise navigation to enable  submarines to get an accurate fix of their positions before they launched their SLBMs.
In 1978, the first experimental Block-I GPS satellite was launched Full Operational Capability (FOC) was declared by Air Force Space Command (AFSPC) in April 1995, signifying full availability of the military's secure Precise Positioning Service (PPS).

Early warning systems

A number of nations have developed satellite based early warning systems designed to detect ICBMs during different flight phases. In the United States these satellites are operated by the Defense Support Program (DSP). The first launch of a DSP satellite was on 6 November 1970 with the 23rd and last launched 10 November 2007. This program has been superseded by the Space-Based Infrared System (SBIRS).

Satellite weapons

In the United States, research into satellite based weapons was initiated by President Eisenhower in the 1950s. In 1958 the United States initiated Project Defender to develop an anti-ICBM solution launched from satellites. The satellites would have deployed a huge wire mesh to disable ICBMs during their early launch phase. The project foundered due to the lack of any mechanism to protect the satellites from attack resulting in the cancellation of Defender in 1968.
Since October 1967 satellite based weapons systems have been limited by international treaty to conventional weapons only. Art. The treaty became effective on 10 October 1967 and, as of May 2013, 102 countries are parties to the treaty with a further 27 pending full ratification.

Military communication satellites

The US Armed Forces maintains international networks of satellites with ground stations located in various continents. 
Signal latency is a major concern in satellite communications, so geographic and meteorological factors play an important role in choosing teleports. Since some of the major military activities of the U.S. army is in foreign territories, the U.S. government needs to subcontract satellite services to foreign carriers headquartered in areas with favorable climate."US Military Satellite Communications Through Australian Teleports"
Military Strategic and Tactical Relay, or Milstar, is a constellation of military satellites managed by the United States Air Force. Six spacecraft were launched between 1994 and 2003, of which five are operational, with the sixth lost in a launch failure. They are deployed in geostationary orbit and provide wideband, narrowband and protected military communication systems. Wideband systems support high-bandwidth transfers. Protected systems offer more sophisticated security protection like antijam features and nuclear survivability, while narrowband systems are intended for basic communications services that do not require high bandwidth.
The United Kingdom also operates military communication satellites through its Skynet system. This is currently operated with support from Astrium Services and provides a near world wide with both X band and Ultra high frequency services.
Skynet 5 is the United Kingdom's most recent military communications satellite system. There are four Skynet satellites in orbit, with the latest launch completed in December 2012. The system is provided by a private contractor, Astrium, with the UK government paying service charges based on bandwidth consumption.





Resources




