[[Glasgow Caledonian University]]

CATEGORIES: Glasgow Caledonian University, Florence Network, Educational institutions established in 1993, 1993 establishments in Scotland, University Alliance

Glasgow Caledonian University (informally GCU or Caledonian) is a public university in Glasgow, Scotland. With a history traceable to 1875, the University was formally instituted in 1993 by an Act of Parliament that created Glasgow's third university, and what would become one of Scotland's largest universities with more than 18,000 students.
GCU is regularly ranked among the UK's top 10 modern universities,
Noble Peace Prize laureate Muhammad Yunus was installed Chancellor of the University in 2012, as the first non-British international figure to hold the office of University Chancellor in Scottish history. Pamela Gillies has been the Principal and Vice-Chancellor of the University since 2006.
Independent research carried out in 2012 revealed that the University contributes over £444m to Scotland's economy each year with the quantifiable lifetime premium of a one-year class of graduates estimated at around £375m, bringing the University's total annual economic impact to around £820m in Scotland alone.
The University is a member of the University Alliance, the UK league of business-oriented universities. It is also a member of the Association of Commonwealth Universities, the European University Association, Universities UK, Universities Scotland, the Florence Network, the Talloires Network, the Erasmus+ Programme, and the Santander Universities Network.

History

The University traces it origin from The Queen's College, Glasgow (founded 1875) and the Glasgow Polytechnic (founded 1971). The Queen's College, which specialised in providing training in domestic science, received the Royal accolade of being named after Queen Elizabeth II in its centenary celebrations in 1975. Queen Elizabeth II was, herself, Patron of the College since 1944.
On 1 April 1993, the two institutions amalgamated to form Glasgow Caledonian University. The new university took its name from Caledonia, the poetic Latin name for present-day Scotland.

Coat of arms and motto

The University's coat of arms is the work of university academic and artist Malcolm Lochhead and draws on four elements from the coat of arms of the University's predecessor institutions. The Caledonian Oak Tree (of St. Mungo's infamous legend) and the Book of Knowledge were borrowed from the arms of Glasgow Polytechnic while the Saltire Ermine and the Crossed Keys (intended to represent the "unlocking" of the Book of Knowledge) were taken from the arms of The Queen's College. A visual feature was added to the new arms with the illuminated capital letters in the Book's paragraphs reading: G C U (the three-letter abbreviation of the University's name). The Coat of Arms was matriculated by the Lord Lyon King of Arms and is inscribed into university degree parchments. The University's motto: "for the common weal", which has been adopted since 1975, features in the full design of the arms.

Campuses

GCU is located in a modern purpose-built campus in the heart of Glasgow's city centre and opened a graduate campus in London in 2010, the first for a Scottish university. The University also has affiliate campuses in China and Oman and is planning to open a graduate campus in New York to deliver executive training and short courses, as the first British university to do so.

Saltire Centre

The Saltire Centre is the hub of student life and the centrepiece of the University's Glasgow Campus. One of the UK's best-loved and most-used university buildings,

Organisation and administration

Academic schools

=Engineering and Built Environment=

The School of Engineering and Built Environment is one of the largest schools of its kind in the UK and Scotland's largest provider of built environment graduates.  It is organised within the following three research themes:

=The Glasgow School for Business and Society=

The Glasgow School for Business and Society integrates the University's faculties in business, law, and social sciences. It is one of seven UK schools (and two in Scotland) to achieve a "Centre of Excellence" designation by the Chartered Institute for Securities & Investment.
The School is composed of the following three departments:

=Health and Life Sciences=

The School of Health and Life Sciences is one of Scotland's largest research and teaching centres in health care and life sciences; The School is composed of the following three departments:

Administration

By Statute, the University maintains two internal institutions: The University Court and The University Senate. The University Court is the supreme governing body of the University and is composed of a number of 'governors', statutory mandated with overseeing its overall strategic direction and appointing both the Chancellor and the Principal (and Vice-Chancellor) of the University. The University's Principal and Vice-Chancellor and the President of the Students' Association are ex officio governors of the Court. The University Senate, on the other hand, is statutory tasked with the overall planning, co-ordination, development and supervision of the University's academic affairs. University degrees and fellowship as well as academic honours and distinctions are awarded by and in the name of the Court, with the advice of the Senate. The current Chair of the Court is Tony Brian and the Senate is presided over by the University's Principal and Vice-Chancellor, currently Pamela Gillies.

Academic profile

GCU offers academic programmes in all of the Scottish Funding Council funding groups but medicine, dentistry and teacher education. The 2008 Research Assessment Exercise gave the University an 'internationally recognised' research profile in a multitude of disciplines. Over 70% of the University's research submissions were judged as being internationally recognised and 30% were deemed world-leading or of international excellence. In 2010, the QAA awarded the University its highest judgment for academic standards, whilst praising the University's innovative academic approaches.

Research institutes

In addition to the many specialised research centres that are based within its academic schools, the University has three university-wide institutes that engage in cross-disciplinary research across various disciplines: The Institute of Applied Health Research, which carries out research on a range of health-related topics; The Institute for Sustainable Engineering and Technology, which carries out research on a range of disciplines aimed at minimising impact on the environment; and The Institute for Society and Social Justice Research, which carries out research on the topics of citizenship and participation, crime and justice, and gender and economy. The latter is home to the Scottish Poverty Information Unit, which was established in 1995 and is regarded as a lead authority on issues related to poverty and social justice in Scotland.

Caledonian Academy

The Caledonian Academy is a university-based think tank and research centre that was set up in 2006 with the aim of shaping future learning processes and environments around the world. The Academy follows two strands for its work: the "Learning Development" strand, which supports the university in embedding outputs from the Academy's research into practice, and the "Research and Scholarship" strand, which carries out applied research in learning and teaching with organisations in a number of countries. The Academy attracts a group of international visiting scholars every year and counts as some of its principal funders the UK Higher Education Academy, the QAA, and the UK Joint Information Systems Committee.

Rankings

GCU is regularly ranked as one of the UK's top 10 modern universities and is one of very few modern universities to rank among the top 50 universities in the UK in at least one of the national league tables. It is also the first and, so far, only modern Scottish university to rank among the top 400 universities the world, making Glasgow home to three universities in the top 400 world rankings. A 2013 review by the UK's Higher Education Statistics Agency placed GCU as top in Glasgow, 2nd in Scotland, and 11th in the UK for employability among graduates. Also in 2013, the University was ranked 2nd in the UK for international student satisfaction.

Magnus Magnusson Fellowship

The Magnus Magnusson Fellowship, named in honour of former University Chancellor Sir Magnus Magnusson, is an intellectual group based at the University and comprises leading international figures from a variety of backgrounds. The fellowship meets annually to debate and agree action on issues of major concern to society, both locally and globally. It holds an annual lecture that alternates between Glasgow, London, and Reykjavík (Magnusson's birthplace). 
Muhammad Yunus gave the inaugural Magnusson Fellowship Lecture in 2008 and was formally inducted as one of the first cohort of fellowship members. Fellowship members include Will Hutton (Magnusson Fellow, 2010), former President of Ireland Mary Robinson (Magnusson Fellow, 2011), and Renata Salecl (Magnusson Fellow, 2012).

Partnerships

Grameen Caledonian Partnership

The University has developed a unique partnership with the Grameen Trust, described in Yunus's 2008 book Building Social Business as "a collection of initiatives that illustrate how a university can help spread and develop and new approach to society's ills". The partnership resulted in the creation of the Yunus Centre for Social Business and Health, a research institute in social business and healthcare development based in Glasgow, and the Grameen Caledonian College of Nursing in Dhaka, which provides accredited nursing and midwifery education to some of Bangladesh's most disadvantaged communities, with the aspiration, as Yunus  puts it, of utilising the intellectural leadership of the University to turn members of Grameen-borrowing families into world-class nurses. In March 2011, the Grameen Caledonian College celebrated its inaugural capping ceremony in Dhaka, with the Princess Royal in attendance.
The Grameen Caledonian partnership also envisaged the creation of a Caledonian-backed Grameen Bank in Scotland, the first to be set up in Europe. A 2009 BBC documentary on the proposed Bank highlighted the legal difficulties surrounding the Bank's potential operations in Scotland, including the risk that Scottish micro-loan recipients would forfeit their entitlement to much-needed state benefits, failing governmental intervention to amend the law 

South African Link

The University has enjoyed a rich history of interaction with South Africa and a number of its leading figures. It was the first university to award Nelson Mandela an honorary doctorate upon his release from prison in 1990 in recognition of his leadership during the anti-apartheid movement.

Cultural Fellows

The Caledonian Cultural Fellows Initiative was set up in 2009 with the aim of enhancing university cultural life and promoting cultural engagement with wider community. Liz Lochhead, the Scots Makar, is the current Honorary President of the Fellowship, whose membership includes writer Anne Donovan, poet and novellist Jackie Kay, and artist Toby Paterson.

Caledonian Club

The Caledonian Club is a multi award-winning social and community engagement initiative involving staff and students coaching young people and their families in advancing their learning and life skills, while university-based researchers carry out long-term analysis into the process as part of a wider university research agenda into life-long learning. In 2011, the Club developed an award-winning project named 'The Tale of Two Sporting Cities', with the aim of engaging cultural exchanges between primary schools in Glasgow and London and assessing the sporting and cultural legacy of the 2012 London Summer Olympics and the 2014 Glasgow Commonwealth Games.

Student life

Students' Association

Glasgow Caledonian University Students' Association (GCUSA) is an independent body serving and representing the student population of the University. It is located on a separate site within campus and students are automatically admitted to its membership upon matriculation. In 2011, the Association was awarded the coveted title of Students' Union of the Year by NUS Scotland.

Graduation

GCU holds its annual graduation ceremonies during the Summer and Autumn and its academic attire is made by robe-maker Ede & Ravenscroft. Under the University's academic dress code, the wearing of the customary mortar boards is disallowed, as it is not part of the official academic attire that consists of gowns and hoods only, individual to each award conferred.

Notable staff and alumni






