[[Wallowa Mountains]]

CATEGORIES: Landforms of Wallowa County, Oregon, Mountain ranges of Oregon, Wallowa–Whitman National Forest

The Wallowa Mountains are a mountain range located in the Columbia Plateau of northeastern Oregon in the United States. The range runs approximately  Much of the range is designated as the Eagle Cap Wilderness, part of the Wallowa–Whitman National Forest.

Geography

The range is drained by the Wallowa River, which flows from the north side of the mountains, and its tributary the Minam River, which flows through the west side of the range. The Imnaha River flows from the east side of the range.
The highest point in the range is Sacajawea Peak, at an elevation of .

Geology

Many geologists believe the Wallowa Mountains in northeastern Oregon are a displaced fragment of the Insular Belt.
The Wallowa Batholith is formed of granite from a magma upwelling in Late Jurassic and Early Cretaceous time (between 160 million and 120 million years ago). The placement of this rock caused uplift of the surface, which at the time was tropical sea. This is evident from the slate, quartzite, and marble present in the mountains, which come from metamorphism of the sedimentary deposits of oceans during the Triassic. however, these are uncommon.
Glaciers carved out the valleys during the late Pleistocene, which left a number of moraines.

Climate

In the mountains, much precipitation falls as snow. Total snowfall peaks around March.

Ecology

The higher precipitation of the mountains compared with the surrounding country has created a mesic habitat in the Wallowas.

History

The area was home to the Wallowa band of the Lower Nez Perce. The Nez Perce lived in the canyons and burned trees to create meadows for the horses that they obtained around 1730. and the other for settlers. Two years later, in 1875, the government banned the Nez Perce from the valley. The first road into the valley, a toll road, was constructed the same year. The U.S. Government attempted to force the removal of the Nez Perce in 1877; however, this angered the natives, who chose instead to raid the settlers, leading to the Nez Perce War.
Logging came in the late 1880s, using streams and rivers to transport the wood. A dam was constructed on Wallowa Lake in 1884 to help irrigate the valley. In 1908, the first railroad into the valley was completed. Rail lines were built to the upper valley by the Union Pacific Railroad in 1919, allowing for safer transportation of logs. The dam beneath Wallowa Lake was replaced by a concrete dam in 1916, and a new dam was completed in 1929.






