[[Finola Hughes]]

CATEGORIES: 1959 births, Actresses from London, English expatriates in the United States, English film actresses, English soap opera actresses, English stage actresses, English television actresses, English voice actresses, Living people, People educated at the Arts Educational Schools, Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series winners

Finola Hughes (born 29 October 1959) is an English actress, television host, entrepreneur, author, former dancer, director, and producer, best known for role as Anna Devane on the ABC soap opera General Hospital, General Hospital: Night Shift, and her role as Anna Devane's identical twin sister, Doctor Alexandra Devane Marick, on All My Children. She is also known as Patty Halliwell on the supernatural series, Charmed, continually appearing throughout the course of the entire series, and as Carol on the NBC sitcom Blossom. In films, she is known for her role in Staying Alive, Aspen Extreme, Above Suspicion and Like Crazy.

Career

Hughes trained in dance and performing arts at the Arts Educational Schools London. In 1981, she originated the role of Victoria the White Cat in the London production of Andrew Lloyd Webber's musical Cats. In 1983, Hughes starred with John Travolta in the musical film Staying Alive, a sequel to Saturday Night Fever. She played the role of Laura, an English dancer who is the romantic interest of Travolta's character Tony Manero. Hughes also appeared on the sitcom Blossom, and as the X-Men character Emma Frost in the 1996 TV movie Generation X. In 1997 Hughes starred in Aaron Spelling's short-lived primetime soap opera Pacific Palisades. She was also a frequent guest-star on the television series Charmed, playing the mother of the Halliwell girls, Patricia "Patty" Halliwell. She provided the voice of Lara, Kal-El's biological mother in Superman: The Animated Series. Another voice-over role she had was Miss Robertson on an episode of Fox's animated comedy series Life with Louie.
From 1985 to 1992 she played Anna Devane on General Hospital. Hughes won a Daytime Emmy in 1991, for Outstanding Lead Actress on General Hospital. She was nominated for the same category in 1990 for Anna, in 2000 for AMC as Alex, and, in 2002, as Anna. After establishing herself as a daytime TV star, Hughes shot a feature film cameo as a soap actress who loses an award to Sally Field in the soap opera satire film Soapdish (1991). Two years later she played a leading role in the 1993 film Aspen Extreme.
It was announced in April 2006 that Hughes would be returning to GH. In May 2006 as part of the May Sweeps period, three GH veterans would return. Finola Hughes would be reunited with Tristan Rogers (Robert Scorpio) and Emma Samms (Holly Sutton). Following a rise in ratings from her sweeps return, Hughes returned to General Hospital for a limited run through August 2006. Finola would return the following year on 13 July 2007 and once again on 25 April 2008.
In September 2008, Hughes guest-starred in the General Hospital spinoff series General Hospital: Night Shift. It has been said also to be returning as Robert Scorpio, his character Colin on the CBS soap The Young and the Restless exiled from Genoa City a few months back. Ex-GH costar Genie Francis, who played Colin's ex will still remain on the soap and will not be returning to GH. In 2010 Finola also appeared in the CSI: NY, Make It or Break It and Melissa & Joey. Finola made a permanent return to General Hospital in March 2012. Her character, Anna Devane, moved in with Luke Spencer.
In 2013 Hughes made her feature-film directing debut with indie comedy-drama The Bet.

Personal life

Hughes was born in London, England. She married Russell Young in 1992. They welcomed their first child, son Dylan Joseph Young, on 9 November 2000. Later, they adopted a boy named Cash Justice Young (born 2005) and a girl named Sadie Beatrice Young (born December 2007).

Filmography

Film

Television

Awards and nominations






