[[Zebda]]

CATEGORIES: French music

Zebda is a French music group from Toulouse known for its political activism and its wide variety of musical styles.  The group, which was formed in 1985, consisted of seven musicians of diverse nationalities, and the themes of much of their music involved political and social justice, the status of immigrants and minorities in France, and the inhabitants of the French banlieues, or suburbs. English: "Zebda continues to talk about exclusion, racism, tolerance and its opposite."  Zebda earned widespread recognition, as well as several awards, for its 1998 single "Tomber la chemise" ("Take Off Your Shirt").  In 2001, the band spearheaded an independent political party that won over 12% of the first-round vote in Toulouse's municipal elections.  The group disbanded in 2003 but reformed in 2011.

History

Zebda was first formed in 1985 when Magyd Cherfi, a community organizer at the time, organized a small group of his musician friends to shoot a video for a community organization for which he was working. Page 4.  The group began performing together regularly in 1988.  The band gained widespread recognition when they performed at the Printemps de Bourges music festival in 1990 and then performed on an international tour which included venues in France, Italy, and the United Kingdom.
The group released its first album, L'arène des rumeurs, in 1992, under the label of Barclay Records. As the band toured and performed, the members continued to be active in community work, and Zebda became known for its politicized lyrics. Its 1995 album, Le bruit et l'odeur ("The Noise and the Smell") took its name from a gaffe made by then-president Jacques Chirac in reference to the conditions in the French banlieues, many of which have large immigrant populations. Page 3. The record itself had a strong critical and commercial reception and has been said to have "caused a major stir" in France.
In 2003, Zebda released its only live album, La Tawa, after which the band split up.
The group reformed in 2011 and toured France. A new album, Second tour, was released in January 2012."Zebda : 'Nous nous sommes débarrassés de l'accessoire'.", L'humanité. Retrieved 9 January 2012.

Political involvement

Zebda (زبدة, transliterated Zibdah), the Arabic word for butter (beurre in French), is a play on the word beur, a French slang word referring to French citizens of Arab origin Page 7.  The themes of Zebda's music were known for dealing in issues of racism and intolerance.
In 1997, three members of Zebda formed a group called "Tactikollectif," which was involved in fund-raising and advocacy for immigrant groups in the banlieues.  In the 2001 municipal elections, Zebda sponsored and spearheaded a list of independent candidates, Les Motivé-e-s ("The Motivated Ones"), "Le mouvement « Motivé(e)s », dans lequel sont engagés, de près ou de loin, tous les membres de Zebda, rafle 12,38% des suffrages au premier tour des municipales à Toulouse." English: "The Motivé(e)s movement, in which all the members of Zebda were engaged from near or from far, won 12.38% of the votes in the first round of the municipal elections in Toulouse."
After the band's breakup in 2003, the individual members continued to be active in local politics and other activities for social advocacy.

Musical style

Zebda's music is influenced by these band members' multicultural as well as music from all over the world; the group's songs have incorporated rock, and reggae styles, and musical instruments and styles as diverse as Latin music, Arab, and French accordion.  While the content and themes of their music are politically serious, typically detailing racism and discrimination, the group has been said to have a positive and "upbeat" sound that represents the ideal of peaceful coexistence and cultural diversity. "Pop Goes the Banlieue: Musical Metissage and the Articulation of a Multiculturalist Vision", The Journal of Contemporary French and Francophone Studies, 8(1)2004. Page 43.
The group is best known for its single "Tomber la chemise" ("Take Off Your Shirt"), from the 1998 platinum album Essence ordinaire.  In addition to being a commercial success, the song went on to be named the best French song of 2000 at both the Victoires de la musique awards and the NRJ Music Awards.

Awards

Discography

Albums

Singles

Further reading





News


