[[Nicko McBrain]]

CATEGORIES: 1952 births, Living people, English rock drummers, English heavy metal drummers, Iron Maiden members, Trust (band) members, English expatriates in the United States, People from Hackney, English Christians, Converts to Christianity

Michael Henry "Nicko" McBrain (born 5 June 1952 in Hackney, London) is an English musician, best known as the drummer of the British heavy metal band Iron Maiden, which he joined in 1982.
Having played in small pub bands from the age of 14, upon leaving school McBrain paid his bills with session work before he joined a variety of artists, such as Streetwalkers, Pat Travers, and the French political band, Trust. He joined Iron Maiden in time to debut on their fourth album, Piece of Mind (1983), and has remained with them since, contributing to a total of twelve studio releases.

Biography

McBrain first wanted to learn the drums at a young age after watching Joe Morello performing with The Dave Brubeck Quartet on television.
Although he obtained a degree in engineering at his parent's request,
In 1975, he began playing with Streetwalkers,
Although the band's lineup changed frequently in the 1990s, McBrain remained in Iron Maiden and, since the return of Adrian Smith and Bruce Dickinson in 1999, the group has undergone a resurgence in popularity,
Although he writes the drum parts for all the band's songs, McBrain registered his first and only album songwriting credit for "New Frontier," from 2003's Dance of Death, However, McBrain had received two previous songwriting credits for non-album tracks: 1984's "Mission From 'Arry", which was actually a recording of a backstage argument with Steve Harris, and 1992's "Nodding Donkey Blues", which were B-sides of the singles "2 Minutes to Midnight" and "Be Quick or Be Dead" respectively.

Drumming style

McBrain's drumming has been an important element of Iron Maiden's sound from 1983's Piece of Mind onwards, with guitarist Adrian Smith remarking that, "he always had the chops and the technique, but in Maiden he really exploded, to the point where a lot of stuff we did after he joined was then founded on his playing, all those busy patterns he does, displaying tremendous technique."
He is often considered among the best and most influential heavy metal/hard rock drummers of all time.
McBrain often employs the back end of his left hand drum stick to allow for more powerful "snare hits".
Steve Harris remarks that "... Drummers from other bands sit round the back of him to see what he's doing, but he's got his kit set so he doesn't even look at what he's hitting half the time".
In 1991, McBrain released an instructional drum video, entitled Rhythms of the Beast, which was re-released on DVD in 2010.

Equipment

McBrain currently uses Premier drums and Paiste cymbals. For A Matter of Life and Death he used his Ludwig metal shell LM 402 snare drum which was purchased in 1975, making it the oldest drum in his kit. He endorses Vic Firth signature drum sticks, also using them for his own drumming.

Tour Kit

Premier Elite Drums with custom finish:
Sticks
Cymbals by Paiste:
McBrain's drum kit and cymbals do not bear the standard Premier and Paiste logos. They are labelled with the brand name using the Iron Maiden logo font.

Personal life

McBrain converted to Christianity in 1999 after an experience in the Spanish River Church, near his Boca Raton, Florida home. His wife, Rebecca (from Whitman, West Virginia), had been asking him to attend with her, and upon entering the church, McBrain soon found himself crying as he experienced a "calling". Recounting the tale, he said "I just sat there thinking, 'I didn't drink last night..."
In an interview, McBrain was asked if he felt it was appropriate to be a member of Iron Maiden in light of his Christian views. He responded by saying, "When you become a Christian, you don't become sinless. The idea is to sin less. We're all sinners. We're never going to be clean till the day the good Lord is standing in front and judgement comes. But to me, I try to live my life. I do fall off, and occasionally I fall off hard and I have to get down on my knees and beg forgiveness. So it's not an easy ride, and it's not professed to be either." He was also asked if he shared his religious views with his band mates, and if so, how they felt about it. McBrain responded, "We've had some incredibly deep conversations amongst each of us. I can't say to you that I'm trying to convert all these guys in my band to be Christians. I'm leading them on my route, and if they choose to follow what God's plan is in the Bible, that's up to them. I say to them all, you know, look, in my belief, at the moment, if you turn to your saviour Jesus Christ, I'll have eternal life in Heaven with you! ... We don't talk about it every time we get together, but we've had some interesting conversations over the years."
In 1988, McBrain appeared as a guest on the The Sooty Show, in which he played drums with Sooty and Sweep. 
He also enjoys playing golf in his spare time, along with band mate Dave Murray.

Discography

Notes



|last = Wall
|first = Mick
|authorlink=Mick Wall
|title = Iron Maiden: Run to the Hills, the Authorised Biography
|edition = third
|publisher = Sanctuary Publishing
|year = 2004
|isbn = 1-86074-542-3
|ref = harv
|postscript = 
}}


