[[Malcolm Winters]]

CATEGORIES: The Young and the Restless characters, Fictional characters introduced in 1994, Fictional African-American people, Fictional photographers

Malcolm Winters is a fictional character from the American CBS soap opera The Young and the Restless. Originally portrayed by Shemar Moore for two intervals, the role was last portrayed by Darius McCrary from December 29, 2009 to October 17, 2011.
Malcolm is the half-brother of longtime character Neil Winters. His history includes a romance with Neil's later wife Drucilla Winters, his history as a photographer, and marriages to Olivia Winters and Sofia Dupre.

Casting

The role was originated by Shemar Moore in May 1994, who received a Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor for his portrayal in 2000,

In September 2009, it was announced that the soap opera had put out a casting call for the role of Malcolm.

Storylines

1994–2002, 2004–05

Malcolm first arrives in Genoa City in 1994, determined to get to know his estranged half-brother, Neil Winters. Neil, at first, wanted nothing to do with his rebellious younger half-brother, but eventually decided to give him a second chance. With the help of Blade Bladeson, Malcolm became Genoa City's most prominent photographer.
He soon met Drucilla Barber, and was instantly smitten with her, but nothing becomes of the relationship and she married Neil. Malcolm and Drucilla longed for one another and had sex. However, Drucilla had taken a good dose of cold medication, and thus mistook Malcolm for Neil. Drucilla called out for Neil, which made Malcolm realize her advances were not intended for him. The following morning Malcolm realized what a mistake he had made and confides in Dru's sister, Olivia Barber.
Nine months later, Drucilla gave birth to a daughter, Lily Winters. Having convinced herself that Neil is Lily's father, Dru forgave Malcolm and Olivia soon fixed him up with her hospital colleague, Keesha Monroe. They fell in love and married, just before Keesha died of AIDS.
Malcolm then developed a relationship with recently widowed Olivia and grew very attached to her son Nate Hastings, Jr. Malcolm and Olivia were married in 1997. One year later, Malcolm's ex-girlfriend Callie Rogers arrived in town and Olivia became jealous that Malcolm was spending so much time with her. Olivia's insecurity ultimately destroyed her marriage to Malcolm and he rebounded back to Callie. The two became engaged but Callie soon broke it off and left town. In the meantime, Malcolm continued his close relationship with his former stepson Nate, who views Malcolm as his father.
Malcolm and Neil soon found themselves fighting over a woman, attorney Alex Perez. Malcolm and Alex fell in love and become engaged, though she was also developing feelings for Neil. Malcolm catches them together and left. While Malcolm driving over a bridge in Kenya, the bridge collapses and Malcolm is presumed dead.
Malcolm returned to town two years later resenting Neil, believing he did not do enough to rescue him in Kenya. Eventually the two buried the hatchet. While in town, Malcolm briefly had a fling with Adrienne Markham, Damon Porter's ex-wife.
Malcolm then demanded that Dru take a paternity test to determine once and for all if he is Lily's biological father. When Malcolm was proven to be Lily's father, he and Dru decide to keep it a secret and he left town. While Malcolm is gone, Lily and Neil discovered the truth about her paternity, but were unable to contact him.

2009–11

Four years later, Malcolm returned to Genoa City while secretly working undercover as a corporate spy for Tucker McCall. He learns that Lily had been diagnosed with ovarian cancer and attempted to support her while clashing with Neil. However, the two eventually put aside their differences and reconnected as brothers. Malcolm took a job as a photographer at Restless Style magazine and hired his adopted nephew, Devon Hamilton, as his assistant. Months after Malcolm mentioned he was engaged, his fiancée, Sofia Dupre, arrived in town. She worked for Tucker and had a business clash with Neil, and they ended up having an affair and not telling Malcolm in order to act like it never happened. Malcolm and Sofia were married soon after.
Sofia is later found out to be pregnant, though the paternity of the baby was left undetermined. While pregnant, Sofia was forced to tell Malcolm the truth about her affair with Neil, and that she wasn't sure of the paternity of the baby. Sofia gave birth to a boy named Moses Winters, after her father. Afterward, a paternity test showed that Neil is Moses's father. Devastated, Malcolm had to make a decision about his future with Moses, and visited Sofia in the hospital and asked her to sign divorce papers and tells her that he will be moving away, even though Sofia wanted to work out their marriage. Malcolm said goodbye to all his friends in Genoa City and headed for the airport.




