[[Jacqueline Carey]]

CATEGORIES: 1964 births, Living people, American fantasy writers, American women writers, American people of Irish descent, Lake Forest College alumni, Kushiel's Legacy, People from Highland Park, Illinois, 21st-century American novelists

Jacqueline Carey (born 1964) is an American author and novelist, primarily of fantasy fiction.

Biography

Born at  in Highland Park, Illinois, she attended Lake Forest College, receiving B.A.'s in psychology and English literature in 1986. During college, she spent 6 months working in a bookstore in London as part of a work exchange program. While there, she decided to write professionally. After returning she started her writing career while working at the art center of a local college. After ten years, she discovered success with the publication of her first book in 2001.  Retrieved 2009-1-06. Currently, Carey lives in western Michigan and is a member of the oldest Mardi Gras krewe in the state.

Career

Writing

Carey's literary work has been recognized and highlighted at Michigan State University in their Michigan Writers Series.

Works

Terre D'Ange

Her first novel was Kushiel's Dart, published by Tor Books in 2001, and the recipient of the 2002 Locus Award for Best First Novel. The Kushiel's Legacy trilogy, completed with Kushiel's Chosen and Kushiel's Avatar, follows the story of a courtesan in a historical fantasy or alternate history (Terre d'Ange) society that follows a demi-god, Elua, whose precept is "Love as thou wilt". The map of Terre d'Ange, the "Land of the Angels," bears a striking resemblance to that of France. Fictional versions of Greece, Great Britain, Italy, Germany, and Spain also figure prominently in the series. Elua was born when the blood of Yeshua ben Yosef, the son of the one God, mingled with the tears of the Magdelene and carried in the womb of Mother Earth. With Elua's peaceful wanderings and the one God's rejection of him, seven angels then rejected God to become Elua's companions on Earth. These angels and Elua himself then founded a nation and comingled with humans before leaving. D'Angelines are the people from their descent. 
The first trilogy, Kushiel's Legacy, begins with the story of Phèdre nò Delaunay, a courtesan's flawed and unwanted daughter who is sold into indenture. The second trilogy (named Treason's Heir in the UK and frequently dubbed the Imriel Trilogy in North America), is a continuation of the storyline started in Kushiel's Legacy. The main protagonist is Imriel nò Montrève de la Courcel, third in line for the throne of Terre d'Ange and adopted son of Phèdre nò Delaunay de Montrève.
The third trilogy, whose third novel Naamah's Blessing came out in June 2011, takes place centuries after both trilogies and features the protagonist Moirin of the Maghuinn Dhon. Moirin is half-D'Angeline and half of the Maghuin Donn. She is touched by the blessing of Naamah as well as her diadh-anam, the bear-goddess of the Maghuin Dhonn. After a terrible accident and the revelation that her father is a priest of Naamah, Moirin sets sail for Terre d'Ange in search of a destiny her bear-goddess has foretold. Instead of a seemingly clear destiny, Moirin finds herself in an entanglement of court intrigue, scandal and passion. Tossed between the Queen and her courtier, Moirin must decide which path to take before she bleeds dry in the process. She also meets Lo Feng, a sort-of priest of Ch'in, present day China. Feng teaches our heroine the five styles of breathing and offers a respite from her complicated court life. In following her destiny, she will also follow Feng and his young apprentice across yet another ocean where she will meet a princess possessed by a dragon. This is just the first test Moirin will encounter along her destiny's path. She discovers through her diadh-anam that her true love has never been far away. She will travel through cities, deserts and vast areas in an attempt to join the two together. Through her travels, she will always remember that she still has unfinished business back in Terre d'Ange before she can ever hope to see her mother again. 
According to Publisher's Weekly, "Carey's triumph as a writer lies in her ability to turn these stock-nearly stereotyped-components into an engaging, fascinating novel.""Editorial Reviews." Barnes & Noble – Books, Textbooks, EBooks, Toys, Games & More. Web. Oct. 19, 2010. .

Other

Carey's second fantasy series is The Sundering, consisting of Banewreaker, published in 2004, and Godslayer, published in 2005. It is a story in the vein of J. R. R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings, but told as a tragedy from the point of view of the "dark" side.
Carey's third series begins with Santa Olivia, published in 2009 and concludes with its sequel, Saints Astray, in 2011. Recently through a Facebook contest, Carey offered fans the chance to choose a new name for the sequel to Santa Olivia, as her publishers were not happy with the working title. The new title of Saints Astray was announced on her Facebook fan page on August 27, 2010.

Bibliography

Fiction

=Short stories=

=Online archived short stories=

Non-fiction

Awards





Interviews


