[[Rob Mills]]

CATEGORIES: 1982 births, Australian Idol participants, Dancing with the Stars (Australian TV series) participants, Australian game show hosts, Musicians from Melbourne, Living people

Rob Mills (born 21 June 1982) is an Australian singer best known as one of the finalists from Australian Idol Season 1. He was a co-host on the late-night quiz show The Mint as well as a regular singer on the game show The Singing Bee both on the Nine Network. Until August 2009 Mills starred as Fiyero in the Melbourne production of the musical Wicked and continued the role when it moved to Sydney on 5 September 2009. Mills is the host of Network Ten's revamped Young Talent Time.

Early life

Mills attended Brentwood Secondary College until the end of Year 10, frequently participating in the school Battle of the Bands concert. He completed Year 11 and 12 at Box Hill Senior Secondary College.
Mills formed a band called "The Megamen" with two friends and soon developed a keen following on the Melbourne live music scene with their sessions every Sunday at the Red Eagle Hotel at Albert Park. Mills is a resident of Melbourne.

Australian Idol

Mills was a contestant for the first series of Australian Idol and he made the top five.  He performed on "Rise Up", the #1 Australian single performed by all the Australian finalists in 2003. Mills performed the song "Dirty Girl" on the double platinum album Australian Idol: Final 12 soundtrack released in October 2003.
Mills' song list:

Post-Idol

Touring and Television

He signed a contract with BMG in 2004. His first album "Up All Night" was released in Australia on 14 June 2004 and debuted in the top 40. The first single from the album Ms Vanity was released on 31 May in Australia and debuted at #6 in the Australian singles charts.
In July 2005, Mills toured the east coast of Australia, playing from Cairns to Tasmania. Also performing on national TV,  KAK, The Today Show and Carols by Candlelight while on tour.
After having completed his tour, he had a starring role as Johnny Casino alongside John Farnham, Natalie Bassingthwaighte and Craig McLachlan in Grease - The Musical Arena Tour. The tour was a commercial and critical success. .
Mills hosted a television show Stooged on Network Ten, a hidden-camera show. The show premiered on 28 July 2005 however was cancelled shortly after due to declining ratings.
During Triple M's tsunami fundraiser, where people pledged money to hear their favourite song played, Mills called the station and requested his own song. This was a request made of him by the radio station.
Mills confessed on the television show Spicks and Specks that he had a brief but highly publicised tryst with celebrity heiress Paris Hilton at the Melbourne Cup of 2003. He later made fun of the tryst by singing "I Love Paris" (best known in a recording by Frank Sinatra) to close-off the show.
On 31 July 2007, Mills started a co-hosting role on the late-night quiz show The Mint which aired on the Nine Network.
He appeared in a stunt for the ABC TV show The Chaser's War on Everything alongside Craig Reucassel that satirised the Tasmanian Premier Paul Lennon.
In October 2007, Mills and three others were selected to be regular singers on the game show The Singing Bee.
On 4 June 2009 it was announced on Today Tonight that he was on the new season of Dancing with the Stars. He was the second person to be eliminated 
In 2009 and early 2010 Mills had a role as a recurring character on the Australian children's show The Shak 
On 26 May 2010, Mills appeared on an episode on the children's game show Pyramid and again on 7, 16 and 23 June  2010.
On 9 June 2010 Mills appeared on variety show Hey Hey It's Saturday, accompanying the show's band.
He appeared in a guest role in the Australian TV show Winner's and Losers as Sean.
In August 2011, it was announced that Rob would host a new version of the popular Australian talent show Young Talent Time, with co-production duties from original host Johnny Young.right|thumb|Rob Mills performs with the boys from Young Talent Time
Mills joined the Young Talent Time cast in a live tour throughout June and July 2012. There were a total of 14 shows across 8 venues, beginning in Sydney and Canberra, and ending with five sold-out shows at Melbourne's Crown Casino. Mills hosted the show and performed solo and with cast members.facebook. The tour also featured choreography and dancers from the Project Dance creative team.facebook.com/ProjectDanceAustralia
In 2013, Mills competed on the third season of the The Celebrity Apprentice Australia. He won $40,000 for his charity in the fourth task, but he was fired in the following episode.

Musical Theatre

In May 2007, Mills appeared as the lead role of Claude in the sold out Perth production of the rock musical Hair along with Cosima De Vito and Nikki Webster. The production was directed by Chris Kabay and musically directed by Simon Holt of Yellow Glass Theatre.
Mills then originated the role of Fiyero in the Australian production of the Broadway musical Wicked. The show opened on 12 July 2008, in Melbourne where it ran for 13 months, closing on 9 August 2009. It then transferred to Sydney from 12 September. He originally starred oppostie Lucy Durack as Glinda, Amanda Harrison as Elphaba and the late Rob Guest as The Wizard. Mills played his final performance on 6 June 2010, and was replaced by Tim Campbell.
After rumors began circulating the Australian theatre scene that Mills had auditioned for the musical Hairspray which begins its Melbourne run in October 2010, Mills confirmed that he had auditioned for the show on his Twitter page, though for which role he auditioned is not yet known. Mills however, did not receive a part in the production.
From 13–30 July 2011, Rob played the role of Jamie in Jason Robert Brown's musical "The Last Five Years" at Sydney's Seymour Centre.
In March 2012, it was announced that Mills will play Warner Huntington III in the Australian production of Legally Blonde, which also starred his Wicked co-star Lucy Durack as the main character, Elle Woods. It then went of to play at the Lyric Theatre in Brisbane from March 2013. It then opened in Melbourne at the Princess Theatre in May 2013.
Mills most recently played the of Danny in the Australian tour of Grease, which began performances October 2013 at Sydney's Lyric Theatre and ran till January 2014.Rob Mills and Gretel Scarlett Star in 2013 Australian Tour of GREASE, Opening Tonight in Sydney Retrieved 25 November 2013

Discography

Albums

Singles






