[[Powder River (Oregon)]]

CATEGORIES: Rivers of Oregon, Wild and Scenic Rivers of the United States, Tributaries of the Snake River, Landforms of Baker County, Oregon

The Powder River is a tributary of the Snake River, approximately  long,U.S. Geological Survey. National Hydrography Dataset high-resolution flowline data. The National Map, accessed May 3, 2011 in northeast Oregon in the United States. It drains an area of the Columbia Plateau on the eastern side of the Blue Mountains. It is almost entirely contained within Baker County but includes a portion of Union County.

History

The name Powder River is first recorded in the journals of Peter Skene Ogden without notation of the origin of the name.  Explorer Donald Mackenzie likely named the river. Dr. William C. McKay (grandson of John Jacob Astor's partner Alexander MacKay) says that the origin of the name is from the powdery and sandy soil along the shores of the river, from the Chinook Jargon polalle illahe. It appears on Lewis and Clark's maps as Port-pel-lah.
In 1988, 

Ecology

Beaver (Castor canadensis) populations are increasing along the river, with an excellent viewing area just off Oregon Route 7 below Mason Dam, about 
The Powder River was once an important spawning stream for Chinook salmon (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha) and Steelhead trout (Oncorhyncus mykiss) coming from the Pacific Ocean.

Watershed

The Powder River watershed is located in the northwest portion of the Middle Snake Ecological Province and drains  of northeastern Oregon. There are three man-made reservoirs on the Powder River:  Phillips Lake, Thief Valley Reservoir, and also the Powder arm of Brownlee Reservoir at the Oregon-Idaho border at the confluence of the Powder and Snake Rivers.
The Powder River's tributaries arise in the southern Blue Mountains in the Umatilla National Forest. The river's mainstem begins in Sumpter, where McCully Fork, Cracker Creek and several smaller tributaries join, and flows east-southeast through the tailings of past dredge mining and into Phillips Reservoir. After exiting Phillips Reservoir, the river continues east for about  downstream from Richland.
Major streams flowing into the Powder are Eagle, Wolf, and Rock creeks and the North Powder River.






