[[LGBT themes in speculative fiction]]

CATEGORIES: LGBT speculative fiction, Science fiction culture, Sexuality and society

LGBT themes in speculative fiction refer to the incorporation of  lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender (LGBT) themes into science fiction, fantasy, horror fiction and related genres. Such elements may include an LGBT character as the protagonist or a major character, or explorations of sexuality or gender that deviate from the hetero-cisnormative.
Science fiction and fantasy have traditionally been puritanical genres aimed at a male readership, and can be more restricted than non-genre literature by their conventions of characterisation and the effect that these conventions have on depictions of sexuality and gender. However, speculative fiction also gives authors and readers the freedom to imagine societies that are different from real-life cultures. This freedom makes speculative fiction a useful means of examining sexual bias, by forcing the reader to reconsider his or her heteronormative cultural assumptions. It has also been claimed by critics such as Nicola Griffith that LGBT readers identify strongly with the mutants, aliens, and other outsider characters found in speculative fiction.
Before the 1960s, explicit sexuality of any kind was rare in speculative fiction, as the editors who controlled what was published attempted to protect their perceived key market of adolescent male readers. As the readership broadened, it became possible to include characters who were undisguised homosexuals, though these tended to be villains, and lesbians remained almost entirely unrepresented. In the 1960s, science fiction and fantasy began to reflect the changes prompted by the civil rights movement and the emergence of a counterculture. New wave and feminist science fiction authors realised cultures in which homosexuality, bisexuality and a variety of gender models were the norm, and in which sympathetic depictions of alternative sexuality were commonplace.
From the 1980s onwards, homosexuality gained much wider mainstream acceptance, and was often incorporated into otherwise conventional speculative fiction stories. Works emerged that went beyond simple representation of homosexuality to explorations of specific issues relevant to the LGBT community. This development was helped by the growing number of openly gay or lesbian authors and their early acceptance by speculative fiction fandom. Specialist gay publishing presses and a number of awards recognising LGBT achievements in the genre emerged, and by the twenty-first century blatant homophobia was no longer considered acceptable by most readers of speculative fiction. There was a concurrent increase in representation of homosexuality within non-literary forms of speculative fiction. The inclusion of LGBT themes in comic books, television and film continues to attract media attention and controversy, while the perceived lack of sufficient representation, along with unrealistic depictions, provokes criticism from LGBT sources.

Critical analysis

As genres of popular literature, science fiction and fantasy often seem more constrained than non-genre literature by their conventions of characterisation and the effects that these conventions have on depictions of sexuality and gender. Science fiction in particular has traditionally been a puritanical genre oriented toward a male readership. 1088 "Sex" Sex is often linked to disgust in SF and horror, and plots based on sexual relationships have mainly been avoided in genre fantasy narratives. 354 On the other hand, science fiction and fantasy can also provide more freedom than realistic literature to imagine alternatives to the default assumptions of heterosexuality and masculinity that permeate many cultures. Homosexuality is now an accepted and common feature of science fiction and fantasy literature, its prevalence due to the influence of lesbian-feminist and gay liberation movements. x "Preface"
In speculative fiction, extrapolation allows writers to focus not on the way things are (or were), as non-genre literature does, but on the way things could be different. It provides science fiction with a quality that science fiction critic Darko Suvin has called "cognitive estrangement": the recognition that what we are reading is not the world as we know it, but a world whose differences force us to reconsider our own with an outsider's perspective. In science fiction, such estranging features include technologies that significantly alter sex or reproduction. In fantasy, such features include figures such as mythological deities and heroic archetypes, who are not limited by preconceptions of human sexuality and gender, allowing them to be reinterpreted.1–6 SF has also depicted a plethora of alien methods of reproduction and sex, some of which can be viewed as homo- or bisexual through a human binary-gender lens.
In spite of the freedom offered by the genres, gay characters often remain contrived and stereotypical,Garber & Lyn Paleo, p. xix "Introduction" by Samuel R. DelanyGarber & Lyn Paleo, p. xi "Preface" and most SF stories take for granted the continuation of heteronormative institutions.,The Cambridge Companion to Science Fiction, "Science Fiction and Queer Theory", Wendy Pearson, p. 153. ISBN 0-521-01657-6 Alternative sexualities have usually been approached allegorically, or by including LGBT characters in such a way as to not contradict mainstream society's assumptions about gender roles.,The Cambridge Companion to Science Fiction, "Science Fiction and Queer Theory", Wendy Pearson, p. 150. ISBN 0-521-01657-6 Works that feature gay characters are more likely to be written by women writers, and to be viewed as being aimed at other women or girls; big-name male writers are less prone to explore gay themes.137
Speculative fiction has traditionally been "straight";Stephanie A. Smith, "A Most Ambiguous Citizen: Samuel R. "Chip" Delany", American Literary History, Oxford Journals. Retrieved on October 20, 2008 Samuel R. Delany has written that the science fiction community is predominantly made up of white male heterosexuals, but that the proportion of minorities, including gay people, is generally higher than found in a "literary" group. Delany, Shorter Views, p.268 The inclusion of homosexuality in SF has been described in Science Fiction Culture as "sometimes lagging behind the general population, sometimes surging ahead".135 Nicola Griffith has written that LGBT readers tend to identify strongly with the outsider status of mutants, aliens, and characters who lead hidden or double lives in science fiction. Original Gay and Lesbian Writing: Science Fiction, Overlook Press: 1998 ISBN 978-0-87951-856-1 In comparison, Geoff Ryman has claimed that the gay and SF genre markets are incompatible, with his books being marketed as one or the other, but never both, and David Seed said that SF purists have denied that SF that focuses on soft science fiction themes and marginalised groups (including "gay SF") is "real" science fiction., A Companion to Science Fiction, "Science Fiction and Postmodernism" p. 245, ISBN 1-4051-1218-2 Gay and lesbian science fiction have at times been grouped as distinct subgenres of SF,Brian Stableford, Science Fact and Science Fiction: An Encyclopedia, "Sex", p. 479, ISBN 978-0-415-97460-8 and have some tradition of separate publishers and awards.

Literature

Proto-SF

True History by the Greek writer Lucian (A.D. 120–185) has been called the earliest surviving example of science fictionFredericks, S.C.: "Lucian's True History as SF", Science Fiction Studies, Vol. 3, No. 1 (March 1976), pp. 49–60Gunn, James E. denotes True History as "Proto-Science Fiction", p.249 and the first ever "gay science fiction story". 95, Alyson Publications: 1992 ISBN 978-1-55583-206-3 The narrator is suddenly enveloped by a typhoon and swept up to the moon, which is inhabited by a society of men that are at war with the sun. After the hero distinguishes himself in combat, the king gives him his son the prince in marriage. The all male society reproduces (male children only) by giving birth from the thigh or by growing a child from a plant produced by planting the left testicle in the moon's soil. 752, "Science Fiction"
In other proto-SF works, sex itself, of any type, was equated with base desires or "beastliness", as in Gulliver's Travels, which contrasts the animalistic and overtly sexual Yahoos with the reserved and intelligent Houyhnhnms. The frank treatment of sexual topics of pre-nineteenth century literature was abandoned in most speculative fiction, although Wendy Pearson has written that issues of gender and sexuality have been central to SF since its inception but were ignored by readers and critics until the late twentieth century. 2 Early works that contained LGBT themes and showed the gay characters to be morally impure include the first lesbian vampire story "Carmilla" (1872) by Sheridan Le FanuGarber & Paleo, "Carmilla" p. 76 and The Picture of Dorian Gray (1890) by Oscar Wilde, which shocked contemporary readers with its sensuality and overtly homosexual characters. 148
An Anglo-American Alliance, a 1906 novel by Gregory Casparian, was the first SF-themed novel to openly portray a lesbian romantic relationship.

The pulp era (1920–30s)

During the pulp era, explicit sexuality of any kind was rare in genre science fiction and fantasy. For many years, the editors who controlled what was published felt that they had to protect the adolescent male readership that they identified as their principal market.  Although the covers of some 1930s pulp magazines showed scantily clad women menaced by tentacled aliens, the covers were often more lurid than the magazines' contents.  In such a context, writers like Edgar Pangborn, who featured passionate male friendships in his work, were exceptional; almost until the end of their careers, including so much as a kiss would have been too much. Implied or disguised sexuality was as important as that which was openly revealed. As such, genre SF reflected the social mores of the day, paralleling common prejudices; This was particularly true of pulp fiction, more so than literary works of the time.
As the demographics of the readership broadened, it became possible to include characters who were more or less undisguised homosexuals, but these, in accordance with the attitudes of the times, tended to be villains: evil, demented, or effeminate stereotypes. The most popular role for the homosexual was as a 'decadent slaveholding lordling' whose corrupt tyranny was doomed to be overthrown by the young male heterosexual hero. During this period, lesbians were almost entirely unrepresented as either heroes or villains.
One of the earliest examples of genre science fiction that involves a challenging amount of unconventional sexual activity is the early novel Odd John (1935), by Olaf Stapledon. John is a mutant with extraordinary mental abilities who will not allow himself to be bound by many of the rules imposed by the ordinary British society of his time. The novel strongly implies that he seduces an older boy who becomes devoted to him but also suffers from the affront that the relationship creates to his own morals. 127

The Golden Age (1940–50s)

In the Golden Age of Science Fiction, the genre "resolutely ignored the whole subject" of homosexuality, according to Joanna Russ. Eric Garber, Lyn Paleo G K Hall: 1983 ISBN 978-0-8161-1832-8 As the readership for science fiction and fantasy began to age in the 1950s, however, writers like Philip Jose Farmer and Theodore Sturgeon were able to introduce more explicit sexuality into their work. Until the late 1960s, however, few other writers depicted alternative sexuality or revised gender roles, or openly investigated sexual questions. The majority of LGBT characters were depicted as caricatures, such as "man-hating amazons", and attempts at portraying homosexuals sympathetically or non-stereotypically were met with hostility.
Sturgeon wrote many stories during the Golden Age of Science Fiction that emphasised the importance of love, regardless of the current social norms. In his short story "The World Well Lost" (1953), its sensitive treatment of homosexuality was unusual for science fiction published at that time, and it is now regarded as a milestone in science fiction's portrayal of homosexuality. Delany, when Sturgeon first submitted the story, the editor (John W. Campbell) not only rejected it but phoned every other editor he knew and urged them to reject it as well. Delany, Introduction to Uranian Worlds: A Guide to Alternative Sexuality in Science Fiction, Fantasy, and Horror, p xviii, Ed. Eric Garber, Lyn Paleo G K Hall: 1983 ISBN 978-0-8161-1832-8Pearson, Hollinger & Gordon, p. 56 Sturgeon would later write Affair with a Green Monkey, which examined social stereotyping of homosexuals, and in 1960 published Venus Plus X, in which a single-gender society is depicted and the protagonist's homophobia portrayed unfavourably.
Images of homosexual male societies remained strongly negative in the eyes of most SF authors. For example, when overpopulation drives the world away from heterosexuality in Charles Beaumont's short story "The Crooked Man" (1955), first published in Playboy, inhumane homosexuals begin to oppress the heterosexual minority. In Anthony Burgess's The Wanting Seed  (1962) homosexuality is required for official employment; Burgess treats this as one aspect of an unnatural state of affairs which includes violent warfare and the failing of the natural world.
Although not usually identified as a genre writer, William S. Burroughs produced works with a surreal narrative that estranged the action from the ordinary world as science fiction and fantasy do. In 1959 he published Naked Lunch, the first of many works such as The Nova Trilogy and The Wild Boys in which he linked drug use and homosexuality as anti-authoritarian activities.

The New Wave era (1960–70s)

By the late 1960s, science fiction and fantasy began to reflect the changes prompted by the civil rights movement and the emergence of a counterculture.  Within the genres, these changes were incorporated into a movement called "the New Wave," a movement more sceptical of technology, more liberated socially, and more interested in stylistic experimentation. 3  New Wave writers were more likely to claim an interest in "inner space" instead of outer space. They were less shy about explicit sexuality and more sympathetic to reconsiderations of gender roles and the social status of sexual minorities. Under the influence of New Wave editors and authors such as Michael Moorcock (editor of the influential New Worlds), sympathetic depictions of alternative sexuality and gender multiplied in science fiction and fantasy, becoming commonplace. 752, "Science Fiction" The introduction of gay imagery has also been attributed to the influence of lesbian-feminist and gay liberation movements in the 1960s. x G K Hall: 1983 ISBN 0-8161-8573-5 In the 1970s, lesbians and gay men became a more visible presence in the SF community and as writers; notable gay authors included Joanna Russ, Thomas M. Disch and Samuel R. Delany., Daughters of Earth: Feminist Science Fiction in the Twentieth Century, "Simians, Cyborgs and Women", Joan Haran, p. 245
Feminist SF authors imagined cultures in which homo- and bisexuality and a variety of gender models were the norm. Joanna Russ's The Female Man (1975) and the award winning story "When It Changed", showing a female-only lesbian society that flourished without men, were enormously influential. Russ is largely responsible for introducing radical lesbian feminism into science fiction;Eric Garber, Lyn Paleo Uranian Worlds: A Guide to Alternative Sexuality in Science Fiction, Fantasy, and Horror, "Joanna Russ", p. 118, G K Hall: 1983 ISBN 978-0-8161-1832-8 she has stated that being openly lesbian was bad for her career and sales. Similar themes are explored in James Tiptree Jr.'s award-winning "Houston, Houston, Do You Read?", which presents a female-only society after the extinction of men from disease. The society lacks stereotypically "male" problems such as war, but is stagnant. The women reproduce via cloning and consider men to be comical. Tiptree was a closeted bisexual woman writing secretly under a male pseudonym,Alice Sheldon was bisexual. "I like some men a lot, but from the start, before I knew anything, it was always girls and women who lit me up." Julie Phillips, James Tiptree, Jr.: The Double Life of Alice B. Sheldon, St. Martin's PressHoustonvoice.": The amazing lives of writer Alice B. Sheldon  and explored the sexual impulse as her main theme.
Other feminist utopias do not include lesbianism: Ursula K. Le Guin's The Left Hand of Darkness (1969) depicts trans-species sexuality, in which individuals are neither "male" nor "female" but can have both male and female sexual organs and reproductive abilities, making them in some senses bisexual. In The Language of the Night, a collection of Le Guin's criticism, she admits to having "quite unnecessarily locked the Gethenians into heterosexuality ... the omission the homosexual option implies that sexuality is heterosexuality. I regret this very much."Garber & Paleo, "Nine Lives" p. 77 Sexual themes and fluid genders also figure in the works of John Varley, who came to prominence in the 1970s. Many of his stories contain mentions of same-sex love and gay and lesbian characters. 140 In his "Eight Worlds" suite of stories and novels, humanity has achieved the ability to change sex on a whim. Homophobia is shown to initially inhibit uptake of this technology, as in his story "Options", as it engenders drastic changes in relationships, with bisexuality eventually becoming the norm for society. 139 His Gaea trilogy features lesbian protagonists, and almost all the characters are to some degree bisexual. 140
Samuel R. Delany was one of the first openly gay science fiction authors;M. Keith Booker, Encyclopedia of Literature and Politics: Censorship, Revolution, and Writing, "Science Fiction" p. 639, 2005, Greenwood Publishing Group, ISBN 0-313-33568-0 in his earliest stories the gay sexual aspect appears as a "sensibility", rather than in overt sexual references. In some stories, such as Babel-17 (1966), same-sex love and same-sex intercourse are clearly implied but are given a kind of protective colouration because the protagonist is a woman who is involved in a three-person marriage with two men. The affection all three characters share for each other is in the forefront, and sexual activity between or among them is not directly described. In Dhalgren (1975), his most famous science fiction novel, Delany peoples his large canvas with characters of a wide variety of sexualities.David Seed Ed., A Companion to Science Fiction, "Samuel Delany" p. 403, ISBN 1-4051-1218-2
Delany's Nebula-winning short story "Aye, and Gomorrah" posits the development of neutered human astronauts and then depicts the people who become sexually oriented toward them. By imagining a new gender and resultant sexual orientation, the story allows readers to reflect on the real world while maintaining an estranging distance. Further award winning stories featuring gay characters, such as "Time Considered as a Helix of Semi-Precious Stones", were to follow, all collected in Delany's short story retrospective Aye, and Gomorrah, and other stories. Delany faced censorship from book distribution companies for treatment of these topics. In later works, gay themes become increasingly central to Delany's works, attracting controversy,David Seed Ed., A Companion to Science Fiction, "Samuel Delany" p. 404, ISBN 1-4051-1218-2 and some blur the line between science fiction and gay pornography.
Delany's SF series Return to Neveryon was the first novel from a major US publisher to deal with the impact of AIDS,Gaétan Brulotte & John Phillips,Encyclopedia of Erotic Literature', p.324, CRC Press, 2006, ISBN 1-57958-441-1 and he later won the William Whitehead Memorial Award for lifetime achievement in gay and lesbian writing., A Companion to Science Fiction'', "Samuel Delany" p. 399, ISBN 1-4051-1218-2

Other big name SF authors approached LGBT themes in individual works: In Time Enough for Love (1973) by Robert A. Heinlein, the main character argues strongly for the future liberty of homosexual sex, but sex for the purpose of procreation remains held as the ideal. 61 The female bisexuality in Stranger in a Strange Land (1961) has been described as mere titillation and male homosexuality in the same work was a "wrongness" deserving pity. 61 Heinlein's use of sexuality is discussed in an essay entitled "The Embarrassments of Science Fiction" by SF writer Thomas Disch. His other major SF novels also contained bisexual characters: in his mosaic novel 334, gay people are referred to as "republicans" in contrast to the straight "democrats". However, he did not try to write to a particular community: "I'm gay myself, but I don't write 'gay' literature."
Elizabeth Lynn is an openly lesbian science fiction and fantasy writer who has written numerous works featuring positive gay protagonists. Lynn: Biographical note" p. 84 Her Chronicles of Tornor novels  (1979–80), the first of which won the World Fantasy Award, were among the first fantasy novels to have gay relationships as an unremarkable part of the cultural background, and included explicit and sympathetic depictions of same-sex love;Garber & Paleo, "A different light" p. 83 the third novel is of particular lesbian interest. Her SF novel A Different Light (1978) featured a same-sex relationship between two men,Garber & Paleo, "The Dancers of Arun" p. 83 and inspired the name of the LGBT bookstore and chain "A Different Light". The "magical lesbian tale" "The Woman Who Loved the Moon" also won a World Fantasy Award and is the title story in the Lynn's The Woman Who Loved the Moon, a collection also containing other gay speculative fiction stories. 83

Modern SF (post New Wave)

After the pushing back of boundaries in the 1960s and 70s, homosexuality gained much wider acceptance, and was often incorporated into otherwise conventional SF stories with little comment. This was helped by the growing number of openly gay or lesbian authors, such as David Gerrold, Geoff Ryman, and transsexual writers such as Jessica Amanda Salmonson,Thomas M. Disch, The Dreams Our Stuff is Made Of: How Science Fiction Conquered the World, Simon and Schuster, 2000, page 134. an author who chronicled the progress of her gender change in the pages of The Literary Magazine of Fantasy and Terror. 832; ISBN 0-312-19869-8.  In the 1980s, blatant homophobia was no longer considered acceptable to most readers. However, depictions of unrealistic lesbians continue to propagate for the titillation of straight men in genre works. Eric Garber, Lyn Paleo G K Hall: 1983 ISBN 978-0-8161-1832-8  In the 1990s, stories depicting alternative sexualities experienced a resurgence.Wendy Pearson (March 1999), Identifying the Alien: Science Fiction meets its Other Science Fiction Studies, volume 26, Part 1, #77
Cyberpunk, a genre arising in the mid-1980s, has been seen as heteronormative and masculine to a large extent, although feminist and "queer" interpretations are mooted by some critics. 9Pearson, Hollinger & Gordon, p. 121 Melissa Scott, a lesbian writer, has written several cyberpunk works that prominently feature LGBT characters, including Lambda-award winning Trouble and Her Friends (1994) and Shadow Man (1995), the latter having also been inducted into the Gaylactic Spectrum Hall of Fame. Scott has reported that reviewers called some of these works "too gay" for mixing cyberpunk clichés with political themes. Many of Scott's other SF works also contain LGBT themes; she said that she chooses to write about gay themes using SF because these genres allow her to explore situations in which LGBT people are treated better or worse than in reality, and that it also gives an estranging distance for readers averse to such themes, who might otherwise feel accused of similar discriminatory practices as those in the books.
Uranian Worlds, by Eric Garber and Lyn Paleo, was compiled in 1983 and is an authoritative guide to science fiction literature featuring gay, lesbian, transgender, and related themes. The book covers science fiction literature published before 1990 (2nd edition, 1990), providing a short review and commentary on each piece.7
A number of LGBT-themed anthologies of speculative short fiction have been published since the 1980s, the first being the science fiction-themed Kindred Spirits (1984), edited by Jeffrey M. Elliot. These anthologies often focus on particular sexual identities, such as the New Exploits of Lesbians series with titles in the fantasy (Magical lesbians, Fairy-tale lesbians) and horror (Twilight lesbians) areas. Others are grouped around particular genres, such as the award-winning Bending the Landscape series edited by Nicola Griffith and Stephen Pagel, in which each of the three volumes focus upon science fiction, fantasy or horror; or the horror-oriented Queer Fear anthologies, edited by Michael Rowe.
Gay characters became common enough that Diana Wynne Jones' The Tough Guide To Fantasyland contains an entry on gay mages as a fantasy cliche. The Tough Guide To Fantasyland. DAW (December 1, 1998). ISBN 978-0-88677-832-3 Such characters are found in Mercedes Lackey's works, such as the Lambda award winning The Last Herald Mage trilogy (1989), in which the protagonists are gay and have magical powers. Their relationships are an integral part of the story, which takes places in the fictional country of Valdemar. Much of the extended series provides non-heterosexual role-models for younger readers. 554
David Gerrold is an openly-gay science fiction writer with a number of LGBT themed works. The Man Who Folded Himself examines the narcissistic love of a time-traveler who has gay orgies with alternate versions of himself, including female and lesbian versions.
Geoff Ryman wrote several award-winning novels and short stories that prominently feature LGBT characters: The protagonist of The Child Garden (1989), an outsider because of her resistance to genetic manipulation and her lesbianism, enters into a relationship with a similarly outcast lesbian polar bear. Lust follows a gay man who finds that his sexual fantasies are magically coming true. Was (1992) includes a gay actor with AIDS and a mentally-challenged abused child, linked by their connection to The Wizard of Oz books and film.92 In a Locus magazine interview Ryman claimed that the gay and SF genre markets are incompatible: "In 1990, if you had asked me which was the worst thing to be labeled as, gay or an SF writer, I'd have said gay: kills you stone-dead in the market. Then Was came out.... They had it in the gay section of bookstores and they had stuff in gay magazines, but they didn't say SF — at which point I realized that being a science fiction writer is worse than being gay."
In 2003, J.K. Rowling's statement that Albus Dumbledore, a character in her Harry Potter series, was gay caused some controversy. More recently in Rick Riordan's 2013 teen-fantasy novel The House of Hades, character Nico Di Angelo has recently professed romantic feelings for Percy Jackson.
In terms of gender identity, in his novel 2312 Kim Stanley Robinson depicts a world of fluid gender, where "self-images for gender" include feminine, masculine, androgynous, gyandromorphous, hermaphrodite, ambisexual, bisexual, intersex, neuter, eunuch, nonsexual, undifferentiated, gay, lesbian, queer, invert, homosexual, polymorphous, poly, labile, berdache, hijra, and two-spirit.

Comics and manga

For much of the 20th century, gay relationships were discouraged from being shown in comics which were seen mainly as directed towards children. Until 1989, the Comics Code Authority (CCA), which imposed de facto censorship on comics sold through news stands in the United States, forbade any suggestion of homosexuality. Overt gay and lesbian themes were first found in underground and alternative titles which did not carry the CCA's seal of approval.
The CCA came into being in response to Fredric Wertham's Seduction of the Innocent, in which comic book creators were accused of attempting to negatively influence children with images of violence and sexuality, including subliminal homosexuality. Wertham claimed Wonder Woman's strength and independence made her a lesbian,Wertham, Fredric (1954) Seduction of the Innocent, pp. 192 and 234–235, Reinhart & Company, Inc. and stated that "The Batman type of story may stimulate children to homosexual fantasies."
In recent years the number of LGBT characters has increased greatly in mainstream superhero comics; however, LGBT characters continue to be relegated to supporting roles, and generate criticism for the treatment gay characters receive.

Marvel

Alpha Flight's Northstar was the first major gay character in the Marvel universe and remains the most famous gay character in mainstream comics. Created by Marvel comics in 1979 as a member of the original Alpha Flight superhero team, Northstar's sexual identity was hinted at early in his history, in 1983 in issues 7 and 8 of Alpha Flight, but not openly stated; his apparent lack of interest in women was chalked up to his obsessive drive to win as a ski champion.
In 2002, Marvel Comics revived The Rawhide Kid in their Marvel MAX imprint, The first edition of the Rawhide Kid's gay saga was called Slap Leather. According to a CNN. com article, the character's sexuality is conveyed indirectly, through euphemisms and puns, and the comic's style is campy.  Conservative groups quickly protested the gay take on the character and claimed that children would be corrupted by it, and the covers carried an "Adults only" label.
Marvel's policy had stated that all series emphasizing solo gay characters must carry an "Adults Only" label, in response to conservative protests. But in 2006, Marvel editor-in-chief Joe Quesada claimed that this policy was no longer in force, In 2012, despite protests, Marvel published an issue of Astonishing X-Men in which Northstar married his partner, Kyle.

DC

DC often still draws criticism for its use of stereotypes for LGBT characters. Firebrand, a superhero debuting in 1941, is thought by some to be an early example, with his pink or transparent costume. A more modern example is the violent vigilante superhero Midnighter. The Batman-like Midnighter was shown as being in a relationship with the Superman-like Apollo during their time as members of the superhero team The Authority.
In addition to true LGBT characters, there has been controversy over various homosexual interpretations of the most famous superhero comic book characters. Batman's relationship with Robin has famously come under scrutiny, in spite of the majority of creators associated with the creator denying that the character is gay. Psychologist Fredric Wertham, who in Seduction of the Innocent asserted that "Batman stories are psychologically homosexual", claimed to find a "subtle atmosphere of homoeroticism which pervades the adventures of the mature 'Batman' and his young friend 'Robin'". Seduction of the Innocent. Rinehart and Company, Inc., 1954. pg. 189–90 It has also been claimed that Batman is interesting to gay audiences because "he was one of the first fictional characters to be attacked on the grounds of his presumed homosexuality," and "the 1960s TV series remains a touchstone of camp."Medhurst, Andy. "Batman, Deviance, and Camp." The Many Lives of the Batman: Critical Approaches to a Superhero and His Media. Routledge: London, 1991. ISBN 0-85170-276-7, pg. 150 Frank Miller has described the relationship between Batman and the Joker as a "homophobic nightmare",Sharrett, Christopher. "Batman and the Twilight of the Idols: An Interview with Frank Miller." The Many Lives of the Batman: Critical Approaches to a Superhero and His Media. Routledge: London, 1991. ISBN 0-85170-276-7, pp. 37–38 he views the character as sublimating his sexual urges into crime fighting.
Some continue to play off the homosexual interpretations of Batman. One notable example occurred in 2000, when DC Comics refused to allow permission for the reprinting of four panels (from Batman #79, 92, 105 and 139) to illustrate Christopher York's paper All in the Family: Homophobia and Batman Comics in the 1950s.
Many of DC's gay characters, such as Obsidian and Renee Montoya, were changed or essentially erased in The New 52 reboot. Meanwhile, others, such as Kate Kane, were given far less attention than before the reboot. In 2012 DC announced that an "iconic" character would now be gay in the new DC universe. It was then revealed that Alan Scott, the original Green Lantern was that character. This led to fan outcry because his status as "iconic" is debatable, and he does not actually exist in the mainstream DC universe. This also effectively meant that the already gay character, Obsidian, could not exist as he was Alan Scott's child.

Manga

Yaoi and Yuri (also known as Boys' Love and Girls' Love, respectively, as well as Shōnen-ai and Shōjo-ai in the West, although these are not used in Japan due to pedophilic undertones) are Japanese genres which have homosexual romance themes, across a variety of media. Yaoi and yuri have spread beyond Japan: both translated and original yaoi and yuri is now available in many countries and languages. The characters of yaoi and yuri do not tend to self-identify as homosexual or bisexual. Why are Japanese Girls' Comics full of Boys Bonking? Refractory: A Journal of Entertainment Media Vol. 10, 2006/2007Lees, Sharon (June 2006). "Yaoi and Boys Love". Akiba Angels.
Yaoi has been criticised for stereotypical and homophobic portrayals of its characters,Lunsing, Wim. Yaoi Ronsō: Discussing Depictions of Male Homosexuality in Japanese Girls' Comics, Gay Comics and Gay Pornography Intersections: Gender, History and Culture in the Asian Context Issue 12, January 2006 Accessed 12 August 2008.Vincent, Keith (2007) "A Japanese Electra and her Queer Progeny" Mechademia 2 pp.64-79Wood, Andrea. (Spring 2006). "Straight" Women, Queer Texts: Boy-Love Manga and the Rise of a Global Counterpublic. WSQ: Women's Studies Quarterly, 34 (1/2), pp. 394–414.
There is also a style of manga called Bara, which is typically written by gay men for a gay male adult audience. Bara often has more realistic themes than yaoi and is more likely to acknowledge homophobia and the taboo nature of homosexuality in Japan. While western commentators sometimes group bara and yaoi together, writers and fans consider them separate genres."Boys' Love," Yaoi, and Art Education: Issues of Power and Pedagogy

Film and television

In general, speculative fiction on television and film has lagged behind literature in its portrayals of homosexuality. Sexual relationships in major speculative fiction franchises have generally been depicted as heterosexual in nature. Inter-species and inter-ethnic relationships have been commonly depicted, while homosexual and transgendered (LGBT) relationships are more rare.

Film

LGBT characters in films began to appear more regularly only in the 1980s. Films in the late 1920s and early 1930s reflected the liberal attitudes of the day and could include sexual innuendos and references to homosexuality,
Films produced under such censorship could only introduce homosexuality as a disguised undercurrent, and still flirted with controversy in doing so, such as in the cult horror film White Zombie.
The less stringent rules of the post-Hayes film industry allowed sexuality to be more open, and cinema as a whole became more sexually explicit from the 1980s in particular, but aimed to purely to entertain rather than exploring underlying sexual dynamics. Much of the sex in speculative fiction film is merely intended to titillate; a review of fantasy films identified 10-15% as softcore pornography.xxx, "Pornography" but it remained rare to see gay characters in speculative fiction films. Horror films, that had sex as one of their major preoccupations, continued to be more leniently censored, due to the perception of being unserious and lightweight. Vampires in particular have been described as obvious erotic metaphors and as a result, numerous vampire films since the 1970s strongly imply or explicitly show lesbianism, following the inspiration of lesbian vampire story Carmilla. The prototypical Hollywood vampire, Dracula, was shown to be openly gay in the spoof film Does Dracula Suck? in 1969.
Gay genre films remain rare,The Year in Gay Movies, AfterElton. Still there are some curious cases like Cthulhu  (2007) a horror/thriller film based on the works of H. P. Lovecraft, in which the main character is gay but it isn't the main thing, although it is important in the development of the character's psychology. The film is plagued with monsters and disturbing happenings. Also, in V for Vendetta there are two secondary characters - one gay, one lesbian - shown as victims of the totalitarian dystopia. 2012 saw the light of the epic Wachowskis + Tom Tykwer blockbuster, Cloud Atlas, featuring in one of the six stories a couple of gay characters.

Television

LGBT characters began appearing on television with increasing frequency only in the 1990s. The 1994 television science fiction show, Babylon 5 introduced a bisexual character, Susan Ivanova whose relationship with a fellow female telepath was revealed in season 2 (1995). Advocate magazine called this relationship out as the closest that the Star Trek franchise or any "Star Trek clone," as he called the show, had come to a "gay creature—much less a gay human being."
The Xena: Warrior Princess fantasy television series introduced its main characters, Xena and Gabrielle, as close companions; fan speculation about lesbian overtones led to them becoming lesbian icons, although the lesbian content remained at the subtext level.
Torchwood is a British science fiction drama television programme, part of the long-running Doctor Who franchise, which began airing in 2006 on BBC Three. The series explores several themes in its narrative, in particular LGBT themes. Various characters are portrayed as sexually fluid; through those characters, the series examines homosexual and bisexual relationships. Although the nature of their sexual flexibility is not explicitly discussed, the characters offer varying perspectives on orientation,
Series creator Russell T Davies has said that he hopes to defy audience expectations of monosexual characters: "Without making it political or dull, this is going to be a very bisexual programme. I want to knock down the barriers so we can't define which of the characters is gay. We need to start mixing things up, rather than thinking, 'This is a gay character and he'll only ever go off with men.'"
Davies has also described Jack Harkness as omnisexual: "He'll shag anything with a hole. Jack doesn't categorise people: if he fancies you, he'll do it with you."
The inclusion of significant LGBT characters in modern speculative fiction television series has not been universal. For example the Star Trek franchise's lack of same-sex relationships has long been a sore spot with LGBT fandom, some of whom have organised boycotts against the franchise to protest its failure to include LGBT characters. They also point out that Gene Roddenberry had made statements in later life favourable to acceptance of homosexuality and the portrayal of same-sex relationships in Star Trek, but that the franchise's coverage has remained meagre.
Within the Star Trek canon, there have been no officially recognized LGBT characters in the television spin-offs.  The International Review of Science Fiction ran a feature entitled "Prisoners of Dogma and Prejudice: Why There Are no G/L/B/T Characters in Star Trek: Deep Space 9"
In 2005 the television series Dante's Cove premiered on the here! cable station. The series included both gay and lesbian couples dealing with supernatural situations in the costal town of the same name. The following year, Syfy premiered the series Eureka. The series spotlighted a fictional town in Oregon that consisted almost entirely of geniuses. This included the town's cafe owner Vincent, who also happened to be gay.
HBO brought then new series True Blood to the forefront of gay genre television, introducing a variety of omnisexual characters to the small screen in 2008 including: Lafayette Reynolds (played by Nelsan Ellis), Jesus Velasquez (played by Kevin Alejandro), Tara Thornton (played by Rutina Wesley), Pam Swynford De Beaufort (played by Kristin Bauer van Straten), Eddie Gauthier (played by Stephen Root), Russell Edgington (played by Denis O'Hare), and Rev. Steve Newlin (played by Michael McMillian).
Stargate Universe in 2009 became the first space-based science fiction show to feature an openly gay character in its primary cast, which was "Camille Wray" played by Ming-Na. "Wray" was also the first gay character in the franchise and the first primary lesbian Asian-American character on primetime television.
In 2009 the series Warehouse 13 premiered on the Syfy cable network. The series later introduced a character named Steve Jinks, played by actor Aaron Ashmore, a gay government agent assigned to assist in the containment of bizarre artifacts.
In 2010 a cable series prequel to Battlestar Galactica was introduced titled Caprica. The series highlighted a world in which same-sex marriage was common. One of the central characters named Sam Adama, played by Sasha Roiz, had a husband named Larry, played by Julius Chapple.
In 2011 the cable station Syfy premiered the series Being Human, an Americanized version of the previously released British series of the same name. A lesbian character named Emily Levison, played by actress Alison Louder, was introduced as the sister to one of the main characters. That same year the FX cable series American Horror Story highlighted gay ghost couple Chad Warwick and Patrick, played by Zachary Quinto and Teddy Sears. The HBO cable station premiered Game of Thrones, based on the book series of the same name. The series included gay couple Renly Baratheon and Loras Tyrell, played by actors Gethin Anthony and Finn Jones. MTV also premiered the cable series Teen Wolf that same year. One of the characters depicted is an out gay high school lacrosse player named Danny Mahealani, played by Keahu Kahuanui.

Slash fiction

The platonic close male relationships in television and film science fiction have been reinterpreted by fans as slash fiction - Kirk/Spock being the earliest example., A Companion to Science Fiction, "Science Fiction/Criticism" p. 57, ISBN 1-4051-1218-2 Slash cannot be commercially distributed due to copyright, and until the 1990s was either undistributed or published in zines.) Encyclopedia of Erotic Literature New York: Routledge, pp. 1233-1235. With the advent of the internet, the slash fiction community of fans and writers began to cluster at sites such as fanfiction.[ref]
</ref>  These demographics are older than the yaoi fans and they tend to be more easily disturbed about slash depicting underage sexuality,<ref>
[/ref]  but this is becoming less true due to the popularity of Harry Potter-inspired slash fiction. The World of Yaoi: The Internet, Censorship and the Global "Boys' Love" Fandom Australian Feminist Law Journal, 2005.
Femslash is a subgenre of slash fiction which focuses on romantic and/or sexual relationships between female fictional characters,Lo, Malinda. (4 January 2006) Fan Fiction Comes Out of the Closet AfterEllen. Retrieved 19 July 2007. Typically, characters featured in femslash are heterosexual in the canon universe; however, similar fan fiction about lesbian characters are commonly labeled as femslash for convenience. (April 2005) The Internet World of Fan Fiction Virginia Commonwealth University. Retrieved 12 August 2007.  There is less femslash than there is slash based on male couples - it has been suggested that heterosexual female slash authors generally do not write femslash,  It is "relatively recently" that male writers have begun writing femslash.com/Volumes/Slayage_Volume_4.pdf

Reaction of the speculative fiction community

There has been a long history of tolerance of LGBT people in SF fandom. The presence of gay members was noted by attendees of early conventions, but generally not discussed — the idea that gay or lesbian members would seek recognition within the SF community was "unthinkable," and an accusation in the 1940s by a fanzine editor that the Los Angeles Science Fiction Association was "full of gay members" caused a scandal in fan circles.136 Prominent SF fan Forrest Ackerman is regarded as one of the first members of fandom to openly support the gay and lesbian movements. He was known for writing early lesbian fiction and aided in the publication of The Ladder, the journal of the recently formed lesbian group the Daughters of Bilitis. He claims the group named him an honorary lesbian for his support, and to have pseudonymously written the earliest work of "lesbian SF" in 1947 in Vice Versa, the lesbian fanzine edited by Lisa Ben.
As the number of works featuring LGBT characters increased, so did the visibility of LGBT fans. At least as early as the 1980 Worldcon (Noreascon Two), there were gatherings of gay and gay-friendly members of the SF community, including Samuel R. Delany, Marion Zimmer Bradley and Melissa Scott. 139 However, such meetings did not necessarily indicate whole-hearted acceptance within the fan community, and gay and lesbian fans were not regarded as a unified interest group. Informal gatherings at conferences and the attempted creation of a newsletter for LGBT fans drew little notice. 140
Networking between gay fans continued, finally coalescing at the 1986 Worldcon into a plan of action. This led to the first Gaylaxicon science fiction convention being held in 1988 and subsequently to the creation of the Gaylactic Network and the Gaylactic Spectrum Awards by the science fiction community. Gay-themed discussions are now a staple at conventions such as WisCon; for example, WisCon 30 featured a panel discussing "Why Women Write About Gay Men", and the 38th World Science Fiction Convention in Boston had a discussion panel entitled "The Closed Open Mind — Homophobia in Science Fiction and Fantasy Stories".
Other SF authors, such as Orson Scott Card, have been criticised by the LGBT community for their works or opinions, which have been described as homophobic."Orson Scott Card Draws Gay Protest", 'Science Fiction Chronicles '13'''(6), March 1992.
Some lesbian science fiction is targeted specifically to a lesbian audience, rather than science fiction fans, and published by small feminist or lesbian presses such as Bella Books.

LGBT speculative fiction awards

A number of awards exist that recognise works at the intersection of LGBT and speculative fiction:



Footnotes

 SF is used throughout as an abbreviation for speculative fiction, for convenience. Science fiction and slash fiction are written in full when referred to specifically.

 Collected in In a Glass Darkly.

 Collected in A Saucer of Loneliness.

 Collected in Her Smoke Rose Up Forever.

 Collected in The Wind's Twelve Quarters.






