[[Ronald Reagan Presidential Library]]

CATEGORIES: Library buildings completed in 1991, Buildings and monuments honoring American Presidents, Museums in Ventura County, California, Presidential libraries, Presidential museums in California, Ronald Reagan, Buildings and structures in Simi Valley, California, Libraries in Ventura County, California

The Ronald Reagan Presidential Library and Center for Public Affairs is the presidential library and final resting place of Ronald Wilson Reagan, the 40th President of the United States. Designed by Hugh Stubbins and Associates, the library is located in Simi Valley, California, about  west of Chatsworth. The library may be accessed by driving to the Olsen Road exit of State Route 23, which connects to the nearby Ronald Reagan Freeway, State Route 118.
The Reagan Library is the largest of the thirteen federally operated presidential libraries. The street address, 40 Presidential Drive, is numbered in honor of Reagan's place as the 40th President.
The Reagan Library is open daily from 10am - 5pm, with the exception of a few holidays (Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day and New Year's Day). Parking is free, as is access to the grounds surrounding the library, but there is an admission fee for entry into the library and special exhibits. 

Dedication

It was initially planned to build the Reagan Library at Stanford University, and an agreement was reached with the university in 1984. Only Former First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis did not attend.

Facilities

When the Reagan Library opened it was the largest of the presidential libraries, with approximately 
As a Presidential library administered by the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA), the Reagan Library, under the authority of the Presidential Records Act, is the repository of presidential records for Reagan's administration. Holdings include 50 million pages of presidential documents, over 1.6 million photographs, a half million feet of motion picture film and tens of thousands of audio and video tapes. The Library also houses personal papers collections including documents from Reagan's eight years as Governor of California.

Exhibits and scenery

The museum features continually changing temporary exhibits and a permanent exhibit covering President Reagan's life. This exhibit begins during Reagan's childhood in Dixon, Illinois and follows his life through his film career and military service, marriage to Nancy Davis Reagan, and political career.
A full-scale replica of the Oval Office — a feature of most presidential libraries — is a prominent feature of this museum as well.
The hilltop grounds provide expansive views of the area, a re-creation of a portion of the White House Lawn, and, like many presidential libraries, a piece of the Berlin Wall. An F-14 Tomcat (BuNo 162592) is also located on the grounds.

Artifacts controversy

On November 8, 2007, Reagan Library National Archives officials reported that due to poor record-keeping, they are unable to say whether approximately 80,000 artifacts have been stolen or are lost inside the massive museum complex. The National Archives labeled the Reagan library as having the most serious problems with its inventory. In an audit, U.S. Archivist Allen Weinstein blamed the library's poor inventory software for the mishap. Frederick J. Ryan Jr., president of the Ronald Reagan Presidential Foundation's board of directors, said the allegations of poor management practices at the library reflect badly on the National Archives. The library has undertaken a massive inventory project that will take years to complete.

Air Force One Pavilion

A 
SAM 27000 is part of a comprehensive display about presidential travel that also includes a Johnson-era Sikorsky VH-3 Sea King, call sign Marine One, The pavilion is also home to the original O'Farrell's pub from Ballyporeen in the Republic of Ireland that President and Mrs. Reagan visited in June 1984, now called the "Ronald Reagan Pub." Also featured are exhibits on the Cold War and Reagan's extensive travels aboard Air Force One.
On June 9, 2008, Secretary of Education Margaret Spellings joined Nancy Reagan to dedicate the Reagan Library Discovery Center, located in the Air Force One Pavilion.  The center is an interactive youth exhibit in which fifth through eighth grade students participate in role-playing exercises based on events of the Reagan administration.
The pavilion has been used on several occasions as the venue for televised Republican Party primary-related debates (see below).

Center for Public Affairs

The Reagan Library has hosted many events, including the funeral of Ronald Reagan in June 2004, and the first Republican presidential candidates' debate of the 2008 primaries. On May 23, 2007, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and Australian Foreign Minister Alexander Downer held a brief private talk and a press conference.

Ronald Reagan's funeral

Following his death, Reagan's casket was driven by hearse to the Reagan Library on June 7, 2004 from Point Mugu through a 25 mph procession down Las Posas Road to U.S. 101.  Many people lined the streets and freeway overpasses to pay final respects. A memorial service was held in the library lobby with Nancy Reagan, Reagan's children, close relatives, and friends. The Reverend Dr. Michael Wenning officiated at the service.
From June 7 to 9, Reagan's casket lay in repose in the library lobby, where approximately 105,000 people viewed the casket to pay their respects. After flying the body to Washington, D.C., lying in state in the Capitol rotunda, and a national funeral service in the Washington National Cathedral, Reagan's casket was brought back to the library in California for a last memorial service and interment.
Construction plans for the library included a tomb for the eventual use of Reagan and his wife. Following a sunset service on the library grounds the previous evening, early on the morning of June 12, 2004 Reagan was laid to rest in the underground vault.

Republican primary debates

On May 3, 2007, the Ronald Reagan Presidential Foundation and Nancy Reagan hosted the first 2008 Republican primary debate in the Library's Air Force One Pavilion. The candidates present included Kansas Senator Sam Brownback, former Virginia Governor Jim Gilmore, former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani, former Arkansas Governor Mike Huckabee, Representative Duncan Hunter of California, Senator John McCain of Arizona, Representative Ron Paul of Texas, former Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney, Representative Tom Tancredo of Colorado, and Tommy Thompson, former Governor of Wisconsin and President George W. Bush's first Secretary of Health and Human Services. Mrs. Reagan, California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger, and Fred Ryan, Chairman of the Ronald Reagan Presidential Foundation were among those in attendance. Candidates discussed the War in Iraq, the War on Terror, taxes, healthcare, abortion, stem-cell research, gay rights, illegal immigration, and made at least 20 individual references directly or in passing, to Ronald Reagan and his presidency.
On January 30, 2008, after the Republican candidates were narrowed to four — Mitt Romney, Mike Huckabee, Ron Paul, and John McCain — the Library was the scene of the final GOP debate, once again hosted by the Reagan Foundation and Mrs. Reagan.
The Library announced that it would once again host the first Republican primary debate of future 2012 Republican candidates on May 2, 2011.  The debate was co-hosted by NBC News and Politico.

Centennial and library renovation

The Ronald Reagan Presidential Foundation and GE announced a partnership beginning March 17, 2010, to support the two-year-long celebration of President Reagan's 100th birthday on February 6, 2011. GE, for whom Reagan hosted General Electric Theater and served as a goodwill ambassador from 1954 to 1962, prior to being elected Governor of California, will serve as the Presenting Sponsor of the historic Reagan Centennial Celebration.
GE's overall participation as Presenting Sponsor of the Ronald Reagan Centennial Celebration includes:
The Reagan Centennial is also being led by the National Youth Leadership Committee. Notable members of the Committee include chairpersons Nick Jonas, Jordin Sparks and Austin Dillon, as well as famous non-chairpersons, including actress Anna Maria Perez de Tagle, Olympic bronze medalist Bryon Wilson, Olympian and X-Games medalist Hannah Teter, and recording artist Jordan Pruitt. Several other Olympians and athletes are also members of the Committee.






