[[Eynsham]]

CATEGORIES: Villages in Oxfordshire, West Oxfordshire, Civil parishes in Oxfordshire

Eynsham  east of Witney, in Oxfordshire, England.

History

Eynsham grew up near the historically important ford of Swinford on the River Thames flood plain. Excavations have shown that the site was used in the Bronze Age for a rectilinear enclosure on the edge of the gravel terrace.
The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle records Eynsham as Egonesham and describes it as one of four towns that the Saxons captured from the Britons in AD 571. Evidence has been found of 6th and 7th century Saxon buildings The name is recorded in AD 864 (in the dative) as Egenes homme = "Ægen's enclosure or river-meadow".
In 1005 Aethelmar, kinsman of Aethelred II founded a Benedictine abbey on the site of the earlier minster. The first abbot was Ælfric of Eynsham, a prolific writer in Old English. By the medieval period Eynsham Abbey was one of the largest in the area, but it was dissolved at the Reformation in 1538 and only a few remains are still visible. The Church of England parish church of Saint Leonard dates from the 13th century. and most recently through the fundraising efforts of the whole community over a period of eight years in the 1980s.
By 1302 Eynsham had a wharf handling freight including hay, straw, malt, grain and timber. It was beside the Talbot Inn on Wharf Stream, a tributary of the Thames. By 1790 the newly completed Oxford Canal was trading with Eynsham Wharf, primarily to sell coal from the Midlands. perhaps in response to the Railway Mania that was beginning to take traffic from canals and navigations.
Eynsham Lock is on the Thames just above the confluence with Wharf Stream. This was the last flash lock on the Thames, and was not rebuilt as a pound lock until 1928.
The village suffered a number of fires in its history.
The Bartholomew Room was built in 1703; the result of an endowment from a John Bartholomew in 1701 to found a charity school for the parish.
The fortunes of the main road through Eynsham have fluctuated. By the middle of the 18th century Swinford had a ferry, but the road was in poor condition. The heavier road traffic between Oxford and Witney preferred to pass further north via Bladon, where the better-maintained Oxford — Woodstock and Witney — Woodstock roads met. When the latter was made into a turnpike in 1751, the road via Eynsham and Swinford ferry was included as a branch of it.
Eynsham was an important coaching stop on the London — Fishguard trunk road. Since 1922 this has been classified as the A40 road. In 1936 a bypass for the main road was built north of the village, and the road over Swinford bridge was reclassified as the B4044.
The Witney Railway between Witney and Yarnton was built through Eynsham parish and opened in 1861. Eynsham railway station was on the south side of the village. The Great Western Railway took over the line in 1890 and enlarged Eynsham station in 1944. British Railways closed the line to passenger trains in 1962. In 1970 the line closed to freight traffic and was dismantled.
In 1895 Herbert May founded a Roman Catholic mission at his home, Newland Lodge.

Amenities

Local industries include gravel extraction and the large superconducting magnet factory, Siemens Magnet Technology Ltd. There is also a business park on the village outskirts.
Eynsham Primary SchoolEynsham Primary School is a community primary school. Bartholomew SchoolBartholomew School in Eynsham is the county secondary school for the village and surrounding area. Its partnership Primary Schools are Eynsham Primary, Standlake, Stanton Harcourt, Freeland, Cassington and Hanborough. It is a specialist Technology College.Bartholomew School
Eynsham Football Club plays in Witney and District Football League Division One.Witney and District Football League Eynsham Cricket ClubEynsham Cricket Club plays in Oxfordshire Cricket Association League Division Three.Oxfordshire Cricket Association
Eynsham has a Women's InstituteOxfordshire Federation of Women's Institutes and a Morris dancing side.Eynsham Morris

Notable residents

Gallery

Image:Oxfordeynsham5.JPG|Swinford Bridge
Image:Oxfordeynsham6.JPG|The River Thames near Eynsham
Image:Oxford-eynsham-osm-map.png|Map of the town





Sources and further reading




