[[Military funeral]]

CATEGORIES: Military life, Military traditions, State ritual and ceremonies, Funerals

A military funeral is a memorial or burial rite given by a country's military for a soldier, sailor, marine or airman who died in battle, a veteran, or other prominent military figures or heads of state. A military funeral may feature guards of honor, the firing of volley shots as a salute, drumming and other military elements, with a flag draping over the coffin.

Canada

Canadian military funerals involve many rituals seen in other parts of the world. The Royal Canadian Horse Artillery use a 25-pounder gun and limber as the funeral vehicle. Muffled drums accompany the graveside processional. The deceased's headdress, insignia and medals are borne on a velvet cushion into the funeral service. Volleys are fired over the grave when the body is interred. Countries in the Commonwealth duplicate the British military drill and ceremony. The Canadian funeral described above typifies the funerary service. The bugle tune Last Post is played as the body is interred.

Chile

In Chilean military funerals, due to its Prussian military tradition, the German song "Ich hatt' einen Kameraden" is  sung.

Germany

In Germany, Ludwig Uhland's song "Ich hatt' einen Kameraden" is an integral part of a military funeral.

Indonesia

In Indonesia, military funerals are generally given only military members or former guerrillas, Konfrontasi and Trikora Operation Soldiers, especially those holding the Bintang Gerilya (Star of the Guerrilla). Exceptional politicians and Ministers have the option for such a funeral, but most opt for a more intimate religious one. Music is not performed as it is not part of Indonesian military tradition. A 21-gun volley salute is the norm by seven soldiers- occasionally a mixture of armed forces dependent on their career,(example- a Minister of Transportation may have been a career Army soldier, became a bureaucrat and assisted the national aviation or maritime industry- thus the corresponding Force would send soldiers as gratitude) Honour drill team is platoon-size formation and larger the more illustrious the departed. A good example of an Indonesian military burial is that of the late president Suharto- (although obvious major differences exist)

Italy

In Italy the members of the Armed Forces who died in the line of duty are granted a state funeral by decree of the Prime Minister. So the funeral follows the protocol of a state funeral, and in particular the six officers in high uniform who carry the coffin are members of the same Armed Force of the departed.

Poland

In Poland, the last fragment of Władysław Tarnowski's song Śpij, kolego ("Sleep, friend"), is an integral part of a military funeral.

Spain

In Spain, the  formed troops sing "La muerte no es el final": Death is not the End during funeral ceremonies and in all military ceremonies, when the fallen are being honored. The Spanish Legion has an exception: the regimental hymn Novio de la Muerte (Bridegroom of Death) is played in full instead during occasions that the Legion attends.

United Kingdom

The British army carries reversed arms at military funerals. 

United States of America

In the United States, the United States Army Military District of Washington (MDW) is responsible for providing military funerals. "Honoring Those Who Served" is the title of the program for instituting a dignified military funeral with full honors to the nation's veterans.
As of January 1, 2000, Section 578 of Public Law 106-65 of the National Defense Authorization Act mandates that the United States Armed Forces shall provide the rendering of honors in a military funeral for any eligible veteran if requested by his or her family. As mandated by federal law, an honor guard detail for the burial of an eligible veteran shall consist of no fewer than two members of the Armed Forces. One member of the detail shall be a representative of the parent armed service of the deceased veteran. The honor guard detail will, at a minimum, perform a ceremony that includes the folding and presenting of the flag of the United States to the next of kin and the playing of Taps which will be played by a lone bugler, if available, or by audio recording. Today, there are so few buglers available that the United States Armed Forces often cannot provide one. However, federal law allows Reserve and National Guard units to assist with funeral honors duty when necessary.

Other

Gallery

File:Funeral henry bell.S. Navy Rear Admiral Henry H. Bell held in Hiogo, Japan on January 14, 1868.
File:Reginald Warneford funeral.
File:Richthofen funeral. 3 Squadron RAAF who carry his coffin in Bertangles Cemetery, France on April 22, 1918.
File:Bundesarchiv Bild 183-J27851, Staatsakt für Helmut Lent.
File:3-inch-gun-arlington-19980810.
File:Chapmans Coffin. Chapman on January 8, 2002 at Seattle-Tacoma International Airport.
File:Space Shuttle Columbia funeral -c.S. Navy Captain Laurel Blair Salton Clark, a crew member of the Space Shuttle Columbia who perished with the rest of her crewmates during the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster in 2003. 
File:Smoke Smith42.
File:Caspar Weinberger 2006-04-04 funeral N-0696M-380.
File:Novosel FuneralProcession 20060413. Novosel during a ceremonial funeral procession at Arlington National Cemetery where he was laid to rest on April 13, 2006.
File:US Navy 040316-N-3560G-017 The Ceremonial Unit assigned to Naval Air Station Lemoore renders full honors at a military funeral at San Joaquin National Cemetery, Gustine, Calif.
File:US Navy 071031-N-1134L-019 Ceremonial marching platoons assigned to Military District Washington enter the U.S. Naval Academy Cemetery as part of the funeral procession for former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Adm. Wil. Crowe in 2007.
File:Zembiec coffin and pallbearers. Zembiec, former commander of E Company, 2nd Battalion, 1st Marine Regiment from the Naval Academy Chapel in Annapolis, Maryland following a funeral service held in his honor. 
File:Sundown ceremony at Kandahar Air Field, Afghanistan, July 17, 2009. Sebastien Courcy during a sundown ramp ceremony at Kandahar Air Field, Afghanistan on July 17, 2009.
File:Funeral140675.





Further reading

Images and sounds


