[[Levantine Arabic]]

CATEGORIES: Arabic languages, Languages of Syria, Languages of Lebanon, Languages of Jordan, Languages of Palestine, Languages of Israel

Levantine Arabic (), is a broad dialect of Arabic spoken in the 100 to 200 km-wide Eastern Mediterranean coastal strip.170 It is considered one of the five major varieties of Arabic.20 In the frame of the general diglossia status of the Arab world, Levantine Arabic is used for daily spoken use, while most of the written and official documents and media use Modern Standard Arabic. It is part of Eastern Arabic that includes Mesopotamian Arabic and peninsular Arabic along with Levantine.
On the basis of the criterion of mutual intelligibility, Levantine Arabic could be regarded as a self-standing language (with different variants or dialects as explained below), as distinct from other members of the Arabic language family such as Egyptian Arabic, Maghrebi Arabic or Peninsular Arabic, in the same way as French, Spanish, Italian and Romanian are all descended from Latin but are separate languages within the family of Romance languages.

Generalities

Location

Levantine Arabic is spoken in the fertile strip on the eastern shores of the Mediterranean. To the East, in the desert, one finds North Arabian Bedouin varieties. The transition to Egyptian Arabic in the South via the Sinai desert where Bedouin varieties are spoken, was described by de Jong in 1999,Rudolf de Jong, Characteristics of Bedouin dialects in southern Sinai: preliminary observations, in, Manfred Woidich, Martine Haak, Rudolf Erik de Jong,, eds., Approaches to Arabic dialects: a collection of articles presented to Manfred Woidich on the occasion of his sixtieth birthday, BRILL, 2004, pp.151-176 while the region of el-Karak announces Hijazi Arabic.

Main features

The most distinctive feature of Levantine Arabic is probably its stress pattern, which remains closest to the Classical Arabic among all varieties. It ignores the gahawa syndrome typical of the Mesopotamian and Peninsular Arabic ( 'that you drink'.
As in most Arabic-speaking areas, the spoken language differs significantly between urban, rural and nomad populations. 

Origin

The area where Levantine Arabic is spoken has historically been home to other Semitic speakers for millennia, with written records beginning with the East Semitic languages Eblaite and Akkadian and then the Central Semitic languages, which are Arabic and the Northwest Semitic languages, which included Ugaritic and the Canaanite languages. The Canaanite languages showed a strong tendency to shift Semitic /ā/ to /ō/ and /θ/ to /š/). By the middle of the 1st millennium BCE, Western Aramaic had come to dominate most of the region and was subsequently strengthened by its use as an official language of the Persian Empire. Persian influence declined after Alexander the Great conquered the area, which was subsequently annexed by the Romans several centuries later. Having been a part of the more Hellenized Eastern Roman Empire, just before Arabization, the region certainly must have counted a significant number of Greek speakers as a province of the Byzantine Empire.
Since Roman times, Arabic was a neighboring language, spoken in the desert immediately east of this area (Nabataeans in Petra). The Ghassanid kingdom established in the first centuries CE in the Hauran mountains was the first (Christian) Arab authority on the sedentary area. In the first years of the Islamic conquest, the Levant was taken from the Byzantine Empire and the first Caliphate was established in Damascus. Arabic entered deeper into the population by then, although the shift occurred gradually. The persistence of a spoken Aramaic dialect in a few villages to the north of Damascus is the last trace of this slow conversion. It is interesting to note that this Aramaic dialect shares feature with rural Palestinian Arabic (e.g. /q/ > /k/).
It may thus be considered that Levantine Arabic arose from the adoption of Arabic by speakers of Aramaic languages which resulted in a marked Aramaic substrate. The state of affairs in Aramaic immediately before Arabization is largely unknown, but it could have shown dialectal variations linked to the languages Aramaic replaced (as it did so rapidly), and this may have left traces in the subsequent Arabic dialects. See, for example, the similarity of central Palestinian plural suffix pronouns (-kem, -ken, -hem, -hen) with their Hebrew counterparts, or the variant of the same pronouns in the Nusairiyyah mountains (-ko:n, -ke:n, -ho:n, -he:n) compared to identical forms in Aramaic. In other words, the implication is that there is an Aramaic substrate in Levantine Arabic, but the Aramaic of some regions already included strong substrates of preceding languages (e.g. Hebrew in Palestine). These influenced Levantine Arabic via Aramaic, although they had themselves long been out of use at the time of the Arabisation.
It is likely that the Arabic they adopted is a Hijazi (as opposed to Najdi spoken by Bedouins) variety of Arabic (as shown, for example, by the treatment of an internal glottal stop as a semivowel).

Urban Levantine Arabic

As mentioned above, the urban varieties are remarkably homogeneous throughout the whole area, compared to the changes the language undergo in rural populations. This homogeneity is probably inherited from the trading network among cities in the Ottoman Empire. It may also represent an older state of affairs. As a matter of facts, there is a current trend to diverge from this unity, the language of the cities taking on some of the features of their neighboring villages (e.g. Jerusalem used to say as Damascus ˈnɪħna ("we") and ˈhʊnne ("they") at the beginning of the 20th century, and this has moved to the more rural ˈɪħna and ˈhʊmme nowadays.).U. Seeger, Mediterranean Language Review 10 (1998), pp. 89-145. The table below shows the main variants which have shibboleth role, most of the rest of the language remaining the same.

Rural Subdialects

Rural Levantine Arabic can be divided into two groups of mutually intelligible subdialects.
Note that in Israel, apart from Galilee and the Negev, rural dialects are almost extinct, and this description gives is the pre-1948 state of affairs. Palestinian refugees in Jordan have brought with them their typical features, although they tend to adopt the emerging Jordanian urban speech.
To these typical, widespread subdialects, one could add marginal varieties such as:

Linguistic description

Phonetics

=Consonants=

The table below shows the correspondence between Modern Standard Arabic (MSA) phonemes, and their counterpart realization in Levantine Arabic. The Urban speech is taken as reference, the variations are given relative to it.
NB. Hamza has a special treatment: at the end of a closed syllable, it vanishes and lengthens the preceding vowel, e.g. /ra's/ > ra:s (see compensatory lengthening). If followed by i, it turns into j, /nā'im/ > na:jɪm. These evolutions plead for a Hijazi origin of Levantine Arabic. Word initially, hamza is often changed to h in Southern Levantine.

=Vowels and diphthongs=

The table below shows the correspondence between Modern Standard Arabic (MSA) phonemes and their counterpart realization in Levantine Arabic.
Levantine Arabic vowels can be represented in the Arabic script in many ways because of etymological and grammatical reasons, e.g. /ᵊlyo:m/ اليَوم "today".

Grammar

For Modern Standard and Classical Arabic grammar, see Arabic grammar.

Morphology

=Personal pronouns=

In Levantine Arabic, personal pronouns can have anything between eight to twelve forms depending on various locational and social factors: The second and third persons differentiate gender, while the first person does not, although many Levantine Arabic variants (especially urban varieties) have not preserved gender in the plural whatsoever. Most variants of Levantine Arabic have lost the dual number. Traditionally, the pronouns are listed in the order "third, second, first".
The trend in the most evolutive variants (i.e. urban) is to lose the distinction between masculine and feminine in the plural. The result is an alignment on the masculine for both genders, but the feminine variant remains understood.

==Enclitic pronouns==

Enclitic forms of personal pronouns (Arabic: الضمائر المتصلة aḍ-ḍamāʾir al-muttaṣilah) are affixed to various parts of speech, with varying meanings:

Attempts at institutionalisation

See more

For more information, see






