[[Salt Lake Temple]]

CATEGORIES: 19th-century Latter Day Saint temples, Places of worship in Salt Lake City, Utah, Religious buildings completed in 1893, Temple Square, Temples of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Utah, Visitor attractions in Salt Lake City, Utah, 1893 establishments in Utah Territory, Historic American Buildings Survey in Utah

The Salt Lake Temple is a temple of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) located on Temple Square in Salt Lake City, Utah, United States. At 

Details

The Salt Lake Temple is the centerpiece of the  As such, there are special meeting rooms in the building for these purposes, including the Holy of Holies, which are not present in other temples.
The official name of the Salt Lake Temple is also unique. In 1999, as the building of LDS temples accelerated, the church announced a formal naming convention for all existing and future temples. For temples located in the United States and Canada, the name of the temple is generally the city or town in which the temple is located, followed by the name of the applicable state or province (with no comma). For temples outside of the U.S. and Canada, the name of the temple is generally the city name (as above) followed by the name of the country. However, for reasons on which the church did not elaborate, the Salt Lake Temple was made an exception to the new guidelines and was not renamed the Salt Lake City Utah Temple.
The temple also includes some elements thought to evoke Solomon's Temple at Jerusalem.  It is oriented towards Jerusalem and the large basin used as a baptismal font is mounted on the backs of twelve oxen as was the brazen sea in Solomon's Temple (see Chronicles 4:2-4). However, the literal interpretation of the Biblical verses has been disputed.
The temple is located in downtown Salt Lake City, with several mountain peaks close by. Nearby, a shallow stream, City Creek, splits and flows both to the west and to the south, flowing into the Jordan River. There is a wall around the 

Temple construction and dedication

The location for the temple was first marked by Mormon prophet Brigham Young, the second president of the church, on July 28, 1847, just four days after arriving in the Salt Lake Valley. The temple site was dedicated on February 14, 1853. Groundbreaking ceremonies were presided over by Brigham Young, who laid the cornerstone on April 6 of that year.
Sandstone was originally used for the foundation. During the Utah War the foundation was buried and the lot made to look like a plowed field to prevent unwanted attention from federal troops. After tensions had eased in 1858 and work on the temple resumed, it was discovered that many of the foundation stones had cracked, making them unsuitable for use. Although not all of the sandstone was replaced, the inadequate sandstone was replaced by quartz monzonite (which has the appearance of granite) from Little Cottonwood Canyon, located twenty miles (32 km) southeast of the temple site.  Oxen transported the quarried rock initially, but as the Transcontinental Railroad neared completion in 1869 the remaining stones were carried by rail at a much faster rate.
The capstone—the granite sphere which holds the statue of the Angel Moroni—was laid on April 6, 1892, by means of an electric motor and switch operated by Wilford Woodruff, the church's fourth president, thus completing work on the temple's exterior. The Angel Moroni statue, standing  At the capstone ceremony it was proposed by President Woodruff that the interior of the building be finished within one year, thus allowing the temple to be dedicated forty years to the day of its commencement.  John R. Winder was instrumental in overseeing the completion of the interior on schedule; he would serve as a member of the temple presidency until his death in 1910. Woodruff dedicated the temple on April 6, 1893, exactly forty years after the cornerstone was laid.

Symbolism

The Salt Lake Temple incorporates many symbolic adornments, similar to other LDS temples around the world. Symbolism is an important subject in the LDS faith.
The golden Angel Moroni placed on the capstone of the temple symbolizes the angel mentioned in  that will come to welcome in the Second Coming of Christ. The six spires of the temple represent the power of the priesthood. The three spires on the east side are a little higher than those on the west: they represent the Melchizedek or "higher priesthood" and the Aaronic or "preparatory priesthood" respectively. The three spires on the east side represent the church's First Presidency and the twelve smaller spires on those three represent the Twelve Apostles. On the west side of the temple the Big Dipper appears, which represents how the constellation was used to help travelers find the North Star and help them on their way, in the same way the temple is viewed as a symbol to help people find their way back to Heaven. On the east side of the temple are "clouds raining down" representing the way God has continued revelation and still speaks to man "like the rains out of Heaven". Above each door appears the "hand clasp," which is a representation of covenants that are made within temples—a central point of the LDS religion. Around the temple there are several carved stones known as "sunstones" which represent Heaven, "moonstones" in different phases representing this life in its different phases, and "starstones" representing Jesus Christ. The center tower on each side contains a depiction of the All-Seeing Eye of God representing how God sees all things.

Temple presidents





Further reading

 | last       = Cannon
 | first      = George Q. 
 | authorlink = George Q. Cannon
 | year       = 1893
 | title      = House of the Lord: Historical and Descriptive Sketch of the Salt Lake Temple from April 6, 1853 to April 6, 1893
 | location   = Salt Lake City, Utah
 | publisher  = Geo. Q. Cannon & Sons Co.
 | oclc       = 54243596
 | url        = 
}}
 | last       = Hamilton
 | first      = Mark
 | title      = The Salt Lake Temple: A Monument to a People
 | location   = Salt Lake City, Utah
 | publisher  = University Services
 | year       = 1992
 | isbn       = 0-913535-07-9
 | oclc       = 28119583
}}
 | last       = Hamilton
 | first      = Charles Mark
 | year       = 1979
 | title      = The Salt Lake Temple: an architectural monograph
 | degree     = Ph. D.
