[[Peter Kormos]]

CATEGORIES: 1952 births, 2013 deaths, Canadian socialists, Democratic socialists, Ontario New Democratic Party MPPs, Osgoode Hall Law School alumni, People from Welland, York University alumni, Ontario municipal councillors

Peter Kormos (October 7, 1952 – March 30, 2013) was a politician in Welland, Ontario, Canada.  A former lawyer, he was first elected as an Ontario New Democratic Party (ONDP) Member of Provincial Parliament (MPP) to the Legislative Assembly of Ontario in the Welland constituency in a 1988 provincial by-election. He replaced veteran NDP legislator Mel Swart. Kormos was re-elected in every subsequent Ontario general election until his retirement from provincial politics in 2011.
In 2012, he was elected to Niagara Regional Council in a by-election."Peter Kormos wins Welland byelection ". Hamilton Spectator, March 27, 2012.

Early life and education

Peter Eric Kormos had Slovak origins from his father, Michael, and Belgian origins from mother, Simone. Peter was the third of six children: Michael, Elaine, Peter, Nadine, Mark, and Sam.
Kormos first attained notoriety in the Welland area while still in high school, while president of his student council.

Provincial politics

Kormos was a practicing criminal lawyer, and a local Welland city councillor in 1988, when long-time Welland Member of Provincial Parliament (MPP) Mel Swart decided to retire due to health reasons. Swart was a populist ONDP MPP, in a heavily unionized constituency. The constituency had a long history of electing "populist" politicians, going back to 1951 to Swart's predecessor, Ellis Morningstar.  The by-election occurred in the middle of two other major elections at the time: the Canadian General election known as the "Free Trade" election, and the Welland city council election. Kormos continued the "populist" approach pioneered by Morningstar and Swart, and won a heated – and what the The Toronto Star called,  "  vote as  dirty as mudwrestling" – election on November 3, 1988.

In government 1990–1995

The NDP won government under Bob Rae in the general election of 1990, and Kormos was appointed to cabinet as Minister of Consumer and Commercial Relations and Minister of Financial Institutions on October 1, 1990.
At the same time Kormos launched a campaign against beer company advertising which he called sexist and exploitative. Somewhat inconsistently, he elicited controversy by appearing, fully clothed, as a "Sunshine Boy" model in the Toronto Sun tabloid. This was anathema to some in the party, because of the Sun's politically conservative position and because of the Sunshine Boy's place as a parallel to the  "Sunshine Girl" franchise, pictures of scantily-clothed women given considerably more prominence than the Sunshine Boy.
Rae handed the auto insurance file to Brian Charlton but after considerable discussion, the party backed away from this goal, against considerable opposition from the outspoken Kormos and other party members, including Swart and Kormos' supporter and fellow MPP Mark Morrow.
For the remainder of Rae's term in office, Kormos acted as an unofficial "left opposition" within the NDP caucus, together with Morrow and, until his resignation, Anglican priest Dennis Drainville. In 1993, this group and former cabinet minister Karen Haslam were the only NDP MPPs to vote against the Rae government's Social Contract legislation.
The NDP were defeated in the 1995 provincial election, though Kormos's personal popularity was such that he was re-elected without difficulty.

In opposition 1995–2011

After Rae's retirement, Kormos sought the leadership of the Ontario NDP at the convention held on June 22, 1996.
In 1996, Kormos was charged with assaulting a security guard at the Family Support Services office in Downsview, Ontario. Kormos challenged the charges on the basis that the prosecution amounted to an abuse of the court's process by the Attorney General, but his challenge was dismissed by the court. However, when the case came to trial, the judge dismissed the charges,Charges against Kormos dismissed in R. v. Kormos, 1998 CanLII 14958 (ON SC) writing that there was only "some incidental contact by Mr. Kormos in order to divert Mr. Subedar's attention away from a cameraman's efforts to film the offices."Thomas Claridge, "Kormos cleared on charge of assault Judge accepts MPP's story," 28 January 1998, A10.
He was widely expected to contest the leadership in 2009, following Hampton's retirement, but instead supported the successful candidacy of Andrea Horwath.
Kormos served as House Leader for the Ontario NDP Caucus from 2001 until his retirement in 2011 and also held numerous critic portfolios in Opposition, including Justice, Community Safety and Correctional Services, Consumer and Business Services, Labour, and Democratic Renewal. On June 3, 2011, Kormos announced that he was not running for office again, and would retire after 23 years at the Legislative Assembly.
In 2005, the Big Brothers Big Sisters of Canada honoured several Ontario MPPs whose support of mentoring programs in their ridings have made a great difference in the organization's ability to provide one-on-one mentoring to children and youth. Peter Kormos was one of them.[ref]
</ref>

Niagara Regional Council

Kormos was elected to Niagara Regional Council in a municipal by-election on March 26, 2012, filling the seat vacated by Cindy Forster when she won election to succeed Kormos in the Legislative Assembly. He remained a member of the law firm Kormos and Evans.

Death

Peter Kormos had some health problems in the years approaching his death. In 2011, he was absent from the legislature for several months just before the provincial election and he chose not to run again for MPP.
He collapsed in Toronto on Wednesday, March 27, 2013, and was taken to hospital. However, he checked himself out and returned to Welland.[ref]
