[[Kiveton Park]]

CATEGORIES: Villages in South Yorkshire, Geography of Rotherham

Kiveton Park , informally Kiveton, is a village within the Metropolitan Borough of Rotherham, in South Yorkshire, England. Historically a part of the West Riding of Yorkshire, from the Norman conquest to 1868, Kiveton was a hamlet of the parish of Harthill-with-Woodall. It subsequently transferred to the civil parish of Wales which takes its name from the neighbouring village.

Geography

Kiveton Park is located at approximately  - Kiveton Bridge railway station, in the centre of the village, and Kiveton Park railway station.

History

Kiveton gets its name from the Anglo-Saxon for the settlement in the hollow. In the Domesday Book it is written Cieutone, and was under the ownership of William de Warenne. It subsequently transferred to the de Keuton family, who sold the estate on to former Lord Mayor of London Sir William Hewet in 1580. One of his descendants was Thomas Osborne who became the first Duke of Leeds. He arranged the building of a stately home in the village, Kiveton Hall (also spelled Keveton, Keeton or Keton Hall), in 1698. The building was demolished by George William Frederick Osborne, 6th Duke of Leeds in 1812, with local legend stating that the demolition was the result of a bet with the then Prince of Wales (subsequently George IV of the United Kingdom).
A major Community History Project has been in progress to record and encourage an understanding of the history of Kiveton Park and neighbouring Wales, particularly their mining heritage. This was based in the Old Colliery Offices, pictured below, and can be explored at 

Economy

Coal mining has traditionally been the principal industry of Kiveton, and dates back to the Middle Ages. Much of the coal is near to the surface, and as early as 1598, the area was extracting 2,000 tons a year. By the middle of the 19th century, the coal-fields were being served both by canal and by rail, and in 1866, the Kiveton Park Colliery was sunk, making it one of the earliest deep mines in the world. As a result of the new colliery, the population of Kiveton leapt from 300 to 1,400 over a period of just ten years.
The pit closed in 1994, resulting in the loss of 1,000 jobs. As a consequence, Kiveton is now essentially a commuter base for adjacent towns.
Kiveton is also home to large steelworks at the bottom of Redhill. Due to the fire which occurred on 27 August 2009, it is unknown the extent of the damage.
Most of the colliery buildings have since been demolished, but the protected pit-head baths (built in 1938), and the 1870s office building with its gothic clock tower, remain.
The Kiveton Park and Wales Community Development Trust use the office building as a base of operations. The trust is aims to provide appropriate services and increase development within the community sector.

Sport

Kiveton has a long sporting heritage stretching back to 1879, when Kiveton Park Colliery Cricket Club was formed. The club plays in the Bassetlaw and District Cricket League and has done since its inception in 1904, and are the only club to hold the distinction of playing in the league every single year the league has functioned.
In 1892, Kiveton Park Football Club was formed. The club was one of the founding members of the Northern Counties East League League, and now plays in the Central Midlands Football League, at the 12th level of the English Football Pyramid. The club played in the FA Cup for four consecutive years from 1946 as 'Kiveton Park Colliery', and in 1969 as 'Kiveton Park United'. The club also played in the FA Vase from 1976 to 1989.
The village is also famous as the birthplace of legendary football manager Herbert Chapman and his brother Harry, one of the greatest players to have played for Sheffield Wednesday.  At one time Kiveton was reputed to be the birthplace of more professional footballers than any place its size in England, with the likes of the Chapman brothers, Derrick Ashton (Aston Villa), Sidney Cartwright (Arsenal), Jack Hicklin (Sheffield Wednesday), Leslie Hoften (Manchester United), Eric Oakton (Chelsea) and Walter Wigmore (Birmingham City) all hailing from the village.
Kiveton has even produced an international footballer - Bert Morley appearing for England against Ireland in 1910, just five years after making his name with the village side.

Radio

Following many successful month long broadcasts since the year 2000 on Saturday 27 March 2010, Kiveton gained its very own community radio station on a 5 year liecence called Redroad

Notable people




