[[Shut Down Volume 2]]

CATEGORIES: The Beach Boys albums, 1964 albums, Capitol Records albums, English-language albums, Albums produced by Brian Wilson

Shut Down Volume 2 is the fifth studio album by the Beach Boys, and the first of four they would release in 1964.  The "Volume 2" in the album title refers to the 1963 hot rod compilation Shut Down, released by the band's label, Capitol, which included "409" and "Shut Down".
Shut Down Volume 2 reached number 13 in the US charts during a chart stay of 38 weeks.

Album history

Recorded just as "Beatlemania" was reaching American shores, Shut Down Volume 2 was intended to solidify the Beach Boys' position as one of the most successful acts in America, furthering string tally of hit singles and albums they'd amassed over the past two years. 
Cited in part to the British invasion, the album peaked at 13 on the Billboard charts in the US (number 11 Record World, number 12 Cash Box). Shut Down Volume 2 didn't enter the Billboard albums chart until six weeks after release and stayed a shorter time in the charts (nine months) than their previous albums. Despite the band's relatively sluggish commercial performance at the start of 1964, by the middle of the year, the Beach Boys' career had recovered its self-generating momentum. Shut Down Volume 2 was listed by Cash Box as fourth-biggest selling rock album of 1964 and received Gold certification by the RIAA in 1966.
The name of the record is based on the Shut Down compilation released by Capitol in July 1963. The compilation included two Beach Boys songs, "409" and "Shut Down" and peaked at number seven on the Billboard album charts, showing for 44 weeks.google.au/books?id=VgsEAAAAMBAJ&pg=PA38&dq=Billboard+%22Shut+Down%22&hl=en&sa=X&ei=aF8PUoOoO-WCiQf-koDIDw&ved=0CC4Q6AEwADgo#v=onepage&q=%22Shut%20Down%22&f=false
Critics have cited points of Shut Down Volume 2 such as "Don't Worry Baby" (a response to "Be My Baby", produced by Phil Spector), "Fun, Fun, Fun" and the melancholic "The Warmth of the Sun" (a  composition with music by Brian Wilson and words by Mike Love written just hours after JFK's assassination) as being among the strongest songs in the Beach Boys' catalog.
A cover of Frankie Lymon's "Why Do Fools Fall in Love" is notable for producer Brian Wilson's first utilisation of the Wrecking Crew and "Pom Pom Play Girl" for Carl Wilson's first lead vocal on a Beach Boys song.
It has been speculated that the album's relative poor chart showing was due in part to Capitol's focus on promotion for the Beatles at the expense of the Beach Boys. Some critics have also noted that the presence of tracks such as ""Cassius" Love vs. "Sonny" Wilson" (a mock-fight between Brian and Mike, referencing Cassius Clay vs. Sonny Liston which took place days before release of the album) and "Denny's Drums", a song that features Dennis Wilson soloing on his drum kit for a minute-and-a-half adversely affected the album's quality.
Shut Down Volume 2 was marketed as a "hot rod" collection after its predecessor Little Deuce Coupe and the compilation album Shut Down had performed successfully, despite this, less than half of the songs on the album mention cars.
The multi-tracks for Shut Down Volume 2 went missing shortly after the album's release. In 2009, three reels of session out takes were unexpectedly retrieved with the help of biographer Jon Stebbins. New stereophonic mixes were created by producers Mark Linett and Alan Boyd for the compilation Summer Love Songs, which includes an alternate version of "Why Do Fools Fall In Love" featuring a never-before-heard unused intro section as well as a new stereo mix of "Don't Worry Baby".

Alternate releases

Capitol released a 7-inch 33 1/3 "mini-LP" for jukeboxes with six tracks, the front album cover being the same, the back blank.  Four jukebox strips were included.  Side 1: "Keep an Eye on Summer" / "Fun, Fun, Fun" / "The Warmth of the Sun". Side 2: "Why Do Fools Fall in Love" / "In the Parkin' Lot" / "Don't Worry Baby".
In the early 1980s, as part of Capitol Records' repackage series of their Beach Boys albums, Shut Down Volume 2 was retitled Fun Fun Fun and had two tracks deleted: ""Cassius" Love vs. "Sonny" Wilson" and "In the Parkin' Lot."

Cover art

The front sleeve photograph, taken by Capitol staff photographer George Jerman, shows the band (Al Jardine making his cover debut) posing next to a selection of cars - notably, a blue Corvette Sting Ray owned by Dennis and Pontiac Grand Prix owned by Carl.

Live Performances

8 of the 12 songs on the album have been performed live by either The Beach Boys or Brian Wilson as a solo artist. Making it one of the most heavily drawn from albums when it comes to live setlists.
Fun, Fun, Fun has become a concert staple often being used as the closing song at most Beach Boys and Brian Wilson shows. Don't Worry Baby, despite its many lead vocalists through the years in the absence of Brian Wilson, has also become a concert staple at both Beach Boys and Wilson solo shows.
The Warmth of the Sun has also been performed live many times although not as frequently as the other two previously mentioned numbers. Why Do Fools Fall in Love was not played live until 1999 but since then it has become a concert staple for the Mike Love and Bruce Johnston lead Beach Boys.
Pom, Pom Play Girl was played live only once on the bands 1971 tour and even that was only a brief tease.
The other two songs Keep an Eye on Summer and This Car of Mine have only been played live by Brian Wilson although infrequently. This Car of Mine made its live debut on Brian Wilson's 2013 tour with AL Jardine and David Marks with Marks on Dennis Wilson's original lead vocal.

Track listing

Personnel

Sales chart positions




