[[John Sulston]]

CATEGORIES: British Nobel laureates, Fellows of the Royal Society, British humanists, Members of the European Molecular Biology Organization, People educated at Merchant Taylors' School, Northwood, Alumni of Pembroke College, Cambridge, Academics of the University of Cambridge, Nobel laureates in Physiology or Medicine, Academics of the University of Manchester, Knights Bachelor, Wellcome Trust, 1942 births, Living people, English Nobel laureates

Sir John Edward Sulston FRS (born 27 March 1942) is a British biologist. He is a joint winner of the 2002 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. 

Early life and education

John Sulston was born in Cambridge for research in nucleotide chemistry. Between 1966 and 1969 he worked as a postdoctoral researcher at the Salk Institute for Biological Studies in US. His supervisor Colin Reese had arranged for him to work with Leslie Orgel, who would turn his scientific career in a different pathway. Orgel introduced him to Francis Crick and Sidney Brenner, who were themselves from Cambridge. He became inclined to biological research.

Career

Although Orgel wanted Sulston to remain with him, Sidney Brenner persuaded Sulston returned to Cambridge to work on the neurobiology of Caenorhabditis elegans at the Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology. Sulston soon produced the complete map of the worm's neurons. 
Sulston played a central role in both the C. elegans and human genome sequencing projects.  He had argued successfully for the sequencing of C. elegans to show that large-scale genome sequencing projects were feasible.  As sequencing of the worm genome proceeded, the project to sequence the human genome began.  At this point he was made director of the newly established Sanger Centre (named after Fred Sanger and now the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute), located in Cambridgeshire, England.
Following completion of the 'working draft' of the human genome sequence in 2000, Sulston retired from his role as director at the Sanger Centre. In 2002 he won the Dan David Prize and the Robert Burns Humanitarian Award. Later, he shared the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine with Sydney Brenner and H. Robert Horvitz, both of whom he had collaborated with at the MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology (LMB), for their discoveries concerning 'genetic regulation of organ development and programmed cell death'. One of Sulston's most important contributions during his research years at the LMB was to elucidate the precise order in which cells in C. elegans divide. In fact, he and his team succeeded in tracing the nematode's entire embryonic cell lineage.  Sulston is now a leading campaigner against the patenting of human genetic information.

Personal life

John Sulston met Daphne Bate, a fellow research students in Cambridge. They got married in 1966 just before they left for US for postdoctoral research. Together they have three children. The first child Ingrid was born in La Jolla in 1967, Adrian and Madeleine later in England.
Although brought up in a Christian family, Sulston lost his faith during his student life at Cambridge, and remain an atheist. He is a distinguished supporter of the British Humanist Association.
Sulston is in favour of free public access of scientific information. He wants genome information freely available, and he has described as "totally immoral and disgusting" the idea of profiteering from such research. He also want to change patent law, and argues that restrictions on drugs such as anti-viral drug Tamiflu by Roche are hindrance to patients whose lives are dependent on them.

Awards and honours

In 2001 Sulston was invited to deliver the Royal Institution Christmas Lecture on The Secrets of Life.
He also provided bail sureties for Julian Assange, according to Mark Stephens, Julian's solicitor.
He was awarded the Royal Society's Rutherford Memorial Lecture for 2013, which he delivered in New Zealand on the subject of population pressure.   





Publications

News and Press about John Sulston


