[[River Raisin]]

CATEGORIES: Rivers of Michigan, Geography of Monroe County, Michigan, Monroe, Michigan, Geography of Lenawee County, Michigan, Geography of Washtenaw County, Michigan, Geography of Jackson County, Michigan, Tributaries of Lake Erie, Michigan in the War of 1812, Geography of Hillsdale County, Michigan

The River Raisin is a river in southeastern Michigan, United States that flows through glacial sediments into Lake Erie. The area today is an agricultural and industrial center of Michigan. The river flows for almost  in the Michigan counties of Lenawee, Monroe, Washtenaw, Jackson, Hillsdale, and also a portion of Fulton County, Ohio. The French term for "raisin" is "raisin sec" (dry grape).A.C. Quisenberry, "A Hundred Years Ago: the River Raisin", Register of the Kentucky Historical Society, Sept 1913, p.18

History and geography

The River Raisin was used by local Potawatomi and Wyandot including a portage between the upper river into the Grand and Kalamazoo Rivers flowing west toward Lake Michigan. The river is still called canoeable throughout its length; however, low gradient, access issues, frequent logjams in the upper reaches and 22 dams on the mainstream limit its recreational use. Dodge, Michigan Department of Natural Resources, October 1998 The first European settlement of the river was the "ribbon" farms of Frenchtown established in the 1780s. Now part of Monroe, Michigan, this area is still the most populous area along the river. The resort area of Irish Hills lies in the uppermost region of the watershed which includes 429 lakes and ponds. The largest of these is the  Lake Columbia.
During the winter of 1813 as part of the War of 1812, the Battle of Frenchtown occurred near the river between British and Native American troops under the command of British General Henry Procter and Native American chiefs Roundhead, Walks in Water, and Split Log, and a  division of Kentucky infantry and militia under command of General James Winchester. Cut off and surrounded and facing total slaughter, Winchester surrendered with British assurances of safety of the prisoners, but the next day many were killed by the Native Americans without British intervention.
The Massacre of the River Raisin became a rallying cry ("Remember the Raisin") particularly for Kentuckians, and American troops returned in the spring to drive the British from Michigan forever. The original battlefield was a county park in Monroe, Michigan and has several monuments to the Kentucky soldiers who died there. On October 12, 2010, the land was transferred to the federal government and is now the only National Battlefield Park devoted to a battlefield of the War of 1812 as the River Raisin National Battlefield Park.
The river has been polluted by industrial wastes and agricultural runoff. While cleanup efforts have mitigated some of the pollution, there remains a problem with difficult-to-remove PCBs. An established Area of Concern covers only  of the watershed at the mouth of the river, much of which is industrial and harbor use including the Ford Motor Company plant, Detroit Edison Monroe powerplant and the Port of Monroe.2010 MICHIGAN FISH ADVISORY, MDCH Division of Environmental Health, 2010 - River Raisin, below Monroe Dam: no consumption of carp, channel cat, larger white bass; limited consumption of black buffalo, freshwater drum, smallmouth bass, smaller white bass.
The river has many small dams to control water flow, a legacy of the paper mills constructed along it in the mid-1800s and of Henry Ford's rural industry program.  While most of the dams are in Monroe, the most significant one is located in Dundee, Michigan. The Port of Monroe was constructed near the mouth of the river in the 1930s. Flooding along the river comes from three causes: heavy rains, ice dams during spring break-up, and on-shore winds pushing Lake Erie waters upstream. The worst flood was recorded on March 16, 1982 at  of water flow.
Most of the flow of the river is diverted through the Detroit Edison plant and then discharged into Plum Creek. Previously it was discharged back into the river but is now diverted to limit additional pollution of the river mouth area. In fact, the power plant's peak use of , so water is drawn upstream from Lake Erie into the plant on some occasions. The high level of water use is thought to kill large numbers of fish in the intake screens and to make fish migration from the river into the Great Lakes almost impossible. Selzer, Water Bureau, Aquatic Nuisance Control & Remedial Action Unit, Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, December 19, 2006
In 2013 U.S. Rep. Tim Walberg, along with the entire Michigan delegation, introduced a resolution (H. Res. 37, 113th Congress) to honor the 200th anniversary of the battles at the River Raisin.gpo.pdf

Tributaries

In addition to the river forming from the Upper River Raisin and the South Branch River Raisin, the following streams flow into the River Raisin:River Raisin Watershed Hydrologic Study, Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, February 17, 2006
The Eagle Island Marsh is part of the Detroit River International Wildlife Refuge.

Flora and fauna

The River Raisin is home to "warm-water" fish including bluegill, white sucker, channel catfish, walleye, carp, white bass, black buffalo, freshwater drum and smallmouth bass. Very few fish migrate between the river and the Great Lakes because of the seven dams in Monroe as well as the power plant intakes. Bird species use the area as part of the flyway along eastern Lake Erie and include bald eagles, sandhill cranes, ducks and seagulls. Invasive fauna include zebra mussels and rusty crayfish. The threatened American lotus is present in Eagle Island Marsh but several invasive species are present in the watershed, including flowering rush, Eurasian milfoil, curlyleaf pondweed, Phragmites and purple loosestrife.

Communities

Towns along the river include:

Crossings

Monroe
1. Winchester pkwy.google.com/
2. Monroe st.
3. US-24 Telegraph rd.
Monroe Township/Frenchtown Township/Raisinville Township
1. Raisinville rd.
Raisinville Township
1. Ida-Maybee rd.
Dundee
1. Monroe st.
Summerfield Township
1. Petersburg rd.
Summerfield Township/Petersburg
1. Railroad st./Deerfield rd.
Deerfield/Deerfield Township
1. Rodesiler hwy.
Blissfield
1. US-223 Adrian st.
Palmyra Township
1. Crockett hwy.
2. US-223
3. Deerfield rd.
Palmyra Township/Raisin Township
1. Academy rd.
Raisin Township
1. Laberdee rd.
2. Wilmoth hwy.
3. Raisin Center hwy.
4. Sutton rd.
Raisin Township/Tecumseh
1. Russell rd.
Tecumseh
1. MI-50 Chicago blvd.
2. Evans st.
Clinton Township
1. Staib rd.
Clinton
1.
Manchester Township
1. Allen rd.
2. Wilbur rd.
3. Austin rd.
Manchester
1. MI-52 City rd.
2. Furnace st.
3. Duncan st.
4. Main st.
5. Union st.




