[[Natasha Stott Despoja]]

CATEGORIES: Members of the Australian Senate, Australian Democrats politicians, Australian people of Croatian descent, Australian people of English descent, Australian republicans, Australian women in politics, Members of the Australian Senate for South Australia, People from Adelaide, University of Adelaide alumni, Women members of the Australian Senate, 1969 births, Living people, People educated at Pembroke School, Adelaide, Delegates to the 1998 Australian Constitutional Convention, Members of the Order of Australia

Natasha Jessica Stott Despoja AM (born 9 September 1969) is an Australian former politician and former leader of the Australian Democrats. She was a Democrats senator for South Australia from 1995 to 2008. She was appointed to the Senate at the age of 26, and until Sarah Hanson-Young was elected in 2007, was the youngest woman ever to be elected to the Parliament of Australia. Access date: 20 August 2013. She was also the first leader of a political party to visit an immigration detention centre.

Early life

Stott Despoja was born in Adelaide, the daughter of Shirley Stott Despoja, an Australian-born journalist with English heritage, and Mario Despoja, an immigrant from Croatia (then Yugoslavia). She was educated at Stradbroke Primary and Pembroke School and, later, the University of Adelaide where she graduated B.A.. She was active in student politics, becoming president of the Students' Association of the University of Adelaide (SAUA) and serving as state women's officer for the National Union of Students in South Australia. She then worked as a political advisor to Democrat senators John Coulter (SA) and Cheryl Kernot (Qld).

Personal life

Stott Despoja is married to former Liberal party advisor Ian Smith.Downer set to quit Parliament, The Daily Telegraph, 14 February 2008

Career

On 29 November 1995, Stott Despoja was appointed to the casual vacancy created by the resignation of Senator Coulter due to ill-health. She completed the remainder of Coulter's term, was returned at the 1996 election and re-elected in 2001.
Stott Despoja was elected to the party's deputy leadership in 1997, under Meg Lees. At the time, she was party spokesperson for parliamentary portfolios including Science and Technology, Attorney General, Higher Education, IT, Employment and Youth Affairs.
During the passage of the Goods and Services Tax (GST) legislation in 1999, Stott Despoja, along with Andrew Bartlett, split from the party's other senators by opposing the package, which had been negotiated by Lees and prime minister John Howard. She said that she refused to break promises made by the party during the election. The party had gone to the election stating that they would work with whichever party formed government to improve their tax package. The Australian Democrats traditionally permitted parliamentary representatives to cast a conscience vote on any issue but, on this occasion, close numbers in the Senate placed greater pressure than usual on the dissenters.
In 1999, she was appointed a Global Leader for Tomorrow by the World Economic Forum (WEF).

Parliamentary leadership and deposition

Stott Despoja was elected leader on 6 April 2001, replacing Meg Lees, who resigned from the party in July 2002. Further public criticism and disputes between Democrat senators resulted in Stott Despoja's resignation as leader on 21 August 2002, following presentation by four of her six colleagues (those who had earlier enabled the passage of the GST) with a ten-point 'reform' agenda proposed by John Cherry. She announced her resignation in a speech to the Senate, concluding with a "pledge to bring the party back home to the members again", and referring to her reluctance over colleagues' attitude towards her.
She was replaced as leader by Bartlett following a membership ballot interval during which Brian Greig acted in the position.
In 2004, Stott Despoja took 11 weeks' leave from the Senate following the birth of her first child before returning to full duties as Democrat spokesperson on, inter alia, Higher Education, Status of Women, and Work and Family.
During her political career she also introduced 24 Private Member's Bills on issues including paid maternity leave, and same sex marriage.aph.au/Parliamentary_Business/Bills_Legislation/Bills_Search_Results/Result?bId=s502 Stott Despoja regularly attends the Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras.com/?p=6545

Retirement from Parliament

On 22 October 2006, after undergoing emergency surgery for an ectopic pregnancy, she announced that she would not be contesting the 2007 election to extend her term beyond 30 June 2008. She was the Australian Democrats' longest-serving senator. Her retirement coincided with the ending of her party's federal parliamentary representation; the Democrats' support had collapsed after 2002 and they won no seats at the 2004 and 2007 half-senate elections.
On 13 June 2011, Stott Despoja was named a Member of the Order of Australia for service to the Parliament of Australia, particularly as a Senator for South Australia, through leadership roles with the Australian Democrats, to education, and as a role model for women.

Career Post Parliament

She is a regular commentator in The Adelaide Advertiser, a casual host on ABC 891 radio  and is the Thursday night guest panellist on Channel 10's The Project. She was previously a columnist for the Australian business news website Business Spectator. The Spectators: Natasha Stott-Despoja. Retrieved 21 June 2010.
Natasha is an Honorary Visiting Research Fellow at The University of Adelaide. Each year, she teaches winter school at The University of Adelaide with former Foreign Minister, Alexander Downer, 'The Practice of Politics'.
Currently Stott Despoja is a board member of non-profit organisations Burnet Institute (Australia's largest virology and communicable disease research institute), she is a deputy-chair at beyondblue (Australia's national depression initiative),Business Spectator (28 Dec 2009) 'A New Year, A New Leader?: Natasha Stott Despoja Interview'. Retrieved 29 July 2010. the South Australian Museum 
She is an Ambassador for Ovarian Cancer Australia (OCA),
In the past few years, Natasha has also been an election observer for the US-based National Democratic Institute (NDI) in Nigeria (2011);  with The Burnet Institute.
In July 2013, Natasha was named Chair of the Foundation to Prevent Violence against women and their children, The foundation aims to educate the community by building partnerships with business, philanthropic organisations and government.
In December 2013, Australian Foreign Minister Julie Bishop announced the appointment of Natasha as Australia's new ambassador for women and girls.

Author

Books

Journal Articles






