[[Thomas Ustick Walter]]

CATEGORIES: 1804 births, 1887 deaths, People from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Fellows of the American Institute of Architects, Architects of the Capitol, Greek Revival architects, NRHP architects, Architects from Pennsylvania, Burials in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

Thomas Ustick Walter (September 4, 1804 – October 30, 1887), born Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, was an American architect, the dean of American architecture between the 1820 death of Benjamin Latrobe and the emergence of H.H. Richardson in the 1870s. He was the fourth Architect of the Capitol, responsible for adding the north (Senate) and south (House) wings and the central dome that brought the U.S. Capitol building to essentially its modern appearance.  Walter was one of the founders and second president of the American Institute of Architects.

Early life

Born in 1804 in Philadelphia, Walter was the son of mason and bricklayer Joseph S. Walter and his wife Deborah.
Walter received early training in a variety of fields including masonry, mathematics, physical science, and the fine arts.  At 15, Walter entered the office of William Strickland, studying architecture and mechanical drawing, then established his own practice in 1830.

Works

Walter's first major commission was Moyamensing Prison, the Philadelphia County Prison. Designed as a humane model in its time, the prison was built between 1832 and 1835.
He first came to national recognition for his design of Girard College for Orphans (1833–48) in Philadelphia, among the last and grandest expressions of the Greek Revival movement.
Walter also designed mansions, banks, churches, the hotel at Brandywine Springs, and courthouses.philaathenaeum.org/tuw/  In 1836, he designed the Bank of Chester County at West Chester, Pennsylvania;
It has also been suggested that Walter designed the Second Empire-styled Quarters B and Quarters D at Admiral's Row in Brooklyn, New York.
Among the notable residences designed by Walter were his own home, located at High and Morton Streets in Germantown, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania George's Hall, residence of Matthew Newkirk, president of the Philadelphia, Wilmington & Baltimore Railroad (PW&B).  Walter also designed the Garrett-Dunn House in Mt. Airy, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
Among his smaller designs was the 1839 Newkirk Viaduct Monument, commissioned by the PW&B to mark the completion of the first rail line south from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

The U.S. Capitol and its dome

By far the most famous construction of Walter's is the dome of the U.S. Capitol. By 1850, the rapid expansion of the United States had caused a space shortage in the Capitol. Walter was selected to design extensions for the Capitol. His plan more than doubled the size of the existing building and added the familiar cast-iron dome.
There were at least six draftsmen in Walter's office, headed by Walter's chief assistant, August Schoenborn, a German immigrant who had learned his profession from the ground up. It appears that he was responsible for some of the fundamental ideas in the Capitol structure. These included the curved arch ribs and an ingenious arrangement used to cantilever the base of the columns. This made it appear that the diameter of the base exceeded the actual diameter of the foundation, thereby enlarging the proportions of the total structure.
Construction on the wings began in 1851 and proceeded rapidly; the House of Representatives met in its new quarters in December 1857 and the Senate occupied its new chamber by January 1859. Walter's fireproof cast iron dome was authorized by Congress on March 3, 1855, and was nearly completed by December 2, 1863, when the Statue of Freedom was placed on top. He also reconstructed the interior of the west center building for the Library of Congress after the fire of 1851. Walter continued as Capitol architect until 1865, when he resigned his position over a minor contract dispute. After 14 years in Washington, he retired to his native Philadelphia.
Then, when financial setbacks forced him to come out of retirement in the 1870s, he worked as second-in-command when his friend and younger colleague John McArthur, Jr. won the competition for Philadelphia City Hall. He continued on that vast project until his death in 1887.

Other Honors

For their architectural accomplishments, both Benjamin Latrobe and Thomas U. Walter are honored in a ceiling mosaic in the East Mosaic Corridor at the entrance to the Main Reading Room of the Library of Congress.
Walter's grandson, Thomas Ustick Walter III, was also an architect, practicing in Birmingham, Alabama from the 1890s to the 1910s. (2010) Landscape of Transformations: Architecture and Birmingham, Alabama. Knoxville, Tennessee: University of Tennessee Press ISBN 978-1-57233-687-2

Gallery

File:Moyamensing Prison.jpg|Moyamensing Prison, completed 1835
File:1st Presbyterian Church West Chester PA.
File:Chester County PA Courthouse.
File:1st Baptist Bristol TU Walter.JPG|First Baptist Church, Bristol, Pennsylvania
File:Latrobe-Walter-LoC-mosaic.JPG|Mosaic in ceiling of Library of Congress, Washington, DC honoring Benjamin Henry Latrobe and Thomas Walter
File:Latrobe-Walter-LoC-mosaic-detail.JPG|Mosaic detail
File:TabbStPresby.JPG|Tabb Street Presbyterian Church, December 2009








