[[Mammad Amin Rasulzade]]

CATEGORIES: Azerbaijani-language writers, 1884 births, 1955 deaths, People from Absheron District, Azerbaijan Democratic Republic politicians, Azerbaijani emigrants to Turkey, Burials at Cebeci Asri Cemetery

Mammad Amin Rasulzade (; born in January 31, 1884, Novxanı, near Baku— died March 6, 1955, Ankara) was an Azerbaijani statesman, scholar, public figure and the first and only president of Democratic Republic of Azerbaijan (1918–1920). His expression "Bir kərə yüksələn bayraq, bir daha enməz!" ("The flag once raised will never fall!") has become the motto of the independence movement in Azerbaijan in the 20th century.

Early life

Mammad Amin Rasulzade received his education at the Russian-Muslim Secondary School and then at the Technical College in Baku. In his years of study he created "Muslim Youth Organisation Musavat",. His dramatic play entitled "The Lights in the Darkness" was staged in Baku in 1908.
Rasulzade and his co-workers were representatives of the Azerbaijani bourgeois intelligentsia. Most of them, including Rasulzade himself, had been members of the Baku organization of the Russian Social-Democratic Workers' Party (Bolsheviks) in 1905. A photograph is extant in Soviet archives, showing Rasulzade with Prokopius Dzhaparidze and Meshadi Azizbekov, Bolsheviks who later became famous as two of the 26 Baku Commissars shot during the civil war.M.D. Guseinov. Тюркская Демократическая Партия Федералистов "Мусават" в прошлом и настоящем. Baku, 1927, p. 9  During the First Russian Revolution (1905–1907), Rasulzade actively participated in revolutionary developments. As the story goes, it was Rasulzade who saved young Joseph Stalin in 1905 in Baku, when police were searching for the latter as an active instigator of riots. 7:3 (Autumn 1999), pp. 22-23.
In 1909, under the persecution from Tsarist authorities, Rasulzade fled Baku to participate in the Constitutional Revolution of 1905-1911. While in Persia, Rasulzade edited Iran-e Azad newspaper, which means "New Iran" and which has been described as "the greatest, most important and best known of the Persian newspapers, and the first to appear in the large size usual in Europe". Encyclopædia Iranica. In 1911, Rasulzade also published his book "Saadet-e bashar" ("Happiness of Mankind") in defense of the revolution.  
After Russian troops entered Iran in 1911 and, in cooperation with British, assisted Qajar Court to put an end to Iranian Constitutional Revolution, Rasulzade fled to Istanbul, then capital of Ottoman Empire. Here, in the wake of Young Turk Revolution, Rasulzade founded a journal called Türk yurdu (The Land of Turks), in which he published his famous article "İran Türkleri" ("The Iranian Turks"). Azerbaijan Government 1918-1920. Baku, "Youth", 1990. page 25 lines 3-11 from above

The Musavat Party and Azerbaijan Democratic Republic

After the Amnesty Act of 1913, dedicated to the 300th anniversary of the Romanov dynasty, Rasulzade returned to Baku, left the Hummet party he was previously member of, and joined the then secret Musavat (Equality) party in 1913, established in 1911, which initially promoted pan-Islamist, pan-Turkist and Socialist ideas,Pan-Turkism: From Irrendentism to Cooperation by Jacob M. Landau P.55On the Religious Frontier: Tsarist Russia and Islam in the Caucasus by Firouzeh Mostashari P. 144Ethnic Nationalism and the Fall of Empires by Aviel Roshwald, page 100Disaster and Development: The politics of Humanitarian Aid by Neil Middleton and Phil O'keefe P. 132The Armenian-Azerbaijan Conflict: Causes and Implications by Michael P. Croissant P. 14 or more precisely Pan-Islamism yet with affinity for greater cultural bonds with the Turkic world,Prof. Tadeusz Swietochowski, Russian and Azerbaijan: A Borderland in Transition, Columbia University Press, 1995, p. 52.  and which eventually became Azerbaijani nationalist party, and quickly became its chief. In 1915 he started to publish party's newspaper "Açıq Söz" (Open word) which lasted till 1918. When February Revolution happened, Musavat together with other secret political parties in Russian Empire quickly legalized and became a leading party of Caucasian Muslims after it merged with Party of Turkic Federalists headed by Nasib Yusifbeyli. October revolution in 1917 lead to secession of Transcaucasia from Russia and Rasulzade became head of Muslim faction in the Seym, parliament of Transcaucasian Federation.  After the dissolution of the Transcaucasian Federation Muslim faction re-organized into Azerbaijani National Council, whose head Rasulzade was unanimously elected in May 1918.
On May 28, 1918, the Azerbaijani National Council, headed by Rasulzade, declared an independent Azerbaijan Republic. Rasulzade also initiated the establishment of Baku State University together with Rashid Khan Gaplanov, minister of education with the funding of oil baron Haji Zeynalabdin Taghiyev in 1919. Rasulzade taught Ottoman literature at the University.
After the collapse of Azerbaijan Democratic Republic in April 1920, Rasulzade left Baku and went into hiding in the mountainous village of Lahij to direct the resistance to Sovietization, but in August 1920, after Soviet Russian army crushed the rebellions of Ganja, Karabakh, Zagatala and Lankaran, led by ex-officers of the Azerbaijani National Army, Rasulzade was arrested and brought to Baku.  It was only due to his earlier rescue of Joseph Stalin in 1905, that Rasulzade was released and transferred from Azerbaijan to Russia.  For the next two years, Rasulzade worked as the press representative at the Commissariat on Nations in Moscow.  He was seconded to Saint Petersburg in 1922 from where he escaped to Finland.

Exile

For the rest of his life, Rasulzade lived in exile first in Turkey.  However, the 1931 suppression of the emigre publications Due to sensitivity of his presence in either Turkey or Iran, and being often exiled, Rasulzade "cherished bad memories of both Iran and Turkey".''Charles van der Leeuw, Azerbaijan: A Quest for Identity, Palgrave Macmillan, 2000, p. 121. In his appeal to Azerbaijani people in 1953 through Voice of America, he  stressed his hope that one day it will become independent again.rasulzade.mp3 He died in 1955, a broken man according to Thomas Goltz, and was buried in Cebeci Asri cemetery in Ankara.

Legacy and honors

Rasulzade was commemorated by many memorials throughout Azerbaijan, such as Baku State University, which was named after his honor. Rasulzade was depicted on the obverse of the Azerbaijani 1000 manat banknote of 1993-2006. National currency: 1000 manat. – Retrieved on 24 March 2009.
Mehmet Emin Resulzade Anatolian High School, named after him, is a public high school at Ankara, Turkey.

Major works

Rasulzades works include:






