[[Crime and punishment in the Bible]]

CATEGORIES: Hebrew Bible topics, Punishments in religion

The Hebrew Bible is considered a holy text in most Abrahamic religions. It records a large number of events and laws that are endorsed or prescribed by the God of Israel. Judaism teaches that the Torah contains 613 commandments, many of which deal with crime and punishment, but only the Noahide Laws apply to humanity in general. Most Christian denominations have also adopted some of these directives, such as the Ten Commandments and Great Commandment, while a minority believes all Old Covenant laws have been abrogated.

In the Book of Exodus

Moses negotiated the Exodus from Egypt with Pharaoh leading to the Ten plagues.
When Pharaoh enslaved the Children of Israel, the Egyptians appointed conscription officers over the Israelites to crush their spirits with hard labor. The Israelites were to build up the cities of Pithom and Ra'amses as supply centers for Pharaoh. The Egyptians started to make the Israelites do labor designated to break their bodies. They made the lives of the Israelites miserable with harsh labor involving mortar and bricks, as well as all kinds of work in the field. All the work they made them do was intended to break them.ort.asp?ACTION=displaypage&BOOK=2&CHAPTER=1 then he issued decrees to kill all the Israelite malesExodus 1:15-16 God hardened Pharaoh's heart, so that he would not allow the Hebrews to leave, and then God sent various disasters onto the whole of Egypt. The cycle ends with the story of the killing of every firstborn child in Egypt as the final punishment for having enslaved the Israelites.Exodus 6-14

The Midianites

The people of Midian together with Moab began to interact with the people of Israel. The Israelites were staying in Shittim and the Israelite men began to commit whoredom with the Moabite women. The Moabite women invited the men to worship the Moabite gods. The  then ordered Moses to vex the Midianites and smite them, for plotting against the Israelites in the matters of Peor and Cozbi.Numbers 25:1-18
When a 12,000 men army (1,000 from each tribe) was sent to "avenge the  of Midian", Moses was angry ("wroth") when the army returned with captive women and other spoils, because the women had played vital roles in the previous Num.25 above trespasses and consequent plague.Num 31:1-16 
Moses then ordered all males and non-virgin females killed, and all female virgins preserved.Num 31:32-35 Out of the booty that belonged to Israelites, one of every fifty was set apart to the Levites who cared for the Tabernacle. (Numbers 31:30)

Special punishments

Examples of the death penalty

The Bible prescribes the death penalty for the following activities, among others:

Ransom from death penalty questions

There is some question as to whether the death penalty was invariably or even usually implemented in ancient Israel, or whether this was even the intention of the Tanakh (c.f. Numbers 35:31). "It must be noted that the death penalty might also indicate the seriousness of the crime without calling for the actual implementation of it in every case. In fact, there is little evidence that many of these sanctions were ever actually carried out in ancient Israel. Only in the case of premeditated murder was there the added stricture of 'Do not accept a ransom for the life of the murderer who deserves to die' (Num 35:31). . . . Traditional wisdom, both in the Jewish and Christian communities, interpreted this verse in Numbers 35:31 to mean that out of the almost twenty cases calling for capital punishment in the Old Testament, every one of them could have the sanction commuted by an appropriate substitute of money or anything that showed the seriousness of the crime, but in the case of what we today call first-degree murder, there was never to be offered or accepted any substitute or bargaining of any kind: the offender had to pay with his or her life"., Peter H. Davids, F. F. Bruce, and Manfred T. Brauch, Hard Sayings of the Bible (Downers Grove: IVP Academic, 1996), .  

Modern view




