[[Donald P. Hodel]]

CATEGORIES: 1935 births, Living people, Harvard University alumni, University of Oregon alumni, United States Secretaries of Energy, United States Secretaries of the Interior, Reagan administration cabinet members, American Lutherans, Lawyers from Portland, Oregon, Focus on the Family, Grant High School (Portland, Oregon) alumni, Oregon Republicans

Donald Paul Hodel (born May 23, 1935) was to former a United States Secretary of Energy and the Secretary of the Interior, from the Chairman of the company FreeEats.  He was known during his tenure as Secretary of the Interior for his controversial "Hodel Policy," which stated that disused dirt roads and footpaths could be considered right-of-ways under RS 2477. 

Early life

He was born in Portland, Oregon, to son of Philip E. Hodel and Theresia R. Brodt. He attended Harvard University. He married in 1957, to the former Barbara Beecher Stockman, who was born in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and she attended from the Wellesley College in Massachusetts. She married Donald P. Hodel from on her senior year.
They we're moved on the Oregon, after that graduation and Hodel earned on his J.D. at the University of Oregon.A Publication of the Council for National Policy - "Keeping the Flame Alive" While at the Oregon, Donald and Barbara Hodel had two sons:
Philip Hodel (died in 1974)
David Hodel
Mrs. Hodel was to became as the full-time mom. Following the suicide of their oldest son, the Hodels became evangelical Christians, as well as active in church and various other Christian ministries as speakers at evangelistic meetings and prayer breakfasts. The Hodels have appeared on The 700 Club with Pat Robertson, The Hour of Power with Robert Schuller and on Focus on the Family broadcasts with Dr. James Dobson, encouraging families who have lost loved ones to suicide.

Government career

Hodel served as United States Secretary of Energy from 1982 to 1985, and the Secretary of the Interior from 1985 to 1989 under President Ronald Reagan.  Prior to that he was Undersecretary of the Interior under James Watt.
Critics disrupted his efforts to impose a new management policy on a large amount of federal land, and blocked his efforts to create vast new wilderness areas. In spite of these criticisms, the Reagan Administration Secretaries added over two million acres (8,000 km²) to the national wilderness system. The Hodel policy was continued under Manuel Lujan Jr. (1989–93)  in the Bush Administration. It was finally rescinded in 1997 by Secretary Bruce Babbitt. 
In an article, Hodel wrote, "Throughout President Reagan's eight years, his secretaries of the Interior pursued these objectives within the framework of his and their conviction that America could have both an improving environment and an adequate energy supply.  We did not and do not have to choose between them, as some have contended. . . ."
While secretary, Hodel proposed to undertake a study on the removal of the O'Shaughnessy Dam in Yosemite National Park, and the restoration of Hetch Hetchy Valley, a smaller, but inundated version of Yosemite Valley. Senator Dianne Feinstein, former mayor of San Francisco, which owns the dam, however, opposed the study and had it quashed.
In March 1984, the Navajo Nation requested that the Secretary of the Interior, who was then William Clark, make a reasonable adjustment of the coal lease royalty rate paid by Peabody Coal, now Peabody Energy. In July 1985, newly appointed Hodel secretly met ex parte with Peabody's representative ("a former aide and friend of Secretary Hodel."). Then after very briefly reviewing the merits of the proposals, Hodel approved lease amendments with royalty rates well below the rate that had previously been determined appropriate by those agencies responsible for monitoring the federal government's relations with Native Americans. In 2007, the US Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit determined that these actions by Hodel breached the government's duty of trust to the Nation and established a "cognizable money-mandating claim" against the government under the Indian Tucker Act.(The Navajo Nation v United States, No. 2006-5059, USCA Fed. Cir., September 13, 2007 

Post-Government Career

Hodel moved to Colorado where he engaged in the energy consulting business, and served on various charitable and corporate boards of directors.  He is the author of Crisis in the Oil Patch (Regnery, 1995).
From June 1997, until February 1999, Hodel served as President of the Christian Coalition, a nonprofit conservative political group founded by religious broadcaster Pat Robertson.  
From May 2003, until March 2005, Hodel served as President and CEO of Focus on the Family, a nonprofit evangelical Christian organization.  He had stated that his job was to manage the transition from the founder, Dr. James Dobson, to his ultimate successor. Hodel had, several years prior to being named President, served on its board and remained on the board until October 2005. 
In 2006, his company FreeEats. Perry.

Environmental Efforts

As Secretary of the Interior, in 1985, Hodel ordered the acquisition of a ranch in southern Arizona which would become the Buenos Aires National Wildlife Refuge. Encompassing approximately 
Currently, Hodel serves as Chairman and Senior Vice President for Strategy and Policy at  Summit Power Group, Inc., a Seattle-based developer of wind, solar and gas-fired power plants.  In 1989, Hodel was the founder and managing director of Summit Power Group's predecessor company.






