[[Boomerang (TV channel)]]

CATEGORIES: Boomerang (TV channel), Children's television networks in the United States, Cartoon Network, Time Warner subsidiaries, Cartoon Network programs, Television channels and stations established in 2000, English-language television stations in the United States, Companies based in Atlanta, Georgia, Companies based in Los Angeles, California

Boomerang (also referred to as Boomerang from Cartoon Network) is an American digital cable and satellite television channel that is owned by the Turner Broadcasting System subsidiary of Time Warner. Originating as a spinoff of Cartoon Network (which originated Boomerang as a programming block in 1992), Boomerang specializes in reruns of animated programming from Time Warner's extensive archives, including pre-1986 MGM, Hanna-Barbera, the pre-1991 library of Ruby-Spears, Warner Bros. Animation, a portion of Famous Studios, and DePatie-Freleng Enterprises programs as well as Cartoon Network original programs, stretching from cartoon shorts of the 1930s and 1940s (almost always in color) to repeats of shows still in production on Cartoon Network.

History

Much of the programming that makes up the core of Boomerang's current lineup was originally part of TBS's Disaster Area, a block of children's programming that aired on that network from 1997 to 1999. Boomerang had originated a programming block airing on Cartoon Network that debuted on December 8, 1992. It was aimed towards the generation of baby boomers, and was similar to the Vault Disney nostalgia block that would debut five years later on the Disney Channel. It originally aired for four hours every weekend, but the block's start time had changed frequently. The Saturday block moved to Saturday afternoons, then back to the early morning, and the Sunday block moved to Sunday evenings. Eventually, Boomerang was shortened by an hour, reducing it from four hours to three each weekend. Turner Broadcasting System eventually converted Boomerang into a standalone cable channel that debuted on April 1, 2000. The Cartoon Network programming block was reformatted to air cartoons in production during a certain year (The Flintstones and Top Cat for 1961, The Perils of Penelope Pitstop and Scooby Doo for 1969, et al.). The block was often simulcast with the Boomerang channel on Saturday mornings until 2004. The Boomerang channel initially carried a looping programming format that rotated each week.
Once Boomerang launched as its own channel, on-air promotions for the channel aired at the end of every program within the Cartoon Network block, in attempt to increase visibility for Boomerang. In October 2004, all of the older programming on Cartoon Network, including Looney Tunes, Baby Looney Tunes, and shows from Hanna-Barbera migrated to Boomerang. On October 2 and 3, 2004, nearly four months after the relaunch of Cartoon Network, the Boomerang programming block was replaced with Adult Swim everyday with a lineup of older reruns of classic anthology series such as The Popeye Show, Tom and Jerry, The Bob Clampett Show, ToonHeads and programs formerly seen on Boomerang such as Super Globetrotters. Looney Tunes aired on Cartoon Network for the last time officially on those dates, and would not return to that network until March 14, 2011, when Cartoon Network added two hour-long blocks of Looney Tunes shorts in a run-up to the debut of The Looney Tunes Show.
Boomerang originated as a commercial-free channel, being financed solely by subscription fees and product tie-ins. In order to fill out a half-hour block (Boomerang programming follows a strict half-hour scheduling format), breaks between programs featured promotions for Cartoon Network and/or Boomerang programming (in the latter's case, most of the bumpers are several years old), occasional advertising for DVD products from Warner Home Video, various animated shorts, and eventually public service announcements for Cartoon Network's "Stop Bullying: Speak Up" initiative. Advertising time for cable and satellite providers is leased to some providers such as Dish Network, through insertion by those providers.
During its looping format, which lasted through December 26, 2004, its broadcast day began at 8 a.m. (Eastern Time), with programming being repeated three times a day in eight-hour blocks. Monday through Thursdays featured a variety of half-hour and hour-long animated series; "monthly feature" cartoons were shown all day on Fridays, in which one cartoon was featured for each Friday of a given month for 24 consecutive hours. On January 1, 2005, this block became known as "monthly character of the month", and began to air on weekends from 2 to 4 p.m. Eastern (the block was eventually named "Boomeroyalty" in March 2007, which ran until the fall of 2012). On Saturdays, cartoons from a select calendar year were broadcast. Boomerang's promotional slogan, It's All Coming Back to You, used on the channel itself, was one of nostalgia that accurately reflected its programming of the time (in promotions on Boomerang and especially Cartoon Network, the channel is referred to as "Boomerang from Cartoon Network"); actor and television host John O'Hurley has served as continuity announcer for most of the channel's promotions. In September 2008, Cartoon Network began to feature increased promotion for Boomerang, including two promos that aired on January 1, 2009. Recently, between intermissions, Boomerang air a bumper, followed by two advertisements (one for either Dish Network or DirecTV, depending on the provider, followed by a regular commercial, a classic short and a "Wedgie," a series of original animated shorts that originally aired on Cartoon Network).
For many years, Boomerang generally did not show live action series, with the exception of The Banana Splits, which had a semi-regular place on the channel's schedule through approximately 2011, and the Cartoon Network game show Hole in the Wall, which aired intermittently from 2010 to 2011. However, in October 2011, the channel acquired the cable rights to the 1960s live-action series The Munsters and The Addams Family (1964 version) and airing the two sitcoms in prime time, before being removed from the schedule after Halloween (both series have returned to the Boomerang lineup each October since). Because most of the channel's content consists of archived television programs produced before the advent of high-definition television, Boomerang does not currently maintain a high definition simulcast feed.
On February 4, 2014, as part of the company's 2014 upfronts, Turner Broadcasting announced that Boomerang would become an ad-supported network and seek additional international distribution. In October 2014, Boomerang will unify international feeds under one branding, comparable to when the network first launched.

Cable and satellite availability

Boomerang is carried on most cable and telco providers, along with both satellite services; tiering of the channel varies by service, with some services offering it as a basic service or as a higher-tier offering. A few providers do not carry the linear channel, instead only offering the network's video on demand service bundled with Cartoon Network. The network is offered exclusively in standard definition, with no current plans for a high definition simulcast.

Programming

Boomerang, unlike many other channels that specialize in archive programming, has continued to air programming from the 1950s through the present and has not drifted away from its original premised format; over the course of the years, it has added more recent archival programming such as Cartoon Network's Cartoon Cartoons series. Only five shows (The Flintstones, The Smurfs, Johnny Bravo, Scooby-Doo and The Powerpuff Girls) have permanent places on the schedule; several others, such as Tom and Jerry, The Yogi Bear Show, The Jetsons and The Snorks are periodically rotated onto and off of the schedule. Most other programs aired by Boomerang stay on the schedule for several weeks, then are rotated out and replaced by other programs.
Not all of the Time Warner animation library is currently available to Boomerang. A portion of the library is licensed to Hub Network as of 2013; this license includes the WB-produced animated series from the 1990s that were produced in collaboration with Steven Spielberg (including Tiny Toon Adventures and Animaniacs), and most properties involving Batman and Superman (including the DC Animated Universe). One exception to this is Justice League Unlimited, which is licensed to Saban Brands to air on Vortexx (a block which incidentally airs on The CW, which is 50% owned by Time Warner). Boomerang also occasionally licenses programming from other distributors, such as The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show, which rejoined the lineup for a short run in August and September 2013. The Looney Tunes and Merrie Melodies cartoon shorts, which were dropped by Boomerang since 2007, returned for the schedule on October 5, 2013.
Although Boomerang's programming philosophy is intended to showcase cartoons, it started to added some newer shows in recent years. On January 1, 2012, the channel began airing episodes of Puppy in My Pocket: Adventures in Pocketville, which ended in February 2013. On November 17 and 24, 2012, Boomerang aired new episodes of Ben 10: Omniverse, before their telecast on sister channel Cartoon Network. Boomerang reintroduced the "Wedgies" series of animated shorts (which air in-between shows) in 2013.

Programming blocks

Because of Boomerang's fluid schedule, programming blocks will air for a few months, then be removed from the schedule, only to be added again a few months later.

=Current=

==Seasonal programming blocks==

=Former blocks=

Other services

Boomerang On Demand

Boomerang On Demand is the channel's video-on-demand service, offering select episodes of the channel's archived programming, along with select archived Cartoon Network original programs. Launched in 2005, it is available on select digital cable, satellite and IPTV providers. In April 2013, Boomerang On Demand began to separate program content by "theme" (for example, in observance of Mother's Day, the service featured episodes of The Flintstones and Dexter's Laboratory featuring the characters of Dexter's mom and Wilma Flintstone).

International

Boomerang, originally established as a cable channel in the United States, has expanded worldwide.
Each of these networks will be aligned globally in 2014 under one unified branding to reflect a family co-viewing network.turner.cfm?article_id=6623

Australia

An Australian version of Boomerang was launched in March 2004 as part of the launch of Foxtel's digital service, with a lineup very similar to that of the U.K. version. It began as a four-hour block of programs in 2001, when the Australian version of Cartoon Network began broadcasting on a 24-hour schedule. It previously used the logo and break format of the flagship American service. However, in November 2007, the channel revamped both its logo and promotions as well as its website, boomerangtvshow. However, it uses the same bumpers for as the U.S. channel. On December 1, 2012, the channel introduced a new on-air look with the same logo and appearance as the European channels.

Southeast Asia

The Southeast Asian version of Boomerang was launched on September 1, 2005. It began as a 90-minute block of programs in 2001, when the Asian version of Cartoon Network began broadcasting on a 24-hour schedule. It previously used the American logo and style of commercial breaks. It previously used the logo and break format of the flagship American service. However, in November 2007, the channel revamped both its logo and promotions. In December 2012, the channel was replaced by Toonami.
This channel is available in Hong Kong, the selected ASEAN member neighbor countries and Sri Lanka. The 24-hour channel in India was only available on Dish TV exclusively along with Turner Classic Movies until March 2, 2009. It is currently only available on IN Digital Cable from the Hinduja Group in Mumbai and the National Capital Region. In Pakistan, it ran as a two-hour block but was replaced with Pogo due to poor ratings. In Indonesia, it is available on Indovision, Aora TV and TelkomVision.

Thailand

The Thailand version of Boomerang was launched on August 14, 2013. Similar to Southeast Asia, it is part of the Boomerang Europe franchise.

United Kingdom & Ireland

Boomerang launched in the Republic of Ireland and the United Kingdom on May 27, 2000. It broadcasts 24 hours a day on Sky Digital, Virgin Media, TalkTalk TV and Chorus Digital. This version of the channel also features other animated series such as Mr. Bean and Gadget Boy. In late July 2007, Boomerang UK started carrying live-action programs, including those exclusive to the channel such as My Spy Family.

Germany

Boomerang launched in Germany in June 2006; it is available on Kabel Deutschland, Kabel BW and Unity Media.

Italy

France

Scandinavia

In late 2005, Turner Broadcasting announced its intention to launch several new channels in the Nordic region (to join its then-current channels Turner Classic Movies, Cartoon Network and CNN International). One of the planned new channels was Boomerang, for which Turner applied for a broadcast license to operate on Swedish digital terrestrial television in the fall of 2005.

Spain

Boomerang launched a Spanish version of the channel in 2004. It is available on the Digital+ digital platform and on the Auna cable platform. It was introduced as a part of Cartoon Network's schedule on weekend afternoons.
The channel's programming strongly resembles that of the UK version. It relies heavily in older Warner Bros., MGM, and Hanna-Barbera cartoons, but it also includes fairly recent programmes featuring older characters, like Baby Looney Tunes and Duck Dodgers. It also features other classic cartoons, like the Japanese Heidi and the Spanish La vuelta al mundo de Willy Fog (Around the World with Willy Fog).
On September 1, 2011, it was replaced by Cartoonito, which itself ceased operations on June 30, 2013, along with the Spanish version of Cartoon Network.

Europe, Middle East and Africa and Central and Eastern Europe

Boomerang Europe, Middle East and Africa launched in June 2005, originally broadcasting in Eastern Europe (in English), Poland (in Polish) and Hungary (only selected shows in Hungarian); it features mainly former Cartoon Network and Hanna-Barbera programmes.
In October 2010, the channel started to broadcast select shows in Romanian. In October 12, 2011, the Central and Eastern Europe feed was separated from Europe, Middle East and Africa; as a result, the former maintains its own schedule and promos in Hungarian and Romanian language as well as the preschool-targeted block Cartoonito, which was added to both feeds at the same time.
In February 2012, the channel began accepting commercial advertising outside of Poland, whose feed also accepts traditional advertising. In July 2013, the channel started to air select shows in Russian, in preparation for a possible launch of a separate feed for Russia.blogspot.html

Latin America and Brazil

Boomerang Latin America and Boomerang Brazil both launched in July 2001. On April 3, 2006, Boomerang Latin America/Brazil was relaunched as a general entertainment children's channel, which incorporated featuring live-action programming and movies, while retaining classic cartoons during late night hours. In October 2008, classic cartoons were dropped from the schedule and Boomerang was refocused as a teen-oriented channel. In practice, the channel changed from a regional version of Boomerang USA to a version of Pogo, Cartoon Network's sister channel in India. Since 2011, the channel does not air any animated programming.
On December 1, 2008, Tooncast was launched, a channel following the format of the international versions of Boomerang, airing both classic animation shows and shows formerly aired on Cartoon Network.  However, The Powerpuff Girls was added as of February 2014, making it again inclusive to animated programming. In April, it moved its cartoon programming to daytime slots on the schedule.turner.cfm?article_id=6623

Others

Since 2005, Boomerang is also available via digital cable and satellite in the Netherlands and Belgium. In the Middle East, North Africa and the Levant territories, it broadcasts via satellite on the Orbit Showtime Network. In Sub-Saharan Africa, Boomerang is available on MultiChoice's DStv.






