[[Shemar Moore]]

CATEGORIES: 1970 births, African-American male actors, American male film actors, African-American models, American male soap opera actors, American male television actors, American television personalities, Living people, Male actors from Oakland, California, Santa Clara University alumni, American people of Irish descent, American people of French-Canadian descent, Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series winners

Shemar Franklin Moore (; born April 20, 1970) is an American actor and former fashion model. His notable roles are that of Malcolm Winters on The Young and the Restless from 1994 to 2005, Derek Morgan on CBS's Criminal Minds from 2005 to present, and as the third permanent host of Soul Train from 1999 to 2003.

Early life

Shemar Franklin Moore was born in Oakland, California, the son of Marilyn Wilson, a business consultant, and Sherrod Moore. His mother now lives in Pacifica, California, where he visits from time to time.

Career

Moore played the role of Malcolm Winters on The Young and the Restless for eight years. In November 2004, he returned to The Young and the Restless after originally planning to leave the show, but after a few months he dropped back to recurring status and left in September 2005. In 2007, he said, "My time is done on Y&R. I did eight solid years as Malcolm."
He was the host of the syndicated version of the series Soul Train from 2000 until 2003, He also appeared in the romantic comedy The Seat Filler with Kelly Rowland and Duane Martin.
Criminal Minds was the seventh pilot Moore was cast in. In one episode, he was shown watching The Young and the Restless after breaking into fellow agent Dr. Reid's hotel room.
He has won fans due to his high-profile modeling, often shirtless and in erotic shots.

Personal life

Around 1998, Moore's mother was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis. Moore, along with several of his Criminal Minds castmates, have done several charity events to raise money for MS research.

Filmography

Film

Television

Awards and nominations






