[[Rocketdyne F-1]]

CATEGORIES: Rocket engines, Rocketdyne engines, North American Aviation

The F-1 is a gas-generator cycle rocket engine developed by Rocketdyne in the late 1950s and used in the Saturn V rocket in the 1960s and early 1970s.  Five F-1 engines were used in the S-IC first stage of each Saturn V, which served as the main launch vehicle in the Apollo program.  The F-1 remains the most powerful single-chamber liquid-fueled rocket engine ever developed.W. David Woods, How Apollo Flew to the Moon, Springer, 2008, ISBN 978-0-387-71675-6, p. 19

History

The F-1 was originally developed by Rocketdyne to meet a 1955 US Air Force requirement for a very large rocket engine. The eventual result of that requirement was two engines, the E-1 and the much larger F-1. The E-1, although successfully tested in static firing, was quickly seen as a technological dead-end, and was abandoned for the larger, more powerful F-1. The Air Force eventually halted development of the F-1 because of a lack of requirement for such a large engine. However, the recently created National Aeronautics and Space Administration appreciated the usefulness of an engine with so much power, and contracted Rocketdyne to complete its development. Test firings of F-1 components had been performed as early as 1957. The first static firing of a full-stage developmental F-1 was performed in March 1959. The first F-1 was delivered to NASA MSFC in October 1963. In December 1964, the F-1 completed flight-rating tests. Testing continued at least through 1965.
During development tests revealed serious combustion instability problems which sometimes caused catastrophic failure. Initially, progress on this problem was slow, as it was intermittent and unpredictable. Oscillations of 4 kHz with harmonics to 24 kHz were observed. Eventually, engineers developed a technique of detonating small explosive charges (which they called "bombs") outside the combustion chamber, through a tangential tube (RDX, C4 or black powder were used) while the engine was firing. This allowed them to determine exactly how the running chamber responded to variations in pressure, and to determine how to nullify these oscillations. The designers could then quickly experiment with different co-axial fuel-injector designs to obtain the one most resistant to instability. These problems were addressed from 1959 through 1961. Eventually, engine combustion was so stable, it would self-damp artificially induced instability within 1/10 of a second.

Design

The Rocketdyne-developed F-1 engine is the most powerful single-nozzle liquid-fueled rocket engine ever flown.  The RD-170 produces 11% more and the RD-171 produces 20% greater thrust using a cluster of four combustion chambers and four nozzles. The M-1 rocket engine was designed to have more thrust, however it was only tested at the component level.  The F-1 was a liquid-fueled rocket motor, burning RP-1 (kerosene) as fuel, and using liquid oxygen (LOX) as the oxidizer. A turbopump was used to inject fuel and oxygen into the combustion chamber.
The heart of the engine was the thrust chamber, which mixed and burned the fuel and oxidizer to produce thrust.  A domed chamber at the top of the engine served as a manifold supplying liquid oxygen to the injectors, and also served as a mount for the gimbal bearing which transmitted the thrust to the body of the rocket.  Below this dome were the injectors, which directed fuel and oxidizer into the thrust chamber in a way designed to promote mixing and combustion.  Fuel was supplied to the injectors from a separate manifold; some of the fuel first travelled in 178 tubes down the length of the thrust chamber—which formed approximately the upper half of the exhaust nozzle—and back, to cool the nozzle.
A gas-generator was used to drive a turbine which in turn drove separate fuel and oxygen pumps, each feeding the thrust chamber assembly. The turbine was driven at 5,500 RPM by the gas generator, producing . Structurally, fuel was used to lubricate and cool the turbine bearings.
Below the thrust chamber was the nozzle extension, roughly half the length of the engine.  This extension increased the expansion ratio of the engine from 10:1 to 16:1.  The exhaust from the turbopump was fed into the nozzle extension by a large, tapered manifold; this relatively cool gas formed a film which protected the nozzle extension from the hot () exhaust gas.
The F-1 burned  per second. Each F-1 engine had more thrust than three Space Shuttle Main Engines combined.
Designer of the pump for the E-1/F-1 for Rocketdyne was Ernest A. Lamont.  His hand written original calculations are part of the family archives and available for display.  He stated that the design of the rocket engine hinged on the question of whether the pump design was viable.

Pre and post ignition procedures

During static test firing, the kerosene-based RP-1 fuel would leave hydrocarbon deposits and vapors in the engine post test firing.  These vapors and deposits had to be removed from the engine to avoid problems during engine handling and future firing. To this effect, the solvent Trichloroethylene(TCE) was used to clean the engine's fuel system immediately before and after each test firing.  The cleaning procedure involved pumping TCE through the engine's fuel system and letting the solvent overflow for a period ranging from several seconds to 30–35 minutes, depending upon the engine and the severity of the deposits.  For some engines, the engine's gas generator and LOX dome were also flushed with TCE prior to test firing.  The F-1 rocket engine had its LOX dome, gas generator, and thrust chamber fuel jacket flushed with TCE during launch preparations.

Specifications

Sources:

F-1 improvements

F-1 thrust and efficiency were improved between Apollo 8 (SA-503) and Apollo 17 (SA-512). This was necessary for Saturn V payload capacity to meet the increasing demands of the later Apollo missions. There were small performance variations between engines on a given mission, and variations in average thrust between missions. For Apollo 15, F-1 performance was:
Measuring and making comparisons of rocket engine thrust is more complicated than it first appears. Based on actual measurement the liftoff thrust of Apollo 15 was  - significantly more than the specified value.

F-1A after Apollo

During the 1960s, Rocketdyne undertook uprating development of the F-1 resulting in the new engine specification F-1A.  While outwardly very similar to the F-1, the F-1A produced a larger thrust of about 
There were proposals to use eight F-1 engines on the first stage of the Nova rocket.  Numerous proposals have been made from the 1970s on to develop new expendable boosters based around the F-1 engine design. These include the Saturn-Shuttle, and one in 2013. , none has proceeded beyond the initial study phase.
The F-1 is the largest, highest thrust single-chamber, single-nozzle liquid fuel engine flown. The RD-170 and RD-171 from the Soviet Union use a cluster of four separate combustion chambers and nozzles, giving the appearance of four engines; however, the combustion chambers are all driven by a single turbopump. The assembly produces around 20% more thrust than the F-1, the highest thrust liquid-fuel engines ever flown.  Larger solid-fuel engines exist, such as the Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Booster with a sea-level liftoff thrust of .

F-1B booster

As part of the Space Launch System (SLS) program, NASA is running the Advanced Booster Competition, scheduled to end with the selection of a winning booster configuration in 2015. In 2012, PWR proposed using a derivative of the F-1 engine in the competition.
Pratt and Whitney, Rocketdyne and Dynetics, Inc. presented a competitor to the 5 segment Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Booster and NK-33 engines intended for the Space Launch System, using two increased-thrust and heavily modified F-1B engines. Due to the engine's potential advantage in specific impulse (a unit analogous to car fuel efficiency), if this F-1B configuration were integrated with the SLS Block II, the vehicle could deliver 150 metric tons to low earth orbit, 20 metric tons greater than what is achievable with the currently planned solid boosters.
The F-1B engine has a design goal to be at least as powerful as the un-flight-tested F-1A, while also being more cost effective. The design incorporates a greatly simplified combustion chamber, a reduced number of engine parts, and the removal of the F-1 exhaust recycling system, including the turbopump exhaust mid-nozzle and the "curtain" cooling manifold. The reduction in parts costs is aided by using Selective laser melting in the 3-D printing of metallic parts. of thrust that the mature Apollo 15 F-1 engines produced.

Locations of F-1 engines

Sixty-five F-1 engines were launched aboard thirteen Saturn Vs, and each first stage landed in the Atlantic ocean after about two and a half minutes of flight. Ten of these followed approximately the same flight azimuth of 72 degrees, but Apollo 15 and Apollo 17 followed significantly more southerly azimuths (80.088 degrees and  91.503 degrees, respectively). The Skylab launch vehicle flew at a more northerly azimuth to reach a higher inclination orbit (50 degrees versus the usual 32.5 degrees). NASA, Apollo By the Numbers, "Earth Orbit Data"
Ten F-1 engines were installed on two Saturn Vs that never flew. The first stage from SA-514 is on display at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas and the first stage from SA-515 is on display at the Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans, Louisiana.
On March 28, 2012, a team funded by Jeff Bezos, founder of Amazon. On March 20, 2013, Bezos announced he had succeeded in bringing parts of an F-1 engine to the surface, and released photographs. Bezos noted, "Many of the original serial numbers are missing or partially missing, which is going to make mission identification difficult. We might see more during restoration." Walker, Brian (March 20, 2013). "Apollo Mission Rocket Engines Recovered", CNN Light Years blog
The recovered parts are currently at the Kansas Cosmosphere and Space Center in Hutchinson, Kansas for the process of conservation.
On July 19, 2013, Bezos revealed that the serial number of the recovered engine is Rocketdyne serial number 2044 (equating to NASA number 6044), the #5 (center) engine that helped Neil Armstrong, Buzz Aldrin and Michael Collins to reach the Moon with the Apollo 11 mission.








