[[Lloyds Bank]]

CATEGORIES: Banks established in 1765, Banks of the United Kingdom, Financial services companies of the United Kingdom, Lloyds Banking Group

Lloyds Bank plc is a British retail bank with branches across England and Wales. It has traditionally been considered one of the "Big Four" clearing banks. In 1995 it merged with the Trustee Savings Bank and traded as Lloyds TSB Bank plc between 1999 and 2013.
The bank is the principal subsidiary of Lloyds Banking Group, which was formed in January 2009 by the acquisition of HBOS by the then-Lloyds TSB Group. That year, following the UK bank rescue package, the British Government took a 43.4% stake in Lloyds Banking Group. As a condition imposed by the European Commission regarding state aid,Rights Issue and Capital Enhancement Proposals Presentations and Webcasts, Lloyds Banking Group, 3 November 2009 the group later announced that it would create a new standalone retail banking business, made up of a number of Lloyds TSB branches and those of Cheltenham & Gloucester. The new business began operations on 9 September 2013 under the TSB brand. Lloyds TSB was subsequently renamed Lloyds Bank on 23 September 2013.
Lloyds Bank has an extensive network of branches and ATM in England and Wales and offers 24-hour telephone and online banking services.  it has 16 million personal customers and small business accounts. The Work Foundation. January 2005.

History

Origins

The origins of Lloyds Bank date from 1765, when button maker John Taylor and iron producer and dealer Sampson Lloyd II set up a private banking business in Dale End, Birmingham. The first branch office opened in Oldbury, some six miles (10 km) west of Birmingham, in 1864. The symbol adopted by Taylors and Lloyds was the beehive, representing industry and hard work. The black horse device dates from 1677, when Humphrey Stokes adopted it as sign for his shop. Stokes was a goldsmith and "keeper of the running cashes" (an early term for banker) and the business became part of Barnett, Hoares & Co. When the bank took over that bank in 1884, it retained the black horse as its symbol.
The association with the Taylor family ended in 1852 and, in 1865, Lloyds & Co. converted into a joint-stock company known as Lloyds Banking Company Ltd. Two sons of the original partners followed in their footsteps by joining the established merchant bank Barnett, Hoares & Co. which later became Barnetts, Hoares, Hanbury and Lloyd— based in Lombard Street, London. Eventually, this became absorbed into the original Lloyds Banking Company, which became Lloyds, Barnetts and Bosenquets Bank Ltd. in 1884, and, finally, Lloyds Bank Limited in 1889.

Expansion

Through a series of mergers, including Cunliffe, Brooks in 1900, the Wilts. and Dorset Bank in 1914 and, by far the largest, the Capital and Counties Bank in 1918, Lloyds emerged to become one of the "Big Four" clearing banks in the United Kingdom. By 1923, Lloyds Bank had made some 50 takeovers, one of which was the last private firm to issue its own banknotes—Fox, Fowler and Company of Wellington, Somerset. Today, the Bank of England has a monopoly of banknote issue in England and Wales.A brief history of banknotes Bank of England (retrieved 11 October 2008) In 2011, the company founded SGH Martineau LLP.
In 1968, a failed attempt at merger with Barclays and Martins Bank was deemed to be against the public interest by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission. Barclays finally acquired Martins the following year. That same year it introduced Cashpoint, the first online cash machine to use plastic cards with a magnetic stripe. In popular use, the Cashpoint trademark has become a generic term for an ATM in the United Kingdom.
Under the leadership of Sir Brian Pitman between 1984 and 1997, the bank's business focus was narrowed and it reacted to disastrous lending to South American states by trimming its overseas businesses and seeking growth through mergers with other UK banks. During this period, Pitman tried unsuccessfully to acquire The Royal Bank of Scotland in 1984, Standard Chartered in 1986,Offer Sweetened By Lloyds Bank The New York Times, 28 June 1986 and Midland Bank in 1992. Lloyds Bank International merged into Lloyds Bank in 1986, since there was no longer an advantage in operating separately. 9) In 1988, Lloyds merged five of its businesses with the Abbey Life Insurance Company to create Lloyds Abbey Life.

Lloyds TSB

The bank merged first with the newly demutualised Cheltenham & Gloucester Building Society (C&G), then with the TSB Group in 1995. The C&G acquisition gave Lloyds a large stake in the UK mortgage lending market. The new bank commenced trading in 1999, after the statutory process of integration was completed. 5) On 28 June, TSB Bank plc transferred engagements to Lloyds Bank Plc which then changed its name to Lloyds TSB Bank plc; at the same time, TSB Bank Scotland plc absorbed Lloyds' three Scottish branches becoming Lloyds TSB Scotland plc. The combined business formed the largest bank in the UK by market share and the second-largest to Midland Bank (now HSBC) by market capitalisation.
Lloyds Abbey Life became a wholly owned subsidiary of the group in 1996, absorbing Hill Samuel in 1997, before closing to new business in 2000. In 2007, Abbey Life was sold to Deutsche Bank for £977 million.
In 1999, the group agreed to buy the Scottish Widows Fund and Life Assurance Society for £7 billion.
In October 2011, Lloyds TSB's credit rating was reduced by Moody's from Aa3 to A1.  The action was taken in the light of a shift in government policy to move risk from taxpayers to creditors by reducing the level of support offered to financial institutions.
Lloyds TSB was the first Official Partner for the 2012 Summer Olympics in London.

Divestment and return to Lloyds Bank

After the 2008 rescue of HBOS,Anticipated acquisition by Lloyds TSB Group Plc of HBOS Plc Office of Fair Trading, 24 October 2008 Lloyds TSB Group was renamed Lloyds Banking Group.4% stake in Lloyds Banking Group. The European Commission ruled that the group must sell a portion of its business by November 2013, as it categorised the stake purchase as state aid.
On 24 April 2013, it was confirmed that a number of Lloyds TSB branches in England and Wales would be combined with the branches of Cheltenham & Gloucester and the business of Lloyds TSB Scotland to form a new bank operating under the TSB brand and divested by the group. The remaining business of Lloyds TSB returned to the Lloyds Bank name on 23 September 2013.

Services

The bank offers a full range of banking and financial services, through a network of 1,300 branches in England and Wales. It is a member of the Financial Ombudsman Service, the Financial Services Compensation Scheme, UK Payments Administration and of the British Bankers' Association. The bank uses the following series of sort codes:—
The Lloyds TSB Foundation funds local, regional and national charities working to tackle disadvantage across England and Wales.

Overseas operations

By the early 1990s, Lloyds Bank had offices in 30 countries, from Argentina to the United States of America.

Europe

1911 saw the formation of Lloyds Bank (France) when Lloyds Bank acquired Armstrong and Co., based in Paris and Le Havre. From 1917 it was run jointly as Lloyds and National Provincial Bank. In 1955, Lloyds Bank bought full ownership and it became Lloyds Bank (Foreign) and later Lloyds Bank Europe.Lloyds Bank Europe The Royal Bank of Scotland Group (retrieved 11 October 2008)

Bank of London and South America

A strong connection with South America began in 1918 with the acquisition of the London and River Plate Bank. The later merger with the London and Brazilian Bank resulted in the Bank of London and South America. The Bank of London and Montreal was a joint venture between the Bank of London and South America and the Bank of Montreal. In 1971, Lloyds Bank bought the controlling interest in BOLSA and merged it with Lloyds Bank Europe to form Lloyds and Bolsa International Bank. This became Lloyds Bank International in 1974 and was merged into Lloyds Bank in 1986.

National Bank of New Zealand

In 1872, the National Bank of New Zealand was founded in London as an overseas bank and shared many directors with Lloyds Bank. In 1919, Lloyds Bank acquired a small interest in the National Bank and in 1966, purchased it outright. In 1978, the National Bank moved its head office from London to Wellington.National Bank of New Zealand About ANZ National (retrieved 11 October 2008)
An already commanding presence as the National Bank of New Zealand was further strengthened in 1994 by the takeover of the Rural Bank, the former New Zealand government owned bank, from Fletcher Challenge, making it the leading provider of agricultural finance in the country.
In 2003, Lloyds TSB sold the National Bank to the Australia and New Zealand Banking Group. In 2013, ANZ announced that the National Bank brand (including the black horse and colour green) would be phased out.

Asia

In 1961, Lloyds Bank transferred its Eastern Division to National and Grindlays Bank in exchange for a 25 per cent share in National and Grindlays Bank (renamed Grindlays Bank in 1975). The bank retained its interest in Grindlays until 1984, when it was sold to the ANZ Banking Group.

North America

The Bank of London and Montreal was a joint venture between the Bank of London and South America and Canadian Bank of Montreal established in 1958 and headquartered in Nassau, Bahamas. In 1970, BOLSA fully acquired BOLAM.
Lloyds Bank of Canada was formed in 1986, when the bank purchased the Continental Bank of Canada. In 1990, after several years of losses, Lloyds Bank sold its Canadian operations to the Hong Kong Bank of Canada, a subsidiary of HSBC Holdings plc.

Controversies

Payment protection insurance

In November 2005 an investigation by the Financial Services Authority (FSA) highlighted a lack of compliance controls surrounding payment protection insurance (PPI). A second investigation in October 2006 identified further evidence of poor compliance and major PPI providers including Lloyds were fined for not treating customers fairly. In January 2011 a High Court case began which in the following April ruled against the banks, on 5 May 2011 Lloyds withdrew from the legal challenge. In 2012, Lloyds announced that they had set aside £3.6 billion to cover the cost of compensating customers who were mis-sold PPI.
In March 2014 it was reported that Lloyds had been reducing the compensation they offered by using a regulatory provision called "alternative redress" to assume that customers wrongly sold single-premium PPI policies would have bought a cheaper, regular premium PPI policy instead.

Links to arms trade

In December 2008 the British anti-poverty charity War on Want released a report documenting the extent to which the UK high street banks invest in, provide banking services for and lend to arms companies. The report stated that Lloyds TSB is the only high street bank whose corporate social responsibility policy does not mention the arms industry, yet is that industry's second largest shareholder among high street banks.

Tax evasion

In 2009, the BBC's Panorama alleged that Lloyds TSB Offshore in Jersey, Channel Islands was encouraging wealthy customers to evade tax.  An employee of Lloyds was filmed telling a customer how several mechanisms could be used to make their transactions invisible to the UK tax authorities.

Retail conduct failings

In December 2013, Lloyds Banking Group had been fined £28m for "serious failings" in relation to bonus schemes for sales staff. The Financial Conduct Authority said it was the largest fine that it or the former Financial Services Authority had imposed for retail conduct failings. The bonus scheme pressured staff to hit sales targets or risk being demoted and have their pay cut, the FCA said. Lloyds Bank has accepted the regulator's findings and apologised to its customers.
In February 2014, the Twitter profile @LloydsBankHell began tracking disquiet with consumers towards the bank. 

Divestment of government-owned shares

Based on figures from the National Audit Office, George Osborne's sale of a 6% tranche of Lloyds shares in autumn 2013—despite his claims that the sale had netted a profit—worked out at a loss of at least £230m for UK taxpayers.





Bibliography




