[[Ad-Aware]]

CATEGORIES: 1999 software, Spyware removal, Windows-only freeware

Ad-Aware is an anti-spyware and anti-virus program developed by Lavasoft that detects and removes malware, spyware and adware on a user's computer. According to Lavasoft, Ad-Aware detects spyware, computer viruses, dialers, Trojans, bots, rootkits, data miners, aggressive advertising, parasites, browser hijackers, and tracking components.lavasoft.pdf

History

Ad-Aware was originally developed in 1999 to highlight web beacons inside of Internet Explorer.
In the 2008 Edition, Lavasoft bundled Ad-Aware Pro and Plus for the first time with an antivirus scanner,
and this practice continued in the subsequent releases.



, Lavasoft makes Ad-Aware version 10 available in three core versions:
Two other versions are also available:
Latest Ad-Aware products have been completely revamped to the point where it has almost nothing in common with its predecessors except the core functionalities.
Lavasoft also offers volume licenses of Ad-Aware for businesses,
Each version includes anti-spyware, antivirus, and anti-rootkit protection, as well as integrated protection against real-time threats. According to Lavasoft, Ad-Aware allows computer users to combat malicious spyware, viruses, and malware; it protects users from malware that takes control of a computer and can result in aggressive advertising pop-ups, in sluggish computer activity and in the stealing of private information.  The vendor says that Ad-Aware detects hazardous content on a user's computer, identifies the threat level, and then gives the user the ability to block or remove unwanted content. Ad-Aware Total Security offers extra features that the three core version do not, primarily: firewall, system tuning, online backup, data recovery, anti-spam and parental controls.com/products/ad_aware_total_security.php
According to PC World magazine, an older version of Ad-Aware, the Anniversary Edition, could locate only 83.6% of malware in a comparative test carried out by the security firm AV-TEST.[ref]
[/ref] However, as the article states, no such tests have been run on the newest version. Neil J. Rubenking at PCMag performed a lab test on version 8.3, where Ad-Aware scored 9.2 points, beating the previous top score of 9.1.
Ad-Aware installs Google Chrome, which will be done automatically unless the user de-selects the tick-box in the Ad-Aware installation program.

Market share

Ad-Aware Free is listed as having been downloaded over 381 million times on download.com)  however, since its primary competition is not downloadable from the same location, a comparison of relative market-share is not possible with these figures.
The paid versions of the product are under threat from more functional and lower cost, even free, competition such as Microsoft Security Essentials.




