[[Light rail in Sydney]]

CATEGORIES: Light rail in Sydney

Light rail is one of the four major public transport modes serving the city of Sydney, Australia. The network presently consists of a single 12.8 kilometre line and a second line that is in the planning stages.

History

In the 19th and early 20th centuries, Sydney developed an extensive tram network, which grew to be one of the largest in the world. The increasing rate of private car ownership and the perception that trams contributed to traffic congestion led to the progressive replacement of tram services with buses, with the final section of the tram network closing in February 1961.
In the 1980s and 1990s, the inner city areas of Darling Harbour and Pyrmont were the subject of an urban renewal program. In 1988 the Sydney Monorail opened, connecting Darling Harbour to the Central Business District. With poor integration between the monorail and other transport modes, and the increasing redevelopment of the Pyrmont peninsula - including the establishment of Sydney's first legal casino - it was decided to convert a disused section of the Metropolitan Goods railway line into a light rail line. A section of track between Pyrmont and Haymarket was upgraded and a new on-street section constructed to link the line to Central railway station.
The line was set up as a public-private partnership, with the Sydney Light Rail Company awarded a concession to operate the line for 30.5 years until February 2028 when ownership would pass to the State Government. In August 1998 the company became part of Metro Transport Sydney, which also owned the Sydney Monorail.
The Government of New South Wales purchased Metro Transport Sydney on 23 March 2012 for $19.8 million placing it under the control of Transport for NSW.
Operation of the service has been contracted to Transdev Sydney since 1998.
In February 2014, three consortium were short listed to build and operate the CBD and South East Light Rail line. The contract will be awarded in late 2014.Tender out to deliver and operate Sydney's Light Rail Network Transport New South Wales 7 March 2014Three shortlisted for Sydney light rail PPP International Railway Journal 20 February 2014 The successful bidder will also take over operation of the Inner West Light Rail line from Transdev Sydney:Three international consortia in the running to build and operate Light Rail Transport New South Wales 14 February 2014Three shortlisted for Sydney light rail PPP International Railway Journal 20 February 2014

Network

L1: Dulwich Hill Line

The Dulwich Hill Line is the network's original line. It connects the Inner Western suburbs with Darling Harbour and the southern end of the Central Business District. The line operates along a former freight railway, with a short on-street section at the city end. The route opened between Central and Wentworth Park in August 1997 as the Sydney Light Rail. A south-western extension to Dulwich Hill opened in March 2014.Inner West Light rail extension now complete Transport New South Wales 27 March 2014

Planned extensions

=CBD and South East line=

The CBD and South East line is a future line that will operate from Circular Quay at the northern end of the Central Business District to Central station at the southern end, then continuing to the south-eastern suburbs. The line was announced in 2012, with construction expected to start in 2014. The line is being built to reduce bus congestion in the CBD and provide higher capacity public transport to the Sydney Football Stadium, Sydney Cricket Ground, Randwick Racecourse and the University of New South Wales, which are currently served only by buses. In contrast to the Inner West line, the route is mostly on-street and follows a similar path to routes used by the former tramway network.

Extension proposals

Several transport corridors have significant potential to allow for the growth of the network beyond its current route structure.
The priority corridors for further investigation by Transport for NSW are:
The City of Sydney Council has also recommended that a Light Rail link be built from the city to Green Square, to service the commercial and residential developments currently being constructed in the area.

=Western Sydney Light Rail Network=

In 2013, Parramatta City Council published a feasibility study into a proposed Western Sydney Light Rail Network, designed to improve transport links throughout Western Sydney and meet the challenges posed by the projected rise in population in the region in the coming decades. The $1 million study found that a light rail system was a viable solution to address the growing transport needs of Parramatta and Western Sydney. The report proposes that an estimated $20 million in state and federal support is required to undertake a detailed investigation and to prepare a business case. It proposed construction of the network in several stages, the first of which comprises two lines: the Macquarie Park line and the Castle Hill line.
The line is proposed to run from Macquarie Centre via Eastwood and Dundas to Parramatta with separate branches to Westmead and Castle Hill via Baulkham Hills. Further extensions would operate to Bankstown and Rhodes.

=Waverley Light Rail=

The Waverley Municipal Council advocates the extension of the light rail network to link the current infrastructure to Bondi Junction and Bondi Beach.

Tram fleet

By mid-2014 the fleet will consist of sixteen trams divided into three classes. All trams are articulated, low floor and bi-directional. The system is electrified and the trams run on 750 volt direct current.

Variotram

The network's original rolling stock is the Variotram which was introduced with the opening of the system in 1997. Seven German-designed vehicles were manufactured in Dandenong, Victoria by Adtranz. On tests up to three trams have been coupled together allowing a maximum capacity of 600 passengers if required. They are numbered 2101-2107, continuing the Sydney trams sequence that finished at 2087 with the last Sydney R1-Class Tram.
The vehicles have a floor to rail height of 30 centimetres and the bogies have no axles between the wheels and are powered with gearless hub motors. The design weight was reduced to compensate for the addition of climate-control air-conditioning equipment. Each tram is fitted with three double doors each side which have enhanced safety systems with obstacle detection interlocked with the traction system.

Urbos

To service the Dulwich Hill extension and increase service frequencies, ten additional trams are joining the fleet.

=Urbos 2=

The four leased trams are second-hand Urbos 2 units from Spain. Three units (2108-2110) are from Vélez-Málaga, where they operated between 2006 and 2012. Delivery was completed in November. The trams entered service on 22 March 2014, five days before the opening of the extension to Dulwich Hill.Inner West Light Rail Extension opens next week Transport for NSW 21 March 2014
The trams feature four double and two single doors on each side. The seats are unpadded and are generally built in the longitudinal seating configuration - running parallel to the sides of the tram body. Digital voice announcements and Dot-matrix displays provide information about the next stop.

=Urbos 3=

It is expected the new trams will come from the company's Urbos 3 platform. 
On 11 October 2013, the Government announced an order for six additional trams to replace the Variotrams. The first tram from the additional order is expected to enter service in 2015.

Future trams

Approximately twenty-five additional trams will be procured to serve the CBD and South East line. These will be approximately 45 metres long and will provide increased capacity compared to the trams serving the Inner West. The trams are expected to offer catenary free operation in a pedestrianised section of George Street between Bathurst and Hunter Streets.

Ticketing

The light rail network uses its own ticketing system. Single and return tickets are available with fares based on two zones. Day and weekly tickets are also available, some of which allowed travel on the monorail prior to that system's closure.
Several tickets are recognised on the light rail but are not sold on trams. A "TramLink" ticket which allows travel on Sydney Trains and the light rail is available from Sydney Trains stations.
From 2015, the Opal card will be accepted for travel across the entire light rail network.








