[[Metamorpho]]

CATEGORIES: Comics characters introduced in 1965, 1965 comic debuts, DC Comics titles, Fictional archaeologists, Fictional shapeshifters, Fictional soldiers, DC Comics metahumans, Fictional characters who can stretch themselves, Fictional alchemists, DC Comics characters with accelerated healing, Fictional characters who can duplicate themselves, Characters created by Bob Haney

Metamorpho (real name Rex Mason, also called The Element Man) is a fictional character, a superhero in the . He is a founding member of the Outsiders, and has also joined multiple incarnations of the Justice League.

Publication history

Metamorpho's creator, Bob Haney, had seen success with DC Comics in 1963 with the titles Metal Men and Doom Patrol, featuring bands of superheroes exhibiting fantastic powers. Under the editorial management of George Kashdan, Haney was asked to capitalize on these titles' popularity with a similar character. Metamorpho, the Element Man, debuted in The Brave and the Bold #57 (January 1965).
In 1975 Metamorpho appeared in 1st Issue Special #3, a brief series consisting of one-shots of new and established DC comics characters. That issue was written by Bob Haney and illustrated by Ramona Fradon, Metamorpho's original creators.
After becoming a charter member of the Outsiders in 1983, and member of the European branch of the Justice League International, he received his own 4 issue mini-series in 1993.
In 2005, DC Comics reprinted Metamorpho's early The Brave and the Bold appearances and the entirety of the 1965 series as one of the company's volumes of Showcase Presents.
In 2007, Dan Jurgens launched the 6 issue series Metamorpho Year One.
As part of a Wednesday Comics, Neil Gaiman wrote a twelve-page Metamorpho story that Mike Allred illustrated.

Fictional character biography

Rex Mason was an adventurer who was hired by business tycoon Simon Stagg to retrieve a rare Egyptian artifact, the Orb of Ra. Mason also started dating Stagg's daughter, Sapphire Stagg. This was just one of the incidents that antagonized Simon Stagg.
In an Egyptian pyramid, Rex Mason was knocked out by Simon's brutish bodyguard, Java, and eventually exposed to a radioactive meteorite from which the Orb of Ra was fashioned. A tremendous flare-up of its radiation transformed Rex Mason into Metamorpho, the Element Man. He gained the ability to shapeshift and change himself into any element found in the human body, or any combinations thereof. It was also established in his origin story (see: The Brave & The Bold #57) that he was virtually invulnerable in his inert (untransformed) state, when Stagg, afraid that Rex was going to kill him, shot him point-blank without effect. The Orb of Ra, however, had the same effect on Rex that kryptonite has on Superman. Thus Stagg continued to control Metamorpho. Later, it was revealed that Mason was but one of many metamorphae, created by the sun god Ra – by this meteor – to serve as warriors in his battle against the god Apep, "the serpent who never dies."
Metamorpho, unlike other super-humanoids described in DC Comics, could not assume a fully human, normal appearance, being no longer composed of flesh, blood and bone. As such, he regarded his metamorphic powers as a disease and sought a cure for his condition. (This was then, and has remained, a common theme in science fiction and comic books.) He considered himself a non-human freak because of his abilities and wanted to be restored to normal. For that reason, he rejected an offer of membership that the Justice League of America extended to him. He did have Green Lantern attempt to change him back to normal. Due to a "yellow" component of the meteor radiation that had given him his powers, the ring was unable to make him normal again.
Metamorpho briefly had a crimefighting partner: a woman named Urania "Rainie" Blackwell who deliberately exposed herself to the Orb and gained its powers, calling herself Element Girl. She worked with him on a number of cases.
Issues #16-17 were intended to show a new direction for the series, with Sapphire marrying a man named Wally Bannister and Metamorpho going off with a mysterious Mr. Shadow to deal with an immortal queen who looked just like Sapphire. Bent on world conquest, the queen married Metamorpho, stepped outside her mystic city and instantly aged 2000 years.
Wally Bannister, however, was murdered off-stage by Algon, a Metamorpho who had lived for centuries in a depowered state. Mr. Shadow turned out to be attempting to enslave Metamorpho. He did not show up to defend Metamorpho when he is framed, tried, convicted by a jury of rabble, condemned and executed. Element Girl revived Metamorpho. Algon, the real murderer, was killed by molten lava minerals in an attempt to regain his burned-out powers. The murder of Mr. Bannister was engineered by the villainous Prosecutor, who was apparently killed by an insectoid villain in a cocoon. At this point, issue #17 ended and the story was never continued.
Metamorpho reappears years later in The Brave and the Bold #101 (April–May 1972), in which it is revealed that he spent the period after the end of his own series immersed in a painful chemical bath concocted by Stagg that was intended to cure his condition. Stagg retrieves him from this "cure" too early because he needs Mason to save his endangered daughter Sapphire. Metamorpho went on to star in a new a back-up series beginning in Action #413 (June 1972). There was no reference to the last two issues of his regular series in this revival, or to any of characters or incidents in those issues.
Urania Blackwell, unreferenced since the end of the regular series, was later revealed to have ended her partnership with Metamopho when her unrequited attraction to him became too much for her, afterwards living as a recluse. Blackwell's power was removed, resulting in her death, at her own request by the sun god Ra, with assistance from Death, in Neil Gaiman's Sandman. She mentions Algon, in passing, as having achieved release from the torment of his existence through death, to convince Ra to remove her powers.

Outsiders

Metamorpho spends some time working with the Outsiders. While in the despotically ruled country of Mozombia, Metamorpho is subdued and taken apart. The tyrant's forces keep him inert with a constant application of radiation. He is freed by Katana's indestructible sword, which had been latched onto a live electrical wire.
While leaving Mozombia, the Outsiders' plane is shot down by the Bad Samaritan. Metamorpho and the others spend some time stranded on a deserted island, simply too far away from land to rescue themselves.
Metamorpho perishes, for the first of multiple times, during the Millennium event. The scientific adviser to the Outsiders, Dr. Jace, had decided that life with the more logical Manhunters was preferable and she betrayed the team. They fought back, but Metamorpho had been brainwashed into assisting Jace. He was killed in the resulting battle. He returns during the Invasion miniseries, when a gene-bomb set off by invading aliens affected his biomass.

Justice League

Metamorpho spent some time with the Justice League, including Justice League Europe. There, he encounters Sapphire Stagg again. He becomes involved in a battle with the Metal Men, who had been tricked by Simon. His League friends, Rocket Red and Animal Man, were at the site of the battle, but were being detained by Java. At the conclusion of the battle, Metamorpho learns he had a son with Sapphire. Unfortunately, the baby boy's touch harmed all but Sapphire and Metamorpho. When Java held the baby, his arms melted. Metamorpho handed the baby over to Simon, who became convinced he would die, harmed like Java had been moments ago. However, something in his genetic structure protected him, just as it did with the baby's mother. Simon's stance softened and everyone was set free. Doc Magnus, the leader of the Metal Men, offered his services in creating new arms for Java. On the way home, Metamorpho's friends were puzzled as to how he knew Simon would be unaffected by the child. Metamorpho indicates that he had hoped the baby would kill Simon.
Metamorpho would later have a romantic relationship with Crimson Fox, which was cut short by her apparent murder. His personal investigation of the incident uncovers multiple layers of lies and deceit. During his time with the team, while fighting the planet-smashing aliens called The Family, Metamorpho is hit by a powerful energy blast that destroys his body. He quickly re-forms in a totally different look. He will sport this new look until his next demise.

Second death

Later, the Hyperclan attacked the Justice League of America's orbiting base, destroying it. Metamorpho protected three of his teammates, Nuklon, Obsidian, and the original Icemaiden, in a giant, fluid filled ball. The intent was for them to survive reentry into Earth's atmosphere. The three make it, injured but alive, but Metamorpho does not. He was buried with solemn honors. After a temporary resurrection by the wish-granting Id (fundamentally flawed because the wisher, his son Joey, only wished for him to be back rather than to be alive), he would return some time later.

Return

Sapphire Stagg used the Orb of Ra to bring Metamorpho back to life, and he briefly joined the Doom Patrol. Shortly thereafter, an accident with one of Simon Stagg's experiments turned Simon, Sapphire, and Joey into an energy being, and caused Metamorpho to take on the form and personality of Java. "Java" kidnapped Black Canary, asking for her help in rescuing the others. With Canary's help, he became Metamorpho again and managed to return the others to their normal forms.Birds of Prey #51-52 (March – April 2003)

Outsiders / "Shift"

At the same time, Metamorpho had seemingly been appearing in the Outsiders (vol. 3) series, but Rex Mason informed the team that their "Metamorpho" is a regrown fragment of his own body. 3) #7 (February 2004) Rex attempts to reassimilate his "twin," but the Outsiders convinced him that the "twin" deserves the chance to lead his own life. This second Metamorpho chose the name "Shift" and developed a relationship with Indigo, becoming depressed over her death. After the events of One Year Later, Shift willingly chose to be reassimilated into Metamorpho, because he had killed several people. Rex has stepped in to fill Shift's position in the Outsiders, while a full account of Shift's crimes is explained in the Outsiders (vol. 3) Annual; he had inadvertently killed 44 people during Black Lightning's escape from Iron Heights Penitentiary.
Metamorpho continued to serve on the Outsiders when Batman took over, and following its further restructuring following Batman's apparent death. He was apparently killed alongside the rest of the team in a satellite explosion orchestrated by Talia al Ghul.Batman Incorporated: Leviathan Strikes

The New 52

In the rebooted continuity of The New 52, the Outsiders are revealed to have survived. It is mentioned that Metamorpho was able to save the team by using the same technique he used to rescue the Justice League during the Hyperclan's attack many years ago. 2) #1 He is also shown as one of the candidates for the new Justice League International, but he is ultimately not chosen. 3) #1

Powers and abilities

Metamorpho's body appears segmented, with each limb appearing to be made of a different substance.
Metamorpho can stretch, bounce, elongate and manipulate his body as if it were made of plastic.
Metamorpho can transmute his body to any of a wide variety of elemental compounds and form it to his will. Originally, he was limited to the elements which occur naturally in the human body. Over time, this limitation seems to have disappeared. He can alter the shapes and consistencies of these elements and combine them to form complex compounds. Rex can assume forms of gas, liquid or solid states.
Metamorpho can also shape parts and portions of his body instead of the whole. He can form such complex shapes as a tank and a bicycle and such simple forms as a cloud or a spring.
The nature of Rex's body provides him with natural body armor offering damage resistance from blunt attacks and energy attacks.

Enemies

Besides the enemies that he fights with the Outsiders, Metamorpho has his own rogues gallery:

Other versions

Justice

Rex Mason/Metamorpho appears in the 12-issue mini-series Justice, as a member of the Justice League.Justice #7

JLA: The Nail

In the Elseworlds story JLA: The Nail, an unstable Metamorpho makes an appearance at Lexcorp tower in Metropolis, until being reasoned with J'onn J'onzz, before his death.JLA: The Nail #2

The New Frontier

In Darwyn Cooke's 12-issue series, DC: The New Frontier, Metamorpho appears with the rest of the Justice League at the end of the series.DC: The New Frontier #12

In other media

Television

Film






