[[Henry Ian Cusick]]

CATEGORIES: 1967 births, Living people, Peruvian male film actors, Alumni of the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama, Scottish male film actors, Peruvian people of Scottish descent, Scottish male stage actors, Scottish male television actors, Peruvian expatriates in the United States, Scottish expatriates in the United States, 20th-century Scottish male actors, 21st-century Scottish male actors


Henry Ian Cusick Chávez (born 17 April 1967) is a Scottish-Peruvian stage, television, and film actor.
He is well known for his role as Desmond Hume on the U.S. television series Lost, for which he received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination. He starred in the ABC drama Scandal, as Stephen Finch, but did not return for the second season.

Early life and education

Henry Ian Cusick was born in Trujillo, Peru, to a Peruvian mother (Esperanza Chávez) and a Scottish father (Harry Joseph Cusick). When he was two, his family moved to Madrid, Spain, then Glasgow, Scotland, before moving to Trinidad and Tobago where they lived for ten years. He is fluent in both English and Spanish, and was raised Roman Catholic.

Career

Cusick began his career as a classical theatre actor. His first leading roles on stage included: Dorian Gray in The Picture of Dorian Gray with Rupert Everett, Hamlet in The Marovitz Hamlet with Helen Baxendale, and Horner in The Country Wife. His performances as Torquato Tasso in the Edinburgh International Festival production of Torquato Tasso, and Creon in the Citizens' Theatre production of Oedipus earned him a special commendation for the 1995 Ian Charleson Award for outstanding performance by a young actor in a classical theatre role.
Cusick began taking television and film roles. After appearing in recurring roles in series such as Casualty and The Book Group, he starred as Jesus Christ in the 2003 film The Visual Bible: The Gospel of John. His largest role to date came in 2005 when he was cast as Desmond Hume in the ABC series Lost. Originally a recurring guest star in the second season (for which he received an Emmy nomination), Cusick became a member of the main cast from seasons three to six. Cusick won the role when, while staying at the home of his friend Brian Cox, he met Cox's next-door neighbor, Carlton Cuse, the executive producer of Lost. Cusick believes: "a seed (was) planted, because they had been looking for either a Scottish or Irish character."
He also appeared as Theo Stoller in two episodes of season 5 of 24 and the 2007 film Hitman.  He stars in the direct-to-DVD film Dead Like Me: Life After Death, a continuation of the cult classic television show of the same name.
Cusick appears in two episodes of Law & Order: Special Victims Unit in the twelfth season, playing Erik Weber, a vigilante with a Citizens Organized Against Predators group. He was in ABC's Scandal in 2011, but left the following year.
He also played Trent Marsh in Body of Proof and appeared in the show The 100, which premiered in March 2014.   
Cusick is also the director on a film called Dress, currently being filmed from his home town, Kailua, Hawaii.cusickgallery.net/2013/04/dress-a-new-film-coming-soon-from-director-henry-ian-cusick/

Personal life

Cusick and his wife Annie are parents to three sons, Eli (born 1994), Lucas (born 1998), and Esaú (born 2000). The couple were married in a civil ceremony following fourteen years of cohabitation on 15 July 2006. They now live in Kailua, Hawaii together.

Filmography

Television

Theatre






