[[Kübler-Ross model]]

CATEGORIES: Grief, Death, Psychiatry works, Psychological theories, Psychology books, Self-help books, Therapy, Stage theories

The Kübler-Ross model, or the five stages of grief, is a series of emotional stages experienced when faced with impending death or death of someone. The five stages are denial, anger, bargaining,  depression and acceptance. 
The model was first introduced by Swiss-American Psychiatrist Elisabeth Kübler-Ross in her 1969 book, On Death and Dying, and was inspired by her work with terminally ill patients..
Elisabeth Kübler-Ross noted that the stages are not meant to be a complete list of all possible emotions that could be felt, and they can occur in any order. Her hypothesis holds that not everyone who experiences a life-threatening or life-altering event feels all five of the responses, due to  reactions of personal losses differing between people.

Stages

The stages, popularly known by the acronym DABDA, include:
Kübler-Ross originally developed this model based on her observations of people suffering from terminal illness. She later expanded her theory to apply to any form of catastrophic personal loss, such as the death of a loved one, the loss of a job or income, major rejection, the end of a relationship or divorce, drug addiction, incarceration, the onset of a disease or chronic illness, an  infertility diagnosis, as well as many tragedies and disasters (and even minor losses).
Supporting her theory, many (both sufferers and therapists) have reported the usefulness of the Kübler-Ross Model in a wide variety of situations where people were experiencing a significant loss. The application of the theory is intended to help the sufferer to fully resolve each stage, then help them transition to the next – at the appropriate time – rather than getting stuck in a particular phase or continually bouncing around from one unresolved phase to another. The subsections below give a few specific examples of how the model can be applied in different situations. These are just some of the many benefits that Kübler-Ross hoped her model would provide.

Children grieving in divorce

Grieving a break-up

Grieving in substance abuse

As stated above, according to her hypothesis, Kübler-Ross claimed these stages do not necessarily come in order, nor are all stages experienced by all patients. She stated, however, that a person always experiences at least two of the stages. Often, people experience several stages in a "roller coaster" effect—switching between two or more stages, returning to one or more several times before working through it. Women are more likely than men to experience all five stages.
However, the Kübler-Ross hypothesis holds that there are individuals who struggle with death until the end. Some psychologists believe that the harder a person fights death, the more likely they will be to stay in the denial stage. If this is the case, it is possible the ill person will have more difficulty dying in a dignified way. Other psychologists state that not confronting death until the end is adaptive for some people.

Cultural relevance

A dying individual's approach to death has been linked to the amount of meaning and purpose a person has found throughout his lifetime. A study of 160 people with less than three months to live showed that those who felt they understood their purpose in life or found special meaning, faced less fear and despair in the final weeks of their lives than those who had not. In this and similar studies, spirituality helped dying individuals deal with the depression stage more aggressively than those who were not spiritual.

Pedagogical relevance

Studies of pedagogy, the process of teaching, suggest that the patterns of grief are one way of describing the basic patterns of integrating new information that conflicts with previous beliefs. Also, see Learning theory (education)
Another hypothesis suggests that this learning process is the same pattern seen in the back-and-forth looping movement of a particle being disturbed by a wave."Stages of Grief" - The normal learning process, diagram. May, 2011  Emotional intensity moves up and down and up again, while knowledge moves backward, forward, back, and then forward again, until the individual is happy with the way they have integrated the new information with the old.

Criticism

The extensive scientific studies of George Bonanno argue that the Kübler-Ross stages of grief do not exist. Bonanno's research shows that most people who experience a loss do not grieve, but are resilient. If there is no grief, there can be no stages of grief. Gary Stix, 15 February 2011. Scientific American. Ruth Davis Konigsberg, 29 January, 2011, Time Magazine. In Bonanno's book, The Other Side of Sadness: What the New Science of Bereavement Tells Us About Life After a Loss,
His findings conclude that a natural resilience is the main component of grief and trauma reactions.tc.edu/upload/gab38/americanPsychologist. Bonanno's work has also demonstrated that absence of grief or trauma symptoms is a healthy outcome, rather than something to be feared as has been the thought and practice until his research.
A 2000–2003 study of bereaved individuals conducted by Yale University obtained some findings that were consistent with the five-stage hypothesis and others that were inconsistent with it. Several letters were also published in the same journal criticizing this research and arguing against the stage idea. K., JAMA (February 21, 2007). Retrieved April 14, 2009. Skeptic Magazine published the findings of the Grief Recovery Institute, which contested the concept of stages of grief as they relate to people who are dealing with the deaths of people important to them. "The Myth of the Stages of Dying, Death and Grief", Skeptic Magazine (2008). Retrieved 2008, from 
Kübler-Ross did not appear to adequately take the personal environment into consideration. If patients are surrounded by positive experiences, they will experience things differently from if they were surrounded by negatives.

Grief communication

Grief communication occurs in grief-stricken people, through their emotions, actions, and words.  Kübler-Ross placed much emphasis on communication.  When a person is approaching death and is going through the five stages of her model she believed that person wanted to review his or her life, the illness he or she has, and his or her imminent death.  When a patient and physician could discuss this courageously and candidly a good death would be possible.  This model and her thoughts are influential to health care providers; it provides guidance to approaching and interacting with people experiencing grief.

Additional theoretical models

Charles A Corr: a social psychologist and recent researcher who wants to help caregivers, researchers, and educators move beyond limitations of the stage theory.
He stresses:
Debbie Messer Zlatin:
William McDougall: researcher, founder of field of social psychology. He kept a journal of his own terminal illness, and provided an intellectual approach.

Notes

Further reading




