[[Nitrofurantoin]]

CATEGORIES: Antibiotics, Hydantoins, World Health Organization essential medicines, Nitrofurans

Nitrofurantoin (trade name Macrobid among others) is an antibiotic usually used to treat urinary tract infection.
It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines, a list of the most important medication needed in a basic health system.

Medical use

Nitrofurantoin has been available for the treatment of urinary tract infections (UTIs) since 1953.  Its current uses include the treatment of uncomplicated urinary tract infections and prophylaxis against urinary tract infections in people prone to recurrent UTIs.
Nitrofurantoin is not recommended for the treatment of pyelonephritis, prostatitis because of extremely poor tissue penetration and low blood levels.

Dosing

Treatment is for five to seven days.  Shortened courses of 3 days are not recommended. Nitrofurantoin should be taken with food, as this improves the absorption and bioavailability of the drug as well as lessening the common side effects of nausea and vomiting.

Antibacterial activity

Nitrofurantoin has been shown to have good activity against the following organisms:
and is used in the treatment of infections caused by these organisms.
Many or all strains of the following are resistant to nitrofurantoin:
Antibiotic susceptibility testing should always be performed to further elucidate the resistance profile of the particular strain of bacteria causing infection.

Pregnancy

Nitrofurantoin is Pregnancy Category B.  It is one of the few drugs that is commonly used in pregnancy to treat urinary tract infections.
Several trials on the safety and teratogenicity of nitrofurantoin in pregnancy have shown mixed results.  A retrospective study in 2009 claimed that several birth defects, such as hypoplastic left heart syndrome, ophthalmic malformations, cleft lip and cleft palate, and atrial septal defect were more common in neonates exposed to nitrofurantoin during pregnancy.

Pharmacology

Organisms are said to be susceptible to nitrofurantoin if their minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) is 32 μg/mL or less.  The peak blood concentration of nitrofurantoin following an oral dose of nitrofurantoin 100 mg, is less than 1 μg/mL and may be undetectable; tissue penetration is negligible; the drug is well concentrated in the urine: 75% of the dose is rapidly metabolised by the liver, but 25% of the dose is excreted in the urine unchanged, reliably achieving levels of 200 μg/ml or more.  For this reason, nitrofurantoin cannot be used to treat anything other than simple cystitis.
At the concentrations achieved in urine (>100 microgm/mL), nitrofurantoin is bacteriocidal.  It is bacteriostatic against most susceptible organisms at concentrations less than 32 micrograms per milliliter.
Nitrofurantoin and the quinolone antibiotics are mutually antagonistic in vitro.  It is not known whether this is of clinical significance, but the combination should be avoided.
Resistance to nitrofurantoin may be chromosomal or plasmid mediated and involves inhibition of nitrofuran reductase.  Acquired resistance in E. coli continues to be rare.
Nitrofurantoin and its metabolites are excreted mainly by the kidneys.  In renal impairment, the concentration achieved in urine may be subtherapeutic.  Nitrofurantoin should not be used in patients with a creatinine clearance of 60 mL/min or less. However a retrospective chart review may suggest that nitrofurantoin is not contraindicated in this population.

Mechanism

The mechanism of action of nitrofurantoin is unique and complex.  The drug works by damaging bacterial DNA, since its reduced form is highly reactive. This is made possible by the rapid reduction of nitrofurantoin inside the bacterial cell by flavoproteins (nitrofuran reductase) to multiple reactive intermediates that attack ribosomal proteins, DNA, respiration, pyruvate metabolism and other macromolecules within the cell.  Nitrofurantoin exerts greater effects on bacterial cells than mammalian cells because bacterial cells activate the drug more rapidly. It is not known which of the actions of nitrofurantoin is primarily responsible for its bactericidal activity. It is likely that the broad mechanism of action for this drug is responsible for the low development of resistance to its effects, as the drug affects many different processes important to the bacterial cell.

Adverse effects

The most common side effects with nitrofurantoin are nausea, headache, and flatulence.  Less common adverse events (occurring in less than 1% of those taking the drug) include:
Patients should be informed that nitrofurantoin colours urine brown; this is completely harmless.
Some of the more serious but rare side effects of nitrofurantoin have been a cause of concern.  These include pulmonary reactions, hepatotoxicity, and neuropathy.

Pulmonary toxicity

The pulmonary toxicity caused by nitrofurantoin can be categorized into acute, subacute, and chronic pulmonary reactions.  The acute and subacute reactions are thought to be due to a hypersensitivity reaction and often resolve when the drug is discontinued.  Acute reactions occur in about 1/5000 women who take the drug and are independent of dose.  These reactions usually develop 3–8 days after the first dose of nitrofurantoin, but may occur from a few hours to a few weeks after starting the drug.  Symptoms include fever, dyspnea, chills, cough, pleuritic chest pain, headache, back pain, and epigastric pain.  Chest radiograph will often show unilateral or bilateral infiltrates similar to pulmonary edema.  Treatment includes discontinuation of the nitrofurantoin, which should result in symptom improvement within 24 hours.
Chronic pulmonary reactions caused by nitrofurantoin include diffuse interstitial pneumonitis, pulmonary fibrosis, or both. This uncommon reaction may occur 1 month to 6 years after starting the drug and is usually related to the total lifetime dose of nitrofurantoin.  This reaction manifests with progressive shortness of breath.  It is important to recognize nitrofurantoin as possible cause of symptoms and discontinue the drug when the suspicion of pulmonary side effects arises.  

Hepatotoxicity

Hepatic reactions, including hepatitis, cholestatic jaundice, chronic active hepatitis, and hepatic necrosis, occur rarely. The onset of chronic active hepatitis may be insidious, and patients should be monitored periodically for changes in biochemical tests that would indicate liver injury. These reactions usually occur after exposure to the drug for more than 6 weeks.  If signs of liver failure are observed in a patient taking nitrofurantoin, the drug should be discontinued.  Re-challenge with the drug at a later date is not recommended, as the reaction may have a hypersensitivity component and recur when the drug is resumed.

Neuropathy

Neuropathy is a rare side effect of taking nitrofurantoin.  Patients may experience numbness and tingling in a stocking-glove pattern, which may or may not improve upon discontinuation of the drug.

Contraindications

Nitrofurantoin is contraindicated in patients with decreased renal function (CrCl Nitrofurantoin is also contraindicated in neonates (babies up to the age of one month), as they have immature enzyme systems in their red blood cells (glutathione instability) and nitrofurantoin must therefore not be used because it can cause haemolytic anaemia.  For the same reason, nitrofurantoin should not be given to pregnant women after 38 weeks of pregnancy, or who are about to give birth. Nitrofurantoin is contraindicated in patients with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency because of risk of intravascular hemolysis resulting in anemia.

Use in animal feed

Residues from the breakdown of nitrofuran veterinary antibiotics, including nitrofurantoin, have been found in chicken in Vietnam, China, Brazil, and Thailand.  The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of the United States has prohibited furaltadone since February 1985 and withdrew the approval for the other nitrofuran drugs (except some topical uses) in January 1992.  The topical use of furazolidone and nitrofurazone was prohibited in 2002.  Australia prohibited the use of nitrofurans in food production in 1992.  Japan did not allocate MRLs for nitrofurans leading to the implementation of a "zero tolerance or no residue standard".  In Thailand, the Ministry of Health issued in 2001 Proclamation No. 231 MRL of veterinary drug in food which did not allocate MRL for nitrofurans. The Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives had already prohibited importation and use of furazolidone and nitrofurazone in animal feed in 1999 which was extended to all nitrofurans in 2002.  Several metabolites of nitrofurans, such as furazolidone, furaltadone and nitrofurazone cause cancer or genetic damage in rats.

Precautions

Nitrofurantoin should be taken with food to improve its absorption.

Trade names






