[[Croatia national football team]]

CATEGORIES: Franjo Bučar Award winners, European national association football teams, Croatia national football team, National sports teams of Croatia

The Croatia men's national football team ( This team was dissolved in 1945 as Croatia became a constituent federal republic of SFR Yugoslavia. In the period between 1945 and 1990, Croatia did not field a separate team for competitive matches and Croatian players played for the Yugoslavia national football team.
The modern Croatian team was formed in 1991, shortly before Croatia's independence from Yugoslavia, and by 1993 had gained membership in FIFA and UEFA.
Most home matches are played at the Maksimir Stadium in Zagreb, with some fixtures also taking place at the Poljud Stadium in Split or at other, smaller venues, such as Stadion Kantrida in Rijeka or Stadion Gradski vrt in Osijek, depending on the nature of the match. The team was undefeated in its first 36 home competitive matches at Maksimir, the run ending with a 2008 defeat to England.
The team was named FIFA's "Best Mover of the Year" in 1994 and 1998, the only team along with Colombia to win the award more than once.fifa.html

History

Pre-independence

Football was introduced to Croatia by English expatriates in Rijeka and Županja in 1873; the official rulebook was recognised in 1896. By 1907 local clubs had been established in Croatia and a modern edition of the sport's laws was published. Translation
In 1940, Jozo Jakopić led an unofficial national team representing the Banovina of Croatia in four friendly matches: two against Switzerland and two against Hungary. Croatia made their debut as an independently sanctioned team by defeating the Swiss 4–0 in Zagreb on 2 April 1940. Translation Croatia's first recorded result as a FIFA associate was a 1–1 tie with Slovakia on 8 September in Bratislava. Further matches were played until 1945 when the Independent State of Croatia was abolished and the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia assumed control, thereby ending the team's affiliation with FIFA.
From 1950 to 1956 another unofficial Croatian team was briefly active; it won games against Indonesia and a Yugoslav team playing as "Serbia". The Yugoslavia squad at the 1956 Summer Olympics included Croatian footballers,

Official formation

The last Yugoslav team to field a considerable Croatian contingent played against Sweden on 16 May 1991, days before Croatia's independence referendum.
In mid-1992 the team joined FIFA and UEFA. The team's performances before Croatia's independence were not recorded by FIFA, so they entered the World Rankings in 125th place. Miroslav Blažević was appointed manager and oversaw the team's qualifying campaign for Euro 96, beginning with Croatia's first officially recognised post-independence victory: a 2–0 win over Estonia on 4 September 1994. Their first competitive defeat came on 11 June 1995, with a 1–0 away loss to Ukraine during the same qualifying campaign. They finished on top of their qualifying group

"Golden Generation"

Goran Vlaović scored the team's first goal at a major tournament, a late winner against Turkey at the City Ground during Euro 96.
Miroslav Blažević remained as manager during Croatia's 1998 World Cup qualifying campaign, which ended successfully with victory over Ukraine in the play-offs. In the group stage of the World Cup, Croatia beat Jamaica and Japan but lost to Argentina, before defeating Romania to reach a quarter final tie against Germany, then ranked second in the world. Though regarded as underdogs, Croatia won 3–0, with goals from Robert Jarni, Goran Vlaović and Davor Šuker after Christian Wörns was sent off for Germany.
Croatia faced the host nation, France, in the semi-final: after a goalless first-half, Croatia took the lead, only to concede two goals by opposing defender Lilian Thuram and lose 2–1. Croatia won third place by defeating the Netherlands, and Davor Šuker won the Golden Boot award for scoring the most goals in the tournament. Many of these players were also in the former Yugoslavia under-20 team which won the 1987 FIFA World Youth Championship in Chile.
Despite these successes in their first two major competitions, Croatia finished third in their Euro 2000 qualifying group, behind Yugoslavia and Republic of Ireland, and thus failed to qualify. The return match in Zagreb ended in a 2–2 draw, preventing Croatia from qualifying for the tournament.

Decline under Jozić and Barić in the early 2000s

Coach Blažević resigned in autumn 2000 and Mirko Jozić was appointed his successor. Despite the retirement of many "Golden Generation" players, Croatia were unbeaten in their qualifying matches for the 2002 World Cup. They commenced the tournament campaign with a narrow loss to Mexico before producing a surprise 2–1 victory over Euro 2000 finalists Italy in the next fixture.
Under Barić Croatia performed indifferently in the Euro 2004 qualifiers, reaching the tournament finals with a playoff 2-1 on aggregate win against Slovenia, with Dado Pršo's crucial goal in the second leg.

Kranjčar and Bilić's revival

Former Croatia international Zlatko Kranjčar, appointed to succeed Barić in July 2004, oversaw Croatia's qualification for the 2006 World Cup without losing a match,
The HNS replaced Kranjčar with Slaven Bilić in July 2006.
After primary striker Eduardo da Silva suffered a compound fracture while playing in the English Premier League, Bilić was forced to alter his tournament squad significantly
Amidst speculation that he would quit, Croatia lost at home to England, ending a fourteen-year unbeaten home record. The team was eventually burdened with a number of key injuries and went on to suffer their heaviest defeat ever, losing 5-1 to England at Wembley Stadium. Although Croatia defeated Kazakhstan in their final qualifying fixture, they were ultimately eliminated after Ukraine, who had previously defeated group leaders England, beat Andorra to gain second place in the group. Bilić was once again heavily expected to resign as national coach, but instead vowed to renew his contract and remain in charge.

Euro 2012; Bilić departs

Despite heavy loss of form, which also saw the team fall outside the top 10 in the FIFA rankings, Croatia were placed in the top tier of teams for the UEFA Euro 2012 qualifying draw; the Croatian republic was previously a candidate to co-host the tournament with Hungary which would have allowed the team to qualify automatically. Instead, it was chosen to be played in Poland and Ukraine, Croatia ultimately competed in Group F for qualifying, and, despite being top-seeds, only finished second in the group behind Greece, settling for a play-off draw against Euro 2008 rivals Turkey. The buildup towards the matches garnered much global and domestic media attention, with Bilic himself referring the tie as a slight opportunity for revenge. Croatia proceeded to beat Turkey 3-0 on aggregate, with all three goals coming in the away leg in Istanbul, thereby qualifying for the 2012 European championship at Turkey's expense. In the proceeding group-stage draw for the tournament, Croatia were placed in pot three, the third tier of teams, and were eventually grouped with Ireland, Italy and defending champions Spain.
In the buildup towards the UEFA Euro 2012 tournament, the team's first major competition since their 2008 run at the same event, manager Slaven Bilić formally agreed a deal to manage Russian club Lokomotiv Moscow, thereby announcing his resignation from the national team. The team was once again garnished by many key injury concerns at the tournament, with long-standing forward Ivica Olić and defender Dejan Lovren missing out on a place in the squad. The team concluded their tournament preparations with friendly fixtures against Estonia and Norway.
Croatia opened their tournament campaign with a comfortable 3-1 victory over The Republic of Ireland, with striker Mario Mandžukić scoring twice. Mandžukić continued his run at the tournament with an equaliser in the 1-1 draw against Italy, which was marred by controversial fan reactions and referee decisions from English official Howard Webb. The team ultimately faced a complicated scenario in the buildup to their final group game against reigning champions Spain. UEFA's previous alteration of the tie-breaking criteria (used when two or more teams finish with an equal number of points) forced the national team to retain at least a point in their final game while also scoring at least once to match Italy's head-to-head record against Spain. Croatia ultimately suffered a 1-0 defeat. Moments before Jesus Navas scored the game's only goal, Vedran Ćorluka was the victim of a neck-tie tackle by Spain defensive midfielder Sergio Busquets on a corner kick which removed Ćorluka from a goal scoring opportunity in the penalty box. The late Spanish goal, along with Italy's victory over The Republic of Ireland, forced Croatia to exit the tournament in the group stage. However, the team subsequently garnered widespread domestic praise for their tournament performance, and were greeted by a large crowd upon their return. Upon his formal departure, Bilić was also praised for his long-standing service to the national side. Domestic media outlet Jutarnji List labelled him as Croatia's only manager to depart on such positive terms and credited him for his strong revival of the national side during his six-year tenure.

2012–present; Šuker takes over as president

After the Euro, The Croatian Football Federation (HNS) has chosen a new president, with Croatia's all-time top goalscorer Davor Šuker replacing Vlatko Marković. Following an official meeting in Zagreb, the national side was chosen to be managed by another of its former defenders and analyst of the team's matches, Igor Štimac. However, Štimac's reign was deemed unsuccessful, lasting only a year, and he was replaced by former national team captain, Niko Kovač, who managed the U21 team at the time.

Tournament records

World Cup record

Croatia qualified for and competed in three consecutive World Cup finals between 1998 and 2006, but failed to qualify for the 2010 World Cup in South Africa after finishing 3rd in Group 6 of their Qualification Group behind England, and Ukraine. Although they had joined both FIFA and UEFA by 1992, they were unable to enter the 1994 World Cup as qualification had started before the side was officially recognised. The nation's best performance came in their first World Cup where they finished third. In their following two World Cup campaigns they were eliminated after finishing third in their groups.

UEFA Euro record

Croatia's best results in UEFA Championships were quarter final finishes on their debut, in 1996, and in 2008. They did not qualify for the 2000 tournament. The HNS raised an unsuccessful joint bid with the Hungarian Football Federation to co-host the 2012 tournament, which was awarded instead to Poland and Ukraine.

Minor tournaments

Recent results and forthcoming fixtures

2012

2013

2014

Players

Current squad

The following is the final list of players for the friendly match against Switzerland, which took place on 5 March 2014. 
Caps, goals and player numbers correct as of 5 March 2014.  
Statistics include official FIFA-recognised matches only.























Recent callups

The following players have also been called up to the Croatia squad in the last 12 months and were not named in the above squad list, but are still eligible for selection.




















Previous squads

Statistics

Managers

Before Croatia's independence distinct Croatian football federations and teams were occasionally formed separately from the official Yugoslavian organisations. Ivo Kraljević served as the manager of the initial federation, established in 1939, and organised non-sanctioned matches played by unofficial national squads up to 1956. These temporary sides, playing non-competitive fixtures, were led by seven different managers.{{#tag:ref|The following organisers led the national team as 'managers':
Statistically, Dražan Jerković and Vlatko Marković are the most successful managers in Croatia's history; they both recorded victories in each of their few games in charge. Miroslav Blažević, who was the team's first official manager, holds the highest number of competitive victories, having led Croatia to their best performances at major international tournaments.

Most appearances

Top goalscorers

1940s participants

From 1940 to 1944 FIFA affiliated national teams played under the banner of the "Independent State of Croatia" nineteen friendly matches, of which it won nine, drew four and lost six. Twelve players scored for the team during this period.

Records

Dario Šimić was Croatia's first player to reach 100 appearances, doing so before his retirement in 2008. This allowed him to surpass Robert Jarni's previous record of 81 appearances. Translation On 6 February 2013, Darijo Srna, Josip Simunic and Stipe Pletikosa each also played their 100th cap for Croatia in the 4-0 friendly victory over South Korea in London. The trio went on to set a new join-record of 101 appearances for the national team on 22 March 2013 in a World Cup qualifying victory against Serbia. 
With 45 goals scored, Davor Šuker is Croatia's highest-scoring player. He was named Croatia's "Golden Player" at the UEFA jubilee celebration in 2004 in recognition of this achievement.
The national team's joint record for highest-scoring victory comes from two 7–0 results, over Andorra in 2006 and Australia in 1998. Croatia's worst defeat is also a joint record, the Independent State of Croatia side having twice lost 5–1 defeats to Germany in the 1940s. In the modern era Croatia lost 4–1 to Slovakia in a 1994 friendly and 3–0 to Portugal at Euro 96. The worst defeat in the modern period was the 5–1 loss to England in the 2010 World Cup qualifying campaign.

Hierarchy

The Croatian team is a fully licensed member of FIFA and UEFA. FIFA governs Croatia's participation in global international tournaments including the FIFA World Cup;
The team is also governed by the Croatian Football Federation, which governs domestic football under FIFA and UEFA affiliation. The federation is led by Davor Šuker, who represents the team in conferences. The federation (abbreviated HNS) governs player registration and selects the team coaching staff and pays players' salaries. Head coach selects and organises national squad players and enforces team policies.

Stadium

Most home matches take place at the Maksimir Stadium in Zagreb. The venue, built 1912 and refurbished in 1997, is named after the surrounding neighbourhood of Maksimir.
Home matches were occasionally played at other venues. The Poljud Stadium in Split hosted several qualifying fixtures for Euro 1996 and the 1998 World Cup. Ever since the first match in 1995 against Italy which ended 1-1, Croatia was unable to win an official FIFA-recognised match at Poljud. That fact was known amongst the Croatian public as "Poljud curse". Translation The unusual curse was finally broken in June 2011 with a 2-1 win against Georgia. The team also played qualifying matches at Stadion Kantrida in Rijeka, which they are unbeaten at, the Gradski vrt stadium in Osijek and the Stadion Anđelko Herjavec stadium in Varaždin.

Home venues record

Since Croatia's first fixture (17 October 1990, vs. United States) they have played home games at nine stadiums.

Team image

Names

Under the official FIFA Trigramme the team's name is abbreviated as CRO; this acronym is used to identify the team in FIFA and media.

Jersey

Croatia's initial jersey was designed in 1991 by Miroslav Šutej, who also designed the nation's coat of arms. Although slightly altered by Lotto (the 1998 jersey was a white jersey with the chequers on the right side, like a flying flag) and Nike since its original release, the jersey has remained similar as a national identity; the chequered design is also used to represent other Croatian sports teams and athletes.

=Kit History=

 
 

Training

Croatia's traditional training ground is located in Čatež, Slovenia, where the team prepares for all upcoming matches. However, the HNS has announced the production of a new training ground located in Tuhelj to accommodate further training improvements.croatiantimes.php?id=1427

Supporters

Prominent among Croatia's supporters are supporters from Slavonija region especially during last three big tournaments. Also big supporting base is given by followers of Hajduk Split and Dinamo Zagreb, the two best-supported clubs in the Croatian domestic league, the Prva HNL.
Nonetheless, fan behaviour at international games has led to international sanction against the side. Croatia was penalised and threatened with expulsion from UEFA for racist behaviour by fans at Euro 2004
Croatia fans often use flares in both domestic league derby matches and in international games,
Tensions with fans of sides from other former Yugoslav states have also manifested at Croatia games. Croatia fans in the crowd at a 3 June 1990, game between Yugoslavia and the Netherlands booed the Yugoslavian national anthem and players and cheered for the Dutch side instead.
Croatia's problems with its supporters continued throughout the opening round of the Euro 2012 competition as the team was cited for fan behaviour that included the display of racist banners and symbols, racist chants, and setting off and throwing fireworks during a match. In addition, the disciplinary case initiated by FIFA after the team's group match versus Spain includes a review of improper conduct by players who received six yellow cards during the contest.

Media and public relations

Football is Croatia's most popular team sport. 52 By competing separately in both official and unofficial matches, the national team strengthened the unity of Croatian culture, an accomplishment which the predominant Catholic Church and economy were criticised for failing. 113 After Croatia's success at the 1998 World Cup, Tuđman declared that "football victories shape a nation's identity as much as wars". American politician and diplomat Strobe Talbott predicted Croatia's growth in football to influence that of the nation itself. 116 The national team were greeted by 100,000 residents from all around the country after their return from the World Cup where they placed third.
Though the relationship between the team and any political party has waned since Tuđman's death in 1999, the team (and football) remain patriotic traditions in Croatia as in the rest of Europe.22
The team also received constant media attention; their games are regularly broadcast live on HRT 2 also like in the rest of Europe.

All-time team record

The following tables show Croatia's all-time international record, correct as of 5 March 2014.
*Draws include knockout matches decided on penalty kicks.

Modern Croatian team (1991–present)

Pre-independence team (1940–1944, 1950, 1956)

For explanation see: Croatia national football team games – 1940s, Pre-independence period (above), Croatia – List of international matches, Detailed list of all Croatia's games.
All fixtures were friendly.

Honours

Friendly titles

Other awards





Footnotes

Books




