[[Ghassanids]]

CATEGORIES: Ghassanids

The Ghassanids (Arabic:   The Ghassanids generally did not accept Islam and few became Muslim following the Islamic Conquest, most Ghassanids remained Christian and joined Melkite Syriac communities.
After settling in the Levant, the Ghassanids became a client state to the Eastern Roman and Byzantine Empire. They fought alongside the Byzantine Empire against the Persian Sassanids and Arabian Lakhmids. The lands of the Ghassanids also acted as a buffer zone, protecting lands annexed by the Romans against raids by Bedouin tribes. After the fall of the first kingdom, the Ghassanid Dynasty ruled other realms, both Christian and Muslim, until 1747 AD in Mount Lebanon.google.com/books?id=c788wWR_bLwC&printsec=frontcover&dq=Late+Antiquity%22+-+Bowersock/Brown/Grabar&hl=en&sa=X&ei=eSfCUMiIEIeCjALz04Fw&ved=0CDMQ6AEwAA#v=onepage&q=ghassanid&f=false

Migration from Yemen

Oral tradition holds that the Ghassanids came from the city of Ma'rib in South Arabia, modern day Yemen.
The date of the migration to the Levant is unclear, but they are believed to have arrived in the region of Syria between 250-300 AD. Their earliest appearance in records is dated to 473 AD, when their chief Amorkesos signed a treaty with the Eastern Roman Empire acknowledging their status as Foederati controlling parts of Palestine.   He apparently became Chalcedonian at this time. By the year 510, the Ghassanids were no longer Monophysite, but Chalcedonian.

The Ghassanid Kingdom in the Roman era

After originally settling in the Levant, the Ghassanids became a client state to the Eastern Roman Empire.
The Romans found a powerful ally in the Ghassanids who acted as a buffer zone against the Lakhmids. In addition, as kings of their own people, they were also phylarchs, native rulers of client frontier states. 1, Irfan Shahîd, 1995, p. 103Byzantium and the Arabs in the Sixth Century, Volume 2 part 2, Irfan Shahîd, pg. 164 The capital was at Jabiyah in the Golan Heights. Geographically, it occupied much of the eastern Levant, and its authority extended via tribal alliances with other Azdi tribes all the way to the northern Hijaz as far south as Yathrib (Medina).google.com/books?id=4Z0YrPfeHa8C&pg=PA160&sig=UWroKQFA0vSD0cRrz26n-K5931w&hl=en#v=onepage&q&f=false

The Ghassanid kingdom in the Byzantine era

The Ghassanids fought alongside the Byzantine Empire against the Persian Sassanids and Arab Lakhmids. The lands of the Ghassanids also continually acted as a buffer zone, protecting Byzantine lands against raids by Bedouin tribes.
The Byzantine Empire was focused more on the East and a long war with the Persians was always their main concern. The Ghassanids maintained their rule as the guardian of trade routes, policed Lakhmid tribes and was a source of troops for the Byzantine army. The Ghassanid king al-Harith ibn Jabalah (reigned 529–569) supported the Byzantines against Sassanid Persia and was given in 529 by the emperor Justinian I, the highest imperial title that was ever bestowed upon a foreign ruler; also the status of patricians. 2, part 1, Irfan Shahîd 1995, p. 51Byzantium and the Arabs in the Sixth Century, vol. 2, part 1, Irfan Shahîd 1995, p. 51-104 In addition to that, al-Harith ibn Jabalah was given the rule over all the Arab allies of the Byzantine Empire. 2, part 1, Irfan Shahîd, 1995, p. 51 Al-Harith was a Miaphysite Christian; he helped to revive the Syrian Miaphysite (Jacobite) Church and supported Miaphysite development despite Orthodox Byzantium regarding it as heretical. Later Byzantine mistrust and persecution of such religious unorthodoxy brought down his successors, al-Mundhir (reigned 569-582) and Nu'man.
The Ghassanids, who had successfully opposed the Persian allied Lakhmids of al-Hirah (Southern modern-day Iraq), prospered economically and engaged in much religious and public building; they also patronized the arts and at one time entertained the famous Arabian poets Nabighah adh-Dhubyani and Hassan ibn Thabit at their courts. Barry Hoberman.  Accessed 31/01/2014.
After the fall of the first kingdom of Ghassan, King Jabalah ibn-al-Aiham established a Government-in-exile in Byzantium. 13 Ghassanid influence on the empire lasted centuries; the climax of this presence was the elevation of one of his descendants, Nikephoros I (ruled 802-811) to the throne and his establishment of a short-lived dynasty that can be described as the Nikephorian or Phocid Dynasty in the 9th century. 325 But Nikephoros was not only a mere Ghassanid descendant, he claimed the headship of the Ghassanid Dynasty using the eponym of King Jafna, the founder of the Dynasty, rather than merely express himself descendant of King Jabalah. 334Tarik, Tabari (Cairo, 1966), VIII, p. 307

The Ghassanids and Islam

The Ghassanids remained a Byzantine vassal state until its rulers and the eastern Byzantine Empire were overthrown by the Muslims in the 7th century, following the Battle of Yarmuk in 636 AD.  At the time of the Muslim conquest the Ghassanids were no longer united by the same Christian faiths: some of them accepted union with the Byzantine Chalcedonian church; others remained faithful to Monophysitism.  Later those who remained Christian joined Melkite Syriac communities.  The remnants of the Ghassanids were dispersed throughout Asia Minor.

Jabalah ibn-al-Aiham ordeal with Islam

There are different opinions why Jabalah and his followers didn't convert to Islam. All the opinions go along the general idea that the Ghassanids were not interested yet in giving up their status as the lords and nobility of Syria. Below is quoted the story of Jabalah's return to the land of the Byzantines as told by 9th-century historian al-Baladhuri. Jabalah ibn-al-Aiham sided with the Ansar (Azdi Muslims from Medina) saying, "You are our brethren and the sons of our fathers" and professed Islam. After the arrival of 'Umar ibn-al-Khattab in Syria, year 17 (636AD), Jabalah had a dispute with one of the Muzainah (Non-Arab Caste) and knocked out his eye. 'Umar ordered that he be punished, upon which Jabalah said, "Is his eye like mine? Never, by Allah, shall I abide in a town where I am under authority." He then apostatized and went to the land of the Greeks (the Byzantines). This Jabalah was the king of Ghassan and the successor of al-Harith ibn-abi-Shimr (or Chemor). by P. K. Hitti and F. C. Murgotten, Studies in History, Economics and Public Law, LXVIII (1916-1924), I, 208-209 

Ghassanid Kings

Earlier kings are traditional, actual dates highly uncertain.

Legacy

The Ghassanids reached their peak under al-Harith V and al-Mundhir III. Both were militarily successful allies of the Byzantines, especially against their the Lakhmids, and secured Byzantium's southern flank and its political and commercial interests in Arabia proper. On the other hand, the Ghassanids remained fervently dedicated to Monophysitism, which brought about their break with Byzantium and Mundhir's own downfall and exile, which was followed after 586 by the dissolution of the Ghassanid federation..
After the fall of the first kingdom in the 7th century, several dynasties, both Christian and Muslim, ruled claiming to be a continuation of the House of Ghassan. 469 Besides the Phocid or Nikephorian Dynasty of the Byzantine Empire, other rulers claimed to be the heirs of the Royal Ghassanids. The Rasulid Sultans ruled from the 13th until the 15th century in Yemen. 332 And the Burji Mamluk Sultans in Egypt from the 14th until the 16th century. 328 Even both dynasties being Muslim, they claimed to be heirs and successors of Ghassan. The last rulers to bear the titles of Royal Ghassanid successors were the Christian Sheiks Chemor in Mount Lebanon ruling the small sovereign sheikhdom of Zgartha-Zwaiya until 1747 A.D. Gharios of Ghassan-Anna Wang, 2011, p.202

Notes and references

Bibliography

Primary Sources

Secondary Literature


