[[Legion of Super-Villains]]

CATEGORIES: Legion of Super-Heroes, Comics characters introduced in 1968, Time travel comics

The Legion of Super-Villains is a team of fictional supervillains that appear in comic books published by DC Comics. They are adversaries of the Legion of Super-Heroes in the future. They first appeared as adults in Superman #147 (1961) and as teens in Adventure Comics #372 (1968).

Fictional team history

Pre-Crisis the Legion first appears when Lex Luthor creates a radio to contact the future, hoping to send a message to a Legion of Super-Villains, feeling there must be an evil counterpart to the Legion of Super-Heroes. He is broken out of jail by a gun, flying belt, and force-field helmet being sent into his cell. He then meets the trio of villains, Cosmic King, Lightning Lord and Saturn Queen, who tell him of their origins. They cause trouble for Superman and finally an illusion cast by Saturn Queen succeeds in luring him to a planetoid, where a kryptonite field holds him. He is told the origins of the Legion, and sentenced to death in a parody of the way the Legion of Super-Villains voted him in, but the adult Legion of Super-Heroes appears and battles their foes. Luthor threatens to kill Superman, but Saturn Woman offers herself in his place. Superman asks for a tribute to her and is released after promising not to rescue her. He uses part of Saturn's rings to create a ring round the planetoid, causing Saturn Queen to hyptonize the villains before they can kill Saturn Woman, as it is revealed Saturn's rings somehow make the inhabitants stay good. Saturn Queen is given a fragment to make sure she stays good, and the other villains are jailed. However they would battle Superman at other points, such as during Whatever Happened to the Man of Tomorrow?, where they create a force field around the Fortress of Solitude to stop other heroes helping Superman, before fleeing back to the future when Superman brutally attacks Lightning Lord.
Pre-Crisis, the Legion of Super-Villains was founded by Tarik the Mute, who had suffered irreparable damage to his vocal cords during a battle with the Science Police and subsequently developed a pathological hatred of law and order.
Several other incarnations of the group formed over the years, led first by Sun Emperor and then by Nemesis Kid.
In post-Crisis continuity, some of the members of the Legion of Super-Villains attempted to remake the universe by tampering with the origins of Superman and Batman and adopting them as their own "children," eventually transforming them into dictators of Earth, and eliminating other members of the JLA to stop them interfering. Superman and Batman managed to overcome their brainwashing, however, due to the Darkseid of another reality telling them what had happened, restored the timestream to its proper course, and took the villains to the 31st century to be imprisoned, but kept the memories of their lives with the villains.Superman/Batman #14-18 (January–April 2005)

Five Years Later

During the fourth volume of Legion of Super-Heroes, the Legion of Super-Villains has disbanded, and some of its members had actually reformed. Echo joined the Legion during the Five Year Gap, but resigned after the events of Black Dawn. 4, #28 (April 1992) Lightning Lord reformed and went to work on his family's plantation on Winath. 4, #3 (January 1990) Ron-Karr joined the Legion of Substitute HeroesLegion of Super-Heroes vol. 4, #16 (March 1991) and Spider Girl joined the Legion,Legion of Super-Heroes vol. 4, #54 (February 1994) nursing some feelings for Jo Nah and changing her identity to "Wave" when the Legion went on the run. Saturn Queen married Matter-Eater Lad and reformed after retrieving her family's hypno-stone from Prince Evillo, ultimately becoming queen of Titan. 4, #50 (Late November 1993) Radiation Roy, however, was kidnapped by the Dominator-controlled Earthgov and almost mindwiped as a soldier for the Dominion. 4, #27 (March 1992) These events were all wiped out by Zero Hour. 4, #62 (November 1994)

The Lightning Saga

Manifestations of the Legion based on the nightmares of Dream Girl appeared at the end of Justice Society of America vol. 3, #4 (2007), where they kill the guards of Arkham Asylum.

Superman and the Legion of Super-Heroes

In Action Comics #859 (2008), Spider Girl and Radiation Roy are shown to be members of the xenophobic Justice League of Earth, along with other rejected Legion of Super-Heroes applicants Earth-Man (formerly Absorbency Boy), Eyeful Ethel, Tusker, Golden Boy, and Storm Boy. Spider Girl is now in a relationship with Earth-Man, the League's leader, and traded the Legionnaire White Witch to Mordru, in return for his staying off the planet. Roy now has to wear a containment suit, since his radioactive powers have caused him to develop tumors over his body, specifically one dominating the right side of his face. Defeated by Superman and the Legionnaires, the Justice Leaguers are sent to the prison planet Takron-Galtos.

Final Crisis: The Legion of Three Worlds

The Legion of Super-Villains appear in the Final Crisis: Legion of 3 Worlds limited series which runs from August 2008 to September 2009. The villains are broken out of Takron-Galtos by Prime, and reveal to him that it was he who inspired them to band together.Final Crisis: Legion of 3 Worlds #1 (October 2008)
Each member is later given copies of the Legion of Super-Heroes' flight rings bearing Prime's "S" symbol. The Legion of Super-Villains later appear on Sorcerer's World as Mordru is trying to stop Dawnstar, Wildfire, Blok, and Green Lantern/Legionnaire Rond Vidar from rescuing the White Witch. The White Witch manages to create a stargate, but Rond forces them through and is left to fight the Legion by himself. After Vidar has fought off several Legion members, Saturn Queen gets inside his head and starts to hinder his willpower. When Prime grabs Rond by the neck, Saturn Queen tells him to wait, since Rond is Universo's son. Universo shows no care for Rond and only wants his power ring. Rond mocks him, telling him it can never be his, and spits in his face before Prime snaps his neck. Universo tries to take his ring, but it flies off to Oa. Mordru is then offered membership in the Legion, telling him it can only be temporary, which is the same case for the Fatal Five and the Justice League. Earth Man sums up that as much as the various villains dislike each other, they all want the Legion of Super-Heroes dead. They head for Earth and launch an attack on the Legionnaires.Final Crisis: Legion of 3 Worlds #5 (September 2009)

Post-Legion of Three Worlds

In Adventure Comics vol. 2, #3 (2009), it was revealed that the Legion of Super-Villains has sent an espionage squad back into the 21st century.
It has also been revealed that Saturn Queen has been reforming the group in order to bring anarchy back to the universe, starting with the destruction of the worlds that house the immortal beings that represent will (Oa), faith (the Rock of Eternity), and wisdom (Utopia, the World of the Wise, homeworld of supporting character Harmonia Li).Legion of Super-Heroes #15, released July 2011

Roster

The members of the Legion included:

In other media

Television






