[[Linda Lusardi]]

CATEGORIES: 1958 births, Living people, Dancing on Ice participants, English female adult models, English people of Italian descent, English television actresses, English television personalities, People from Palmers Green

Linda Lusardi (born 18 September 1958, Palmers Green, London) is an actress, television presenter and former model.

Career

Modelling

Born in Palmers Green, London, Lusardi began her modelling career in The Sun at the age of 18 in 1976  She was voted the Best Page 3 Girl Of All Time in 2005.

TV Acting

As an actress, Lusardi has appeared in the drama series  The Bill (playing the girlfriend of corrupt officer DS Don Beech) and also in Hollyoaks and  Brookside. She joined the cast of Emmerdale in 2007 as Carrie Nicholls, an ex-girlfriend of Tom King and mother of his secret child, Scarlett. Her first on-screen appearance was on 12 February 2007.  She left the programme after a year.

Movies

Lusardi has appeared in movies including (Snappers) (The Zero Imperative) (OH Minnie) and (Consuming Passions)

Stage

Lusardi has starred as Eliza Doolittle in Pygmalion at the Malvern Festival. Toured in Happy as A Sandbag, Funny Peculiar, Bedside Manners, Not Now Darling, Rock with Laughter, No Sex Please We're British Doctor on The Boil. Lusardi took her own show the British Forces in Belize, the Falklands and Northern Ireland
She is a supporter of UK pantomime and often stars with her husband Sam Kane  each Christmas at major theatres in the UK. Recent venues have been Woking, Southend, Plymouth, and Llandudno. Lusardi has starred in over 25 Pantomimes

Other television work

Lusardi appeared in two series of  (A Kind of Magic) for ITV as season of Loose Women ITV. Regularly presented (Wish You Were Here) Miss Northern Ireland. Its Bizarre ITV. Film Review ITV. No Smoking Day ITV. Lusardi took part in the reality game show The Games in 2004, ITV daytime programme Have I Been Here Before? and BBC 1's Hole in the Wall in 2009. She also sells (Lusardi My Miracle) a range of skin-care products on shopping television- Ideal World. In 1992 she appeared in the "Dead Ringer" observation round of The Krypton Factor She Also Appeared in a special edition of Bullseye presented by Jim Bowen. Lusardi appeared on Saturday Night Take Away on ITV and in The Royal Variety Performance. Celebrity Eggheads and BBC Celebrity Pointess

Reality TV

In January 2008 she joined the new series of ITV's Dancing On Ice where she finished in sixth place.  Her professional skating partner was Daniel Whiston, who temporarily moved into her family home to make training more convenient.  Lusardi had to catch up with her fellow skaters after falling and breaking a bone in her foot during her first hour on the ice. She also won the Channel 4 show Celebrity Come Dine With Me in 2008. In the show she was voted the best dinner host by her fellow contestants Abi Titmuss, Rodney Marsh, Lesley Joseph and Paul Ross. She participated in the 2011 series of Celebrity Masterchef, where she reached the final 5.

Personal life

During the 1980s Lusardi married a builder named Terry Bailey and they were often featured in the News of the World's Sunday supplement magazine, "Sunday".  They  divorced in 1996. In 1998 Lusardi  married  actor Samuel Kane; they have two children, son Jack and  daughter Lucy. She is patron of two charities The Willow Foundation and The Rhys Daniels Trust.






