[[Helix (band)]]

CATEGORIES: Helix (band), Canadian glam metal musical groups, Canadian hard rock musical groups, Canadian heavy metal musical groups, Musical groups established in 1974, Musical groups from Waterloo Region

Helix is a Canadian hard rock/heavy metal band.  They formed in 1974, and are best known for their 1984 single "Rock You."  The original lineup was formed by drummer Bruce Arnold, and consisted of lead vocalist Brian Vollmer, guitarists Ron Watson and Rick "Minstrel" Trembley, keyboardist Don Simmons, and bassist Keith "Bert" Zurbrigg.  Their most well known lineup, however, and the one that recorded "Rock You", was the 80s version of the band:  Vollmer on vocals, accompanied by guitarists Brent "The Doctor" Doerner and Paul Hackman, bassist Daryl Gray, and drummer Greg "Fritz" Hinz.  The history of the band has been marked by many lineup changes, with Vollmer being the sole constant member and only remaining member of the original lineup.  Although guitarist Paul Hackman was killed in a tour bus accident in 1992, the surviving members of the 80s lineup reunited in 2009 for an album and continue to tour in 2011.
Helix have toured with bands such as Kiss, Aerosmith, Rush, Mötley Crüe, Alice Cooper, Whitesnake, Night Ranger, Heart, Quiet Riot, W.A.S.P., Ian Gillan, and Motörhead among others.
Their most recent studio album is 2009's Vagabond Bones.

History

Early years: 1974-1982

Helix were formed in 1974 for a battle of the bands contest in Kitchener (Originally from St. Thomas Ontario)Canada by drummer Bruce Arnold.  They were originally a six-piece, consisting of Arnold, lead vocalist Brian Vollmer, guitarists Ron Watson and Rick "Minstrel" Trembley, keyboardist Don Simmons, and bassist Keith "Bert" Zurbrigg, who always wore his trademark tuxedo on stage.  Their original name was The Helix Field Band, soon shortened to simply Helix. 
With new management under Kitchener's William Seip, Helix released two independent albums on their own H&S Records, entitled Breaking Loose and White Lace & Black Leather, in 1979 and 1981 respectively.  During the sessions for Breaking Loose, Helix recorded a cover of the Del Shannon hit "Thinkin' It Over", unreleased until the 1999 Helix CD B-Sides.  Their second album, White Lace & Black Leather saw more lineup changes, with bassist Mike Uzelac replacing Keith Zurbrigg, and drummer Leo Niebudek replacing Brian Doerner.  With Zurbrigg gone, Brian Vollmer was now the last remaining original member.

Commercial success: 1983-1989

Changing their image from that of a standard bar band to a more image-conscious metal band, Helix finally signed to Capitol Records after being rejected by them three times.  In 1983 they released No Rest for the Wicked, with Greg "Fritz" Hinz (ex-Starchild) on drums.  This album featured Canadian hit video "Heavy Metal Love", which featured their new look.  Under Seip's advice, Helix dropped their T-shirts and jeans in favour of leather clothing in order to stay current.  The tour for this album cycle was not without drama.  Mike Uzelac, whose drug use had become problematic, left the band to be replaced by a bass player named Peter Guy from London, Ontario.  Guy was unable to travel to the United States due to a previous drug conviction, and Uzelac came back to finish the tour.  When Uzelac had fulfilled his commitment, Mark Rector of Kitchener was hired on bass.  He was let go at the conclusion of the tour.  With the addition of bassist Daryl Gray  completing the band's classic 80s lineup, they released Walkin' the Razor's Edge in 1984.  It sold over 100,000 copies in Canada, and over 400,000 internationally.  The album also included their best known song "Rock You" and a cover of A Foot in Coldwater's "(Make Me Do) Anything You Want".
The band's also released a music video for the Crazy Elephant cover "Gimme Gimme Good Lovin'" the same year, creating a parody of the Miss America Pageant titled the "Miss Rock Fantasy" Pageant.  Two versions were created: an uncensored version featuring semi-nude and topless women, and a censored version made available for the more mainstream media markets like MTV.  The ending of both versions of the video feature comedian Rip Taylor seated on a motorcycle surrounded by the band and the models all waving goodbye.  It caused some controversy several years after its initial release when it was learned that among the cast of porn stars that appear topless in the uncensored version was a then-unknown 16-year-old Traci Lords as "Miss Georgia". (This version was also featured in a pornographic video titled Electric Blue 26.)
In 1985, Helix released their fifth album Long Way to Heaven, featuring the singles "Deep Cuts The Knife" and "The Kids Are All Shakin'". The album allowed the band to tour Sweden, becoming the first Canadian rock band to do an extensive Swedish tour.  The result was a No. 1 album in that country. The following year, their song "It's Too Late" was featured in the movie Iron Eagle and its soundtrack album (this was a completely different song than the track "It's Too Late" that appeared on their second album).
Long Way To Heaven was followed by the release of Wild in the Streets in 1987, featuring the title track and a cover of "Dream On" by Nazareth.  One song from that record, "She's Too Tough" was written by Joe Elliot, lead singer for Def Leppard.  Leppard also recorded their own version of "She's Too Tough" and released it as a B-side and on their Retro Active album.  The recording of Wild in the Streets, done in England with producer Mike Stone, was plagued by extensive takes and remixes.
Capitol released the first Helix compilation album Over 60 minutes with... at the end of 1989, which featured new and unreleased material as well as the hits.  At the end of the decade, Brent Doerner quit the band, tired of the grind of touring.  Helix was left as a four piece.

Lineup changes and tragedy: 1990-2003

Helix began the 90s with Back for Another Taste, which Doerner contributed songwriting and guitar parts to.  On tour, Helix brought in their first American member, Denny Balicky.  As a touring member, Balicky was not featured in any of their music videos, but he did make significant appearances in the MuchMusic hourlong special Walzing With Helix, which documented Helix's European tour with Sacred Reich and Ian Gillan.  Balicky later appeared in the retrospective documentary 30 Years Of Helix: No Rest For The Wicked after changing his name to Denny Blake.
After this tour, Vollmer and Hackman began writing songs with the intention of Hackman's material being used for the next Helix release, and Vollmer's going towards a solo album.  In the meantime, The Early Years was released by A&M Records, which compiled their first two independent albums on CD for the first time.  Helix toured sporadically during this time, including a special reunion show in Kitchener featuring Keith Zurbrigg and the Doerner brothers.  A 1992 Western Canadian tour was booked, with Brian Doerner filling in on drums for the unavailable Greg Hinz, and Brent Doerner filling in for Denny Balicki.  It was during this tour when disaster struck.
On July 5, 1992, Paul Hackman, not wearing a seatbelt, was killed when the group's van rolled down a 40-foot embankment after a concert in Vancouver.
Brent Doerner left the band for the second time after a few shows supporting It's a Business Doing Pleasure.  Helix were forced to carry on with a rapid succession of replacement guitar players:  Gary Borden (ex-Ray Lyell),  
In order to keep new Helix product in stores, five new studio tracks were recorded and released in 1998 on half-ALIVE, produced by Daryl Gray, which compiled these with live tracks from previous tours.  Vollmer also released compilations of hits and rare tracks, as well as his first official solo album (When Pigs Fly, 1999) through his website.  The band continued to play live through this period, recruiting new guitar players as they were available.  At various times, Mike Hall and Gerry Finn, who were both in Killer Dwarfs, joined Helix on the road, as did Darren Smith, the former Harem Scarem drummer, who had switched to guitar.  Periodically, the surviving members of the classic 80s lineup would reform, as they did on the B-Sides CD to record three new songs including "Danger Zone", which were again produced by Daryl Gray. This was a song that Paul Hackman had been working on shortly before his death.  At the beginning of the new decade, Helix had to endure another major lineup change.   Daryl Gray left the band in 2002 due to an increasingly strained relationship with Vollmer, leaving Brian as the sole member from their 80s heyday.
With Glen Gamble's help, Vollmer added three new members to bring some stability back to the lineup:  Jeff "Stan" Fountain replacing Daryl Gray on bass, Dan Fawcett on guitar, and Shaun Sanders on guitar.  All three had played together with Gamble in London's Buffalo Brothers.

30th Anniversary

In 2004, the 30th anniversary of Helix, the band released several titles to mark the occasion.  Their first new studio album of all-original material in over a decade came out, titled Rockin' in My Outer Space.  
The band played a special 30th anniversary concert at Brantford Ontario's Sanderson Centre.  The show featured the current band and past members.  Guests included members of the original 1974 Helix lineup (Ron Watson, Bruce Arnold, Keith "Bert" Zurbrigg, and Don Simmons), as well as Brent Doerner, Brian Doerner, Leo Niebudek, and Greg "Fritz" Hinz.  The night was released on DVD as the 30th Anniversary Concert.  Released at the same time was the documentary DVD 30 Years Of Helix: No Rest For The Wicked.  
Helix experienced a slight resurgence in popularity at this point thanks to a third-season episode of the Trailer Park Boys TV show ("Closer To The Heart"), in which Bubbles and Ricky discuss the merits of Helix compared to Rush.  Vollmer also filmed a cameo during that season which was included as a DVD deleted scene.  Helix was mentioned in several other episodes; it's revealed that Ricky especially favors attending, and selling marijuana at, their concerts.
In July 2005, Vollmer announced that Helix would be entering the studio to record another new album of original material as well as a cover album.  The cover album was intended to be released in spring 2006 and consist entirely of Canadian rock songs.  The tentative title was Many Are Cold But Few Are Frozen, but it never materialized.
Finally, Brian Vollmer published his autobiography, Gimme An R, in December 2005.  The book covered the numerous lineup changes and ups and downs of Helix through their 30 year career, along with many rare photos.

Increased activity:  2005-July 2009

In late 2005, Glen Gamble left Helix to form his own band, The Joys.  Gamble was briefly replaced by a returning Brian Doerner, who stayed with the band for several months.  With Gamble gone, Brian Vollmer was left to manage every aspect of the Helix organization, from booking tours, to distributing Helix merchandise.  
More lineup changes ensued in 2006:  Brian Doerner again departed, this time to play in Saga.  He was replaced by Brent "Ned" Niemi, who was a veteran of the Toronto progressive metal band THD that also featured former Slash Puppet vocalist Mif.  Helix toured with this new lineup, most notably opening for Alice Cooper in Canada, before Rainer and Cindy Wiechmann left amicably and formed their own band Nail.  Rainer was replaced on guitar by Kitchener's Rick VanDyk, formerly of Zero Option who had released an album in the early 90s.  Recording for a new album began.
In October 2006, the song "Heavy Metal Love" was to be featured on the soundtrack for the Trailer Park Boys movie The Big Dirty, however, at the last minute, the track was pulled by Dean Cameron, president of EMI Canada, as distribution of the soundtrack was being handled by Universal, and not EMI who owns the track.
In 2007, Helix re-released all the tracks from Get Up! along with four new studio tracks on a full-length studio album called The Power of Rock and Roll.  Unlike the EP, this album received both US and UK releases.
Following this, in October 2008 Helix produced their first Christmas CD.
Although Brian Vollmer has recorded Christmas songs before on a charity CD for his church called Raising The Roof on Mary Immaculate, A Heavy Mental Christmas was the first such release from the band.
By late 2008, Helix began working on a new studio album, their 12th, following up A Heavy Mental Christmas.  These recording sessions coincided with another new Helix lineup:  In February 2009, Brent "The Doctor" Doerner joined the band for the third  time. Jim Lawson remained on guitar, VanDyk having departed to make room for the returning Brent Doerner.  Work on the new studio CD progressed with Sean Kelly co-writing and co-producing.
In February 2009, Vollmer reunited the surviving members of the No Rest For The Wicked lineup (Brent Doerner, Mike Uzelac, and Greg Hinz) to record a new version of the AC/DC classic "It's A Long Way To The Top", to be included on a compilation  album.

Current and 80s band reunion:  July 2009-present

In an unexpected turn of events, after their July 10, 2009 Rocklahoma performance, Sean Kelly amicably gave notice that he was quitting Helix to be the new guitar player in Nelly Furtado's band.  His first date with Furtado was in Mexico City in September 2009.
Daryl Gray was the first member to play live with the band, appearing August 9, 2009 in Lewisporte, Newfoundland.
The new Helix CD was tentatively titled It's Rock Science, NOT Rocket Science!, before being changed to Vagabond Bones after a song co-written by Kelly.
Brian Vollmer had a cameo appearance in the second Trailer Park Boys movie Countdown To Liquor Day, released September 25, 2009.
The reunion tour has lasted into 2010 including both Canadian and US dates.  Brian Vollmer also implied that he would like to continue writing for future Helix albums with former member Sean Kelly.  In regards to Kelly's departure in 2009, Vollmer stated, "I give Sean my blessings, no worries. As long as we continue to write together, I am happy."  
On August 15, 2010, Vollmer announced the forthcoming release of two new Helix albums.  The first, titled Smash Hits...
In November 2010, Vollmer announced that the band were filming a pilot episode for a Helix-based reality TV series.
In 2012, Helix toured across eight cities in southwestern/southeastern Ontario for a mini Heavy Mental Christmas Tour. Performing classic Christmas songs but with a twist of heavy metal, and they played their hit songs such as Rock You, Heavy Metal Love and their own "All I want For Christmas is the Leafs to win the Cup" song. 
Currently, the band is playing in bars/casinos across Canada. 

Outside Helix

Brent and Brian Doerner maintain My Wicked Twin as an ongoing prospect alongside their main bands, Helix, and Crisis What Crisis, a Supertramp tribute band.  Brian Vollmer currently teaches the classical vocal technique, Bel canto, in London, Ontario, as well as singing classical music at weddings and funerals throughout southern Ontario.Calgary Herald - 25 years later, Helix still wants to rock you

Band members

Current members

Former members

† - deceased

Discography

Albums

Studio albums

Live albums

Compilation albums

EPs

Unofficial compilation albums

Singles

Music Videos

DVD and VHS

Non-album tracks and solo albums

=Non-album tracks=

=Solo albums=

Helix in popular culture

Helix and "Rock You" was a topic of discussion by the Trailer Park Boys. You can find the discussion here on Wikiquote.






