[[North Atlantic Treaty]]

CATEGORIES: 1949 in military history, Cold War treaties, NATO, Political charters, Treaties concluded in 1949, Treaties entered into force in 1949, Treaties of Belgium, Treaties of Canada, Treaties of Denmark, Treaties of Estonia, Treaties of Iceland, Treaties of Latvia, Treaties of Lithuania, Treaties of Luxembourg, Treaties of Norway, Treaties of Romania, Treaties of Slovakia, Treaties of Slovenia, Treaties of the Czech Republic, Treaties of the Estado Novo (Portugal), Treaties of the French Fourth Republic, Treaties of the Kingdom of Greece, Treaties of Spain, Treaties of the Netherlands, Treaties of Italy, Treaties of Albania, Treaties of Bulgaria, Treaties of Croatia, Treaties of Poland, Treaties of Hungary, Treaties of the United Kingdom, Treaties of the United States, Treaties of Turkey, Treaties of West Germany, NATO treaties, Treaties establishing intergovernmental organizations, 1949 in Washington, D.C.

The North Atlantic Treaty, signed in Washington, D.C. on 4 April 1949, is the treaty establishing the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).

Background

The treaty was drafted by a committee in talks in Washington which was chaired by Theodore Achilles. Earlier secret talks had been held at the Pentagon between 22 March and 1 April 1948, of which Achilles said:
 The talks lasted about two weeks and by the time they finished, it had been secretly agreed that there would be a treaty, and I had a draft of one in the bottom drawer of my safe. It was never shown to anyone except Jack Hickerson. I wish I had kept it, but when I left the Department in 1950, I dutifully left it in the safe and I have never been able to trace it in the archives. It drew heavily on the Rio Treaty, and a bit of the Brussels Treaty, which had not yet been signed, but of which we were being kept heavily supplied with drafts. The eventual North Atlantic Treaty had the general form, and a good bit of the language of my first draft, but with a number of important differences.trumanlibrary.htm 
According to Achilles, another important author of the treaty was John D. Hickerson: More than any human being Jack was responsible for the nature, content, and form of the Treaty... 
The treaty was created with an armed attack by the Soviet Union against Western Europe in mind, but the mutual self-defense clause was never invoked during the Cold War. Rather, it was invoked for the first time in 2001 in response to the 11 September 2001 attacks against the World Trade Center and The Pentagon in Operation Eagle Assist.

Members

Founding members

The following twelve nations signed the treaty and thus became the founding members of NATO. The following leaders signed the agreement as plenipotentiaries of their countries in Washington D.C.:

Later members

The following 16 nations joined the treaty after the 12 founding countries:

Content

Article 4

The treaty includes Article 4, which triggers not military intervention but merely consultation over military matters. It has been invoked three times by Turkey: once in 2003 over the Second Persian Gulf War (Iraq War), once in June 2012 after the shooting down of a Turkish military jet, and once again in October 2012 after Syrian attacks on Turkey and their counterattacks. in March 2014 in response to the 2014 Crimean crisis.

Article 5

However, the key section of the treaty is Article 5. Its commitment clause defines the casus foederis. It commits each member state to consider an armed attack against one member state to be an armed attack against them all. This article has been invoked only once in NATO history: by the United States after the September 11 attacks in 2001.








