[[Baltimore City College]]

CATEGORIES: Baltimore City College, Educational institutions established in 1839, Public high schools in Maryland, International Baccalaureate schools in Maryland, Magnet schools in Maryland, Middle States Commission on Secondary Schools, Public schools in Baltimore, Maryland, 1839 establishments in Maryland

Baltimore City College, also referred to as The Castle on the Hill, City, and B.C.C. is a public college-preparatory school located in northeast Baltimore, Maryland. The curriculum includes the International Baccalaureate Programme and emphasizes study in the classics, humanities and liberal arts. Baltimore City College is a selective magnet school and admission is competitive. Applicants from Baltimore City and the surrounding metropolitan area are evaluated for admission using a combination of academic grades and standardized test scores.
Established in 1839 as an all-male institution, City College is listed among the oldest high schools in the United States, specifically as the third oldest public high school in continuous use in America. The school has been located in seven different downtown Baltimore buildings over its 175-year history, finally relocating on April 10, 1928, to its current location.  The Castle sits on Collegian Hill with an expansive, tree-shaded 38-acre campus which includes athletic fields for baseball, softball, soccer, and lacrosse. Tennis courts, a gymnasium, and Alumni Field, the school's football stadium with grandstands on the south and west sides (153,781 m2), complete the athletic complex at 33rd Street and The Alameda.
City College has long maintained a strong academic tradition and has many notable alumni including a Nobel Laureate, a Wolf Prize recipient, Pulitzer Prize winners, and many state and national political leaders. Three current members of the United States Congress are B.C.C alumni. City College is a National Blue Ribbon School of Excellence for the academic year 1999–2000,

History

The creation of a high school "in which the higher branches of English and classical literature should be taught exclusively" was unanimously authorized by the Baltimore City Council on March 7, 1839. 207. Accordingly, the Board of School Commissioners rented a townhouse structure on a small narrow by-way of what was then called Courtland Street (now on the east side of Saint Paul Street/Place.  The High School, as it was first called, opened its doors on October 20, 1839, with 46 students and one teacher/professor, Nathan C. Brooks (1809–1898), who also served as first principal. The school moved several times and was housed in three different locations in its first three years before returning again to the original townhouse building on Courtland Street. Finally, in 1843, the City Council allocated $23,000 to acquire the vacant old landmark Assembly Rooms structure at the northeastern corner of East Fayette and Holliday Streets for the school. The famous Assembly Rooms also served as the intellectual and educational center of town, with the upper floors holding rooms where the new Library Company of Baltimore and the later Mercantile Library were located for several years. In 1850, the City Council granted the Board of School Commissioners the right to confer graduates of the school with certificates, and the following year the school held its first commencement ceremony. 209.
In 1865, in accordance with a recommendation from the Board of Commissioners of the Baltimore City Public Schools, the school began offering a five-year track, as part of a process aimed at elevating the school to the status of a college so that it could grant its graduates baccalaureate degrees. The following year, on October 9, 1866, as another part of this process, the school was renamed "The Baltimore City College" (BCC) by the City Council. The Council failed to take any further action, and although the school changed nominally, it was never granted the power to confer Bachelor of Arts degrees. 218.
The building on Fayette and Holliday Streets had been in a state of decline for two decades. It was not until 1873, when a fire spread from the Holliday Street Theater to the "Assembly Rooms", that the City Council dedicated the resources to erect a new building for City College. A lot was acquired on North Howard Street opposite West Centre Street and the Council allocated $150,000 for the construction of the new building designed by Baltimore architect Edmund G. Lind. 220. The new English Gothic revival-styled building faced east on Howard Street and was dedicated on February 1, 1875. The school moved in the following week. 221.
The Tudor Gothic building which housed the school was undermined, in 1892, by the construction of the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad tunnel from Camden Street Station to Mount Royal Station and collapsed. In 1895, a new larger structure, designed in the Romanesque style by the noted local architects Baldwin & Pennington, was erected on the same site, only facing the Centre Street northern side. This new building quickly became overcrowded and an annex was established on 26th Street. The addition did not help with the increase in school-aged youth beginning to attend City College by World War I. During the 1920s, alumni began a campaign to provide the school with a more suitable building, and, in 1926, ground was broken for a massive Collegiate Gothic stone castle on Collegian Hill at 33rd Street and The Alameda. This new structure cost almost $3 million and officially opened in 1939. 20.
The school began admitting African American students following the landmark ruling Brown v. Board of Education. In September 1954,  The school board also sent two African American men, Eugene Parker and Pierre H. Davis, to teach at the school in 1956. Parker taught at City College for 30 years. Davis taught for one year, but returned as the school's first black principal in 1971. 38.
In 1978, at the urging of concerned alumni, City College underwent its first major capital renovations. When the campus reopened, the high school welcomed women for the first time. The all-male tradition did not end easily; alumni had argued for the uniqueness of a single-sex educational system and convinced the task force studying the issue to vote 11–6 in favor of keeping the all-male tradition. The Board of School Commissioners, in a reversal, voted to admit women citing constitutional concerns. 58.

Campus

City College stands on a 38-acre (153,781 m2) campus in northeast Baltimore at the intersection of 33rd Street and the Alameda. 120. The campus consists of two buildings: the Gothic-style edifice known locally as the "Castle on the Hill" that sits in the center of the campus, and the power plant building east of the castle. In addition to providing the building's utilities, the power plant originally housed five work shops: an electrical shop, a mechanical shop, a metal shop, a printing shop, and a wood shop. 124. It currently houses the Coldstreram-Homestead-Montebello community corporation headquarters. Only the main building is in academic use by the school. Both buildings were designed by the architecture firm of Buckler and Fenhagen. Just south of the main building is Alumni Field, the school's stadium, which serves as home to the football, boys and girls lacrosse and track teams. During a major building renovation in 1978 a modern gymnasium was added to the southwest corner of the main building.
On June 30, 2003, the current building was placed on the National Register of Historic Places as the result of an Alumni Association initiative. On June 21, 2007, City's alumni association received a historic preservation award from Baltimore Heritage for its leadership role in preserving the building as an historic Baltimore landmark.

Academics

Throughout most of the 20th century the college preparatory curriculum at City College was divided into two tracks: the "A" course and the "B" course. Though both tracks were intended to provide students with the skills necessary for college, the "A" course was intended to be more rigorous, enabling students to complete sufficient college-level courses to enter directly into the second year of college. In the early 1990s, Principal Joseph Antenson removed the two-tier system because he believed it to be racially discriminatory. The IB Program is a comprehensive, liberal arts program that must be completed in students' junior and senior years. Students now have the option to pursue a standard college preparatory curriculum, the IB Program, or a combination of the two.
In 2007, opposition to the continuation of the IB Program arose. Members of the Baltimore City College Alumni Association argued that the IB Program was diverting a significant amount of the school's resources in order to benefit a fraction of the student population. Only approximately 30 students were in the full IB Diploma Program at City College at that time. Some members also argued that the rigidity of the program did not give students enough flexibility. Citing these concerns, the alumni association encouraged the school to replace the IB Program with the "A course" and expand the number of Advanced Placement courses offered. The alumni association's recommendation, though non-binding, was intended to persuade the school to terminate the IB program and replace it with a more equitable and flexible curriculum. Nevertheless, school administrators moved ahead with plans to expand City's IB Program by incorporating the IB Middle Years Program into the 9th and 10th grade curricula.
In addition to the 23 IB courses, the school offers  The expansion of the number of AP and IB courses offered allowed City to perform well in the Newsweek rankings, which are based heavily on the number of AP and IB courses offered.

Enrollment

Students wishing to enroll in City College must apply in the eighth grade. Enrollment is open to both residents and non-residents of Baltimore City, though non-residents must pay tuition. Eligibility is based on a composite score that is determined by the Baltimore City Public School System. The school system generates the composite score based on a student's grades in the seventh grade and first quarter of the eighth grade, and a student's performance on a national standardized test, with the student's grades receiving double the weight as the test scores.
There were 1,319 students enrolled at City College in 2009. Of those students, 514 were males and 805 were females. Approximately 1,193 students identified themselves as African American, comprising 90.5% of the student population. An additional 109 students identified themselves as Caucasian, comprising 8.3% of the student population. The remaining 1.2% of the population identified themselves as Hispanic, Asian, or American Indian.

Athletics

History

Interscholastic athletics at Baltimore City College date back over 120 years. Though varsity sports were not formally organized until 1895, interscholastic athletics became a fixture at the school earlier in the 19th century. 198 In the late-1890s, City competed in the Maryland Intercollegiate Football Association (MIFA), a 9-member league consisting of colleges in Washington, D.C., and Maryland. 28, Columbia Publishing Co., 1952. City College was the lone secondary school among MIFA membership. The 1895 football schedule included St. John's College, Swarthmore College, the United States Naval Academy, University of Maryland, and Washington College. 200. Between 1894 and 1920, City College faced off against the Johns Hopkins Blue Jays and the Navy Midshipmen in lacrosse.cstv.pdf
After 75 years of governing Baltimore-metro area boys high school athletics, the Maryland Scholastic Association dissolved in 1993 when its 15 public school members, including City College, withdrew from the league to join the Maryland Public Secondary Schools Athletic Association (MPSSAA). The Knights currently compete with other public high schools in the top division of the MSPPAA's Baltimore City League.
The current City College varsity athletic program consists of 18 sports: six for boys, seven for girls, and five coeducational teams. The boys sports includes baseball, basketball, football, lacrosse, soccer, and wrestling. The girls sports are badminton, basketball, lacrosse, soccer, softball, and volleyball. The five co-ed sports are cross country, indoor track and field, swimming, outdoor track and field, and tennis. Girls sports were added to City's athletic department in the Fall of 1978 when the school became coeducational for the first time in its then-139-year-old history.
Much of City College's athletic history involves boys sports, but it was the girls basketball team that won the school's first MPSSAA state championship in 2009. Just hours after the Lady Knights were crowned state champions, City College's boys basketball team won the 2009 MPSSAA Class 2A state championship by beating Douglass High School (Prince George's County) at the Comcast Center.

Boys basketball

Basketball has been played at Baltimore City College for more than a century. One of the earliest recorded results in program history is a one-point overtime road loss to the University of Maryland Terrapins (then known as the Maryland Agricultural College Aggies) on January 25, 1913.
City College has won the MPSSAA state championship three times: 2009, 2010, and 2014. With a record of 27–0 in 2014, City College became the first Baltimore City League team since the 2008–2009 season to post an undefeated season.

Football

The Baltimore City College football program began in the mid-1870s, has competed in more than 1,000 contests, and has won more than 20 Maryland Scholastic Association (MSA) and Baltimore City League championships. The Knights primarily faced collegiate competition throughout the 1880s and 1890s because few secondary schools existed in Maryland at the time. The team began competing against other high schools at the beginning of the 20th century.thumb|right|upright|A City College football player carries the ball against Poly (November 2006), M&T Bank Stadium
City College holds the record for most consecutive games played without a loss in MSA/MPSSAA history. The Knights played 54 consecutive games without a loss between 1934–1941.
In 1959, George Young, who also taught in the History Department, became head football coach. Young guided the Knights to six Maryland state championships. Young left the program after the 1967 season to become an offensive line coach for the Baltimore Colts and would later become the general manager of the New York Giants. One of his star City players was quarterback Kurt Schmoke, who later became States' Attorney for Baltimore City and served two terms as the first elected black mayor.
In 1975, George Petrides, BCC '67, became head coach of the football team and has remained in this position for over 35 years. Coach Petrides guided City College to appearances in the semifinals of the MPSSAA state football tournament in 1996, 2001, and 2005. In September 2006, Coach Petrides was honored as the Baltimore Ravens High School Coach of the Week for the third time since 1996.

=City–Poly rivalry (1889–present)=

The City-Poly football rivalry is the oldest American football rivalry in Maryland, and one of the oldest public school football rivalries in the United States. The rivalry began in 1889, when City College met the Baltimore Polytechnic Institute (Poly) at Clifton Park for a football scrimmage. 219. Little is known about the first game, except that it was played between the City JV team and Poly with City emerging as the victor. City remained undefeated in the series until 1908. 221. In the 1920s, the rivalry had gotten so fierce that riots erupted on the streets of downtown Baltimore on the day before "The Game" when opposing parades clashed and the sons of both the Mayor of Baltimore and the Governor of Maryland were arrested in 1928.  By the 1930s a "Peace Pact" was sworn out annually and signed by student government leaders of both schools before the cameras of the press in the Mayor's Ceremonial Office in City Hall. Several student disturbances at games or on transit buses afterwards in the late 1960s and early 70s threatened to put an end to the athletic tradition reflecting the tense tenor of the times, but goodwill eventually prevailed again by the quieter 1980s.  By the 1950s, it had become a Baltimore tradition that after a morning of church services, parades and rallies, the two Catholic high school football powers of Loyola High School (Loyola Blakefield) and Calvert Hall College would play on Thanksgiving Day morning at 10 a.m., followed at 2 p.m. by City-Poly as the two public school rivals at Memorial Stadium on 33rd Street.  That evening's TV news and sports casts led off with the scores and highlights of "The Game" and half-time shows and parades. Next day's The Sun and The News-Post and American had special sections and stories covering all facets of the day before.
One of the most memorable City-Poly games occurred on Thanksgiving Day 1965, at Baltimore's Memorial Stadium, with some 25,000 fans in attendance. City beat Poly 52–6, and completed a 10–0 season with the team being ranked eighth in the nation by a national sports poll. Former Baltimore Mayor Kurt Schmoke was the quarterback and Maryland Delegate Curt Anderson was the captain. The game is no longer played on Thanksgiving or at Memorial Stadium, but is now located at the home of the Baltimore Ravens, M&T Bank Stadium, at Camden Yards in downtown Baltimore. With 2007's 26–20 win by City, Poly leads the series 62–54–6 (counting the first 15 scrimmages won by City). In November 2013, City College and Polytechnic Institute clashed in the 125th City–Poly football game.

Girls basketball

City's girls basketball team was formed in the fall of 1978 when the school became co-educational for the first time in its then-139-year-old history.baltimoremagazine. City College's girls team also advanced to the state semifinals in 2004 and 2005. In 2014, the Lady Knights played in the Division I Baltimore City Championship title game, but fell to arch-rival Poly.

Lacrosse

Baltimore City College boasts the oldest high school lacrosse program in the State of Maryland and is the among the oldest high school lacrosse programs in the United States. At least 10 alumni of the City College boys lacrosse program are in the National Lacrosse Hall of Fame.
It was not until City's arch-rival Poly fielded a lacrosse team in 1912 that the school competed against other secondary schools. Baltimore City College lacrosse competed in the Maryland Scholastic Association (MSA) from 1919 to 1993. The Knights have been members of the Maryland Public Secondary Schools Athletic Association (MPSSAA) since 1993. In all, the Knights have won 16 boys lacrosse championships.Banners hanging in school gym
Anthony Ryan is the current City College boys lacrosse head coach. In 2001, Coach Ryan inherited a team that was winless the previous year. In his first season with the program, he guided the Knights to a 2–11 record. Between 2003 and 2010, Coach Ryan led City College boys lacrosse to a 69–5 record, three Baltimore City League championships, and, at one point, a 44-game inter-league winning streak.

Extracurricular activities

City College offers more than 20 student clubs and organizations. These activities include chapters of national organizations such as the National Honor Society (established at City in 1927) and Quill and Scroll. Service clubs include the Red Cross Club and Campus Improvement Association. Other activities include Drama which holds the annual play, Art, Model UN, Band, Dance, and One City One Book, an organization that invites the entire school community to read one book selected by faculty and invites the author of the book for a reading, discussion, and question and answer period. In 2007, Pulitzer Prize winner, MacArthur Fellow, and novelist Edward P. Jones discussed his book Lost in the City. Moreover, the campus school store is completely student ran and managed by the Student Government. One of City College's most notable academic teams is the It's Academic team which participates on the It's Academic TV show.

Bancroft and Carrollton-Wight Literary Societies

The origins of the national champion debate program at Baltimore City College lie in the Bancroft Literary Association, which was established in 1876. 233. In 1878, a second competing society, the Carrollton Literary Society, was established. That society was later renamed the Carrollton-Wight Literary Society, after its first faculty adviser, Professor Charles Wight. The two societies competed through the 1960s but became dormant in the late 1970s. 66.
In 1997, under the leadership of Donald Koch, the two societies were resurrected as the Baltimore City College speech and debate team.

Band

The marching band at City College was created in the late 1940s. At the time, the instrumental music program consisted of the orchestra, concert band and marching band. The director who brought the band to prominence was Dr. Donald Norton. In 1954, while on sabbatical, he was replaced by Professor Charles M. Stengstacke. The 65 member concert band doubled as a marching band in the fall. During halftime performances at home the band would form the shape of a heart or a car, but always ending the performance by forming the letters C-I-T-Y. 63.
In the 1980s, under James Russell Perkins, these groups grew in size and changed styles, adding "soulful" dance steps. Perkins's groups toured and traveled the east coast. They received superior ratings at district and state festivals. Perkins is responsible for the creation of the City College Jazz Band, the "Knights of Jazz".
In 1994, Alvin T. Wallace became Band Director. During his tenure, a wind ensemble was added and the marching band grew to include over 150 members. In 1999, the band swept the top categories in the Disney World high school band competition. In 2006, the wind ensemble received a grade of superior at the district adjudication festival and marched in the Baltimore Mayor's Christmas Day Parade.

Choir

The City College choir was founded in 1950 by Professor Donald Regier. Originally a co-curricular subject with only 18 members, by 1954 it had developed into a major subject of study with 74 students enrolled. 62.
Under the direction of Linda Hall, today's choir consists of four groups: the Mixed Chorus, the Concert Choir, the Singin'/Swingin' Knights, and the Knights and Daze Show Choir. The Mixed Choir is opened to all students at City College and currently has a membership of approximately 135 students. The Concert Choir is a more selective group consisting of about 50 students, who must audition for their places in the choir. The Singin'/Swingin' Knights is an even more selective group composed of 25 students. The Knights and Daze Show Choir is a group of students, who perform a choreographed dance routine while they sing. With the exception of the Knights and Daze Show Choir, which performs jazz and pop music, the choir's repertoire consists of gospel music, spirituals, and Classical works by composers such as Handel and Michael Praetorius.
The choir has traveled to Europe on several occasions; its first trip was in 1999, after receiving an invitation to perform at the Choralfest in Arezzo, Italy. In 2003, the choir returned to Italy to perform at the annual Conference of the Parties of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. The choir has also performed in France and Spain.
On October 2, 2007, the Weill Institute of Music at Carnegie Hall announced that the City College choir was one of four high school choirs selected to participate in the National High School Choral Festival on March 10, 2008. The four choirs will perform Johannes Brahms' A German Requiem under the direction of Craig Jessop, Mormon Tabernacle Choir Director. The choirs will also be led by their own directors in performing choral selections of their choosing.

Student publications

The Green Bag

The Green Bag is the senior class annual at City College. Published continuously since 1896, The Green Bag is the oldest publication still in existence at the school and one of the oldest high school or college yearbooks in America. 237. G. Warfield Hobbs Jr.  (later an Episcopal priest), president of the 1896 senior class and first editor-in-chief of the Green Bag, gave the publication its name in recognition of the role of City College graduates in political leadership. Historically, the carpet bag containing the political appointees of the Governor of Maryland to be approved by the General Assembly of Maryland was known as the "green bag", though the derivation of the term is unknown.
The most controversial issue of The Green Bag was published in 1900 when members of the senior class used the annual to make fun of their professors. The school board attempted to censor the edition by requiring The Green Bag to be reviewed by Principal Francis A. Soper. The yearbook had already been printed, and in defiance of the school board, the editors refused to have the edition censored and reprinted. The school board responded by withholding the diplomas of six of the editors and the business manager and by preventing the school from holding a public commencement ceremony. One of the boys expelled, Clarence Keating Bowie, became a member of the school board in 1926. 77.

The Collegian

The Collegian has been the school student newspaper of City College since its first publication as a bi-weekly newspaper in 1929. 126. Though several other publications existed in 1929, such as the student magazine The Oriole since 1912, The Collegian is the only publication other than The Green Bag still printed. Originally, the paper was both managed and printed by students. During the 1930s, The Collegian won numerous awards including second place in the Columbia Scholastic Press Association's annual contest for five years in a row. In recent years, the publication has waned. Budget cuts have reduced the number of issues printed. Citing the decline of The Collegian and increasing disorder in the school, 2 underground publications were started, the first entitled Knights' Voice by Marshall Troutner and the second entitled Omnibus by Leah Goldman and Maia Gottlieb in May 2007. Goldman and Gottlieb later went on to revive The Collegian, going to print in 2008. The Collegian is still being published quarterly at the school, often with a bonus issue around the time of the City-Poly game.

Alumni Association

The Baltimore City College Alumni Association Inc. (BCCAA) was established in 1866 as a support network for City College. The BCCAA holds an annual meeting at the school every November and its Board of Governors meets the first Monday of each month at the school.
The BCCAA publishes the class reunion guide, established and maintains a life membership endowment fund, presents Golden Apple Awards annually to faculty members, sponsors the Hall of Fame selection and induction, publishes a semi-annual newsletter, maintains an alumni database, and assists with projects designed to enrich student life and improve the school's facilities.

Trustees of the Baltimore City College Scholarship Funds

The Trustees of the Baltimore City College Scholarship Funds, Inc., was established and incorporated in 1983, and replaced a similar entity that was established in 1924. The Trustees manage endowments, most of which provide annual scholarships to graduating seniors based on criteria stipulated by the donors. Combined endowment assets are currently valued at or around $1.68 million (adjusted for inflation) covering thirty-four annual scholarships.

Baltimore City College Hall of Fame

The Baltimore City College Hall of Fame induction ceremony is held annually in October. Alumni that have demonstrated extraordinary service to the school, city, state, country, or world are elected to the Hall of Fame, with former inductees, alumni, and students attending the two-hour ceremony. Inductees included Vice-President at Goldman Sachs Robert Hormats in 2007,

Notable alumni

Many City College alumni have become civil servants, including three of the 10 individuals currently representing the state of Maryland in the U.S. Congress—Congressman Elijah Cummings, Congressman Dutch Ruppersberger, and Senator Ben Cardin. Among graduates with significant military service are two Commandants of the Coast Guard, Rear Admiral Frederick C. BillardLeonhart (1939), p. 274. and Admiral J. William Kime,
The list of alumni includes prominent scientists, such as theoretical physicist John Archibald Wheeler, co-founder of The Carlyle Group, and David T. Abercrombie, namesake and co-founder of Abercrombie & Fitch.

Notable faculty members

Principals

| title = One hundred years of the Baltimore city college | url=  accessdate =June 1, 2010 | year=1939 | publisher=George W, Johns Hopkins University | page = 192}}[/ref]

Notes






