[[Theophilus Cazenove]]

CATEGORIES: 1740 births, 1811 deaths, Dutch businesspeople, Dutch emigrants to the United States, Dutch people of Huguenot descent, Businesspeople from Amsterdam

Theophilus Cazenove, or Theophile Cazenove (13 October 1740 - 6 March 1811), was a Dutch financier and one of the agents of the Holland Land Company.

Life and career

He was born in Amsterdam, as the son of Théophile Cazenove and Marie de Rapin-Thoyras, French/Swiss Huguenots.org/manakin/brock1. In 1759 he lost four ships loaded with sugar and coffee, which were taken by a Bristol privateer, on their way back... by Benjamin Martin  In 1760 he gave up his business and his sons Charles and Theophile stepped in the company. In 1763, Theophile married Margaretha Helena van Jever, the daughter of a tradesman in Russia, and a member of the vroedschap. Cazenove spent his early career in commercial transactions in France and Russia, but went broke in 1770. In the same year, his portrait was painted by Jean-Baptiste Perronneau.pastellists.pdf After the death of his father-in-law he was involved in a plantation in Surinam. In 1788 he collaborated with Étienne Clavière and Jacques Pierre Brissot, who both shipped in for the United States..., Volume 1 by Jacques-Pierre Brissot de Warville,Étienne Clavière 
In November 1789 Cazenove was retained by Pieter Stadnitski to travel to the United States to act as an investment agent for Stadnitski and other Dutch investors (Nicolaas and Jacob Van Staphorst, Pieter & Christiaen Van Eeghen, and Ten Cate & Vollenhoven). Investing in Land in the Nascent United States (Lukas Ligtenberg) The Low Countries - 2007, nr 15, pp. 279-281  Boon believed that harvesting maple syrup could be a year-round activity, so slavery on the sugar plantations could be avoided.
In 1792 Cazenove invested his clients' money, at first in development bonds issued by the new states and the federal government, after Alexander Hamilton promised to fully pay the debt. Another venture included investing in large tracts of undeveloped land in Genesee County, New York, which included the Holland Purchase.M In order to implement these large and difficult purchases (sometimes complicated by the claims of Indians), he employed the advisory services of Hamilton and later Aaron Burr.
Cazenove lived well as a "grand seigneur" and was known for his extreme carelessness.rootsweb.com/~nyccazen/Biographies/CazenoveT.  He was also hard pressed to account for funds that were under his control.  Around those days he helped his cousin from Geneva to settle in Philadelphia.
In 1799, Cazenove returned to Europe even though he had become an American citizen in 1794. Casanove went to Amsterdam, where he started to archive purchase of land for the financiers. He left the employment of the Dutch investors in 1802 and sought a position under Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord, who he had met in Philadelphia in 1795, when also Talleyrand invested in land purchase.archive.txt Cazenove died in Paris in the Rue du Bac.archive.txt

Legacy

A number of places in New York are named after him, including the Village of Cazenovia, Town of Cazenovia, Cazenovia College, and Cazenovia Creek.





Information

His correspondence along with the records of the Holland Land Company are held at Amsterdam's municipal archive, the Amsterdam City Archives.


