[[Gdov]]

CATEGORIES: Cities and towns in Pskov Oblast, Populated places established in the 14th century

Gdov (

History

Gdov was founded in the 14th century, as an outpost guarding the city of Pskov.
In the course of the administrative reform carried out in 1708 by Peter the Great, it was included into Ingermanland Governorate (known since 1710 as Saint Petersburg Governorate). Gdov was mentioned as one of the towns into which the governorate was divided. In 1780, Gdov was granted town status; its coat of arms was granted on May 28, 1781. Between 1874 and 1912, Gdov issued Zemstvo stamps. The first stamp, worth two kopecks, appeared on April 16, 1874. Stamp production ceased, however, with the coming of World War I. In 1919, Gdov was an area where important events of the Civil War in Russia and the Estonian War of Independence were taking place. Originally, the area east of Lake Peipus was under control of the revolutionary government. On May 15, 1919 the detachment under command of Stanisław Bułak-Bałachowicz (subordinate to General Rodzianko) captured Gdov, and the whole Uyezd thus came under control by the White Army troops of Nikolai Yudenich. In November 1919, the Red Army recaptured Gdov. 
On August 1, 1927, the uyezds were abolished, and Gdovsky District was established, with the center in the town of Gdov. It included parts of former Gdovsky Uyezd. The governorates were abolished as well, and the district belonged to Luga Okrug of Leningrad Oblast. On July 23, 1930 the okrugs were abolished as well, and the districts became directly subordinate to the oblast. Between March 22, 1935 and September 19, 1940 Gdovsky District was a part of Pskov Okrug of Leningrad Oblast, one of the okrugs formed at the state boundaries of Soviet Union. Between 19 July 1941, and 4 February 1944 Gdov was occupied by German troops. The town was seriously damaged during the war, and partially restored afterwards. On August 23, 1944, the district was transferred to newly established Pskov Oblast.

Restricted access

Gdov is included into border security zone, intended to protect the borders of Russia from unwanted activity. In order to visit the zone, a permit issued by the local FSB department is required.

Economy

Industry

The economy of Gdov is based on food and timber industries.

Transportation

A railway connects Gdov via Slantsy with Veymarn. Originally, the railway connected Pskov with Veymarn. It was destroyed during World War II, and the stretch between Gdov and Pskov was never rebuilt.
Gdov is connected by roads with Pskov, Kingisepp via Slantsy, and Plyussa. There are also local roads, with bus traffic originating from Gdov.

Military installations

An active military base, Smuravyevo, was located northeast of the town.

Culture and recreation

Gdov contains two cultural heritage monuments of federal significance and additionally twelve objects classified as cultural and historical heritage of local significance. The federal monuments are archaeological sites. Gdov has a kremlin - an ancient fortress, built in the 14th century. Only fragments of original fortress walls survived. The St. Dimitry Cathedral was destroyed in 1944 and reconstructed in the 1990s. 
The only state museum in the district is the Museum of Gdov Region History. It was founded in 1919, destroyed during the German occupation of Gdov, and re-created after World War II. The museum hosts historical and local interest collections.

Notable people

Gallery

File:Derzhavnaya.jpg|15th-century church of Derzhavnaya Mother of God (destroyed during World War II; restored in the 1980s)
File:Вокзал станции Гдов.JPG|Gdov railway station
File:Дизель-электропоезд ДТ1 на станции Гдов.JPG|DT1 train in Gdov railway station



Notes

Sources




