[[Invensys]]

CATEGORIES: Engineering companies of the United Kingdom, Companies based in London, Companies established in 1999, 1999 establishments in the United Kingdom, MES software

Invensys Ltd. is a  multinational engineering and information technology company headquartered in London, United Kingdom. It was formed in 1999 through the merger of BTR plc and Siebe plc.
Its lines of business are grouped into four segments: Software, Industrial Automation, Energy Controls and Appliance. Its brands include Avantis, Eurotherm, Foxboro, IMServ, InFusion, Triconex, SimSci, Skelta, Wonderware, Drayton, Eberle, Eliwell.
Invensys was taken over by the French multinational Schneider Electric for a total consideration of £3.4 billion in January 2014. Schneider plan to replace the "Invensys" name with their own, therefore the "Invensys" brand name shall be phased out. 

History

Invensys was formed through the merger of BTR plc and Siebe plc in 1999. From 1999 to 2004, it underwent a major restructuring programme to cut its costs as falling sales and large debts had led to the danger of its going bankrupt. A major disposal programme combined with a £2.7bn debt restructuring in 2004 saved it from collapse.
In March 2011, Wayne Edmunds, who had been Chief Financial Officer since 2009, was appointed Chief Executive, replacing Ulf Henriksson.  According to The Financial Times, Henriksson, who had been Chief Executive since 2005, had had differences with chairman Nigel Rudd over running the company, in spite of the return to financial health under Henriksson.
During 2011 and early 2012 the share price fell nearly 50%, in part due to delays costing £40 million in producing control and safety systems for eight Chinese nuclear reactors.
In July 2013 it was announced that Invensys was to be taken over by the French multinational Schneider Electric for a total consideration of £3.4 billion.Schneider Electric press release 17 January 2014

Operations

Invensys is organised into four main segments: Software, Industrial Automation, Energy Controls and Appliance.
Avantis provides maintenance repair and operations solutions including maintenance management, spares and inventory management, condition monitoring and procurement.
Supplier of control measurement and data recording to industrial and process consumers.
Provides control systems addressing distributed and plant operations
IMServ Europe is a provider of carbon & energy solutions and data monitoring. IMServ was previously part of Invensys Controls.
SimSci provides applications that help improve asset performance and utilization with integrated simulation, optimization, training, and process control software and services.
Skelta BPM is an enterprise wide Business Process Management and Advanced workflow solutions product.
Triconex provides safety and critical control systems used in a wide variety of critical applications including Emergency Shutdown, Burner Management, Fire and Gas and Turbomachinery Control and Protection.
Wonderware provides a range of software products to address production operations, production performance, manufacturing intelligence, business process management and collaboration.








