[[Pacific Union College]]

CATEGORIES: Pacific Union College, Liberal arts colleges, Council of Independent Colleges, Universities and colleges affiliated with the Seventh-day Adventist Church, Universities and colleges in Napa County, California, Educational institutions established in 1882, National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities members, Schools accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges, Academic institutions, National Association of Schools of Music, California Pacific Conference, Pharmacy schools in California, Nursing schools in California, Art schools in California, Business schools in California, Music schools in California

Pacific Union College (PUC) is a private, coeducational liberal arts college located in Napa Valley, California. Its campus is located in the upper valley town of Angwin, eight miles north of St. Helena, California. It is the only four-year college in Napa County, California.
Pacific Union College was established in Healdsburg, California in 1882. It is the twelfth oldest institution of higher education in the state of California. In 1906, PUC changed its name from Healdsburg College to Pacific Union College. In 1909, the college moved to its present location in Angwin on Howell Mountain, overlooking California's Napa Valley wine country. The school was ranked America's Most Beautiful College in 2012 by Newsweek and The Daily Beast in part due to its setting in the Napa Valley.
A residential college, it serves an almost exclusively undergraduate student body the overwhelming majority of which live on campus.
PUC is the only liberal arts college affiliated with the Adventist Church. It was also the first school affiliated with the denomination receive regional accreditation when the Northwest Association of Secondary and Higher Schools granted it accreditation in 1933.
In 2014, president Heather J. Knight announced a reinterpretation of the college's statement of academic freedom as it interacted with church teachings and threatened to fire a long-time professor for challenging church teachings.
In the fall of 2011, enrollment at Pacific Union College stood at over 1,500 students. Students choose from a variety of courses offered in over 70 concentrations of study offered by the school's 20 academic departments. The campus occupies  property.

History

Pacific Union College was founded as Healdsburg Academy in 1882 in Healdsburg, California in northern Sonoma County. PUC was California's twelfth college and second founded by the Adventist Church, the first west of the Mississippi. (1996) A Mountain, A Pickax, A College, p. 3. In 1906 the name was changed to Pacific Union College. In 1909 it moved to its current location in Angwin, on Howell Mountain in neighboring Napa County, where the school had purchased the 1,636-acre Angwin Resort for $60,000.  Accessed 2011-09-08.  One reason for relocating to Angwin Resort was its beautiful rural setting, which continues to be a defining characteristic. Accessed 2011-09-10.
In 1933, Pacific Union College became the first higher educational institution affiliated with the Adventist Church to achieve regional accreditation when it was awarded accreditation by the Northwest Association of Secondary and Higher Schools. The year before, PUC had become the first school to receive denominational accreditation. Pacific Union College also was the first Adventist school to form international affiliations; it affiliated with what is now Avondale College in Australia in 1954.
In 1935 its elementary and high schools were administratively separated from the college. The high school, PUC Preparatory School, is located on the campus itself while the elementary school is located down the road off campus.

Presidents

Pacific Union College has had a total of twenty-one presidents. The first eight of these served while the school was still in Healdsburg. Sidney Brownsberger, serving four years from 1882 to 1886, was the first president. In 1983, Malcolm Maxwell became the first alumnus to lead PUC, serving for a record 18 years. The current President is Heather Knight who took office in 2009 after serving as the Provost at Andrews University.

Academics

Pacific Union College is the only four-year college located in Napa County, California. Pacific Union College offers bachelor degrees, associate degrees and pre-professional programs. It has been recognized for its strong undergraduate program. It is the only liberal arts college affiliated with the Adventist Church according to the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching.com/#!/PUCNow/status/142277996835897345[ref]According to the Carnegie Foundation, for a college to be classified as a 'liberal arts college' 50% or more of its degrees must be liberal arts degrees. PUC is the only Adventist school which meets this threshold. The Carnegie Foundation explains its designations in this reference.

[/ref] Students number approximately 1,500, and the school maintains a student/teacher ratio of 13:1.Napa Chamber of Commerce Business Directory Accessed 2011-09-02. PUC's most popular departments are Business, Nursing, Biology, and Psychology & Social Work. It has a very strong pre-med program, and is the largest source of students for Loma Linda University School of Medicine.  According to the Angwin Community Council, the college "has been the training ground for an inordinately large number of outstanding physicians, dentists, nurses, teachers and theologians....."
Pacific Union College operates on a quarter-based academic calendar.
Some departments at Pacific Union College require students to submit a senior thesis project to complete their degrees.
In 2006 the faculty, administration and Board of Trustees underscored PUC's commitment to undergraduate education by making a formal decision to remain a college and not change its name to university, as other small private colleges had done. This decision was based on the institution's commitment to quality liberal arts undergraduate teaching."Our ninety-seven teaching faculty members are dedicated to undergraduate teaching and to quality academic programs, a dedication that was reaffirmed in the 2005-06 school year, when the president initiated a campus-wide debate on the question of whether PUC should give in to pressures to call ourselves a university, like many similar institutions. With near unanimity, the entire community—from the chair of the board of trustees to first-year students—soundly declared its determination to remain (in spite of all temptations…) a college."PUC Institutional (Re-accreditation) Proposal May 2007, p.1. Retrieved 2011-09-08.

Controversy over academic freedom

In early 2014, there was a controversy when a long-time department chair announced his resignation in response to president Heather Knight, preparing to remove a 26-year, tenured professor in his department for "lectures on sex that administrators said clashed with church teachings."Wilson, Robin (2 February 2013). Clash Over Professor's Lectures on Sex Tests Academic Freedom at Religious College. Chronicle of Higher Education. Her actions were viewed as a reinterpretation of the school's policy on academic freedom which were previously interpreted to allow variations from church teachings. Knight withdrew her threat to fire the professor but "doubled down" on her reinterpretation of academic freedom after the professor agreed to alter his lectures to conform to her requests and following a major outcry from faculty, students and alumni. 
Academic Dean Nancy Lecourt stated that the conflict originated from tension between the school's commitment to promote the church and professors' freedom to teach, stating, "How do we get students thinking? We poke at them, we introduce them to new ideas, and we ask difficult questions... But how do we get them thinking without losing their faith?" Following the school's re-evaluation of academic freedom, Greg Schneider stated that "This damages the fabric the school's academic focus, and it's going to take some reweaving." Schneider, who had taught at PUC for 37 years, planned to retire soon and asked, rhetorically, "Can I still, with my whole being, communicate to my students that this is where you ought to be?"

Departments

Rankings

The U.S. News and World Report ranked Pacific Union College as one of their "Top Tier Schools" in the Western Baccalaureate Colleges category for 17 consecutive years until 2010.com. Accessed 2011-09-02. In 2011, for the first time ever, Pacific Union College was ranked as a National Liberal Arts College, the same category used for schools like Williams (ranked #1) and Amherst (ranked #2). Pacific Union College was not ranked in the top 178.  U.S. News did rank PUC second among liberal arts colleges for diversity in both 2011 and 2012.
In 2012, Pacific Union College was named America's Most Beautiful College by Newsweek and The Daily Beast. The ranking reflected data on student attractiveness, weather as measured by the number of sunny days per year and the area's comfort index, which measures humidity and afternoon temperatures, and campus' aesthetics and surrounding area.
College Prowler also ranks Pacific Union College as a top school in a number of categories as of January 2012. The rankings are based on surveys taken by current students at the school. College Prowler ranked Pacific Union College's intramural athletics first out of 932 schools ranked as well as its academic advisors and friendliest students (of both genders). Pacific Union College was also listed in the top 50 for having the most spacious and cleanest dorms, best vegetarian/vegan friendly options in the dining hall, most athletic, friendly and hot girls, most friendly and hot guys, having the friendly locals and most manageable workloads.
Pacific Union College was listed as a "College of Distinction" in 2011 by Student Horizons, a college research service.

Accreditation

Pacific Union College is fully accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges (WASC), the regional accreditation body recognized by the U.S. Department of Education for its region.  Accessed 2011-09-02. In August 2011, following a six-year review process, WASC "awarded Pacific Union College uninterrupted re-accreditation through 2018." The college was first accredited by WASC in 1951.wascsenior.org/apps/node/18571
In addition to institution-wide accreditation by WASC, many of PUC's programs and departments are accredited by their programmatic accreditation bodies. These include the Music Department and the Paulin Center for the Creative Arts which are accredited by the National Association of Schools of Music, the Department of Business Administration 
and Economics which has been accredited by the International Assembly for Collegiate Business Education since 2002, when it became the only Adventist college to receive such accreditation; the Education Department which is accredited by the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing, the Nursing Department which is accredited by the Accrediting Commission of the National League for Nursing and the State of California's Board of Nursing, and the Social Work Program, which has been accredited since 1982 by the Council on Social Work Education.

Campus and facilities

Pacific Union College's main campus is on about  property.  Accessed 2011-09-02. The school has over 30 miles of hiking and biking trails on the remaining property. PUC's campus is located 70 miles (110 km) north of San Francisco, 60 miles (85 km) from the Pacific Ocean, and 180 miles (290 km) southwest of the skiing resorts in Truckee and Lake Tahoe. The college is located in Angwin, on Howell Mountain above the Napa Valley.
During the summer of 2011, PUC refurbished both the interior and exterior of the Nelson Memorial Library at a cost of over a million dollars.
Pacific Union College also operates non-traditional learning programs on off-site locations including the Yuba Community College in Clearlake, California, Travis Air Force Base and in the City of Napa.

Albion Field Station

The Albion Field Station, in Mendocino County on the Pacific coast and the Albion River is owned and operated by Pacific Union College. The Station is designed for educational purposes, its tide pools, estuaries and diverse fauna offering ideal learning opportunities.edu website Albion page.  Accessed 2011-09-02.

Angwin-Parrett Field

Pacific Union College owns and operates Angwin-Parrett Field, a public use airport located on its campus.

Pacific Union College Church

Pacific Union College Church is the campus church, built in 1968. The church complex also has classrooms for theology classes and houses PUC's Office of Service, Justice, and Missions.

Paulin Hall

Paulin Hall is the home of Pacific Union College's music department as well as the Paulin Center for the Creative Arts, which offers enrichment classes to the community taught by the music and art faculties. Paulin Hall regularly hosts approximately 10 concerts a year featuring student performers as well as guest performers from around the world.

Rasmussen Art Gallery

The Rasmussen Art Gallery, located in the heart of the Pacific Union College campus mall, offers students and community a stimulating and enriching cultural dimension in the visual arts. The gallery's exhibitions provide exposure to contemporary work as well as to historically significant art. The gallery hosts six shows each school year and features work from invited artists as well as from faculty and students. Previous exhibitions have included artists such as Vernon Nye, Pirkle Jones, John Maxon, Nathan Greene, Arminee Chahbazian, Earl Thollander, and hosts of others. The gallery is run by the visual arts department. The gallery is open regularly 1-5 p.m. on Sunday, Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday during exhibitions.edu website  The Arts page.  Accessed 2011-09-02. Gallery admission is free to the public.

Endowment and Development

In the summer of 2006, PUC's Board of Trustees announced its intention to enlarge its endowment through the sale and development of a portion of its land holdings into an ecovillage. The initial plans called for 591 homes and improvements to local businesses and shops.napavalleyregister.txt  The original proposal specified master planned development, conservation easements and lot sales affecting approximately 885 acres (3.58 km2) out of PUC's current holdings of over 1,800 acres (7.3 km2). PUC announced on April 3, 2007 that in response to community input it had decided to reduce the planned number of housing units by 200, to 391.napavalleyregister.txt On October 4, 2010, Pacific Union College and Triad Corporation announced a decision to abandon the project.com/star/news/local/article_62c0ee48-dcab-11df-9c06-001cc4c002e0.html

Student life

Pacific Union College's stated focus is on undergraduate education. In the fall of 2011, 1,567 students were enrolled at PUC.com/news/local/enrollment-surges-at-pacific-union-college/article_d5d3e3aa-0378-11e1-ba12-001cc4c002e0. As a residential college, the vast majority of these students live in one of seven on-campus residence halls or school-owned apartments.
Cycling is a popular activity at Pacific Union College. The school maintains an extensive network of trails and hosts two annual bicycle races. The 2009 Tour of California, an international road race wholly contained within California, raced through PUC.

Diversity

Pacific Union College embraces diversity as part of its mission and as a prerequisite for a liberal arts education.  In its Diversity Statement, Pacific Union College states that it understands diversity to include aspects listed in the WASC Statement of Diversity: race, ethnicity, socioeconomic class, gender, age, religious belief, sexual orientation and disability. It goes on to state that PUC supports a campus climate of "genuine appreciation, rather than mere tolerance, for community members representing the full range of human diversity."
The US News and World Report ranks Pacific Union College second out of 219 ranked National Liberal Arts Colleges for Campus Ethnic Diversity.
In May 2013, a story in the school's student newspaper, the Campus Chronicle, reported on the school's non-religious population. It noted that although the student population "often identifies as religious," the official count that only 1.1% of students identify as non-thesistic is probably understating the figure.

Student organizations

There are more than 50 clubs, Honor's Associations and Student Ministries active on campus at Pacific Union College. These include the Biology Club, Asian Student Association, Pre-Med Club, Korean Adventist Student Association, Dramatic Arts Society, Musical Arts Symposium, Homeless Ministry, Psi Chi, College Democrats and others. There are several student publications including the newspaper, Campus Chronicle,  the Funnybook (book of faces), and a literary periodical, Quicksilver.

=REVO PUC=

In 2008, Pacific Union College students founded the first campus branch of REVO,REVO is an organization that helps individuals and groups raise funds and awareness for their cause. REVO is not an acronym; it is short for REVO-lution. REVO website Accessed 2011-09-10. an international philanthropy movement.

=Dramatic Arts Society=

The Dramatic Arts Society is a campus club that was formed in 1990 by students Kimberly Howard and Joel Kindrick. The club's constitution states that it must be student run, with a faculty adviser overseeing activities, and that its mission is to give students opportunities in the performing arts field. Hundreds of students are now alumni of this club with many going on to professions in the entertainment field.

Athletics

=Pioneers Athletics=

Pacific Union College teams, nicknamed athletically as the Pioneers, are part of the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA), primarily competing in the California Pacific Conference (CalPac). Men's sports include basketball, cross country and soccer; while women's sports include basketball, cross country and volleyball.
PUC has been awarded the  "California Pacific Conference Team Sportsmanship Award" five times since 2003, most recently for the 2010-11 school year."Cal Pac Team Sportsmanship Award Awarded to Pacific Union College"  calpacathletics.  Retrieved 2011-09-02. In fall 2011, the coaches for varsity women's volleyball and men's soccer described it as "rebuilding" time.

=Intramurals=

PUC maintains an active intramural athletic program under the name RecRadio. website  PUC life, Sports & Athletics page.  Accessed 2011-09-02. The intramural athletic program is the top intramural athletics program in the country according to College Prowler's "Best Intramural Sports" ranking.

Alumni

Pacific Union College has produced a large number of distinguished alumni for a school of its size. It has been noted for being the "training ground for an inordinately large number of outstanding physicians, dentists, nurses, teachers and theologians" who make up part of its over 50,000 alumni. PUC's notable alumni include members of the United States Congress and California State Assembly; a Harlem Renaissance poet, a professional smooth jazz saxophonist, and others in the arts; multiple presidents of the World Seventh-day Adventist Church, judges, the founder of the Loma Linda University Medical Center, Glendale Adventist Medical Center and Glendale Adventist Hospital; presidents of many institutions of higher education including the University of Houston and La Sierra University.  Notable alumni also include numerous scientists, professors, television personalities and a surgeon in the Japanese Imperial Army. In addition, the first African-American to be ordained a minister in the Adventist Church attended PUC from 1883 to 1885.[ref]
</ref>

Notes

Further reading

| title = A Mountain, A Pickax, A College: Walter Utt's History of Pacific Union College
| author = Utt, Walter
| edition = Third
| origyear = 
| year = 1996
| publisher = Pacific Press Publishing Association
| location = Boise, ID
| isbn = 0-9650789-0-6
}}






