[[Aliiolani Hale]]

CATEGORIES: Hawaiian architecture, Government buildings on the National Register of Historic Places in Hawaii, Hawaii culture, Italian Renaissance Revival architecture in the United States, Government buildings completed in 1874, Buildings and structures in Honolulu, Hawaii, Visitor attractions in Honolulu, Hawaii, Historic district contributing properties in Hawaii, Historic American Buildings Survey in Hawaii

Alii.
Located in the building's courtyard is the famed gold-leaf statue of Kamehameha the Great.

Establishment and monarchy period

The Aliiōlani" was one of the given names of Kamehameha V.
Although the building was designed to be a palace, Kamehameha V realized that the Hawaiian government desperately needed a government building. At that time, the several buildings in Honolulu used by the government were very small and cramped, clearly inadequate for the growing Hawaiian government. Thus, when Kamehameha V ordered construction of Aliiōlani Hale, he commissioned it as a government office building instead of a palace.
Kamehameha V laid the cornerstone for the building on February 19, 1872. He died before the building was completed, and it was dedicated in 1874 by one of his successors, King David Kalākaua. At the time, Hawaiian media criticized the building's extravagant design, suggesting that the building be converted into a palace as originally designed.
Until 1893, the building held most of the executive departments of the Hawaiian government as well as the Hawaiian legislature and courts.

Overthrow of the Hawaiian monarchy

It was from Aliuokalani by public proclamation.
After the establishment of the Hawaiian provisional government in 1893 and the Republic of Hawaiiolani Hale became primarily a judicial building.

Aliiōlani Hale since 1900

thumb|left|Kamehameha Statue The growing size of Hawaii became a United States territory in 1900. In 1911, the building was extensively renovated to help solve these space problems. The entire interior of the building was gutted and rebuilt, giving the building's interior a completely new floorplan. Since the building was originally designed to be a palace, its floorplan was not adequate for its later usage as a judicial building. The new layout of the building fixed this problem.
The size of the territorial government continued to grow. In the 1940s, a new wing was added to the building to help alleviate the growing problem of overcrowding. The architects who designed the new wing tried to blend it in with the original building that dated back to the 1870s.
Over the next many decades, most of the state judiciary functions moved out of Ali
In December 2005, a capsule buried by Kamehameha V when he laid the cornerstone was located, at the direction of the Joint POW/MIA Accounting Command, by Professor Larry Connors of the University of Denver using ground penetrating radar. The capsule contained photos of royal families and the constitution of the Hawaiian Kingdom, Hawaiian postage stamps, Hawaiian and foreign coinage, newspapers, a calendar and books.  The capsule was located to protect it during future renovations, and not retrieved due to concerns of damaging the structure of the building itself.
Copper thieves stripped several copper downspouts from the building in 2006.
In the 2010 version of Hawaii Five-0, Aliiōlani Hale is depicted as the headquarters for the Five-0 task force with exterior shots of the building being used throughout the series. 
Alio Church, Territorial Building, and Washington Place.

King Kamehameha V Judiciary History Center

The King Kamehameha V Judiciary History Center, located in Ali








