[[Julian Glover]]

CATEGORIES: 1935 births, Male actors from London, English male film actors, English male stage actors, English male television actors, Living people, National Youth Theatre members, People educated at Bristol Grammar School, People from Hampstead, Royal Shakespeare Company members, People educated at Alleyn's School, Alumni of the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, 20th-century English male actors, 21st-century English male actors

Julian Wyatt Glover  (born 27 March 1935) is an English actor whose film roles have included a wide range of characters, including General Maximilian Veers in Star Wars Episode V: The Empire Strikes Back, the James Bond villain Aristotle Kristatos in For Your Eyes Only, Walter Donovan in Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade and Brian Harcourt-Smith in The Fourth Protocol, among dozens of others. More recently, in January 2013, he has appeared as General Beauvilliers in the BBC drama, Spies of Warsaw and he has played the recurring role of Grand Maester Pycelle on HBO's Game of Thrones since 2011.

Personal life

Glover was born in Hampstead, London, the son of Honor Ellen Morgan (née Wyatt), a BBC journalist and a close friend of novelist Barbara Pym, and Claude Gordon Glover, a BBC radio producer. Glover has been twice married to actresses: Eileen Atkins and Isla Blair, with whom he has a son, actor Jamie Glover.

Career

Glover attended Bristol Grammar Schooland also Alleyn's School in Dulwich, London. He then trained at the National Youth Theatre and performed with the Royal Shakespeare Company. In the early 1950s, he appeared in several shows at Unity Theatre, London before regularly appearing in British television series during the 1960s and 1970s such as The Avengers, The Saint, Strange Report and Blake's 7.
In 1967, Glover featured as Professor Quatermass' nemesis Colonel Breen in the Hammer Films production of Quatermass and the Pit, an adaptation of Nigel Kneale's 1950s BBC TV original. He has also appeared twice in Doctor Who: as Richard the Lionheart in the 1965 serial The Crusade; and, in 1979, as the villain Scaroth, last of the Jagaroth, in one of the original run's most popular serials, City of Death. Glover later recorded DVD commentaries for the The Crusade episode "The Wheel of Fortune" (from the Lost in Time DVD set) and for City of Death.
In the 1980s, Glover made some of his most notable appearances, such as the Imperial General Maximilian Veers in Star Wars Episode V: The Empire Strikes Back (1980), the ruthless Greek villain Aristotle Kristatos in the James Bond film For Your Eyes Only (1981) and the deceptive American Nazi Walter Donavan in Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade (1989). On television, he played the leading role of Sir Martin Lacey in the BBC English Civil War drama series By the Sword Divided., and played the guest role of surgeon Arnold Richardson in a 1989 episode of the BBC medical drama Casualty (he made a second guest appearance as a different character in 2011, and also appeared as a different character again in the sister series Holby City in 2000).
In the 2002 film version of Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets, Glover voiced the giant spider Aragog.
Glover has been associated with the Anglo-Saxon epic poem Beowulf since the 1980s, delivering various forms of staged interpretation. Taking the role of an Anglo-Saxon gleeman or traveller poet, he delivers an abridged version of the tale while stood around a mead hall hearth. This Old English text, set in the dark Nordic–Germanic world of the Geats, examines Anglo-Saxon concepts of honour and comitatus. The performance is interspersed with Glover rendering selected passages in the original Old English. This adaptation has been shown in documentaries on both the English language and Anglo-Saxon England. It was shown in Michael Wood's documentary Beowulf, broadcast during the BBC Poetry Season on BBC Four and BBC Two in 2009.
Glover recently In the short film Battle for Britain (2010), Glover played a 101-year-old Polish veteran Royal Air Force pilot.Battle for Britain – Film
Since 2011, Glover has portrayed the character of Grand Maester Pycelle in HBO's Game of Thrones, the television adaptation of the first three volumes of George R. R. Martin's fantasy novel series A Song of Ice and Fire.
Glover is an Associate Member of the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art.
Glover played the role of General Beauvilliers in the BBC Four drama series The Spies of Warsaw in 2013.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b01psbj3

Awards

He was awarded the Laurence Olivier Award in 1993 (1992 season) for Best Supporting Actor for Henry V at the Royal Shakespeare Company.
In the Queen's Birthday Honours 2013 Glover was appointed a Commander of The Most Excellent Order of the British Empire for services to drama.

Filmography






