[[A Clash of Kings]]

CATEGORIES: 1998 novels, A Song of Ice and Fire books, Novels by George R. R. Martin, American fantasy novels, 1990s fantasy novels

A Clash of Kings is the second novel in A Song of Ice and Fire, an epic fantasy series by American author George R. R. Martin expected to consist of seven volumes. It was first published on 16 November 1998 in the United Kingdom, although the first United States edition did not follow until March 1999. Like its predecessor, A Game of Thrones, it won the Locus Award (in 1999) for Best Novel and was nominated for the Nebula Award (also in 1999) for best novel. In May 2005 Meisha Merlin released a limited edition of the novel, fully illustrated by John Howe.
The novel has been adapted for television by HBO as the second season of the TV series Game of Thrones.
A Clash of Kings is also the name of the first expansion to the Game of Thrones board game.

Plot summary

A Clash of Kings depicts the Seven Kingdoms of Westeros in civil war, while the Night's Watch mounts a reconnaissance to investigate the mysterious people known as wildlings. Meanwhile Daenerys Targaryen continues her plan to reconquer the Seven Kingdoms.

In the Seven Kingdoms

Joffrey Baratheon (Lannister), Renly Baratheon, and Stannis Baratheon all claim the throne of Westeros. Robb Stark is declared 'King in the North' while Balon Greyjoy declares himself king of the Iron Islands and attacks the western coast of the North. In command of the Stark stronghold of Winterfell, Robb's younger brother Bran Stark finds two new friends in Jojen and Meera Reed.
Stannis Baratheon declares himself King of Westeros, encouraged by Melisandre of Asshai, a priestess who believes Stannis the reincarnation of Azor Ahai, a messianic figure of her faith. The war is dubbed the War of the Five Kings. Stannis's younger brother, Renly, has also laid claim to the throne. Catelyn Stark meets Renly and Stannis to discuss a possible alliance against the Lannisters. The meeting fails, and a shadow created by Melisandre and Stannis kills Renly in the presence of Brienne of Tarth and Catelyn. The two women are incriminated in Renly's murder and most of Renly's supporters defect to Stannis, excepting the Tyrells. Renly's stronghold also falls when Melisandre's second shadow kills its castellan, Cortnay Penrose.
Tyrion Lannister arrives at King's Landing as acting Hand of the King, the closest adviser to the monarch Joffrey. Whilst intriguing against Joffrey's mother Cersei, Tyrion improves the defenses of the city and sends Littlefinger to negotiate with the Tyrells, gaining that house's support when Lord Mace Tyrell agrees to wed his daughter Margaery to Joffrey, despite Margaery's earlier marriage to the deceased Renly and despite Joffrey's earlier pledge to wed Sansa Stark. Tyrion also forges an alliance with House Martell when he marries Joffrey's sister Princess Myrcella to Trystane Martell.
To conquer the North and to impress his father Balon, Theon Greyjoy, a former ward of the Starks and close friend of Robb, captures Winterfell, taking Bran and Rickon captive; but Bran and Rickon disappear in the night, and Theon is unable to trace them. Rather than admit his failure, Theon murders two anonymous peasant boys similar in size to Bran and Rickon and mutilates their faces to enhance the resemblance. Believing this ruse, Stark supporters besiege the castle, joined by a force from House Bolton. Theon having conspired with Bolton's bastard, Ramsay Snow, the Bolton soldiers turn on the besiegers and Theon opens the gates to the victorious Boltons, whereupon they destroy Winterfell. Osha, a captured wildling turned castle servant, agrees to take Rickon to safety, while Bran, accompanied by Meera, Jojen, and his simpleton manservant Hodor, travels north. Robb Stark wins several victories against the Lannisters in their home territory. Tywin Lannister advances against him, but receiving news that King's Landing is threatened, withdraws.
Arya Stark, posing as a boy named 'Arry', travels with new recruits for the Night's Watch. They are captured and taken to Lannister-held Harrenhal, where Arya poses as a serving girl. When Jaqen H'ghar offers to repay Arya for saving himself and his two companions by killing three men of her choice, Arya selects two Lannister bannermen and threatens to name Jaqen himself unless he releases the Stark supporters, who overtake the castle. His debt repaid, Jaqen gives Arya a bronze coin and a strange phrase, "Valar Morghulis", to be used in asking help from his compatriots. When Lord Roose Bolton occupies Harrenhal, Arya becomes his cup bearer, but soon escapes.
Stannis Baratheon's army reaches King's Landing and launches assaults by both land and sea. Under Tyrion's command, Joffrey's forces use "wildfire" (similar to Greek Fire) to ignite the bay and raise a massive chain across its mouth to prevent Stannis's fleet from retreating. Stannis's attack ultimately fails when Tywin Lannister leads his army (and the remaining forces of Highgarden under Mace Tyrell) to the aid of King's Landing. Stannis's fate is left uncertain. During the defense of the castle, Tyrion is attacked by one of Joffrey's guard, and rescued by his squire, Podrick Payne.

On the Wall

A scouting party from the Night's Watch learn that the wildlings are uniting under 'King-beyond-the-Wall' Mance Rayder. The Watch then continue to an ancient hill-top fortress known as the Fist of the First Men, whence Jeor Mormont sends Jon Snow and Qhorin Halfhand with others to the Skirling Pass, where they are hunted by wildling warriors. Facing certain defeat, Halfhand commands Snow to infiltrate the wildlings and learn their plans. They are captured by wildlings who demand Jon fight Qhorin to join them. Jon kills Qhorin with the aid of his direwolf, Ghost, and learns that Mance Rayder is advancing on the Wall with thirty-thousand wildlings, giants, and mammoths.

In the East

Daenerys Targaryen travels east, accompanied by the knight Jorah Mormont, her remaining followers, and three newborn dragons. Scouts find a safe route to the city of Qarth, where her dragons make Daenerys notorious. Xaro Xhoan Daxos, the leader of the Thirteen, a prominent group of traders in Qarth, initially befriends the outsiders; but Daenerys cannot secure aid in claiming the throne of Westeros, because she refuses to give away any of her dragons. As a last resort, Daenerys seeks counsel from the warlocks of Qarth, who show Daenerys many confusing visions and threaten her life, whereupon Daenerys's dragon 'Drogon' burns down the warlocks' 'House of the Undying'.  An attempt to assassinate Daenerys is thwarted by a fat warrior named Strong Belwas and his squire Arstan Whitebeard: agents of Daenerys's ally Illyrio Mopatis, come to escort her back to Pentos.

Characters

The tale is told through the eyes of 9 recurring POV characters plus one prologue POV character:

Editions

Foreign Language Editions

Television adaptation

A Clash of Kings has been adapted for television by HBO as the second season of its successful adaptation of A Song of Ice and Fire. Filming began July 2011, and the first episode of season 2 of Game of Thrones aired on April 1, 2012.

Reception

As with its predecessor, A Clash of Kings was positively received by critics. Dorman Shindler of The Dallas Morning News described it as "one of the best works in this particular subgenre", praising "the richness of this invented world and its cultures ... that lends Mr. Martin's novels the feeling of medieval history rather than fiction."

Awards and nominations




