[[Jim McKay]]

CATEGORIES: 1921 births, 2008 deaths, American Football League announcers, American horse racing announcers, American journalists, American military personnel of World War II, American people of Irish descent, American television sports anchors, American television sports announcers, Association football commentators, Baltimore, Maryland television anchors, Baseball announcers, Eclipse Award winners, Figure skating commentators, Golf writers and broadcasters, Loyola University Maryland alumni, Motorsport announcers, National Basketball Association broadcasters, National Football League announcers, New York Giants broadcasters, Peabody Award winners, People from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Sports Emmy Award winners, Tennis commentators, United States Navy officers, Wide World of Sports (U.S. TV series), North American Soccer League (1968–84) commentators, College football announcers, Olympic Games broadcasters, Gymnastics broadcasters, Track and field broadcasters, American Roman Catholics, Guggenheim Fellows, Television Hall of Fame inductees

James Kenneth McManus (September 24, 1921 – June 7, 2008), better known by his professional name of Jim McKay, was an American television sports journalist.
McKay is best known for hosting ABC's Wide World of Sports (1961–1998). His introduction for that program has passed into American pop culture. He is also known for television coverage of 12 Olympic Games, and is universally respected for his memorable reporting on the Munich massacre at the 1972 Summer Olympics.
McKay covered a wide variety of special events, including horse races such as the Kentucky Derby, golf events such as the British Open, and the Indianapolis 500. McKay's son, Sean McManus, a protégé of Roone Arledge, is president of CBS Sports and News divisions.

Biography

Early life

McKay was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and raised in the Overbrook section of the city in an Irish American Roman Catholic family. He attended Our Lady of Lourdes Grade School and Saint Joseph's Preparatory School. At the age of 14 his family moved to Baltimore, Maryland, where he attended Loyola Blakefield high school. He received a bachelor's degree from Loyola College in Maryland in 1943. During World War II, he served in the United States Navy as the captain of a minesweeper.

Television

In 1947, McKay gave up his job as a reporter for the Baltimore Sun newspapers to join that same organization's new TV station WMAR-TV. His was the first voice ever heard on television in Baltimore, and he remained with the station until joining CBS in New York in 1950 as host of a variety show, called The Real McKay, which necessitated the changing of his on-air surname. Through the 1950s, sports commentary became more and more his primary assignment for CBS. In 1956-57 McKay teamed with Chris Schenkel to call CBS telecasts of New York Giants football. He was originally tabbed to be the lead broadcaster of the network's coverage of the 1960 Winter Olympics, but had to be replaced by Walter Cronkite after suffering a mental breakdown. McKay recovered in time to host the 1960 Summer Olympics from the CBS Television studio in Grand Central Terminal. He had a six-episode stint as host of the game show Make the Connection on NBC in 1955.
He moved on to ABC and was the host of ABC's influential Wide World of Sports for 37 years.
While covering the Munich massacre at the 1972 Summer Olympics for ABC, McKay took on the job of reporting the events live on his only scheduled day off during the Games, substituting for Chris Schenkel.
Although McKay received numerous accolades for his reporting of the Munich hostage crisis (including two Emmy Awards, one for sports and one for news reporting), he stated in a 2003 HBO documentary about his life and career that he was most proud of a telegram he received from Walter Cronkite praising his work he received the day after the massacre.
In 1994, he was the studio host for the FIFA World Cup coverage, the first ever held on American soil. McKay also covered the 2006 FIFA World Cup for ABC. In 2002, ABC "loaned" McKay to NBC to serve as a special correspondent during the Winter Olympic Games in Salt Lake City. In 2003, HBO released a documentary by McKay called Jim McKay: My World in My Words, tracing his career. This film outlines McKay's personal and professional accomplishments.

Maryland horse racing

McKay founded Maryland Million Day, a series of twelve races designed to promote Maryland's horse breeding industry. The day-long program has grown to become a major racing event in the state of Maryland, second only to the Preakness Stakes day at Pimlico Race Course. It has spawned more than twenty other similar events at U.S. race tracks such as the Sunshine Millions.

Death

McKay died on June 7, 2008 from natural causes at the age of 86. He was survived by his wife Margaret, son Sean, and daughter Mary Guba.  McKay, a horse racing enthusiast who also covered Triple Crown races for ABC Sports, died on the same day as the running of the Belmont Stakes.

Honors






