[[Nori]]

CATEGORIES: Edible algae, Japanese cuisine, Japanese cuisine terms, Red algae, Sea vegetables

 though the popularity of sushi in the United States  means that the United States is often an exception to this, either referring to the product as "nori" as the Japanese do, or simply as seaweed. Finished products are made by a shredding and rack-drying process that resembles papermaking.

History

Originally, the term nori was generic and referred to seaweeds including hijiki.
The word "nori" first appeared in an English-language publication in C. P. Thunberg's Trav., published in 1796. It was used in conjugation as "Awa nori", probably referring to what is now called aonori.
The word nori started to be used widely in the United States, and the product (imported in dry form from Japan) became widely available at natural food stores and Asian-American grocery stores in the 1960s due to the influence of the macrobiotic movement, and in the 1970s with the growing number of sushi bars and Japanese restaurants.
In one study by Jan-Hendrik Hehemann, subjects of Japanese descent have been shown to be able to digest the polysaccharide of the seaweed, after gut microbes developed the enzyme from marine bacteria. Gut microbes from the North American subjects lacked these enzymes.

Production

Production and processing of nori is an advanced form of agriculture. The biology of Porphyra, although complicated, is well understood, and this knowledge is used to control the production process. Farming takes place in the sea where the Porphyra plants grow attached to nets suspended at the sea surface and where the farmers operate from boats. The plants grow rapidly, requiring about 45 days from "seeding" until the first harvest. Multiple harvests can be taken from a single seeding, typically at about ten-day intervals. Harvesting is accomplished using mechanical harvesters of a variety of configurations. Processing of raw product is mostly accomplished by highly automated machines that accurately duplicate traditional manual processing steps, but with much improved efficiency and consistency. The final product is a paper-thin, black, dried sheet of approximately  in weight.
Several grades of nori are available in the United States.  The most common, and least expensive, grades are imported from China, costing about six cents per sheet.  At the high end, ranging up to 90 cents per sheet, are "delicate shin-nori" (nori from the first of the year's several harvests) cultivated in Ariake Sea, off the island of Kyushu in Japan".
In Japan, over 

Use

Nori is commonly used as a wrap for sushi and onigiri.  It is also a garnish or flavoring in noodle preparations and soups. It is most typically toasted prior to consumption (yaki-nori). A common secondary product is toasted and flavored nori (ajitsuke-nori), in which a flavoring mixture (variable, but typically soy sauce, sugar, sake, mirin, and seasonings) is applied in combination with the toasting process.).
Nori is sometimes used as a form of food decoration.
A related product, prepared from the unrelated green algae Monostroma and Enteromorpha, is called aonori ( literally blue/green nori) and is used like herbs on everyday meals, such as okonomiyaki and yakisoba.
Since nori sheets easily absorb water from the air and degrade, a desiccant is indispensable when storing it.

Nutrition

Nori is about one-third protein and one-third dietary fiber, and contains high proportions of iodine, vitamins A, B, and K, and iron.
Porphyra yezonsi has been found to contain sufficient vitamin B








