[[Alii]]

CATEGORIES: Hawaiiana, Hawaii culture, Hawaiian nobility, Noble titles, Samoan words and phrases, Samoan society, Polynesian culture, Polynesian titles

Ali in ancient Hawaii and the Samoa Islands. 
A similar word with the same concept is found in other Polynesian societies. In the Cook Islands, an ariki is a high chief and the House of Ariki is a parliamentary house (with very limited power). In New Zealand a Māori ariki held a rank of nobility and the Maori monarch held the title Te Arikinui (Great Chief) similar to Ke Alii Nui in Hawaiian. In Tokelau, the term aliki denotes a chief, on Easter Island a noble was ariki, in Gambier Islands akariki, and in  Tahiti the term is ari'i.
In Samoa, ali'i is a chiefly rank in the fa'amatai system which lies at the heart of the culture's socio-political organisation and similar to the traditional system in Hawaii.

Hawaiian ali'i

In ancient Hawaiian society, ali'i was a hereditary chiefly or noble rank (social class or caste).āinana (commoners).
Most common translations are "Chief" and "High Chief", although lord and lady were sometimes considered equivalent English titles. Proposals to use prince and princess have not received broad support.

Description

All the alii Hawaiian dynasties of the several islands were interrelated, and apparently forbidden to intermarry with other classes.
Alii, in a coup arranged by filibusters.
Ali) and must claim parentage at least of a mother of the highest rank.
Alii is also a term that means hello in Palauan Language.

Titles

Alii-o-Name of District".
MōAimoku of Maui. Later, the title was used for all kings of the Hawaiian Islands and the Hawaiian monarchs.
Kaukaualii. During the monarchy these chiefs served as the primary political figures in the Hawaiian legislature and the king's Privy Council.
Ranks of the Alii Wohi who were product of marriage of close relatives other than siblings; one famous Wohi chief being Kamehameha I. Last came the inferior chiefs.

Feudal social organization

Internecine warfare between heirs of rulers was common in ancient Hawaii. Warfare between chiefs was also common.
Commoner or lesser Alii, not for pay, but instead, due to their duty to allegiance to the nation.
The caste organization facilitated a feudal system that resembles other feudal societies, for example the feudal systems found in Europe circa 1000 AD, in feudal Japan, Ethiopia, and so on.
Higher alii.
Both the reigning dynasties of the united Kingdom of Hawaii, they have later, posthumously, been popularly labeled (mostly erroneously) princesses and princes, although only a limited number of royal relatives ever received the princely title from the monarch.






