[[Nu metal]]

CATEGORIES: Nu metal, 1990s in music, 2000s in music, Alternative metal, Fusion music genres, Heavy metal

Nu metal (also known as nü-metal It is classed as part of alternative metal.

Predecessors

Alternative metal, funk metal, rap metal and industrial metal bands of the 1980s and 1990s including Faith No More, Mr. Bungle, Red Hot Chili Peppers, Jane's Addiction, Pantera, Tool, Primus, Rage Against the Machine, Helmet, Nine Inch Nails and Ministry have been identified as laying groundwork for the development of nu metal, such as combining aggressive riffs with pop structures and drawing influence from a variety of genres within and outside of heavy metal music. 98) - "... These reissues benefit from keen remastering, making it even more obvious that primus' crunch has influenced legions of nu-metal soldiers... "
[/ref]
Groove metal and thrash metal bands of the same era such as Pantera, Sepultura, Metallica and Anthrax have also been cited as influential to nu metal."MTVNews."  MTV. Retrieved 31 October 2012.

Characteristics

Bands associated with nu metal have derived influence from a variety of diverse styles, including electronic music, funk, glam metal, gothic rock, hardcore punk, hip hop, New Wave music, industrial metal, jazz, post-punk, symphonic rock and synthpop. Nu metal also derives influences from multiple sub-genres of heavy metal including rap metal, funk metal, alternative metal and thrash metal.
Nu metal music is largely syncopated and based on guitar riffs. Mid-song bridges and a general lack of guitar solos contrasts it with other genres that are part of heavy metal, in which guitar solos play a major role. Another contrast with other metal genres is its emphasis on rhythm, rather than complexity or mood, tending towards groove metal in rhythm. Nu metal bassists and drummers often draw influence from funk and hip hop break beats, respectively, helping add to the rhythmic nature of the genre. Similarities with many heavy metal sub-genres include its use of common time, distorted guitars, power chords and note structures primarily revolving around Dorian, Aeolian or Phrygian modes. thumb|right|Nu metal band Slipknot, who are known for their use of costumes and masks, performing in Buenos Aires in 2005
Many nu metal bands use seven-string guitars (which are sometimes downtuned to increase heaviness) over traditional six-string guitars. This results in bass guitarists using five-string and six string instruments. DJs are also sometimes used for additional rhythmic instrumentation such as music sampling, turntable scratching and electronic backgrounds.
Nu metal is also sometimes noted for participation of women in the genre in contrast to some other metal genres, including bands such as Coal Chamber,DEZ FAFARA says COAL CHAMBER Is 'Not Even Discussing' Any Other Tours After SOUNDWAVE Blabbermouth. Otep and the all-female band Kittie.
Nu metal vocal styles range between singing, rapping, screaming and death growling, sometimes using multiple of these styles within one song. The lyrics of many nu metal bands focus on pain and personal alienation, similar to that of grunge, rather than the themes of other metal subgenres. Nu metal uses the traditional pop structure of verses, choruses and bridges, contrasting it with other metal genres such as thrash and death metal. "5.1". The Thematical and Stylistic Evolution of Heavy Metal Lyrics and Imagery From the 70s to Present Day. p. 80. "Also, the genre combined a low tuned guitar sound and many other thrash, industrial and death metal traits within a structure which was much more traditional and akin to Pop music (e.g. intro-verse-chorus-verse-chorus-bridge-chorus-outro)."
Trevor Baker of The Guardian wrote "Bands such as Linkin Park, Korn and even the much reviled Limp Bizkit also, incidentally, did far more to break down the artificial barriers between "urban music" and rock than any of their more critically acceptable counterparts. Their concerts also drew huge numbers of women which is much more than you could say for any old-metal band."Why it's worth celebrating nu-metal's anniversary www.co.uk. Nu metal fashion can include baggy shirts, sports jerseys and jackets, basketball singlets and shorts, hoodies, cargo pants, sweatpants, dreadlocks, spiky hair, crew cuts, body piercings, tattoos, long hair, jumpsuits and sweatsuits.com.

History

Early development (early-mid 1990s)

The origins of the term are often attributed to the work of producer Ross Robinson, sometimes called "The Godfather of Nu Metal". Many of the first nu metal bands came from California, and Deftones. Other influential bands are Staind from Massachusetts, Limp Bizkit from Florida,Grierson, Tim. "Alternative Metal - What Is Alternative Metal - Alt-Metal History". About. The New York Times Company. Retrieved January 8, 2012. and Slipknot from Iowa. The aggressive riffs of Korn, the rapping of Limp Bizkit, and the acoustic ballads of Staind created the sonic template for nu metal.
In 1994, Korn's debut single "Blind"'s music video received airplay on MTV, exposing nu metal to a wider audience in a time when grunge dominated. Nu metal continued to achieve recognition through MTV and Ozzy Osbourne's 1995 introduction of Ozzfest, which led the media to talk of a resurgence of heavy metal. 324 Ozzfest was integral to launching the careers of several nu metal bands, including Limp Bizkit in 1998. 326 The band only had experienced moderate fame, as their debut album peaked at number 72 on the Billboard 200. 

Mainstream popularity (late 1990s and early 2000s)

In 1997, nu metal was beginning to rise in popularity when Korn released their single, "A.D.I.D.A.S." off their album Life is Peachy. Life is Peachy peaked at number 3 on the Billboard 200 while the song A.D.I.D.A.S peaked at number 13 on the Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles.
1998 is generally recognized as the year nu metal broke into the mainstream, with Korn's third album, Follow the Leader, which peaked at number 1 on the Billboard 200 Their Issues album also peaked at number 1 on the Billboard 200 and the band had Billboard Hot 100 singles such as Falling Away From Me.
Deftones, an alternative metal band from California, released their album Around the Fur which peaked at #29 on The Billboard 200, remaining there for seventeen weeks and sold 43,000 copies in its first week of release. Deftones: Running on Pure Passion, Circus, May 1998.
The nu metal/alternative metal band Godsmack also broke into the mainstream success of nu metal with their 1998 self-titled album, especially their number 1 hit single, Whatever, which peaked at number 1 on many charts including the Modern Rock Tracks chart as well as peaking number 2 on the Top 40 Mainstream chart and number 4 on the Top 40 Tracks. The album also peaked at number 9 on the Billboard 200. Worldwide the album sold more than 2.5 million units.
Powerman 5000, a nu metal/industrial metal band became very popular in 1999 with their album Tonight the Stars Revolt! which went platinum in the United States.
Orgy also became extremely popular in 1999 and 2000 with albums like Candyass, which became was certified platinum by the RIAA
In May 1999, nu metal musician Kid Rock had sales for his Devil Without a Cause album taking off with the third single "Bawitdaba" and by April 1999, where Devil Without a Cause had achieved a gold disc. The following month, Devil Without a Cause, as he predicted, went platinum.
In 1999, Slipknot, a nu metal band from Iowa, emerged with an extremely heavy sound, releasing their debut album which has gone on to sell over 2 million copies in the United States alone,Gold and Platinum database Recording Industry Association of America. with Rick Anderson of Allmusic writing "You thought Limp Bizkit was hard? They're the Osmonds. These guys are something else entirely."Slipknot album review Allmusic. Limp Bizkit's second album Significant Other, released in 1999, reached number 1 on the Billboard 200, selling 643,874 copies in its first week of release. In its second week, the album sold 335,000 copies.
Sevendust, a nu metal band from Atlanta, Georgia, released their second album Home in 1999 and it peaked at #19 on The Billboard 200 in September and remained there for fourteen weeks and #16 on the Top Internet Albums chart.
In 1999, the nu metal band Staind's album Dysfunction had popular singles such as Mudshovel which reached number 14 on the Modern Rock ChartsBillboard. Kittie's debut album Spit debut was certified gold. That same year, Papa Roach's major label debut Infest, and Disturbed's The Sickness became platinum hits.B. Reesman, "Sustaining the success", Billboard, June 23, 2001, 113 (25), p. 25. The nu metal band Soulfly's Primitive album from 2000 sold over 226,569 copies in the early 2000s."Metal/Hard Rock Album Sales In The US As Reported By SoundScan - Apr. 30, 2002" at Roadrunner Records's blabbermouth. (Retrieved on August 20, 2008)
During the late 1990s and early 2000s, the nu metal band Incubus
In 2000, the nu metal band P.O.D.'s album The Fundamental Elements of Southtown went platinum

That same year, Slipknot released their second album Iowa which peaked at number 3 on the Billboard 200,Iowa-Slipknot Billboard going on to sell over a million copies in the United States,American album certifications -Slipknot_Iowa Recording Industry Association of America. If necessary, click Advanced, then click Format, then select Album, then click SEARCH critic John Mulvey proclaimed the album as the "absolute triumph of nu metal".
In 2002, critics began claiming that nu metal's mainstream popularity was declining,Grierson, Tim. "What Is Rap-Rock: A Brief History of Rap-Rock". About. The New York Times Company. Retrieved December 31, 2008.allmusic. In addition, Papa Roach's third album, Lovehatetragedy, failed to sell as much as its predecessor.Metal Meltdown - MTV
However, nu metal ended up having its popularity saved. Korn's Untouchables album peaked at number 2 on the Billboard 200 which lost to Eminem's album The Eminem Show.

Decline in popularity (mid-late 2000s)

By the mid-2000s, metalcore (a fusion of extreme metal and hardcore punk) was what the New Wave of American Heavy Metal scene had as the most popular sub-genre in metal of the time, in both the mainstream and within metal audiences. Despite the massive success of Linkin Park and Evanescence, nu metal had declined in popularity. Regarding his band's decline in popularity, Fred Durst said "Here's the deal: say in 2000, there were 35 million people who connected to this band. Twelve years later, lots of those people have moved on. We were a moment in time and it's over."The Day Nu metal Officially Died Pedestrian TV.
Many nu metal bands experimented with other genres and sounds. While Deftones and P.O.D retained several of their nu metal traits, they had overall moved on to a more alternative metal style, with their subsequent releases having eliminated rapping in almost all of their songs. Linkin Park's third studio album Minutes to Midnight, released in 2007, was noted for its complete departure from the band's signature nu metal sound.

2010s and possible revival

Despite the lesser radio play and popularity, some nu metal bands still gain critical and commercial success. Korn's 9th studio album Korn III: Remember Who You Are, sold 63,000 copies during its first week in the US, landing at number two on the Billboard 200. Also in 2011, Staind's self-titled album debuted at number 5 on the Billboard 200, with first sales week of 47,000 copies, making the fifth consecutive top-five album for the band. "Lady Antebellum 'Own' the Billboard 200 with Second No. 1 Album". billboard. January 16, 2012.
Evanescence's self-titled album debuted at number 1 on the Billboard 200 and other U.S charts and sold over 127.000 copies in the first week, and 284,000 copies to date. It also charted high globally and has received certifications in U.K, Canada and Australia as of 2012. On 2 December 2011, Korn released The Path of Totality selling 55,000 copies in its first week. Many cited this album as a new direction for nu metal, with the band taking influence from electronic music, most notably dubstep. Artists collaborating on the album included Skrillex, 12th Planet, Feed Me and Excision. The album received mostly positive reviews, winning a Golden Gods award for best album.The Nu-Metal Revival Continues: Static-X Are Touring Again metalbase.Fred Durst on Limp Bizkit's Comeback: 'We've Got to Own Who We Are' billboard.
Nu metal-influenced bands such as Emmure, Suicide Silence Other bands such as Dangerkids, From Ashes to New, and Of Mice & Men are dwelling within this genre as well. Some say that a new version of Nu Metal is coming called Nu Metalcore. My Ticket Home released Strangers Only on September 3 2013 which developed an Nu Metal sound away from their previous Hardcore sound. The band Issues released their self title album February 18, 2014, Of Mice & Men released Restoring Force January 27, 2014, these two album have sold dramatically well since its release date. Nu Metal bands Korn released their new album The Paradigm Shift October 8, 2013, Limp Bizkit is set to release their anticipated album Stampede of the Disco Elephants in the second quarter of 2014, Linkin Park is also making a comeback with their new album The Hunting Party which is set to release June 17, 2014.

Criticism

Nu metal is often controversial amongst fans of other metal genres, and the genres detractors have labeled nu metal derogatory terms such as "mallcore", "whinecore", "grunge for the zeros" and "sports-rock". 
Gregory Heaney of Allmusic has described the genre as "one of metal's more unfortunate pushes into the mainstream."
Some bands considered influential to nu metal have tried to distance themselves from the genre. Regarding his band's influence on nu metal, Faith No More and Mr. Bungle singer Mike Patton said "I feel no responsibility for that, it's their mothers' fault, not mine."
Deftones' frontman Chino Moreno began to criticize the genre, especially Korn's 2003 release Take a Look in the Mirror saying "As Korn go on, it's the same things — bad childhoods and mean moms. It gets too old after a while. How old is Jonathan? Thirty? How long has it been since he lived with his parents?"





Further reading




