[[Bauman Moscow State Technical University]]

CATEGORIES: Bauman Moscow State Technical University, Universities in Moscow, Educational institutions established in 1830, Education in the Soviet Union, Buildings and structures built in the Soviet Union, Technical universities and colleges, Engineering universities and colleges in Russia

The Bauman Moscow State Technical University, Bauman MSTU () is a public technical university located in Moscow, Russia.

History

The Bauman University was founded in 1763 by the Russian empress Catherine II as an Educational Imperial House. Bauman University is the oldest and largest Russian technical university offering B.S., M.S. and PhD degrees in various engineering fields and applied sciences. Bauman University is the second oldest educational institution in Moscow after Lomonosov Moscow State University (1755).
During the first half of the 20th century, Bauman University formed and founded more than 70 technical universities in the USSR.
In 1868 it was reorganised into the Imperial Moscow Technical School (IMTS) under the directorship of Victor Della-Vos. A key feature of the new institution was its educational system called the "Russian method",
It was also applied to other American technical universities.
From 1918 to 2010 more than 144,000 students graduated with different engineering degrees.  Most of them chose to become scientists or engineers in leading research centers, universities, private and government owned companies.

Bauman University today

Bauman University admits 18,000 students who follow a six year engineering course, the longest in Russia. Additionally, Bauman University enrolls roughly 1,000 PhD students. Bauman University annually grants 800 to 3,000 students free room and board in one of 13 university residences.
The admission process includes three exams on math, physics and Russian. The university accepts one in ten applicants, which means that there are more than 30000 applicants.  More than 2,600 of them pass through two years of preparation courses, another 2,000 follow studies in high schools partners of Bauman University.L.I. Volkevich, How not to make a mistake in admitting process of Bauman University  Participation in admission process requires a gage of original high school certificate which prevent applicants to take part in Lomonosov Moscow State University admission process at the same time.
The Bauman University is commonly regarded as one of Russia's most prestigious universities and has high entry requirements for its prospective students. The Bauman University is regularly ranked on the first place in official government and business press rating.[ref]
</ref><ref></ref>
The Bauman University has a National Research Center status, the financing of Bauman University is provided by a separate expense asset of Russian National Budget independently of Ministry of Education.edu.php?page_id=5&topic_id=5&sid=10230
Many Bauman University graduates are world-renowned: Sergei Korolev for the first satellite in the space and first man and woman in the space, Andrey Tupolev for the world first supersonic passenger plane, Nikolay Dollezhal for the world first civil nuclear plant, Vladimir Shukhov for the first method and the world first petrol cracking plant as well as for the first hyperboloid structures in architecture, Nikolay Zhukovsky for the foundation of aerodynamics and hydrodynamics sciences, Pavel Sukhoi for the foundation of Sukhoi Aerospace Design Bureau.
Some of the specialized departments of BMSTU are located outside Moscow in cities of Moscow Oblast: Krasnogorsk (Russian: Красногорск), Reutov (Russian: Реутов), Korolyov (Russian: Королёв).  There is also a largest branch of the University in Kaluga (Russian: Калуга).

Educational programs

The academic year in this university begins on 1 September, and is divided into two terms (semesters). Students take exams at the end of each semester. 
The course of study lasts 6 years without interrupt for engineer specialist degree. But over the last few years the Bauman University has continued to integrate with the Bologna Process. And today some students learn using two step educational system.  The first two years students study general engineering subjects. In the third year students begin to study specialized subjects. 
In this university theoretical subjects accompanied by practical training. Students begin to work at the University's well-equipped (Russian standard) laboratories and in senior years at various plants, design offices and research institutes of Russia.
The history of the Bauman MHTS (Moscow Higher Technical School) or presently the Bauman MSTU (Moscow State Technical University) dates back to 1830, when Emperor Nicholas I confirmed the "statute of the industrial school" to open in Moscow. Russia's developing industry needed skilled labor in many trades. So, the aim of the new school was to train skillful artisans with a solid theoretical background to improve and spread skills in various trades all over Russia. The training personnel of the school comprised graduates of the Moscow University who specialized in mathematics, mechanics, physics and chemistry. By 1868 the academic standards of the school were so high that it was reorganized into a special institution of higher learning (Imperial Moscow Technical School or IMTS). Its major task now was to train mechanics in construction, engineering and manufacturing.
The IMTS was financially supported by the Government and industrialists. Its management was democratic. Its teaching staff boasted of many talented scientists who maintained contacts with the West. All these circumstances helped the School to achieve outstanding successes in manufacturing processes and practices in the chemical, food and textile industries, metal and wood processing, and structural mechanics. During the 1876 Exhibition in Philadelphia the practically-minded Americans highly appreciated and admired the methods used by the School, recognizing them as an original "Russian system" of training engineers. In 1876, Dr. Wrinkle, President of the Boston Institute of Technology, writes to V.K..., and that no other system will hence be used in America.
Thus, the Moscow Higher Technical School joined the ranks of "leading polytechnical schools in Europe".
The late 19th century witnessed quickening progress in electrical engineering, aeromechanics, and the power engineering industry. In 1918, the MHTS organized several research institutes, including TSAGI (Central Aerodynamics and Hydrodynamics Institute), which eventually developed into independent structures, separating from their parent. The quick industrial expansion of the country called for new training facilities on other fields of science and technology. In 1930, the MHTS began to branch out into many new institutions of higher learning: the Moscow Aviation Institute, the Moscow Power Engineering Institute, the Military Chemical Academy, the Textile Institute, and the Moscow Civil Engineering Institute.
The MHTS continued to specialize in training engineers for the machine-building and instrumentation industries.
In 1938, the MHTS opened new departments of defense profile: armoured vehicles and tanks, artillery, and ammunition. In 1948, a department of rocketry was added.
The following famous scientists and specialists have graduated our school: Academician A.N.P.A.I.A.
Our School is distinguished for high-level scientific and engineering training of students, extensive relations with industries, good traditions, and high professional and moral requirements which both the professors and students feel obliged to meet and maintain.
In 1989, the MHTS was conferred a new name: the Bauman Moscow State Technical University (Bauman MSTU).

Departments

Special faculties

Famous faculty and alumni

Notes and references




