[[Asian Football Confederation]]

CATEGORIES: Asian Football Confederation, Association football governing bodies in Asia, Articles which contain graphical timelines, Organisations based in Kuala Lumpur

The Asian Football Confederation (AFC) is the governing body of association football in Asia. It has 47 member countries, mostly located on the Asian continent. All the transcontinental countries with territory in both Europe and Asia are members of UEFA (Azerbaijan, Armenia, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Russia and Turkey). Israel is also a UEFA member even though it lies entirely in Asia. 
On the other hand, Australia, formerly in the OFC, has been in the AFC since 2006, and the Oceanian island of Guam, a territory of the United States, is also a member of AFC.
One of FIFA's six continental confederations, the AFC was formed officially on 8 May 1954 in Manila, Philippines, on the sidelines of the second Asian Games. The 12 founder members were Afghanistan, Burma (Myanmar), Chinese Taipei, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Korea Republic, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, and Vietnam. The main headquarters is located in Bukit Jalil, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. The current president is Salman Bin Ibrahim Al-Khalifa of Bahrain.

Members

The AFC has 46 member associations split into four regions. Below shows the member national associations of the regional federations.

1: Quasi-member & associate AFC member  
2: Palau presented a candidacy in 2008,  

Former members

Competitions

The AFC runs the Asian Cup, a competition for the national football teams of Asia held every four years, as well as the Asian World Cup Qualifying Tournament and the AFC Challenge Cup.
It also runs the Asian Olympics qualifying tournament.
The AFC also runs three levels of annual international club competitions. The most prestigious (and oldest of the current AFC club competitions) is the AFC Champions League tournament, based on the UEFA Champions League, formed in 2002/03 with the amalgamation of the Asian Champions Cup and the Asian Cup Winners Cup. (An Asian Super Cup competition between the winners of these two major tournaments ended with the birth of the AFC Champions League.) The other competitions branched off this in 2004 when the 'Vision Asia' blueprint for development was launched. This led to the top fourteen AFC nations, the 'mature nations', sending their best teams to the AFC Champions League. The next 14 nations, the 'developing nations' qualify to send their teams to the AFC Cup.
The rest of the AFC-affiliated countries, the 'emerging nations' send their teams to the AFC President's Cup. The teams which qualify from each country are usually the champions and the cup winners. Currently there is no promotion and relegation between the different levels of nations.
There are 12 AFC Nations that play in the UAFA organised Arab Nations Cup, namely: Bahrain, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Qatar, Oman, Palestine, Saudi Arabia, Syria, United Arab Emirates, and Yemen.

Regional tournaments

Current champions

Women's football in Asia

The Asian Ladies Football Confederation (ALFC) is the section of the AFC who manage women's football in Asia.  The group was independently founded in April 1968 in a meeting involving Taiwan, Hong Kong, Malaysia and Singapore. In 1986 the ALFC merged with the AFC.asiansportsnet.

Sponsors

The following are the sponsors of AFC (named "AFC Partners"):

Awards

AFC Footballer of the Year

The Asian Footballer of the Year award is presented to the best football player from Asia. Officially awarded since 1994, its official name is Asian Football Confederation's Sanyo Player of the Year Award. Prior to 1994 it was awarded on an unofficial basis; the winners from 1988 to 1991 were chosen by IFFHS.

AFC International Footballer of the Year

AFC Foreign Player of the Year

AFC Women's Footballer of the Year

AFC Young Footballer of the Year

The Asian Young Footballer of the Year award is presented to the best young football player from Asia. Officially awarded since 1995 with the first award being given to Omani player, Mohammed Al-Kathiri.

AFC Coach of the Year

AFC National Team of the Year

Summer Olympics

Men

Women

Notes

FIFA World Cup

Men

Women

Notes

FIFA Confederations Cup

Notes

Rankings

Men's National Team

Rankings are calculated by FIFA.

ImageSize = width:150 height:1200 
PlotArea = left:40 right:0 bottom:5 top:10
DateFormat = dd/mm/yyyy
Period = from:01/01/2000 till:08/05/2014
ScaleMajor = unit:year increment:1 start:2000
TimeAxis = orientation:vertical format:yyyy
Colors =
  id:KSA         value:green
  id:IRN         value:white
  id:JPN         value:blue
  id:AUS         value:yellow  
  id:KOR         value:red
PlotData= 
  bar:Leaders width:25 mark:(line,black) align:left fontsize:S
