[[Ciudad Bolívar]]

CATEGORIES: 1595 establishments, Ciudad Bolívar, Cities in Bolívar (state)



Ciudad Bolívar ( 
Ciudad Bolívar has a well-preserved historic center; a cathedral and other original colonial buildings surround the Plaza Bolívar. Ciudad Bolívar lies at a spot where the Orinoco River narrows to about  in width, and is the site of the first bridge across the river. The city is a major riverport for the eastern regions of Venezuela.  The city is home to the Jesús Soto Museum of Modern Art, designed by Venezuelan architect Carlos Raúl Villanueva and named after Jesús Rafael Soto, an artist native to the city. The museum opened in 1973.

Law and government

Ciudad Bolívar's municipal government is led by the mayor. Its local legislature is the Municipal Council, made up of seven councillors. A municipal comptroller oversees the public finances, and the Local Public Planning Council manages the municipality's development.Law and government

Vegetation

Moriche palms and scrub oaks are found on the shores of the river. Species including the carob tree, the sarrapia, and the merecure are prevalent. Local fauna include capybaras, turtles, herons, parrots, limpets, and iguanas, and others. Fish in the area include Salminus and Palometa.

Climate

Under the  Köppen climate classification, Ciudad Bolívar has a tropical savanna climate (Aw) with distinctive dry and wet seasons. The average temperature is  of precipitation per year and there are 89.3 days with measureable rainfall. The city is fairly sunny, averaging almost 2900 hours of sunshine or an average of 7.9 hours of sunshine per day, ranging from a high of 260.4 hours in October (8.4 hours of sunshine per day) to a low of 201.0 hours in June (or 6.7 hours of sunshine per day).

Economy

The Bolívar state economy is dominated by agriculture and animal husbandry, particularly cattle and pigs. Agricultural products of the area include maize, cassava, mango, yam, and watermelon. Tourism has become increasingly important to the area.
Local mass media include the television stations Bolívar Visión and TV Río, and newspapers El Bolivarense, El Expreso, El Progreso, and El Luchador.

Culture

Ciudad Bolívar's historic district is a popular tourist attraction, featuring houses and buildings that date from the colonial period. The Jesús Soto Museum of Modern Art—named after the city's native sculptor and painter Jesús Soto—features a collection of modern works by Venezuelan and international artists. Ciudad Bolívar is also the birthplace of musicians Cheo Hurtado, Iván Pérez Rossi and Antonio Lauro, and the home of the musical group Serenata Guayanesa.
Traditional local cuisine includes desserts and preserves made of cashew nuts, eaten alone or roasted with salt. The cassava bread prepared in the area is well known, as well as several meals made of tortoise meat such as the Carapacho de Morrocoy Guayanés (baked tortoise in its shell). Locals also use the juice of cassava to create the spicy Catara sauce, an alleged aphrodisiac.

Education

Universities in the city include the Universidad de Oriente (a public university founded in 1962),Universidad de Oriente the Universidad Nacional Experimental de Guayana (a public university founded in 1982),Universidad Nacional Experimental de Guayana the Universidad Simón Rodríguez, the Universidad Gran Mariscal de Ayacucho, the Instituto Universitario Tecnologico del estado Bolívar, the Universidad Nacional Abierta, the Instituto Universitario Tecnológico Rodolfo Loero Arismendi, and the Bolivarian University of Venezuela.

Transportation

Buses are the main means of public transport in the city.
The José Tomás de Heres Airport is located in the center of the city.
The Angostura Bridge connects the city to the rest of Venezuela. The freeway that connects Ciudad Bolívar with Ciudad Guayana is a major regional road.








