[[Lilith Clay]]

CATEGORIES: Comics characters introduced in 1970, DC Comics metahumans, DC Comics superheroes, DC Comics telepaths, Fictional adoptees, Fictional characters with precognition, Fictional dancers, Characters created by Robert Kanigher, DC Comics characters who can teleport, DC Comics supervillains

Lilith Clay is a young superheroine who occasionally appears in DC Comic's Teen Titans titles.

Fictional character biography

Pre-Crisis

Originally living in peace at home, Lilith started to manifest strange mental powers at the age of 13. She read her parents' minds to find she was adopted, then left home to try to find her birth parents. After some trouble, she ended up working as a dancer at the Canary Cottage disco. During this time, she encountered Loren Jupiter, and began to aid him in his cause.
Soon, Lilith approached the Teen Titans and asked to join. She saw premonitions involving a political figure, who inevitably died, proving her power. She then became a member of the Teen Titans.
Eventually, she left the team and resettled on the West Coast, where she started a new branch of the Titans (known as Titans West). She briefly dated one of her team members, Don Hall (Dove), before the team disbanded.
During the Terror of Trigon storyline (New Teen Titans, Vol. 2 #1-6), Lilith played a key role in tracking down the former Titan Raven, who was at that time possessed by her evil demonic father. Eventually, Lilith made some type of psychic connection with Raven's mentor, the goddess Azar, and hosted the souls of her followers in a successful attempt to cleanse Raven of evil.
Lilith stayed on with the Titans briefly, during which time she accompanied the team on a trip to Donna "Wonder Girl" Troy's home island of Themyscira. During this mission into the realms of Greek myth, Lilith finally learned her true parentage: her father was a normal human who had been seduced by Theia, the mythological Greek Titaness of the sun. The power-hungry Thia attempted to take over Olympus, but the young mortal Teen Titans helped defeat the Titans of Myth and returned home safely—all except Lilith, who elected to remain on Olympus, claiming her birthright as a demi-goddess.

Post-Crisis

After the Crisis on Infinite Earths, Lilith was not heard from for a time; however, the mythological Titans (including Thia) showed up in New Titans # 50-54 as a benevolent pantheon and adoptive parents of Donna Troy. This storyline effectively negated Lilith's origin. New Titans # 50-54 Her only significant appearance at this time was a brief cameo in the War of the Gods storyline, in which she received a premonition that her friend Donna was once again in trouble; this showed readers that she was indeed alive and well, and living on Earth as opposed to Olympus.
Years later, Lilith once again found her birth parents. Her mother's identity was never revealed to the readers, but it is known that she helped Lilith unlock untapped abilities. Her birth father turned out to be none other than the Teen Titans' old benefactor, Loren Jupiter.
She took the name Omen, and became part of the Teen Titans team led by a teenaged Atom and founded by Loren Jupiter; initially, the team did not realize that Omen was Lilith. She was captured by her half-brother Haze (Jarrod Jupiter), who used her powers to augment his own. Haze was defeated by the Teen Titans with the aid of four of the original Titans: Nightwing, Tempest, Flash III and Arsenal. Her Teen Titans team eventually disbanded.
She aided the Titans in protecting former team-mate Cyborg's soul from the Justice League in JLA/Titans #1-3: The Technis Imperative. Shortly after that, Lilith was abducted by Vandal Savage, who wanted her to divine a perfect team to take down the Titans. Savage forced Lilith to submit, but she purposely chose members who wouldn't work well as a team. She was rescued by the reformed Titans. Titans #14
Lilith stood with her old friends when a mysterious corporation called Optitron approached the Titans and Young Justice with an offer to fund the two groups.  Before they could discuss the offer, the teams were attacked by an android from the future called Indigo. The malfunctioning robot accidentally activated a Superman android believed to be long destroyed. The rampaging Superman Android managed to both snap Lilith's neck and pierce Donna Troy's heart, killing both beloved Titans. This tragedy, told in Titans/Young Justice: Graduation Day #1-3, led team leader Nightwing to disband the two groups (though they would be reformed shortly thereafter as the Outsiders and the latest incarnation of the Teen Titans).
Lilith appeared in Teen Titans (vol. 3) #30, as her soul was resurrected by the newest Brother Blood as the latest in his doomed line of mother-figures. Teen Titans #29Despite the request of Speedy, Kid Eternity did not allow her to stay among the living. Teen Titans #31
A statue of Lilith is in the Memorial of the Titans Tower in San Francisco. Teen Titans #3
In Blackest Night: Titans crossover, Lilith was reanimated as a member of the Black Lantern, ready to attack the Titans. Blackest Night: Titans #1However, her body is soon destroyed by a burst of white light emanating from Dawn Granger. Blackest Night: Titans #3
Lilith was recently seen in a flashback of Donna Troy's.  During their early years, Donna and Roy Harper were dating, and apparently Roy had intended to propose to Donna.  However, Lilith informed Donna of a prophecy in which a red haired man who loved Donna and became her husband would die. Thinking the prophecy meant Roy, Donna rejected the proposal. Lilith's prophecy however turned out to be true in regards to Donna's now deceased husband Terry.

The New 52

A passing reference to Lilith was made in Red Hood and the outlaws along with Cyborg,  Garth a.k.a Aqualad, Richard, Garfield and a new unseen character named Dustin, as previous super-hero companions that Starfire seemingly no longer remembers.1 #1
The character is much more visible in The Culling. As her story has been changed a lot, she is now a villain. Probably she has never died, her story still remains a mystery. In Teen Titans #8, Omen appears as the main agent of Harvest, a monstrous metahuman who is controlling the secret organization known as N.O.W.H.E.R.E. Skitter somehow knows her name is Lilith, if she is the original Lilith Clay is still unknown. It was later revealed by Scott Lobdell that he had intended to introduce Raven at first, but later replaced her by Lilith, being informed that DC had bigger plans for Raven. Lilith has mind controlling powers as her original incarnation, but now she can actually alter reality.Teen Titans Vol 4 #8 (2012)






