[[Football Writers' Association]]

CATEGORIES: Journalism-related professional associations, Football media in the United Kingdom, British sportswriters, English sportswriters, Football in England, English football organisations, European journalism organizations, Organizations established in 1947, 1947 establishments in England

The Football Writers' Association (the FWA) is an association of England football journalists and correspondents writing for newspapers and agencies, founded in 1947 by Charles Buchan, Messrs Cole, Roy Peskett, and Archie Quick.

History

The choice to create the Football Writers' Association (FWA) was made on September 2, 1947, by four journalists, Charles Buchan, Messrs Cole, Roy Peskett, and Archie Quick while aboard a boat in the middle of the English Channel that was returning from a football match in which England beat Belgium 5-2. The four men formalized a few of the newborn association's rules and regulations within one month. Some of the rules initially created were that membership to the FWA would be invitation only and that they would exclusively send invitations to "working journalists who are accredited football correspondents for newspapers and agencies." It was also determined that the Football Writers' Association's headquarters would be in London, England and the membership fee would be five guineas for the first year of membership with a recurring annual payment of two guineas each year after. Furthermore, the men had decided that there would be a vote held annually for all members that would decide the recipient of the prestigious Footballer of the Year Award, which is still today the oldest and most distinguished award given in the domestic game. The award was originally presented at the annual dinner, which was held on the night before the FA Cup Final, but was later changed to the Thursday preceding every FA Cup Final.footballwriters.co.uk/about/

The Football Writers' Association Today

The FWA has experienced steady growth since its inception in 1947. Membership has grown to about four-hundred members. Changes in modern journalism have welcomed a more diverse range of members. In recent years, the Association has mordernized itself by changing the voting process for Footballer of the Year by making online voting available to its members as well as incorporating social media into its revamped web site. The Football Writers' Association continues to recruit new members openly in the same manner as was created by its founders in 1947.footballwriters.co.uk/about/

The FWA Footballer of the Year Award

Charles, Buchan, one of the founding fathers of the FWA, had originally suggested that there be an award presented "to the professional player who by precept and example is considered by a ballot of members to be the footballer of the year." The award is the oldest and is considered to be the most prestigious award in British football. The award is presented annually. The first player to receive the award was Sir Stanley Matthews.footballwriters.co.uk/awards/

Winners

The award has been presented on 67 occasions as of 2013, with 58 different winners.  On one occasion two players shared the award for a season.

The FWA Tribute Award

The Football Writers' Association Tribute Award is presented annually every January at the Savoy Hotel to the individual that the committee believes to have contributed to the national game in a significant way. The award was first given in 1983 to Ron Greenwood.footballwriters.co.uk/awards/

Winners

1980s

1990s

2000s

2010s








