[[Driver (series)]]

CATEGORIES: 1999 introductions, Action-adventure games, Driver series, Open world video games, Organized crime video games, Racing video games, Video game franchises, Video games developed in the United Kingdom

Driver is a series of mission-based action-adventure video games developed by Reflections Interactive (now Ubisoft Reflections), and originally published by GT Interactive, later by Atari and now by Ubisoft. The gameplay consists of a mixture of action-adventure and driving in open world environments. Since the series began in 1999, there have been five main installments released.
As of August 2011, the series has sold more than 16 million units worldwide.

Games

Driver

The first game of the Driver series was released for the PlayStation on June 30, 1999 in the US. It was later released for Game Boy Color in April 2000, Windows in September 2000, Mac in December 2000, and iOS in December 2009. In the game, the player controls a former racecar driver turned undercover police detective named John Tanner. It featured a storyline inspired by 1970's car chase movies such as Bullitt (1968) and The Driver (1978) and based in four real-life cities; Miami, San Francisco, Los Angeles and New York City. It was the best selling game of the Driver series and an evolution of the freedom to explore a city as brought forth in the early "Grand Theft Auto" games.

Driver 2

The second installment in the Driver series was released for the PlayStation on November 13, 2000 in the US by Infogrames (now known as Atari), and later ported to the Game Boy Advance on October 4, 2002 in the US. It featured detective John Tanner once more, along with a new partner, detective Tobias Jones, in four more real-life cities (Chicago, Havana, Las Vegas, and Rio de Janeiro). It was the first game in the series to feature 2-player modes, curved roads, and the ability to get out of the car at any time in order to steal another car on the street.

Driver 3

The third installment in the Driver series and the first to get an M Rating by the ESRB (the first two were rated T), was released for the PlayStation 2 and Xbox on June 21, 2004 in the US to generally mixed or poor reviews (despite new features such as the ability to use firearms). The game takes place in Miami, Nice and Istanbul. It was subsequently followed by versions for the Windows, and Game Boy Advance.

Driver: Parallel Lines

The fourth game in the series, Driver: Parallel Lines, was released March 14, 2006 for PlayStation 2 and Xbox in the US, and June 26, 2007 for Windows and Wii in the US. It is the most violent of the series—the first one to receive an 18 rating in the UK. Reflections intended Parallel Lines to "return the series to its roots" by focusing more on driving.
The game differs greatly in other aspects from its predecessors, though, as the story no longer follows undercover police officer Tanner and the game takes place in only one location, New York City. The new main player's name is TK, a criminal rather than a cop. The game includes two time periods, 1978 and 2006, when the main player is sentenced to prison for 28 years and returns in 2006. The game received better reviews, but unlike Driver 3, did not sell particularly well.

Driver 76

Driver 76 is a PlayStation Portable exclusive game in the Driver series. Set in New York City in 1976, two years before the events in the first half of Driver: Parallel Lines, the player takes the role of Ray, TK's friend and a supporting character from Parallel Lines. The game was developed by Sumo Digital and Reflections, and was the first Driver game published by Ubisoft after they acquired Reflections. It was released on May 8, 2007 in the US.

Driver: San Francisco

This fifth Driver game was long rumored to be in production.  After several years of speculation, Ubisoft finally unveiled Driver: San Francisco at E3 2010. After several delays, it was finally released on September 1, 2011 in Australia. 
The game takes place in only one location, San Francisco, and follows the series protagonist, Tanner, being in a coma after suffering an accident. Thus, the player controls Tanner during his coma dream. The plot of the Wii version of Driver: San Francisco is completely different from the other versions. It is a prequel to the events of the original Driver.
For this game, developers decided to remove the ability of getting out of a car in order to steal another car on the street. Instead, they created a new mechanic called "Shift", enabling the players to shift to any car at any time.
The game received generally positive reviews, getting the highest ratings in the whole series after Driver 1. Like Driver 3, it sold particularly well.

Driver: Renegade 3D

Exclusive for the Nintendo 3DS, Driver: Renegade 3D follows John Tanner trying to take down the New York City crime mobs with his own hands. It was released on September 1, 2011 in Australia.

Related games

Driver: Vegas (released in 2006) and Driver: LA Undercover (released in 2007) are two mobile exclusive games featuring John Tanner. Vegas features his exploits in Las Vegas in an attempt to exact revenge on Charles Jericho after Driver 3, while LA Undercover, set two years later, features Tanner's exploits in Los Angeles to take down the Los Angeles Mafia by working his way up the ladder.

C.O.P. The Recruit

On November 3, 2009, Ubisoft released C.O.P. The Recruit for Nintendo DS. It was originally registered under numerous names, one of which being "Driver: The Recruit".

Watch Dogs

The Disrupt engine for Watch Dogs was originally intended for a different game focused on driving, potentially in the Driver franchise.
Amongst other things this new engine will even "simulate the way people drive cars".
Ubisoft Reflections staff who had previously worked on Driver: San Francisco, were shown to be collaborating with Ubisoft Montreal on the development of Watch Dogs.


Film adaptation

In February 2002, Impact Pictures, the production team of Paul W. S. Anderson and Jeremy Bolt, announced that it had acquired the film and TV rights to adapt the Atari video game Driver. Screenwriters James DeMonaco, Todd Jason Harthan, and James Roday were developing a script at the time. Impact Pictures had originally intended to produce the film Driver to coincide with the release of the video game Driver 3.
Prior to January 2007, Driver, having a budget of $48 million, was slated to shoot at Cinespace Studios' MT28 lot in Toronto, Canada. Due to a waterfront revitalization project, the studio has been forced to move and the film has been put on hold.

Notes and references




