[[Mis-Teeq]]

CATEGORIES: Musical groups established in 1999, Musical groups disestablished in 2005, British girl groups, British rhythm and blues musical groups, UK garage groups, British dance music groups, Black British musical groups, Musical quartets, Musical trios

Mis-Teeq were a British MOBO award-winning R&B/UK garage girl group, consisting of rapper/singer Alesha Dixon and singers Sabrina Washington and Su-Elise Nash. The group had three top ten double platinum albums and seven consecutive top ten singles with chart-topping success in the UK and across Europe. Originally a quartet which included Zena McNally before her departure in 2001, the group was formed in 1999. The second line-up released their debut studio album Lickin' on Both Sides on 27 October 2001 which peaked at number three in the UK. The album featured the group's first five singles including their debut single "Why?" with McNally and "All I Want". On 29 March 2003, the group released their second studio album Eye Candy following their hiatus. This album featured their biggest international hit "Scandalous" which peaked at number 35 on the Billboard charts. In February 2005, the group announced they would be splitting to pursue solo careers due to the demise of their record label Telstar. The group released a greatest hits album, Mis-Teeq: Greatest Hits on 25 April 2005 to coincide with their separation.
During 2011 rumours circulated that the group would reform.digitalspy.co.html

History

1996–01: Formation and line-up changes

In 1996, Alesha Dixon and Sabrina Washington first met as two young women at a dance studio in Fulham. They were then introduced by their then Producer David Brant (Writer of 1st two hit singles "Why?" "All I Want") via DJ Darren Stokes (TinTinOut) to Inferno Records (sub pop) by A&R man Pat Travers, who went on to sign them to Telstar Records and finally changed their name to Mis-Teeq. After months of recording, including sessions with producers Norwegian duo Stargate along with David Brant (Vybrant Music), Ed Case, Blacksmith, Rishi Rich, and Ceri Evans, Mis-Teeq finally released their debut single, latin-flavoured mid-tempo song "Why?". Co-written and produced by David Brant, a garage remix by Matt "Jam" Lamont soon became a success in the underground UK garage scene, and as a result a second music video for the song was filmed and released. While "Why" became a hit on the UK Singles Chart, with a peak position of number eight, McNally decided to leave the line-up in spring 2001 as she felt unhapppy about "an unbalance in the group."

2001–02: Lickin On Both Sides, touring and hiatus

In 2001 the three remaining members went on to release their second single "All I Want" in June 2001 Co-written and originally produced by David Brant & Produced and Remixed by Ceri Evans aka Sunship. The song topped the success of the trio's debut single and became a #2 hit in the UK, simultaneously entering the top 30 of the Australian singles chart. On 27 October 2001, the band finally released their debut album, Lickin' on Both Sides. The album became a platinum success and sold more than 300,000 copies domestically.bpi.co.aspx Outside the UK, however, Lickin' on Both Sides failed to chart or sell noticeably.
Nevertheless, Mis-Teeq saw instant international success with their Stargate-produced third single "One Night Stand": While the song peaked at #5 on the UK singles chart, it also entered the top 20 in Australia, New Zealand, Norway, and Denmark. In 2002, the band's fourth single, "B with Me", continued the group's remarkable sales with another top 10 entry in the UK; once again entering at #5. The last release from Lickin' on Both Sides was a double A-side of "Roll on" and the Montell Jordan cover "This Is How We Do It", latter song being featured on the soundtrack for Ali G's 2002 film Ali G Indahouse. This release entered the charts at #7 on 29 June 2002. The band supported Shaggy on his UK tour in 2002.

2003–05: Eye Candy, international breakthrough and split

Returning from a short hiatus, Mis-Teeq released their second album, Eye Candy on 29 March 2003. The album featured production by Stargate, Ed Case, Salaam Remi, singer Joe, Delroy "D-Roy" Andrews and Jermaine Dupri and debuted at its peak position of #6 on the UK Albums Chart, eventually receiving a gold certification. While Eye Candy's sales failed to link on the sudden success of Lickin' on Both Sides, pre-released lead single "Scandalous" became the group's most successful single by then: It reached #2 in the UK and top 10 in Ireland, New Zealand, Australia, and Denmark.
In June 2003, the album's second single "Can't Get It Back" became the band's seventh and final domestic top ten single. Originally a remake of the same-titled unreleased Blaque single from 2002, Mis-Teeq and Telstar agreed not to use album version, instead releasing the alternate "Ignorants Radio Edit" as an official single version which entered the UK charts at #8 on 12 July 2003. The song also was included on a Special Edition of Eye Candy which was released in December of the same year and spawned a third single with "Style". However the song failed to reach the UK top 10 and eventually peaked at #13.
"Scandalous" was released in the US in May 2004 (under another label, Reprise Records) and reached number 35 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart in June, making it their only single to chart in the US. The song was featured as the theme of the film Catwoman, starring Halle Berry, in Summer 2004.
Also in 2004, Mis-Teeq began touring the USA after conquering the rest of the globe, after appearing on well known shows such as Jimmy Kimmel, Pepsi smash and Carson Daly, the girls had built up a fan base pulling them to the top of the charts. Unfortunately in 2005 the demise of their record label Telstar left Mis-teeq in a situation where they were unsure of where to go or what to do next, it was released that Mis-teeq were on the verge of signing a huge record deal in the USA but they could not face relocating there permanently. Following the major release of their third self-titled U.S. album and the single "Scandalous" in 2004, the band's record label Telstar Records went bankrupt.
After the announcement of their split in 2005 they released a compilation album, Greatest Hits, containing a new track, a cover of The Andrews Sisters 1940s song "Shoo Shoo Baby", and they were awarded a 2005 Soul Train Lady of Soul Nomination for Best R&B/Soul Album - Group, Band or Duo for their album "Mis-Teeq".
On 9 February 2011, it was reported that the group where in talks to reform for a comeback tour with a source saying "All three have been approached and the signs are very good. They are not in touch regularly but have fond memories of Mis-Teeq. The tour will go ahead if their schedules allow it." However the rumours later turned out to be false and was denied by Dixon.digitalspy.co.html However on 8 January 2013 Dixon confirmed that she would never rule out a reunion saying "I always say, 'Never say never' We're still friends but it would have to happen organically".digitalspy.co.html
On 21 January 2013, Dixon yet again fuelled rumours of a reunion speaking to a reporter following filming Britain's Got Talent saying "We are speaking and we're having a meeting, It's like all these bands reforming are just jumping on the bandwagon, but I'd be quite happy to go in the studio for a year with the girls and just work on a new record. I am so up for doing something with the girls. I have been for a long time. I don't think anybody has actually filled the gap since Mis-Teeq left, which is quite worrying as I thought we were opening doors for people.".digitalspy.co.html In August 2013 Dixon also said that the band may reform somepoint in 2014.

Members

Alesha Dixon was the group's rapper and joined the group in 1999 alongside Washington. Following the group's split, Dixon went on to embark on a highly successful solo career, releasing three studio albums to date and appearing, firstly as a winning competitor, and then as a Judge on Strictly Come Dancing and Britain's Got Talent.
Su-Elise Nash Joined the group in 1999 and was the group's backing singer. Her vocals were rarely heard on the group's records. Following the group's split, Nash has stayed out of the public eye.
Sabrina Washington was the group's lead singer and joined the group in 1999 alongside Dixon. Following the group's split, Washington appeared on I'm a Celebrity... As of 2013, Washington is working on her debut solo album.
Zena McNally Joined the group in 1999 and released only one single with the group before leaving in 2001, due to wanting to pursue her own solo career. Mcnally released two solo singles in 2003 and worked as a radio presenter; she is mostly known for co presenting BBC Radio 1Xtra. McNally now resides in the United States with her husband Cory Gibbs.

Discography

Studio albums

Compilation albums






