[[Florida's Turnpike]]

CATEGORIES: Expressways in Florida, Expressways in Broward County, Florida, Expressways in Miami-Dade County, Florida, Expressways in Orange County, Florida, Expressways in Orlando, Florida, Expressways in Osceola County, Florida, Expressways in Palm Beach County, Florida, Roads in Indian River County, Florida, Roads in Lake County, Florida, Roads in Martin County, Florida, Roads in Okeechobee County, Florida, Roads in St. Lucie County, Florida, Roads in Sumter County, Florida, Toll roads in Florida

Florida's Turnpike, designated as the Ronald Reagan Turnpike, and originally known as the Sunshine State Parkway, is a north–south toll road that runs 
The Turnpike itself is in two sections. The first is the Mainline, a ).

Route description

Miami to Ft. Pierce

The main section of Florida's Turnpike begins at the northern end of the Golden Glades Interchange in Miami Gardens as a six-lane highway, and passes through the Golden Glades Toll Barrier, a cashless toll point, similar to the ones on the HEFT. About 
In central Palm Beach County at mile marker 88, the Ticket system of the turnpike begins at the Lantana Toll Plaza. The turnpike narrows to a four-lane highway as it goes through a less developed portion of Palm Beach County, crossing with interchanges with Lake Worth Road, followed by the Lake Worth/West Palm Beach Service Plaza at mile marker 94. In West Palm Beach, the highway has interchanges with US 98/SR 80 (Southern Boulevard), a SunPass only interchange at Jog Road, followed by an interchange at Okeechobee Boulevard (exit 99) that heads directly into downtown West Palm Beach. North of the interchange, the highway enters stretch of sparse development between this point and Port St. Lucie, intersecting with the Beeline Highway, another SunPass only interchange before leaving West Palm Beach. Just north of the SR 786 interchange in Palm Beach Gardens (exit 109), I-95 parallels the Turnpike to the east for about  crossing I-95 without an interchange just south of the SR 714 interchange, the only exit in Martin County. I-95 heads west towards the western fringes of St. Lucie County development, while the turnpike takes a path along the central areas of the county. The Turnpike has two interchanges in Port St. Lucie, one at Becker Road (exit 138), the third SunPass only exit, and SR 716 (exit 142), followed by the Port St. Lucie-Fort Pierce service plaza at mile marker 144. The turnpike intersects I-95 one last time just south of SR 70 (exit 152) in Fort Pierce, as I-95 continues to head up the east coast of Florida and the turnpike curves inland towards Orlando.

Ft. Pierce to Wildwood

North of the SR 70 interchange, the Turnpike enters a rural area, with cattle farms and orange groves lining the road for most of the section between Fort Pierce and Kissimmee, with only one interchange with SR 60 in Yeehaw Junction (exit 193), although there are two service plazas in this area, one at Fort Drum at mile marker 184 and the other, Canoe Creek, at mile marker 229. Between Fort Pierce and Yeehaw Junction, the turnpike travels in a nearly east-west direction heading inland, with a  After interchanges with US 192/US 441 (exit 242 northbound, exit 244 southbound) and the Osceola Parkway (exit 249), it enters Orange County, and Orlando. Exit 254 is a massive interchange with both Orange Blossom Trail and the Beachline Expressway, where the Turnpike expands to eight lanes north of the interchange, and then it intersects with Consulate Drive (exit 255), a southbound only, SunPass only interchange.
thumb|right|300px|Florida's Turnpike southbound at the interchange with State Road 429 in Ocoee, Exit 267AAfter passing the I-4 interchange (exit 259) near many of Orlando's theme parks, the Turnpike moves in a northwest direction first passing by the Turkey Lake Service Plaza at mile marker 263, where the FDOT district headquarters of the Turnpike are located. The Turnpike has the next two interchanges with Orlando area tollways, the East-West Expressway (exit 265) and the Western Expressway (exit 267A), where in between the two exits, the turnpike expands to become a 12 lane highway, and reverting to an eight-lane highway north of the SR 429 interchange.  The last two Orange County interchanges are with SR 50 five miles apart at exit 267B and 272, with the turnpike becoming a four-lane highway north of exit 272, and staying that way for the rest of its northward journey.  The Turnpike then enters Lake County, heading in a northwestern direction, where hilly countryside become a part of the terrain for the remainder of the expressway. At mile 285, it has a northbound exit/southbound entrance with US 27, followed by the Leesburg toll plaza at mile 288, and a southbound exit/northbound entrance with US 27 at mile 289. The last interchange in Lake County is with County Road 470 (exit 296), which does not provide cash.
At mile marker 299, the turnpike passes through the final service plaza, the Okahumpka service plaza. Between US 301 (exit 304) and the northern terminus (mile 309) is considered to be a free movement as there is no toll for anyone traveling within this section. The tollway ends with an interchange with I-75 in Wildwood, about 20 miles south of Ocala.

Tolls

Tolls on the turnpike are an average of 6.7 cents per mile for cars and other two-axle vehicles using SunPass.
As the Turnpike and its system of roads are primary routes for emergency evacuations, tolls may be suspended, in cooperation with the state's emergency operations center and county governments, when a state or national emergency, most common being a hurricane watch, warrant rapid movement of the population.

Services

Service plazas

Eight service plazas are located along the Turnpike, spaced about 
The operation of Sunshine State Parkway gas stations and service centers were originally bid out under separate contracts, and as a result, differing petroleum brands operated concurrently along the Parkway, with varying levels of service and pricing.
In 2009, Areas U.S.A. signed a 30-year contract for operation of food and retail concessions, taking over operations from Martin Petroleum and HMSHost.  Florida Turnpike Services, L.L.C., Areas' partner, replaced the Citgo brand and changed over the restaurant brands.

Intelligent transportation systems

Florida's Turnpike Enterprise is operating with an intelligent transportation systems (ITS), used to detect and manage incidents on the Enterprise's roadways. The ITS are managed by two traffic management centers (TMC), one located in Pompano Beach, and the other located in Ocoee, operated by Florida's Turnpike Enterprise 24 hours a day, seven days a week. The system, consisting of closed-circuit television (CCTV) traffic cameras, dynamic message signs (DMS), highway advisory radio (HAR), and radar vehicle detection system (RVDS), allow the TMC to see anything from congestion to crashes, to disabled vehicles that may pose a threat to the Turnpike's motorists. When necessary, the TMC will activate the dynamic message signs (DMS) and highway advisory radio stations (HAR) to alert motorists of the potential situation, as well as AMBER/Silver Alerts.

Road Rangers

The Safety Patrol (also known as Road Rangers, and currently sponsored by State Farm) offers free roadside assistance on Florida's Turnpike mainline and Homestead Extension. Utility trucks patrol one of 12 designated zones looking for stranded motorists to provide services such as fuel, tire changes, use of a cellular phone; and also watching out for crashes and road debris. The Traffic Management Center dispatches them to accidents, debris removal, disabled vehicles, or anything that may potentially affect the traveling public; they also assist the Florida Highway Patrol (FHP) with traffic maintenance with incidents involving blockage of lanes.

Call boxes

Motorist-aid call boxes are located on both outside shoulders of the road every mile (1.6 km), and send a signal indicating the need for gasoline, repair (tire or engine), or emergency services (police, ambulance, or firefighters).

History

Planning

In the years following World War II, Florida was experiencing unprecedented growth in population and tourism, along with a revitalized citrus industry recovering from a harsh freeze early in the decade; the increased traffic load quickly burdened the state's highway system. South Florida businessman and accountant firm owner Charles B. Costar was concerned that a trip down the east coast of Florida would take days on the available road network, passing through every small beachside town, siphoning off the traffic before visitors reached South Florida. After driving on the Pennsylvania Turnpike during a vacation there, he envisioned a similar high-speed turnpike in Florida. In 1953, Costar led a lobby group that resulted in state legislature creating the "Florida Turnpike Act," which Governor Dan McCarty signed into law on July 11, 1953, as well as the Florida State Turnpike Authority, which had the ability to plan, design, and construct bond-financed toll roads, in which Costar was instrumental to create, to be repaid through the collection of tolls from Turnpike customers.
Thomas B. Manuel, known as the "Father of the Turnpike," served as chairman of the Florida State Turnpike Authority from January 1955 to January 1961. Manuel debated with state legislature members opposed to tollways, emphasizing the need for a good highway system in a tourism-driven state. During the 1955 legislative session, many small-county legislators and others opposed to the Parkway, formed a "kill the 'Pike'" coalition; Manuel won over the legislators at his headquarters in the Floridan Hotel near the capitol. Only four votes against the turnpike were entered at the end of the session's roll call, and the Legislature granted permission to build with a $70 million bond issue in June 1955. A Turnpike bridge in Stuart bears his name to honor his contributions.

Construction

Construction on the Parkway began on July 4, 1955, starting at what is now the Golden Glades Interchange. highway that ran from Miami to Fort Pierce, opening on January 25, 1957.
In January 1959, Governor LeRoy Collins, favoring a Parkway extension from Fort Pierce to Orlando, stated that building the Parkway north of Orlando would be unnecessary due to the interstate highway system. In late May 1959, the Board authorized a study for the Parkway Extension to Orlando, and connecting the Interstate routes in Florida. In 1961, Governor Collins approved the sale of $80 million in bonds to finance the parkway extension from Fort Pierce to Wildwood, adding another  section between Yeehaw Junction and Orlando opened on July 17, 1963, a section linking Fort Pierce and Yeehaw Junction opened on November 22, 1963, and the section between Orlando and the northern terminus of I-75 opened on July 24, 1964, completing the mainline.

=I-95 realignment=

The Bureau of Public Roads approved an Interstate 95 alignment that used 

Reckless spending

With the St. Petersburg Times in 1963, a team led by Martin Waldron wrote a total of 150,000 words as part of the newspaper's coverage of unchecked spending by the Florida Turnpike Authority that led to estimated costs quadrupling from initial estimates of $100 million.

System expansion

With Florida still growing in population in the 1960s, preliminary studies began for expanding portions of the Turnpike to six lanes in South Florida and additional north–south highways in that area. Dade County and the State Road Department developed a plan for the West Dade Expressway (now known as the Homestead Extension of Florida's Turnpike), beginning at the Turnpike near the Dade County/Broward County line, turning westward and southward, terminating at Florida City in southern Dade County. In 1967, the Florida State Turnpike Authority was authorized to perform engineering and feasibility studies on the West Dade Expressway, and the Bee Line Connector extension, now known as the Martin Andersen Beachline Expressway. The results of the studies came in December 1968, but due to an uncertain bond market and an unknown future for the toll authority, decisions on the roads were delayed.
The Florida Department of Transportation was created in July 1969, with the Florida State Turnpike Authority becoming a part of the new FDOT. Soon after, FDOT and Orange and Dade County officials agreed the Bee Line Connector and Homestead Extension of Florida's Turnpike would be financed by revenue bond issues as extensions of Florida's Turnpike. The Beeline Expressway opened in 1973 and the Homestead Extension opened in 1974 as a part of the Turnpike mainline.

Later changes

From its opening in January 1957 to April 12, 1968, the road was known as the Sunshine State Parkway (SSP). On April 12, 1968, the road was renamed to its current name of Florida's Turnpike, to identify that the toll road was located in Florida and to avoid confusion from other Florida landmarks such as the Sunshine Skyway Bridge.
On September 1, 1971, the Turnpike switched from a sequential exit numbering system to a hybrid numbering system, where adjacent exit numbers differed by 4 south of SR 60 (exit 60 at the time) and 5 north of SR 60.
Between 1974 and 1986, the turnpike experienced little change other than maintenance as the original bonds on the road were being paid off. During this period, the turnpike experienced the first of five toll hikes on February 15, 1979, when the cost of a trip from Golden Glades to Wildwood increased to $5.90 from $4.80, the road's original toll.
In 1988, the Office of Florida's Turnpike was formed, with $220 million worth of revenue bonds being sold in April 1989 to renovate the toll plazas, service centers and improve the road with the reduction of urban congestion. Fifteen new interchanges were planned in the early 1990s with four of them opened by July 1991. Also during this time, sections of the turnpike were converted from a ticket system to a coin system due to urban congestion, with several mainline toll plazas being built. The section between the Golden Glades Plaza and Lantana was converted in 1990, with the opening of the Cypress Creek and Lantana Toll Plazas. Coin baskets were installed in 1994 after years of delays.
The improvements also came with a series of toll hikes between 1989 and 1993 to make the toll rates more uniform six cents per mile throughout the turnpike's length. The first one was enacted on April 1, 1989, which raised the rate to $9.95.
In 1989, the Turnpike switched its exit numbering system to the mile-log system, starting from the south end of the Homestead Extension, 13 years before Florida's interstates integrated it into their system.
In 1998, Florida's Turnpike was designated by Florida legislature as the Ronald Reagan Turnpike, with 20 signs throughout the turnpike showing the designation.
In April 1999, SunPass was introduced to the public, with SunPass only interchanges and lanes being introduced throughout the 2000s. The latest toll hike took effect on March 7, 2004, increasing the toll rate for non SunPass users to $18.20, with SunPass users still using the 1993 toll rates.
The HEFT ceased cash toll collections on February 19, 2011, becoming an exclusive electronic toll road, a move announced in November 2009. The manned toll plazas were converted into electronic toll gantries, and the only ways to pay are either by SunPass transponders or a "toll-by-plate" program.
Between 2005 and 2012, the Turnpike spent $380 million doubling the amount of lanes from SR 528 to the northernmost interchange with SR 50 west of Winter Garden (exit 272).  Most of the section was expanded from four to eight lanes, with the section between SR 408 and SR 429 being expanded from six to 12 lanes.  The portion between SR 528 and Interstate 4 opened in 2008, with the portion between I-4 and SR 408 being finished in 2010, SR 408 to Beulah Road (at the north end of the SR 429 interchange) opened in March 2011, and the portion between Beulah Road and SR 50 (exit 272) was completed in 2012.
In 2007, legislation was passed in Florida to index toll rates across the state to the national Consumer price index (CPI), to be enacted by the end of June, 2012. As a result, the toll rates on roads on Florida's Turnpike Enterprise were raised on June 24, 2012, an increase of 11.7% to reflect the previous five years.  The legislation allows for SunPass rates to be raised slightly each year, with cash rates going up every five years, with SunPass rates staying about a quarter cheaper than cash rates.

Future

Work began in 2006, and is ongoing as of June 2012, along the Turnpike in Broward County to widen the section from Griffin Road (exit 53) to Atlantic Boulevard (exit 66) from six to eight lanes.
Plans are in the works to widen the road from the Lake Worth Road interchange (exit 93) to the Palm Beach-Martin County line from four to eight lanes.
Florida's Turnpike Enterprise plans to convert the entire Turnpike to an all electronic toll road, like the HEFT.
A study is currently under way to eventually reconstruct the northern end of the Turnpike at its junction with Interstate 75 to improve the traffic merge pattern between I-75 and State Road 44, with congestion and some drivers suddenly changing lanes on I-75 between the Turnpike junction and SR 44 a major issue in the area.
The Turnpike Enterprise is also studying possible developer-funded future interchanges near mile marker 279 (servicing Minneola and Clermont) and at County Road 468 (mile marker 300, servicing The Villages and Lady Lake). Neither project is funded or scheduled for construction at this time.

Exit list

North of the HEFT/mainline intersection, the mainline continues the mileage from mile 47 from the HEFT. The spur of the mainline south of the HEFT to the Golden Glades Interchange assumes an alternate numbering system that suffixes an X to each exit number. All tolls described assume the toll is paid in cash.









