[[BI Norwegian Business School]]

CATEGORIES: Education in Oslo, Business schools in Norway, Foundations based in Norway, Universities and colleges in Norway, BI Norwegian Business School, Educational institutions established in 1943, 1943 establishments in Norway, Education in Bærum

BI Norwegian Business School () is the largest business school in Norway and the second largest in Europe."About BI Norwegian Business School" Accessed 16 October 2011, BI has in total 6 campuses with the main one located in Oslo. 
In 2012, the college had 19 980 students, of which 10 889 full-time was students. The proportion of female students is 48 percentB..
Informally the school is known as "B.I.", pronounced with two syllables: "bay-ee".

History

BI Norwegian Business School was founded in 1943 by Finn Øien as Bedriftøkonomisk Institut (), hence the abbreviation BI. 
Previously the school had only one campus. The location of that one is Sandvika. By the 1990's it had campuses at other locations.
The current president is professor Tom Colbjørnsen. Past presidents include Jørgen Randers, co-author of the Club of Rome Report Limits to Growth; Peter Lorange, former president of IMD in Lausanne, Switzerland; Leif Frode Onarheim, a former member of the Norwegian Parliament and current CEO of leading Norwegian fish farming company Marine Harvest.

Factors contributing to its growth

In the 1960's Norway did not fund this school's students with public financial aid thru Statens Lånekasse for utdanning.
In the 1980's the school had students that received loans and/or grants from Statens Lånekasse (to study at BI).

Organization

The university has 830 employees consisting of an academic staff of 417 people and 413 administrative staff.

Current activities

As of 2012, the school has 19,980 students made up of 52% women, 54.5% full-time and 79.9% bachelor students."About BI Norwegian Business School". Retrieved 22 August 2012 Thereby, the Bachelor of Science programs have 9,324 students and the Master of Science programs have 1,168 students. 1,300 are international students. There are 830 employees, of whom 417 are faculty and 413 are administrative.
BI offers a full set of programs for bachelor, master, and doctoral degrees, as well as executive education and tailor-made programs for businesses. The teaching languages are English (BBA and graduate programs) and Norwegian (majority of undergraduate programs and custom programs for local businesses). The school currently participates in exchange programs with 170 foreign institutions in 45 countries."About BI Norwegian Business School". Retrieved 11 October 2011
The internationally award winning main campus in Nydalen (Oslo)"FIABCI Prix d'Excellence Winners 2008" Accessed 11 October 2011 was designed by Niels Torp, "FIABCI Prix d'Excellence Property Award Given to BI" Accessed 11 October 2011 who also designed Gardermoen Airport.

Norsk Kundebarometer

Norsk Kundebarometer (NKB) (

Campuses in Norway

Activities abroad

BI has educated roughly 1700 students in China

Degree programs

Undegraduate,Bachelor programmes Bachelor in:
Graduate (Only available in Oslo; all taught in English except MSc in Professional Accountancy)
The current Executive Masters of Business Administration (EMBA) course at the Norwegian business school is fantastic. The new structure and the combination of the general EMBA courses with other renowned business schools in Europe, Asia, and the United States gives the program an additional edge. The new structure exposes participants to insights on business structure in Europe, Latin America, Asia and North America; hence, providing participants with a global business exposure.

Student organizations

The school has two student organizations, one for the main campus in Oslo and one for the other campuses. The Oslo student organization is called "Studentforeningen ved Handelshøyskolen BI i Oslo" (SBIO) (
The student newspaper is named INSIDE, and its circulation is 11,000.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inside#Avisen
The all-male student choir is named UFDA The Choir BoysUFDA The Choir Boys

Quality accreditations

2014 scheduling of a panelist with controversial generalizations about Jews

The school has scheduled for an April 2014 panel discussion, where a recurring participant (Elisabeth Norheim) is one of the invitees. They were gassed, and thereafter they purchased everything".«Jeg er dritsjalu på jødene. De ble gassa, og så kjøpte de alt» On 28 March she said that she now her "regrets to the Norwegian Jewish population".- Jeg beklager til den norsk-jødiske befolkningen)








