[[Bill Nye the Science Guy]]

CATEGORIES: 1990s American television series, 1993 American television series debuts, 1998 American television series endings, American comedy television series, Science education television series, English-language television programming, Emmy Award winning programs, PBS network shows, Television series by Buena Vista Television, American educational television series, Natural sciences

Bill Nye the Science Guy is a live action educational television program that originally aired from September 10, 1993 to June 20, 1998 and was hosted by William "Bill" Nye. The show aired on PBS Kids and was also syndicated to local stations.
Each of the 100 half-hour episodes aims to teach a specific topic in a natural science to a preteen audience. The show is frequently used in schools as an education medium, and it still airs on some PBS stations for this reason.

Synopsis

Bill's TV persona is a tall and slender scientist wearing a blue lab coat and a bow-tie. He mixes the serious science of everyday things with fast-paced action and humor. Each half-hour show begins with Bill walking onto the set, called "Nye Laboratories", which is filled with scientific visuals including many "of science" contraptions announced dramatically, relevant to the topic of the show. Most half-hour episodes contain a mock song parody and music video in the "Soundtrack of Science" by "Not That Bad Records", substituting a scientific roundup of the episode for the lyrics to a popular song. Each half-hour show ends with Bill explaining in a clever description of an activity on topic. The credits sometimes rolled next to a series of outtakes from the episode.

Soundtrack

The show's memorable bass-heavy theme song is set to a house beat with Bill's name shouted throughout the duration of the song. The sound and speed fluctuations of the voice were accomplished through a vocoder and electronic pitch fluctuation.
The show's episodes consisted of several compositions from Associated Production Music. Some featured tracks include:
Many of these tracks were also featured in SpongeBob SquarePants, Camp Lazlo, All That, KaBlam! and The Ren and Stimpy Show. Another common track used was the theme from the English show Dave Allen At Large, here used as the theme from "The Jackie Smazz Show."

Production

Created by comedian Ross Shafer and based on sketches on KING-TV's sketch program Almost Live!, the show was produced by Disney Educational Productions and KCTS-TV of Seattle.
The announcer was Pat Cashman, whom Nye knew from his time on Almost Live!. The theme song is credited to Mike Greene.
Before this show, Bill had previously worked alongside Christopher Lloyd in Back to the Future: The Animated Series, where he played Doc Brown's assistant and demonstrated several experiments.imdb.com/title/tt0101042
In 1996, Bill made a guest appearance on Cartoon Network's talk-show Space Ghost Coast to Coast in its twenty-fourth episode, Boo! with Michael Norman.imdb.
In November 2013, Bill appeared as himself on episode 142 of The Big Bang Theory, "The Proton Displacement", along with Bob Newhart playing the role of an older former children's TV science presenter.
The show has been likened to the next generation version of Watch Mr. Wizard.

Episodes

100 half-hour episodes were produced.

Season 1

Season 2

Season 3

Season 4

Season 5

"Lost Episodes"

Awards

Bill Nye the Science Guy was nominated for twenty-three Emmy Awards and won nineteen during its run.imdb.com/title/tt0173528/awards
Daytime Emmy Awards

Home media

Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment released the series in its entirety on DVD, as part of the series' 20th anniversary.

Video game

A computer game for the series, titled Bill Nye the Science Guy: Stop the Rock!, was released in 1996 for Windows and Macintosh by Pacific Interactive.
In the game, a large meteoroid called "Impending Dumé" threatens to make a catastrophic collision with the Earth. A team of scientists develop a laser satellite-controlling computer system called MAAX (Meteoroid and Asteroid Exploder) to destroy the meteoroid; however, MAAX develops a personality of its own (in an obvious parody of the sentient computer HAL from the film and novel 2001: A Space Odyssey) and refuses to save the planet unless Earth's scientists can solve seven science riddles. Nye Labs decides to take on MAAX's challenge, and the player, depicted as the newest member of the Nye Labs team, is asked to solve these riddles using Nye Labs' equipment before Impending Dumé hits (represented through an in-game timer). The game featured a fully explorable Nye Labs, as well as video cut scenes featuring Bill and other Nye Labs scientists.  However, the characters and cast members from the TV series, sans Bill and a few others, do not appear in this game, instead being replaced by game-exclusive Nye Labs team members and new actors.








