[[Ottawa]]

CATEGORIES: Ottawa, Capitals in North America, High-technology business districts, Populated places established in 1826, Ontario communities with large francophone populations

Ottawa (
Founded in 1826 as Bytown and incorporated as "Ottawa" in 1855, the city has evolved into a political and technological centre of Canada. Its original boundaries were expanded through numerous minor annexations and ultimately replaced by a new city incorporation and major amalgamation in 2001 which significantly increased its land area. The name "Ottawa" is derived from the Algonquin word adawe, meaning  "to trade".
The 2011 census had the city's population as 883,391,

History

Étienne Brûlé, the first European to travel up the Ottawa River, passed by Ottawa in 1610 on his way to the Great Lakes.
Philemon Wright, a New Englander, created the first settlement in the area on 7 March 1800 on the north side of the river, across from Ottawa in Hull.
Bytown, Ottawa's early name, was founded in 1826 because of preliminary work on the Rideau Canal.
On 31 December 1857, Queen Victoria was asked to choose a common capital for the Province of Canada, and she chose Ottawa.
Starting in the 1850s, large sawmills began to be erected by entrepreneurs known as lumber barons, and these would become some of the largest mills in the world.
Public transportation began in 1870 with a horsecar system,
Urban planner Jacques Greber was hired in the 1940s to work on a master plan for the National Capital Region.  In 2001, in an amalgamation legislated by the Province, all twelve existing municipalities in the area were terminated and replaced by a new incorporation of the City of Ottawa.

Geography

Ottawa is situated on the south bank of the Ottawa River, and contains the mouths of the Rideau River and Rideau Canal.
Located on a major, yet mostly dormant fault line,
Across the Ottawa River, which forms the border between Ontario and Quebec, lies the city of Gatineau, itself the result of amalgamation of the former Quebec cities of Hull and Aylmer together with Gatineau.

Climate

Ottawa has a humid continental climate (Köppen Dfb) with four distinct seasons.. Winters can be very cold with minimum temperatures recorded as low as -36 °C.Statistics Canada climate normals
Summers are warm and humid in Ottawa. Daytime temperatures of  both occur in the winter.
Spring and fall are variable, prone to extremes in temperature and unpredictable swings in conditions. Hot days above .  There are about 2,130 hours of average sunshine annually (46% of possible).

Neighbourhoods and outlying communities

Ottawa is bounded on the east by the United Counties of Prescott and Russell; by Renfrew County and Lanark County in the west; on the south by the United Counties of Leeds and Grenville and the United Counties of Stormont, Dundas and Glengarry; and on the north by the Regional County Municipality of Les Collines-de-l'Outaouais and the City of Gatineau.
The city has a main urban area but there are many other urban, suburban and rural areas within the modern city's limits. The Kanata suburban area consists of Kanata  and the former village of Stittsville. Nepean is another major suburb which also includes Barrhaven. There are also the communities of Manotick and Riverside South  on the other side of the Rideau River, and Greely, southeast of Riverside South.
There are a number of rural communities (villages and hamlets) that lie beyond the greenbelt but are administratively part of the Ottawa municipality. Some of these communities are Burritts Rapids; Ashton; Fallowfield; Kars; Fitzroy Harbour; Munster; Carp; North Gower; Metcalfe; Constance Bay  and Osgoode  and Richmond. There are also a number of towns located within the federally defined National Capital Region but outside the city of Ottawa municipal boundaries, these include the urban communities of Almonte, Carleton Place, Embrun, Kemptville, Rockland, and Russell.

Cityscape and infrastructure

Architecture

Influenced by government structures, much of the city's architecture tends to be formalistic and functional. However, the city is also marked by Romantic and Picturesque styles of architecture such as the Parliament Building's gothic revival architecture. Ottawa's domestic architecture is dominated by single family homes. There are also smaller numbers of semi-detached, rowhouses, and apartment buildings. Most domestic buildings are clad in brick, with small numbers covered in wood or stone.
The skyline has been controlled by building height restrictions originally implemented to keep Parliament Hill and the Peace Tower at 

Public transit

The public transit system is operated by OC Transpo, a department of the city. An integrated hub-and-spoke system of services is available consisting of: regular buses travelling on fixed routes in mixed traffic, typical of most urban transit systems; a bus rapid transit (BRT) system — a high-frequency bus service operating on the transitway — a network of mostly grade-separated dedicated bus lanes within their own right of way and having full stations with Park & Ride facilities further supported by on-road reserved bus lanes and priority traffic signal controls; a light rail transit (LRT) system known as the O-Train operating on one north-south route; and a door-to-door bus service for the disabled known as ParaTranspo.
Both OC Transpo and the Quebec-based Société de transport de l'Outaouais (STO) operate bus services between Ottawa and Gatineau.
Ottawa has approved a 

Inter-city services

Ottawa is served by a number of airlines that fly into the Ottawa Macdonald-Cartier International Airport, as well as two main regional airports Gatineau-Ottawa Executive Airport, and Ottawa/Carp Airport. The city is also served by inter-city passenger rail service at the Ottawa Train Station by Via Rail, and inter-city bus service operating out of the Ottawa Bus Central Station.

Highways, streets and roads

The city is served by two freeway corridors. The primary corridor is east-west and consists of provincial Highway 417 (designated as The Queensway) and Ottawa-Carleton Regional Road 174 (formerly Provincial Highway 17); a north-south corridor, Highway 416 (designated as Veterans' Memorial Highway), connects Ottawa to the rest of the 400-Series Highway network in Ontario. Highway 417 is also the Ottawa portion of the Trans-Canada Highway. The city also has several scenic parkways (promenades), such as Colonel By Drive, Queen Elizabeth Driveway, the Sir John A. Macdonald Parkway, Rockcliffe Parkway and the Aviation Parkway and has a freeway connection to Autoroute 5 and Autoroute 50, in Gatineau. In 2006, the National Capital Commission completed aesthetic enhancements to Confederation Boulevard, a ceremonial route of existing roads linking key attractions on both sides of the Ottawa River.

Bicycle and pedestrian pathways

There are numerous paved multi-use trails that wind their way through much of the city, including along the Ottawa River, Rideau River, and Rideau Canal. These pathways are used for transportation, tourism, and recreation. Because most streets either have wide curb lanes or bicycle lanes, cycling is a popular mode of transportation in the region throughout the year.

Navigable waterways

Ottawa sits at the confluence of three major rivers: the Ottawa River, the Gatineau River and the Rideau River.

Demographics

In 2011, the populations of the City of Ottawa and the Ottawa-Gatineau census metropolitan area (CMA) were 883,391 and 1,236,324 respectively,
Ottawa's median age of 36.7, as well as its percentage of seniors are both below the provincial average and the national average, while those under 15 exceed Canadian percentages.
The vast majority of the population growth is attributable to relocations to the city, and over 20 percent of the city's population is foreign-born.  Around 75% describe themselves as Christian, with Catholics accounting for 43.3%  of the population and members of Protestant churches was 27.6%.
Bilingualism became official policy for the conduct of municipal business in 2002,  Mother tongue was listed as 62.8% English, 14.9% French and 21.6% list languages other than English and French as their mother tongue.

Local government and politics

Ottawa is a single-tier municipality, meaning it is in itself a census division and has no county or regional municipality government above it. elected in a citywide vote.
Along with being the capital of Canada, Ottawa is politically diverse in local politics. Most of the city has traditionally supported the Liberal Party. Perhaps the safest areas for the Liberals are the ones dominated by Francophones, especially in Vanier and central Gloucester. Central Ottawa is usually more left-leaning, and the New Democratic Party can win ridings there as government unions and activist groups are fairly strong. Some of Ottawa's suburbs are swing areas, notably central Nepean and, despite its Francophone population, Orléans. The southern and western parts of the old city of Ottawa are generally moderate and swing to the Conservative Party. The farther one goes outside the city centre like to Kanata and Barrhaven and rural areas, the voters tend to be increasingly conservative, both fiscally and socially. This is especially true in the former Townships of West Carleton, Goulbourn, Rideau and Osgoode, which are more in line with the conservative areas in the surrounding counties. However not all rural areas support the Conservative Party. Rural parts of the former township of Cumberland, with a large number of Francophones, traditionally support the Liberal Party, though their support has recently weakened.

Education

Ottawa is known as one of the most educated cities in Canada, with over half the population having graduated from College and/or university.
The city has two main public universities — Carleton University and University of Ottawa — and two main public colleges — Algonquin College and La Cité collégiale. It also has two Christian universities — Dominican University College and Saint Paul University. There is also the University of Quebec en Outaouais, Cégep de l'Outaouais, and Heritage College in the neighbouring City of Gatineau.
There are four main public school boards in Ottawa: English, English-Catholic, French, and French-Catholic. The Ottawa-Carleton District School Board (OCDSB) is the largest board with 147 schools,

Economy

Ottawa's primary employers are the Public Service of Canada and the high-tech industry.
The region of Ottawa-Gatineau has the third highest income of all major Canadian cities. The average gross income in the region amounted to $40,078, an increase of 4.9% compared to the previous year. The annual cost of living rate in 2007 grew 1.9%.
The Federal government is the city's largest employer, employing over 110,000 individuals from the National Capital region. Many of the telecommunications and new technology are located in the western part of the city (formerly Kanata).
Another major employer is the health sector, which employs over 18,000 people. Business, finance, administration, and sales and service occupations rank high among types of occupations. Approximately ten percent of Ottawa's GDP is derived from finance, insurance, real estate whereas employment is in goods-producing industries is only half the national average.  The City of Ottawa is the second largest employer with over 15,000 employees.
In 2006, Ottawa experienced an increase of 40,000 jobs over 2001 with a five-year average growth that was relative slower than in the late 1990s. While the number of employees in the federal government stagnated, the high-technology industry grew by 2.4%. The overall growth of jobs in Ottawa-Gatineau was 1.3% compared to the previous year, down to sixth place among Canada's largest cities. The unemployment rate in Ottawa-Gatineau was 5.2% (only in Ottawa: 5.1%),

Culture

Traditionally the ByWard Market (in Lower Town), Parliament Hill and the Golden Triangle  (both in Centretown - Downtown) have been the focal points of the cultural scenes in Ottawa. 
Ottawa hosts a variety of annual seasonal activities — such as Winterlude, the largest festival in Canada,
As Canada's capital, Ottawa has played host to a number of significant cultural events in Canadian history, including the first visit of the reigning Canadian sovereign—King George VI, with his consort, Queen Elizabeth—to his parliament, on 19 May 1939.

Museums and performing arts

Amongst the city's national museums and galleries is the National Gallery of Canada; designed by famous architect Moshe Safdie, it is a permanent home to the Maman sculpture.
The city is also home to the Canada Agriculture Museum, the Canada Aviation and Space Museum, the Canada Science and Technology Museum, Billings Estate Museum, Bytown Museum, Canadian Museum of Contemporary Photography, Canadian Ski Museum, Currency Museum, and the Portrait Gallery of Canada.
The Ottawa Little Theatre, originally called the Ottawa Drama League at its inception in 1913, is the longest-running community theatre company in Ottawa.

Historic and heritage sites

The Rideau Canal is the oldest continuously operated canal system in North America, and in 2007, it was registered as a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Retrieved 14 January 2008. In addition, there are 24 other National Historic Sites of Canada in Ottawa, including: the Central Chambers, the Central Experimental Farm, the Château Laurier, Confederation Square, the former Ottawa Teachers' College, Langevin Block, Laurier House and the Parliament Buildings. Many other properties of cultural value have been designated as having  "heritage elements" by the City of Ottawa under Part IV of the Ontario Heritage Act.

Media

There are three main daily local newspapers printed in Ottawa: two English newspapers, the Ottawa Citizen established as the Bytown Packet in 1845 and the Ottawa Sun, with 900,197 and 274,628 weekly circulation respectively, and one French newspaper, Le Droit. Weekly and monthly papers include the Ottawa Business Journal and several neighbourhood and suburban newspapers. A wide range of Canadian broadcast networks and systems are available in both English and French. Some of the local television stations include CJOH, CTV 2, CHOT and TVA. There are a wide range of radio stations that broadcast in both English and French. Some of these stations include 580 News, Hot 89.9, Bob FM, CHEZ-FM, Jack FM, KISS FM, DAWG FM and NRJ, Live 88.5, 99.1 CHRI.

Sports

Sport in Ottawa has a history dating back to the 19th century. Ottawa is currently home to four professional sports teams. The Ottawa Senators are a professional ice hockey team playing in the National Hockey League. The Senators play their home games at the Canadian Tire Centre.
Collegiate teams in various sports compete in Canadian Interuniversity Sport. The Carleton Ravens are nationally ranked in basketball,  Casual recreational activities, such as skating, cycling,  hiking, sailing, golfing, skiing and fishing/ice fishing are also popular.

International relations

At present, Ottawa is host to 130 embassies. A further 49 countries accredit their embassies and missions in the United States to Canada.
Its sister cities are:





        |last = Brault
        |first = Lucien
        |title = Ottawa Old and New
        |year = 1946
        |publisher =  Ottawa historical information Institute
        |publication-place =
        |oclc = 2947504
        |postscript = 
        }}
        |last = Legget
 |first = Robert
        |title = Rideau Waterway
        |year = 1986
        |publisher = University of Toronto Press
        |publication-place = Toronto
        |isbn =0-8020-6591-0
        |url = 
        |postscript = 
        }}
       |first=Carol
       |last=Martin
       |title=Ottawa: a colourguide
       |url=
       |year=1997
       |publisher=Formac Publishing Company
       |isbn=978-0-88780-396-3
       |postscript=
        }}
        |last = Mika
 |first = Nick & Helma
        |title = Bytown: The Early Days of Ottawa
        |year = 1982
        |publisher = Mika Publishing Company
        |publication-place = Belleville, Ont
        |isbn = 0-919303-60-9
        |postscript = 
        }}
        |last = Woods
        |first = Shirley E. Jr.
        |title = Ottawa: The Capital of Canada
        |year = 1980
        |publisher = Doubleday Canada
        |publication-place = Toronto
        |isbn = 0-385-14722-8
        |postscript = 
        }}



}}

