[[1992 Republican National Convention]]

CATEGORIES: Republican National Conventions, United States presidential election, 1992, History of Houston, Texas, 1992 in Texas

The 1992 National Convention of the Republican Party (GOP) of the United States was held in the Astrodome in Houston, Texas, from August 17 to August 20, 1992. The convention nominated President George H. W. Bush, and Vice President Dan Quayle for reelection.  It was the fourth consecutive appearance by Bush as a candidate on a major party ticket. Only Bush and Franklin D. Roosevelt have been nominated on four consecutive presidential tickets. Richard Nixon and Roosevelt were nominated five times, but not consecutively.



The convention is notable in that it featured the last major address of former President Ronald Reagan's long political career. In his speech, Reagan told Americans that 
 "Whatever else history may say about me when I'm gone, I hope it will record that I appealed to your best hopes, not your worst fears, to your confidence rather than your doubts. My dream is that you will travel the road ahead with liberty's lamp guiding your steps and opportunity's arm steadying your way. My fondest hope for each one of you—and especially for the young people here—is that you will love your country, not for her power or wealth, but for her selflessness and her idealism. May each of you have the heart to conceive, the understanding to direct, and the hand to execute works that will make the world a little better for your having been here." 
Lagging in the polls by double digits to the Clinton-Gore team after a successful Democratic Convention, and with Ross Perot temporarily out of the race, the Republican Party worked hard to rally its base of social conservatives. Pat Buchanan's opening night "Culture War" speech argued that a great battle of values was taking place in the United States.  Republican National Committee chairman Rich Bond (referring to Democrats) claimed that "we are America, they are not America". Marilyn Quayle dismissed Bill Clinton's claim to a new generation of leadership by saying, "Not everyone demonstrated, dropped out, took drugs, joined in the sexual revolution or dodged the draft."The New York Times, Week in Review, The War Within: What They're Really Fighting About Regarding Buchanan's speech, liberal humorist Molly Ivins quipped that it "probably sounded better in the original German."New York Times, Feb 1, 2007 Molly Ivins, Columnist, Dies at 62  Writing twenty years after the convention, the New York Times wrote, "Supporters of Mr. Bush pointed to the tone of the convention as one of the reasons he lost re-election that November to Bill Clinton."Negournay, Adam (August 29, 2012) "From the Fringe in 1992, Buchanan's Words Now Seem Mainstream." New York Times. (Retrieved 8-29-12.)
AIDS activist Mary Fisher, who has HIV, addressed the convention, making an eloquent plea for her cause.
During his acceptance speech, President Bush thanked former President Richard Nixon for his advice and contributions to the administration's foreign policy. This would be Nixon's last RNC, as he died in 1994.
The restaurateur Ninfa Laurenzo delivered the Pledge of Allegiance at the opening session on August 17, 1992. "'92 REPUBLICAN CONVENTION : GOP Faithful Ponder if Party Will Unite Behind Bush : Election: Some see the convention as the jump-off point for a strong campaign. Others wonder if it's too little, too late." Los Angeles Times. August 17, 1992. 2.
The stadium banned outside food from the convention, but set up a food court in the nearby Astroarena. The food court operations included Atchafalaya River Cafe, Bambolino's, Frenchy's, Luther's Bar-B-Q, Ninfa's, PeaColes, and Tommy's Burgers. Some restaurant owners had connections with the Houston Host Committee, the group in charge of the vendor market of the Astroarena, and Republican Party officials. The hot dogs and soft drinks sold by the Astrodome's official caterer, Harry M. Stevens, were not present during the convention. Vendors at the convention paid Stevens a fee so they could sell food at the convention, as specified in Stevens' contract with the Astrodome. "Convention '92/Convention briefs." Houston Chronicle. Sunday August 9, 1992. A25.

Aftermath

The convention energized the Republican base, giving the Bush-Quayle ticket a bounce in the polls.The 1992 Campaign; The Race in Different Polls – New York Times The race narrowed considerably, however, when Ross Perot rebooted his insurgent campaign.The 1992 Campaign: Poll; Poll Finds Hostility to Perot And No Basic Shift in Race – New York Times
Because the Astrodome was their home stadium, the Houston Astros were forced to play 26 consecutive road games from July 27 through August 23. The major parties have avoided hosting their conventions at baseball stadiums since then, now holding them in non sports venues (such as Convention Centers) and venues for teams whose seasons are not currently in play at the time of the convention.

The official tally

President

Vice President

Vice President Dan Quayle was renominated by voice vote.








