[[Legal & General]]

CATEGORIES: Companies established in 1836, Insurance companies of the United Kingdom, Companies listed on the London Stock Exchange, Companies based in London, Life insurance companies, 1836 establishments in the United Kingdom

Legal & General Group Plc, commonly known as Legal & General, is a British multinational financial services company headquartered in London, United Kingdom. Its products include life insurance, general insurance, pensions and investments. It has operations in the United Kingdom, Egypt, France, Germany, the Gulf, India, the Netherlands and the United States. As at 6 August 2013 it had total funds under management of £433 billion.
Legal & General is listed on the London Stock Exchange and is a constituent of the FTSE 100 Index.

History

1836 to 2000

Legal & General was formed by Sergeant John Adams and five other lawyers in June 1836 in a Chancery Lane coffee shop. The name was changed to Legal & General Life Assurance Society to reflect that policies were available to the general public but with share ownership restricted to those in the legal profession. The group expanded in the UK and soon began to acquire overseas life assurance companies, purchasing a pensions business from the Metropolitan Life Assurance Company of New York in the 1930s. In 1956 Life business was set up in Australia.
The society became a wholly owned division of Legal & General Group plc in the 1970s.
frame|The former Legal & General logoThe previous Legal & General logo incorporates the image of the Temple Bar (which is still used in the logo of the company's social and athletic committee), and the founding date. The umbrella logo used today was introduced by former Chief Press Officer Gordon Macdonald in June 1984. During the early 1990s, Legal and General sponsored the Regional Weather Forecasts for the ITV network and in 1999, Legal & General announced plans to merge its business with National Westminster Bank to form the first 'bancassurance' company in the UK. However, poor market reception to the deal saw the Royal Bank of Scotland bid for the National Westminster, and the merger deal collapsed.

2000 to present

The company sold the Legal & General Bank and Legal & General Mortgage Services to Northern Rock in 2003
In 2008 Legal & General bought Suffolk Life, a provider of Self Invested Pension products,L&G acquires Suffolk Life and also outsourced its IT development areas to TCS (Tata Consultancy Services).
The company formed a joint venture with two Indian public sector banks, Bank of Baroda and Andhra Bank to launch IndiaFirst Life Insurance Company in India in 2009

Operations

Today the company continues to offer a wide range of products and, in addition to its direct sales service and brokerage agreements with numerous tied agents and independent financial advisers.

Estate Agency – Xperience

Legal & General owns one of the largest estate agency/lettings agency franchise businesses in the United Kingdom through its LGFL (Legal & General Franchising Ltd) subsidiary. The businesses are not marketed under the Legal & General brand, but instead operate under a number of regional brands, operating over 110 branches nationwide.
LGFL Franchisees trade under one of four different brand names depending on the area in which they operate. Each brand name has been trading for at least 17 years and in some cases over 150. The brands are: CJ Hole; Ellis & Co; Parkers; Whitegates and Michael Evison.
Since 2005 LGFL has operated under the name Xperience further separating the branding of operation from the main Legal & General brand.

Senior management

Dr Nigel Wilson (the previous CFO) became Group Chief Executive on 30 June 2012.
Dr Nigel Wilson became CFO in September 2009.






