[[Peter Steele]]

CATEGORIES: 1962 births, 2010 deaths, American bass-baritones, American heavy metal bass guitarists, American heavy metal singers, American male singers, American people of Irish descent, American people of Polish descent, American musicians, American people of Russian descent, American people of Scottish descent, American people of Icelandic descent, American Roman Catholics, Converts to Roman Catholicism from atheism or agnosticism, Deaths from aortic aneurysm, Singers from New York City, People from Brooklyn, People from Staten Island, People with bipolar disorder, Type O Negative members

Peter Thomas Ratajczyk (January 4, 1962 – April 14, 2010),
As the frontman for Type O Negative, Steele was known for his vampiric effect, "His lyrics were often intensely personal, dealing with subjects including love, loss, and addiction." Steele credited Black Sabbath and The Beatles as his key musical inspirations.

Early life

Steele was born in Red Hook, Brooklyn into a Roman Catholic family Steele started taking guitar lessons at age 12, moving on to bass six months later.
Steele worked for the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation up until he began touring with Type O Negative in the summer of 1994. He was based at Brooklyn Heights Promenade, where his job involved park maintenance, driving vehicles including garbage trucks and steamrollers, and eventual promotion to the role of Park Supervisor. Steele considered his days working for the Parks Department to be among his happiest.

Musical career

Fallout and Carnivore (1979-1987)

In 1979, Steele formed the heavy metal band Fallout. In 1982, after the split of Fallout, Steele formed the thrash metal band Carnivore. With Carnivore, Steele's lyrics were often harsh and politically incorrect, dealing with religion, war, race and misogyny. Carnivore released their debut self-titled album in 1985. In 1986, Steele wrote lyrics for several songs on hardcore punk band Agnostic Front's second album Cause for Alarm. In 1987, Carnivore released Retaliation, before splitting up later that same year. 

Type O Negative

=Formation=

Steele formed the band in 1989 along with his childhood friends Josh Silver, Kenny Hickey and Sal Abruscato (later replaced by Johnny Kelly). The band originally used the name "Repulsion", but had to change name in 1990 due to legal issues with the American grindcore band of the same name. The band then used the name "Subzero".

=Slow, Deep and Hard and The Origin of the Feces (1991-1992)=

Type O Negative's debut album, Slow, Deep and Hard, was released in 1991. The album incorporated the thrash elements of Carnivore merged with doom metal. Steele had written the music in the space of one night in the aftermath of a relationship break-up, and this was reflected in the lyrical topics of heartbreak, fantasies of revenge, and the contemplation of suicide; something Steele had himself attempted: "On October 15th, 1989. I slashed my wrists. All I can say is that I fell in love with the wrong person."
Steele caused some controversy when touring in Europe to support Slow Deep and Hard, thanks to rumors about his social and political views, with some critics going so far as to brand him a Nazi sympathizer, even though his bandmate, Josh Silver, is Jewish. Steele suggested that the European press had misunderstood his humor, and that his sarcasm was sometimes lost in translation to print.
In 1992, Type O Negative released the "live" album The Origin of the Feces. The album included a fictitious hostile audience and an evacuation of the venue after a bomb threat had supposedly been called in.

=Bloody Kisses, October Rust and World Coming Down (1993-2002)=

In 1993, Type O Negative released their breakthrough album Bloody Kisses. The album focused primarily on romance, love, sex, and death. The song "Black No.1 (Little Miss Scare-All)" pays tribute to gothic subculture and is an ode to a goth girl Steele had once dated. Steele attacked his detractors with the songs "We Hate Everyone" and "Kill All the White People", which dealt directly with the band's rumored racist ideology and served to erode any such accusations. Bloody Kisses eventually achieved Platinum status and established Type O Negative as one of gothic metal's most influential bands.
Type O Negative released the album October Rust in 1996. It featured a more multi-layered and melodic sound than its predecessor, though it retained similar lyrical themes. Steele penned the majority of the material on October Rust whilst on the road touring, October Rust eventually achieved Gold status.
Steele had been dealing with personal problems during the recording and mixing of 1999's stripped-down and heavier sounding World Coming Down. The themes of drug abuse and addiction appeared on the album, most notably on the song "White Slavery". Steele noted the emotional strain caused by executing songs from World Coming Down in a live setting. The setlists for live shows performed since the initial tour to support World Coming Down usually featured very few selections from the album.
In 2000, Steele made a guest appearance on the song "Just Say No To Love" from Iommi, the first solo album by Black Sabbath guitarist Tony Iommi. In 2002, he guest appeared on the track "Descent" from the Doro album Fight.

=Life Is Killing Me and Dead Again (2003-2010)=

Type O Negative released the album Life Is Killing Me in 2003. Lyrically the album dealt with issues including self-pity, hatred, drugs, death and religion. Steele wrote the song "(We Were) Electrocute" about a "stunning" ex-girlfriend, and how they would attract the interest of passers-by when out together as a couple. Steele's favorite female television characters are the inspiration for the track "How Could She?". "I Like Goils" makes light of the attention Steele received from gay men, specifically after his photoshoot for Playgirl magazine.
In 2005, Type O Negative left Roadrunner Records. Steele had never been happy with the conditions of the recording contract and had described it as "a millstone around my neck". Steele revealed that Type O Negative's split from Roadrunner Records, aside from a poor offer, had to do with an allegedly unauthorized release of a Best Of compilation.
There were unconfirmed rumors at one point of Steele's death after the band website posted an image of a tombstone bearing his name and the dates 1962-2005. According to an article dated May 14, 2005, Steele was not dead; the gag was related to their fresh signing with SPV Records. The website discontinued the tombstone picture in October 2005.
In 2006, Steele reactivated Carnivore with a new lineup that included longtime Type O Negative collaborator Paul Bento.
Steele made his final recording on the 2007 album Dead Again. He revealed on MTV's Headbangers Ball that the new alliance with SPV Records was probably his favorite thing about Dead Again from a production standpoint. "Halloween in Heaven" is a song about dead rockstars that Steele was inspired to write by the death of his close friend Dimebag Darrell. Steele's final live performance was on Halloween night at Harpos Concert Theatre in Detroit, Michigan, the last show of Type O Negative's 2009 tour.

Further appearances

Playgirl

Following the success of Bloody Kisses, Steele began to receive attention outside of music. He appeared as a nude centerfold of Playgirl in 1995.

Television and film

Steele went on to appear as a guest on the talk shows Ricki Lake, The Jerry Springer Show, and The Howard Stern Show. In 2003, Steele had an acting role in the episode "Exeunt Omnes" of the HBO drama series Oz. Also in 2003 he appeared in the film Dirtbags (Armpit of Metal).

Personal life

Steele was widely known for standing 6'8" (203 cm) tall, giving him a famously menacing stage appearance. Despite that perception, Steele admitted to suffering from stage fright which he overcame by drinking alcohol before shows, and by drinking red wine when on stage.
Outside of music, Steele spent time lifting weights both at home and on his tour bus. and kept several as pets.
During 2005, Steele disappeared for an extended period with no explanation. Rumors of his death, terminal illness, and other speculations increased until the mystery was dispelled in an interview on the 2006 DVD Symphony for the Devil. In the interview Steele briefly mentions his incarceration in Rikers Island and "the psych ward at Kings County Hospital ". Steele's family members had staged an intervention and insisted he check into a mental institution. Steele later confirmed he had been suffering from paranoia caused by his heavy substance abuse. Steele had been using cocaine since the age of 35, a decision he expressed great regret about. Steele then attended rehab for cocaine and alcohol addiction, and later served a 30-day prison term for assaulting a love rival. Steele made light of his incarceration by wearing a prison uniform on stage during live performances.
Steele stated in a 2003 interview that he was bipolar, and linked his mood swings to the types of songs he wrote. During a 2007 interview Steele explained: "I've always been a very depressed person, but that's only one side of me, you know. It makes me feel better when I can express my depression, my anger, my frustration through music... sonic therapy." 
In April 2007, Steele revealed that he began identifying himself as Roman Catholic in recent years, after decades of self-professed atheism. In an interview with Decibel magazine, Steele explained:  "There are no atheists in foxholes, they say, and I was a foxhole atheist for a long time. But after going through a midlife crisis and having many things change very quickly, it made me realize my mortality. And when you start to think about death, you start to think about what's after it. And then you start hoping there is a God. For me, it's a frightening thought to go nowhere. I also can't believe that people like Stalin and Hitler are gonna go to the same place as Mother Teresa." 

Death

Peter Steele died of an aortic aneurysm 

=Tributes=

Following his death, the metal band Voyager penned a track entitled "Iron Dream" in memoriam of Steele, released on their 2011 album The Meaning of I.
In his autobiography Iron Man, Black Sabbath's Tony Iommi described his shock at Steele's death, adding, "Peter was a big, tall, and very, very nice guy."






