[[North Sydney, New South Wales]]

CATEGORIES: 2000 Summer Olympic venues, Olympic athletics venues, Suburbs of Sydney, Central business districts in Australia

North Sydney is a suburb and commercial district on the Lower North Shore of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. North Sydney is located 3 kilometres north of the Sydney central business districtGregorys Street Directory, Gregorys Publishing Company, 2007 and is the administrative centre for the local government area of North Sydney Council.

History

Aborigines on the southern side of Port Jackson (Sydney Harbour) called the north side warung which meant the other side, while those on the northern side used the same name to describe the southern side.
The first name used by European settlers was Hunterhill, named after a property owned by Thomas Muir of Huntershill (1765–1799), a Scottish political reformer. He purchased land in 1794 near the location of north pylon of the Sydney Harbour Bridge is now located, and built a house which he named after his childhood home. This area north to Gore Hill became known as St Leonards. The township of St Leonards was laid out in 1836 in what is now North Sydney, bounded by what is now Miller, Walker, Lavender and Berry Streets. By 1846 there were 106 houses here and by 1859, the commercial centre had extended from Milsons Point to Miller Street. A bus service operated by Jeremiah Wall ran between Milsons Point and North Sydney Shops, and North Sydney thus developed its own identity.
The North Sydney municipality was incorporated in 1890 and after naming disputes, North Sydney was settled upon. The post office which opened in 1854 as St Leonards was changed to North Sydney in 1890. The first public school which opened in 1874 as St Leonards was renamed North Sydney in 1910.The Book of Sydney Suburbs, Compiled by Frances Pollon, Angus & Robertson Publishers, 1990, Published in Australia ISBN 0-207-14495-8, page 191
North Sydney underwent a dramatic transformation into a commercial hub in 1971-72. In this period no less than 27 skyscrapers were built.Sydney Architecture

Trams

The history of the North Sydney tramway system can be divided into three periods - the first from the original opening in 1886 to 1909, when the McMahons Point line opened. The second period covers the time until the Wynyard line was opened across the Sydney Harbour Bridge in 1932, and the third from then until the general closure of the system in 1958.D Keenan: The North Sydney lines of the Sydney tramway system. Transit Press November 1987 ISBN 0-909338-05-1
The first part of the North Sydney tramway system was a double-track cable tramway which commenced at the original Milsons Point Ferry wharf, located where the north pylon of the Harbour Bridge is now. The line originally extended via Alfred St (now Alfred Street South), Junction St (now Pacific Highway), Blue St and Miller Sts to the engine house and depot in Ridge St. It used cable grip cars called "dummies" and un-powered trailer cars.
A feature of these lines was the underground tram terminus at Wynyard railway station (the only one in Australia), and the tracks over the Sydney Harbour Bridge. Trams ran from Blue St, North Sydney over a now-demolished steel arch bridge over the Harbour Bridge Roadway, then over the eastern side of the harbour bridge (now road lanes), through a tram platform at Milsons Point railway station, before descending underground into platforms 1 and 2 of Wynyard station.

Heritage

The following buildings are on the Register of the National Estate:The Heritage of Australia, Macmillan Company, 1981, p.2/45-47

Commercial area

The commercial district of North Sydney includes the second largest concentration of office buildings in New South Wales, with a large representation from the advertising and information technology industries. Advertising, marketing businesses and associated trades such as printing have traditionally dominated the business life of the area though these have been supplanted to a certain extent by information technology businesses. Corporations whose offices are in North Sydney include Polltraxx Protection Services, Cisco Systems, Novell, Sun Microsystems, AGL, AAMI, Sophos, Symantec, Nando's and until October 2007, Optus.
Unlike other major suburban hubs within the Sydney metropolitan area, North Sydney has limited shopping facilities and almost no Sunday trading. There are only two medium sized supermarkets (Aldi & IGA). The main shopping complex is the Greenwood Plaza, which is connected to North Sydney station.greenwoodplaza.au Berry Square is another shopping centre in Berry Street, formerly known as North Sydney Shopping World.northsydneysw.au

Transport

North Sydney is directly linked to the Sydney CBD by road and rail across the Sydney Harbour Bridge. North Sydney railway station is on the North Shore, Northern & Western Line of the Sydney Trains network. Bus services by Sydney Buses are heavily present in Blue Street, connecting services towards North Sydney's neighbouring suburbs. The Warringah Freeway links North Sydney south to the Sydney CBD and north to Chatswood, New South Wales. High Street, North Sydney is a wharf stop on the Neutral Bay ferry service, which is part of the Sydney Ferries network. It is possible to walk from parts of North Sydney to the city centre in less than 30 minutes, by way of the Sydney Harbour Bridge.

Places of worship

Churches include St Mary's Catholic Church on Miller Street, St Francis Xavier's War Memorial Church in Mackenzie Street, St Thomas Anglican Church on West and Church Streets, Christ Church on Walker and Lavender Streets, St Peter's Presbyterian Church and Manse on Blues Point Road and Chinese Christian Church on Alfred Street.
A Hare Krishna temple is located on the corner of Falcon Street and Miller Street.iskcon.au

Schools

Primary schools include North Sydney Demonstration School and St Marys Primary School. High schools include the public North Sydney Boys High School and North Sydney Girls High School, the Catholic Marist College North Shore and Monte Sant' Angelo Mercy College and independent schools Wenona School and Sydney Church of England Grammar School (Shore).
St Aloysius' College of Milson's Point and Loreto Kirribilli are also within the confines of the North Sydney local government area. Post-secondary education providers include the Australian Catholic University, APM College of Business and Communication, Raffles College of Design and Commerce, Walker and Miller Training and Billy Blue College of Design.

Landmarks

Sport and recreation

St Leonards Park which includes North Sydney Oval is the suburbs major recreation area, popular among joggers and those wishing to walk their dogs. North Sydney Ovals are notably cricket pitches during the summer and the home ground for the Northern Suburbs Rugby Union Club and the North Sydney Bears Rugby League Club during the winter.
The Norths Pirates Junior Rugby Union Club, is North Sydneys local junior village rugby union team who play all home games at Tunks Park in the adjoining suburb of Cammeray together with North Sydney Brothers, a junior rugby league club and the rugby league teams of Marist College North Shore.
During the 2000 Summer Olympics, the city was the starting point of the marathon course that would end  later at the Olympic Stadium in Sydney.2000 Summer Olympics official report. Volume 1. p. 106.

Notable people

Governance

The local government area of North Sydney Council includes the suburb of North Sydney and the surrounding suburbs of Crows Nest, Wollstonecraft, Waverton, Neutral Bay, McMahons Point, Kirribilli, Cremorne (divided between North Sydney & Mosman), and Cammeray.

Gallery

Heritage

Image:Wiki0150.jpg|North Sydney Post Office, Pacific Highway
Image:NthSydneyBuilding0011.jpg|Rag and Famish Hotel
Image:MaryMackillopMuseum0002.jpg|Mary Mackillop museum, Mount Street
File:NthSydneyBuilding0001.jpg|House designed by William Wardell

Places of worship

Image:Mary Mackillop Memorial Chapel, Mount Street, North Sydney, New South Wales, Sydney - Wiki0152.jpg|Mary Mackillop Memorial Chapel, Mount Street
Image:St Francis Xavier Church, Mackenzie Street, North Sydney, New South Wales, Sydney - Wiki0156.jpg|St Francis Xavier Church
Image:St Francis Xavier Parish Centre, Mackenzie Street, North Sydney, New South Wales, Sydney - Wiki0155.jpg|St Francis Xavier Parish Centre
Image:NthSydneyBuilding0005.jpg|St Peters Church
Image:St Thomas North Sydney 1.jpg|St Thomas' Church






