[[MEDITECH]]

CATEGORIES: Health care companies of the United States, Companies based in Massachusetts, Privately held companies based in Massachusetts, MUMPS programming language family, Health information technology companies

Medical Information Technology, Inc., commonly known as MEDITECH, is a Massachusetts-based software and service company selling information systems that are installed in health care organizations.  The company was founded in 1969 by A. Neil Pappalardo.

History

In 1969, A. Neil Pappalardo began development of MIIS. This was one of several proprietary implementations of MUMPS, a programming language which at the time had not been standardized. MIIS users and developers later influenced efforts toward MUMPS standardization during the early 1970s; the MUMPS standard was complete by 1974 and approved by 1977. Between 1971 and 1979, Pappalardo developed various other systems, but those associated with integrated health care information remained his primary focus.{
In 1982, MEDITECH adopted the then-new MAGIC programming language. MAGIC became integral to MEDITECH's health care information systems' implementations. In 1994, the company adopted Client/Server, a second software platform. While Client/Server utilized the same programming language, MAGIC runs all code on a central server, and clients are in effect dumb terminals. Client/Server executes the code on a user's PC, although all code remains centralized. Client server supports only Microsoft Windows-based operating systems.  MEDITECH unveiled its 6.0 platform in 2006.{

Markets

MEDITECH supplies an integrated information system for health care. This enables health care providers to track a patient's medical records and monitor ongoing treatment, regardless of the patient's whereabouts.
With over 2,200 customers,
MEDITECH supplies Sheehan Medical in Ireland in their two hospitals, the Galway Clinic and Blackrock Clinic. For the Cork Medical Centre as third clinic was made a deal

Products and services

MEDITECH offers software for health care organizations of various types and sizes.  Some of the software modules offered by MEDITECH include the following:
Health Information Management, Revenue Cycle, Scanning and Archiving, Scheduling and Referral Management, Emergency Department Management, Cost Accounting, Data Repository, General Accounting, Human Resource Planning, Supply Chain Management, Operating Room Management, Patient Discharge Instructions, Long Term Care Solutions, Behavioral Health Solutions, and Home Health Solutions.
Some other developments include:

Partnerships

MEDITECH has one wholly owned subsidiary, LSS Data Systems,  acquired in Spring 2011. At that time, Joanne Wood, MEDITECH senior vice president of client services for the MAGIC and Client/Server platforms, took on the additional titles of President and Chief Operating Officer (COO) of LSS Data Systems, overseeing all operations of the company. MEDITECH South Africa, founded in 1982, provides software and services to the health care industry in Africa and the Middle East. Other companies such as BridgeHead Software  produce software designed to be used with MEDITECH software. On June 6, 2012, MEDITECH announced its partnership with Intelligent Medical Objects to provide seamless mapping of clinician-friendly diagnosis and procedure terminologies to billing codes and medical concepts.

Locations

MEDITECH owns six facilities in eastern Massachusetts located in Westwood (two offices, three buildings), Norwood, Canton, Framingham, and Fall River, with a seventh planned for Foxboro and an eighth planned for Waltham in the former Adobe office building. MEDITECH also has a facility in Atlanta, GA that was formerly Patient Care Technologies (PtCT).  MEDITECH also owns a building in Minnetonka Minnesota.




