[[Sharon Case]]

CATEGORIES: American television actresses, American soap opera actresses, 1971 births, Living people, American Scientologists, Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series winners, Actresses from Detroit, Michigan, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, People from Chatsworth, Los Angeles, Actresses from Los Angeles, California

Sharon Case (born February 9, 1971) is an American actress and former model. At the age of 17, Case began working as a model, relocating briefly to Japan, before pursuing an acting career. She is best known for her roles on daytime television soap operas, scoring parts in the serials General Hospital and As the World Turns during the early stages of her career. In 1994, she stepped into the role of Sharon Newman on the CBS daytime soap opera The Young and the Restless, which she still plays presently. Case, who is considered a leading actress for the series, won the 1999 Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series for her performance which has been met with critical acclaim.

Personal life

Sharon Case was born on February 9, 1971 in Detroit, Michigan. During her childhood, she was involved heavily in dancing, devoting herself to ballet and jazz. While she was aged three, Case and her family relocated to Chatsworth, California.
Case is best friends with fashion stylist Elif Inanc, and is also close with on-screen co-star Melody Thomas Scott.
In December 2001, Case became the first soap opera actress to be featured on the cover of FHM, a men's lifestyle magazine. This issue featured multiple other daytime television actresses.

Career

Beginnings

Although Case' main goal was to become an actress, she turned her attention to modeling as a teenager. She stated: "I thought modeling would be a good start in the business".

Television and film

In November 1989, Case scored her first television role playing Dawn Winthrop on the ABC Network soap opera General Hospital. Case wanted to "perfect" her audition prior to screen testing as Dawn, who served as the long-lost daughter of the long-running character Monica Quartermaine (Leslie Charleson). Speaking of the audition, Case stated: "I practiced night and day ... It was a heavy scene in which Dawn learned that her boyfriend Ned (Kurt Robin McKinne) had once slept with her mother! I knew I had to do the best job possible". Previously, she turned town a larger role in the film due to being uncomfortable topless on-screen. Instead, she accepted a smaller, clothed role.
In 2005, Case appeared in an independent film entitled Carpool Guy with The Young and the Restless co-star Lauralee Bell. Also that year, she starred in the short film Wentworth. The film was about a man named Wentworth who had to choose between the women of his dream Emily and the "perfect" woman in his dreams, "Dream" Emily, both played by Case. It was directed by Steve Suettinger, and produced independently by students at the University of Southern California.
In 2007, Case starred alongside Debra Hopkins in her second short film, Repressions, which consisted of 24 minutes. Produced by Roundhay Garden films and directed by Adam Kargman, it was filmed from May 14 to July 16, 2006.

The Young and the Restless

In August 1994, Case was cast in the role of Sharon Newman on the CBS Daytime soap opera The Young and the Restless. The character had been introduced by the show's creator William J. Bell earlier that year, on March 24, 1994.
Since 2011, the character's storylines have been met with controversy and negative feedback. Case herself has stated that she has been unhappy with the character being paired with "too many men" because it "waters" the storyline down. A storyline in which she let her children believe she was dead was heavily frowned upon by Yahoo!.
The show's former head writer and executive producer Maria Arena Bell has been highly criticized for the "destruction" of Sharon. Jillian Bowe, a writer of the website Zap2It said that the character was "beloved" but Bell had "assassinated" her "via one ill-conceived storyline and/or romance after another." The character has tackled issues such as infidelity and rape, and in recent years, mental health social issues like kleptomania and most notably bipolar disorder. Case continues to play Sharon today.

Jewelry line

On January 29, 2010, it was announced that Case would unveil her own signature line of fashion jewelry entitled "Pomp". Inspired by her love for fashion, the actress co-created over 50 pieces with her best friend and fashion stylist, Elif Inanc. "When I was about 11 years old, my grandmother passed along all of her fashion jewelry to me. I thought I had walked into a room full of treasure", stated Case, speaking about her ongoing passion for accessories. The fashion jewelry which consists of rings, necklaces and earrings among other accessories, features stones such as hematite, simulated pearls and rhinestones as well as crystals. Kim Daugherty of Yahoo! noted that "they are touted to be ideal for a night on the town, giving 'The Young and the Restless' fans an affordable way to sparkle and shine with star-quality by wearing star-designed jewelry". Furthermore, the line has been noted to be "dramatic" and "shiny".
In January 2012, Case spoke with the website Fashion Wrap-Up about her inspiration for the line, stating: "Elif and I came up with the idea for this jewelry line a few years ago. I really love fashion and she is a stylist. We thought it would be fun to be in business together as friends. We like to keep up with the current trends and we also enjoy all of the classics looks—our focus is on both. We deliberated over the name of the line for some time. We both came up with several different names, and in the end POMP is what we both agreed on based on the meaning of the word: splendor, drama, grandeur, etc."

Filmography

Awards and nominations






