[[Sun-Sentinel]]

CATEGORIES: Newspapers published in Florida, Broward County, Florida, Tribune Company subsidiaries, Media in the Miami metropolitan area

The Sun-Sentinel,Spelling as per the newspaper itself, at  owned by the Tribune Company, is the main daily newspaper of Fort Lauderdale, Florida, U.S., and all of Broward County, but circulates throughout South Florida. It is the largest-circulation newspaper in South Florida.
The publisher, since 2007, is Howard Greenberg. The editor, since 2011, is Howard Saltz.



For many years, the Sun-Sentinel exclusively targeted Broward County.  However, it expanded its coverage to all of South Florida (including the Miami-Dade and Palm Beach areas) in the late 1990s. In the latter area The Palm Beach Post is its chief competition.
The SunSentinel emphasizes local news, through its Community News and Local sections. It has a daily circulation of 226,591 and a Sunday circulation of 319,103.
The paper was awarded its first Pulitzer Prize on April 15, 2013, the Gold Medal in the category of Public Service Journalism, for its investigative series about hundreds of off-duty police officers who regularly speed—often at 120 or 130 mph—without being punished. You can read the series here.
The newspaper has also been a finalist for a Pulitzer 13 times, including for its 2005 coverage of Hurricane Wilma and an investigation into the Federal Emergency Management Agency's mismanagement of hurricane aid. (The latter investigation was featured in the PBS documentary series Exposé: America's Investigative Reports in an episode entitled "Crisis Mismanagement.")  It also produced a significant contribution to information graphics in the form of News Illustrated, a weekly full-page graphic that has received more than 30 international awards. The photography department has been nominated for a Pulitzer Prize twice in the Spot News category. It was nominated in 1982 for its coverage of a Haitian refugee boat disaster.  It was nominated again in 1999 for its powerful coverage of Hurricane Mitch in Central America.
The Sun-Sentinel publishes several websites, including SunSentinel.com, SouthFloridaParenting.com, and TeenlinkSouthFlorida. Its website has news video from two South Florida television stations: West Palm Beach's CBS affiliate WPEC and WSFL-TV, the Miami and Fort Lauderdale CW affiliate. It also publishes a Spanish-language weekly, El Sentinel, and an alternative weekly distributed for free throughout the region.

History

The Sun-Sentinel traces its history to the 1910 founding of the Fort Lauderdale Weekly Herald, the first newspaper on record in the Fort Lauderdale area, and the Everglades Breeze, a locally printed paper founded in 1911, which promoted itself as "Florida's great Farm, Truck and Fruit Growing paper." In 1926, Horace and Tom Stillwell purchased the paper. However, the devastation wrought by the 1926 Miami hurricane caused circulation to drop and, in 1929, Tom Stillwell sold the paper to the Gore Publishing Company, headed by R.H. Gore, Sr. By 1945, circulation of the Daily News and Evening Sentinel had climbed to 10,000.
In 1953, Gore Publishing changed the name of the paper to the Fort Lauderdale News and added a Sunday morning edition. In 1960, when the paper had a circulation of 60,000, Gore Publishing purchased the weekly Pompano  Beach Sun. Reviving the "Sentinel" name it had discarded seven years earlier, Gore began publishing a new morning newspaper, the Pompano Sun-Sentinel. In 1963, the Tribune Company acquired Gore Publishing. In the 1970s, the two newspapers became known as the Fort Lauderdale News and Sun-Sentinel. In 1982, the two papers merged their editorial staffs,Editor to Retire from Fort Lauderdale's Sun-Sentinel in June. and the newspaper became known as the Fort Lauderdale Sun-Sentinel.  In 2000, after expanding its coverage, the paper changed its name to the South Florida Sun-Sentinel.
In 2001, the Sun-Sentinel opened its first full-time foreign bureau in Havana, Cuba. Shared with the Tribune Co., their Havana newsroom is the only permanent presence of any South Florida newspaper.
In 2002, the Sun-Sentinel began publishing a Spanish weekly newspaper, El Sentinel. The newspaper is distributed free on Saturdays to Hispanic households in Broward and Palm Beach counties and is also available in racks in both counties. It is also available online at Elsentinel.  In 2004, the paper won the Payne Award for Ethics in Journalism for its coverage of health and human services in the state.
On August 17, 2008, the Sun-Sentinel unveiled a redesigned layout, with larger graphics, more color, and a new large "S" logo. This is in tune with another Tribune newspaper (Orlando Sentinel), which redesigned its newspaper a few months previously, and created a brand synergy with Tribune sister operation and CW affiliate WSFL-TV (Channel 39), which relocated its operations to the Sun-Sentinel offices in 2008 and adopted a logo matching the capital "S" in the new logo.






