[[Batam]]

CATEGORIES: Batam, Riau Archipelago, Riau, Cities in Indonesia, Regency capitals of Indonesia, Special economic zones

Batam is an island, municipality (an Indonesian kotamadya), and the largest city (on the island) in Riau Islands Province within Indonesia. Batam is a free trade zone, part of the Indonesia–Malaysia–Singapore Growth Triangle, located  off Singapore's south coast. The 715 km² (276 miles²) island, almost identical in size to Singapore, is the core part of the municipality.  The municipality (1,010.88  km²) has a population of 1,153,860 (Civil Registry Survey April 2012).com/content/soal-mandalika-resort-dprd-ntb-studi-komparatif-dengan-pemkot-batam  As per the 2010 Census it was the fastest growing municipality in the nation, with a growth rate of 11% per year.thejakartapost.html Though the municipality covers adjacent islands, nearly all the people reside on Batam island.

Geography

Batam is located west of Bintan Island, south of Singapore, north of Rempang and east of Bulan Island. The Riau Strait separates Batam and Bintan.
Batam has tropical climate with average temperatures between 26-32°C. Humidity in the region ranges from 73% to 96%. The region has a wet season from November to April and a dry season from May to October. Average annual rainfall is around 2,600 mm.

Administration

The local governmental offices are in Batam Centre. The largest community on the island is Lubuk Baja (formerly known as Nagoya). Other residential area include Baloi Garden, Sekupang, Nongsapura (Nongsa), Waterfront City (Teluk Senimba), Batu Ampar, Jodoh.
Batam City (Kotamadya Batam) is divided into 12 districts (kecamatan) - which include several adjacent islands such as Bulan, Rempang and Galang as well as Batam Island itself.

Economy

Beginning in the 1970s, the island underwent a significant transformation from a largely forested area into a major harbor and industrial zone.
Under a framework signed in June 2006, Batam, along with parts of neighboring Bintan and Karimun, are a part of a Special Economic Zone with Singapore; this zone eliminates tariffs and value-added taxes for goods shipped between Batam and Singapore.
In 2010, approximately 58 percent of foreign tourists came from Singapore, and 13 percent from Malaysia.Living like kingsBatam losing its sex appeal
Batam has recently been exposed as a major facilitator of the controversial ivory trade.thejakartapost.html

Demographic

The demographic of Batam consist of mixture of races, religions and languages among the people. With the population of more than 1 million in the entire municipality, Islam has been majority of the religion among the society with more than 70% of total population are Muslim, followed by Christianity (Catholic and Protestantism) as well as Buddhism and Confucianism and other religions.
Just like in other regions in Indonesia, Bahasa Indonesia is primarily spoken by people in Batam, with several other languages and dialects such as Malay and Chinese dialects (mainly Hokkien and Teochew) as well as Mandarin and English due to the close proximity to Singapore and Malaysia that makes Batam becoming one of the most visited destination by tourists from both countries.

Transport

The local ferry terminal ports connect to nearby Singapore and Bintan, and provides routes to Johor Bahru (Malaysia). There are five ferry terminals on the island: Harbourbay, Nongsapura Ferry Terminal, Sekupang, Waterfront City and Batam Centre International Ferry Terminal.
Buses are available in Batam. They had used Sunlong buses and King Long buses.
Hang Nadim Airport is the island's main airport, and has the longest runway in Indonesia. International flights currently include Singapore, Kuala Lumpur, and Penang.






