[[Sanjeev Bhaskar]]

CATEGORIES: 1963 births, British male actors of South Asian descent, English male comedians, English male film actors, English male stage actors, English male voice actors, English male musical theatre actors, English male television actors, English television writers, Living people, Officers of the Order of the British Empire, People from Essex, English people of Indian descent, People from Ealing, Alumni of the University of Hertfordshire, People associated with the University of Sussex, Actors of Indian descent

Sanjeev Bhaskar, OBE (born 31 October 1963) is a British comedian, actor and broadcaster, best known for his work in the BBC Two comedy series Goodness Gracious Me and as host of The Kumars at No. 42. He also presented and starred in a documentary series called India with Sanjeev Bhaskar in which he travelled India and visited his ancestral home in today's Pakistan.
In 2003, he was listed in The Observer as one of the 50 funniest acts in British comedy.

Biography

Personal life

Bhaskar was born in Ealing, London, and grew up living above a launderette in Hounslow, west London. He earned a degree in marketing from the Hatfield Polytechnic (now the University of Hertfordshire) before landing a job as a marketing executive at IBM. He soon realised that he preferred comedy to marketing and joined forces with an old college friend, Nitin Sawhney, to start a musical comedy double act called "The Secret Indians (non-Asian)" which they first performed in 1996 at the now-defunct Tom Allen Arts Centre in East London. This performance was featured on a BBC magazine show called Reportage. They performed extensively also at the Watermans Arts Centre with numerous other acts at a regular Asian comedy night called "One Nation Under a Groove... Their real break came when they were performing a show at the Oval House venue in South London where, after a strong review in Time Out magazine by journalist and playwright Bonnie Greer, they were approached by Anil Gupta, the producer of what was to become the BBC sketch series Goodness Gracious Me.
In February 2009, Bhaskar and other entertainers wrote an open letter to The Times protesting against the trial of Bahá'í leaders then being held in Iran.
Before the 2010 general election, Bhaskar was one of 48 celebrities who signed a letter warning against Conservative Party policy toward the BBC.

Career

Bhaskar has starred in a number of British-produced films including The Guru and Anita and Me. He also had a cameo as a shop owner in Yash Raj Films' production Jhoom Barabar Jhoom.
Bhaskar, the Kumars and Gareth Gates collectively released the official single for Comic Relief in 2003, which spent three weeks at number 1 and was the second highest selling single of the year.
He appeared as a guest on the BBC's Top Gear in 2003, setting a time of 1:51.0 around a wet Top Gear test track in a Suzuki Liana, placing him 32nd on the original leader board.
In 2005 Bhaskar was made an Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the New Year Honours List.
As part of the BBC's series of programmes on the 60th anniversary of the independence of India and Pakistan, he filmed a BBC documentary series India with Sanjeev Bhaskar with director Deep Sehgal which was broadcast to coincide with the 60th anniversary of Indian Independence in August 2007. According to the BBC it included "an emotional journey" to his father's ancestral home which is now in Pakistan.
His first book India with Sanjeev Bhaskar based on the documentary series became a Sunday Times bestseller in 2007.
In 2008 he made his musical theatre debut as King Arthur in Spamalot at London's Palace Theatre.
In October 2008 he was featured on BBC Radio 4's Desert Island Discs.
He wrote and starred in the ITV sitcom Mumbai Calling
On 23 February 2009 Sanjeev was appointed as the University of Sussex's new Chancellor. He was formally installed at the university's summer graduation ceremony on the 22 July 2009.
In March 2010 Sanjeev featured on the BBC Radio 4 comedy show I've Never Seen Star Wars.
On 23 July 2010 he was guest on the BBC comedy panel game Would I Lie To You?
He also featured in a Channel 4 documentary series called The House That Made Me. This show, produced by Nutopia in 2010, recreated his childhood home and introduced him to the characters of his youth.

Filmography

Written

Composed

Stage








