[[Greater Western Sydney]]

CATEGORIES: Regions of Sydney

Greater Western Sydney (GWS) is the region of the metropolitan area of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia that is generally accepted to embrace the northwest, southwest, central west, and western sub-regions of greater metropolitan Sydney. The University of Western Sydney defines greater western Sydney as comprising 14 local government areas; namely located within Auburn, Bankstown, Blacktown, Blue Mountains, Camden, Campbelltown, Fairfield, Hawkesbury, Holroyd, Liverpool, Parramatta, Penrith, The Hills Shire and Wollondilly.
In government administration, the region has a Minister for Western Sydney, currently held by the Premier, the Hon. Barry O'Farrell, MP.
The population is predominantly of a working class background, with major employment in the heavy industries and vocational trade. The fourteen local government areas which comprise the Greater West together generate more than A$95 billion in Gross Regional Product a year, making its economy the third largest in Australia behind the Sydney CBD and Melbourne.

Sub-regions

Greater Western Sydney local government authorities agree on the broad definition of greater western Sydney, but divide the region based on the regional organisations of councils. The Western Sydney Regional Organisation of Councils (WSROC) includes the local government areas of Auburn,  Bankstown, Blacktown, Blue Mountains, Fairfield, Hawkesbury, Holroyd, Liverpool, Parramatta and Penrith.
The Department of Planning & Infrastructure Metropolitan Strategy for Sydney divides Greater Western Sydney into three sub-regions:

Climate

Western Sydney experiences a warm temperate climate with the annual temperatures having an average maximum of , depending on the location.
Rainfall is almost evenly spread throughout the year, although the first half tends to be wetter, namely February through to June (late summer/early winter). The months from July through to September tend to be drier (late winter/early spring). Thunderstorms are common in the summer months. Winters are pleasantly cool and sunny, although east coast lows can bring large amounts of rainfall, especially in June.

Landmarks

Major tourist attractions in Western Sydney include the Blue Mountains and Sydney Olympic Park. The Western Sydney Parklands, a major urban parkland stretching through many local government areas in Western Sydney, also contains many attractions such as picnic areas and lookouts, Calmsley Hill Farm, Blacktown Olympic Park,  Eastern Creek Raceway, and, most notably, the Nurragingy reserve (features picnic areas and a Chinese garden). Other major recreation include Auburn Botanical Gardens, Fox Studios and Channel Nine's Entertainment Studios. Large shopping malls include Westfield Penrith, Westfield Parramatta, Westfield Liverpool and Westpoint Blacktown.
Parramatta has also become a major centre in Sydney, often being referred to as the second CBD of Sydney. 

Image:Liverpool railway station 1.JPG|Liverpool railway station
Image:Fairfield The Crescent Park.JPG|The Crescent Park, Fairfield
Image:Wentworthville Presbyterian Church.JPG|Presbyterian Church Wentworthville
Image:Auburn Gallipoli Mosque.JPG|Auburn Gallipoli Mosque
Image:ParramattaTownHallfixedperspective.jpg|Parramatta Town Hall
Image:Sydney Olympic Park Showground Hall.JPG|Showground Hall at Sydney Olympic Park
Image:Bicentennial Park 1.JPG|Bicentennial Park at Sydney Olympic Park
Image:Bankstown Appian Way artwork.JPG|Appian Way, Bankstown

Sport

The region hosts many professional sporting teams in a wide range of codes. The National Rugby League, Big Bash League, A-League and the Australian Football League all have teams in the region. It also acts as the namesake of the Greater Western Sydney Giants AFL club.

Advocacy

The following organisations are directly involved in economic and other advocacy for this region:

Major education facilities








