[[Vannes]]

CATEGORIES: Communes of Morbihan, Prefectures in France, Port cities and towns on the French Atlantic coast, Towns in Brittany

Vannes () is a commune in the Morbihan department in Brittany in north-western France. It was founded over 2000 years ago.History of Vannes Official website of the city

Geography

Vannes is located on the Gulf of Morbihan at the mouth of two rivers, the Marle and the Vincin. It is around  south west of Paris. Vannes is a market town and often linked to the sea.

History

The name Vannes comes from the Veneti, a seafaring Celtic people who lived in the south-western part of Armorica in Gaul before the Roman invasions. The Veneti were defeated by Julius Caesar's fleet in 56 BC in front of Locmariaquer; all the Veneti were then either slaughtered or sold into slavery. The Romans settled a town called Darioritum in a location previously belonging to the Veneti.
The diocese of Vannes was erected in the 5th century. The Council of Vannes was held there in 461.
The first historical ruler of Vannes was Waroch.
In 1759 Vannes was used as the staging point for a planned French invasion of Britain. A large army was assembled there, but it was never able to sail following the French naval defeat at the Battle of Quiberon Bay in November 1759.
In 1795, during the French Revolution, French forces based in Vannes successfully repelled a planned British-Royalist invasion.

Population

Inhabitants of Vannes are called Vannetais.

Breton language

The municipality launched a linguistic plan through Ya d'ar brezhoneg on 12 October 2007.
In 2008, 7.71% of the children attended the bilingual schools in primary education. Ofis ar Brezhoneg: Enseignement bilingue

Transport

Train

The Gare de Vannes railway station offers connections to Quimper, Rennes, Nantes, Paris and several regional destinations.

With the fast train TGV, the journey takes:

– 30 minutes to Lorient,

– 1 hour to Nantes or Rennes,

– 3.5 to 4 hours to Paris.

The Transport express régional or TRE is a slower train to join railway stations in the close neighborhood, as Auray or Questembert.

There is no direct railway from Vannes to Saint-Brieuc (70 miles away in the north of Brittany), so the train from Vannes to Saint Brieuc goes via Rennes, which doubles the travel time and cost: it takes 2 to 3 hours to go from Vannes to Saint Brieuc by train.
Car

Two highways, in the north of Vannes, provide fast connections by car:

– N165: drive west to Lorient (35 miles) and Quimper (75 miles), south east to Nantes (70 miles)

– N166: drive north east to Rennes (70 miles)

+ a network of small roads connects Vannes to smaller cities.
There is no highway from Vannes to Saint-Brieuc, so the way to northern Brittany consists of small roads. The lack of highway or railway between Vannes and Saint-Brieuc (70 miles north) cuts the communications between northern and southern Brittany, and limits Brittany economic performance.
Airplanes

Vannes has a small airfield in the village of Monterblanc, called Vannes-Meucon airport, or "Vannes – Golfe du Morbihan airport". It used to be a military airport, but it is now dedicated to business and tourism aircraft. It belongs to Vannes Agglomeration community, the group of cities gathered around Vannes, and the main users of this airfield are Vannes flying club, the local ultralight aviation club and Vannes school of skydiving.
Bus

There are 2 bus networks in Vannes:
– Kicéo, proposes short travels starting from Vannes Place de la Republique on behalf of Vannes Agglomeration community,

– CAT, propose longer travel starting from the railway station on behalf of Morbihan.

So there are 2 central bus stations in Vannes: one on Place de la Libération, the other at the railway station.
Bike

Vannes city has a public bicycle rental program, called Velocea based on the same idea as the Paris Vélib'.
Hundreds of bicycles are available in 20 automated rental stations each with 10 to fifteen bikes/spaces.
Each Velocea service station is equipped with an automatic rental terminal and stands for bicycles.
The bicycles are robust and heavy (lbs 40), and the user can take a bike in any station, and let it in any station, for a cost as: free the first 30 minutes, 1 euro the second 30 minutes, 2 euros per hour.

Monuments and sights

In fiction

Notable people

Vannes was the birthplace of:

International relations

Twin towns – Sister cities

Vannes is twinned with:
Vannes also has partnerships ('partenariats') with:



Gallery

File:Vannes Altstadt.jpg|In the old town centre
File:Bretagne Morbihan Vannes3 tango7174.jpg|Place des Lices
File:Vannes lavoir.jpg|Old washing-places
File:Vannes.jpg|Château de l'Hermine
File:Vannesport.jpg|Port de Vannes
File:Bretagne Morbihan Vannes2 tango7174.jpg|Garden of the Château de l'Hermine
File:Vannes - Centre ville.jpg|Street in town center
File:Vannes cathedral front.jpg|Vannes Cathedral
File:Clocher Saint Paterne. Patern church
File:Port de Vannes quai Eric Tabarly. Vincent gate






