[[Monstera deliciosa]]

CATEGORIES: Monsteroideae, House plants, Flora of Central America, Flora of Chiapas, Flora of Costa Rica, Flora of Guatemala, Flora of Colombia, Flora of Ecuador, Flora of Venezuela, Flora of Panama, Flora of Oaxaca, Flora of Hawaii, Flora of the Society Islands, Flora of Seychelles, Flora of Ascension Island, Flora of Veracruz, Tropical fruit, Epiphytes, plants described in 1849

Monstera deliciosa, the Fruit Salad Plant, is a species of flowering plant native to  tropical rainforests of southern Mexico, south to Colombia. It has been introduced to many tropical areas, and has become a mildly invasive species in Hawaii, Seychelles, Ascension Island and the Society Islands.

Names

The specific epithet deliciosa means "delicious", referring to the edible fruit.
Common names include Fruit Salad Tree (in reference to its edible leaves and fruits),[ Daleys Fruit Tree Nursery, Kyogle, New South Wales, Monstera Fruit Salad Tree ceriman, Swiss cheese plant (or just cheese plant), fruit salad plant, monster fruit, monsterio delicio, monstereo, Mexican breadfruit, locust and wild honey, windowleaf, balazo,  and Penglai banana. (eds.). The Charming Cicada Studio: Masterworks by Chao Shao-an. Asian Art Museum of San Francisco, 1997. p40.

Description

This member of the arum family Araceae is an epiphyte with aerial roots, able to grow up to 20 m (65 feet) high with large, leathery, glossy, heart-shaped leaves 25–90 cm (9 to 35 inches) long by 25–75 cm broad. Young plants have leaves that are smaller and entire with no lobes or holes, but soon produce lobed and fenestrate leaves.hort.edu/newcrop/morton/ceriman. 15–17 (1987) access date 2010-07-09Liebmann, Frederik Michael. 1849.  Videnskabelige Meddelelser fra Dansk Naturhistorisk Forening i Kjøbenhavn 1849: 19, Monstera deliciosa
Wild seedlings grow towards the darkest area they can find until they find a tree trunk, then start to grow up towards the light, creeping up the tree.Online reference to Monstera deliciosa

Cultivation

Monstera deliciosa is commonly grown for interior decoration in public buildings and as a houseplant. It grows best between the temperatures of  and it is killed by frost. In the coastal zones of Sicily, especially in the Palermo area, where it is called "zampa di leone" ("lion's paw"), it is often cultivated outdoors.  In ideal conditions it flowers about three years after it is planted. Flowering is rare when grown indoors. The plant can be propagated by taking cuttings of a mature plant or by air layering.
Monstera deliciosa have gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit.

Fruit

The fruit of Monstera deliciosa is up to 25 cm long and 3–4 cm diameter, looking like a green ear of maize covered with hexagonal scales.
Fruits of plants of the Araceae (Arum family) often contain Raphides and Trichosclereids – needle-like structures of calcium oxalate.
The fruit may be ripened by cutting it when the first scales begin to lift up and it begins to exude a pungent odor. It is wrapped in a paper bag and set aside until the scales begin popping off. The scales are then brushed off or fall away to reveal the edible flesh underneath. The flesh, which is similar to pineapple in texture, can be cut away from the core and eaten. It has a fruity taste similar to jackfruit and pineapple. The unripe green fruits can irritate the throat and the latex of the leaves and vines can create rashes in the skin, because both contain potassium oxalate: that is the reason why the fruits have to be consumed when the scales lift up.
Plants grown indoors in temperate regions occasionally produce flowers and fruit.

Other uses

The aerial roots have been used as ropes in Peru, and to make baskets in Mexico.
In Mexico, a leaf or root infusion is drunk daily to relieve arthritis.
In Martinique  the root is used to make a remedy for snakebite.
In Colombia it is used as a decorative plant.

File:Monstera deliciosa ripen fruit 01.JPG|Monstera fruit
File:Monstera fruit.JPG|Monstera fruit (unripe)
File:Monstera deliciosa flower.jpg|Monstera flower
File:Monstera deliciosa3.jpg|Leaf
File:Monstera deliciosa1281872728.jpg|Leaf and flower
File:Monsteradeliciosafruit.jpg|Growing fruit






