[[Hurricane Danielle (1998)]]

CATEGORIES: 1998 Atlantic hurricane season, Category 2 Atlantic hurricanes, 1998 in the United Kingdom

Hurricane Danielle resulted in minor damage throughout its duration as a tropical cyclone in late August and early September 1998. The fourth named storm and second hurricane of the annual hurricane season, Danielle originated from a tropical wave that emerged off the western coast of Africa on August 21. Tracking generally west-northwestward, the disturbance was initially disorganized; under favorable atmospheric conditions, shower and thunderstorm activity began to consolidate around a low-pressure center. Following a series of satellite intensity estimates, the system was upgraded to Tropical Depression Four during the pre-dawn hours of August 24, and further to Tropical Storm Danielle that afternoon. Moving around the southern periphery of the Azores High located in the northeastern Atlantic, quick intensification to hurricane status occurred early on August 25. By 0600 UTC the following day, Danielle reached an initial peak intensity of 105 mph (165 km/h), a Category 2 hurricane. Increased wind shear from a nearby trough encroached on further development later that day, and subsequently led to slight weakening. By 1200 UTC on August 27, despite continued unfavorable conditions, Danielle reached a second peak intensity equal to the first. Weakening once ensued late on August 27 in addition to the days following, and Danielle was a low-end Category 1 hurricane by August 31 as its forward speed slowed. 
As the cyclone reached the western periphery of the ridge that steered it across the Atlantic for much of its existence, it began yet another period of intensification, and once again attained a peak intensity as a Category 2 hurricane. Passing northwest of Bermuda, Danielle weakened to Category 1 hurricane strength, but for a final time intensified into a 105 mph (165 km/h) tropical cyclone thereafter. As the cyclone passed over increasingly cool sea surface temperatures and became intertwined in a baroclinic zone, it began to undergo an extratropical transition. At 0000 UTC on September 4, Danielle was no longer considered a tropical cyclone, despite retaining hurricane-force winds. Several days later, the remnants of Danielle merged with a larger extratropical low and became indistinguishable. As a tropical cyclone, it produced heavy rainfall in Puerto Rico and the Lesser Antilles, leading to flooding. Tropical storm-force winds were observed in Bermuda even though the cyclone passed well northwest of the island. During Danielle's transition to an extratropical cyclone, it produced light rain and led to minor beach erosion in Newfoundland. The larger extratropical low that merged with the system resulted in large waves off the coast of the United Kingdom, leading to major beach erosion and coastal flooding. Overall, no fatalities were reported with the system and it caused an estimated $50,000 (1998 USD) in damage.

Meteorological history

The origins of Hurricane Danielle trace back to a tropical wave that emerged off the western coast of Africa and into the eastern Atlantic Ocean early on August 21. Tracking west-northwestward, the National Hurricane Center (NHC) began Dvorak satellite intensity estimates later that morning following the consolidation of convection – shower and thunderstorm activity – near the system's center. Favorable atmospheric conditions led to further organization, and it is estimated that the disturbance intensified into a tropical depression by 0600 UTC on August 24, while located roughly  
As the cyclone moved northwestward along the southern periphery of the Azores High, it began a period of rapid deepening in which a "pinhole" eye became distinguishable on satellite imagery; on this basis, Danielle was upgraded to a hurricane at 1200 UTC on August 25. At the time, Danielle was a compact system, with tropical storm force winds spanning only  though post-analysis indicates that the intensity of the storm was underestimated. 
The storm briefly re-strengthened slightly on August 27, reaching its maximum sustained wind speed of 105 mph (165 km/h) for the second time at 1200 UTC. Vertical wind shear persisted and Danielle soon began to weaken again. Later on August 27, the National Hurricane Center predicted that the storm would travel along the periphery of an anticyclone centered just east of Bermuda, which would keep the storm away from the East Coast of the United States. 
By early on August 31, an increase in sustained winds, a decrease in barometric pressure, and a  Three hours later, Danielle reached its maximum sustained wind speed of 105 mph (165 km/h) for the fourth and final time. 
Early on September 2, the storm weakened again and was downgraded to a Category 1 hurricane. At 0600 UTC on September 3, Danielle reached its minimum barometric pressure of 960 mb (hPa; 28.35 inHg), although sustained winds were only 80 mph (130 km/h) at the time. As late as 1500 UTC on September 3, satellite imagery indicated that Danielle was retaining tropical characteristics. The National Hurricane Center did not forecast any further weakening before the extratropical transition, but instead mentioned the possibility of baroclinic strengthening. Danielle officially transitioned into an extratropical cyclone at 0000 UTC on September 4 according to a post-season report from the NHC, while located east-southeast of Newfoundland. The remnants of Danielle traversed east and eventually northeastward across the Atlantic Ocean. It produced rough seas in the British Isles on September 6 before merging with an extratropical low pressure area north of Ireland on September 8.

Preparations and impact

Shortly after formation, Danielle was considered a potential threat to the Lesser Antilles, with the National Hurricane Center noting that "any deviation to the left of the track would bring Danielle closer to the Leeward Islands."
The outer bands of Danielle produced heavy rainfall in Puerto Rico, causing street flooding and landslides in Bayamón, Guaynabo, Toa Alta, and Vega Alta; several streams overflowed their banks, causing additional flooding. In a neighborhood of Bayamón, one house was damaged after a wall collapsed. Losses in Puerto Rico totaled to approximately $50,000 (1998 USD).  
While passing near the British Isles on September 6 as an extratropical storm, Danielle produced severe sea conditions on the western part of the isles. Major beach erosion was observed, and many people required rescuing. Coastal portions of Cornwall were evacuated as high waves inundated many homes, and an all-terrain police vehicle was shoved into the sea by a rogue wave in the Isles of Scilly. An 11 year-old boy and his father were trapped in a sea cave on the north coast of Cornwall due to rough surf. Two other men from Port Isaac also became isolated in the same location after their boat capsized. All four were eventually rescued by a helicopter that hovered near the entrance of the sea cave.








