[[Mutual Street Arena]]

CATEGORIES: Sports venues completed in 1912, Buildings and structures demolished in 1989, Defunct indoor arenas in Canada, Defunct sports venues in Toronto, Indoor arenas in Canada, Indoor ice hockey venues in Canada, Former ice hockey venues in Canada, Defunct National Hockey League venues, Toronto Maple Leafs, Toronto Blueshirts, Ice hockey venues in Toronto

Mutual Street Arena, initially called Arena Gardens or just the Arena, was an ice hockey arena and sports and entertainment venue in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. From the time period of 1912 until 1931, with the opening of the Maple Leaf Gardens, it was the premier site of ice hockey in Toronto, being home to teams from the National Hockey Association (NHA), the National Hockey League (NHL), the Ontario Hockey Association (OHA) and the International Hockey League (IHL).  It was the first home of the Toronto Maple Leafs, who played at the arena under various names for their first 13.5 seasons. The Arena Gardens was the third rink in Canada to feature a mechanically-frozen or 'artificial' ice surface, and for eleven years was the only such facility in eastern Canada. In 1923, it was the site of the first radio broadcast of an ice hockey game, the first radio broadcast of an NHL game, and the first broadcast of an ice hockey game by long-time broadcaster Foster Hewitt. 
The Arena was also used for musical concerts, gatherings and other sporting events, including professional boxing, cycling, wrestling and tennis. In 1962, it was later converted to a curling club and roller skating rink known as The Terrace. The building was demolished in 1989 and the Cathedral Square residential complex and Arena Gardens municipal park now occupy the site. It was located on Mutual Street, just south of Dundas Street East and one block east of Church Street in downtown Toronto.

History

It was constructed for a reported cost of $500,000 and opened in 1912.
The Arena opened with a performance by Nathan Franko's Orchestra on October 7, 1912, supporting a recital by Alice Neville, soprano of the Metropolitan Opera, tenor Orville Harold and a company of opera singers from the Boston Opera Company organized by Neville. It was the first of a series called the Toronto Music Festival.
Arena Gardens was initially home to two new teams in the National Hockey Association (NHA): the Toronto Hockey Club and the Tecumseh Hockey Club. Delays in construction meant that the teams could not play in the 1911-12 season, as was originally scheduled. The 
The year 1922 saw the first professional wrestling bout at the Arena, a bout between former world champion Stanislaus Zbyszko and Canadian champion George Walker. Professional wrestling would continue at the Arena until 1938. Promoter Ivan Mickailoff began promoting weekly shows in 1929. Some of the names that Michailoff presented at the Arena included Strangler Lewis and Toots Mondt, as well as reigning world champions Gus Sonnenberg, Ed Don George, Henri Deglane, Jim Londos, Ali Baba, Vic Christie, Everett Marshall and Billy Weidner, who all defended their titles at the Arena.
On February 8, 1923, the first radio broadcast of an ice hockey game was made from the Arena by Toronto Star's CFCA radio station. Norman Albert did the play-by-play of the third period of a game between North Toronto and Midland, won by North Toronto 16–4.
The building was also used for mass assemblies. An assembly was held for Sir Wilfrid Laurier in 1913 by the Liberal Party of Canada. On June 10, 1925, this building was used as the venue for the inaugural service of the United Church of Canada, which united the Presbyterians, the Methodist Church of Canada, and the Congregational Union of Canada. On October 9, 1936, it was the site of a mass assembly by the Communist Party of Canada.
After the Maple Leafs left in 1931, the building no longer was a venue for professional ice hockey, but remained opened as a venue for sports and entertainment. Some of the other sports included bicycle racing, professional boxing and tennis.
In 1938, the Arena was leased to William Dickson who turned it into a recreation facility offering ice skating in winter and roller skating in summer. The name was changed that year to the Mutual Street Arena.
Dickson bought the building in 1945 and it remained in the family for the next 43 years. The arena was renovated for $3 million in 1962, adding eighteen curling sheets, year-round roller skating, a parking garage and a new facade.

Notable events

This list is incomplete.



Further reading






