[[Tear down this wall!]]

CATEGORIES: 1987 in Germany, 1987 in politics, 1987 works, Berlin Wall, German reunification, Cold War speeches, History of the foreign relations of the United States, Anti-communism in the United States, Anti-communism in Germany, Political slogans, Presidency of Ronald Reagan, Germany–Soviet Union relations, Soviet Union–United States relations, Allied occupation of Germany, West Berlin, Germany–United States relations, Speeches by Ronald Reagan, 1987 in international relations, Political quotes, Articles containing video clips

"Tear down this wall!" was the challenge issued by United States President Ronald Reagan to Soviet Union leader Mikhail Gorbachev to destroy the Berlin Wall, in a speech at the Brandenburg Gate near the Berlin Wall on June 12, 1987, commemorating the 750th anniversary of Berlin.  Reagan challenged Gorbachev, who was then the General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, to tear it down as an emblem of Gorbachev's desire to increase freedom in the Eastern Bloc through glasnost ("transparency") and perestroika ("restructuring").

Background

Built in 1961, the Berlin Wall became known as a symbol of communist oppression.
President Reagan's 1987 visit was his second within five years.  It came at a time of heightened East-West tensions, caused in particular by the debate over the stationing of short range American missiles in Europe and the United States' record peacetime defense buildup.
The Brandenburg Gate site was chosen to highlight the President's conviction that Western democracy offered the best hope to open the Berlin Wall.
Chief speechwriter Anthony R. Dolan gives another account of the line's origins, however, attributing it directly to Reagan.  In an article published in the Wall Street Journal in November 2009, Dolan gives a detailed account of how in an Oval Office meeting that was prior to Robinson's draft Reagan came up with the line on his own.  He records vivid impressions of his own reaction and Robinson's at the time.

The speech

Arriving in Berlin on June 12, 1987, President and Mrs. Reagan were taken to the Reichstag, where they viewed the wall from a balcony. Reagan then made his speech at the Brandenburg Gate at 2:00 pm, in front of two panes of bulletproof glass protecting him from potential snipers in East Berlin. About 45,000 people were in attendance; among the spectators were West German president Richard von Weizsäcker, Chancellor Helmut Kohl, and West Berlin mayor Eberhard Diepgen. That afternoon, Reagan said,
Later on in his speech, President Reagan said, "As I looked out a moment ago from the Reichstag, that embodiment of German unity, I noticed words crudely spray-painted upon the wall, perhaps by a young Berliner, 'This wall will fall. Beliefs become reality.' Yes, across Europe, this wall will fall. For it cannot withstand faith; it cannot withstand truth. The wall cannot withstand freedom."
Another highlight of the speech was Reagan's call to end the arms race with his reference to the Soviets' SS-20 nuclear weapons, and the possibility "not merely of limiting the growth of arms, but of eliminating, for the first time, an entire class of nuclear weapons from the face of the Earth."

Response and legacy

Although it has been called "The four most famous words of Ronald Reagan's Presidency", the speech received "relatively little coverage from the media", Time magazine reported 20 years later. Communists were critical of the speech, and the Soviet press agency Tass accused Reagan of giving an "openly provocative, war-mongering speech."
Twenty-nine months later, on November 9, 1989, after increasing public unrest, East Germany finally opened the Berlin Wall. By the end of the year, official operations to dismantle the wall began. With the collapse of the Communist governments of Eastern Europe and, eventually, the Soviet Union itself, the tearing down of the wall epitomized the collapse for history. In September 1990, Reagan, no longer President, returned to Berlin, where he personally took a few symbolic hammer swings at a remnant of the Berlin Wall.
Former West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl said he would never forget standing near Reagan when he challenged Gorbachev to tear down the Berlin Wall. "He was a stroke of luck for the world, especially for Europe." In an interview with Reagan himself, he recalls the East German police not allowing people to get near the wall, which prevented the citizens from experiencing the speech at all. In addition, despite his famous lines that challenges Gorbachev to tear down the Berlin Wall, there is little evidence that Reagan's speech has had any impact on even the decision behind tearing down the wall let alone the people he addresses. But even though there is considerable disagreement over how much influence Reagan's words had on the destruction of the wall, the speech is remembered as an important moment in Cold War history.
Peter Robinson, the White House wordsmith who drafted the address, said its most famous line was inspired by a conversation with Ingeborg Elz of West Berlin who had remarked in a conversation with him, "If this man Gorbachev is serious with his talk of Glasnost and perestroika he can prove it by getting rid of this wall." At the end of the day, though we remember the words "tear down this wall" as the speech's most influential element, the message and goal of the speech is what formulated Reagan's greatest legacy as a true influencer and communicator. Instead of intimidating Gorbachev like most other leaders would have done to tear down the Berlin Wall, Reagan peacefully tests Gorbachev's intentions and compliments him on his goals for Perestroika and Glasnost during his speech. With his peaceful delivery of the speech, Reagan earns Gorbachev's trust and hopefully gains his inspiration to decide on the Berlin Wall's fate.





Further reading




