[[Ground-Based Midcourse Defense]]

CATEGORIES: Missile Defense Agency, Military equipment of the United States, Boeing, Raytheon products, Lockheed Martin

Ground-Based Midcourse Defense (GMD) is the United States' system for intercepting incoming warheads in space. It is a major component of the American missile defense strategy to counter ballistic missiles, including intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) carrying nuclear, chemical, biological or conventional warheads in a ballistic flight trajectory. GMD is administered by the U.S. Missile Defense Agency (MDA), while the operational control and execution is provided by the U.S. Army, and support functions are provided by the U.S. Air Force. Previously known as National Missile Defense (NMD), the name was changed in  2002 to differentiate it from other U.S. missile defense programs, such as space-based and sea-based intercept programs, or defense targeting the boost phase and reentry flight phases. Armed Services Comm. Strategic Forces Subcomm. (statement of Ronald T. Kadish). MDA. 13 March 2002.  The program is projected to cost $40 billion by 2017.

Description

The system consists of ground-based interceptor missiles and radar which would intercept incoming warheads in space. Boeing Defense, Space & Security is the prime contractor of the program, tasked to oversee and integrate systems from other major defense sub-contractors, such as Computer Sciences Corporation.
The key sub-systems of the GMD system are:
Interceptor sites are at Fort Greely, AlaskaBegich, Gates visit Alaska missile defense base By Tim Bradner, Alaska Journal of Commerce, June 5, 2009. reuters.Commanding Alaska's Guard w/ 24/7 missile defense and Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. A third site was planned for a proposed US missile defense complex in Poland, but was canceled in September 2009.
In December 2008, the U.S. Missile Defense Agency awarded Boeing a $397.9 million contract to continue development of the program."Boeing Wins Missile Deal". Washington Post, December 31, 2008, p. D2.
In March 2013, the Obama administration announced plans to add 14 interceptors to the current 26 at Fort Greely in response to North Korean threats."US to beef up missile defense against NKorea." The deployment of a second TPY-2 radar to Japan was announced at the same time."Alaska's Ground Based Interceptors to Pivot US Defenses Against North Korea." While Obama said that the additional deployment was a hedge against unexpected capabilities, Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs spokesman Hong Lei complained that the additional defenses would impact on global strategic balance and strategic trust."China: U.S. risks antagonizing North Korea."
As of late 2013, there are plans for a proposed Eastern United States missile defense site to house a battery of these missiles.

Program costs

Expenditures on the Ground-Based Midcourse Defense program have been estimated at US$30.7 billion by 2007."More Dollars, Less Sense, Individual Contract Report: Ground-Based Midcourse Defense (Missile Defense)". United States House Of Representatives, Committee On Oversight And Government Reform, June 2007. In 2013, it is estimated that the program will cost $40.926 billion from inception through FY2017; in 2013–17 spending is to total $4,457.8M, an average of $892M per year.

Flight tests

Intercept tests

As of July 2013, 8 of the 17 (47%) hit-to-kill intercept tests have succeeded.  None of the flight intercept tests since 2008 have succeeded. 

Non-intercept tests

Canceled tests

Throughout the program's history, numerous test flights have been canceled. Among them, BV-4, IFT-11, -12, -13, -13A, -15, FTC-03, and most recently, FTG-04, have been canceled.








