[[Al-Ahram]]

CATEGORIES: Arabic-language newspapers, Media in Alexandria, Media in Cairo, Newspapers published in Egypt, Publications established in 1875, 1875 establishments in Egypt

Al-Ahram ( It is majority owned by the Egyptian government.
Given the large dialectal variety of the Arabic language, Al-Ahram is widely considered an influential source of writing style in Arabic. In 1950, the Middle East Institute described Al-Ahram as being to the Arabic-reading public within its area of distribution, "What The Times is to Englishmen and the New York Times to Americans",Middle East Institute, 1950, p. 155. however it has often been accused of heavy influence and censorship by the Egyptian government.
In addition to the main edition published in Egypt, the paper publishes two other Arabic-language editions, one geared to the Arab World and the other aimed at an international audience, as well as editions in English and French.

History

Al-Ahram was founded in Alexandria on 5 August 1875
On 24 May 1960, the paper was nationalized when President Gamal Abdel Nasser passed a law eliminating the ownership of private newspapers.

Profile and editions

Al-Ahram daily is the flagship of what is now the Al-Ahram publishing house, the largest in Egypt. 277. Al-Ahram's headquarters is in Boulaq, Cairo. Its content was controlled by the now defunct Egyptian Ministry of Information. It is published daily in Bahrain, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, UAE and distributed in Egypt and the Gulf Region. Arabic weekly, Al Ahram Al Arabi, which was launched in 1997 is another publication of the publishing house.
An international Arabic-language edition called Al Ahram al Duwali has been published daily in London since 1984. It is printed in both London and Paris and is distributed throughout Europe, USA, Canada and Egypt.
Al-Ahram produces a continually updated news website in the English language at English.org. It also has an Arabic news website which was named as the most popular news portal in the Arab world in the period from 31 August 2011 to 31 August 2012 by Forbes Middle East. Two foreign-language weekly versions are also produced: the English Al-Ahram Weekly (founded in 1991) and the French Al-Ahram Hebdo.

Ownership and government influence

Al-Ahram is owned by the Al-Ahram Foundation and is one of the largest circulating newspapers in the world. Haykal was appointed to the post in August 1957.
The Egyptian government owns a controlling share of the stocks of the paper and appoints the editors. As appointees of the state, little censorship is exercised over them; it is understood that they are loyal to the state.
The Anti-Defamation League, in a review of Arab newspapers in 2005, stated that Al-Ahram "is given substantial leeway" by the government so long as they avoid "certain 'taboos'."Arab Media Review: Index of Arab Newspapers Anti-Defamation League, 14 February 2005 Reporters Without Borders, in their 2005 report on press freedom in Egypt, reported that editorials in many newspapers, including Al-Ahram, had become increasingly critical of the National Democratic Party's control of the government, and the corruption of the Mubarak regime.

Photo controversy

Al-Ahram generated controversy in September 2010 when an Egyptian blogger, Wael Khalil, revealed that the newspaper had altered a photo of Middle East leaders walking with United States President Barack Obama so that instead of Obama leading the group, Egyptian President Mubarak was placed in the front when he was actually walking in the rearmost position.

Notable writers and editors

From 1978 to July 2006 Ibrahim Nafie was the editor-in-chief of Al Ahram.



Bibliography




