[[Tomislav Nikolić]]

CATEGORIES: 1952 births, Candidates for President of Serbia, Eastern Orthodox Christians from Serbia, Independent politicians, Living people, People from Kragujevac, Plagiarism controversies, Presidents of Serbia, Presidents of the National Assembly of Serbia, Serbian nationalists, Serbian non-fiction writers, Serbian Progressive Party politicians, Serbian Radical Party politicians

Tomislav Nikolić (; born 15 February 1952) has been the President of Serbia since 31 May 2012. He is also the founder of the Serbian Progressive Party, and he led the party until his election as President. In the 2012 presidential election, he was elected to a five-year term as President in a second round of voting.
Born in Kragujevac. Nikolić was previously a long-time member and MP of the Serbian Radical Party (SRS). He served as the Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia from 1998 to 1999 and Deputy Prime Minister of FR Yugoslavia in the coalition government from 1999 to 2000. Nikolić was the Radical Party's deputy leader from 2003, and he briefly served as the President of the National Assembly of Serbia in 2007. In 2008 he resigned following a disagreement with party leader Vojislav Šešelj regarding Serbia's relations with the European Union, as Nikolić became in favor of Serbia's accession to the EU, a move that was staunchly opposed by Šešelj and his faction. Nikolić then formed the Serbian Progressive Party, which several SRS members joined.
Nikolić ran for the President of Yugoslavia in the 2000 elections and placed third. He also ran four times for the President of Serbia (in 2003, 2004, 2008 elections, and 2012 elections). In 2003 he garnered the most votes, but the election was cancelled due to low turnout, while in 2004 and 2008 he placed second behind Boris Tadić. In 2012, he won the runoff against Tadić to become President of Serbia.

Early life

Tomislav Nikolić was born in Kragujevac. His father Radomir was a labourer, and his mother Živadinka (née Đoković) was a housewife. In his youth, he trained in athletics. He completed secondary technical school in Kragujevac. His first employment was as a cemetery supervisor. He was also Technical Director of the Utility Services company in Kragujevac. He and his wife Dragica (née Ninković) have two sons. He is 6 feet 3 1⁄2 inches (192 cm) tall.vreme.php?id=383245

Political career

Radical Party

Nikolić began his political career as vice-president of the People's Radical Party. Under his initiative, the People's Radical Party merged with Vojislav Šešelj's Serbian National Renewal to form the Serbian Radical Party. Šešelj was elected president of the new party and Nikolić as vice-president. During the rule of Slobodan Milošević and the Socialist Party of Serbia, he and Šešelj were sentenced to three months in prison which he served in Gnjilane. However, in March 1998 the Serbian Radical Party formed a coalition with the Socialist Party and he then became the vice-president of the Government of Serbia and, by the end of 1999, the vice-president of the government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
In 2000, he began the first of several runs for the presidency of Serbia. In the FR Yugoslavia presidential election of 2000, he finished in third place behind Vojislav Koštunica and Slobodan Milošević. He then ran in the 2003 Serbian presidential election, in which garnered the most votes in the first round (46.23%), ahead of Dragoljub Mićunović, but the results were invalidated due to a low turnout of only 38.8%. Nikolić made yet another bid for presidency in the 2004 presidential election... EU interfered very strongly prior to the presidential elections in Serbia in June 2004, openly lending its support to the pro-reform Democratic Party leader Boris Tadić, against the ultra-nationalist Tomislav Nikolić of the Serbian Radical Party. In the first round, he received 30.1% of the vote and Boris Tadić received 27.3%. In the second round held on 27 June, Nikolić lost to Tadić by 53.7% to 45.4%. 
On 23 February 2003 he became the deputy leader of the party, after Vojislav Šešelj went voluntarily to the ICTY. During his leadership of the party, Nikolić favoured pushing the party towards focusing on more economic and social issues such as poverty and unemployment, rather than militant nationalism.
Nikolić was elected Speaker of Parliament on 8 May 2007, defeating Milena Milošević of the Democratic Party by 142 to 99 votes out of 244 members of Parliament. The Democratic Party of Serbia endorsed him. Hajredin Kuci of the Democratic Party of Kosovo, Ylli Hoxha of the Reformist Party ORA, and the Prime Minister of Kosovo Agim Çeku condemned the election of Nikolić as "counterproductive and dangerous for Kosovo".
He resigned from his position as speaker on 15 May after the Democratic Party and the Democratic Party of Serbia formed a preliminary alliance in preparation for a coalition government. He was the Speaker with the shortest mandate in the history of parliamentary democracy in the Balkans. Nikolić told the Democratic parties that if they "peacefully accept" the independence of Kosovo the Radical Party "will not sit calmly and wait".
In 2008, he ran again for the presidency in the 2008 presidential election. His slogan was With All Heart (
Nikolić abruptly resigned from the Radical Party leadership on 6 September 2008. Serb media cited differences between Nikolić and other members of the Radical Party hierarchy, especially party leader Vojislav Šešelj, about how the party should react to the proposed European Union membership for Serbia.

Progressive Party

On 24 September 2008 he announced that his new party's name would be the Serbian Progressive Party and that the first convention would be held on 21 October.
On 5 February 2011, in front of the National Assembly, Nikolić and his political supporters – Milanka Karić (Strength of Serbia Movement, Velimir Ilić (New Serbia), Aleksandar Vulin (Movement of Socialists) and Aleksandar Vučić organized a protest demanding early parliamentary elections. According to an official Serbian police report there were around 55,000 people present. On 16 April 2011 Nikolić organized a larger protest with the same request. He also started a thirst and hunger strike that morning and later moved to the national parliament. He stated that his goal was to force the then-Serbian government (led by Boris Tadić) to hold early parliamentary elections.
Nikolić led the party in the 2012 parliamentary election, and he ran for president in the 2012 presidential election. His slogan was Let's Get Serbia Moving (). During the campaign, the issue of his education was raised, as the opposition claimed that Nikolić obtained his master's degree under dubious circumstances in a private school. Nikolić responded by suing the daily newspapers Blic and Kurir, demanding 4 million euros as compensation. Kurir-info. Retrieved on 27 March 2013.
On 6 May 2012, Nikolić lost the first round with 25.05% of the vote. Nikolić and incumbent Boris Tadić, who garnered 25.31% of the vote, faced off against each other in a runoff election on 20 May. Nikolić won, receiving 49.4% of the vote in a tally of 70% of the polling stations. Boris Tadić, his rival in the elections, congratulated him on the victory, and stated that he hoped that Serbia would continue its progress under Nikolić.
Nikolić resigned as leader of the Serbian Progressive Party on 24 May 2012.

President of Serbia

Nikolić was inaugurated as the President of Serbia on 11 June 2012. Stefan Fuelle, the EU's enlargement commissioner, was the highest-ranking official to attend and many ambassadors from other countries were also present. Leaders of Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Slovenia and Macedonia boycotted the inauguration due to his denial of the genocide at Srebrenica and claims about Vukovar.

Apology

In April 2013 in Bosnian-Herzegovinian TV, Tomislav Nikolic apologized for the Serb war crime in Srebrenica during the 1990s war against Bosnian Muslims. The act was received with considerable positive reaction and publicity from the western media in the following days.

Controversies

Greater Serbia

During the 1990s and until 2008, Nikolić repeatedly called for the creation of a Greater Serbia. When asked about this change of position, he quoted a French philosopher that said "only a fool does not change his opinion."Tomislav Nikolić: Ne stidim se što sam kao četnik bio u ratu. Rs.eu (24 May 2012). Retrieved on 27 March 2013.

Đinđić and Ćuruvija

In a remark about Serbian Prime Minister Zoran Đinđić's injured leg, Nikolić said on 28 February 2003: "If anyone of you, in the following month or two, sees Zoran Đinđić somewhere, tell him that Tito also had a problem with a leg before his death". A prominent journalist, Slavko Ćuruvija was murdered on 11 April 1999 in front of the door of his building.

Education

In 2012 Nikolić was accused of buying a Masters Degree from Fakultet za Menadzment Novi Sad (Faculty of Management) without attending a single class or exam. The main evidence for this allegation was that his diploma has no stamp and that no other students recall having seen him attend classes or exams.vesti-online. "Istina o diplomi Tome Nikolića!"],  Kurir, accessed 11 May 2012.

Vukovar statements

In a May 2012 interview, Nikolić was quoted by Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung to have said that ″Vukovar was a Serb city and Croats have nothing to go back to there″. Jutarnji. Retrieved on 27 March 2013. Croatian President Ivo Josipović criticized Nikolić for this statement and conditioned future cooperation on Nikolić's withdrawal of the statement. Pressonline. Retrieved on 27 March 2013.
The following day Nikolić's office issued a statement saying that Nikolić never made any such statement and called it a ″treacherous lie″. Tanjug. Retrieved on 27 March 2013. However, Michael Martens, the journalist of the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung subsequently published the audio recording showing that Nikolić had indeed made that statement. Index. Retrieved on 27 March 2013.

Comments about Srebrenica massacre

On 2 June 2012, Nikolić stated on Montenegrin television that "there was no genocide in Srebrenica. In Srebrenica, grave war crimes were committed by some Serbs who should be found, prosecuted and punished. ... It is very difficult to indict someone and prove before a court that an event qualifies as genocide." Nikolić also stated that he wouldn't attend the annual commemoration of the Srebrenica massacre: "Don't always ask the Serbian president if he is going to Srebrenica, my predecessor was there and paid tribute. Why should every president do the same?"
Bakir Izetbegović, a member of Bosnia and Herzegovina's presidency, said Nikolic's comments insulted the survivors. He elaborated "the denial of genocide in Srebrenica will not pave the way for co-operation and reconciliation in the region, but on the contrary may cause fresh misunderstandings and tensions. " Catherine Ashton, foreign policy chief of the European Union, condemned his comments and stated that "the EU strongly rejects any intention to rewrite history."
On 25 April 2013, Nikolić apologised for the crimes committed by any individual in the name of Serbia and the Serbian people. He also asked for forgiveness for Serbia for the crime committed in Srebrenica.Serbia president 'apologises' for massacre, Al Jazeera, 25 April 2013. The apology came after Nikolić was criticised during the presidential election in 2012 for denying that 'there was no genocide in Srebrenica', although the act has been accepted as a genocide by his predecessor Boris Tadić. However, the news was not fully accepted in the media in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Nikolić was said to have not still recognised the massacre of Srebrenica as genocide.

2013 Belgrade Gay Pride Parade

In late September 2013, the Belgrade gay pride parade was banned by the Serbian police for the third consecutive year following violent threats issued by right-wing groups and requests by the Serbian Orthodox Church.

Bibliography

Tomislav Nikolić has published thirteen books.







|-

|-
|-


