[[Raiden (Metal Gear)]]

CATEGORIES: Adoptee characters in video games, Characters created by Hideo Kojima, Characters designed by Yoji Shinkawa, Criminal characters in video games, Cyborg characters in video games, Fictional African-American people, Fictional characters with multiple personalities, Fictional child soldiers, Fictional Delta Force personnel, Fictional First Liberian Civil War veterans, Fictional immigrants to the United States, Fictional mass murderers, Fictional private military members, Fictional special forces personnel, Fictional super soldiers, Fictional vigilantes, Konami protagonists, Male characters in video games, Mercenary characters in video games, Metal Gear characters, Military personnel characters in video games, Ninja characters in video games, Orphan characters in video games, Secret agent and spy characters in video games, Video game characters introduced in 2001, Video game characters who can move at superhuman speeds, Video game characters with accelerated healing, Video game characters with superhuman strength, Video game characters with electric abilities

Raiden is a fictional character from Konami's Metal Gear series. Created by Hideo Kojima and designed by Yoji Shinkawa, Raiden was introduced in the series as the main player character of Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of Liberty. In Metal Gear Solid 2, he appears to be a member of the U.S. special operations unit FOXHOUND, participating in his first mission. Despite coming across as rookie, he is a young soldier who is later revealed to have been a Liberian child soldier. Raiden reappears as a supporting character in Metal Gear Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots and returns as the main character of Metal Gear Rising: Revengeance dealing both with his past and his present life as a combatant. 
The idea of creating Raiden originated from Hideo Kojima's desire to view the Metal Gear series protagonist Solid Snake from a different point of view, inspired by the Sherlock Holmes stories. Raiden's inclusion remained a secret to gamers before his debut; despite some players' reactions, the staff liked his character. Raiden's debut role as the protagonist of Metal Gear Solid 2 became controversial for two reasons: the unexpected substitution of the established hero Solid Snake and Raiden's androgynous appearance. Some critics have defended the character, stating that fans were merely angered by the former's removal and that the latter was appealing. Despite this mixed reception, Raiden has been highly praised for his role and Metal Gear Solid 4 redesign and even more in his role and design in Revengeance.

Character design

Creation and appearance

According to series creator Hideo Kojima, the decision to make a new character replace Solid Snake for most of Metal Gear Solid 2 stemmed from the developer's desire to develop Snake from a third-person perspective instead. Kojima also stated that Raiden's character and its perception by the audience were important to the overall feel of the story. The idea of having a second main character was inspired by the Sherlock Holmes short stories and novels in which the narrator was not the title character, but his friend Dr. Watson. Kojima affirmed that Snake was the game's protagonist instead of Raiden. Yoshikazu Matsuhana, assistant director for the project, was uncertain about this decision; he considered Raiden a "weak-looking character", but decided to follow Kojima.
Kojima received much fan mail; one letter was from a girl who stated she did not want to play a game with an old man. He took this into consideration; he and his team designed a character more appealing to women, resulting in Raiden's appearance. Designer Yoji Shinkawa noted that he and the other character designers took a great deal of inspiration for Raiden's appearance from the bishōnen archetype.
Konami kept Raiden's starring role in Metal Gear Solid 2 secret until the game's North American release, going so far as to replace Raiden with Snake in teaser trailers and other preview materials. Although Raiden appeared in several preview trailers in his scuba gear, his presence was not emphasized. Raiden's appearance in the game was announced to the Japanese press on the day of the game's release in North America. 
Kojima noted that fan response to Raiden's character was both positive and negative. While accepting considerable negative feedback, Kojima and his team liked the character. Therefore, they made him comic relief from the videos in which Raiden tries to become the main character from Metal Gear Solid 4. In response to positive response in Japan, the Raikov character was created for Metal Gear Solid 3: Snake Eater as a parody of Raiden. While noting that Raiden would not be a playable character in Metal Gear Solid 4 Kojima confirmed his appearance in the game to website 1UP.
When Metal Gear Rising: Revengeance was known as Metal Gear Solid: Rising, former producer Shigenobu Matsuyama hinted that Raiden's past as a child soldier would be elaborated and his weaknesses as a human would be explored. Matsuyama wanted Raiden to have as strong a role in the game as in Metal Gear Solid 2, leading him to become the game's main character.
Raiden is first depicted as a white-haired adult who uses a protective black-and-blue suit for his missions known as a 

Personality and portrayal

In his first appearances Raiden is a rookie agent who, as a result of training only in virtual reality, is inexperienced. However, he later reveals that he was feared as a child soldier—known as 
In the Japanese versions of the games Raiden has been voiced by Kenyu Horiuchi,
Kojima Productions have compared Raiden and Solid Snake as to their experiences and ways of thinking. During the game's climax, Raiden stays handcuffed until his final fight against Solidus Snake; Snake escapes from his handcuffs to follow Revolver Ocelot, emphasizing Raiden's lack of freedom. Hideo Kojima compared Raiden and Snake with movie monsters King Kong and Godzilla, respectively; the former was taken from his home and his nature changed upon meeting Rosemary, whereas the latter will continue fighting against mankind's menaces. Defeating Solidus, Raiden is encouraged by Snake to trust himself and believe in his own choices. This is further addressed by the staff's motivation to make a new sequel to Metal Gear without Kojima. Kojima has also likened him with John Rambo from the Rambo series as both characters always find themselves taking part in battles despite their desire for a peaceful resolution.

Appearances

Main games

Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of Liberty introduces the player to 
Metal Gear Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots (set five years after Metal Gear Solid 2) features Raiden as the newest Cyborg Ninja. Disappearing after rescuing Sunny (the late Olga's daughter) from the Patriots,
Metal Gear Rising: Revengeance (set four years after Metal Gear Solid 4) shows Raiden's return as the main character. His already vengeful obsession with Desperado becomes even more personal when he discovered, during a mission into Mexico, that Desperado and World Marshal Inc had been kidnapping several children, surgically removing their brains to place them into cybernetic bodies, and were planning to subject them to VR training modelled after his own training under Solidus during the Liberian Civil War. This results in Raiden abruptly resigning from Maverick to pursue and retrieving the children's brain casings from World Marshal, having to battle his "Jack the Ripper" persona in the process. Although Raiden is successful in defeating Desperado he learns that  Steven Armstrong was using such PMCs to distract Raiden as he attempts to create a new "War on Terror". Raiden manages to stop Armstrong's actions and decides not to return to Maverick, having his "own war to fight."

Other appearances

Although Raiden does not appear in Metal Gear Solid 3: Snake Eater, his character is the subject of parody throughout the game by debuting character Raikov. Raiden also appears in an early promotional trailer for Metal Gear Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots, fighting for control of the franchise with Solid Snake in a series of comic scenes. A sequel to the trailer was produced entitled "Metal Gear Raiden: Snake Eraser" in which Raiden travels to the past to assassinate Big Boss but fails comically. 
In the Xbox 360 and Xbox One versions of Metal Gear Solid V: Ground Zeroes, Raiden stars in a non-canon mission titled "Jamais Vu". Having time-travelled to the past,Metal Gear Solid V: Ground Zeroes Jamais Vu trailer, Kojima Productions (2013). Kazuhira Miller: But we've MSF got a secret weapon. A man Raiden from another world. A dark and distant future. A man turned into a war-machine with no human body for those bastards body-snatchers to snatch. he infiltrates Camp Omega under orders from MSF. His mission objective is to incapacitate a group of soldiers known as the "body snatchers" (a reference to the android replicators in Kojima's other work Snatcher). His appearance in this game is modeled after his Metal Gear Rising design.
The Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of Liberty 2007 comic book adaptation by Alex Garner retells Raiden's role in the series, with few changes made to the story. His relationship with Solidus is explored when he remembers his past; when about to be killed by Solidus, Raiden is saved by Snake.
Outside the Metal Gear series, Raiden appears in the game LittleBigPlanet as a sticker and a playable sack-boy character. He may be accessed by buying the Metal Gear Solid 4 downloadable content.

Reception

Critical reaction

Raiden's replacement of fan favorite Solid Snake in Metal Gear Solid 2 proved controversial, and GamesRadar considered the event a reason to dislike the series overall.
Nevertheless, Eurogamer's Tom Bramwell enjoyed Raiden's role, commenting that his interactions with the other characters also helped expand Solid Snake's character.

Response to the character was mainly positive in subsequent games. His new design for Metal Gear Solid 4 was analyzed by GamePro 
IGN's Jesse Schedeen listed Raiden as one of the "gaming icons" and most valuable players of 2009, in response to his role in an upcoming Metal Gear title. In 2013, Complex ranked Raiden as the 12th greatest soldier in video games, "even as he's not as cool as Solid Snake,"Chad Hunter, Michael Rougeau, The 50 Greatest Soldiers In Video Games, Complex. while GamesRadar called Revengeance "perhaps the greatest cyborg ninja game of all time" and PLAY ranked Raiden as the second top ninja in games.

Analysis

Raiden's role in Metal Gear Solid 2 has been analyzed by several writers, who emphasized how he is intended to represent the actual player.
Upon the revelation of the character's new design as a cyborg ninja, writers noted how Raiden distanced himself from his previous appearance that imitated Solid Snake. They also emphasized how Raiden becomes a different type of game hero with a new, direct fighting style. Since Raiden has become more powerful than Solid Snake in physical strength and weaponry to the point of exaggeration,




