[[Suffolk County Community College]]

CATEGORIES: Suffolk County Community College, Two-year colleges in the United States, Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools, Brookhaven, New York, Islip (town), New York, Riverhead (town), New York, SUNY community colleges, Universities and colleges on Long Island, Educational institutions established in 1959, Works Progress Administration in New York, Universities and colleges in Suffolk County, New York

Suffolk County Community College (SCCC) is a two-year public college on Long Island, NY sponsored by SUNY and Suffolk County, New York in the USA.
Suffolk County Community College was founded in 1959 and has three campuses: Selden, Brentwood and Riverhead. It also has two satellite centers in Sayville and downtown Riverhead.
The school was founded largely through the efforts of Albert Ammerman (1914-November 26, 2008) who was the College's President from its founding in December 1959 until 1983. In its first year it had 13 faculty with 171 full-time students at the Sachem High School in  Ronkonkoma and 335 part-time students at Riverhead High School until what is now called the Ammerman campus opened in 1962 in the former Suffolk County Tuberculosis Sanatorium (originally built in 1912). By 1977 it had opened a campus in Riverhead and one on the edge of the Pilgrim Psychiatric Center in Brentwood.'Heart, spirit, soul' of SCCC dies at 94 - Newsday - November 27, 2008

Background

Suffolk County Community College is the largest community college in the SUNY (State University of New York) system and offers the lowest college tuition on Long Island. The College offers more than 70 degree and certificate programs in a wide variety of areas. It also boasts a low student/faculty ratio of 18:1, a highly respected Honors program, championship athletic teams and devoted faculty.
The College offers the Associate in Arts (A.A.), Associate in Science (A.S.), and Associate in Applied Science (A.A.S.) degree, as well as a variety of certificate programs. Students may choose from upwards of programs of study in the areas of business; communications and the arts; computing; health, community and human services; liberal arts/university parallel; and technical, scientific and engineering studies.
Many students transfer to four-year colleges and universities to complete their baccalaureate degree after attending SCCC. Suffolk is now also partnered with Cornell University through the Pathways to Success Program which allows transfers directly into Cornell degree programs.

Campuses

Ammerman Campus

The Ammerman campus at Selden opened in 1961. It is the largest, first, and main campus of Suffolk County Community College. Located off of Nicolls Road, it has become a landmark of Suffolk County. The main campus is the home to the majority of the sports teams as well. The site was previously a tuberculosis sanitarium.
Only two of the sanitorium's buildings remain (both of which were built by the Works Progress Administration in the 1930s—Ammerman Building (the former William Hugh Ross Building for male patients) and Kreiling Hall (the former J.H. Marshall Building for children). School officials deny a persistent rumor that the basement of the Kreiling Hall was used as a morgue noting that the walk in refrigerators there were used for a cafeteria. As of 2008 only three of the 10,000 Norway spruce and Scotch pine trees that landscaped the sanitarium's grounds remain.

Eastern Campus

The Eastern campus at Riverhead (actually in the hamlet of Northampton in the Town of Southampton with a Riverhead postal address) opened in 1977 on Speonk-Riverhead Road, next to Riverhead-Moriches Road (CR 51. The Eastern campus is the college's smallest.

Michael J. Grant Campus

The Michael J. Grant campus at Brentwood opened in 1974 and is the college's fastest growing. Bordered by Wicks Road, Community College Drive, and Crooked Hill Road (CR 13), the Grant campus is the sole home of the lacrosse, men's & women's track & field, men's & women's bowling, and men's & women's indoor track teams. The Grant Campus is also home to the Mechatronics Program, a machinist and fabrication job-training program funded by local industry and the largest federal grant ever received by the college. It is housed in its own building, the Workforce Development and Technology Center. "New Building Opens on Campus" The Western Student Press, October 2009. Festo Robotics equipment is used in teaching. The program also features a rapid prototyping machine.

Downtown Sayville

The Sayville Downtown Center opened in 2006.

Downtown Riverhead

This satellite center is home to The Culinary Arts and Hospitality Center. It opened in 2008. The campus features a cafe that serves breakfast and lunch.

Departments

Nursing

The nursing program is one of the largest two year, RN programs in the country. The Nursing program is offered at the Selden, Brentwood and Sayville campuses. The passing rate for the Nursing boards is among the highest in New York State. The program is now partially funded by Good Samaritan Hospital in West Islip, NY.

Honors Program

DESCRIPTION:The Honors Program at Suffolk County Community College is a program for intelligent and motivated students. It is designed to give students the qualifications they need to transfer to nationally competitive universities. Graduates of this Honors Program have been accepted into highly ranked schools including Cornell and UNC Chapel Hill. 
Honors courses are available in many disciplines. The courses are taught by highly qualified and respected faculty, who tailor the class to fit the student's capabilities. The maximum capacity per Honors course is 22 students although they often run with fewer.  If enrolled in these courses, one can expect to meet other highly motivated students, engage regularly in classroom discussions, and do more in-depth coursework.
LOCATION:The Honors Program is offered on all three of Suffolk County Community College's campuses (Grant, Ammerman, and East).
OPPORTUNITIES:On each campus, there are Honors counselors who assist students in making their schedules at Suffolk County Community College and help them through the transferring process. Students are given the chance to participate in many on campus Honors events, and go on field trips. Honors students also have the opportunity to meet various students and professors from four year colleges and universities through events such as the Scholar to Scholar Symposium.  
In addition, there are many transfer initiatives once the student graduates such as the Stay on Long Island Initiative Program.  Honors students also have the convenience of spending time in the Honors Lounge's on the Ammerman and East Campus and the Honors Cottage on the Grant Campus to socialize and do homework.
REQUIREMENTS:Entering students will be invited into the Honors Program based on their high school achievements. A B+ average and a composite SAT score of 1650 are required. A student who is not granted admission into the Honors Program upon enrollment has the option to join the following semester if they meet the academic standards. A current student must have at least a 3.2 GPA and a B+ or better in Freshman Composition. Once enrolled, a student must maintain a 3.2 GPA.
RECOGNITION:There are two Honors designations. Students must take a minimum of 22 honors credits. The other Honors option is to complete an Honors Recognition Sequence. This is achieved by taking 12 to 21 Honors credits.  These achievements will be noted on both the graduates Official Transcript and his or her diploma. 
Whether a student is graduating with an Honors Diploma/Honors Recognition or not, an Honors course is noted as "HONORS: (course title)" on the Official Transcript.

Athletics

The Athletic program is a component of the college's co-curricular offerings. SCCC is a member of the National Junior College Athletic Association. Athletics are taken place on both the Ammerman and Grant campuses. Men's Intercollegiate sports teams include baseball, basketball, cross-country, golf, soccer, swimming, and tennis. Women's teams include soccer, basketball, cheerleading (co-ed), dance (co-ed), cross-country, swimming, softball, tennis, and volleyball. In addition, the office coordinates an intramural program for men and women.
In the 2003 the men's basketball team won the NJCAA Men's Division III Basketball Championship and the women's basketball team won the NJCAA Women's Basketball Division III Championship. The men repeated as champs in 2004.
In 2005 the women's soccer team was formed, where they placed first during the regular season in division III, region 15. Five members of the team made all region first team players- Angela F. Merante, DiAnna G. Dezego, Jaclyn A. Ciamillo, Jacqueline Papile, and Vanessa Thompson. Komi Afeto, their coach, was named coach of the year. 

College Art Galleries

Suffolk County Community College has student exhibition galleries on each of its three main campuses. The gallery on the Ammerman Campus is the Maurice N. Flecker Memorial Gallery, The Lyceum Gallery, Gallery West, Campus and features an annual regional high school exhibition as well as student work.

Honor Societies

SCCC has two honor societies, Phi Theta Kappa (PTK) and Alpha Beta Gamma (ABG).

Phi Theta Kappa (PTK)

PTK membership is based primarily upon academic achievement.
Local Chapters:
Ammerman Campus
Eastern Campus
Michael J. Grant Campus

Alpha Beta Gamma (ABG)

ABG is an international business honor society established in 1970 to recognize and encourage scholarship among two-year college students in business curricula.
Local Chapters:
Ammerman Campus
Eastern Campus
Grant Campus

People

Administration

Notable faculty

Notable alumni



Notes


