[[Jay Mohr]]

CATEGORIES: 1970 births, Living people, Male actors from New Jersey, American male film actors, American impressionists (entertainers), American people of Scottish descent, American Roman Catholics, American stand-up comedians, American male television actors, American television talk show hosts, Converts to Roman Catholicism, Converts to Roman Catholicism from Calvinism, Former Presbyterians, People from Verona, New Jersey

Jay Ferguson Cox Mohr (born Jon Ferguson Mohr; August 23, 1970) is an American actor, stand up comedian, and radio host. He is known for his role as Professor Rick Payne in the TV series Ghost Whisperer, the title role in the CBS sitcom Gary Unmarried, which ran from 2008 to 2010,  as a featured player for two seasons on the long running sketch comedy show Saturday Night Live, and the back-stabbing sports agent Bob Sugar in Jerry Maguire. As of January 2, 2013, Mohr is the host of Jay Mohr Sports, a daily midday sports radio talk show on Fox Sports Radio.

Early life

Mohr was born in Verona, New Jersey. His mother, Jean (née Ferguson), is a nurse, and his father, Jon Wood Mohr, is a marketing executive.

Career

Acting career

Mohr appeared as a featured player for the 1993-94 and 1994-95 seasons of Saturday Night Live. His 2004 memoir, Gasping for Airtime: Two Years in the Trenches of Saturday Night Live,ISBN 1-4013-0006-5 details this tumultuous period of his life, including his battle with chronic panic attacks.  
Mohr had a recurring role in the first season of The Jeff Foxworthy Show as Jeff Foxworthy's brother, Wayne. Mohr's first major film role was in 1996 when he played the conniving Bob Sugar, a sleazy sports agent in Jerry Maguire, followed in 1997 by a starring role in Picture Perfect. In 1999, Mohr starred in the television series Action, in which he played sleazy film producer Peter Dragon. He was also the voice-over artist for Fox Sports Net's Beyond the Glory. Mohr has also appeared in movies such as Suicide Kings, Are We There Yet?, Small Soldiers, Go, Pay It Forward, and The Groomsmen.  Mohr was offered a late night talk show job by Michael Eisner but he declined. Mohr managed to convince Eisner to let him host a talk show on ESPN entitled Mohr Sports which ran briefly in 2001 before being cancelled. The talk show job Mohr passed was then offered to Jimmy Kimmel and became Jimmy Kimmel Live!.
In 2003 and 2004, Mohr created, hosted, and was executive producer of NBC's Last Comic Standing reality television program. The show aired for three seasons, but was cancelled near the end of the third season due to poor ratings, only to be renewed later. Mohr was very vocal toward NBC concerning its cancellation and did not return for the show's fourth season in 2006. Mohr was replaced with new host Anthony Clark, but he is credited as a consultant. On the season finale of Last Comic Standing 4, Jay performed as a guest comedian. He had a recurring role on the TV series Ghost Whisperer, which had developed into a regular role. Mohr also appeared in an episode of the hit sitcom Scrubs - "My Own Private Practice Guy" in 2003 and in an episode of The West Wing in 2004. Parts of Mohr's stand up was featured in Comedy Central's animated series Shorties Watchin' Shorties.
Mohr starred as newly divorced dad Gary Brooks for two seasons on the CBS sitcom Gary Unmarried. Paula Marshall played his ex-wife. In January 2010 he took the role as Billy in Clint Eastwood's thriller film Hereafter.

Radio

Mohr has contributed frequently to The Jim Rome Show and often guest-hosts the program. His nickname on the show is "Slam Man", and, more recently, the derisive "Weigh More" and "Ham Man," "Salami Man" and—when feeling particularly fancy -- "Prosciutto Man."   Mohr finished in 7th place in the 2007 Smack-Off, 6th place in the 2008 Smack-Off, 10th place in the 2009 Smack-Off, 6th place in the 2010 Smack-Off, and 6th place in the 2011 Smack-Off. Jay is also known to do "drive-by" call-in's to the show to usually promote one of his stand-up shows or live events.
On January 2, 2013, Mohr replaced Rome on Fox Sports Radio, as he hosts a daily talk show titled Jay Mohr Sports in Rome's longtime 12-3 p.m. (ET) timeslot, as Rome moved his show from Premiere Networks (the distributor of Fox Sports Radio) to CBS Sports Radio.com/fox-sports-radio-adds-jay-mohr-for-middays/ The show can be heard on several internet platforms and regional affiliates.

Podcast

Mohr hosts his own podcast entitled Mohr Stories. The podcast was hosted on the SModcast Network,

Other work

In June 2004, Mohr's first book, Gasping for Airtime: Two Years in the Trenches of Saturday Night Live, was published by Hyperion and chronicled his two years working on Saturday Night Live. In May 2010, publisher Simon & Schuster released Mohr's second book, No Wonder My Parents Drank: Tales from a Stand-Up Dad. Mohr provided the voice of the Agent in the 2008 video game Blitz: The League II. He has also hosted the 2010 and 2011 NHL Awards.

Personal life

Mohr has been sober since 1996.
He has a son, Jackson,

Filmography

Celebrity impressions






