[[Edwin Henry Landseer]]

CATEGORIES: 1802 births, 1873 deaths, 19th-century English painters, Animal artists, Burials at St Paul's Cathedral, Deaths in London, Dog artists, Royal Academicians

Sir Edwin Henry Landseer  well known for his paintings of animals—particularly horses, dogs and stags. The best known of Landseer's works, however, are sculptures: the lions in Trafalgar Square, London.

Life

Landseer was born in London, the son of the engraver John Landseer A.R.A. He was something of a prodigy whose artistic talents were recognised early on. He studied under several artists, including his father, and the history painter Benjamin Robert Haydon, who encouraged the young Landseer to perform dissections in order to fully understand animal musculature and skeletal structure. Landseer's life was entwined with the Royal Academy. At the age of just 13, in 1815, he exhibited works there. He was elected an Associate at the age of 24, and an Academician five years later in 1831. He was knighted in 1850, and although elected President in 1866 he declined the invitation.
In his late 30s Landseer suffered what is now believed to be a substantial nervous breakdown, and for the rest of his life was troubled by recurring bouts of melancholy, hypochondria, and depression, often aggravated by alcohol and drug use.

Painting

Landseer was a notable figure in 19th-century British art, and his works can be found in Tate Britain, the Victoria and Albert Museum, Kenwood House and the Wallace Collection in London. He also collaborated with fellow painter Frederick Richard Lee.
Landseer's popularity in Victorian Britain was considerable, and his reputation as an animal painter was unrivalled.  Much of his fame—and his income—was generated by the publication of engravings of his work, many of them by brother Thomas.4
His appeal crossed class boundaries: reproductions of his works were common in middle-class homes, while he was also popular with the aristocracy. Queen Victoria commissioned numerous pictures from the artists. Initially asked to paint various royal pets, he then moved on to portraits of ghillies and gamekeepers, Then, in the year before her marriage, the queen commissioned a portrait of herself, as a present for Prince Albert.102   He taught both Victora and Albert to etch,Manson (1902), p.104 and made portraits of Victoria's children as babies, usually in the company of a dog.105 He also made two portraits of Victoria and Albert dressed for costume balls, at which he was a guest himself.106 One of his last paintings was a life-size equestrian portrait of the Queen, shown at the Royal Academy in 1873, made from earlier sketches.107
Landseer was particularly associated with Scotland, which he had first visited in 1824, and the Highlands in particular, which provided the subjects (both human and animal) for many of his important paintings, including his early successes The Hunting of Chevy Chase (1825–6) and An Illicit Whiskey Still in the Highlands (1826–9), and his more mature achievements such as the majestic stag study Monarch of the Glen (1851) and Rent Day in the Wilderness (1855–68).
So popular and influential were Landseer's paintings of dogs in the service of humanity that the name Landseer came to be the official name for the variety of Newfoundland dog that, rather than being black or mostly black, features a mix of both black and white; it was this variety Landseer popularised in his paintings celebrating Newfoundlands as water rescue dogs, most notably Off to the Rescue (1827), A Distinguished Member of the Humane Society (1838), and Saved (1856), which combines the Victorian conception of childhood with the appealing idea of noble animals devoted to humankind—a devotion indicated, in Saved, by the fact the dog has rescued the child without any apparent human involvement.
Laying Down The Law (1840) satirises the legal profession through anthropomorphism. It shows a group of dogs, with a poodle symbolising the Lord Chancellor.101
His painting The Shrew Tamed, entered at the 1861 Royal Academy Exhibition, caused controversy because of its subject matter.  It showed a powerful horse on its knees among straw in a stable while a lovely young woman lies with her head pillowed on its flanks, lightly touching its head with her hand.  The catalogue explained it as a portrait of a noted equestrienne, Ann Gilbert, applying the taming techniques of the famous 'horse whisperer' John Solomon Rarey. 12; Issue 23924; col A  Critics however were troubled by the depiction of a languorous woman dominating a powerful animal, and some concluded Landseer was referencing the famous courtesan Catherine Walters, then at the height of her fame. 90 (550) Aug 1861 Page 211  Walters was herself an excellent horsewoman and along with other "pretty horsebreakers" frequently appeared riding in Hyde Park.
Some of Landseer's later works, such as his Flood in the Highlands and Man Proposes, God Disposes (both of 1864) are pessimistic in tone. The latter shows two polar bears toying with the bones of the dead, and other remains, from Sir John Franklin's failed arctic expedition.161 The painting was purchased at auction by Thomas Holloway and currently hangs in the picture gallery of Royal Holloway, University of London. It is a college tradition to cover the painting with a union jack when exams are held in the gallery, as there is a longstanding rumour that the painting drives people mad when they sit by it.

Sculpture

In 1858 the government commissioned Landseer to make four bronze lions for the base of Nelson's Column in Trafalgar Square, following the rejection of a set in stone by Thomas Milnes. Landseer accepted on condition that he would not have to start work for another nine months, and there was a further delay when he asked to be supplied with copies of casts of a real lion he knew were in the possession of the academy at Turin. The request proved complex, and the casts did not arrive until the summer of 1860. who also cast them. Work was slowed by Landseer's ill health, and his fractious relationship with Marochetti. The sculptures were installed in 1867.

Death

Landseer's death on 1 October 1873 was widely marked in England: shops and houses lowered their blinds, flags flew at half mast, his bronze lions at the base of Nelson's column were hung with wreaths, and large crowds lined the streets to watch his funeral cortege pass.
At his death, Landseer left behind three unfinished paintings: Finding the Otter, Nell Gwynne and The Dead Buck, all on easels in his studio. It was his dying wish that his friend John Everett Millais should complete the paintings, and this he did.J

Miscellaneous

Landseer was rumoured to be able to paint with both hands at the same time, for example, paint a horse's head with the right and its tail with the left, simultaneously.  He was also known to be able to paint extremely quickly—when the mood struck him.  He could also procrastinate, sometimes for years, over certain commissions.
The architect Sir Edwin Landseer Lutyens was named after him and was his godson—Lutyens' father was a friend of Landseer.

Gallery

File:Edwin Landseer - Scene from A Midsummer Night's Dream. Titania and Bottom - Google Art Project. 1850
File:Landseer, Edwin Henry (Sir, RA) - Lion- A Newfoundland Dog - Google Art Project.jpg|Lion: A Newfoundland Dog, 1824
File:Sir Edwin Henry Landseer - Favourites, the Property of H.R.H. Prince George of Cambridge - Google Art Project.R.H. Prince George of Cambridge, 1834 to 1835
File:Edwin Landseer - The Arab Tent - WGA12440.jpg|The Arab Tent, 1866
File:A Distinguished Member of the Humane Society by Sir Edwin Landseer.jpg| A Distinguished Member of the Humane Society, exhibited 1838
File:Landseer Saved.jpg|Saved, 1856
File:Eos, A Favorite Greyhound of Prince Albert.jpg|A Favorite Greyhound of Prince Albert, 1841
File:Windsor Castle in Modern Times. 1841-1845. 1842
File:Edwin Landseer - Attachment.jpg|Attachment, 1829
File:Edwin Landseer - Queen Victoria and Prince Albert at the Bal Costumé of 12 May 1842 - WGA12439.jpg|Queen Victoria and Prince Albert at the Bal Costumé of 12 May 1842 
File:Edwin Landseer. Falcon.JPG| Falcon, 1837
File:Edwin Landseer- The Wild Cattle of Chillingham.JPG|The wild cattle of Chillingham, 1867
File:Landseer.crumbs.jpg|Doubtful Crumbs, 1858
File:Rachel Russell (1826-1898) by Edwin Henry Landseer (1802-1873).jpg|Rachel Russell, 1835
File:Sir Edwin Henry Landseer - A Highland Landscape - Google Art Project. 1830
File:Edwin Landseer- A Highland Breakfast.JPG|A Highland Breakfast, 1834



Notes






