[[Paparoa National Park]]

CATEGORIES: National parks of New Zealand, Buller District, Grey District, Protected areas established in 1987, Important Bird Areas of New Zealand, Protected areas of the West Coast Region

Paparoa National Park is on the west coast of the South Island of New Zealand.
It was established in 1987 and encompasses 306 km².  The park ranges from on or near the coastline to the peak of the Paparoa Ranges.  A separate section of the park is to the north and is centered at Ananui Creek.  The park protects a limestone karst area. The park contains several caves, of which Metro Cave / Te Ananui Cave is a commercial tourist attraction.  The majority of the park is forested with a wide variety of vegetation. The park was the site of the 1995 Cave Creek disaster where fourteen people died as a result of the collapse of a scenic viewing platform.
The small settlement of Punakaiki, adjacent to the popular Pancake Rocks tourist attraction, lies on the edge of the park.

History of establishment

In 1976, the Federated Mountain Clubs had identified the northern part of the Paparoa Ranges as a potential wilderness area. In 1979, the Native Forest Action Council proposed a 130,000 hectare national park, including the northern Paparoa Ranges and land to the north and east. This eventually led to the National Parks and Reserves Authority identifying the western Paparoa Range as a prospective national park. Meanwhile, a joint proposal by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research and the National Museum succeeded in having a core area of great ecological significance -  the forests of the lowland karst syncline - gazetted as the Pororari Ecological Area in 1979.
The initial proposal for a large park incorporating the wilderness area was rejected, but after seven rounds of submissions, and help from other environment groups including the Royal Forest and Bird Protection Society, an area of 30,327 hectares was gazetted as Paparoa National Park on 23 November 1987.

Landforms

The park has diverse geology and a variety of landforms including mountain, lowlands and coastal terrain.

Mountains

More than half the park is best described as mountainous, from the eastern edge of the
syncline to the crest of the main range. On their eastern side, an assortment of hanging
valleys, truncated spurs, towering bluffs and cirques overlook deep glaciated valleys running
north and south.
The predominant ancient granite and gneiss rocks of the Paparoa mountains bear a closer
geological resemblance to those in distant Fiordland than to the main range of the Southern Alps.
This is because the Alpine Fault has separated them from their original neighbours over the
last 10 million years.

Karst

Rivers flowing from the Paparoa Ranges pass through the limestone syncline, creating subterranean waterways and extensive cave systems that are one of the features of the park.  The main rivers are the Fox, Pororari and Punakaiki.  Another of the rivers is Cave Creek, site of the 1995 Cave Creek disaster.
The river gorges, confined by high, forest-crowned limestone cliffs, provide a means of access to
the park's karst interior. However, in many of the tributaries the gorges are narrow, steep and include
waterfalls. Dry, mossy streambeds, karren, blind valleys and
basins where water emerges from caves or vanishes into sinks are all indicators of
the complex subterranean system beneath.
Intricate systems of shafts, passages and caverns have been slowly formed by the continual
effects of water through the soluble limestone. The forest ensures that this process continues
by supplying decaying vegetation to add to the acidity in the flowing water.
The largest single feature in the karst region is the Barrytown Syncline. Limestone is exposed
on both flanks of the syncline with more recent gravels and mudstones occupying the low lying
area in between. These more easily erodible rocks overlie interstratal karst.
The majority of known cave systems are in the western side of the limestone syncline where
underground drainage patterns are concentrated mainly along horizontal lines of weakness in
the bedding planes.

Coastal region

The Paparoa coastline is characterised by high cliffs cut away by waves from the Tasman Sea, with indented coves and sandy beaches.  There are small islands off shore and rock pillars.  These terraces were once islands, which became part of the mainland when New Zealand was uplifted quite recently in its geological history.
The most well known feature of the coastal region is the "pancake rocks" at Dolomite Point,near Punakaiki,
where evenly layered stacks of platey limestone have been eroded in places to form surge
pools and blowholes.
A significant feature of the coast is the colony of the rare seabird, the Westland Petrel or tāiko, that is located on densely forested terraces just south of Punakaiki river.  The Westland Petrel breeding site at Punakaiki has been identified as an Important Bird Area, by BirdLife International. (2012). Important Bird Areas factsheet: Punakaiki. Downloaded from  on 2012-02-16.

Protection from mining

Although Paparoa National Park is protected from mining by Schedule 4 of the Crown Minerals Act, there have been proposals to allow some mining within the park's borders. On 22 March 2010, the Energy and Resources Minister Gerry Brownlee and Conservation Minister Kate Wilkinson released a discussion paper including a proposal to remove 7,058 hectares of land from Schedule Four of the Crown Minerals Act 1991, including the Inangahua sector of Paparoa National Park.  The proposed change  would remove the prohibition on mining for the area concerned.
On 26 March 2010, a spokesman for Energy and Resources Minister Gerry Brownlee said that opencast mining in Paparoa National Park could not be ruled out.
On 20 July 2010, in a joint statement by Energy and Resources Minister Gerry Brownlee and Conservation Minister Kate Wilkinson, the Government announced that it had received 37,552 submissions on its discussion paper, and that it had decided not to remove any land from Schedule 4 of the Crown Minerals Act for the purposes of further mineral exploration or extraction. Ms Wilkinson said the government had agreed to continue with its proposal to add 14 areas with a total of 12,400 hectares of land to Schedule 4, including 240 hectares of Paparoa National Park (the northwest addition).








