[[Janice Hart]]

CATEGORIES: LaRouche movement, Living people, 1955 births, Women in Illinois politics, Illinois Democrats

Janice Hart (born 1955) was an unsuccessful candidate for the office of Illinois Secretary of State in 1986.
Hart, a political unknown and a LaRouche movement activist since the age of 17,"anice Hart proud she never went to college" Lloyd Green, Don Hayner. Chicago Sun - Times. Chicago, Ill.: Mar 20, 1986. pg. 5 unexpectedly won the Democratic Party's nomination. Her opponent, Aurelia Pucinski, came from a politically prominent family and was supported by the party organization. On March 19, 1986, Hart celebrated her victory of the previous day, saying "I'm going to revive the spirit of Abraham Lincoln and General Patton. We're going to roll our tanks down State Street."
Prominent Democrats nationwide opposed Hart's candidacy, with Democratic National Committee chairman Paul Kirk saying "Good Lord, we have a problem here." Following the election Hart defiantly said,  "Victory is not defined by your petty election."Chicago Tribune November 6, 1986
Hart appeared in the news again in the summer of '86 when she threw a pound of raw liver, as a symbolic "pound of flesh," at the feet of Milwaukee Archbishop Rembert Weakland, to protest what she perceived as his support for the International Monetary Fund. After initially failing to appear to answer the charges, she was fined $500 for disorderly conduct.
Hart opposed Pucinski again in 1987, this time for circuit court clerk, which Pucinski won. When Hart applied for the nomination for Secretary of State again in 1990 she did not qualify due to insufficient signatures on her petition. She subsequently retired from public life. In 2007, one-time running mate Fairchild told a reporter that Hart was no longer with the LaRouche movement."LaRouche follower returns to Capitol; Mark Fairchild pushes for ban on home foreclosures" BERNARD SCHOENBURG. State Journal Register. Springfield, Ill.: Nov 2, 2007. pg. 5

Political significance

Hart ran on the LaRouche platform, including measures to classify AIDS as a communicable disease "and give health officials the power to test and quarantine
where needed," A similar theory is that she won because her name caused voters to connect her with then-prominent Democrat Gary Hart (of Colorado). Others blame Stevenson for his inept campaigning for the ticket and voters for their apathy. Dennis King in Lyndon LaRouche and the New American Fascism (1989) cites evidence that some of Hart's support resulted from below-the-radar organizing and campaigning in farm communities and rust belt towns.

Footnotes




