[[Whalley, Lancashire]]

CATEGORIES: Viaducts in England, Villages in Lancashire, Civil parishes in Lancashire, Geography of Ribble Valley

Whalley  is a large village in Ribble Valley on the banks of the River Calder in Lancashire, England. It is overlooked by Whalley Nab, a large picturesque wooded hill over the river from the village.
The main road through Whalley is King Street, which leads through to Clitheroe Road. Neighbouring Whalley are the small villages of Wiswell, Billington, Barrow, and Read. Close by is Downham village and Pendle Hill which was made famous in William Harrison Ainsworth's book "The Lancashire Witches". (1849)

Landmarks

Whalley Viaduct

Known locally as "Whalley Arches", Whalley Viaduct is a 48-span railway bridge crossing the River Calder and a listed structure.
It was built between 1846 and 1850 under the engineering supervison of Terrence Wolfe Flanagan.  It is a red brick arch structure and the longest and largest railway viaduct in Lancashire.3m over the river for 620m.
Over 7 million bricks and 12,338 cubic metres of stone were used in construction. 3,000m of timber were used for the arch centring, temporary platforms and the permanent foundation piles. During construction on 6 October 1849, two of the 41 arches then completed collapsed, with the loss of three lives.
The east side of the bridge, nearest the remains of the Abbey, has the only decorative treatment. Marshall, David and Charles, Newton Abbot

Whalley Abbey

The village has the ruins of Whalley Abbey, a 14th-century Cistercian abbey. The monks of Whalley described the site of their abbey beneath Whalley Nab on the banks of the Calder as locus benedictus - a blessed place Whalley Abbey.

Other places of interest

The parish church of St Mary and All Saints dates to 628 in the period when St. Paulinus was said to have preached at Whalley. The church has a large number of notable misericords - eighteen 15th century and four Victorian, the former known to have originated at Whalley Abbey. The church-yard has three Anglo-Saxon crosses  thumb|right|150px|Whalley St Mary and All Saints parish church tower It also contains war graves of 8 servicemen of World War I and 5 of World War II.cwgc.%20MARY)%20CHURCHYARD CWGC Cemetery Report. Breakdown obtained from casualty record.
A Roman Catholic church, The English Martyrs, lies near the Abbey. Until the 1980s there was a girls' boarding school called Whiteacre. The village has a total of 23 listed buildings at Grade I, II* and II.

Calder's waterfall and isles

The River Calder has a man-made weir section at Whalley, which supposedly allowed the monks of Whalley Abbey to collect water easily. It has been suggested that was one of the main reasons for the abbey being built where it was. The river here has two small islands made of pebbles and rocks.
The Dam/weir was built to guide water to a channel,that fed a water wheel in the Corn Mill,(there is a sluice gate where the dam meets the channel, this turns the wheel on and off) this gave power to grind the various products (Wheat, Barley etc.).  The power to the Mill was all belt driven through a pulley system.  The Mill has now been transformed into flats, but you can still see the remains of the wheel through an opening at the back of the building.

Shops and amenities

Whalley has many independent shops, hairdressers, numerous take-aways and estate agents, a SPAR minimarket, Lloyds Pharmacy and wine shop. Barclays Bank has a branch on the main street. The centre of the town is dominated by four pubs -  The Dog, The Whalley Arms, The Swan Hotel (established in 1780) and The DeLacy Arms. There is also a small club named Rendezvous (Rio's) and a public library, doctors' surgery and an adult learning centre.
Whalley is home to the Calderstones Partnership NHS Mental Health Trust. The hospital was founded in 1915 as "Queen Mary's Military Hospital". It then became "Whalley Asylum" and eventually, from 1929 to 1993, "Calderstones Hospital".gov.uk
The hospital has a burial ground, at the end of which is the Whalley (Queen Mary's Hospital) Cemetery, containing 42 graves of Commonwealth service personnel (primarily military patients) - 33 from World War I and nine from World War II - together with a memorial to nearly 300 servicemen who died in the hospital. The cemetery is accessible via the more recently established Ribble Valley Remembrance Park.cwgc.
Oakhill College is an independent Roman Catholic school located in the village.

Transport

There are hourly trains from the railway station to Blackburn and Manchester, running over the imposing Whalley Viaduct. These are operated by Northern Rail
There are also many bus services to the surrounding Lancashire, North Yorkshire and Greater Manchester towns and cities including Accrington, Blackburn, Burnley, Bolton, Clitheroe, Darwen, Longridge, Skipton and Manchester from the village's central street and Whalley Bus Station. Most bus services are operated by Transdev in Lancashire, Holmeswood Coaches and M&M Coaches.
The small bus station consists of three stands for buses heading south. Buses heading north, towards Clitheroe and beyond, use the bus stop located almost opposite, on King Street, the main street running through the village.

Sport

A local club staged speedway meetings at Dean's Pleasure Grounds in the late 1920s. The track was very small and only two riders were allowed to race at any one time. A contemporary photo  shows the track on flat land adjacent to a river and the showground with a helter-skelter. Today there are sports facilities including tennis courts, football pitches, a bowling green and cricket ground. In 1867, Whalley hosted the first Roses Match between Lancashire County Cricket Club and Yorkshire County Cricket Club at Station Road.

Culture

Whalley Pickwick Night (named after the Charles Dickens novel The Pickwick Papers) is an event in December of each year with people in Victorian costume to raise funds for charity.  The first event was in the 1980s as a late night (6pm–9 pm) Christmas shopping event, and in more recent years has since expanded with stalls, indoor events and a religious service.
The town participates with the adjacent village of Billington in "Billington and Whalley Brass Band Club."

Gallery

Image:Whalley Saxon Cross 1.jpg|Anglo-Saxon cross in the churchyard of St Mary and All Saints parish church
Image:Whalley Saxon Cross 2.jpg|Second Anglo-Saxon cross in the churchyard
Image:Whalley Saxon Cross 3.jpg|Third Anglo-Saxon cross in the churchyard
Image:Whalley Arches detail.jpg|Whalley Arches, east side, detail
Image:Whalley Gateway from the west 028.jpg|''Whalley Gateway from the west'
Image:Whalley Gateway from east.jpg|Whalley Gateway from the east
Image:Terrace Row, Whalley.jpg|Terrace Row, Grade II listed
Image:Swan Hote, Whalley.jpg|The Swan Hotel






