[[Mayim Bialik]]

CATEGORIES: 1975 births, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, Actresses from San Diego, California, American child actresses, American film actresses, American Jews, American neuroscientists, American people of Czech descent, American people of Hungarian descent, American people of Polish descent, American television actresses, American voice actresses, American Zionists, Baalei teshuva, Jewish American actresses, Jewish American musicians, Jewish American scientists, Living people, University of California, Los Angeles alumni

Mayim Hoya Bialik (

Early life and education

Bialik was born in San Diego, California, to Barry Bialik and Beverly Winkelman.
Bialik attended Walter Reed Junior High School and graduated from North Hollywood High School in North Hollywood, California as part of the class of 1993. "Hypothalamic regulation in relation to maladaptive, obsessive-compulsive, affiliative, and satiety behaviors in Prader-Willi syndrome" (PhD Diss., UCLA, 2007).

Career

Bialik started her career as a child actress in the late 1980s. Her early roles included the horror film Pumpkinhead (1988), her first acting job, and guest appearances on The Facts of Life and Beauty and the Beast. It was for her Beauty and the Beast work, in which she played a sewer-dwelling girl named Ellie who had about 10 lines of dialogue, that Bialik obtained her Screen Actors Guild (SAG) card."How Did You Get Your SAG-AFTRA Card?" TV Guide. January 13, 2014. p. 10. She appeared in three episodes of MacGyver as Lisa Woodman. She appeared in Beaches (1988), playing Bette Midler's character as a young girl. She also appeared in the video for the song "Liberian Girl" by Michael Jackson.
In 1990, Bialik was tied to two television pilots, Fox's Molloy and NBC's Blossom. Molloy at first produced six episodes for a tryout run, followed by the shooting of the pilot special for Blossom. The latter actually aired two weeks before Bialik's Fox series and ultimately garnered higher ratings than it. When Molloy folded after its six episodes, Blossom was pursued as a regular series, airing until 1995. She had a major part in the Woody Allen comedy film "Don't Drink the Water" in 1994.
Between 1995 and 2005, Bialik mostly did voice-over work for cartoons, such as The Real Adventures of Jonny Quest and Recess.
She appeared in the feature film Kalamazoo? (2005) and appeared in three episodes of the HBO comedy series Curb Your Enthusiasm as Jodi Funkhouser, the lesbian daughter of a friend of Larry David. Bialik also made guest appearances as a fictionalized version of herself in the series Fat Actress, and made a guest appearance in an episode of Saving Grace. She had a recurring role as the high school guidance counselor in ABC Family's The Secret Life of the American Teenager.
In 2009, Bialik was nominated by Clinton Kelly for a makeover on TLC's What Not To Wear.people.
She joined the cast of The Big Bang Theory as Dr. Amy Farrah Fowler. Her first appearance was in the season 3 finale as a potential love interest for the character of Sheldon Cooper (Jim Parsons). In Season 4, she began as a recurring character playing Sheldon's "friend that's a girl, but not a girlfriend." Beginning with Season 4, Episode 8, she became part of the main cast.
Prior to her joining the cast, in the episode "The Bat Jar Conjecture", Raj suggests recruiting the real-life Bialik to their Physics Bowl team, saying "You know who's apparently very smart, is the girl who played TV's Blossom. She got a Ph.D. in Neuroscience or something."  She is cast as one of the guest stars on the Steve Carell 2014 improvisational sketch show Riot.
On March 6, 2012, her book, Beyond the Sling: A Real-Life Guide to Raising Confident, Loving Children the Attachment Parenting Way, was released.

Personal life

Bialik married Michael Stone on August 31, 2003, in a Victorian-themed ceremony with traditional Jewish customs. Bialik and Stone had two sons together:
In 2010, Bialik returned to television so that she could spend more time with her children and stated, "I'm glad that I completed my PhD and I'm very proud of it, but the life of a research professor would not have suited my needs in terms of what kind of parenting I wanted to do." In November 2012, her marriage ended in divorce.
In a 2012 interview, Bialik stated that she would call herself "aspiring Modern Orthodox".
Bialik is a celebrity spokesperson for the Holistic Moms Network.
Bialik is a vegan

Filmography

Awards and nominations

Bibliography






