[[Double Falsehood]]

CATEGORIES: Shakespeare Apocrypha, 1727 plays, Works based on Don Quixote

Double Falshood; or, The Distrest Lovers is an early 18th-century play by the English writer and playwright Lewis Theobald. Many scholars believe it to be an adaptation of a lost play by William Shakespeare and John Fletcher known as Cardenio. Theobald himself claimed his version was based on three manuscripts of an unnamed lost play by Shakespeare.  
The play's title in modern spelling is Double Falsehood.

Source

The 1727 play is based on the "Cardenio" episode in Don Quixote, which occurs in the first part of the novel.  The author of the play appears to know the novel through Thomas Shelton's  English translation, which appeared in 1612.A. Luis Pujante, "Double Falsehood and the Verbal Parallels with Shelton's Don Quixote," Shakespeare Survey, Vol. 51 (1998), pp. 95–106. Theobald's play changes the names of the main characters from the Spanish original: Cervantes' Cardenio becomes Julio, his Lucinda becomes Leonora; Don Fernando is turned into Henriquez, and Dorothea into Violante.

Authorship

Publisher Humphrey Moseley was the first to link Cardenio with Shakespeare:  the title page of his edition of 1647, entered at the Stationers' Register on 9 September 1653, credits the work to "Mr Fletcher & Shakespeare".  In all, Moseley added Shakespeare's name to six plays by other writers, attributions which have always been received with scepticism.
Theobald's claim of a Shakespearean foundation for his Double Falshood met with suspicion, and even accusations of forgery, from contemporaries such as Alexander Pope, and from subsequent generations of critics as well.  Nonetheless Theobald is regarded by critics as a far more serious scholar than Pope, and as a man who "more or less invented modern textual criticism". The inclusion in the Arden canon, notwithstanding the caution expressed in their editor's guarded endorsement,Hammond, Brean, quoted in Maltby (2011):"I am relatively sure that some part of this play is Shakespeare's work" is criticised for harming Shakespeare's reputation as a playwright...

Performance and publication

The play was first produced on 13 December 1727 at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, and published in 1728. The drama was revived at Covent Garden on 24 April 1749, and performed again on 6 May of the same year. Later performances occurred in 1781 and 1793, and perhaps in 1770 also.
After the first edition of 1728, later editions appeared in 1740 and 1767.

Modern revivals

A new edition of the play was published in March 2010 in the Arden Shakespeare series. In January 2011 this version, advertised as by "William Shakespeare and John Fletcher", was presented at the Union Theatre, Southwark, by theatre company MokitaGrit, director Phil Willmott. Wilmott, while praising the "flashes of psychological insight" in the work, found himself unconvinced by the attribution to Shakespeare, noting  the absence of  comic interludes,  the play's uncharacteristic structure and, above all, the absence of "heart-stopping moments of poetry". Certainly some typical Shakespearean plot elements, such as women disguised as men, a disaffected younger brother and a switch from scenes at court to one in the country are to be found, but the possibility remains that these were included by another as an  "homage" to Shakespeare's style, or as a deliberate attempt to deceive.[ref]
