[[Dole Food Company]]

CATEGORIES: Companies formerly listed on the New York Stock Exchange, Agriculture companies of the United States, Food production companies of the United States, Companies established in 1851, Business in Hawaii, Multinational food companies, Companies based in Los Angeles County, California, Companies based in Hawaii

Dole Food Company, Inc. is an American-based agricultural multinational corporation headquartered in Westlake Village, California. The company is the largest producer of fruits and vegetables in the world, operating with 74,300 full-time and seasonal employees who are responsible for over 300 products in 90 countries. However, once Chiquita Brands and Fyffes finish their merger, it will be No. 2."Chiquita and Fyffes join to make world's biggest banana firm". Reuters. Retrieved 14 March 2014. Dole markets such food items as bananas, pineapples (fresh and packaged), grapes, strawberries, salads, and other fresh and frozen fruits and juices.
Dole's Chairman founded the Dole Nutrition Institute, a nutritional research and education foundation.

Operations

Management and staff



Products

Including the original pineapple, Dole distributes fresh plant foods in the forms of  whole fruits, whole vegetables,  berries, and fresh-cut vegetables. 
Packaged products include fruit bowls, fruit bowls in gel, fruit in plastic jars, fruit parfaits, fruit crisps, dates, raisins, and canned fruits. 
Frozen products include berries, tropical fruits, and fruit bars.
Juices are sold chilled, frozen, or canned.
Salad products include greens, salad kits, and shreds.
In 1998 Dole bought several growers in Colombia and became the largest distributor of fresh-cut flowers in the US. However, by 2008 the flower business was losing money, and it was bought in January 2009 by a group of private investors.

History

The company traces its origin to the 1851 establishment of Castle & Cooke by missionaries Samuel Northrup Castle and Amos Starr Cooke. Castle & Cooke rapidly became one of the largest companies in Hawaii, investing in shipping, railroad construction, sugar production, and seafood packing. The other half of Dole's corporate heritage, the Hawaiian Pineapple Company, was founded in 1901 by James Dole, who opened his first pineapple plantation in the central plateau of the Hawaiian island of Oahu. Sanford Dole, the cousin of James, had been president of the Republic of Hawaii from 1894 after the overthrow of the Kingdom of Hawaii (her last monarch, Queen Lili
The annexation of Hawaii to the United States made selling agricultural products to the mainland much more profitable, since they would never be subject to import tariffs.
In 1932, Castle & Cooke purchased a 21% interest in the Hawaiian Pineapple Company. In the 1960s, Castle & Cooke acquired the remainder of the Hawaiian Pineapple Company and the Standard Fruit Company and renamed the company "The Dole Food Company, Inc" in 1991. Castle & Cook also owned Bumble Bee Foods from 1961 until the 1980s.
It was then the third largest producer and U.S. importer of bananas. Dole and Chiquita remain the top two U.S. banana companies as of 2011.
In 2011, the company reported $7.2 billion in annual revenue. It is a publicly traded company on the NYSE (DOLE).
Castle & Cooke Inc, a real estate company, was spun off in 1995; it is currently operating as a subsidiary of Flexi-Van Leasing, Inc.
Dole operates plantations throughout Central and South America, and in the Asia-Pacific region, with plantations in the Philippines and two packing plants in Thailand, Hua Hin and Chumphon.
PepsiCo distributes Dole's Single Serving Juices.
Dole Food Company Inc. has agreed to sell its worldwide packaged foods and Asia fresh produce businesses to Japanese trading house Itochu Corporation for $1.7 billion in cash.
In August 2013, Dole announced it has sold itself to CEO David Murdock for $1.2 billion.

Corporate headquarters

In 1994, Dole announced that it would finalize its plans to build its world headquarters on a  Dole completed construction and opened its new world headquarters building in May 1999.

Legacy

The Guinness Book of World Records (2001) lists the pineapple maze at the Dole Plantation in Oahu, Hawaii as the world's largest maze.
The Dole Nutrition Institute (DNI) was founded by David H. Murdock in 2003 to "Feed the World with Knowledge" through research and education regarding the health benefits of a plant-based diet.

Mascot

Bobby Banana is a mascot of Dole Food Company and the leader of the SuperKids (children who regularly eat five to nine fruits and vegetables every day).
In 1985 and 1986, the Dole banana was featured as the official banana of the Pittsburg State University (KS) Gorillas' athletic programs.  The project was the brainchild of then Pitt State radiosports play-by-play voice Scott Burton.  The introduction of the Dole banana as the official banana of the Gorillas delighted then Athletic Director David Suenram and Pittsburg State University sports fans alike.  The head football coach at the time of the promotion was Dennis Franchione.  Dole provided company trinkets for fan giveaways and the popularity of the Dole banana thrived in southeast Kansas and southwest Missouri (Joplin) during the promotion's two year run.

Criticism and controversies

Legal cases

In 2001, Dole was involved in the suit Del Monte Fresh Produce Co. v. Dole Food Co. with Del Monte Fresh over the potential misappropriation of Del Monte's specially-bred pineapple.

Hawaiian coup

James Dole, who founded the Hawaiian Pineapple Company, came to Hawaii in 1899, five years after his cousin (once removed), Sanford B. Dole had taken up position as first president of the  republic, following the overthrow of the Hawaiian monarchy.

Food safety

In 2005, 23 people in Minnesota were sickened with E. coli O157:H7. The source of the bacteria was found to be Dole brand bagged lettuce. Then in 2006, another E. coli outbreak that caused over 200 people to become ill and killed 3 more was linked to bagged spinach sold by Dole. The spinach was processed by Natural Selection Foods in California.

Labor relations

The banana industry has traditionally been dominated by a few large corporations, which employ low-wage workers in developing countries.
In 2007, Nicaraguan plantation workers, represented by Los Angeles-based personal injury lawyer Juan Dominguez, sued Dole and Dow Chemical Company, claiming the use of illegal pesticides such as the now banned Nemagon (containing DBCP) had made them sterile. The pesticide was not banned in Nicaragua until after Dole ceased its operations within the country. The suit and two others were subsequently thrown out by California courts after it was concluded that "contrary to their sworn testimony, most of the plaintiffs never worked on Dole-affiliated banana farms and none were involved in the DBCP application process," while similar lawsuits were filed in U.S. and Nicaraguan courts.
A lawyer for the Nicaraguans, Steve Condie, however, stated that some of the witnesses who gave testimony that the claims were fraudulent, had been paid by Dole.  The witnesses' identities were kept secret so that the plaintiffs' lawyers could not interview them.
Swedish film director Fredrik Gertten made a documentary film about Dominguez and the alleged banana workers. The movie Bananas!* premiered in the 2009 Los Angeles Film Festival. Dole said they had serious concerns about the film's accuracy and they urged festival officials to "immediately cease and desist" their sponsorship of the film. 11 June 2009 - bananasthemovie. In addition, festival officials distributed information before the film's screening that indicated Dole believed the film to be factually inaccurate.
Although the film was screened with a disclaimer from the festival, Gertten was subsequently sued for defamation by Dole.
The Nicaraguan DBCP awards against Dole were overturned in July 2010.
In May 2013 Oxfam demanded Dole remove its 'Ethical Choice' labels from its bananas in New Zealand until it improved treatment of its workers in the Philippines, but Dole said Oxfam was trying to "destroy the Dole brand" in favour of another supplier.

Labeling of genetically engineered foods in California

In 2012, Dole Packaged Foods contributed $171,261 to a $46 million political campaign known as "The Coalition Against The Costly Food Labeling Proposition, sponsored by Farmers and Food Producers".kcet.html This organization opposed California Proposition 37 (2012), proposing mandatory labeling of foods containing genetically modified ingredients. Dole's donation was among the lowest provided by manufacturers to the "No" campaign.






