[[Nicholas Katzenbach]]

CATEGORIES: 1922 births, United States presidential electors, 1996, 2012 deaths, Alumni of Balliol College, Oxford, American chief executives, American Episcopalians, American people of German descent, American people of French descent, American prisoners of war in World War II, American military personnel of World War II, American Rhodes Scholars, Lyndon B. Johnson Administration cabinet members, New Jersey Democrats, People associated with the John F. Kennedy assassination, People from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, People from Trenton, New Jersey, Phillips Exeter Academy alumni, Princeton University alumni, Rutgers School of Law–Newark faculty, United States Army Air Forces officers, United States Assistant Attorneys General, United States Attorneys General, United States Deputy Attorneys General, University of Chicago faculty, Under Secretaries of State (United States), Writers from New Jersey, Writers from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Yale Law School alumni, Yale Law School faculty, World War II prisoners of war held by Italy, World War II prisoners of war held by Germany

Nicholas deBelleville Katzenbach (January 17, 1922 –   May 8, 2012) was an American lawyer who served as United States Attorney General during the Lyndon B. Johnson administration.

Early life

Katzenbach was born in Philadelphia and raised in Trenton. His parents were Edward L. Katzenbach, who served as Attorney General of New Jersey, and Marie Hilson Katzenbach, who was the first female president of the New Jersey State Board of Education. His uncle, Frank S. Katzenbach, served as mayor of Trenton and as a Justice of the New Jersey Supreme Court.  He was named after his mother's great-great-grandfather, Nicholas de Belleville (1753–1831), a French physician who accompanied Kazimierz Pułaski to America and settled in Trenton in 1778."Trenton Old & New", Trenton Historical Society. Accessed June 27, 2008. Katzenbach was raised an Episcopalian,
Katzenbach served in the United States Army Air Corps in World War II. Assigned as a navigator in the 381st Bomb Squadron, 310th Bomb Group in North Africa.  His B-25 Mitchell Bomber was shot down  February 23, 1943, over the Mediterranean Sea off North Africa. He spent over two years as a prisoner of war in Italian and German POW camps.talkingpointsmemo.php#comment-3351824 Letter from Katzenbach at TPM Cafe 2009
Katzenbach attended Phillips Exeter Academy, received his B.A. cum laude from Princeton University in 1945 and his LL.B. cum laude from Yale Law School in 1947, where he served as Articles Editor of the Yale Law Journal. From 1947 to 1949, he was a Rhodes Scholar at Balliol College, Oxford.
On June 8, 1946, Katzenbach married Lydia King Phelps Stokes, in a ceremony officiated by her uncle, Anson Phelps Stokes, former canon of the Washington National Cathedral. Her father was Harold Phelps Stokes, a newspaper correspondent and secretary to Herbert Hoover."Nuptials are Held for Lydia Stokes",  The New York Times, June 9, 1947. Accessed June 27, 2008.
Katzenbach was admitted to the New Jersey bar in 1950 and the Connecticut bar in 1955. He was an associate in the law firm of Katzenbach, Gildea and Rudner in 1950.

Government service

From 1950 to 1952 he was attorney-advisor in the Office of General Counsel to the Secretary of the Air Force. Katzenbach was on the faculty of Rutgers School of Law—Newark from 1950 to 1951; was an associate professor of law at Yale from 1952 to 1956; and was a professor of law at the University of Chicago from 1956 to 1960.
He served in the U.S. Department of Justice as Assistant Attorney General of the Office of Legal Counsel in 1961-1962 and as Deputy Attorney General from 1962 to 1965. President Johnson appointed Katzenbach the 65th Attorney General of the United States on February 11, 1965, and he held the office until October 2, 1966. He then served as Under Secretary of State from 1966 to 1969.
In September 2008, Katzenbach published Some of It Was Fun: Working with RFK and LBJ (W. W. Norton), a memoir of his years in Government service.

The "Stand in the Schoolhouse Door"

On June 11, 1963, Katzenbach was a primary participant in one of the most famous incidents of the Civil Rights struggle. Alabama Governor George Wallace stood in front of Foster Auditorium at the University of Alabama in an attempt to stop desegregation of that institution by the enrollment of two black students, Vivian Malone and James Hood. This became known as the "Stand in the Schoolhouse Door." Wallace stood aside only after being confronted by Katzenbach, accompanied by federal marshals and the Alabama National Guard.

Role in JFK assassination investigation

A 1979 account of the House Select Committee on Assassinations (HSCA), reported that on November 25, 1963, only 3 days after the John F. Kennedy assassination and before any formal federal investigation had been conducted, Nicholas Katzenbach, then deputy attorney general, had written a memo to presidential assistant Bill Moyers at the White House. Katzenbach's memo may come the closest of any known official document (Katzenbach's memo) to discussing a conscious desire on the part of government to control information about Kennedy's death:
"It is important that all of the facts surrounding President Kennedy's Assassination be made public in a way which will satisfy people in the United States and abroad that all the facts have been told and that a statement to this effect be made now. The public must be satisfied that Oswald was the assassin; that he had no confederates who are still at large; and that evidence was such that he would have been convicted at trial... Speculation about Oswald's motivation ought to be cut off...)... We need something to head off public speculation or Congressional hearings of the wrong sort."
The Committee's final report can be interpreted as implying that Katzenbach, FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover, and others were the key actors behind the creation of the Warren Commission.  According to the report, Hoover told staff members on November 24, 1963 that he and Katzenbach were anxious to have "something issued so we can convince the public that Oswald is the real assassin," though the idea of a commission was initially opposed by President Johnson.

Later years

Katzenbach left government service to work for IBM in 1969, where he served as general counsel during the lengthy antitrust case filed by the Department of Justice seeking the break-up of IBM. He and Cravath, Swaine & Moore attorney Thomas Barr led the case for the computer giant for 13 years until the government finally decided to drop it in 1982. Later Katzenbach led the opposition against the case filed by the European Economic Community. He retired from IBM in 1986 and became a partner at the firm of Riker, Danzig, Scherer, Hyland & Perretti in New Jersey.See Katzenbach, Nicholas (de Belleville) in John S. Bowman, ed., The Cambridge Dictionary of American Biography (Cambridge, England: The Cambridge University Press, 1995).
In 1980, Katzenbach testified in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia for the defense of W. Mark Felt, later revealed to be the "Deep Throat" of the Watergate scandal and later Deputy Director of the FBI; accused and later found guilty of ordering illegal wiretaps on American citizens.
In December 1996, Katzenbach was one of New Jersey's fifteen members of the Electoral College, who cast their votes for the Clinton/Gore ticket.1996 Electoral College Votes, accessed December 21, 2006
Katzenbach also testified on behalf of President Clinton on December 8, 1998, before the House Judiciary Committee hearing, considering whether to impeach President Clinton.transcript
On March 16, 2004, MCI Communications in a press release announced "its Board of Directors  has elected former U.S. Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach as non-executive Chairman of the Board, effective upon MCI's emergence from Chapter 11 protection. Katzenbach has been an MCI Board member since July 2002." MCI later merged with Verizon.
Katzenbach and his wife Lydia retired to Princeton, New Jersey, with a summer home  on Martha's Vineyard in West Tisbury, Massachusetts."Land Bank adds beach, pasture", Martha's Vineyard Times, March 29, 2007. Accessed June 28, 2008.  His son is writer John Katzenbach. His daughter Maria Katzenbach is also a published novelist.
Katzenbach died on May 8, 2012.  He was 90.





Bibliography

Katzenbach, Nicholas, Some Of It Was Fun: Working with RFK and LBJ, (2008, W.W. Norton) 



|-
|-

|-


