[[Kalama]]

CATEGORIES: 1817 births, 1870 deaths, Hawaiian royal consorts, House of Kamehameha, Burials at the Royal Mausoleum of Hawaii, Members of the Hawaiian Kingdom House of Nobles, Members of the Hawaiian Kingdom Privy Council, Hawaiian adoptees (hānai), Recipients of the Royal Order of Kamehameha I

Kalama Hakaleleponi Kapakuhaili (1817–1870) was a Queen consort of the Kingdom of Hawai

Early life

She was born March 17, 1817; this date is a later invention when her husband declared that their birthdays would be on Saint Patrick's Day. She was the only child of Kona chief Naihekukui, who was commander of the native Hawaiian fleet at Honolulu. Her mother was Chiefess Ii (chief).
Kalama means "The Torch" in the Hawaiian language.

Marriage

Due to her uncle's friendship with Kamehameha II, she associated with the royal family. The young Kamehameha III, the boy king at the time, was needing a suitable royal bride. Many of the traditional chiefs wanted a union between the king and his sister Nāhienaena, like it had been customary to in the Hawaiian court since the beginning of time, but the missionaries and Christian chiefs, who held the most political power, opposed this suggestion, calling it incest.
Kamanele, the daughter of Governor John Adams Kuakini, was proposed as the most suitable in age, rank, and education. The young king fell in love with Kalama in 1832. This angered his sister Kīnaʻu and many of the high chiefs. Kamehameha III married her on February 14, 1837. This was only a few months after Nahienaena's death.

Queen

Though given the title of Queen Consort, she was overshadowed by her sister-in-law, Kīnaʻu, having the authority of Kuhina Nui because Kamehameha III had come to power only at the age of ten when his brother Kamehameha II died of measles in England.

Children

Kalama and Kamehameha III had two children who died in their infancy. Both were named Keaweaweulaokalani, after their father.
It was said by Kekāuluohi that she secretly caused the death of her two sons. It was because she was a common Hawaiian woman wholly without rank or chiefly blood. She and Kamehameha III would later hānai (adopt) their nephew Alexander Liholiho, who later became Kamehameha IV. She also adopted Kaʻiminaʻauao, the daughter of Analea Keohokālole and Caesar Kapaʻakea as her own. She even adopted her husband's illegitimate son Albert Kukaʻilimoku Kunuiakea by Jane Lahilahi Young.

Later life

She would outlive both her husband Kamehameha III and her nephew Kamehameha IV, becoming known as the Queen dowager of Hawaii. She met Prince Alfred on his visit to Hawaii in the reign of Kamehameha V. She drove out to Waikīkī in her own carriage of state, accompanied by her adopted son, Kunuiakea, and Miriam Likelike. The drivers of these carriages wore the royal feather shoulder capes, and the footmen were clad in like royal fashion. It was considered one of the grandest occasions in the history of those days.Hawaii's Story by Hawaii's Queen written by Liliuokalani
Kalama skillfully managed her properties and at the time of her death, she owned over 22,000 acres on the windward side of the island of Oahu.keauhouresort.pdf
In her will, her uncle Charles Kanaina was declared as the heir to her vast lands and properties.
She died on September 20, 1870, in Honolulu at the age of 53, only 2 years before the end of the Kamehameha Dynasty's reign over Hawaii. On September 21, American marines had to be landed to place the American flag at half-mast, when the American consul at Honolulu would not assume responsibility for doing so, owing to a past instance where the Queen's death was falsely reported.Hawaii's Story by Hawaii's Queen written by Liliuokalani
She and her husband would spend time in their summer palace.

Honours

Namesakes









