[[Instituto Tecnológico Autónomo de México]]

CATEGORIES: Instituto Tecnológico Autónomo de México, Universities in Mexico City, Educational institutions established in 1946, Business schools in Mexico, 1946 establishments in Mexico

The Instituto Tecnológico Autónomo de México (Mexico Autonomous Institute of Technology), commonly known as ITAM, is a private Ph.D.-granting research university located in Mexico City, Mexico. It is one of the nation's preeminent institutions of higher learning, the best private university in Mexico according to El Universal; Also, it is considered one of Mexico's think tanks and has the highest rank of admission to the Mexican Foreign Service.elsupuesto.com/internas/2013/10/diplomacia-itamita-toman-ex-alumnos-cancilleria/

History

It was originally an Economics School and one year later it opened its undergraduate business school. Due to the opening of the Accounting School, the institute grew from 52 students in 1947 to 500 in 1951. In 1963, by government decree, the ITAM was recognized as a "Free University School" and became autonomous (hence its name).  However the inclusion of the word autonomous in its name was not recognized by the government until 1985. Acerca del ITAM.
During the 1970s new programs were added including Applied Mathematics (1974), Social Science (1975) and a Master of Business Administration (1974). In the 1980s and '90s the additions were: Law (1980), Actuarial Science(1982), Computer Science (1983), Political Science (1991, instead of Social Science), International Relations (1992), Telematics (1993) and Industrial Engineering (1997). During the last decade the academic offer was increased by the establishment of Business Engineering (2004), Financial Management and Mechatronics (2010).

Campi

During its first four years the ITAM was originally located in a house in Mexico City's centro in 518 La Palma street. In 1950 the institute moved to 65 Serapio Rendón street in the Colonia San Rafael.  During the late 50's it moved once more to a new building built specially for the institute at the corner of Marina Nacional street and Lago Zirahuen street in the Colonia Anáhuac.  Finally, in 1978, ITAM moved to its current campus in 1 Río Hondo, in San Ángel. In 1991 the smaller graduate school campus, in 939 Camino Santa Teresa, was opened. Acerca del ITAM.

Administration and organization

Rectors

During its 60 years ITAM has had eight rectors:

Academic divisions (schools)

Today the institute has 38 academic programs dependent organized on 5 academic divisions, subdivided in 14 academic departments (equivalent to Schools). Acerca del ITAM. The academic programs include Licenciaturas and Ingenierias (equivalent to B.A., B.Sc. and LL.B.), as well as Masters (M.A., MBA and M.Sc.) and a Ph.D. program.

=Academic Division of Economics, Law and Social Sciences (School of Economics, Law and Social Sciences)=

This division is in charge of:

==Department of Economics==

The ITAM, through this department, offers an education in modern economics, with a considerable emphasis on analytic techniques and economic models, in line with the subjects being taught in economics department around the world. The Department of Economics has been especially influential. It is a major feeder for Latin American candidates into top international graduate programs, and has played an important role in the economic liberalization process that the Mexican Government started in the mid 1980s; in the last 20 years most of Mexico's Secretaries and Deputy Secretaries of Finance have been either ITAM professors or alumni. The department is ranked as the best Economics school in Mexico, depending on the survey, and one of the Top 75 Economics departments globally. Departamento de Economía, ITAM.

==Department of Political Science==

Because of the economics leading career, the Department of Political Science was invited to be the leading faculty in the field since the middle 1980s. With the formal change of the career in 1991, the program was adapted to the modern American political science and incorporated important tools like mathematics, economics and statistics. The program has a tremendous success, being the principal school in the subject, because of the number of students and all full-time faculty did doctoral studies in world's leading universities like Harvard, Stanford, Columbia, Duke, Chicago, Michigan, Princeton, UCLA, UCSD, and Yale. Licenciaturas e Ingenierías. Departamento de Ciencia Política, ITAM. Many of his undergraduate students are recruited in the best universities in the United States and Europe and others are employed in the federal and local governments and political parties.

=Academic Division of Management and Accountancy (Business School)=

The division is in charge of:

=Academic Division of Actuarial Science, Mathematics and Statistics (School of Actuarial, Mathematics and Statistics Sciences)=

The division is in charge of:

==Department of Mathematics==

The Department of Mathematics at ITAM consists of full-time researchers with graduate degrees who follow active research lines and publish in internationally renowned journals. The department has also participated in the global mathematics community by hosting several international applied mathematics conferences over the years. Its main strengths lie in numerical analysis, financial mathematics, stochastic processes, real analysis and dynamic systems applied to the social sciences. Departamento de Matemáticas, ITAM. Both BSc programs it maintains have been hugely successful in providing high level technical skills to its students, which often obtain graduate degrees abroad in Math, Finance, Economics, Statistics and Operations Research.

=Academic Division of General and International Studies (School of General and International Studies)=

This division is in charge of:

==Department of International Studies==

The Department of International Studies is one of the main research centers of diplomatic studies in Mexico and Latin America. Departamento de Estudios Internacionales, ITAM. It also coordinates the Institute of European Integration Studies (IEIE) and the Inter-American Studies Center (CEPI). Also, ITAM publishes the Latin American edition of Foreign Affairs, the American journal of international relations, and has the highest rank of admission to the Mexican Foreign Service (SEM).

==Department of General Studies==

Despite being known for as a technocratic education center, ITAM has maintained a large group of faculty devoted to the study of Philosophy, History, Religion and Society in its Department of General Studies. This department provides the bulk of the teaching for the core courses at ITAM: History, Philosophy and Problems of the Current Society. This department edits a journal by the name of Estudios which contains mostly essays by Mexican philosophers and historians.

=Academic Division of Engineering (School of Engineering)=

This division is in charge of:

Academics

The Institute is proud of teaching humanities and philosophical courses inside every major, this with the objective of developing a higher sense of ethics even with majors like economics and business management. ¿Por qué el ITAM?

Accreditations

All the programs at ITAM are officially accredited by the Secretaría de Educación Pública (SEP). In 2005 ITAM Business School became the first in Mexico to hold simultaneous accreditation of its programs by the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB) of the United States, the Association of MBAs of the United Kingdom and the European Quality Improvement System (EQUIS).

Faculty

ITAM has 239 professors and researchers, 85 percent of which are full-time professors. 90 percent of the faculty have a graduate degree and 68 percent have a PhD.  Furthermore, 20 percent of the professors are part of Sistema Nacional de Investigadores. Instituto Tecnológico Autónomo de México.

International Programs

ITAM is currently collaborating with the Tulane University in the ITAM/Tulane Executive MBA Program and the ITAM/Tulane Global Master in Business Administration; the Illinois Institute of Technology in the ITAM/IIT Master in Information Technologies and Management; the Universidad Autónoma de Barcelona in the ITAM/UAB Master in European Integration; the Florida International University in the ITAM/FIU Master in Accountancy.;Oficina de Intercambio Académico. Instituto Tecnológico Autónomo de México. and the ITAM/SciencesPo joint programme.

Honoris Causa degrees

Some of the Honoris Causa degrees awarded by the ITAM include:

Research

As a research university, ITAM has several centers dedicated to economics, law, political science, foreign affairs and business. Some include:

Notable alumni, faculty and staff

Alumni

Mexican presidents
Mexican Secretaries of Finance
Other Secretaries in the Mexican Government
Government (others)
Politicians
Business persons
Others

Faculty

Some famous faculty members include:






