[[Kānāwai Māmalahoe]]

CATEGORIES: Hawaii law

Kānāwai Māmalahoe, or Law of the Splintered Paddle (also translated Law of the Splintered Oar), is a precept in Hawaiian law, originating with King Kamehameha I in 1797. The law, "Let every elderly person, woman and child lie by the roadside in safety," is enshrined in the state constitution, Article 9, Section 10, and has become a model for modern human rights law regarding the treatment of civilians and other non-combatants. (PDF). hawaii.  His party encountered a group of commoners on a beach.  While chasing two fishermen who had stayed behind to cover the retreat of a man carrying a child, Kamehameha's leg was caught in the reef. One of the fisherman, Kaleleiki, hit him mightily on the head with a paddle in defense, which broke into pieces.  Kamehameha could have been killed at that point but the fisherman spared him. Years later, the same fisherman was brought before Kamehameha.  Instead of ordering for him to be killed, Kamehameha ruled that the fisherman had only been protecting his land and family, and so the Law of the Splintered Paddle was declared. The Law of the Splintered Paddle. Sacred-texts. Retrieved on 17 October 2011. 
The complete original 1797 law in Hawaiian:

English translation:

Cultural context

It has been noted that Kānāwai Māmalahoe was not an invention of Kamehameha I, but rather an articulation of concepts regarding governmental legitimacy that have been held in Hawaiʻi for many prior generations.  Countless stories abound in Hawaiian folklore of the removal of chiefsHawaiian Mythology: Part Three. The Chiefs: XXVIII. Usurping Chiefs. Sacred-texts. Retrieved on 17 October 2011. – generally, but not always, through popular execution – as a result of mistreatment of the common people,'Aumakua of Kona, O'ahu. Kapi'olani Community College. kcc.edu who have traditionally been intolerant of bad government.  As a shrewd politician and leader as well as a skilled warrior, Kamehameha used these concepts to turn what could have been a point of major popular criticism to his political advantage, while protecting the human rights of his people for future generations.

Modern relevance and controversy

Kānāwai Māmalahoe has been applied to Hawaiian rights, elder law, children's rights, homeless advocacy, and bicyclist safety. Litigation-essentials.com. Retrieved on 17 October 2011. Jkendurance.com (2011-07-21). Retrieved on 17 October 2011.  It also appears as a symbol of crossed paddles in the center of the badge of the Honolulu Police Department. Honolulupd. Retrieved on 17 October 2011. It is an unofficial symbol of the William S. Richardson School of Law, reflecting its ethos for legal education. As such, particularly in consideration of the human rights concerns of the Hawaiian sovereignty movement (in which the State of Hawaii is generally viewed as de facto, or lacking legitimacyPart 3: Hawaii vs. U.S. Imperialism. Pinkyshow. Retrieved on 17 October 2011.), Kānāwai Māmalahoe has been the subject of extended controversy. Paclii. Retrieved on 17 October 2011. 11-21. hawaii.Mokuleia Beach residents not budging to vacate park – Hawaii News Now – KGMB and KHNL Home. Hawaii News Now (2008-06-17). Retrieved on 17 October 2011.  The Honolulu Star-Advertiser published an editorial discussing modern day application of the Law of the Splintered Paddle to contemporary homeless populations living in Hawaii. Kauanoe. Honolulu Star-Advertiser (2014-02-06).  William S. Richardson School of Law - Derek Kauanoe '08: Law of Splintered Paddle should apply to Hawaii's homeless - Honolulu Star-Advertiser.  The editorial advocated for support of House Bill 1889 introduced in the Hawaii legislature in 2014 and recognized a homeless person's bill of rights.
[/ref]




