[[Battle Chess]]

CATEGORIES: 1988 video games, 3DO Interactive Multiplayer games, Acorn Archimedes games, Amiga games, Apple IIGS games, Atari ST games, CD32 games, Chess engines, Commodore 64 games, DOS games, FM Towns games, Interplay Entertainment games, Mac OS games, Multiplayer null modem games, Nintendo Entertainment System games, NEC PC-9801 games, Sharp X68000 games, Windows games

Battle Chess is a video game version of chess in which the chess pieces come to life and battle one another when capturing. It was originally developed and released by Interplay Entertainment for the Amiga in 1988 and subsequently on many other systems, including 3DO, Acorn Archimedes, Amiga CD32,  Amiga CDTV, Apple IIGS, Apple IIe, Atari ST, Commodore 64, DOS, FM Towns, NES, Mac OS, PC-98, Sharp X68000 and Windows 3.x. In 1991, Battle Chess Enhanced was released by Interplay for the PC, featuring improved VGA graphics and a symphonic musical score that played off of the CD-ROM.
Battle Chess was critically acclaimed and commercially successful, resulting in two official follow-ups as well as several inspired games. Its remake, Battle Chess: Game of Kings, was released on Steam (software) on March 16, 2014.

Gameplay

Since there are six types of pieces for each color, and a king cannot capture a king, there are 35 battle animations. The rook, for example, turns into a rock monster and kills a pawn by smashing his head. Some battle sequences like knight versus knight, or king versus bishop, are direct references to the black knight fight in Monty Python and the Holy Grail and the short battle between Indiana Jones and a swordsman in Raiders of the Lost Ark, respectively.
The game can be also played in a 2D version with no animations, and the Amiga CDTV version features a fully voiced introduction describing the movements of the pieces for the benefit of beginners. Digitized sound is utilized in the DOS version for all battle sound effects and is played through the PC speaker, without the need for a sound card, using a technique akin to RealSound.
Battle Chess could be played against a human opponent (by hotseat, or by null modem or over a local area network in some ports) or against the computer's artificial intelligence (AI). The game has an opening library from over 30,000 moves (which were not available for the Commodore 64 and Apple II versions). 

Development

Battle Chess was the first title developed and published by Interplay Entertainment themselves after ending their relationship with Electronic Arts, besides Neuromancer. The game was featured in the 1992 film Knight Moves about a chess grandmaster who is accused of several murders.inXile Entertainment Update - News and Siteseeing

Reception

The Amiga version received favourable reviews from magazines due its comical battle sequences which were advanced (for the time) in terms of graphics, animation and sound. German game magazine ASM, however, criticized the weak chess AI. In 1996, Computer Gaming World ranked it as the 106th best game of all time for its "funny, elaborate animated sequences and spectacular special effects."CGW 148: 150 Best Games of All Time

Legacy

Sequels

A sequel titled Battle Chess II Chinese Chess was released in 1991, based on xiangqi, commonly known as "Chinese chess". The next year's Battle Chess 4000 spoofed science fiction movies and television series (such as a battle sequence involving the monolith from 2001: A Space Odyssey) and used a clay animation art style similar to Clayfighter.

Inspired games

Battle Chess also spawned a number of inspired games, such as Star Wars Chess, released by Software Toolworks in 1993,
One similar game, titled Battle vs. Chess, was developed by TopWare Interactive for "just about every platform".
The District Court of California came into session and given that after two years of litigation, TopWare Interactive discharged their lawyer, resulting in Interplay winning the case by default.

Remake

Battle Chess: Game of Kings was released on Steam, on March 16, 2014.






