[[Olive]]

CATEGORIES: Olives, Flora of the Mediterranean, Cocktail garnishes, Drought-tolerant trees, Trees of Mediterranean climate, Ornamental trees, Trees of Africa, Trees of Europe, Trees of the Middle East, Trees of Ethiopia, Trees of Metropolitan France, Trees of Greece, Trees of Italy, Trees of Morocco, Trees of Portugal, Trees of Spain, Trees of Turkey, Angiosperms of Metropolitan France, Flora of North Africa, Flora of East Africa, Flora of Southern Africa, Flora of Western Asia, Flora of Macaronesia, Flora of Egypt, Flora of the Canary Islands, Flora of Mauritius, Flora of China, Flora of Java, Flora of Pakistan, Flora of California, Flora of Réunion, Flora of Bermuda, Flora of South Africa, Flora of Tanzania, Flora of Ethiopia, Flora of Madagascar, Flora of Comoros, Flora of Saudi Arabia, Medicinal plants, Garden plants of Africa, Garden plants of Asia, Garden plants of Europe, Plants used in bonsai, Plants described in 1753, Fertile Crescent

The olive (, Olea europaea, meaning "Oil from/of Europe") is a species of small tree in the family Oleaceae, much of Africa, the Mediterranean Basin from Portugal to Turkey, the Arabian Peninsula, and southern Asia as far east as China, plus the Canary Islands, Mauritius and Réunion. The species is cultivated in many places and considered naturalized in France, Corsica, Crimea, Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Syria, Java, Norfolk Island, California and Bermuda.Kew World Checklist of Selected Plant Families, Olea europaea Biota of North America Program, map, Olea europaea
Its fruit, also called the olive, is of major agricultural importance in the Mediterranean region as the source of olive oil. The tree and its fruit give its name to the plant family, which also includes species such as lilacs, jasmine, Forsythia and the true ash trees (Fraxinus). The word derives from Latin ŏlīva ("olive fruit", "olive tree"; "olive oil" is ŏlĕum) 
[/ref] The word "oil" in multiple languages ultimately derives from the name of this tree and its fruit.

Description

The olive tree, Olea europaea, is an evergreen tree or shrub native to the Mediterranean, Asia and Africa. It is short and squat, and rarely exceeds  wide. The trunk is typically gnarled and twisted.
The small white, feathery flowers, with ten-cleft calyx and corolla, two stamens and bifid stigma, are borne generally on the previous year's wood, in racemes springing from the axils of the leaves.
The fruit is a small drupe  long, thinner-fleshed and smaller in wild plants than in orchard cultivars. Olives are harvested in the green to purple stage. Canned black olives may contain chemicals (usually ferrous sulfate) that artificially turn them black. Olea europaea contains a seed commonly referred to in American English as a pit or a rock, and in British English as a stone.

Taxonomy

There are six natural subspecies of Olea europaea distributed over a wide range:
The subspecies maroccana and cerasiformis are respectively hexaploid and tetraploid.
Wild growing forms of the olive are sometimes treated as the species Olea oleaster.

Cultivars

There are hundreds of cultivars of the olive tree (Olea europaea).
Since many olive cultivars are self-sterile or nearly so, they are generally planted in pairs with a single primary cultivar and a secondary cultivar selected for its ability to fertilize the primary one. In recent times, efforts have been directed at producing hybrid cultivars with qualities such as resistance to disease, quick growth and larger or more consistent crops.

History

Prehistory

The edible olive has been cultivated for at least 5,000 to 6,000 years, The olive tree is native to the Mediterranean region and Western Asia, and spread to nearby countries from there.
The immediate ancestry of the cultivated olive is unknown. It is assumed Fossil Olea pollen has been found in Macedonia, Greece, and other places around the Mediterranean, indicating that this genus is an original element of the Mediterranean flora. Fossilized leaves of Olea were found in the palaeosols of the volcanic Greek island of Santorini (Thera) and were dated about 37,000 BP. Imprints of larvae of olive whitefly Aleurolobus (Aleurodes) olivinus were found on the leaves. The same insect is commonly found today on olive leaves, showing that the plant-animal co-evolutionary relations have not changed since that time.L. (1978) Fossil plants from Weichselian interstadials, Santorini (Greece) II, published in the "Thera and the Aegean World II", London, pp. 109–128. Retrieved on 2011-12-07.
As far back as 3000 BC, olives were grown commercially in Crete; they may have been the source of the wealth of the Minoan civilization.Gooch, Ellen, "10+1 Things you may not know about olive oil", Epikouria Magazine, Fall/Spring (2005)

Americas, Japan

Olives are not native to the Americas. The Spanish colonists brought the olive to the New World where its cultivation prospered in present-day Peru and Chile. The first precious seedlings from Spain were planted in Lima by Antonio de Rivera in 1560. Olive tree cultivation quickly spread along the valleys of South America's dry Pacific coast where the climate was similar to the Mediterranean. In Japan the first successful planting of olive trees happened in 1908 on Shodo Island which became the cradle of olive cultivation.International Olive Council

Symbolic connotations

Olive oil has long been considered sacred. The olive branch was often a symbol of abundance, glory and peace. The leafy branches of the olive tree were ritually offered to deities and powerful figures as emblems of benediction and purification, and they were used to crown the victors of friendly games and bloody wars. Today, olive oil is still used in many religious ceremonies. Over the years, the olive has been the symbol of peace, wisdom, glory, fertility, power and purity.

Ancient Egypt

Leafy branches of the olive tree were found in Tutankhamun's tomb.

Ancient Israel and Hebrew Bible

The olive was one of the main elements in ancient Israelite cuisine. Olive oil was used for not only food and cooking, but also lighting, sacrificial offerings, ointment, and anointment for priestly or royal office.
The olive tree is one of the first plants mentioned in the Hebrew Bible and in the Christian Old Testament, and one of the most significant. It was an olive leaf that a dove brought back to Noah to demonstrate that the flood was over
(Book of Genesis, 8:11). The olive is listed in Deuteronomy, 8:8 as one of the seven species that are noteworthy products of the Land of Israel.

Ancient Greece

The ancient Greeks used to smear olive oil on their bodies and hair as a matter of grooming and good health.
Olive oil was used to anoint kings and athletes in ancient Greece. It was burnt in the sacred lamps of temples as well as being the "eternal flame" of the original Olympic Games. Victors in these games were crowned with its leaves.
In Homer's Odyssey, Odysseus crawls beneath two shoots of olive that grow from a single stock,Homer, Odyssey, book 5". and in the Iliad, (XVII.53ff) is a metaphoric description of a lone olive tree in the mountains, by a spring; the Greeks observed that the olive rarely thrives at a distance from the sea, which in Greece invariably means up mountain slopes. Greek myth attributed to the primordial culture-hero Aristaeus the understanding of olive husbandry, along with cheese-making and bee-keeping."He learned from the Nymphai how to curdle milk, to make bee-hives, and to cultivate olive-trees, and was the first to instruct men in these matters." (Diodorus Siculus, 4. 81. 1). Olive was one of the woods used to fashion the most primitive Greek cult figures, called xoana, referring to their wooden material; they were reverently preserved for centuries. It was purely a matter of local pride that the Athenians claimed that the olive grew first in Athens."Indeed it is said that at that ancient time there were no olives anywhere save at Athens." (Herodotus, 5. 82. 1 ). In an archaic Athenian foundation myth, Athena won the patronship of Attica from Poseidon with the gift of the olive. Though, according to the 4th-century BC father of botany, Theophrastus, olive trees ordinarily attained an age of about 200 years,Theophrastus, On the Causes of Plants,, 4.13.5., noted by Signe Isager and Jens Erik Skydsgaard, Ancient Greek Agriculture, An introduction, 1992, p. 38. he mentions that the very olive tree of Athena still grew on the Acropolis; it was still to be seen there in the 2nd century AD;"...14.1). and when Pausanias was shown it, c. 170 AD, he reported "Legend also says that when the Persians fired Athens the olive was burnt down, but on the very day it was burnt it grew again to the height of two cubits."Pausanias, Description of Greece 1. 27. 1. Indeed, olive suckers sprout readily from the stump, and the great age of some existing olive trees shows that it was perfectly possible that the olive tree of the Acropolis dated to the Bronze Age. The olive was sacred to Athena and appeared on the Athenian coinage.
Theophrastus, in On the Nature of Plants, does not give as systematic and detailed an account of olive husbandry as he does of the vine, but he makes clear (in 1.16.10) that the cultivated olive must be vegetatively propagated; indeed, the pits give rise to thorny, wild-type olives, spread far and wide by birds. Theophrastus reports how the bearing olive can be grafted on the wild olive, for which the Greeks had a separate name, kotinos. 35.

Ancient Rome

According to Pliny the Elder a vine, a fig and an olive tree grew in the middle of the Roman Forum, the latter was planted to provide shade (the garden plot was recreated in the 20th century).""Me pascunt olivae, me cichorea levesque malvae." Horace, Odes 1.31.15, c. 30 BC Lord Monboddo comments on the olive in 1779 as one of the foods preferred by the ancients and as one of the most perfect foods.Letter from Lord Monboddo to John Hope, 29 April 1779; reprinted by William Knight 1900 ISBN 1-85506-207-0
Vitruvius describes of the use of charred olive wood in tying together walls and foundations in his De Architectura:
 
 The thickness of the wall should, in my opinion, be such that armed men meeting on top of it may pass one another without interference. In the thickness there should be set a very close succession of ties made of charred olive wood, binding the two faces of the wall together like pins, to give it lasting endurance. For that is a material which neither decay, nor the weather, nor time can harm, but even though buried in the earth or set in the water it keeps sound and useful forever. And so not only city walls but substructures in general and all walls that require a thickness like that of a city wall, will be long in falling to decay if tied in this manner.V, Sec.3, p.22

New Testament

The Mount of Olives east of Jerusalem is mentioned several times in the New Testament. The Allegory of the Olive Tree in St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans (which reappears in greatly expanded form in the Book of Jacob in the Book of Mormon) refers to the scattering and gathering of Israel. It compares the Israelites and gentiles to tame and wild olive trees. The olive tree itself, as well as olive oil and olives, play an important role in the Bible.

Islam

The olive tree and olive oil are mentioned seven times in the Quran, and the olive is praised as a precious fruit. Most notably, it is mentioned in one of the most famous verses of the Quran, Ayat an-Nur: "Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth. The metaphor of His Light is that of a niche in which is a lamp, the lamp is inside a glass, the glass is like a brilliant star. (This lamp is) lit from a blessed tree, an olive neither of the east nor of the west, its oil almost giving off light even though no fire touches it. Light upon Light. Allah guides to His Light whoever He wills and Allah makes metaphors for mankind and Allah has knowledge of all things." (Quran, 24:35). Olive tree and olive-oil health benefits have been propounded in Prophetic medicine. Muhammad is reported to have said: "Take oil of olive and massage with it – it is a blessed tree" (Sunan al-Darimi, 69:103).
Olives are substitutes for dates (if not available) during Ramadan fasting, and olive tree leaves are used as incense in some Muslim Mediterranean countries.Religious use of incense

Uses

The olive tree, Olea europaea, has been cultivated for olive oil, fine wood, olive leaf, and the olive fruit. 90% of all harvested olives are turned in to oil, while about 10% are used as table olives.

Table Olives

Table olives are classified by the IOC into 3 groups according to the degree of ripeness achieved before harvesting:
1. Green Olives. Picked when they have obtained full size, but before the ripening cycle has begun. Usually shades of green to yellow.
2. Semi-ripe or Turning Colour Olives. Picked at the beginning of the ripening cycle, when the colour has begun to change from green to multi-colour shades of red to brown. Only the skin is coloured as the flesh of the fruit lacks pigmentation at this stage, unlike that of ripe olives.
3. Black Olives or Ripe Olives. Picked at full maturity when fully ripe. Found in assorted shades of purple to brown to black.

Traditional fermentation and curing

Raw or fresh olives are naturally very bitter; to make them palatable olives must be cured and fermented, to remove oleuropein, a bitter phenolic compound that can reach levels of 14% of dry matter in young olives. "Oleuropein in olive and its pharmacological effects." Scientia pharmaceutica 78.2 (2010). In addition to oleuropein, other phenolic compounds render freshly picked olives unpalatable and must also be removed or lowered in quantity through curing and fermentation. Generally speaking, phenolics reach their peak in young fruit and are converted as the fruit matures. (One exception is the throubes olive, which can be eaten fresh.) Once ripening occurs the levels of phenolics sharply decline through their conversion to other organic products which renders some cultivars edible immediately.
The curing process may take from a few days, with lye, to a few months with brine or salt packing. Olives: Safe Methods for Home Pickling. University of California, Division of Agricultural and Natural Resources. With the exception of California style and salt cured olives, all methods of curing involve a major fermentation involving bacteria and yeast that is of equal importance to the final table olive product., and David John Harris. Producing table olives. Landlinks Press, 2007. Traditional cures, using the natural microflora on the fruit to induce fermentation, lead to two important outcomes: the leaching out and breakdown of oleuropein and other unpalatable phenolic compounds and the generation of favourable metabolites from bacteria and yeast, such as organic acids, probiotics, glycerol and esters, which affect the sensorial properties of the final table olives. The probiotic qualities of mixed bacterial/yeast olive fermentations is only recently being explored., et al. "Screening of lactic acid bacteria isolated from fermented table olives with probiotic potential." Food Research International 50.1 (2013): 135-142., et al. "Characterization of yeasts from Portuguese brined olives, with a focus on their potentially probiotic behavior." LWT-Food Science and Technology 44.6 (2011): 1349-1354. Of all the metabolites lactic acid is the most important as it acts as a natural preservative lowering the pH of the solution to make the final product more stable against the growth of unwanted pathogenic species. The result is table olives which will store with or without refrigeration and thus, Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) dominated fermentations are generally considered the most suitable method of curing olives. Yeast dominated fermentations produce a different suite of metabolites which have less self-preservation characteristics and therefore acid corrected, often with citric acid, in the final processing stage to achieve microbial stability. Garrido, M. J. Fernandez-Diez, and Martin R. Adams. Table olives: production and processing. Springer, 1997.
There are many types of preparations for table olives depending on local tastes and traditions. The most important commercial examples are:
Spanish or Sevillian type (Olives with fermentation). Most commonly applied to green olive preparation. Around 60% of all the worlds table olives are produced with this method. "Microbial dynamics and biodiversity in table olive fermentation: culture-dependent and-independent approaches." Frontiers in microbiology 3 (2012). Olives are soaked in lye (Dilute NaOH, 2-4%) for 8–10 hours to hydrolyse the oleuropein. They are usually considered "treated" when the lye has penetrated two-thirds of the way into the fruit. They are then washed once or several times in water to remove the caustic solution and transferred to fermenting vessels full of brine at typical concentrations of 8-12% NaCl. The brine is changed on a regular basis to help remove the phenolic compounds. Fermentation is carried out by the natural microbiota present on the olives that survive the lye treatment process. Many organisms are involved, usually reflecting the local conditions or "Terroir" of the olives. During a typical fermentation gram-negative enterobacteria flourish in small numbers at first, but are rapidly outgrown by Lactic acid bacteria species such as Leuconostoc mesenteroides, Lactobacillus plantarum, Lactobacillus brevis and Pediococcus damnosus. These bacteria produce lactic acid to help lower the acidity of the brine and therefore stabilize the product against unwanted pathogenic species. A diversity of yeasts then accumulate in sufficient numbers to help complete the fermentation alongside the lactic acid bacteria. Yeast commonly mentioned include the teleomorphs Pichia anomala, Pichia membranifaciens, Debaryomyces hansenii and Kluyveromyces marxianus. Once fermented, the olives are placed in fresh brine and acid corrected ready for market.
Sicilian or Greek type. (Olives with fermentation). Applied to green, semi-ripe and ripe olives. Almost identical the Spanish type fermentation process, however the lye treatment process is skipped and the olives are placed directly in fermentation vessels full of brine (8-12% NaCl). The brine is changed on a regular basis to help remove the phenolic compounds. As the caustic treatment is avoided, Lactic acid bacteria are only present in similar numbers to yeast and appear to be outcompeted by the abundant yeasts found on untreated olives. As there is very little acid produced by the yeast fermentation, lactic, acetic or citric acid is often added to the fermentation stage to stabilize the process.
Picholine or directly-brined type. (Olives with fermentation). Can be applied to green, semi-ripe or ripe preparations. Olives are soaked in lye typically for longer periods than Spanish style (e.g. 10–72 hours) until the solution has penetrated three-quarters of the way into the fruit. They are then washed and immediately brined and acid corrected with citric acid to achieve microbial stability. Fermentation still occurs carried out by acidogenic yeast and bacteria, but is more subdued than other methods. The brine is changed on a regular basis to help remove the phenolic compounds and s series of progressively stronger concentrations of NaCl are added until the product is fully stabilized and ready to be eaten.
Water-cured type. (Olives with fermentation). Can be applied to green, semi-ripe or ripe preparations. Olives are soaked in water or weak brine and this solution is changed only a daily basis for 10–14 days. The oleuropein in naturally dissolved and leached into the water and removed during a continual soak-wash cycle. Fermentation takes place during the water treatment stage and involves a mixed yeast/bacteria ecosystem. Once debittered the olives are brined to concentrations of 8-12% NaCl, acid corrected and ready to eat.
Salt-cured type. (Olives with minor fermentation). Applied only to ripe olives and usually produced by Morocco or Turkey and other eastern mediterranean countries. Once picked, the olives are vigorously washed and packed in alternating layers with salt. The high concentrations of salt draw the moisture out of olives, dehydrating and shrivelling them to they look somewhat analogous to a raisin. Once packed in salt fermentation is minimal and only initiated by the most halophilic yeast species such as Debaryomyces hansenii. Once cured, they are sold in their natural state without any additives.
California or "artificial ripening" type. (Olives without fermentation). Applied to green and semi-ripe olives. Olives are placed in lye and soaked. Upon their removal they are washed in water injected with compressed air. This process is repeated several times until both oxygen and lye have soaked through to the pit. The repeated, saturated exposure to air oxidises the skin and flesh of the fruit, turning it black in an artificial process that mimics natural ripening. Once fully oxidised or "blackened", they are brined and acid corrected ready for eating.

Olive wood

Olive wood is very hard and is prized for its durability, colour, high combustion temperature and interesting grain patterns.  Because of the commercial importance of the fruit, and the relatively small size of the tree, olive wood and its products are relatively expensive.  Common uses of the wood include: kitchen utensils, carved wooden bowls, cutting boards, fine furniture, and decorative items.

Cultivation

The earliest evidence for the domestication of olives comes from the Chalcolithic Period archaeological site of Teleilat Ghassul in what is today modern Jordan. Farmers in ancient times believed that olive trees would not grow well if planted more than a certain distance from the sea; Theophrastus gives 300 stadia () as the limit. Modern experience does not always confirm this, and, though showing a preference for the coast, they have long been grown further inland in some areas with suitable climates, particularly in the southwestern Mediterranean (Iberia, northwest Africa) where winters are mild.
Olives are now cultivated in many regions of the world with Mediterranean climates, such as South Africa, Chile, Peru, Australia, and California and in areas with temperate climates such as New Zealand, under irrigation in the Cuyo region in Argentina which has a desert climate. They are also grown in the Córdoba Province, Argentina, which has a temperate climate with rainy summers and dry winters (Cwa). Volume 15. Madrid. 1981. Espasa-Calpe S.A. ISBN 84-239-4500-6 (Complete Encyclopedia) and ISBN 84-239-4515-4 (Volume 15 ) The climate in Argentina changes the external characteristics of the plant but the fruit keeps its original features. 2001. Cavagnaro P., J. Juárez, M Bauza & R.W. Masuelli. AGRISCIENTA. Volume 18:27–35 The northernmost olive grove is placed in Anglesey, an island off the north west coast of Wales, in the United Kingdom: but it is too early to say if the growing will be successful, having been planted in 2006.

Growth and propagation

Olive trees, Olea europaea, show a marked preference for calcareous soils, flourishing best on limestone slopes and crags, and coastal climate conditions. They grow in any light soil, even on clay if well drained, but in rich soils they are predisposed to disease and produce poorer oil than in poorer soil. (This was noted by Pliny the Elder.) Olives like hot weather and sunny positions without any shade while temperatures below  may injure even a mature tree. They tolerate drought well, thanks to their sturdy and extensive root system. Olive trees can live for several centuries, and can remain productive for as long if they are pruned correctly and regularly.
In situations where extreme cold has damaged or killed the olive tree the rootstock can survive and produce new shoots which in turn become new trees. In this way olive trees can regenerate themselves. In Tuscany in 1985 a very severe frost destroyed many productive, and aged, olive trees and ruined many farmers' livelihoods. However new shoots appeared in the spring and, once the dead wood was removed, became the basis for new fruit-producing trees. In this way an olive tree can 'live' for centuries or even millennia.
Olives grow very slowly, and over many years the trunk can attain a considerable diameter. A. P. de Candolle recorded one exceeding  in height, and are generally confined to much more limited dimensions by frequent pruning. The yellow or light greenish-brown wood is often finely veined with a darker tint; being very hard and close-grained, it is valued by woodworkers. There are only a handlful of olive varieties that can be used to cross-pollinate. Pendolino olive trees are partially self-fertile, but pollenizers are needed for a large fruit crop. Other compatible olive tree pollenizers include Leccino and Maurino. Pendolino olive trees are used extensively as pollenizers in large olive tree groves.
Olives are propagated by various methods. The preferred ways are cuttings and layers; the tree roots easily in favourable soil and throws up suckers from the stump when cut down. However, yields from trees grown from suckers or seeds are poor; they must be budded or grafted onto other specimens to do well (Lewington and Parker, 114). Branches of various thickness cut into lengths of about  planted deeply in manured ground soon vegetate. Shorter pieces are sometimes laid horizontally in shallow trenches and, when covered with a few centimetres of soil, rapidly throw up sucker-like shoots. In Greece, grafting the cultivated tree on the wild tree is a common practice. In Italy, embryonic buds, which form small swellings on the stems, are carefully excised and planted under the soil surface, where they soon form a vigorous shoot.
The olive is also sometimes grown from seed. To facilitate germination, the oily pericarp is first softened by slight rotting, or soaked in hot water or in an alkaline solution.
Where the olive is carefully cultivated, as in Languedoc and Provence, the trees are regularly pruned. The pruning preserves the flower-bearing shoots of the preceding year, while keeping the tree low enough to allow the easy gathering of the fruit. The spaces between the trees are regularly fertilized. The crop from old trees is sometimes enormous, but they seldom bear well two years in succession, and in many cases a large harvest occurs every sixth or seventh season.

=Old olive trees=

