[[The Elephant Sanctuary (Hohenwald)]]

CATEGORIES: Animal charities, Animal welfare organizations in the United States, Buildings and structures in Lewis County, Tennessee, Wildlife sanctuaries of the United States, Environmental organizations based in Tennessee, Elephant conservation

The Elephant Sanctuary in Hohenwald, Tennessee, founded in 1995, is a non-profit organization licensed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) and the Tennessee Wildlife Resources Agency (TWRA). As a member accredited by The Association of Sanctuaries (TAOS), the sanctuary follows guidelines stipulated by TAOS, one of which is that none of the elephants be bred. Its founders are former CEO, Carol Buckley, and former Operations Director, Scott Blais. 
In 2010 the sanctuary was featured on the children's show FETCH! with Ruff Ruffman.
At over  African habitat. The goal is to retire 100 elephants from zoos and circuses to the sanctuary. 
Tarra, was the inspiration for the sanctuary. After 15 years working in the circus Tarra needed a place to retire with her own kind with lots of space. 

History

In 1995 The Elephant Sanctuary was started on  with one elephant, Tarra.
An internship program was established to train elephant caregivers in 1996.
A  barn was added in 1999.
In 2001 a  lake was acquired.
Another  in 2003.
In 2004, the first two African elephants were accepted into the new African habitat.
The existing herd of Asian elephants was relocated to a new  hay barn which is able to hold up to 35,000 bales of hay.

Facilities

The development of the Sanctuary was done in several stages. It was originally built in phases and then expanded whenever funding was available or the elephants needed more space or accommodation. Twenty miles of double fencing encloses The Elephant Sanctuary's . In accordance with TWRA regulations and TAOS guidelines the quarantine area has a hot wire fence.

Population and history

Currently, the Elephant Sanctuary is home to eleven Asian elephants and two African elephants.  The goal is to accommodate 100 elephants.
November 23, 2003, Delhi was the first elephant to use the quarantine facility. She was the first of 16 elephants to be confiscated by the USDA from Hawthorn Corporation
a company that trained and rented elephants to circuses, and which became widely known and fined for providing poor care for its elephants.
Tina, born at the Oregon Zoo in 1970, arrived at the sanctuary on August 11, 2003, from Vancouver. She died the following July.
November 17, 2004, it became home to two Asian elephants named Lota and Misty who came from the Hawthorn Corporation. Both Lota and Misty were diagnosed with a human strain of tuberculosis, a disease that was prevalent in the Hawthorn herd.
Lota died on February 9, 2005 of advanced tuberculosis.
On January 30, 2006, Minnie and Lottie were the first two of eight more Asian elephants to arrive at the Sanctuary from the Hawthorn Corporation. They were joined in subsequent days by Queenie, Liz, Debbie, Ronnie, Billie and Frieda. Unfortunately, Sue died December 30, 2005, before she reached the Sanctuary.
On July 21, 2006, Winkie, a female Asian elephant, knocked down and stepped on Joanna Burke, 36, Winkie's caregiver for 6 years, while Joanna was going to look at a sting to one of Winkie's eyes. Joanna was killed instantly. Winkie also injured director Scott Blais who was trying to intervene. Winkie had a reputation as a dangerous animal while she was living in a zoo but it was clear by her actions that Winkie was not acting out aggressively any more than trying to indicate she had pain from the sting and the subsequent treatment. On July 25, it was released that,  as per Joanna's wishes, Winkie would not be euthanized. A statement released by the Sanctuary stated the following: "Joanna made it perfectly clear in word and deed that no harm should come to any elephant no matter their action. She shared the Sanctuary's philosophy that Winkie will not be punished for her actions but managed in a way that keeps another innocent caregiver out of harm's way." Burke was interred  on the grounds of the Sanctuary on July 26, 2006, as per her wishes.
On July 25, 2006, the Sanctuary announced it will be adjusting its protocol with regard to any elephants who are affected with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). The Sanctuary protocols are a set of standards of elephant care and management the Elephant Sanctuary staff follow when dealing with their elephants. Currently, two of the elephants at the Sanctuary, Winkie and Flora, have been diagnosed with PTSD. "In respect of their condition, caregivers will adjust how they physically interact with the elephants".
On October 17, 2006, Jenny died from an undetermined illness. She was 34.
Dulary, from the Philadelphia Zoo, arrived on May 1, 2007.
A long campaign to have Mona, the sole elephant at the Birmingham Zoo in Birmingham, Alabama moved to the Elephant Sanctuary ended when she was euthanized at the zoo on June 21, 2007.
On March 11, 2008, Delhi died at age 62 (+).
Queenie died on March 29, 2008, 18 days after her friend, Delhi. Both were formerly owned by the Hawthorn Corporation.
Lucy aka Skanik of the Edmonton Valley Zoo, born circa 1975, has a standing invitation to retire to the sanctuary because she suffers from a respiratory infection, chronic foot infections and arthritis.

Non-invasive research

Elephant conservation projects






