[[Eric Douglas]]

CATEGORIES: 1958 births, 2004 deaths, 20th-century American male actors, Accidental deaths in New York, Male actors from California, American people of Belarusian-Jewish descent, American people of Belgian descent, American male film actors, American male stage actors, American stand-up comedians, American male television actors, Burials at Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery, Douglas family tree, Drug-related deaths in New York, Pitzer College alumni

Eric Anthony Douglas (June 21, 1958 – July 6, 2004) was an American actor and stand-up comedian. Douglas was the youngest son of actor Kirk Douglas and his second wife Anne Buydens. One of his half-siblings was Academy Award-winning actor and producer Michael Douglas.
Douglas pursued a career in show business but did not attain the same level of success as his father and siblings. His career was typically overshadowed by his numerous run-ins with the law and problems with alcohol and drugs.

Early life

Born in Los Angeles, California, Douglas was the youngest son of actor Kirk Douglas and German American mother Anne Buydens. He was the younger brother of Peter Douglas, and his older half-brothers were Michael and Joel Douglas.
Douglas studied at Pitzer College, the Royal Academy of Dramatic Arts, and the London Academy of Dramatic Arts.

Career

Acting

Douglas made his screen debut in 1971 in A Gunfight, starring his father and Johnny Cash. In 1982, Douglas appeared in the NBC television film Remembrance of Love, also starring his father. Douglas portrayed a younger version of his father's character in flashback scenes. He appeared in several films in the 1980s including The Flamingo Kid (1985), Tomboy (1985), The Golden Child (1986), and Honor Bound (1988). In the late 1980s, Douglas performed off-Broadway at the Village Gate Theater with the critically acclaimed improvisational comedy troupe Noo Yawk Tawk . Also in the production was folk performer Bobby Bridger, but the production never made it to Broadway.
In 1991, Douglas appeared with his father (in the senior Douglas' Emmy-nominated performance) in "Yellow", the Season 3 finale of the television series Tales from the Crypt.  The father and son acting duo portrayed father and son characters with Eric a young officer in World War I brought up on charges of cowardice by his commanding general who is also his cold-hearted father.

Stand-up comedy

In the early 1990s, Douglas attempted a career as a stand-up comedian. He performed in New York City comedy clubs with much of his self-deprecating material coming from his status as the black sheep of the Douglas dynasty.
Douglas entered British comedy folklore when, during a stand-up performance at The Comedy Store, London, he became angry by the audience's reaction to his stand-up routine. This led to him shouting out, "You can't do this to me, I'm Kirk Douglas's son!" A member of the audience stood up and shouted "No, I'm Kirk Douglas' son," referring to the iconic "I'm Spartacus" scene of the 1960 film starring Kirk Douglas. This ended up with the majority of the audience standing up and repeating the line.

Personal life

Legal issues

Douglas was arrested multiple times throughout the 1990s. One of his first arrests came in 1991 for kicking a Beverly Hills police officer.
In August 1996, he was arrested in Long Beach, California for driving under the influence of drugs and alcohol. Two days later, Douglas was arrested in New Canaan, Connecticut for disorderly conduct after he attempted to kiss a young girl who was a fellow patient at Silver Hill Hospital, a rehab facility he was in at the time.

Drug issues

In 2000, Douglas revealed in an interview that he went into an eight-day coma in 1999 after accidentally overdosing on Xanax. Douglas recalled, "I was in L.A. sitting around my breakfast table with my dad and I choked on a piece of sausage. But because the pills had taken effect, I was not able to dislodge the sausage from my throat." After the Douglas' maid attempted the Heimlich maneuver, Douglas was taken to Cedars-Sinai Medical Center where he fell into a coma. Due to a lack of oxygen, his speech became slurred and gait was altered.
In May 2001, Douglas sued his former psychiatrist, Dr. William Leader, claiming that Leader prescribed him a combination of prescription drugs that are lethal when combined with alcohol. Douglas asserted that Leader, who had been treating Douglas for his drug addictions for ten years, failed to consider his alcohol problem when he prescribed Vicodin, Klonopin, and Xanax. Douglas claimed the drugs caused him to feel suicidal and also caused an episode of cardiac arrest which led him to require constant care and hospitalization. Douglas sought $50,000 in damages from Leader.
Weeks before his death, Douglas' was back in a rehab center in upstate New York rehab center. His parents reportedly visited him and gave him a tough love ultimatum regarding his drug use.

Death

On July 6, 2004, a maid found Douglas' body in his Manhattan apartment. An autopsy and toxicology report later determined that his death was caused by "acute intoxication" from the combined effects of alcohol, tranquilizers and painkillers. Douglas' death was ruled accidental. Douglas is interred in the Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery, Westwood, Los Angeles, California.

Family tree

Filmography






