[[Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights]]

CATEGORIES: United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, United Nations Development Group

The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) is a United Nations agency that works to promote and protect the human rights that are guaranteed under international law and stipulated in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of 1948. The office was established by the UN General Assembly on 20 December 1993 in the wake of the 1993 World Conference on Human Rights.
The office is headed by the High Commissioner for Human Rights, who co-ordinates human rights activities throughout the UN System and supervises the Human Rights Council in Geneva, Switzerland. The current High Commissioner is South African lawyer Navanethem Pillay, whose four-year term began on 1 September 2008 and then was extended an additional two years in 2012.
As of 2008, the agency had a budget of US$120m and 1,000 employees based in Geneva. "Profile: New UN human rights chief". BBC News. Retrieved on 1 September 2008. It is an Ex-Officio member of the Committee of the United Nations Development Group.

Functions and organization

Mandate

The mandate of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights derives from Articles 1, 13 and 55 of the Charter of the United Nations, the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action and General Assembly resolution 48/141 of 20 December 1993, by which the Assembly established the post of United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. In connection with the programme for reform of the United Nations (A/51/950, para. 79), the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Centre for Human Rights were consolidated into a single Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on 15 September 1997.

Purpose

The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights:

Organization

The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights is divided into organizational units, as described below. The Office is headed by a High Commissioner with the rank of Under-Secretary-General.

=United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (Under-Secretary-General)=

The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights is accountable to the Secretary-General.
The High Commissioner is responsible for all the activities of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, as well as for its administration, and carries out the functions specifically assigned to him or her by the General Assembly in its resolution 48/141 of 20 December 1993 and subsequent resolutions of policy-making bodies; advises the Secretary-General on the policies of the United Nations in the area of human rights; ensures that substantive and administrative support is given to the projects, activities, organs and bodies of the human rights programme; represents the Secretary-General at meetings of human rights organs and at other human rights events; and carries out special assignments as decided by the Secretary-General. As well as those human rights are currently included in legally binding treaties, the High Commissioner also promotes human rights yet to be recognized in international law (such as the adoption of economic, social and cultural rights as a strategic priority, which are not all currently recognized in international legal instruments).org/sites/default/files/user/%5BA4ID%5D%20UN%20Human%20Rights%20System.pdf; An overview of the United Nations Human Rights system; Hogan Lovells International LLP; Advocates for International Development ; 2012; accessed on 27 August 2013
The current High Commissioner is South African Navanethem Pillay.

=Deputy to the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (Assistant Secretary-General)=

The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in the performance of his or her activities, is assisted by a Deputy to the High Commissioner who acts as Officer-in-Charge during the absence of the High Commissioner. In addition, the Deputy to the High Commissioner carries out specific substantive and administrative assignments as decided by the High Commissioner. The Deputy is accountable to the High Commissioner.
The current Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights is the Italian national Flavia Pansieri.

=Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights (New York)=

The Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights (not to be confused with the Deputy High Commissioner, who is also an Assistant Secretary-General) based in New York heads the New York Office of the High Commissioner. He represents the High Commissioner in New York and promotes the integration of human rights in policy processes and activities undertaken by inter-governmental and inter-agency bodies at the United Nations headquarters.
The current Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights is Ivan Šimonović from Croatia.

=Staff Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights=

The Staff Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights is headed by a Chief who is accountable to the High Commissioner. The core functions of the Staff Office are as follows:

=Administrative Section=

The Administrative Section is headed by a Chief, Kyle F. Ward, who is accountable to the Deputy High Commissioner. The core functions of the Administrative Section, in addition to those set out in section 7 of Secretary-General's bulletin ST/SGB/1997/5, are as follows:

=New York Office=

The New York Office is headed by an Assistant Secretary-General who is accountable to the High Commissioner. The core functions of the New York Office are as follows:

=Research and Right to Development Branch=

The Research and Right to Development Branch is headed by a Chief who is accountable to the High Commissioner. The core functions of the Research and Right to Development Branch are as follows:

=Treaties and Commission Branch=

The Treaties and Commission Branch (formerly Support Services Branch) is headed by a Chief who is accountable to the High Commissioner. The core functions of the Treaties and Commission Branch are as follows:

=Capacity Building Branch=

The Capacity Building Branch (formerly Activities and Programmes Branch) is headed by a Chief who is accountable to the High Commissioner. The core functions of the Capacity Building Branch are as follows:
(Source: ST/SGB/1997/10, 15 September 1997, SECRETARY-GENERAL'S BULLETIN, ORGANIZATION OF THE OFFICE OF THE UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS)

High Commissioners for Human Rights

On 24 July 2008, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon nominated Navanethem Pillay to succeed Louise Arbour as High Commissioner for Human Rights. The United States reportedly resisted her appointment at first, because of her views on abortion and other issues, but eventually dropped its opposition. Campaign group avaaz.Louis Charbonneau (28 July 2008). "UN assembly confirms S. Reuters. Retrieved on 30 July 2008. At a special meeting on 28 July 2008, the UN General Assembly confirmed the nomination by consensus. "Navanethem Pillay confirmed as new High Commissioner for Human Rights". Retrieved on 30 July 2008. Her four-year term began on 1 September 2008, and was extended an additional two years in 2012. Pillay says the High Commissioner is "the voice of the victim everywhere".





Further reading




