[[Rene Gagnon]]

CATEGORIES: 1925 births, 1979 deaths, American military personnel of World War II, Burials at Arlington National Cemetery, American people of French-Canadian descent, People from Manchester, New Hampshire, United States Marines, Battle of Iwo Jima, Manchester Central High School alumni, Deaths from myocardial infarction, Subjects of iconic photographs

René Arthur Gagnon (March 7, 1925 – October 12, 1979) was one of the United States Marines immortalized by Joe Rosenthal's famous World War II photograph Raising the Flag on Iwo Jima.

Early life

Gagnon was born March 7, 1925 in Manchester, New Hampshire, the only child of French Canadian immigrants from Disraeli, Quebec, Henri Gagnon and Irène Marcotte. He grew up without a father. His parents separated when he was an infant, though they never divorced. When he was old enough, he worked alongside his mother at a local shoe factory. He also worked as a bicycle messenger boy for the local Western Union. He was drafted in 1943 and elected to join the Marine Corps.

World War II

On May 6, 1943, he was inducted into the Marine Corps Reserve and sent to Marine Corps Recruit Depot Parris Island, South Carolina. He was promoted to private first class on July 16, 1943. He was transferred to the Marine Guard Company at Charleston Navy Yard in South Carolina and remained there for eight months. He then joined the Military Police Company of the 5th Marine Division at Camp Pendleton, California. Four days later, on April 8, 1944, he was transferred to Company E, 2nd Battalion, 28th Marine Regiment. In September, the 5th division left Camp Pendleton for further training at Camp Tarawa, Hawaii, for the assault on Iwo Jima code named Operation Detachment, by three Marine divisions of the V Amphibious Corps.
On February 19, 1945, Gagnon landed with the 28th Marines on "Green Beach 1" on the southeast side closest to Mount Suribachi on the southern end of Iwo Jima. Four days later - though with much fighting still ahead - Gagnon, a Marine company runner, participated in what was most likely the most celebrated American flag raising in U.S. history. 
In 1991, former Marine Lt. George Greeley Wells, who was the 2nd battalion, 28th Marines, adjutant in charge of carrying the American flag(s) for the battalion, stated in the New York Times, that he was ordered by the battalion commander to get the larger second American flag for Mount Suribachi and that he (Wells) ordered Pfc. Gagnon, a Company E runner, to get the larger second flag from a ship on shore (possibly the USS Duval County  Schrier with a message for Lt. Schrier to raise this flag and give the smaller first flag flown on Mount Suribachi back to Gagnon to be returned to Wells. Wells stated he had handed the first flag to Lt. Schrier to take up Mount Suribachi and when it was returned to him by Gagnon, he secured the flag until it was delivered to Marine Headquarters after the 2nd battalion returned to Hawaii from Iwo Jima. Greeley Wells. New York Times, October 17, 1991, p. A 26
At the same time the second American flag was raised on Mount Suribachi, the first flag on top of Mount Suribachi was lowered, and taken to Marine headquarters; A third American flag was officially raised by two Marines at Marine headquarters located at the base of Mount Suribachi on March 14, 1945.
On March 26, when the 28th Marines left Iwo Jima for Hawaii, Gagnon was aboard the transport USS Winged Arrow (AP-170) with Ira Hayes. Gagnon was the first to be identified as one of the six-flag raisers in the photo and was ordered to Washington, D.C., arriving on April 7. Together with the other two identified survivors of the second flag raising, Navy Pharmacist's Mate John Bradley and Marine Private First Class Ira Hayes, Gagnon was assigned to temporary duty with the Finance Division, U.S. Treasury Department, for appearances and participation in connection with the Seventh War Loan drive (bond selling tour) in May and June 1945. The tour went through several major U.S cities raising billions of desperately needed dollars and morale at home to help win the war.bucknell.xmlThe three flag-raisiers had the second American flag with them during the bond tour.
In July 1945, he was ordered to San Diego for further transfer overseas. Gagnon married Pauline Georgette Harnois, of Hooksett, New Hampshire, in Baltimore, Maryland, on July 7, 1945.
By September, he was on his way overseas again, this time with the 80th Replacement Draft. On November 7, 1945, he arrived at Tsingtao, China, where he joined Company E, 2nd Battalion, 29th Marines, 6th Marine Division. He later served with the 3rd Battalion, 29th Marines. In March 1946, he had been on duty with the U.S. occupation forces in China for about five months before he boarded a ship at Tsingtao at the end of the month for San Diego.
He arrived in San Diego on April 20. With nine days short of three years' service in the Marine Corps Reserve, of which 14 months was spent overseas, Gagnon was promoted to Corporal. Gagnon was honorably discharged at Camp Pendleton, California, on April 27, 1946.

Military awards

Gagnon received the following military awards:

Post-war

Gagnon appeared in two films about the battle: To the Shores of Iwo Jima (a government documentary which simply showed the color footage of the U.S. flag raising) and Sands of Iwo Jima (1949), the latter with fellow surviving flag raisers Bradley and Hayes.  He was also part of a Rose Bowl half-time show.  However, in the end, it amounted to almost nothing, and left him bitter and an alcoholic. He worked at menial jobs, but was fired from most of them, the last one on Memorial Day, 1978. As recorded in the book Flags of Our Fathers, in his latter years Gagnon only participated in events that were at his wife's urging, events praising the U.S. flag raising on Iwo Jima. She enjoyed the limelight, whereas he, by that time, no longer did.
Bradley, James and Ron Powers. Flags of Our Fathers, 2000. ISBN 0-553-11133-7
Gagnon died on October 12, 1979 in Manchester, New Hampshire. He left behind his wife Pauline Gagnon (Jan 16, 1926-Jan 16, 2006) and son Rene Gagnon Jr. He was buried at Mount Calvary Mausoleum. At the request of his widow, his remains were re-interred in Section 51, Grave 543 of Arlington National Cemetery on July 7, 1981. He is also memorialized in a special room at the Wright Museum of WWII History in Wolfeboro, New Hampshire.canadiancontent.html

Portrayal in film








