[[Pygmy Cormorant]]

CATEGORIES: Birds of Europe, Birds of Asia, Birds of Azerbaijan, Birds of Kazakhstan, Birds of Turkey, Birds of Pakistan, Microcarbo, Birds of Ukraine

The Pygmy Cormorant (Microcarbo pygmeus) is a member of the PhalacrocoracidaeCormorant family of seabirds. It breeds in southeastern Europe and southwestern Asia. It is partially migratory, with northern populations wintering further south, mostly within its breeding range. It is a rare migrant to western Europe.

Distribution

The Pygmy Cormorant occupies an area from south-east of Europe (at east of Italy) and south-west of Asia, in Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan. In România, according to studies of Czech ornithologist Robert Ritter von DombrowskiRobert Ritter von Dombrowski, ornithologist  at the end of the 19th century, the Pygmy Cormorant was present in large colonies in Danube Delta, Brăila and Ialomiţa Pond, on Vederoasa Lake (Constanţa County), on certain pools and ponds with reeds and willows in Muntenia. The number of Pygmy Cormorants' pairs was 10000 without taking in account the breeding population of Danube Delta. Populations of Pygmy Cormorant in Romania have a dramatically decline especially in 60' when due to the communist agricultural policies The Great Brăila Island and important parts of Ialomiţa Pond were drained in order to practice agriculture, so this the habitats of a great number of aquatic birds were destroyed. Actually, the Pigmy Cormorant can be found in Danube Delta, Jijia Largă Pond (Iasi County), probably on Maţa, Rădeanu, Vădeni Ponds in (Galați County), Cârja Pond (Vaslui County), at Vlădeşti on Prut River (Galați County), on Calinovăţ Island from Caraş-Severin County, In the Small Brăila Island, on Dunăreni Pond (Mârleanu, Constanța County), in Danubian Plain on Parches Pond-Somova (Tulcea County). At global scale it was estimated that the whole population of Pygmy Cormorants is 85.000-180.000 individuals (a study effectuated by Wetlands International in 2006) and 74-94% of total population lives in Europe. The biggest colony is in the Danube Delta, numbering 4,000 pairs, but this seems certain to plunge due to a massive canalization scheme, which despite the protected status of the delta, commenced in May 2004. According to a study made by BirdLife International in 2004Situation of Pygmy Cormorant Population in Europe it was estimated that population of Pygmy Cormorant in Romania is 11.500-14.000 pairs and during the winter 1500-4000 pairs.

Habitat and ecology

The Pygmy Cormorants like pools with plenty of vegetation, lakes and[river deltas. They avoid mountainous and cold and dry areas. They love rice fields or other flooded areas where trees and shrubs can be found. During winter they also go to waters with higher salinity, in estuaries or on barrier lakes. These are birds who can live alone or in groups and they have adapted to human presence. They build nests from sticks and reeds in dense vegetation, in trees, shrubs, willows but ocasionally in reeds on small floating islets. At the end of May, beginning of June, both parents incubate for 27–30 days, and nestlings become independent after 70 days. The young are fed by their parents with small fish and other aquatic animals (Kiss & Rekasi, 2002). This bird frequently shares the same type of habitat with [egrets, herons and spoonbills.

Threats

The Pygmy Cormorant is a species with habitats strongly affected by human actions. Threats include the drainage and serious degradation of wetlands and their associated woodland, water pollution, disturbance, and poaching as well as drowning in fishing nets.
Being a great fish consumer and destroyer of fishing nets, it is often persecuted by fishermen. In Romania, ponds drainage located on the inferior course of the Danube for agricultural purposes, the accidental death of birds captive in improvised fishing nets, nest destroyal by professional fishermen in order to protect fish resources decreased of the number of individuals which put the species on the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN]) red list as a vulnerable species. It is also hunted in leisure activities, and in Iran the Pygmy Cormorant is commercialized for cooking.
This species is distinguished from the Great Cormorant and the Common Shag by its much smaller size, lighter build, and long tail.
It feeds mainly on fish, often hunting in groups, and perches in trees between fishing expeditions.
The biggest colony is in the Danube Delta, numbers 4,000 pairs, but this seems certain to plunge due to a massive canalization scheme, which despite the protected status of the delta, commenced in May 2004.
The Pygmy Cormorant is one of the species to which the Agreement on the Conservation of African-Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds (AEWA)African-Eurasian Waterbird Agreement AEWA applies.



Bibliography



Notes


