[[Omega-3 fatty acid]]

CATEGORIES: Fatty acids, Biologically based therapies, Treatment of bipolar disorder

Omega-3 fatty acids (also called ω-3 fatty acids or n-3 fatty acids The fatty acids have two ends, the carboxylic acid (-COOH) end, which is considered the beginning of the chain, thus "alpha", and the methyl (CH3) end, which is considered the "tail" of the chain, thus "omega." The nomenclature of the fatty acid is taken from the location of the first double bond, counted from the methyl end, that is, the omega (ω-) or the n- end.
The three types of omega-3 fatty acids involved in human physiology are ALA (found in plant oils), EPA, and DHA (both commonly found in marine oils). Common sources of animal omega-3 EPA and DHA fatty acids include fish oils, egg oil, squid oils, krill oil, while some plant oils contain the omega 3 ALA fatty acid such as seabuckthorn and chia seeds, along with berry oils, clary sage seed oil, algal oil, flaxseed oil, Sacha Inchi oil, Echium oil, and hemp oil.
Omega-3 fatty acids are important for normal metabolism,

Health effects

Supplementation does not appear to be associated with a lower risk of all-cause mortality.

Cancer

The evidence linking the consumption of fish to the risk of cancer is poor.
A 2006 review concluded that there was no link between omega-3 fatty acids consumption and cancer. This is similar to the findings of a review of studies up to February 2002 that failed to find clear effects of long and shorter chain omega-3 fats on total risk of death, combined cardiovascular events and cancer.
The effect of consumption on prostate cancer is not conclusive. There is a decreased risk with higher blood levels of DPA, but an increased risk of more aggressive prostate cancer with higher blood levels of combined EPA and DHA (found in fatty fish oil).

Cardiovascular disease

Evidence does not support a beneficial role for omega-3 fatty acid supplementation in preventing cardiovascular disease (including myocardial infarction and sudden cardiac death) or stroke.
Large amounts may increase low-density lipoproteins (LDL) (see below), up to 46%, although LDL changes from small to larger, buoyant, less atherogenic particles.Pharmacy & Therapeutics (May, 2008) "Omega-3-acid Ethyl Esters (Lovaza) For Severe Hypertriglyceridemia"
Omega-3 fatty acids may have a modest effect on systolic blood pressure, though studies have produced inconsistent results. The 18 carbon α-linolenic acid (ALA) has not been shown to have the same cardiovascular benefits that DHA or EPA may have.
Some evidence suggests that people with certain circulatory problems, such as varicose veins, may benefit from the consumption of EPA and DHA, which may stimulate blood circulation, increase the breakdown of fibrin, a compound involved in clot and scar formation, and, in addition, may reduce blood pressure.
Evidently, omega-3 fatty acids reduce blood triglyceride levels, and regular intake may reduce the risk of secondary and primary heart attack. ALA does not confer the cardiovascular health benefits of EPA and DHA.
Large amounts may increase the risk of hemorrhagic stroke in women; lower amounts are not related to this risk.[ref]
</ref>

Inflammation

Some research suggests that the anti-inflammatory activity of long-chain omega-3 fatty acids may translate into clinical effects.
For rheumatoid arthritis (RA), one systematic review found a consistent, but modest, evidence for the effect of marine n-3 PUFAs on symptoms such as "joint swelling and pain, duration of morning stiffness, global assessments of pain and disease activity" as well as the use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.

Developmental disorders

Although not supported by current scientific evidence as a primary treatment for ADHD, autism spectrum disorders, and other developmental differences, omega-3 fatty acids have gained popularity for children with these conditions.[ref]
</ref>
A Cochrane review found "there is little evidence that PUFA supplementation provides any benefit for the symptoms of ADHD in children and adolescents",
Fish oil has only a small benefit on the risk of early birth.

Mental health

There is some evidence that omega-3 fatty acids are related to mental health,

Cognitive aging

Epidemiological studies suggest that consumption of omega-3 fatty acids can reduce the risk of dementia, but evidence of a treatment effect in dementia patients is inconclusive.

Chemistry



List of omega-3 fatty acids

This table lists several different names for the most common omega-3 fatty acids found in nature.

Mechanism of action

The 'essential' fatty acids were given their name when researchers found that they are essential to normal growth in young children and animals, though the modern definition of 'essential' is more strict. A small amount of omega-3 in the diet (~1% of total calories) enabled normal growth, and increasing the amount had little to no additional effect on growth.
Likewise, researchers found that omega-6 fatty acids (such as γ-linolenic acid and arachidonic acid) play a similar role in normal growth. However, they also found that omega-6 was "better" at supporting dermal integrity, renal function, and parturition. These preliminary findings led researchers to concentrate their studies on omega-6, and it is only in recent decades that omega-3 has become of interest.
In 1964, it was discovered that enzymes found in sheep tissues convert omega-6 arachidonic acid into the inflammatory agent called prostaglandin E,2, which both causes the sensation of pain and expedites healing and immune response in traumatized and infected tissues. By 1979, more of what are now known as eicosanoids were discovered: thromboxanes, prostacyclins, and the leukotrienes. The eicosanoids, which have important biological functions, typically have a short active lifetime in the body, starting with synthesis from fatty acids and ending with metabolism by enzymes. However, if the rate of synthesis exceeds the rate of metabolism, the excess eicosanoids may have deleterious effects. Researchers found that certain omega-3 fatty acids are also converted into eicosanoids, but at a much slower rate. Eicosanoids made from omega-3 fatty acids are often referred to as anti-inflammatory, but in fact they are just less inflammatory than those made from omega-6 fats. If both omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids are present, they will "compete" to be transformed, so the ratio of long-chain omega-3:omega-6 fatty acids directly affects the type of eicosanoids that are produced.
This competition was recognized as important when it was found that thromboxane is a factor in the clumping of platelets, which can both cause death by thrombosis and prevent death by bleeding. Likewise, the leukotrienes were found to be important in immune/inflammatory-system response, and therefore relevant to arthritis, lupus, asthma, and recovery from infections. These discoveries led to greater interest in finding ways to control the synthesis of omega-6 eicosanoids. The simplest way would be by consuming more omega-3 and fewer omega-6 fatty acids.
They are required during the prenatal period for the formation of synapses and cell membranes. These processes are also essential in postnatal human development for injury response of the central nervous system and retinal stimulation.

Interconversion

=Conversion efficiency of ALA to EPA and DHA=

Humans can convert short-chain omega-3 fatty acids to long-chain forms (EPA, DHA) with an efficiency below 5%.
These conversions occur competitively with omega-6 fatty acids, which are essential closely related chemical analogues that are derived from linoleic acid. Both the omega-3 α-linolenic acid and omega-6 linoleic acid must be obtained from food. Synthesis of the longer omega-3 fatty acids from linolenic acid within the body is competitively slowed by the omega-6 analogues. Thus, accumulation of long-chain omega-3 fatty acids in tissues is more effective when they are obtained directly from food or when competing amounts of omega-6 analogs do not greatly exceed the amounts of omega-3.
The conversion of ALA to EPA and further to DHA in humans has been reported to be limited, but varies with individuals.oregonstate.edu/infocenter/othernuts/omega3fa/#metabolism[ref]
</ref> Women have higher ALA conversion efficiency than men, which is presumed  to be due to the lower rate of use of dietary ALA for beta-oxidation. This suggests that biological engineering of ALA conversion efficiency is possible. Goyens ''et al.'' argue that it is the absolute amount of ALA, rather than the ratio of omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids, that controls the conversion efficiency.<ref name="cala">
</ref>

=The omega-6 to omega-3 ratio=

Some older clinical studies indicate that the ingested ratio of omega-6 to omega-3 (especially linoleic vs alpha-linolenic) fatty acids is important to maintaining cardiovascular health.
However, three studies published in 2005, 2007 and 2008, including a randomized controlled trial, found that, while omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids are extremely beneficial in preventing heart disease in humans, the levels of omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids (and, therefore, the ratios) did not matter.
Both omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids are essential; i.e., humans must consume them in their diet. Omega-6 and omega-3 eighteen-carbon polyunsaturated fatty acids compete for the same metabolic enzymes, thus the omega-6:omega-3 ratio of ingested fatty acids has significant influence on the ratio and rate of production of eicosanoids, a group of hormones intimately involved in the body's inflammatory and homeostatic processes, which include the prostaglandins, leukotrienes, and thromboxanes, among others. Altering this ratio can change the body's metabolic and inflammatory state.[ref]
