[[Shillong]]

CATEGORIES: Shillong, Indian capital cities, Geography of Meghalaya, Hill stations in India, East Khasi Hills district, Cities and towns in East Khasi Hills district

Shillong ( Khasi: Shillong) is the capital of Meghalaya, one of the smallest states in India and home to the Khasis. It is the headquarters of the East Khasi Hills district and is situated at an average altitude of 4,908 feet (1,496 m) above sea level, with the highest point being Shillong Peak at 6,449 feet (1,966 m). Shillong is the 330th most populous city in India with population of 143,007 according to the 2011 census.census2011.co.php It is said that the rolling hills around the town reminded the European settlers of Scotland. Hence, Shillong is known as "Scotland of the East". The population density of the state of Meghalaya in the current decade is 342 people per sq mile.
It has steadily grown in size and significance since it was made the civil station of the Khasi and Jaintia Hills in 1864 by the British. In 1874, on the formation of Assam as a Chief Commissioner's Province, it was chosen as the headquarters of the new administration because of its convenient location between the Brahmaputra and Surma valleys and more so because the climate of Shillong was much cooler than tropical India. Shillong remained the capital of undivided Assam until the creation of the new state of Meghalaya on 21 January 1972, when Shillong became the capital of Meghalaya and Assam moved its capital to Dispur in Guwahati.

Geography

Shillong is at . It is on the Shillong Plateau, the only major uplifted structure in the northern Indian shield. and P. England, Plateau pop-up during the great 1897 Assam earthquake. Nature(Lond),410, 806–809, 2001 The city lies in the centre of the plateau and is surrounded by hills, three of which are revered in Khasi tradition: Lum Sohpetbneng, Lum Diengiei and Lum Shillong.

Climate

Under Köppen's climate classification the city features a subtropical highland climate (Cwb). Its summers are warm and very rainy, while its winters are cool and dry. Shillong is subject to vagaries of the monsoon. The monsoons arrive in June and it rains almost until the end of August. October–November and March–April are the best months to visit Shillong.

Connectivity

Although well connected by road, Shillong has no rail connection and a proper air connection. Umroi Airport has only limited flights.

Roadways

Shillong is well connected by roads with all major northeastern states. Two major National Highways pass through:
Private bus operators as well as state transport buses from other states ply to and from Shillong daily. Taxi services are also available to destination like Guwahati, Agartala, Dimapur and other North Eastern towns and cities.

Demographics

 Shillong City urban/metropolitan population is 354,325 of which 176,591 are males and 177,734 are females. Males constitute 46% of the population and females 54%. Average literacy rate of 86%, higher than the national average of 63.5%: male literacy is 85%, and female literacy is 92.34%.   13% of the population is under 6 years of age.
Khasis make up the majority of the population though the percentage of Khasi people in the city continues to fall as a result of the large number of migrants from other Indian states. All the other North East tribes are represented here as well as significant numbers of Assamese, Nepali, and a bit of Bengali , Hindi-speaking people making it a fairly cosmopolitan city. Christianity is the dominant religion in the city. Presbyterianism and other denominations of Protestants and Roman Catholics make up the Christian population. A large proportion of the population follow the original Khasi religion: Niam Khasi and Niamtre. Other religions found in India are represented in significant numbers in the city.

Places of interest

These are locations in and around Shillong which are tourist spots. These include:

Sports

Although relatively unknown in the field of sports, Shillong recently got into the limelight because of Shillong Lajong FC, a football club based here which has taken the Indian football scene by storm in the recent I-League. Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium is the homeground of Shillong Lajong FC in I-League.
Shillong Golf Course is one of the oldest golf course of the country and is surrounded by scenic pine and rhododendron trees.
Locals are adept in archery. Shillong is also famous for its daily dose of archery gambling where people predict scores of an archery game played near Polo Ground, Shillong.
Binningstar Lyngkhoi from Shillong is a national marathon runner and represented India in the last 2010 Commonwealth Games. He is currently the fastest marathoner in India with a timing of 2:18 hours.

Education

Shillong is fast emerging as an education hub for the entire northeastern region. Important educational institutes like the Indian Institute of Management, National Institute of Technology Meghalaya, University of Technology and Management, North Eastern Hill University (NEHU), Martin Luther Christian University, Institute of Hotel Management (IHM), National Institute of Fashion Technology, Shillong and North Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of Health and Medical Sciences, English and Foreign Languages University, Shillong Campus, St. Edmund's College, St. Anthony's College, Shillong and several others college and engineering institution have been established here.
St. Edmund's is a century-old educational institute which has produced many eminent personalities in different spheres. 
UPES Dehradun has come up with its sister university called UTM-The New Age University- it is the only university to introduce courses like Computer Science Engineering programs in collaboration with IBM and the University of Petroleum and Energy Studies.. The university offers other courses like Bachelor in Journalism & Mass Communication, B.

Media

Local media in Shillong is strong. There are a number of theatres, newspapers, magazines, local radio and television stations.

Print media

Quite a number of dailies are published for Shillong both in Khasi and English. Prominent English dailies published here include Shillong Times, Meghalaya Guardian, Highland Post, Meghalaya Times and The Sentinel. Khasi dailies like Mawphor, Nongsain Hima among others are published here. Among those Khasi Dailies, Salonsar was published in 2010, the only religious bi-lingual newspaper in Meghalaya.

Electronic media

The radio industry has expanded with a number of private and government-owned FM channels being introduced. State-owned Doordarshan transmits terrestrial television channels. Apart from these few weekly news channels like PCN, Ri Khasi Channel, Batesi are broadcast weekly on the local cable networks. Currently, the only news broadcaster in English is Media Plus.

Communication services

Shillong has a well-connected communication network. Fixed telephones lines are available. Internet services are available both wired and wireless broadband. It is also well covered in mobile networks with all major cellular providers like Airtel, Aircel, Vodafone, IDEA, BSNL, RELIANCE available here.

Localities

Shillong is divided geographically into localities. These include

Eminent personalities associated with Shillong

People who have been associated with Shillong include






