[[Reculver]]

CATEGORIES: Ancient Roman forts in England, Archaeological sites in Kent, City of Canterbury, Country parks in Kent, Monasteries in Kent, Villages in Kent

Reculver is a village and coastal resort about  east by south from London. Reculver once occupied a strategic location at the north-western end of the Wantsum Channel, a sea lane which separated the Isle of Thanet and the Kent mainland until the late Middle Ages. This led the Romans to build a small fort there at the time of their conquest of Britain in 43 AD, and, starting late in the 2nd century, they built a larger fort, or castrum, called Regulbium, which later was part of the chain of Saxon Shore forts. The military connection resumed in the Second World War, when Barnes Wallis's bouncing bombs were tested in the sea off Reculver.
After the Romans left Britain early in the 5th century, Reculver became a landed estate of the Anglo-Saxon kings of Kent. The site of the Roman fort was given over for the establishment of a monastery dedicated to St Mary in 669 AD, and King Eadberht II of Kent was buried there in the 760s. During the Middle Ages Reculver was a thriving township with a weekly market and a yearly fair, and it was a member of the Cinque Port of Sandwich. The twin spires of the church became a landmark for mariners known as the Twin Sisters, and the 19th-century facade of St John's Cathedral in Parramatta, a suburb of Sydney, Australia, is a copy of that at Reculver.
Reculver declined as the Wantsum Channel silted up, and coastal erosion claimed many buildings constructed on the soft sandy cliffs. The village was largely abandoned in the late 18th century, and most of the church was demolished in the early 19th century. Protecting the ruins and the rest of Reculver from erosion is an ongoing challenge.
The 20th century saw a revival as a tourism industry developed and there are now three caravan parks. The census of 2001 recorded 135 people in the Reculver area, nearly a quarter of whom were in caravans at the time. Reculver Country Park is a Special Protection Area, Site of Special Scientific Interest and Ramsar site, which has rare clifftop meadows and is important for migrating birds.

History

Toponymy

The earliest recorded form of the name, Regulbium, was Celtic in origin, meaning "at the promontory", or "great headland", and, in Old English, this became corrupted to Raculf, sometimes given as Raculfceastre, giving rise to the modern "Reculver".

Pre-historic and Roman

Stone Age flint tools have been washed out from the cliffs to the west of Reculver,
The fort was located at what was then the north-eastern extremity of mainland Kent, overlooking the sea lane later known as the Wantsum Channel, which lay between it and the Isle of Thanet: the fort's location thus lay at the "main point of contact in the system Saxon Shore forts",
Towards the end of the 3rd century a Roman naval commander named Carausius was given the task of clearing pirates from the sea between the Roman provinces in Britain, or Britannia, and on the European mainland.

Monastery and church

After the Roman occupation of Britain ended in about 410, Reculver became a landed estate of the Anglo-Saxon kings of Kent, possibly with a royal toll-station or a "significant coastal trading settlement,".
The monastery developed as the centre of a "large estate, a manor and a parish",
By 1066 the monastery had become a parish church.

Decline and loss to the sea

The thriving township of medieval Reculver depended partly on its position on a maritime trade route through the Wantsum Channel, already present in Anglo-Saxon times and exemplified by Reculver's membership of the Cinque Port of Sandwich later in the Middle Ages.
Reculver was also diminished by coastal erosion. By 1540, when John Leland recorded a visit to Reculver, the coastline to the north had receded to within little more than a quarter of a mile (402 m) of the "Towne which at this tyme was but Village lyke".. At about this time,

By 1787 Reculver had "dwindled into an insignificant village,"
When the Hoy and Anchor Inn at Reculver fell into the sea, the redundant vicarage was used as a temporary replacement under the same name.

Bouncing bombs

During the Second World War, the Reculver coastline was one location used to test Barnes Wallis's bouncing bomb prototypes.
Two prototype bouncing bombs, about 

Governance

In the 10th-century charter by which King Eadred gave Reculver to the archbishops of Canterbury, the boundary of the mainland part of the estate was about the same as those for the parishes of Reculver, Hoath and Herne, and the estate included part of the Isle of Thanet.
Reculver parish was represented by two tithings – known in Kent as "borghs"
The parishes of Herne, to the west of Reculver, and St Nicholas-at-Wade on the Isle of Thanet were created from parts of Reculver parish in 1310,
At the national level Reculver is in the English parliamentary constituency of North Thanet, for which Roger Gale (Conservative) has been MP since 1983.

Geography

Reculver is located on the north coast of Kent about 
Sediments laid down around 55 million years ago are particularly well displayed in the cliffs at Reculver..
These rocks are easily washed away by the sea. 6, 9;  New sea defences were built in the 1990s, including covering the beaches around the church with boulders. 10, 14.
The warmest time of year in Kent is in July and August, with average maximum temperatures of around 

Demography

In the census of 1801, the number of people present in the parish of Reculver, enclosing an area of about 
In the 2001 census the relevant census area covered  and included only Reculver and outlying farms and houses, in which 135 people were found, almost a quarter of whom were in caravans. All were born in the United Kingdom except for three individuals from the Republic of Ireland and three from South Africa. Gender was given as 69 female and 66 male, and the age distribution was 12 individuals aged 0–5 years (8.8%), 16 aged 6–16 years (14%), 30 aged 17–35 years (22.2%), 14 aged 36–45 years (10.3%), 44 aged 46–64 years (32.5%) and 21 aged 65 years and over (15.5%). Half (67) of all the individuals recorded were described as economically active, with 58 of these having employers and nine being self-employed; none were recorded as full-time students or unemployed. Twenty-four people were described as retired (17.7%). Of those aged 16–74 years, 14 (12.8%) were placed at the highest level for education or qualification. Christianity was the only religion represented, by 99 individuals, with 22 recorded as having no religion and 14 whose religion was not stated. From April 2001 to March 2002 the average gross weekly income of households in the ward of Reculver, which includes Beltinge, Bishopstone, Hillborough and most of the eastern part of the town of Herne Bay, was estimated by the Office for National Statistics as £560, or £29,120 per year.
In the 2011 census the relevant census area was identical to Reculver electoral ward, an area of  Therefore, while the total resident population of the ward at the 2011 census numbered 8,845, detailed information comparable to that of the 2001 census is unavailable.

Economy

In the Middle Ages, Reculver was a member of the Cinque Port of Sandwich.
Today Reculver is dominated by static caravan parks, the first of which appeared after the Second World War.
On the eastern side of Reculver is a hatchery for oysters belonging to a seafood company which is based in Reculver.

Culture and community

Culture

=Twin Sisters=

A byname for the towers of the ruined church is the "Twin Sisters", and an account of how this first arose was current about a hundred years after
its supposed happening in the late 15th century, but in its usual form, for example in a 19th-century travel guide,

=Crying baby=

It is reported that the sound of a crying baby is often heard in the grounds of the fort and among the ruins of the church.

Community facilities

The nearest post office to Reculver is in Beltinge, about 

Landmarks

Ruined church of St Mary

The medieval towers of the ruined church of St Mary are Reculver's "most dominant features".
The foundation of this church, sited within the remains of the Roman fort of Regulbium, exemplifies the "widespread practice Anglo-Saxon England of re-using Roman walled places for major churches",
Ten years after the foundation of the monastery, in 679, King Hlothhere of Kent granted lands at Sturry, about 
Further charters show that the monastery at Reculver continued to benefit from Kentish kings in the 8th century, under abbots Heahberht, Deneheah and Hwitred, acquiring lands in Higham Upshire and Sheldwich and exemption from the toll due on one ship at Fordwich,
|Matthews. It comprises a narrow strip of protected, cliff-top land about .
In 2011 it was found that the shoreline in the Herne Bay area, including Reculver, had come under threat from an invasive species, the Carpet sea squirt (Didemnum vexillum), also known as "marine vomit".

Centre for renewable energy

A visitor centre in Reculver Country Park re-opened in 2009 as the Reculver Renewable Energy and Interpretation Centre, "marking 200 years of the moving of Reculver village". The centre features a log burner fuelled by logs from the Blean woodland, solar and photovoltaic panels provide electrical power for the centre, and it has displays and information describing the history, geography and wildlife of the area.

Transport

Reculver is at the end of an unclassified road, Reculver Lane, and is about 
In 1817 the nearest coaching route to Reculver was that running between London, Canterbury and the Isle of Thanet, which passed through Upstreet, about 
As of 2014 a bus service, route 7/7A, connects Reculver directly with Herne Bay and Canterbury daily except Sundays and bank holidays. Other destinations on this route include Reculver Church of England Primary School at Hillborough, Beltinge, Birchington-on-Sea and Westgate-on-Sea. The bus stop at Reculver is adjacent to the King Ethelbert Inn.
The nearest railway stations to Reculver are at Herne Bay, about 
There is no formal access to Reculver by sea. Passenger steamships called at Herne Bay pier on their route between London and destinations along the north coast of Kent from 1832, but this service ceased in 1862.
In the 16th century, oysters dredged at Reculver were reported as better than any in Kent,. A travel guide of 1865 advised that

Coastguards were stationed at Reculver from the mid-19th century until they were withdrawn in the mid-20th century,

Education

Reculver Church of England Primary School is adjacent to the church at Hillborough, in Reculver parish, where Reculver residents relocated in the late 18th century and early 19th century due to coastal erosion. After a school inspection report was released in March 2013, the school was placed under "special measures", meaning that it was "failing to give its pupils an acceptable standard of education, and the persons responsible for leading, managing or governing the school were not demonstrating the capacity to secure the necessary improvement in the school";[ref]
 

Religion

A new Anglican parish church for Reculver was built at Hillborough, about 
The church begun in 1876 was built by Gothic Revival architect Joseph Clarke,

Notable people

King Eadberht II of Kent was buried in the church at Reculver in the 760s.. Retrieved 21 April 2014.
The first recorded owner of Brook, about 
Thomas Broke, alderman and MP for Calais in the mid-16th century,
Robert Hunt, vicar of Reculver from 1595 to 1602, became minister of religion to the English colonial settlement at Jamestown, Virginia, sailing there in the ship Susan Constant in 1606, and probably celebrated "the first known service of holy communion in what is today the United States of America on 21 June 1607."



Footnotes

Notes

Bibliography




