[[Curtis Martin]]

CATEGORIES: 1973 births, Sportspeople from Pennsylvania, African-American players of American football, American football running backs, Big 33 Football Classic alumni, New England Patriots players, New York Jets players, American Christians, American Conference Pro Bowl players, Players of American football from Pennsylvania, Pittsburgh Panthers football players, Living people, National Football League Offensive Rookie of the Year Award winners, Pro Football Hall of Fame inductees

Curtis James Martin, Jr. (born May 1, 1973) is a former American football running back who played in the National Football League (NFL) for the New England Patriots and New York Jets over the span of 10 years. Martin began his professional career with the Patriots, who selected him in the third round of the 1995 NFL Draft. As a free agent in 1998, he joined the Jets where he finished his career in 2005 due to a career-ending knee injury. He retired having amassed the fourth highest total of rushing yards in NFL history. He was selected as a member of the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 2012.

Early years

Curtis Jr. was born to Rochella Dixon and Curtis Sr. on May 1, 1973.
He and his mother settled in Point Breeze prior to his sophomore year of high school where he began attending Taylor Allderdice High School which was known for its highly regarded academic reputation. He played basketball as a sophomore but did not participate in any sports during his junior year. At the insistence of his mother, who wanted him to participate in an extracurricular activity as a way to keep him away from crime and violence, Curtis began to play football during his senior year despite having never cared much for the sport.
Martin was considered a natural athlete according to former head coach Mark Wittgartner and became an immediate star on the football team as he played at the running back and linebacker positions. He also played on special teams and occasionally at quarterback. He ran for 1,705 yards and scored 20 touchdowns in his lone season of high school football. Martin graduated from Allderdice in 1991 and was inducted into their alumni hall of fame in 2011.
Martin's performance at Allderdice attracted the attention of the University of Pittsburgh's football coach Paul Hackett. Though other offers were available, Martin decided to remain close to home and attend Pittsburgh.

College career

Martin, whom Hackett likened to Tony Dorsett, was expected to be a valued contributor to the Panthers when he arrived in 1991. However, injuries plagued much of his college career. As a junior he rushed for 1,045 yards in ten games but he missed the final two with a sprained shoulder. In 1994, Martin opened his senior year running for a career high 251 yards against Texas however the following week against Ohio he suffered a sprained ankle that sidelined him for the rest of the season.
Martin had the option to redshirt and play one more season at Pittsburgh or enter the NFL Draft. He chose to enter the draft stating "in the end it was the best thing to do". Draft analysts predicted that had Martin stayed another season at Pittsburgh and remained injury free he could have been a potential first round selection. Martin was highly touted for his speed, he ran a 4.4 in the 40 yard dash, and his slashing running style.

Professional career

New England Patriots

The Patriots lost three running backs to free agency upon the conclusion of the 1994 season and sought to fortify their backfield. One running back, Kevin Turner, was signed by the Philadelphia Eagles as a restricted free agent and Philadelphia sent a third round selection to New England. The Patriots used the selection to draft Martin in the 1995 NFL Draft despite concerns about his durability. Martin signed a contract with the team on July 19, 1995, He became the first Patriots rookie to rush for 100 yards during their debut. Martin continued his impressive streak and rushed for over 100 yards eight more times during the season. He finished the season as the AFC's leading rusher with 1,487 yards and 14 touchdowns. He won the Offensive Rookie of the Year Award and was named to the Pro Bowl.
The following year, Martin only rushed for 100 yards twice during the season but recorded 1,152 yards and 14 rushing touchdowns. In the playoffs, Martin, playing in his first career playoff game, served as a key player in the Patriots' wild card victory over the Pittsburgh Steelers. He rushed for a then franchise record 166 yards and three touchdowns including a 78-yard touchdown, the second longest touchdown run in playoff history at the time. The Patriots went on to play in Super Bowl XXXI, but lost to the Green Bay Packers. Martin rushed for 42 yards, caught three passes for 28 yards, and scored a touchdown in the game. Martin was again named to the Pro Bowl.

New York Jets

After the 1997 season, Martin became a restricted free agent. On the first day of the free agency period Martin's agent, Eugene Parker, contacted the New York Jets to gauge their interest in potentially signing the running back.
In his first seven seasons with the Jets, Martin missed only one game and was selected to the Pro Bowl three times. In 1998, Martin gained 182 yards from scrimmage and scored two touchdowns against the Jacksonville Jaguars in a Jets playoff win. In 2004, Martin rushed for a season-high 196 yards against the Cincinnati Bengals in the team's home opener and would do so eight more times that season, finishing with 1,697 yards.
In 2005, Martin suffered what was deemed as a strained right knee injury in the Jets' second game of the season against the Miami Dolphins, when he was tackled by linebacker Zach Thomas.
Martin began 2006 on the Physically Unable to Perform list as the post-operation recovery period took longer than expected though the surgery was considered minimally invasive.

Post retirement

Following his retirement, Martin expressed interest in becoming the owner of an NFL franchise.
Martin was considered for induction into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in his first year of eligibility in 2011 however, he was not selected.
The Jets retired Martin's No. 28 jersey in a halftime ceremony at New York's season-opening game against the Buffalo Bills on September 9, 2012. 
On November 11th, 2013, Martin was added to the Miami Dolphins' five-man committee to develop the conduct code by owner Stephen M. Ross following a locker room hazing incident involving Richie Incognito and Jonathan Martin. 

Personal life

Martin married his longtime girlfriend Carolina Williams in a ceremony held at Oheka Castle in Huntington, Long Island in 2010. On December 15, 2011, the couple welcomed their first child, a daughter named Ava.
In 1998, on Father's Day, Martin and his mother Rochella began a long reconciliation process with his father, Curtis Sr., by renting a new, furinshed condiminium for his father, who had left the family due to his addictions to cocaine and alcohol. In 1990, Curtis Sr. checked into a veteran's hospital for two weeks followed by a six-month stay at a rehabilitation center and was able to remain sober through his death, due to cancer, in June 2009 at age 58. The family made peace with each other in the final weeks of the elder Martin's life.

Career statistics

New England Patriots/New York Jets

=Regular season=

=Playoffs=

Career accomplishments

Awards and honors








