[[Cancer vaccine]]

CATEGORIES: Vaccination, Cancer vaccines

A cancer vaccine is a vaccine that treats existing cancer or prevents the development of cancer in certain high-risk individuals. Vaccines that treat existing cancer are known as therapeutic cancer vaccines. There are currently no vaccines able to prevent cancer in general.
Some types of cancer, such as cervical cancer and some liver cancers, are caused by viruses (known as oncoviruses), and traditional vaccines against those viruses, such as HPV vaccine and hepatitis B vaccine, will prevent those types of cancer. These anti-viral vaccines are not further discussed in the rest of this article. Other cancers are to some extent caused by bacterial infections (e.g. stomach cancer and Helicobacter pylori
Scientists have also been trying to develop vaccines against existing cancers. Some researchers believe that cancer cells routinely arise and are destroyed by the healthy immune system;

Method

One approach to cancer vaccination is to separate proteins from cancer cells and immunize cancer patients against those proteins, in the hope of stimulating an immune reaction that could kill the cancer cells. Therapeutic cancer vaccines are being developed for the treatment of breast, lung, colon, skin, kidney, prostate, and other cancers.
In a phase III trial of follicular lymphoma (a type of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma), investigators reported that the BiovaxID (on average) prolonged remission by 44.2 months, versus 30.6 months for the control, at the June 2009 meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. S. J. Schuster, et al. 2009 ASCO Annual Meeting, J Clin Oncol 27:18s, 2009 (suppl; abstr 2)
On April 14, 2009, Dendreon Corporation announced that their Phase III clinical trial of Provenge, a cancer vaccine designed to treat prostate cancer, had demonstrated an increase in survival. It received U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)  approval for use in the treatment of advanced prostate cancer patients on April 29, 2010.
Another approach to therapeutic anti-cancer vaccination is to generate the immune response in situ in the patient using oncolytic viruses. This approach has been successfully used in the drug talimogene laherparepvec, a version of herpes simplex virus which has been engineered to replicate selectively in tumor tissue and also to express the immune stimulatory protein GM-CSF. This enhances the anti-tumor immune response to tumor antigens released following viral lysis and provides an in situ patient specific anti-tumor vaccine as a result. Interim phase 3 trial results in melanoma showed a significant tumour response rate compared to administration of GM-CSF alone. Amgen announces top-line results of phase 3 talimogene laherparepvec trial in melanoma. Mar 19, 2013. Available here
On April 8, 2008, New York-based company Antigenics announced that it had received approval for the first therapeutic cancer vaccine in Russia. It is the first approval by a regulatory body of a cancer immunotherapy. The treatment, Oncophage, increased recurrence-free survival by a little more than a year according to the results of a phase III clinical trial. The approval is for a subset of kidney cancer patients who are at intermediate risk for disease recurrence. It awaits approval in the US and EU.
Most of the cancer vaccines in development are addressing specific cancer types and are therapeutic vaccines. Several cancer vaccines are currently in development by companies such as:

Approved therapeutic vaccines

Abandoned

CancerVax (Canvaxin), Genitope Corp (MyVax personalized immunotherapy), and Favrille Inc (FavId) are examples of cancer vaccine projects that have been terminated due to poor phase III results (despite promising phase II data and strong immune responses).

Desired characteristics

Effective cancer vaccines must resolve several challenges.  Cancer vaccines seek to target an antigen specific to the tumor and distinct from self-proteins.  Selection of the appropriate adjuvant, molecules that activate antigen-presenting cells to stimulate immune responses, is required. At the present time, only Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG), aluminum-based salts and a squalene-oil-water emulsion are approved worldwide for clinical use. The effective vaccine also should seek to provide longterm memory to prevent tumor recurrence.  Some scientists believe that for total tumor elimination, both the innate and adaptive immune systems should be activated. (2008). "Cancer vaccines: Accomplishments and challenges." Critical Reviews in Oncology Hematology.67: 93-102.

Antigen candidates

Tumor antigens have been divided into two broad categories: shared tumor antigens; and unique tumor antigens.  Shared antigens are expressed by many tumors.  Unique tumor antigens result from mutations induced through physical or chemical carcinogens; they are therefore expressed only by individual tumors.
In one approach, vaccines contain whole tumor cells, though these vaccines have been less effective in eliciting immune responses in spontaneous cancer models.  Defined tumor antigens decrease the risk of autoimmunity but because the immune response is directed to a single epitope, tumors can evade destruction through antigen loss variance.    A process called "epitope spreading" or "provoked immunity" may mitigate this weakness, as sometimes an immune response to a single antigen will lead to development of immunity against other antigens on the same tumor.

Hypothesized problems

A vaccine against a particular virus is relatively easy to create. The virus is foreign to the body, and therefore will express antigens that the immune system can recognize.  Furthermore, there are usually only a few viable variants of the virus in question. It is very hard to develop vaccines for viruses that mutate constantly such as influenza or HIV.
A tumour can have many different types of cells in it, each with different cell-surface antigens. Furthermore, those cells are derived from the individual with cancer, and therefore display few if any antigens that are foreign to that individual.  This makes it difficult for the immune system to distinguish the cancer cells from normal cells.  Some scientists believe that Renal cancer and melanoma are the two cancers with most evidence of causing spontaneous and effective immune responses, possibly because they often display antigens that are recognized as foreign.  Therefore, many attempts at developing cancer vaccines are directed against these tumors.  However, given Dendreon's success in prostate cancer, a disease that never spontaneously regresses, cancers other than melanoma and renal cancer may be equally amenable to immune attack.
However, most clinical trials investigating a cancer vaccine have failed or had very modest responses by standardized oncologic assessment criteria described as the RECIST criteria.  The precise reasons are unknown, but possible explanations include:

Recommendations for success

In January 2009, a review article was published in Expert Reviews in Anticancer Therapy (Vol 9, #1, pages 67–74) which highlighted past program failures and made recommendations for success as follows:








