[[North Eastern Hill University]]

CATEGORIES: Universities and colleges in Meghalaya, Central universities in India, North Eastern Hill University, Educational institutions established in 1973, 1973 establishments in India

North Eastern Hill University (NEHU) is a Central University established on 19 July 1973 by an Act of the Indian Parliament. The university is in the suburb of Shillong, the state capital of Meghalaya, India. The university has two campuses: Shillong and Tura in Meghalaya. NEHU Tura Campus functions under a pro-vice chancellor.
It is the University Grants Commission's University with Potential for Excellence (conferred in 2006). It was established as a regional university for the states of northeast India, including Meghalaya, Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram, and had given birth to Nagaland University in 1994 and Mizoram University in 2001.

Administration

The head of the admintration is the Vice-chancellor, who is appointed by the Visitor of the university, the President of India, for a five-year tenure. The Governor of Meghalaya is the Chief Rector. Presently Prof A.N. Rai is the Vice-chancellor, under whom are two pro-vice-chancellors, Prof E.D. Thomas at the Tura campus and Prof B. Myrboh at the Shillong campus. Initially, the academic departments and the administration of NEHU at Shillong functioned from three prime sites in the Shillong city; one from the former Maharaja of Mayurbhanj, the other from the Rani of Bijni and the third one from the Government of Meghalaya, popularly known as Horse-Shoe Building. The university now runs its central administration from its main campus in Mawkynroh-Umshing.

Campus

NEHU has two academic campuses, one at Mawkynroh-Umshing, Shillong, and another at Chandmari, Tura. Shillong is the headquarters of academic and administrative functions. The main campus is 1025 acres in area. It accommodates National Council of Science Museum, Indira Gandhi National Open University, Indian Council of Social Science Research, Sports Authority of India and The English and Foreign Languages University.

Library

The Central Library started in 1973 with a collection of 600 books. Its membership includes university and college teachers, postgraduate and undergraduate honours students and members of the non-teaching staff. The permanent library at Shiilong campus was funded by the Indian Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region and inaugurated in 2006. It now has a collection of over 230,000 books, 38,000 bound periodicals and it subscribes to 316 foreign and 366 Indian journals.

Schools

The university has the following schools (departments/centres of studies):
Each of the schools of studies comprises academic departments and centers of studies detailed above.

Jurisdictions and affiliated colleges

The jurisdiction of the university extended originally to the states of Meghalaya and Nagaland and the erstwhile Union Territories of Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram. With the establishment of the Nagaland University on 6 September 1994, the jurisdiction of NEHU ceased over Nagaland. Likewise with the establishment of the Mizoram University the jurisdiction of NEHU over Mizoram also ceased from June 2001. Arunachal Pradesh has its own university. 
There are 53 undergraduate colleges affiliated to the university including eight professional colleges.






