[[Oncogene]]

CATEGORIES: Oncogenes, Carcinogenesis

An oncogene is a gene that has the potential to cause cancer. The World of the Cell, Becker, W.M., et al., 7th ed. San Francisco, CA; 2009. In tumor cells, they are often mutated or expressed at high levels. "Oncogenes" Free full text
Most normal cells undergo a programmed form of death (apoptosis). Activated oncogenes can cause those cells designated for apoptosis to survive and proliferate instead. Illustrated presentation. Most oncogenes require an additional step, such as mutations in another gene, or environmental factors, such as viral infection, to cause cancer. Since the 1970s, dozens of oncogenes have been identified in human cancer. Many cancer drugs target the proteins encoded by oncogenes. Michael Bishop and Harold E. Varmus for their discovery of "the cellular origin of retroviral oncogenes".

History

The term "oncogene" was coined in 1969 by National Cancer Institute scientists, George Todaro and Robert Heubner. 363, endnote.
The first confirmed oncogene was discovered in 1970 and was termed src (pronounced sarc as in sarcoma).  Src was in fact first discovered as an oncogene in a chicken retrovirus. Experiments performed by Dr. G. Steve Martin of the University of California, Berkeley demonstrated that the Src was indeed the oncogene of the virus. Steven Martin, Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 2: 467 (2001)  The first nucleotide sequence of v-src was sequenced in 1980 by  A.P. Czernilofsky et al.(A.P. Czernilofsky et al., 1980, Nature Vol 287, pp 198-203).
In 1976 Drs. Dominique Stehelin, J. Michael Bishop and Harold E. Varmus of the University of California, San Francisco demonstrated that oncogenes were activated proto-oncogenes, found in many organisms including humans. For this discovery, proving Todaro and Heubner's "oncogene theory", Bishop and Varmus were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1989. Michael Bishop and Harold E. Varmus for their discovery of "the cellular origin of retroviral oncogenes". Press Release.

Proto-oncogene

A proto-oncogene is a normal gene that can become an oncogene due to mutations or increased expression. The resultant protein may be termed as oncoprotein. The MYC gene is implicated in Burkitt's Lymphoma, which starts when a chromosomal translocation moves an enhancer sequence within the vicinity of the MYC gene. The MYC gene codes for widely used transcription factors. When the enhancer sequence is wrongly placed, these transcription factors are produced at much higher rates. Another example of an oncogene is the Bcr-Abl gene found on the Philadelphia Chromosome, a piece of genetic material seen in Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia caused by the translocation of pieces from chromosomes 9 and 22. Bcr-Abl codes for a receptor tyrosine kinase, which is constitutively active, leading to uncontrolled cell proliferation. (More information about the Philadelphia Chromosome below)

Activation

The proto-oncogene can become an oncogene by a relatively small modification of its original function. There are three basic methods of activation:
The expression of oncogenes can be regulated by microRNAs (miRNAs), small RNAs 21-25 nucleotides in length that control gene expression by downregulating them. Antisense messenger RNAs could theoretically be used to block the effects of oncogenes.

Classification

There are several systems for classifying oncogenes,THE Medical Biochemistry PageClassification of Oncogene Function but there is not yet a widely accepted standard. They are sometimes grouped both spatially (moving from outside the cell inwards) and chronologically (parallelling the "normal" process of signal transduction). There are several categories that are commonly used:
More detailed information for the above Table:








