[[Oolong]]

CATEGORIES: Oolong tea, Chinese tea, Chinese words and phrases

Oolong ( The degree of oxidation can range from 8 to 85%,施海根，中國名茶圖譜、烏龍茶黑茶及壓製茶花茶特種茶卷 p2，上海文化出版社 2007 ISBN 7-80740-130-3 depending on the variety and production style. Oolong is especially popular with tea connoisseurs of south China and Chinese expatriates in Southeast Asia,Joseph Needham, Science and Civilization in China vol 6 part V 40f Tea Processing and Utilization, pp535-550 Origin and processing of oolong tea as is the Fujian preparation process known as the Gongfu tea ceremony.
In Chinese tea culture, semi-oxidised oolong teas are collectively grouped as qīngchá ( all depending on the horticulture and style of production. Several subvarieties of oolong, including those produced in the Wuyi Mountains of northern Fujian, such as Da Hong Pao, are among the most famous Chinese teas.
Different varieties of oolong are processed differently, but the leaves are formed into one of two distinct styles. Some are rolled into long curly leaves, while others are 'wrap-curled' into small beads, each with a tail. The former style is the more traditional of the two in China.
The name oolong tea came into the English language from the Chinese name (), meaning "black dragon".

Possible origins

There are three widely accepted explanations of the origin of the Chinese name. According to the "tribute tea" theory, oolong tea came directly from Dragon-Phoenix Tea Cake tribute tea. The term oolong tea replaced the old term when loose tea came into fashion. Since it was dark, long, and curly, it was called Black Dragon tea.
According to the "Wuyi" theory, oolong tea first existed in the Wuyi Mountains region. This is evidenced by Qing dynasty poems such as Wuyi Tea Song (Wuyi Chage) and Tea Tale (Chashuo). It was said that oolong tea was named after the part of the Wuyi Mountain where it was originally produced.
According to the "Anxi" theory, oolong tea had its origin in the Anxi oolong tea plant, which was discovered by a man named Sulong, Wulong, or Wuliang.
Another tale tells of a man named Wu Liang (later corrupted to Wu Long, or Oolong) who discovered oolong tea by accident when he was distracted by a deer after a hard day's tea-picking, and by the time he remembered to return to the tea it had already started to oxidize.co.uk

Varieties

Wuyi rock (cliff) tea (武夷岩茶 Wǔyí yán chá) from Fujian province

The most famous and expensive oolong teas are made here, and the production is still usually accredited as being organic. Much Shuǐ Xiān is grown elsewhere in Fujian.
Some of the better known cliff teas are:

Fújiàn province

Golden Cassia ''Huángjīn Guì'' (黄金桂）
There is a story regarding the origin of the Tiě Guānyīn variety: There was once a poor farmer who was devout and dedicated to maintaining the temple of Kuan Yin, the goddess of mercy. One day, to reward him for his loyalty and commitment to her, she told him that the key to his future was outside the temple. Outside he found a scrungy old bush, which he nursed to a flourishing bloom of greenish leaves.

Guangdong province

The name dan cong is often misinterpreted as meaning the tea is all picked from a single bush, grove, or clone. This is not correct. Dan cong is a botanical term that refers to the morphology of the tea plant. Most tea bushes emerge from the ground as a cluster of branches; however, the uncommon dan cong variety emerges as a single trunk that branches off higher up the stem. Also, some tea plants are found in the form of a long, dark green vine that wraps itself around guava trees. This type of Oolong is extremely rare, and is grown exclusively in Thailand.

Taiwan

Tea cultivation began in Taiwan in the 18th century. Since then, many of the teas which are grown in Fujian province have also been grown in Taiwan., Issue 1 www.com Since the 1970s, the tea industry in Taiwan has expanded at a rapid rate, in line with the rest of Taiwan's economy. Due to high domestic demand and a strong tea culture, most Taiwanese tea is bought and consumed by the Taiwanese.
As the weather in Taiwan is highly variable, tea quality may differ from season to season. Although the island is not particularly large, it is geographically varied, with high, steep mountains rising abruptly from low-lying coastal plains. The different weather patterns, temperatures, altitudes, and soil ultimately result in differences in appearance, aroma, and flavour of the tea grown in Taiwan. In some mountainous areas, teas have been cultivated at ever higher elevations to produce a unique sweet taste that fetches a premium price.

New Zealand

In the early 1990s a Taiwanese migrant to New Zealand was intrigued by the similarities between his native Taiwan's high mountains and New Zealand north Island's climate. He imported oolong cuttings into New Zealand and the plants thrived. Two oolong cultivars (qin xin and jinxuan) now spread across just under 40 hectares and have developed their own unique terroir character. The leaves are processed into oolong and black tea and exported worldwide under the trade name Zealong.

Steeping

Generally, 3 grams of tea per 200 ml of water, or about two teaspoons of oolong tea per cup, should be used. Oolong teas should be prepared with 200 to 205°F (93 to 96°C) water (not boiling) and steeped 3–10 minutes.Upton Tea Imports, 
A widely used ceremonial method of steeping oolongs in Taiwan and China is called gongfucha. This method uses a small steeping vessel, such as a gaiwan or Yixing clay teapot, with more tea than usual for the amount of water used. Multiple short steeps of 20 seconds to 1 minute are performed; the tea is often served in one- to two-ounce tasting cups.

Caffeine

Though the caffeine content in tea may vary based on the brewing method, and number of extractions, Oolong tea in general contains caffeine.






