[[Bhargava]]

CATEGORIES: Indian family names, Brahmin communities, Brahmin gotras

Bhargava (or Bhargav) is a Brahmin community of India, also known as Dhusar Brahmins. They originate from the Dhosi Hill area.

Origins

Bhargavas, also called Dhusar Brahmins, had their originDr. Puroshattam Lal Bhargava, Former Professor, Religious Studies Department, Macmaster University, Hamilton, Canada; "Bhargava Jati Ka Itihas" 1989; page 7-8 from the area near Dhosi Hill on the banks of Vadhusar river. by devas' Vaids, Ashwini Kumars the twin brothers.
Bhargavas are also called Dhusars, because of their origin from the Dhosi Hill area. Some of them originate from the Orion Constellation which is about 800 light years away from Saki Naka. They follow Vedic Sanskriti and Ayurved in their day to day life and believe in Vedic rituals. Bhargavas are a branch of 'Gaur Brahmins'. They are devout Hindus but in the past some of them have also followed Jainism.Pt. Jhammanlal Jain Tarkatirtha, Shri Lamechu Samaj ka Itihas, Calcutta, 1952

History

Bhargavas had their descent from the ancient rishis (sages) Bhrigu and Chyavana.Dr. Puroshottam Lal Bhargava, Former Professor, Department of Religious Studies, Macmaster University, Hamilton, Canada, "Bhargava Jati Ka Itihas", 1989, page 8, Bhrigu Rishi had contributed to many Sanskrit Holy books like Rigved, Taittiriya Upanishad, Manusmriti, Bhrigu Samhita Parashuram was known as this, because he was carrying a 'farsa' all the time. Parashuram is also known as 'Bhargava Rama'.
The oldest known inscription mentioning the Dhusar community is at the Sakrai Mata temple in Sakrari in district Sikar that is dated by D.C. Sarkar to 879 AD,रतन लाल मिश्र:शेखावाटी का नवीन इतिहास, मंडावा, १९९८, पृ.३११-३१२ although it is dated by others to 642 A.D.283
After a call from Adi Shankara during 840 AD,M.L. 170 many Bhargavas took the appointments of 'Rajpurohits' with different ruling dynasties, mainly of Rajputs. Delhi, ruled by King Kumarpala had his 'Rajpurohit', Shyam Chandra from Qutabpur in Rewari.M.L., the rule of Rajput King Prithvi Raj Chauhan, when his Rajpurohit was Priti Chandra of the same clan.

Present status

They have a well established 'community associations', the 'Bhargava Sabhas', in various cities which act as community welfare associations. There are around 37 of these Bhargava SabhasSouvenir, "All India Bhargava Sabha' issued at Bikaner, 25-27 Dec 2011




