[[Afro-Brazilian]]

CATEGORIES: Afro-Brazilian, Brazilian people, Ethnic groups in Brazil, Peoples of the African diaspora, Race in Brazil

Afro-Brazilian or African Brazilian refers to a Brazilian national with African ancestry. The term does not have widespread usage in Brazil, where people with noticeable African ancestry are generally referred to as preto ("black") or pardo (multiracial or "brown").
In recent years,
Brazilians rarely use the American-style phrase "African Brazilian" to categorize themselves, and never in informal discourse: the IBGE's July 1998 PME shows that, of Black Brazilians, only about 10% consider themselves of "African origin"; most of them identify as having a "Brazilian origin". Fora de foco: diversidade e identidades étnicas no Brasil. Quadro 6, p. 10. In the July 1998 PME, the categories "Afro-Brasileiro" (Afro-Brazilian) and "Africano Brasileiro" (African Brazilian) weren't used even once; the category "Africano" (African) was used by 0.004% of the respondents. A Cor Denominada. Anexo 1. p. 43 (unavailable online) In the 1976 PNAD, none of these were used even once. Paolo, 25 June 1995. (PDF) Accessed 19 September 2010.
Brazilian geneticist Sérgio Pena has criticised American scholar Edward Telles for lumping "pretos" and "pardos" in the same category. According to him, "the autosomal genetic analysis that we have performed in non-related individuals from Rio de Janeiro shows that it does not make any sense to put "pretos" and "pardos" in the same category".laboratoriogene.br/geneImprensa/2009/pensamento.
According to Edward Telles, The third is the Black movement system that distinguishes only two categories, summing up "pardos" and "pretos" (blacks, lowercase) as "negros" (Blacks, with capital initial). Race in Another America: the significance of skin color in Brazil. p. 85. More recently, the term "afrodescendente" has been brought into use,Pena, Sérgio, and Bortolini, Maria Cátira. Pode a genética definir quem deve se beneficiar das cotas universitárias e demais ações afirmativas? Note 1, p. 47 but it is restricted to very formal discourse, such as governmental or academic discussions, being viewed by some as a cultural imposition from the "politically correct speech" common in the United States.

Brazilian race/colour categories

The first system referred by Telles is that of the IBGE. In the Census, respondents choose their race or color in five categories: branca (white), parda (brown), preta (black), amarela (yellow) or indígena (indigenous). The term "parda" needs further explanation; it has been systematically used since the Census of 1940. In that census, people were asked for their "colour or race"; if the answer was not "White", "preta" (black), or "Yellow", interviewers were instructed to fill the "colour or race" box with a slash. These slashes were later summed up in the category "pardo". In practice this means answers such as "pardo", "moreno", "mulato", "caboclo", etc. In the following censuses, "pardo" became a category on its own, and included Amerindians,IBGE. Censo Demográfico. p. XVIII which became a separate category only in 1991. So it is a term for people who have a skin darker than whites and lighter than blacks, but not necessarily implies a white-black mixture.
Telles' second system is that of popular classification. Two IBGE surveys (the 1976 PNAD and the July 1998 PME) have sought to understand the way Brazilians think of themselves in "racial" terms, with the explicit aim of adjusting the census classification (neither, however, resulted in actual changes in the Census). Besides that, Data Folha has also conducted research on this subject. The results of these surveys are somewhat varied, but seem to coincide in some fundamental aspects. First, there is an enormous variety of "racial" terms in use in Brazil; the 1976 PNAD found 136 different answers to the question about race; the July 1998 PME found 143. A Cor Denominada. p. 18 (unavailable online) However, most of these terms are used by very small minorities. Telles remarks that 95% of the population chose only 6 different terms (branco, moreno, pardo, moreno-claro, preto and negro); Petrucelli shows that the 7 most common responses (the above plus amarela) sum up 97%, and the 10 most common (the previous plus mulata, clara, and morena-escura) make 99%. A Cor Denominada. p. 19 (unavailable online) Petrucelli, analysing the July 98 PME, finds that 77 denominations were mentioned by only one person in the sample. Other 12 are misunderstandings, referring to national or regional origin (francesa, italiana, baiana, cearense). Many of the "racial" terms are (or could be) remarks about the relation between skin colour and exposition to sun (amorenada, bem morena, branca-morena, branca-queimada, corada, bronzeada, meio morena, morena-bronzeada, morena-trigueira, morenada, morenão, moreninha, pouco morena, queimada, queimada de sol, tostada, rosa queimada, tostada). Others are clearly variations of the same idea (preto, negro, escuro, crioulo, retinto, for black, alva, clara, cor-de-leite, galega, rosa, rosada, pálida, for White, parda, mulata, mestiça, mista, for "parda"), or precisions of the same concept (branca morena, branca clara), and can actually grouped together with one of the main racial terms without falsifying the interpretation. Some seem to express an outright refusal of classification: azul-marinho (navy blue), azul (blue), verde (green), cor-de-burro-quando-foge. In the July 1998 PME, the categories "Afro-Brasileiro" (Afro-Brazilian) and "Africano Brasileiro" (African Brazilian) weren't used even once; the category "Africano" (African) was used by 0.004% of the respondents. In the 1976 PNAD, none of these were used even once.
The remarkable difference of the popular system is the use of the term "moreno". This is actually difficult to translate into English, and carries a few different meanings. Derived from Latin maurus, meaning inhabitant of Mauritania,José Luiz Petrucelli. A Cor Denominada. p. 14 (unavailable online) traditionally it is used as a term to distinguish White people with dark hair, as opposed to "ruivo" (redhead) and "loiro" (blonde).macaenews.br/ver_col.Anusuya A. Mokashi and Noah S. Scheinfeld. Photoaging. In Robert A. Norman, Diagnosis of Aging Skin Diseases. p. 13. In connection to this, it is used as a term for suntanned people, and is commonly opposed to "pálido" (pale) and "amarelo" (yellow), which in this case refer to people who aren't frequently exposed to sun. Finally, it is also often used as a euphemism for "pardo" and "preto".
Finally, the Black movement has synthesized groups "pardos" and "pretos" in a single category, "negro" (and not "Afro-brasileiro" or any other hyphenated form)Edward Telles. Race in Another America: the significance of skin color in Brazil. p. 85.: This system of classification uses only two terms, 'negro' and branco. This looks more similar to the American racial perception,Edward Telles. Race in another America. p. 86: The Brazilian government had sought to dichotomize, or worse, (North) "americanize" racial classification in a society that used and even celebrated intermediate terms. but there are some subtle differences. First, as other Brazilians, the Black movement understands that not everybody with some African descent is Black,Kabengele Munanga Uma resposta contra o racismo. In Brasil Autogestinário. Do ponto de vista norteamericano, todos os brasileiros seriam, de acordo com as pesquisas do geneticista Sergio Danilo Pena, considerados negros ou ameríndios, pois todos possuem, em porcentagens variadas, marcadores genéticos africanos e ameríndios, além de europeus, sem dúvida. ("From the American standpoint, all Brazilians would, according to the researches of geneticist Sergio Danilo Pena, be considered Black or Amerindian, for all of them have, in varied proportions, African and Amerindian genetic markers, besides, of course, European ones") and that many White Brazilians indeed have African (or Amerindian, or both) ancestrals – so a "one drop rule" isn't what the Black movement envisages,Edward Telles. Race in Another America: the significance of skin color in Brazil. p. 85.: Thus, they claim that Brazil's informal one-drop rule holds that one drop of White blood allows one to avoid being classified as Black, a tradition that they seek to revert. as it would make affirmative actions impossible; second, the main issue for the Black movement isn't "cultural", but rather economic: it is not a supposed cultural identification with Africa, but rather a situation of disadvantage, common to those who are non-White (with the exception of those of East Asian ancestry) that groups them into a "negro" category.
However, this binary division of Brazilians between "brancos" and "negros" is nevertheless seen as influenced by American one-drop rule, and attracts much criticism. For instance, sociologist Demétrio Magnoli considers the sum of pretos and pardos as Blacks an "assault" on the racial vision of Brazilians. He believes that scholars and activists of the Black movement misinterpret the ample variety of intermediate categories, characteristic of the popular system, as a result of Brazilian racism, that would cause Blacks to refuse their identity, and hide themselves in euphemisms. Uma Gota de Sangue, Editora Contexto 2008 (2008). p. 143 According to the same author, a survey about race, conducted in the town of Rio de Contas, Bahia (total population about 14,000, 58% of whom White), replaced the word "pardo" by "moreno". Not only "pardos" choose the "moreno" category, but also almost half of the people who previously reported to be White and half of the people who previously reported to be pretos also choose the moreno category. Uma Gota de Sangue, Editora Contexto 2008 (2008). p. 157. Notice how the words "moreno" and "pardo" cannot be synonymous: they refer to different sets of people.
According to a 2000 survey held in Rio de Janeiro, the entire self-reported preto population reported to have African ancestry. 86% of the self-reported "pardo" and 38% of the self-reported White population reported to have African ancestors. It is notable that 14% of the pardos (brown) from Rio de Janeiro said they have no African ancestors. This percentage may be even higher in Northern Brazil, where there was a greater ethnic contribution from Amerindian populations.
Racial classifications in Brazil are based on skin color and on other physical characteristics such as facial features, hair texture, etc. Color and genomic ancestry in Brazilians 2nd paragraph: Color (in Portuguese, cor) denotes the Brazilian equivalent of the English term race (raça) and is based on a complex phenotypic evaluation that takes into account, besides skin pigmentation, hair type, nose shape, and lip shape This is a poor indication of ancestry, because only a few genes are responsible for someone's skin color: a person who is considered White may have more African ancestry than a person who is considered Black, and vice-versa.BBC delves into Brazilians' roots accessed July 13, 2009

Conception of Black and prejudice

In Brazil, a person's "race" is based primarily on physical appearance. In Brazil it is possible for two siblings of different colors to be classified as people of different races. Children who were born to a black mother and a European father would be classified as black if their features read as African, and classified as white if their features appeared more European. With no strict criteria for racial classifications, lighter-skinned mulattoes were easily integrated into the white population, introducing a large proportion of African blood in the white Brazilian population, as well as a large proportion of European blood in the black population. This system is very different from that found in the United States, which had defined concepts of race due to the one drop rule so that people with any known African ancestry were automatically classified as Black, regardless of their skin color. Thus, many Black Americans have some degree of European ancestry, while few white Americans have African ancestry.
The Brazilian approach is criticized by geneticist Sérgio Pena: "Only a few genes are responsible for someone's skin colour, which is a very poor indication of ancestry. A white person could have more African genes than a black one or vice-versa, especially in a country like Brazil".
Sociologist Simon Schwartzman points out that to "substitute 'negro' for 'preto', suppressing the 'pardo' alternative would mean to impose unto Brazil a vision of the racial issue as a dichotomy, similar to that of the United States, which wouldn't be true."
A 2007 study found that White workers received an average monthly income almost twice that of blacks and pardos (browns). The blacks and browns earned on average 1.8 minimum wages, while the whites had a yield of 3.4 minimum wages.
Gilberto Freyre has described how few wealthy Brazilians admit to having African ancestry, with people of darker complexion from the dominant classes usually associating their skin color with an Amerindian rather than African ancestry.

=The revaluation of Black identity=

In the last years, Brazil has been undergoing a process of redemption of its Black identity. This process was also reflected in national censuses. Each year the percentage of Brazilians who self-report to be non-Whites (pretos
or pardos) is growing, (even though Ribeiro considered the Apartheid model to be worse than the Brazilian assimilationism model when other aspects are considered).
The Government of President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva created the "Ministry for racial equality" seeking the inclusion of racial issues in their policies. Among the measures taken, there are quotas in universities to Black students. These measures have been advocated by a part of Brazilian society, which believes that Blacks are socially disadvantaged and that this portion of the population needs government incentives, and the creation of a Black identity is a way to promote the necessary union of this population against poverty and discrimination. Another portion is against them. According to sociologist Demétrio Magnoli, to encourage the division of the Brazilian population in races and to privilege a certain segment of the society is very dangerous  because they would encourage the creation of racial identities, which would promote violence and segregation. Uma Gota de Sangue, Editora Contexto 2008 (2008) 

=Affirmative action issue=

In recent years, the Brazilian government has encouraged affirmative action programs for segments of the population considered to be "African-descendant"

History

Slavery

=Iberian conquerors and early slavery in the New World=

The first Spaniards and Portuguese conquerors in the New World initially enslaved American Amerindian populations. African slavery in Latin America and the Caribbean. New York: Oxford University Press, 1986. p. 22 Sometimes this labor was available through existing Native American states that fell under the control of invading Europeans; in other cases, Native American states provided the labor force. Africa and Africans in the making of the Atlantic world, 1400-1800. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998. p. 130–131 In the case of the Portuguese, the weakness of the political systems of the Tupi-Guarani Amerindian groups they conquered on the Brazilian coastline, and the inexperience of these Amerindians with systemic peasant labor, made them easy to exploit through non-coercive labor arrangements. However, several factors prevented the system of American Amerindian slavery from being sustained. For example, Native American populations were not numerous or accessible enough to meet all demands of the settlers for slaves. Africa and Africans in the making of the Atlantic world, 1400-1800. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998. p. 134 Furthermore, in many cases, exposure to Old World diseases caused the Amerindian population to diminish in number. For example, historians estimate that about 30,000 Amerindians under the rule of the Portuguese died in a smallpox epidemic in the 1560s. African slavery in Latin America and the Caribbean. New York: Oxford University Press, 1986. p. 41 Due to such constraints on the use of indigenous population as a labor force, Iberian conquerors in the New World began relying increasingly on importing slaves from Africa as a primary labor force after 1570. African slavery in Latin America and the Caribbean. New York: Oxford University Press, 1986. p. 42

=African slavery in the New World=

Over nearly three centuries from the late 1500s to the 1860s, Brazil was consistently the largest destination for African slaves in the Americas. In that period, approximately 4 million enslaved Africans were imported to Brazil. For example, gold mining in Brazil began to grow around 1690 in interior regions of Brazil, such as modern-day region of Minas Gerais. African slavery in Latin America and the Caribbean. New York: Oxford University Press, 1986. p. 68 Slaves in Brazil also worked on sugar plantations, such as those found in the first capital of Brazil—Salvador, Bahia. Other products of slave labor in Brazil during that era in Brazilian history included tobacco, textiles, and cachaça, which were often vital items traded in exchange for slaves on the African continent.

=Slave life, Creole populations, and abolition=

The nature of the work that slaves did had a direct effect on aspects of slaves' lives such as life expectancy and family formation. An example from an early inventory of African slaves (1569–71) from the plantation of Sergipe do Conde in Bahia shows that he owned nineteen males and one female. Africa and Africans in the making of the Atlantic world, 1400-1800. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998. p. 164 These uneven gender-ratios combined with the high mortality rate related to the physical duress that working in a mine or on a sugar plantation (for example) could have on a slave's body. The effect was often that many New World slave economies, including Brazil, relied on a constant importation of new slaves to replace those who had died. Africa and Africans in the making of the Atlantic world, 1400-1800. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998. p. 167
Despite the changes in the slave population demographic related to the constant importation of slaves through the 1860s, a creole generation in the African population emerged in Brazil. By 1800, Brazil had the largest single population of African and creole slaves in any one colony in America. African slavery in Latin America and the Caribbean. New York: Oxford University Press, 1986. p. 81 In 1888 Brazil abolished slavery.

=Travel=

In Africa, about 40% of Blacks died on the route between the areas of capture and the African coast. Another 15% died in the ships crossing the Atlantic Ocean between Africa and Brazil. From the Atlantic coast, the journey could take from 33 to 43 days. From Mozambique it could take as many as 76 days. Once in Brazil, from 10 to 12% of the slaves also died in the places where they were taken to be bought by their future masters. In consequence, only 45% of the Africans captured in Africa to become slaves in Brazil survived. 1808. São Paulo, Editora Planeta, 2007. ISBN 978-85-7665-320-2. Not available online. 

=Violence and resistance=

Although there is a myth that the slavery in Brazil was more lenient, the reports of colonial chroniclers show the opposite. recorded the extreme violence and sadism of White women against female slaves, usually due to jealousy or to prevent a relationship between their husbands and the slaves.
Slaves resisted against slavery during all the centuries it lasted. The most frequent form of resistance was flight, which often led to death.

Origins

The Africans brought to Brazil belonged to two major groups: the West African and the Bantu people.
West African people were sent in large scale to Bahia.
Bantu people were brought from Angola, the Congo region and the Shona kingdoms of Zimbabwe and Mozambique and sent in large scale to Rio de Janeiro, Minas Gerais, and Northeastern Brazil.
Gilberto Freyre noted the major differences between these groups. Some Sudanese peoples, such as Hausa, Fula and others, were Islamic and spoke Arabic and many of them could read and write in this language. Among Muslim slaves were brought from northern Mozambique. Freyre noted that many slaves were better educated than their masters, because many Muslim slaves were literate in Arabic, while many Portuguese Brazilian masters could not read or write in Portuguese.
Despite the large influx of Islamic slaves, most of the slaves in Brazil were brought from the Bantu regions of the Atlantic coast of Africa where today Congo and Angola are located, and also from Mozambique. from Angola were nomadic and did not know agriculture.

Image:Rugendas - Escravos de Benguela e Congo.jpg|Africans from Benguela and Congo
Image:Rugendas - Escravos de Cabinda, Quiloa, Rebola e Mina.jpg|Africans from  Cabinda, Kilwa, Rebolo and Minna
Image:Rugendas - Escravos de Moçambique.jpg|Africans from Mozambique
Image:Rugendas - Escravos Benguela, Angola, Congo, Monjolo.jpg|Africans from  Benguela, Angola, Congo and Monjolo

Abolition of Slavery

According to Petrônio Domingues, by 1887 the slave struggles pointed to a real possibility of widespread insurrection. On October 23, in São Paulo, for instance, there were violent confrontations between the police and rioting Blacks, who chanted "long life freedom" and "death to the slaveowners". Uma história não contada: negro, racismo e branqueamento em São Paulo. p. 73. The president of the province, Rodrigues Alves, reported the situation as following:
Uprisings erupted in Itu, Campinas, Indaiatuba, Amparo, Piracicaba and Capivari; ten thousand fugitive slaves grouped in Santos. Flights were happening in daylight, guns were spotted among the fugitives, who, instead of hiding from police, seemed ready to engage in confrontation.
It was as a response to such situation that, on May 13, 1888, slavery was abolished, as a means to restore order and the control of the ruling class,Petrônio Domingues. Uma história não contada: negro, racismo e branqueamento em São Paulo. p. 76. in a situation in which the slave system was almost completely disorganised.
As an abolitionist newspaper, O Rebate, put it, ten years later,

Evolution of the Black population in Brazil

Before abolition, the growth of the black population was mainly due to the acquisition of new slaves from Africa. In Brazil, the black population had a negative growth. This was due to the low life expectancy of the slaves, which was around 7 years. O Povo Brasileiro, Companhia de Bolso, fourth reprint, 2008 (2008). 
According to Darcy Ribeiro the process of miscegenation between whites and blacks in Brazil, in contrast to an idealized racial democracy and a peaceful integration, was a process of sexual domination, in which the white man imposed an unequal relationship using violence because of his prime condition in society. As an official wife or as a concubine or subjected to a condition of sexual slave, the black woman was the responsible for the growth of the "parda" population.
Historian Manolo Florentino refutes the idea that a large part of the Brazilian people is a result of the forced relationship between the rich Portuguese colonizer and the Amerindian or African slaves. According to him, most of the Portuguese settlers in Brazil were poor adventurers from Northern Portugal who immigrated to Brazil alone. Most of them were men (the proportion was eight or nine men for each woman) and then it was natural that they had relationships with the Amerindian or Black women. According to him the mixture of races in Brazil, more than a sexual domination of the rich Portuguese master over the poor slaves, was a mixture between the poor Portuguese settlers with the Amerindian and Black women.
The Brazilian population of more evident black physiognomy is more strongly present along the coast, due to the high concentration of slaves working on sugar cane plantations. Another region that had a strong presence of Africans was the mining areas in the center of Brazil. Gilberto Freyre wrote that the states with strongest African presence were Bahia and Minas Gerais. Freyre wrote, however, that there's no region in Brazil where the black people have not penetrated. Many blacks fled to the hinterland of Brazil, including the Northern region, and met Amerindian and Mameluco populations. Many of these acculturated blacks were accepted in these communities and taught them the Portuguese language and the European culture. In these areas the blacks were "agents for transmitting European culture" to those isolated communities in Brazil. Many blacks mixed with the Amerindian and caboclo women.

Geographic distribution of Black Brazilians

As of 2007, the Brazilian Metropolitan Area with the largest percentage of people reported as Black was Salvador, Bahia, with 1,869,550 Pardo people (53.8%) and 990,375 pretos (28.5%). The state of Bahia has also the largest percentage of "pardos" (62.9%) and pretos (15.7%).

Genetic studies

A recent genetic study of Black Brazilians made for BBC Brasil analysed the DNA of self-reported Blacks from São Paulo.
The research analyzed the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), that is present in all human beings and passed down with only minor mutations through the maternal line. The other is the Y chromosome, that is present only in males and passed down with only minor mutations through the paternal line. Both can show from what part of the world a matrilineal or patrilineal ancestor of a person came from, but one can have in mind that they are only a fraction of the human genome, and reading ancestry from Y chromosome and mtDNA only tells 1/23rd the story, since humans have 23 chromosome pairs in the cellular DNA.DNAPrint Genomics Genealogy website
Analyzing the Y chromosome, which comes from male ancestors through paternal line, it was concluded that half (50%) of Brazilian "negros" Y chromosomes come from Europe, 48% come from Africa and 1.6% come from Native Americans. Analyzing their mitochondrial DNA, that comes from female ancestors though maternal line, 85% of them come from Africa, 12.5% come from Native Americans and 2.5% come from Europe.Afrobras – DNA do negro
The high level of European ancestry in black Brazilians through paternal line exists because, for much of Brazil's History, there were more Caucasian males than Caucasian females. So inter-racial relationships between Caucasian males and Sub-Saharan African or Native American females were widespread.
Over 75% of Caucasians from North and Northeastern Brazil would have over 10% Sub-Saharan African genes, according to this particular study. Even in Southeastern and Southern Brazil, regions which received large waves of European immigration beginning in the 1820s and growing strongly in the late nineteenth century, 49% of the Caucasian population would have over 10% Sub-Saharan African genes, according to that study. Thus, 86% of Brazilians would have at least 10% of genes that came from Africa. The researchers however were cautious about its conclusions: "Obviously these estimates were made by extrapolation of experimental results with relatively small samples and, therefore, their confidence limits are very ample". A new autosomal study from 2011, also led by Sérgio Pena, but with nearly 1000 samples this time, from all over the country, shows that in most Brazilian regions most Brazilians "whites" are less than 10% African in ancestry, and it also shows that the "pardos" are predominantly European in ancestry, the European ancestry being therefore the main component in the Brazilian population, in spite of a very high degree of African ancestry and significant Native American contribution. Other autosomal studies (see some of them below) show a European predominance in the Brazilian population.
Another study (based on blood polymorphisms, from 1981) carried out in one thousand individuals from Porto Alegre city, Southern Brazil, and 760 from Natal city, Northeastern Brazil, found whites of Porto Alegre had 8% of African alleles and in Natal the ancestry of the samples total was characterized as 58% White, 25% Black, and 17% Amerindian". This study found that persons identified as White or Pardo in Natal have similar ancestries, a dominant European ancestry, while persons identified as White in Porto Alegre have an overwhelming majority of European ancestry.
According to an autosomal DNA genetic study from 2011, both "whites" and "pardos" from Fortaleza have a predominantly degree of European ancestry (>70%), with minor but important African and Native American contributions. "Whites" and "pardos" from Belém and Ilhéus also were found to be pred. European in ancestry, with minor Native American and African contributions.
According to another study conducted on a school in the poor periphery of Rio de Janeiro, autosomal DNA study (from 2009), the "pardos" there were found to be on average over 80% European, and the "whites" (who thought of themselves as "very mixed") were found out to carry very little Amerindian and/or African admixtures. "The results of the tests of genomic ancestry are quite different from the self made estimates of European ancestry", say the researchers. In general, the test results showed that European ancestry is far more important than the students thought it would be. The "pardos" for example thought of themselves as 1/3 European, 1/3 African and 1/3 Amerindian before the tests, and yet their ancestry was determined to be at over 80% European. The "blacks" (pretos) of the periphery of Rio de Janeiro, according to this study, thought of themselves as predominantly African before the study and yet they turned out predominantly European (at 52%), the African contribution at 41% and the Native American 7%.ensp.br/informe/anexos/ric.pdf
According to another autosomal DNA study (see table), those who identified as Whites in Rio de Janeiro turned out to have 86.4% – and self identified pardos 68.1% – European ancestry on average (autosomal). Pretos were found out to have on average 41.8% European ancestry

Another study (autosomal DNA study from 2010) found out that that European ancestry predominates in the Brazilian population as a whole ("whites", "pardos" and "blacks" altogether). European ancestry is dominant throughout Brazil at nearly 80%, except for the Southern part of Brazil, where the European heritage reaches 90%. "A new portrayal of each ethnicity contribution to the DNA of Brazilians, obtained with samples from the five regions of the country, has indicated that, on average, European ancestors are responsible for nearly 80% of the genetic heritage of the population. The variation between the regions is small, with the possible exception of the South, where the European contribution reaches nearly 90%. The results, published by the scientific magazine 'American Journal of Human Biology' by a team of the Catholic University of Brasília, show that, in Brazil, physical indicators such as skin colour, colour of the eyes and colour of the hair have little to do with the genetic ancestry of each person, which has been shown in previous studies"(regardless of census classification)DNA de brasileiro é 80% europeu, indica estudo. "Ancestry informative SNPs can be useful to estimate individual and population biogeographical ancestry. Brazilian population is characterized by a genetic background of three parental populations (European, African, and Brazilian Native Amerindians) with a wide degree and diverse patterns of admixture. In this work we analyzed the information content of 28 ancestry-informative SNPs into multiplexed panels using three parental population sources (African, Amerindian, and European) to infer the genetic admixture in an urban sample of the five Brazilian geopolitical regions. The SNPs assigned apart the parental populations from each other and thus can be applied for ancestry estimation in a three hybrid admixed population. Data was used to infer genetic ancestry in Brazilians with an admixture model. Pairwise estimates of F(st) among the five Brazilian geopolitical regions suggested little genetic differentiation only between the South and the remaining regions.'' Estimates of ancestry results are consistent with the heterogeneous genetic profile of Brazilian population, with a major contribution of European ancestry (0.771) followed by African (0.143) and Amerindian contributions (0.085). The described multiplexed SNP panels can be useful tool for bioanthropological studies but it can be mainly valuable to control for spurious results in genetic association studies in admixed populations."
 It is important to note that "the samples came from free of charge paternity test takers, thus as the researchers made it explicit: "the paternity tests were free of charge, the population samples involved people of variable socioeconomic strata, although ''likely to be leaning slightly
towards the ''pardo'' group''". According to it the total European, African and Native American contributions to the Brazilian population are:
In support of the dominant European heritage of Brazil, according to another autosomal DNA study (from 2009) conducted on a school in the poor periphery of Rio de Janeiro the "pardos" there were found to be on average over 80% European, and the "whites" (who thought of themselves as "very mixed") were found out to carry very little Amerindian and/or African admixtures. "The results of the tests of genomic ancestry are quite different from the self made estimates of European ancestry", say the researchers. In general, the test results showed that European ancestry is far more important than the students thought it would be. The "pardos" for example thought of themselves as 1/3 European, 1/3 African and 1/3 Amerindian before the tests, and yet their ancestry was determined to be at over 80% European. The "blacks" (pretos) of the periphery of Rio de Janeiro, according to this study, thought of themselves as predominantly African before the study and yet they turned out predominantly European (at 52%), the African contribution at 41% and the Native American 7%.
An autosomal study from 2013, with nearly 1300 samples from all of the Brazilian regions, found a pred. degree of European ancestry combined with African and Native American contributions, in varying degrees. 'Following an increasing North to South gradient, European ancestry was the most prevalent in all urban populations (with values up to 74%). The populations in the North consisted of a significant proportion of Native American ancestry that was about two times higher than the African contribution. Conversely, in the Northeast, Center-West and Southeast, African ancestry was the second most prevalent. At an intrapopulation level, all urban
populations were highly admixed, and most of the variation in ancestry proportions was observed between individuals within each population rather than among population'.plosone.action?uri=info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.0075145&representation=PDF
According to another autosomal DNA study from 2009, the Brazilian population, in all regions of the country, was also found out to be predominantly European: "all the Brazilian samples (regions) lie more closely to the European group than to the African populations or to the Mestizos from Mexico".ncbi.nih.7% European 23.3% African 10.0% Amerindian) Northern Brazil (60.6% European 21.3% African 18.1% Amerindian) Central West (66,3% European 21.7% African 12.0% Amerindian) Southeast Brazil (60.7% European 32.0% African 7.3% Amerindian) Southern Brazil (81.5% European 9.3% African 9.2% Amerindian). According to it the total European, African and Native American contributions to the Brazilian population are:
An autosomal study from 2011 (with nearly almost 1000 samples from all over the country, "whites", "pardos" and "blacks" included, according to their respective proportions) has also concluded that European ancestry is the predominant ancestry in Brazil, accounting for nearly 70% of the ancestry of the population: "In all regions studied, the European ancestry was predominant, with proportions ranging from 60.6% in the Northeast to 77.7% in the South". The 2011 autosomal study samples came from blood donors (the lowest classes constitute the great majority of blood donors in Brazil Brazilian homogeneity is, therefore, greater within regions than between them:
According to another study from 2008, by the University of Brasília (UnB), European ancestry dominates in the whole of Brazil (in all regions), accounting for 65,90% of the heritage of the population, followed by the African contribution (24,80%) and the Native American (9,3%).bce.br/tedesimplificado/tde_busca/arquivo.php?codArquivo=3873
According to an autosomal DNA study (from 2003) focused on the composition of the Brazilian population as a whole, "European contribution ... is highest in the South (81% to 82%), and lowest in the North (68% to 71%). The African component is lowest in the South (11%), while the highest values are found in the Southeast (18%-20%). Extreme values for the Amerindian fraction were found in the South and Southeast (7%-8%) and North (17%-18%)". The researchers were cautious with the results as their samples came from paternity test takers which may have skewed the results partly.hereditas.br/pdfs/AJHB-Callegari-Jacquesetal2003.pdf
São Paulo state, the most populous state in Brazil, with about 40 million people, showed the following composition, according to an autosomal study from 2006: European genes account for 79% of the heritage of the people of São Paulo, 14% are of African origin, and 7% Native American.wiley.1002/ajhb.20474/abstract A more recent study, from 2013, found the following composition in São Paulo state: 61,9% European, 25,5% African and 11,6% native American.plosone.1371/journal.0075145#pone-0075145-g004
Several other older studies have suggested that European ancestry is the main component in all Brazilian regions. Several other older studies have suggested that European ancestry is the main component in all Brazilian regions. A study from 1965, Methods of Analysis of a Hybrid Population (Human Biology, vol 37, number 1), led by the geneticists D. F. Roberts e R. W. Hiorns, found out the average the Northeastern Brazilian to be predominantly European in ancestry (65%), with minor but important African and Native American contributions (25% and 9%).

Image:Rugendas - Escravos Crioulos.jpg|Crioulo (Brazilian born) slaves
Image:Debret - Esclaves Nègres de Differénts Nations.jpg|Slave women from various African regions wearing European-style hairdressing
Image:Debret - Diferentes Nacoes Negras.jpg|African slaves from Monjolo, Elmina, Mozambique, Benguela e Calava

In 2007 BBC Brasil launched the project Raízes Afro-Brasileiras (Afro-Brazilian Roots), in which they analyzed the genetic ancestry of nine famous Brazilian blacks and "pardos". Three tests were based on analysis of different parts of their DNA: an examination of paternal ancestry, maternal ancestry and the genomic ancestry, allowing to estimate the percentage of African, European and Amerindian genes in the composition of an individual.
Of the 9 people analyzed, 3 of them had more European ancestry than African one, while the other 6 people had more African ancestry, with varying degrees of European and Amerindian admixture. The African admixture varied from 19.5% in actress Ildi Silva to 99.3% in singer Milton Nascimento. The European admixture varied from 0.4% in Nascimento to 70% in Silva. The Amerindian admixture from 0.3% in Nascimento to 25.4% in soccer player Obina.

Image:Sandrasa21032007.7% African, 2.1% European and 1.1% Amerindian
Image:Again_Seu_Jorge.1% African, 12.9% European and 2% Amerindian
Image:Djavan_en_Chile_cropped.1% European and 4.9% Amerindian
Image:Obina.4% African, 25.4% Amerindian and 13.2% European
Image:Daiane_dos_Santos_13072007.8% European, 39.7% African and 19.6% Amerindian
File:Neguinho da Beija-flor.1% European, 31.5% African and 1.4% Amerindian

Media

Pretos and "pardos" have a low representation in the Brazilian media. Blacks are under-represented in telenovelas, which have the largest audience of Brazilian television. The Brazilian soap operas, as well as throughout Latin America, are accused of hiding the Black and Amerindian population and to make almost entirely white casts, usually as upper-middle-class people.Soap operas on Latin TV are lily white[ref]
The Blond, Blue-Eyed Face of Spanish TV Article about Spanish television, has nothing to do with Brazil.[/ref]Skin tone consciousness in Asian and Latin American populations Article about Latin American and Asian immigrants in the United States, doesn't have one line about Brazil. In 1975 the telenovela Gabriela was produced, based on a book by Jorge Amado, who described Gabriela, the main character, as a mulata. But to play Gabriela on television Rede Globo choose a White actress, Sônia Braga, who is an olive-skinned woman. The producer claimed he "did not find any talented Black actress" for the role of Gabriela. In 2001 Rede Globo produced Porto dos Milagres, also based on a book by Jorge Amado. In the book Amado described a Bahia full of blacks. In the Rede Globo's soap opera, on the other hand, almost all the cast was white.96.
In the fashion world blacks and "pardos" are also poorly represented. In Brazil there is a clear predominance of models from the South of Brazil, mostly of European descent. Many black models complained of the difficulty of finding work in the fashion world in Brazil.

Religion

Most blacks are Christians, mainly Catholics.
These black slaves would summon their gods, called Orixas, Voduns or Inkices with chants and dances they had brought from Africa. These religions have been persecuted in the past, mainly due to Catholic influence. However, Brazilian government has legalized them. In current practice, Umbanda followers leave offerings of food, candles and flowers in public places for the spirits. The Candomblé terreiros are more hidden from general view, except in famous festivals such as Iemanjá Festival and the Waters of Oxalá in the Northeast. From Bahia northwards there is also different practices such as Catimbo, Jurema with heavy, though not necessarily authentic, indigenous elements.
Since the late 20th Century, a large number of negros became followers of Protestant denominations, mainly Neopentecostal churches. Among Brazil's predominant ethnicities, Blacks make up the largest proportion of Pentecostal Protestants, while Whites make up the largest group of non-Pentecostal Protestants. As mentioned, some black Brazilians are Muslims of Sunni sect whose ancestors were called Malê.

Cuisine

The influence of African cuisine in Brazil is expressed in a wide variety of dishes. In the state of Bahia, an exquisite cuisine evolved when cooks improvised on African and traditional Portuguese dishes using locally available ingredients. Typical dishes include Vatapá and Moqueca, both with seafood and dendê palm oil (). This heavy oil extracted from the fruits of an African palm tree is one of the basic ingredients in Bahian or Afro-Brazilian cuisine, adding flavor and bright orange color to foods. There is no equivalent substitute, but it is available in markets specializing in Brazilian or African imports.
Feijoada is the national dish of Brazil (for over 300 years). It is basically a mixture of black beans, pork and farofa (lightly roasted coarse cassava manioc flour). It started as a Portuguese dish that the African slaves built upon, made out of cheap ingredients: pork ears, feet and tail, beans and manioc flour. It has been adopted by all the other cultural regions, and there are hundreds of ways to make it.
Acarajé is a dish made from peeled black-eyed peas formed into a ball and then deep-fried in dendê (palm oil).  It is found in Nigerian and Brazilian cuisine. The dish is traditionally encountered in Brazil's northeastern state of Bahia, especially in the city of Salvador, often as street food, and is also found in most parts of Nigeria, Ghana and the Republic of Benin.

Sports

Capoeira

Capoeira is a martial art developed initially by African slaves and is always played with music. Recently, the sport has been popularized by the addition of Capoeira performed in various computer games and movies, and Capoeira music has been featured in modern pop music (see Capoeira in popular culture).

Football

Football is the most important national sport in Brazil, until recently the only to be practiced in truly professional way, and even nowadays the one that has most professional practitioners, infrastructure, and public. Although it has been, in its early development, an elite amateur sport, whose clubs discriminated against Blacks, it soon became a popular sport, with a huge following. The need to win competitions eventually forced football clubs to adopt professionalism, and, consequently, to hire the best players, regardless of race.Mário Filho. O Negro no Futebol Brasileiro
Soccer was quickly dominated by blacks and "pardos", and it became – and still remains – a mainstream way of social ascension for poor boys, especially blacks and "pardos" who had fewer opportunities in education or conventional labour.
The International Federation of Football History & Statistics Player of the CenturyIFFHS. IFFHS' Century Elections list of the 20 best Brazilian players of the 20th Century includes 6 black (Pelé (#1), Arthur Friedenreich (#5), Leônidas da Silva (#8), Luís Pereira (#15), Domingos da Guia (#17), and Jairzinho (#19)) and 9 "pardo" (Garrincha (#2), Zizinho (#4), Didi (#7), Nilton Santos (#9), Ronaldo (#9), Romário (#11), Ademir da Guia (#14), Carlos Alberto Torres (#16) and Ademir (#18)) players, compared to only 5 Whites (Zico, Tostão, Falcão, Rivelino and Bebeto).

Music

The music of Brazil is a mixture of Portuguese, Amerindian, and African music, making a wide variety of styles. Brazil is well known for the rhythmic liveliness of its music as in its Samba dance music. This is largely because Brazilian slave owners allowed their slaves to continue their heritage of playing drums (unlike U.S. slave owners who feared use of the drum for communications).

Literature

Many important names of Brazilian literature are or have been blacks or "pardos". Machado de Assis, generally considered the most important Brazilian fictional writer, was himself "pardo". Other remarkable writers include: João da Cruz e Souza, symbolist poet of refined inspiration; Lima Barreto, novelist, master of satyre and sarcasm, and pioneer of social criticism; João Ubaldo Ribeiro, novelist and short story writer; João do Rio, fine chronicler, José do Patrocínio, journalist; Paulo Leminski, poet.

Important or famous Black Brazilians

In spite of strong prejudice, many black Brazilians and "pardos" have been prominent in Brazilian society. This is particularly true of fields where neither academic achievement nor material investment is decisive: the arts, particularly music and sports. From the colonial times, "pardos" as Father José Maurício Nunes GarciaRicardo Bernardes. José Maurício Nunes Garcia e a Real Capela de D. João VI no Rio de Janeiro. p. 42. (baroque conductor and composer) or AleijadinhoDomingos Tavares. Sensibilidade e cultura na obra arquitectónica do Aleijadinho. p. 120. (outstanding sculptor and architect) attained high prestige as artists.
Other remarkable artists include Machado de Assis,Hélio A. G. Teive et alli. A neuro-psiquiatria em Machado de Assis. p. 386. arguably Brazil's most important writer, whose novels are the kernel of the Brazilian canon, João da Cruz e Souza,Uelinton Farias Alves. Cruz e Sousa: Dante Negro do Brasil. symbolist poet of refined inspiration, Lima Barreto, Jorge Ben Jor,Luciana Xavier de Oliveira. A Gênese do Samba-Rock: Por um Mapeamento Genealógico do Gênero. p. 11. Gilberto Gil,Ely de Oliveira. O dia Nacional da Consciência Negra & Adão e Eva p. 37. have built the Brazilian musical identity.
Another field where black Brazilians and "pardos" have excelled is soccer: Pelé,Ely de Oliveira. O dia Nacional da Consciência Negra & Adão e Eva. p. 38. arguably the most complete soccer player ever, Garrincha,Mário Filho (Mário Rodrigues). O negro no futebol brasileiro. p. 16. right-forward, exceptional dribbler, Leônidas da Silva, nicknamed "Black Diamond", Arthur Friedenreich, Ademir da Guia,Décio Pignatari. Contracomunicação. p. 196. are well known historic names of Brazilian soccer; Ronaldo,Nei Lopes. Enciclopédia brasileira da diáspora africana. p. 585. Ronaldinho,Nei Lopes. Enciclopédia brasileira da diáspora africana. p. 585 Romário, Robinho and many others continue this tradition. Important athletes in other sports include Daiane dos SantosNei Lopes. Enciclopédia brasileira da diáspora africana. p. 603. (gymnastics), known for the invention of original movements, João Carlos de OliveiraMariana Kneipp. Há dez anos, o Brasil perdia João do Pulo. In Plugmania. Jadel Gregório, Nelson Prudêncio,Nei Lopes. Enciclopédia brasileira da diáspora africana. p. 545. Ademar Ferreira da Silva. Next to last paragraph.
Particularly important among sports is capoeira, itself a creation of Black Brazilians; important "Mestres" (masters) include Mestre Amen Santo, Mestre Barba Branca, Mestre Bimba,Nei Lopes. Enciclopédia brasileira da diáspora africana. p. 120. Mestre Cobra Mansa, Mestre João Grande, Mestre João Pequeno, Mestre Jogo de Dentro, Mestre Moraes, Mestre Pastinha,Nei Lopes. Enciclopédia brasileira da diáspora africana. p. 516. Mestre Pé de Chumbo.
Since the end of the military dictatorship, the political participation of black Brazilians and "pardos" has increased. The first female senator, Benedita da Silva,Ely de Oliveira. O dia Nacional da Consciência Negra & Adão e Eva. p. 37. is Black; other important politicians include Senator Paulo Paim,Revista Afro. Paulo Paim, de metalúrgico a senador former mayor of São Paulo Celso Pitta, former Senator Marina Silva, former governor of Rio Grande do Sul, Alceu Collares,Nei Lopes. Enciclopédia brasileira da diáspora africana. p. 197. former governor of Espírito Santo, Albuíno Azeredo. Enciclopédia brasileira da diáspora africana. p. 84. One of the justices of the Supremo Tribunal Federal, Joaquim Barbosa, is Black. There is only one Black Justice at the TST (Tribunal Superior do Trabalho) who is Minister Carlos Alberto Reis de Paula.
Despite many obstacles, black Brazilians and "pardos" have also excelled as actors, such as Lázaro Ramos,Nei Lopes. Enciclopédia brasileira da diáspora africana. p. 558. Ruth de Souza,Geledés Instituto da Mulher Negra. Ruth de Souza - A nossa estrela maior. Zózimo Bulbul, Milton Gonçalves,Nei Lopes. Enciclopédia brasileira da diáspora africana. p. 302. Mussum, Taís Araújo,Nei Lopes. Enciclopédia brasileira da diáspora africana. p. 69. Zezé Motta. Enciclopédia brasileira da diáspora africana. p. 454.

Image:Daiane dos Santos 13072007.jpg|Daiane dos Santos
File:Neguinho da Beija-flor. Enciclopédia brasileira da diáspora africana. p. 585. musician 
Image:Djavan en Chile cropped.240. musician
Image:Sandrasa21032007.jpg|Sandra de Sá, singer
Image:Obina.jpg|Obina,Obina: "Sou negro e tenho orgulho" soccer player
Image:Beneditadasilva11012007.jpg|Benedita da Silva
Image:Paulopaim2006.jpg|Paulo Paim
File:Joaquim barbosa stf.jpg|Joaquim Barbosa
Image:Machado assis.jpg|Joaquim Maria Machado de Assis
Image:Nilo Peçanha 02. Enciclopédia brasileira da diáspora africana. p. 520.
Image:Cruz e Sousa.jpg|João da Cruz e Sousa
Image:Milton Santos (TV Brasil). Enciclopédia brasileira da diáspora africana. p. 605.
Image:Pelé. O dia Nacional da Consciência Negra & Adão e Eva. p. 38.
Image:Ronaldinho061115. Enciclopédia brasileira da diáspora africana. p. 585.
Image:Romário2004.jpg|Romário
Image:Robinho061115-2.jpg|Robinho
Image:Brazil.01.jpg|Gilberto Gil
Image:Seu Jorge Coachella. Seu Jorge: 'Se fosse 100% negro, lutaria por indenização'
Image:DJMarky.jpg|DJ Marky
Image:Lázaro Ramos 13072007. Enciclopédia brasileira da diáspora africana. p. 558.
Image:City of god.jpg Alexandre Rodrigues
Image:Margareth menezes foto. Enciclopédia brasileira da diáspora africana. p. 435.
File:Anderson Silva. Eu acredito em educação.
File:Taís Araújo, 2013. Enciclopédia brasileira da diáspora africana. p. 69.
File:Fe Garay, Grand Prix Łódź, Poland.jpg|Fernanda Garay
File:Joao Candido.jpg|João Cândido Felisberto with sailors and reporters on the last day of the Revolt of the Lash
File:Joaquim barbosa stf.jpg|Joaquim Barbosa
File:Fabiana Marcelino Claudino.jpg|Fabiana Claudino





Further reading




