[[Cracker Barrel]]

CATEGORIES: 1969 establishments in Tennessee, Companies established in 1969, Companies listed on NASDAQ, Lebanon, Tennessee, Organizations based in Tennessee, Restaurant chains in the United States, Restaurants established in 1969, Restaurants in Tennessee, Retail companies of the United States, Theme restaurants, Discrimination against LGBT people

Cracker Barrel Old Country Store, Inc. is an American chain of combined restaurant and gift stores with a Southern country theme. The company was founded by Dan Evins in 1969; its first store was in Lebanon, Tennessee, which remains the company headquarters. The chain's  stores were at first positioned near highway exits in the Southeastern and Midwestern US, but it expanded across the country during the 1990s and 2000s.  the chain operates 620 stores in 42 states.
Cracker Barrel's menu is based on traditional Southern cuisine, with appearance and decor designed to resemble an old-fashioned general store. Each restaurant features a front porch lined with wooden rocking chairs, a stone fireplace, and artifacts from the local area. Cracker Barrel is known for its partnerships with country music performers, and has received attention for its charitable activities, such as its assistance of victims of Hurricane Katrina and injured war veterans.
During the 1990s, the company was the subject of controversy for its official stance against gay and lesbian employees and for discriminatory practices against African American and female employees. A U.S. Department of Justice investigation found Cracker Barrel discriminated against minority customers; patrons complained of racially segregated seating and service quality. In an agreement with the Department of Justice, Cracker Barrel has implemented non-discrimination policies, and pledged to focus on improving minority representation and civic involvement, particularly in the black community. Company shareholders added sexual orientation to the company's non-discrimination policy in 2002.

History

First location and early company history

Cracker Barrel was founded in 1969 by Dan Evins, a sales representative for Shell Oil, who developed the restaurant and gift store concept initially as a plan to improve gasoline sales. serving Southern cuisine including biscuits, grits, country ham, and turnip greens.
Evins incorporated Cracker Barrel in February 1970, and soon opened more locations. In the early 1970s, the firm leased land on gasoline station sites near interstate highways to build restaurants. These early locations all featured gas pumps on-site; during gasoline shortages in the mid to late 1970s, the firm began to build restaurants without pumps. Into the early 1980s, the company reduced the number of gas stations on-site, eventually phasing them out altogether as the company focused on its restaurant and gift sales revenues. Cracker Barrel became a publicly traded company in 1981 to raise funds for further expansion. It floated more than half a million shares, raising $4.6 million. Following the initial public offering, Cracker Barrel grew at a rate of around 20 percent per year; by 1987, the company had become a chain of more than 50 units in eight states, with annual net sales of almost $81 million.

New markets and refocus

The company grew consistently through the 1980s and 1990s, attaining a $1 billion market value by 1992. As of 1993, the chain's revenue was nearly twice that of any other family restaurant.
In 1994, the chain tested a carry-out-only store, Cracker Barrel Old Country Store Corner Market, in suburban residential neighborhoods. In addition, it expanded into new markets through the establishment of more traditional Cracker Barrel locations, the majority of them outside the South, and  tested alterations to its menus to adapt to new regions. The chain added regional dishes to its menus, including eggs and salsa in Texas and Reuben sandwiches in New York, but continued to offer its original menu items in all restaurants.
By September 1997, Cracker Barrel had 314 restaurants, and aimed to increase the number of stores by approximately 50 per year over the following five years. The firm closed its Corner Market operations in 1997, and refocused on its restaurant and gift-store locations. Its then president, Ron Magruder, stated that the chain was concentrating on strengthening its core theme, offering traditional foods and retail in a country-store setting, with good service and country music.

Recent operations

The number of combined restaurants and stores owned by Cracker Barrel increased between 1997 and 2000, to more than 420 locations. In 2000 and 2001, the company addressed staffing and infrastructure issues related to this rapid growth by implementing a more rigorous recruitment strategy and introducing new technology, including an order-placement system.

Restaurants

Food and gift shop

As a Southern-themed chain, Cracker Barrel serves traditional Southern comfort food often described as "down-home" country cooking, and sells gift items including toys and woodcrafts.

Locations, service, and decor

For much of its early history, Cracker Barrel decided to locate its restaurants along the Interstate Highway System, and the majority of its restaurants remain close to interstate and other highways. Cracker Barrel is known for the loyalty of its customers, particularly travelers who are likely to spend more at restaurants than locals.
The locations are themed around the idea of a traditional Southern U.S. general store. Items used to decorate each store are authentic artifacts, including everyday objects from the early 1900s and after.

Awards

Destinations magazine has presented the chain with awards for best chain restaurant, It was also named the "Best Family Dining" restaurant by a nationwide "Choice in Chains" consumer poll in Restaurants & Institutions magazine for 19 consecutive years.

Corporate overview

Investment and business model

Cracker Barrel restaurants are aimed at the family and casual dining market as well as retail sales. The chain also advertises to people traveling on the interstate highways, as the majority of its locations are close to highway exits. The company has promoted its cost controls to investors,
The board of directors of Cracker Barrel has repeatedly been at odds with the largest shareholder, Biglari Holdings Inc..  The poison pill was adopted after Biglari Holdings sought approval to purchase a 49.99% share of the company and join the board of directors.
Biglari Holdings purchased shares of Cracker Barrel in 2011, and has been often critical of the transparency to shareholders, overspending on advertising, lack of customer value,

Community involvement

Cracker Barrel has supported a wide range of charities through one-off donations, promotional events, and partnerships with charitable organizations.
Cracker Barrel sponsored the NASCAR Atlanta 500 race at Atlanta Motor Speedway from 1999 to 2001

Controversies

Policy toward sexual orientation

In early 1991, an intra-company memo called for employees to be dismissed if they did not display "normal heterosexual values". According to news reports, at least 11 employees were fired under the policy on a store-by-store basis from locations in Georgia and other states. After demonstrations by gay rights groups, the company ended its policy in March 1991 and stated it would not discriminate based on sexual orientation. It was not until 2002 that the proposals were successful; 58 percent of company shareholders voted in favor of the addition.
Cracker Barrel achieved the lowest score (15 out of 100) of all rated food and beverage companies in the Human Rights Campaign's 2008 Corporate Equality Index, a measure of LGBT workplace equality.
On December 20, 2013, Cracker Barrel announced it would no longer sell certain Duck Dynasty products which it was "concerned might offend some of its guests" after Phil Robertson, a star on the reality TV show, remarked in a GQ interview

Robertson also made "comments likening homosexuality to terrorism and bestiality" in the interview, and expressed views about race which attracted criticism.
On December 22, less than two days after pulling the products from its shelves, Cracker Barrel reversed its position after protests from customers.[ref]
[/ref]

Racial and sexual discrimination

In July 1999, a discrimination lawsuit was filed against Cracker Barrel by a group of former employees, who claimed that the company had discriminated against them on the grounds of race.
In 2004, an investigation by the U.S. Justice Department found evidence that Cracker Barrel had been segregating customer seating by race; seating or serving white customers before seating or serving black customers; providing inferior service to black customers, and allowing white servers to refuse to wait on black customers. The Justice Department determined that the firm had violated Title II of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. The company was required to sign a five-year agreement to introduce "effective nondiscrimination policies and procedures". The terms included new equal opportunity training; the creation of a new system to log, investigate and resolve complaints of discrimination; and  the publicizing of its non-discrimination policies. They were required to hire an outside auditor to ensure compliance with the terms of the settlement.
In 2006, Cracker Barrel paid a $2 million settlement to end a suit alleging race and sexual harassment at three Illinois restaurants.
Since the early 2000s, Cracker Barrel has provided training and resources to minority employees, to improve its image on diversity. These efforts involved beginning outreach to minority employees, along with testing a training plan to help employees whose first language is Spanish to learn English. 

Licensed products

In November 2012, Cracker Barrel licensed its name to Smithfield Foods' John Morrell division in a deal to create a line of meat products to be sold in super markets and other retail channels. In response to this contract, Kraft Foods started a trademark infringement lawsuit in February 2013. Kraft has sold cheese under the Cracker Barrel brand in retail stores since 1954. Kraft says that Cracker Barrel (store) has not made significant sales of retail food products beyond its menu, and asked that the deal be nullified by the U.S. District Court in the Northern District of Illinois.



YouTube videos




