[[Idina Menzel]]

CATEGORIES: 1971 births, 20th-century American actresses, 20th-century American singers, 20th-century composers, 21st-century American actresses, 21st-century American singers, 21st-century composers, Actresses from New Jersey, Actresses from New York City, American female singer-songwriters, American film actresses, American musical theatre actresses, American television actresses, American people of Russian-Jewish descent, American voice actresses, Circle in the Square Theatre School alumni, Hollywood Records artists, Jewish American actresses, Jewish American composers and songwriters, Jewish singers, LGBT rights activists from the United States, Living people, People from Marlboro Township, New Jersey, People from Queens, New York, People from Syosset, New York, Singers from New Jersey, Singers from New York City, Songwriters from New Jersey, Songwriters from New York, Tisch School of the Arts alumni, Tony Award winners, Warner Bros. Records artists, Writers from New York City

{{Infobox person
| name        = Idina Menzel
| image       = Idina Menzel Defense.png
| alt         = 
| caption     = Menzel performing on May 25, 2008
| image_size  = 200px
| birth_name  = Idina Mentzel
| birth_date  = 
| birth_place = Queens, New York, United States
| nationality = American
| other_names = 
| occupation  = Singer-songwriter, actress
| years_active  = 1996–present
| known_for   = 
| spouse      = 
| children    =  Walker Nathaniel Diggs
| module      = 

Idina Menzel (; born May 30, 1971) is an American actress and singer-songwriter. She rose to prominence when she originated the role of Maureen Johnson in the hit Broadway musical Rent, a role which she reprised for the 2005 feature film adaptation of the musical.
She received a Tony Award nomination in 1996 for her performance in Rent.
In 2004, she won the Tony Award for Best Leading Actress in a Musical for originating the role of Elphaba in the blockbuster Broadway musical Wicked. She made her return to Broadway in the 2014 musical If/Then. She is currently a nominee for the 2014 Tony Award for Best Leading Actress in a Musical for her performance.
Menzel is also known for her recurring role of Shelby Corcoran on the musical comedy-drama television series Glee, the 2007 Disney movie Enchanted and as the voice of Elsa the Snow Queen in the 2013 Disney animated film Frozen, which is the highest-grossing animated film of all time,  in which she sang the Academy Award-winning song "Let It Go". The song peaked at number five on the Billboard Hot 100 chart. Menzel is the only competitive Tony Award-winning actress to ever reach the top 10.

Early life

Menzel was born in Queens.  Her family lived in Syosset, New York, and New Jersey (East Brunswick, Somerset and Marlboro).
When Menzel was 15 years old, her parents divorced and she began working as a wedding and bar mitzvah singer, a job which she continued throughout her time at New York University's Tisch School of the Arts. She was friends with actor Adam Pascal before they worked together in Rent.

Theatre career

In 1995, Menzel auditioned for Rent, which became her first professional theatre job and her Broadway debut.  Rent opened off-Broadway at the New York Theatre Workshop on January 26, 1996, but it moved to Broadway's Nederlander Theatre due to its popularity. For her performance as Maureen Johnson in the original cast of the musical, Menzel received a Tony nomination as Best Featured Actress in a Musical losing to Ann Duquesnay for Bring in 'da Noise, Bring in 'da Funk.  Her final performance in the musical was on July 1, 1997.
Following the success of Rent, Menzel released her first solo album entitled Still I Can't Be Still on Hollywood Records, Menzel also originated the role of Dorothy in Summer of '42 at Goodspeed Opera House in Connecticut, starred as Sheila in the New York City Center Encores! production of Hair and appeared on Broadway as Amneris in Aida.  Menzel earned a Drama Desk Award nomination for her performance as Kate in the Manhattan Theatre Club's 2000 off-Broadway production of Andrew Lippa's The Wild Party.  Her other off-Broadway credits include the pre-Broadway run of Rent and The Vagina Monologues.
In 2003, Menzel starred with actress and singer Kristin Chenoweth on Broadway in Wicked, a musical by Stephen Schwartz and Winnie Holzman based upon Gregory Maguire's novel Wicked: The Life and Times of the Wicked Witch of the West (1995). Menzel received the 2004 Tony Award for Best Leading Actress in a Musical for her portrayal of Elphaba, the Wicked Witch of the West. During her penultimate performance of Wicked on January 8, 2005, she fell through a trap door and cracked a lower rib. The injury prevented her from performing in her final show on January 9. Menzel did, however, make a special out-of-costume appearance at that performance, performed her final song, and received a five-minute standing ovation. Menzel was replaced by Elphaba standby Shoshana Bean.
Following Wicked, Menzel appeared off-Broadway in the Public Theater's production of See What I Wanna See, a Michael John LaChiusa-penned musical whose run ended in December 2005, for which she received Drama Desk Award and Drama League Award nominations. She reprised her Tony Award-winning role as Elphaba in the West End production of Wicked when it opened at London's Apollo Victoria Theatre on September 7, 2006.  During her run, she was the highest-paid female performer in the West End at $30,000 per week.  Menzel finished her West End run on December 30, 2006. She was succeeded by Elphaba standby Kerry Ellis.
Menzel played the role of Florence in the 21st-anniversary concert of Chess at the Royal Albert Hall, London from May 12 to 13, 2008, alongside Kerry Ellis, Adam Pascal and Josh Groban.
In 2008, Menzel headlined the Powerhouse Theatre's reading of Steven Sater and Duncan Sheik's musical Nero from July 11 to 13, performing the role of Nero's mistress, Poppea.
On February 28, 2013, it was announced that Menzel would make her return to the Broadway stage, starring as Elizabeth in the new Tom Kitt and Brian Yorkey musical If/Then. The new musical, directed by Michael Greif (whom Menzel previously worked with in the original production of Rent), had its world premiere at the National Theatre in Washington, D.C., starting with previews on November 5, 2013, till November 24, 2013. Following the out-of-town tryout, the show moved to the Richard Rodgers Theatre on Broadway and began previews on March 4, 2014.  It officially opened on March 30, 2014.blogs.com/2013/02/28/idina-menzel-to-return-to-broadway-next-spring-in-a-new-musical/.  The New York Times. February 28, 2013.com/news/article/180213-New-Musical-If-Then-Starring-Tony-Winner-Idina-Menzel-Will-Arrive-at-Broadways-Richard-Rodgers-Theatre-in-March-2014.. For her performance, Menzel was nominated for her second Tony Award for Best Leading Actress in a Musical.2014 Tony Award Nominations - The Complete List; A GENTLEMAN'S GUIDE Leads With 10! broadwayworld.com, Retrieved April 30, 2014

Film, television, recording and singing career

Menzel's film roles include appearances in Just a Kiss, Kissing Jessica Stein, The Tollbooth, Water, Ask the Dust, Enchanted, Frozen, and Rent, in which she and five other original cast members reprised their stage roles. As a singer, Menzel is known for her wide vocal range and her use of the 'belt' technique.
Menzel performed at the 1998 Lilith Fair summer concert festival and  continues to write and perform original music.  She has toured extensively and frequently performs in various venues throughout New York City. She produced and released her debut album, Still I Can't Be Still, for Hollywood Records in 1998. One single from the album, "Minuet", made the Radio & Records CHR/Pop Tracks chart at #48 in October 1998.
Her second album, Here, was released independently by Zel Records in 2004.  Menzel has contributed to soundtracks, including those for the film The Other Sister and the ABC television dramedy Desperate Housewives. She also appears on Ray Charles's album Genius and Friends, which was released in 2005, on the track "I Will Be There." In 2007, she appeared on the Beowulf soundtrack singing the end credits song, "A Hero Comes Home". Also in 2007, Menzel's powerful singing voice led her to be asked to  accompany the baritone British X-Factor runner-up Rhydian Roberts on his debut album, duetting on the song "What If".
Her third solo album, I Stand, was released on January 29, 2008. It includes many new songs, including the lead single, "Brave", the title track "I Stand", and a song released on EP, "Gorgeous".  The album debuted at #58 in the Billboard 200, making it the first solo album by Menzel to make the charts. There are five versions of this album: the original version, the special limited edition, the iTunes version, the Barnes & Noble edition, and the Borders edition. Menzel wrote many of the songs on her album.
On April 1, 2008, Menzel kicked off her 2008-2009 "I Stand Tour" in support of her new album performing four sold-out legs. The concert at Rose Hall at Lincoln Center in New York City was filmed for the PBS television series Soundstage. Menzel was joined by special guests, superstar Josh Groban and saxophonist Ravi Coltrane.
On November 11, 2008, Menzel released "Hope", written by Paul Hampton, benefitting Stand Up to Cancer. On November 27, 2008, she performed "I Stand" on the M&M Candies float as part of the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade.
Menzel has a recurring guest star role in the television series Glee, playing Shelby Corcoran, the coach of the rival glee club Vocal Adrenaline.  When the series first premiered, Glee fans had noted a strong physical resemblance between Menzel and Lea Michele who portrays the character Rachel Berry.  According to her husband, actor Taye Diggs, Menzel expressed interest in possibly guest starring as the biological mother of Rachel.   People.  December 3, 2009.  The character was introduced in the April 13, 2010, episode "Hell-O", and it was revealed in the May 18, 2010, episode, "Dream On", that Shelby is, in fact, Rachel's biological mother, having answered an ad from Rachel's two gay dads looking for a 'mother' to help them have a baby. Lea Michele and Idina Menzel sing together "I Dreamed a Dream" from Les Misérables and "Poker Face" originally by Lady Gaga. Menzel returned to Glee in Season 3 episode "I Am Unicorn", her role this time as a teacher causing trouble for Rachel, Quinn, Puck, and former flame Will Schuster.
On July 19, 2010, Menzel performed "Defying Gravity" and "What I Did For Love" in front of President Barack Obama and First Lady Michelle Obama  at A Broadway Celebration: In Performance at the White House. The concert aired on PBS October 20, 2010."Nathan Lane, Idina Menzel, Brian d'Arcy James and More to Perform Broadway Celebration at White House". Broadway. July 14, 2010.
In April 2010, Menzel returned to concert stage embarking on her "Barefoot at the Symphony Tour", which she was accompanied by major symphony orchestras. Her performances included collaborations with the New York Philharmonic, the Boston Pops Orchestra, and the North Carolina Symphony. In October 2011, Menzel returned to London to perform a one night only concert in the United Kingdom at the Royal Albert Hall with the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra with Marvin Hamlisch conducting. Menzel's concert stop in Toronto was filmed at The Royal Conservatory of Music on November 17 and 18, 2011, for her second PBS special. She was accompanied by the Kitchener-Waterloo Symphony  with Marvin Hamlisch conducting and special guest Taye Diggs, Menzel's husband. Idina Menzel Live: Barefoot at the Symphony was released as a live CD and DVD and air on PBS in March 2012."Idina Menzel Live: Barefoot at the Symphony to Premiere on Chicago's PBS January 9; March 3 Nationwide". BroadwayWorld. January 9, 2012.
Menzel announced she will continue live performances in 2012.  The first date she announced was July 8, 2012, at Ravinia Festival near Chicago, Illinois."Idina to Play Ravinia". Idina Menzel official website. January 5, 2012.  She made her Carnegie Hall solo debut (originally on October 29, 2012).  However, due to Hurricane Sandy's impact on New York City, it was postponed until January 13, 2013.idinamenzel.cfm/pk/view/cd/NAA/cdid/521460/pid/400025
Menzel toured Australia in June 2013 with shows in South Australia, Melbourne, Brisbane and two at the Sydney Opera House.
Menzel voiced the character of Queen Elsa in the Disney-animated film Frozen, released on November 22, 2013.
She was invited to perform "Let It Go" at the 86th Academy Awards in March 2014, where the song won the Academy Award for Best Original Song. When John Travolta announced her before she sang the song, he incorrectly introduced her as 'Adele Dazeem'. The slip-up became a popular Internet meme.

Personal life

Menzel married actor Taye Diggs on January 11, 2003.  They met in 1995 during the original production of Rent, in which Diggs portrayed the role of Benjamin Coffin III, the landlord.

Charity

Menzel was an honorary chair of the Imperial Court of New York's Annual Charity Coronation Ball, Night of A Thousand Gowns on March 21, 2009.   Other honorary chairs for the evening's charity event included Elton John, Patti LuPone, John Cameron Mitchell, Joan Rivers and Robin Strasser.
On May 17, 2009, Menzel performed at a special benefit concert in Atlanta, Georgia to raise money for the Pace Academy Diversity Program in coordination with the Ron Clark Academy.
In 2010, Menzel founded the A BroaderWay Foundation with husband Taye Diggs as a means of supporting young people in the arts. A BroaderWay sponsors camp programs, theater workshops, innovative educational programming and offers scholarships and opportunities to experience professional performances. In Summer 2011, Camp BroaderWay welcomed young girls from under-served metro New York communities to a 10-day performing arts camp, run by Menzel and a team of acclaimed professional Broadway artists including Taye Diggs.  During this camp the girls collaborated with Broadway artists to write an original musical that was performed at a theatre in New York.  The camp was held at Belvoir Terrace Summer Camp in Lenox, Massachusetts.
Menzel has long-championed LGBT rights by partnering with organizations like The Trevor Project,"Married Broadway Vets Idina Menzel and Taye Diggs 'Call the Whole Thing Off'". Broadway. December 7, 2010. the Give A Damn Campaign (filming a public service announcement"Idina Menzel, Elton John and More 'Give a Damn' Against Hate Crimes". Broadway. October 5, 2010. and designing a T-shirtThe Give A Damn Campaign Launches Celebrity T-shirt Project Presented By Van Gogh Vodka, wegiveadamn."Idina Menzel Joins NOH8 Campaign's Gay Rights Protest". On Top Magazine. March 21, 2012.

Theatre credits

Film and television credits

Discography

Solo albums

Singles

Cast recordings

Miscellaneous






