[[Joel Quenneville]]

CATEGORIES: 1958 births, Living people, Baltimore Skipjacks players, Canadian emigrants to the United States, Canadian ice hockey defencemen, Chicago Blackhawks coaches, Chicago Blackhawks players, Colorado Avalanche coaches, Colorado Rockies (NHL) players, Franco-Ontarian people, Hartford Whalers players, Ice hockey people from Ontario, Jack Adams Award winners, New Brunswick Hawks players, New Jersey Devils players, People from Windsor, Ontario, Quebec Nordiques coaches, St. John's Maple Leafs players, St. Louis Blues coaches, Stanley Cup champions, Toronto Maple Leafs draft picks, Toronto Maple Leafs players, Washington Capitals players, Windsor Spitfires players

Joel Norman Quenneville (born September 15, 1958 in Windsor, Ontario) is the head coach of the Chicago Blackhawks professional ice hockey team. He is a former ice hockey defenseman and former head coach of the Colorado Avalanche and St. Louis Blues. He is known affectionately by fans and players as "Coach Q."

Hockey career

As a player, Quenneville was drafted 21st overall by the Toronto Maple Leafs in the 1978 NHL Entry Draft.  He has played for the OHA Windsor Spitfires, AHL New Brunswick Hawks, Toronto Maple Leafs, Colorado Rockies, New Jersey Devils, Hartford Whalers, AHL Baltimore Skipjacks, Washington Capitals and AHL St. John's Maple Leafs. He has also been a player/assistant coach for St. John's, head coach for the AHL Springfield Indians, and assistant coach for the Quebec Nordiques and Colorado Avalanche. He won the Jack Adams Award with the Blues in the 1999–2000 NHL season.
Quenneville won the Stanley Cup as an assistant coach with the Avalanche in 1996. He then moved to the Blues franchise, becoming head coach midway through the next season after Mike Keenan was fired. He led St. Louis to 7 straight playoff berths. In Quenneville's 8th season with the Blues, the team started poorly. Late in the year, St. Louis was in danger of missing the playoffs for the first time in a quarter century. As a result, Quenneville was fired.
Quenneville was hired to coach the Avalanche in June 2004, before the 2004–05 NHL lockout resulted in the season's cancellation. In his first year with the Avalanche, he led the team to the playoffs and a first round upset of the Dallas Stars. On March 25, 2007, Quenneville coached his 750th career game. He became one of only seven currently active coaches to reach 750 games as of the 2006–07 season. Quenneville reached his 400th coach win on October 26, 2007, in a 3–2 OT win in Calgary against the Flames.  On May 9, 2008, the Avalanche announced that Quenneville was leaving the organization.  Quenneville was hired as a pro scout by the Chicago Blackhawks in September 2008.
On October 16, 2008, Quenneville was promoted to head coach of the Chicago Blackhawks, replacing former Blackhawk Denis Savard. On December 1, 2009, he received his 500th win as a coach in an 11 round shootout battle vs Columbus. In his first two seasons with Chicago, he led the Hawks to the 2009 Western Conference Final and the 2010 Stanley Cup Finals. With the Blackhawks' victory over the Philadelphia Flyers in the latter, Quenneville earned his first Stanley Cup as a head coach. On December 18, 2011, he earned his 600th career coaching win, winning 4-2 against the Calgary Flames. Joel earned his second championship as a head coach against the Boston Bruins during the 2013 Stanley Cup Finals, cementing his status as one of a handful of Chicago head coaches with multiple championships (the others are George Halas of the Chicago Bears, Phil Jackson of the Chicago Bulls, and Frank Chance of the Chicago Cubs).
 On March 19, 2014, Quenneville became just the third head coach in NHL history to record 700 wins.

Career statistics

Playing statistics

Coaching record

Personal life

Quenneville is of French-Canadian ancestry and is married to Elizabeth, a native of Connecticut whom he met during his stint with the Hartford Whalers. They reside in Hinsdale, IL with their three children: a son, Dylan, and two daughters, Lily and Anna. After working in the U.S. for over 30 years Quenneville passed the USCIS naturalization test required to become a US citizen on May 24, 2011. He now holds citizenship in both the USA and Canada.
Quenneville was hospitalized and reported as being "in stable condition after "severe discomfort" of a non-cardiac nature" on February 16, 2011, resulting in him missing a home game versus the Minnesota Wild that night. He finally returned to take the Hawks' practice on February 23, having been released from hospital on the 19th.
Quenneville is a second cousin of Peter Quenneville, who was drafted 195th overall by the Columbus Blue Jackets in the 2013 NHL Entry Draft.

Notes and references






