[[Granulomatosis with polyangiitis]]

CATEGORIES: Arthritis, Autoimmune diseases, Diseases involving the fasciae, Lung disorders, Nephrology, Rheumatology, Systemic connective tissue disorders, Vascular-related cutaneous conditions

Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA), formerly known as Wegener's granulomatosis (WG), is a systemic disorder that involves both granulomatosis and polyangiitis. It is a form of vasculitis (inflammation of blood vessels) that affects small- and medium-size vessels in many organs. Damage to the lungs and kidneys can be fatal. It requires long-term immunosuppression. Because of Wegener's Nazi past, professional bodies and journals have replaced his name with a descriptive name.
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis is part of a larger group of vasculitic syndromes, all of which feature an autoimmune attack by an abnormal type of circulating antibody termed ANCAs (antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies) against small and medium-size blood vessels. Apart from Wegener's, this category includes Churg–Strauss syndrome and microscopic polyangiitis. Although Wegener's granulomatosis affects small- and medium-size vessels,

Signs and symptoms

Initial signs are extremely variable, and diagnosis can be severely delayed due to the nonspecific nature of the symptoms. In general, Rhinitis is the first sign in most people.

Causes

Its causes are unknown, although microbes

Pathophysiology

Inflammation with granuloma formation against a nonspecific inflammatory background is the classical tissue abnormality in all organs affected by Wegener's granulomatosis.
It is now widely presumed that the anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCAs) are responsible for the inflammation in Wegener's. The typical ANCAs in Wegener's are those that react with proteinase 3, an enzyme prevalent in neutrophil granulocytes.
In vitro studies have found that ANCAs can activate neutrophils, increase their adherence to endothelium, and induce their degranulation that can damage endothelial cells. In theory, this phenomenon could cause extensive damage to the vessel wall, in particular of arterioles.

Diagnosis

Granulomatosis with polyangiitis is usually suspected only when a person has had unexplained symptoms for a long period of time. Determination of Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCAs) can aid in the diagnosis, but positivity is not conclusive and negative ANCAs are not sufficient to reject the diagnosis. Cytoplasmic-staining ANCAs that react with the enzyme proteinase 3 (cANCA) in neutrophils (a type of white blood cell) are associated with Wegener's.
If the person has renal failure or cutaneous vasculitis, a biopsy is obtained from the kidneys. On rare occasions, thoracoscopic lung biopsy is required. On histopathological examination, a biopsy will show leukocytoclastic vasculitis with necrotic changes and granulomatous inflammation (clumps of typically arranged white blood cells) on microscopy. These granulomas are the main reason for the appellation of "Wegener's granulomatosis", although it is not an essential feature. Nevertheless, necrotizing granulomas are a hallmark of this disease. However, many biopsies can be nonspecific and 50% provide too little information for the diagnosis of Wegener's.

Criteria

In 1990, the American College of Rheumatology accepted classification criteria for Wegener's. These criteria were not intended for diagnosis, but for inclusion in randomised controlled trials. Two or more positive criteria have a sensitivity of 88.2% and a specificity of 92.0% of describing Wegener's.
According to the Chapel Hill Consensus Conference (CHCC) on the nomenclature of systemic vasculitis (1992), establishing the diagnosis of Wegener's granulomatosis demands:
Several investigators have compared the ACR and Chapel Hill criteria.

Treatment

The standard treatment for GPA is cyclophosphamide and high dose corticosteroids for remission induction and less toxic immunosuppressants like azathioprine, leflunomide, methotrexate or mycophenolate mofetil.
A systematic review of 84 trials examined the evidence for various treatments in GPA. Many trials include data on pooled groups of people with Wegener's and microscopic polyangiitis. In this review, cases are divided between localised disease, non-organ threatening, generalized organ-threatening disease and severe renal vasculitis and immediately life-threatening disease.

Prognosis

Prior to the development of corticosteroids and cyclophosphamide for GPA the 2-year mortality rate was over 90% and the average survival was just five months. Death usually resulted from uraemia or respiratory failure. Nowadays the 5-year survival rate is over 80%. Long-term complications are very common (86%): mainly chronic renal failure, hearing loss and deafness.

Epidemiology

The incidence is 10-20 cases per million per year. It is exceedingly rare in Japan and African Americans.

History

Scottish otolaryngologist Peter McBride (1854–1946) first described the condition in 1897 in a BMJ article  entitled "Photographs of a case of rapid destruction of the nose and face". Heinz Karl Ernst Klinger (born 1907) would add information on the anatomical pathology, but the full picture was presented by Friedrich Wegener (1907–1990), a German pathologist, in two reports in 1936 and 1939.
An earlier name for the disease was pathergic granulomatosis.
In 2006, Alexander Woywodt (Preston, United Kingdom) and Eric Matteson (Mayo Clinic, USA) investigated Wegener's past, and discovered that he was, at least at some point of his career, a follower of the Nazi regime. In addition, their data indicate that Wegener was wanted by Polish authorities and that his files were forwarded to the United Nations War Crimes Commission. Furthermore, Wegener worked in close proximity to the genocide machinery in Lodz. Their data raise serious concerns about Wegener's professional conduct. They suggest that the eponym be abandoned and propose "ANCA-associated granulomatous vasculitis."






