[[Anthony A. Williams]]

CATEGORIES: 1951 births, African-American mayors, Columbia University alumni, Harvard Law School alumni, Living people, Mayors of Washington, D.C., Santa Clara University alumni, Yale University alumni, United States Air Force airmen, Washington, D.C. Democrats, Politicians from Los Angeles, California, American adoptees

Anthony Allen "Tony" Williams (born July 28, 1951) is an American politician who served as the fifth mayor of the District of Columbia for two terms, from 1999 to 2007.  He had previously served as chief financial officer for the District, managing to balance the budget and achieve a surplus within two years of appointment.  He held a variety of executive posts in cities and states around the country prior to his service in the D.C. government.

Early life and education

Williams, born on July 28, 1951, is the adopted son of Virginia and Lewis Williams, and is one of seven children; Lewis IV, Virginia II, Carla, Leif Eric I, Kimberly, and Loris. He also served in the United States Air Force.ibid

Career

Williams served as the Deputy State Comptroller of Connecticut. Williams also served as Executive Director of the Community Development Agency in St. Louis, Missouri; Assistant Director of the Boston (MA) Redevelopment Authority; and Adjunct Professor at Columbia University. He was elected to the New Haven, Connecticut Board of Aldermen, where he served as President Pro-Tempore.
Williams was appointed by President Bill Clinton and confirmed by the United States Senate to serve as the first CFO for the US Department of Agriculture, as well as a founder and Vice Chairman of the U.S. CFO Council.

Politics

Williams first rose to prominence as the District of Columbia's Chief Financial Officer (CFO) during the final term of Mayor Marion Barry, who nominated Williams to the position in September 1995.
Williams' financial successes in the District made him a popular figure. In January 1998, local media reported that Williams was considering a run for mayor in that year's election;

=Mayor=

During his first term he restored the city to the financial black, running budget surpluses every year and allowing the control board to terminate itself two years ahead of schedule. He brought some $40 billion of investment to the city. Unprecedented capital investments and service improvements also came to some disadvantaged neighborhoods under Williams' administration.
By 2001, real property values were climbing steadily and Washington D.C. was experiencing a real estate investment boom in the residential, commercial and retail markets. Congress dissolved the Financial Control Board in September 2001.  In 2002 the Association of Foreign Investors in Real Estate (AFIRE) named Washington, D.C. the top global and U.S. city for real estate investment. (It made the top slot again in 2003 and 2004.)
Williams also alienated some lower-income residents. His first term in office was marked by the beginning of a period of gentrification throughout the city.  Longtime residents complained of being priced out of their homes and neighborhoods and forced to move to neighboring Prince George's County, Maryland. In addition, one of Williams' budget-trimming measures was the closure of inpatient services at D.C. General Hospital, the only public hospital in the District.  The City Council voted down Williams' proposed closure in the spring of 2001, but their decision was overturned by the Control Board soon afterwards.

==Second term==

In 2002, Williams ran for reelection and stumbled into a political scandal. The firm which he hired to collect signatures to put his name on the Democratic Primary ballot had irregularities with hundreds of names on the petitions.  As a result of the irregular petitions, the Williams campaign was fined $277,700 by the District of Columbia Board of Elections and Ethics and his name was removed from the Democratic Primary ballot.  He was forced to run as a write-in candidate.  His chief opponent, minister Willie Wilson, also ran as a write-in candidate.  Despite this handicap, Williams won both the Democratic and Republican primaries as a write-in candidate and went on to be reelected in the general election.
During his second term, Williams continued his record of stabilizing the finances of the District.  The city was able to balance its budget for ten consecutive years between the 1997 and 2006 fiscal years; the cumulative fund balance swung from a deficit of $518 million in the 1996 fiscal year to a surplus of nearly $1.6 billion in the 2005 fiscal year.  During this same period, the District's bond ratings went from "junk bond" status to "A" category by all three major rating agencies.
Williams was instrumental in arranging a deal to move the financially ailing Montréal Expos, a Major League Baseball (MLB) team, to Washington, D.C.  Although he faced opposition from much of the D.C. Council, Wiliams eventually prevailed.  In late December 2004, the Council approved by one vote a financing plan for a new stadium.  The new team, the Washington Nationals, began playing in April 2005, the first time since 1971 that the nation's capital had its own MLB team.
While in office, Williams was elected president of the National League of Cities in December 2004.  In January 2005, he was elected Vice Chair of the Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments (COG).
Williams was not without detractors.  His international traveling was criticized, as was his failure to purchase a home in D.C., despite his aggressive publicity campaign to convince residents to buy homes in the city.  Some of his constituents and members of the D.C. Council (including his successor, Adrian M. Fenty) criticized Williams' deal with Major League Baseball for   conceding too much and not providing a spending cap on the public financing of the new baseball park.
On September 28, 2005, Williams announced he would not seek re-election in 2006. Williams endorsed Council Chair Linda W. Cropp as a successor; however, Cropp lost to Ward 4 Councilmember Adrian Fenty in the Democratic primary.  Fenty went on to win the general election.

Legacy and honors

Williams was generally seen as a moderate; he had good relations with Congress and the White House, business and labor, and the community and region.  Unlike many Democrats, he said he was "open" to Sam Brownback's proposal to implement a flat tax in D.C., and he supported school vouchers. His public persona is that of an intellectual bureaucrat, especially when compared to the colorful Barry. He is known for his signature bow tie.
In 1997, Governing Magazine named him "Public Official of the Year".
Driven by a growth in local revenues, income and sales taxes, Williams managed District resources to improve services, lower tax rates, improve the performance of city agencies and invest in infrastructure and human services.  This dramatic turnaround required transformational improvements in cash management, budget execution, and revenue collections.  After many years of declining population, the District has had a steady growth in population.  In its July 2004 issue, Black Enterprise magazine selected Washington, D.C. as the second-best city in the country for African Americans to live and work in because of its housing, jobs, health care and economic development.
Under Williams' administration, the District's crime rate dropped dramatically.  By the end of his tenure, hotels reported 2% vacancy rates.  Real estate values in the District remained high despite regional and national trends in the opposite direction.
On the eve of Williams' last day in office in 2006, Washington Post columnist Colbert I. King wrote,  Williams leaves in his wake a city with a good bond rating, sizable cash reserves, a more accessible health-care system for the underserved, several promising neighborhood projects, a major league baseball team, a new stadium under construction and a home town that is no longer the laughingstock of the nation... On his watch, the District underwent its most profound transformation in generations. Williams promoted an investment climate that led to the sprucing up of a city that had gone to seed. 

Personal life

In January 2007, Williams entered into a partnership with the Washington-area investment bank Friedman Billings Ramsey Group, Inc. to form Primum Public Realty Trust, a real estate investment trust (REIT) focused on buying and leasing back government and not-for-profit real estate.
Williams has also been actively involved in local education initiatives, including serving on the boards of the nonprofit organizations D.C. Children First and the national nonprofit Alliance for School Choice.
In March 2008, Williams made headlines by purchasing a home in D.C., a condominium on the city's revitalizing H Street NE corridor.
Williams served as a member of the Debt Reduction Task Force at the Bipartisan Policy Center.
In 2012, Williams joined the board of directors of the Bank of Georgetown.






