[[Old Fashioned]]

CATEGORIES: Cocktails with whisky, History of Louisville, Kentucky, Cocktails with bitters



The Old Fashioned is an IBA Official Cocktail made by muddling sugar with bitters then adding alcohol, such as whiskey or brandy, and a twist of citrus rind. 
It is traditionally served in a short, round,  tumbler-like glass, which is called an Old Fashioned glass, named after the drink.
The Old Fashioned is one of six basic drinks listed in David A. Embury's The Fine Art of Mixing Drinks.

History

The first documented definition of the word "cocktail" was in response to a reader's letter asking to define the word in the May 6, 1806, issue of The Balance and Columbia Repository in Hudson, New York. In the May 13, 1806, issue, the paper's editor wrote that it was a potent concoction of spirits, bitters, water, and sugar; it was also referred to at the time as a bittered sling."Raising a glass to the cocktail", Newsday article by Sylvia Carter, May 17, 2006. Newsday archive; Highbeam archive. Relevant paragraph quoted at ArtHistoryInfo.com
J.E. Alexander describes the cocktail similarly in 1833, as he encountered it in New York City, as being rum, gin, or brandy, significant water, bitters, and sugar, though he includes a nutmeg garnish as well.
By the 1860s, it was common for orange curaçao, absinthe, and other liqueurs to be added to the cocktail. The original concoction, albeit in different proportions, came back into vogue, and was referred to as "old-fashioned". The most popular of the in-vogue "old-fashioned" cocktails were made with whiskey, according to a Chicago barman, quoted in The Chicago Daily Tribune in 1882, with rye being more popular than Bourbon. The recipe he describes is a similar combination of spirits, bitters, water and sugar of seventy-six years earlier.
Traditionally, the first use of the name "Old Fashioned" for a Bourbon whiskey cocktail was said to have been, anachronistically, at the Pendennis Club, a gentlemen's club founded in 1881 in Louisville, Kentucky. The recipe was said to have been invented by a bartender at that club in honor of Colonel James E. Pepper, a prominent bourbon distiller, who brought it to the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel bar in New York City.,

Recipe

George Kappeler provides some of the earliest published recipes for Old Fashioned cocktails in his 1895 book. Recipes are given for Whiskey, Brandy, Holland gin, and Old Tom gin. The Whiskey Old Fashioned recipe specifies the following (with a jigger being ):
|title=Modern American Drinks: How to Mix and Serve All Kinds of Cups and Drinks
|author=Kappeler
|year=1895
}}[/ref]
By the 1860s, as illustrated by Jerry Thomas' 1862 book, basic cocktail recipes included Curaçao, or other liqueurs, not mentioned in the early 19th century descriptions, nor the Chicago Daily Tribune descriptions of the "Old Fashioned" cocktails of the early 1880s; it is absent from Kappeler's Old Fashioned recipes, as well. The differences of the Old Fashioned cocktail recipes from the cocktail recipes of the late 19th Century are mainly preparation method, the use of sugar and water in lieu of simple or gomme syrup, and the absence of additional liqueurs. These Old Fashioned cocktail recipes are literally for cocktails done the old-fashioned way.
|title=How to mix drinks: or, The bon-vivant's companion...
|author=Thomas
|year=1862
}}[/ref]
A book by David Embury published in 1948 provides a slight variation, specifying 12 parts American whiskey, 1 part simple syrup, 1-3 dashes Angostura bitters, a twist of lemon peel over the top, and serve garnished with the lemon peel.
Two additional recipes from the 1900s vary in the precise ingredients, but omit the cherry which was introduced after 1930"Old Fashioned Recipes", The WikiTender,2 August 2006.  as well as the soda water which the occasional recipe calls for."Old Fashioned Recipes", The WikiTender, 2 August 2006.  Orange bitters were a popular ingredient in the late 19th century,"After 184 Years, Angostura Visits the Orange Grove", Saveur, by Robert Simonson, Dec 8, 2008.  and for the second recipe, the Curaçao reappears to have been added to increase the orange flavor.

Modifications

The original Old Fashioned recipe would have showcased the whiskey available in America in the 19th century, either Irish, Bourbon or rye whiskey. But in some regions, especially Wisconsin, brandy is substituted for whiskey (sometimes called a Brandy Old Fashioned).
Common garnishes for an Old Fashioned include an orange slice or a maraschino cherry, although these modifications came around 1930, some time after the original recipe was invented. While some recipes began making sparse use of the orange zest for flavor, the practice of muddling orange and other fruit gained prevalence as late as the 1990s.
Bartenders often use a dissolved sugar-water premix called simple syrup, which is faster to use than granulated sugar and eliminates the risk of leaving undissolved sugar in the drink, which can spoil a drinker's final sip.

In popular culture

The Old Fashioned is mentioned several times by drunken airplane pilot Tyler Fitzgerald in the 1963 comedy It's A Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World.
The Old Fashioned is also the cocktail of choice of Don Draper, the lead character on the Mad Men television series, set in the 1960s.  The drink was well-known in the 1960s, but was nearly forgotten at the time of the series's premiere in 2007. The use of the drink in the series coincides with a renewed interest in this and other classic cocktails in the 2000s.





Further reading




