[[Porphyry (philosopher)]]

CATEGORIES: 234 births, 305 deaths, 3rd-century Romans, 4th-century Romans, 3rd-century philosophers, Commentators on Aristotle, Commentators on Plato, Anti-Gnosticism, Late Antique writers, Neoplatonists, Roman-era philosophers, Roman-era students in Athens, People from Tyre, Lebanon

Porphyry of Tyre (, Porphyrios, AD c. 234 – c. 305) was a Neoplatonic philosopher who was born in Tyre. Sarton 1936, pp. 429-430, identifies Transjordania as Porphyry's place of birth. He edited and published the Enneads, the only collection of the work of his teacher Plotinus. He also wrote many works himself on a wide variety of topics. For a comprehensive list see Beutler (1894-1980). His Isagoge, or Introduction, is an introduction to logic and philosophy,Barnes 2003, p. xv clarifies that the Isagoge "was not an Introduction to the Categories, rather "it was an introduction to the study of logic, it was... an introduction to philosophy--and hence accidentally an introduction to the Categories." and in Latin translation it was the standard textbook on logic throughout the Middle Ages. ix. In addition, through several of his works, most notably Philosophy from Oracles and Against the Christians, he was involved in a controversy with a number of early Christians,See Digeser 1998. and his commentary on Euclid's Elements was used as a source by Pappus of Alexandria.

Biographical information

Porphyry's parents were Phoenician, and he was born in Tyre.   His parents named him Malchus ("king")For connotations of West Semitic MLK, see Moloch; compare theophoric names like Abimelech. but his teacher in Athens, Cassius Longinus, gave him the name Porphyrius ("clad in purple"), possibly a reference to his Phoenician heritage, or a punning allusion to his name and the color of royal robes.  Under Longinus he studied grammar and rhetoric. In 262 he went to Rome, attracted by the reputation of Plotinus, and for six years devoted himself to the practice of Neoplatonism, during which time he severely modified his diet.  At one point he became suicidal.  On returning to Rome, he lectured on philosophy and completed an edition of the writings of Plotinus (who had died in the meantime) together with a biography of his teacher. Iamblichus is mentioned in ancient Neoplatonic writings as his pupil, but this most likely means only that he was the dominant figure in the next generation of philosophers. The two men differed publicly on the issue of theurgy. In his later years, he married Marcella, a widow with seven children and an enthusiastic student of philosophy. Little more is known of his life, and the date of his death is uncertain.

Introduction (Isagoge)

Porphyry is best known for his contributions to philosophy. Apart from writing the Aids to the Study of the Intelligibles (Sententiae Ad Intelligibilia Ducentes), a basic summary of Neoplatonism, he is especially appreciated for his Introduction to Categories (Introductio in Praedicamenta), a very short work often considered to be a commentary on Aristotle's Categories, hence the title. xiv outlines the history of the opinion that Porphyry meant for his Isagoge to be an introductory work to the Categories. According to , however, the correct title is simply Introduction (εἰσαγωγή,) (Isagoge), and the book is an introduction not to the Categories in particular, but to logic in general, comprising as it does the theories of predication, definition, and proof. The Introduction describes how qualities attributed to things may be classified, famously breaking down the philosophical concept of substance into the five components genus, species, difference, property, accident.
As Porphyry's most influential contribution to philosophy, the Introduction to Categories incorporated Aristotle's logic into Neoplatonism, in particular the doctrine of the categories of being interpreted in terms of entities (in later philosophy, "universal"). Boethius' Isagoge, a Latin translation of Porphyry's "Introduction", became a standard medieval textbook in European schools and universities, which set the stage for medieval philosophical-theological developments of logic and the problem of universals. In medieval textbooks, the all-important Arbor porphyriana ("Porphyrian Tree") illustrates his logical classification of substance. To this day, taxonomy benefits from concepts in Porphyry's Tree, in classifying living organisms: see cladistics.
The Introduction was translated into Arabic by Abd-Allāh Ibn al-Muqaffaʿ from a Syriac version. With the Arabicized name Isāghūjī (إيساغوجي) it long remained the standard introductory logic text in the Muslim world and influenced the study of theology, philosophy, grammar, and jurisprudence. Besides the adaptations and epitomes of this work, many independent works on logic by Muslim philosophers have been entitled Isāghūjī. Porphyry's discussion of accident sparked a long-running debate on the application of accident and essence.Encyclopedia Iranica, "Araz" (accident)

Philosophy from Oracles (De Philosophia ex Oraculis Haurienda)

Porphyry is also known as an opponent of Christianity and defender of Paganism; his defense of traditional religion, Philosophy from Oracles, written before the persecutions of Christians under Diocletian and Galerius, set out the basis for them:
Whether or not Porphyry was the pagan philosopher opponent in Lactantius' Divine Institutes, written at the time of the persecutions, has long been discussed. A Christian version of Philosophy from Oracles has been attributed to Porphyry. The attribution was accepted by Eusebius and appealed to by apologists like Theodoret. Scholars have identified that epigrams from this work are scattered throughout the works of St. Augustine. Fitzgerald (editor), Augustine through the Ages: An Encyclopedia, page 663 (Wm B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1999). ISBN 0-8028-3843-X
[/ref] Dr Nathaniel Lardner rejected the attribution in the 18th century. ISBN 2-85121-117-X

Against the Christians (Adversus Christianos)

During his retirement in Sicily, Porphyry wrote Adversus Christianos (Against the Christians) which consisted of fifteen books.  Some thirty Christian apologists, such as Methodius, Eusebius, Apollinaris, Jerome, etc., responded to his challenge. In fact, everything known about Porphyry's arguments is found in these refutations, largely because Theodosius II burned every copy he could find in A.D. 435 and again in 448."Constantine and other emperors banned and burned Porphyry's work" (Digeser 1998:130).9.30-31; Gelasius, Historia Ecclesiastica, II.36; translated in Stevenson, J., (Editor; Revised with additional documents by W. H. C. Frend), A New Eusebius, Documents illustrating the history of the Church to AD 337 (SPCK, 1987).
Porphyry became one of the most able pagan adversaries of Christianity of his day.  His aim was not to disprove the substance of Christianity's teachings but rather the records within which the teachings are communicated.
In it, he famously is quoted as having said, "The Gods have proclaimed Christ to have been most pious, but the Christians are a confused and vicious sect."
According to Jerome, Porphyry especially attacked the prophecy of Daniel because Jews and Christians pointed to the historical fulfillment of its prophecies as a decisive argument. But these prophesies, he maintained, were written not by Daniel but by some Jew who in the time of Antiochus Epiphanes (d. 164 B.C.) gathered up the traditions of Daniel's life and wrote a history of recent past events but in the future tense, falsely dating them back to Daniel's time. 
The first part of Daniel, with the exception of the dream in Daniel 2, is historic, not prophetic. Porphyry, attacking only the prophetic portion, declares it to be merely a late anonymous narrative of past events, purporting to have been predicted long before by Daniel. Thus Porphyry's scheme was based on the supposed spuriousness of Daniel's prophecies.
Porphyry devised his own interpretation where the third "prophetic kingdom" was Alexander, and assigned the Macedonian Ptolemies and Seleucids to the fourth kingdom. From among these he chose ten kings, making the eleventh to be Antiochus Epiphanes.  In this way he threw his main strength against the book of Daniel, recognizing that if this pillar of faith be shaken, the whole structure of prophecy must tremble.  If the writer was not Daniel, then he lied on a frightful scale, ascribing to God prophecies which were never uttered, and making claim of miracles that were never wrought. And if Daniel's authorship could be shown to be false, then Christ Himself would be proved to bear witness to an imposter. (Matt. 24: 15.)
Augustine and the 5th-century ecclesiastical historian Socrates of Constantinople, assert that Porphyry was once a Christian.23. Porphyry acknowledged Jesus Christ only as an outstanding philosopher.

Other subjects

Porphyry was opposed to the theurgy of his disciple Iamblichus. Much of Iamblichus' mysteries is dedicated to the defense of mystic theurgic divine possession against the critiques of Porphyry. French philosopher Pierre Hadot maintains that for Porphyry, spiritual exercises are an essential part of spiritual development.: Philosophy as a Way of Life (Oxford: Blackwells, 1995), p. 100.
Porphyry was, like Pythagoras, an advocate of vegetarianism on spiritual and ethical grounds. These two philosophers are perhaps the most famous vegetarians of classical antiquity. He wrote the De Abstinentia (On Abstinence), advocating against the consumption of animals, and he is cited with approval in vegetarian literature up to the present day.
Porphyry also wrote widely on astrology, religion, philosophy, and musical theory. He produced a History of Philosophy (Philosophos historia) with vitae of philosophers that included a life of his teacher, Plotinus. His life of Plato from book iv exists only in quotes by Cyril of Alexandria. Notopoulos, "Porphyry's Life of Plato" Classical Philology 35.3 (July 1940), pp. 284-293, attempted a reconstruction from Apuleius' use of it. His book Vita Pythagorae on the life of Pythagoras is not to be confused with the book of the same name by Iamblichus.  His commentary on Ptolemy's Harmonics (Eis ta Harmonika Ptolemaiou hypomnēma) is an important source for the history of ancient harmonic theory.

Works by Porphyry

Translations

Notes






