[[Grey Wolves]]

CATEGORIES: Rebel groups in Turkey, Terrorism in Spain, Operation Gladio, Nationalist movements in Asia, Far-right politics, Terrorism in Turkey, Grey Wolves, Organizations established in 1969, 1969 establishments in Turkey, Nationalist organizations, Nationalist movements in Europe, Turkish nationalism, Neo-fascism

The Idealist Youth ( the organization carried out 694 murders during the late-1970s political violence in Turkey, between 1974 and 1980. Jongman, Alex Peter Schmid, Political Terrorism: A New Guide to Actors, Authors, Concepts, Data Bases, Theories, & Literature, pp. 674

Etymology

The organization is named after Asena, by the 20th century Turkish writer Ziya Gökalp and later developed by the 20th century writer Nihal Atsız.
Ülkü Ocakları (Hearths of Ideal), clubhouses of the Grey Wolves, denies "direct" links with the MHP and presents itself as an independent youth organization. Their female supporters are called Asena.

History

Role in 1980 military coup

At the time of the military coup of September 12, 1980, led by general Kenan Evren (who was also the leader of Counter-Guerrilla) there were some 1,700 Grey Wolves organizations, with about 200,000 registered members and a million sympathizers. and Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia.

Role in Kurdish affairs

The MHP is strongly opposed to Kurdish separatists, namely the  PKK.
The paramilitary wing of the Grey Wolves have been utilized by the Turkish intelligence services to assassinate PKK leaders. The fact that Counter-Guerrilla had engaged in torture was confirmed by Talat Turhan, a former Turkish colonel.

Activities to date

|accessdate=2008-08-27
|title=Greece condemns Turkish barbarity
|work=Cyprus News Agency
|date=1996-08-12
}}[/ref]
|accessdate=2009-01-02
|title=Istanbul University: Alleged Police-Ulkucu Collaboration Escalates Tensions
|work=Turkish Daily News
|publisher=Hürriyet
|date=1996-12-13
|author=Ayik, Zeki
|coauthors=Yoruk, Zafer F
}}[/ref]
|accessdate=2008-08-27
|title=Gray Wolves Spoil Turkey's Publicity Ploy on Ararat
|work=California Courier
|first=Harut
|last=Sassounian
|date=2004-01-15
|publisher=ADL Ramgavar Azadagan France
}}[/ref]Ülkü Ocaklari: Ararat Yayinlanamaz 

Links to Operation Gladio

The Grey Wolves were the most visible force at the command of the Counter-Guerrilla; the Turkish branch of Operation Gladio. By using such paramilitary structures, the leaders were able to maintain a facade of plausible deniability.
Numerous sources show that the MHP and the Grey Wolves had ties to the Turkish mafia, to the Turkish intelligence services as well as to the CIA and other intelligence agencies. Former military public attorney and member of the Turkish Supreme Court, Emin Değer, has established that the Grey Wolves collaborated with the counter-insurgency governmental forces, as well as the close ties between these state security forces and the CIA. Les liaisons dangereuses de la police turque," Le Monde diplomatique, March 1997 The Double Standard: The Turkish State and Racist Violence (Chapter 13) in Racism in Europe (edited by Tore Bjorgo) (ISBN 0-312-12409-0) Indeed, Martin A. Lee also wrote that the para-military wing of the Grey Wolves were covertly supported by the CIA, which worked with the Gladio network, while a December 5, 1990 article by the Swiss Neue Zürcher Zeitung stated that the Counter-Guerrilla had their headquarters in the building of the US DIA military secret service. Le Monde diplomatique wrote that "the CIA used proponents of the Greater Turkey to stir up anti-sovietic passions at the heart of Turkish Muslim minorities in the Soviet Union". Thus, in 1992, colonel Türkes went to newly independent Azerbaijan, where he was acclaimed as a hero. He supported Grey Wolves sympathiser Abulfaz Elchibey's candidacy to the presidency. Once elected, Elchibey chose as ministry of Interior İsgandar Hamidov, a member of the Grey Wolves who plead for the creation of a Greater Turkey which would include northern Iran and extend itself across Siberia, Central Asia, Afghanistan, Pakistan and China. Isgandar Hamidov resigned in April 1993 after having threatened Armenia with a  nuclear strike.
According to Daniele Ganser, a researcher at the ETH Zürich University, the founder of the Grey Wolves, Alparslan Türkeş was a member of Counter-Guerrilla, the Turkish branch of Gladio, a stay-behind NATO anti-communist paramilitary organization which was supposed to prepare networks for guerrilla warfare in case of a Soviet invasion.) which used false flag terrorist attacks in order to discredit the communist movement. Daniele Ganser. Many documents available in various languages, including Turkish articles; audio interviews of Ganser; Ganser's June 2005 article in The Whitehead Journal of Diplomacy and International Relations; Der Spiegel article, etc.

Grey Wolves outside of Turkey

Azerbaijan

The Grey Wolves have provided support to Azeri forces fighting Armenians during the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict,Brzezinski, Zbigniew, Paige Sullivan and Center for Strategic and International Studies, Russia and the Commonwealth of Independent States, (M.E., 1997), 616. It is also revealed that a new force of 200 armed members of the Grey Wolves organization has been dispatched from Turkey in preparation for a new Azeri offensive and to train units of the Azeri army. and still operate in Azerbaijan, although their name has been changed to the Azerbaijan National Democrat Party.

Belgium

There had already been attempts of infiltration of local politics by Grey Wolves in 2000, but during the municipal elections of 2006 two candidacies of leaders of Idealist clubs were put under the attention of the main media, Fuat Korkmazer on the Flemish Christian Democrats list in Ghent and Murat Denizli on the Francophone Socialist Party list in Schaerbeek, a commune in the Brussels Region. In both cases, political observers considered it was an attempt by Belgian parties to attract far right Turkish voters in communes where there are numerous Turks, with or without the Belgian citizenship. Korkmazer got a very low number of votes, Denizli was elected but had to resign because it was discovered he had a false address and lived in another commune. Hugues Dorzée, Le loup gris du PS hante Schaerbeek, Le Soir, 12 October 2006

Cyprus

In 1996, the Grey Wolves went to Cyprus in support of Turkish Cypriot protesters. Consequently, they were involved in attacks on Greek Cypriot properties and Greek Cypriot civilians,which resulted in the murder of Tassos Isaac.B.

Germany

The first "Idealist club" was established on 18 June 1978 in Frankfurt as "Federation of Turkish Democratic Idealist Associations in Europe" (Avrupa Demokratik Ülkücü Türk Dernekleri Federasyonu). Hakkımızda / Wir über uns (Official website of the Grey Wolves in Europe)

Italy

According to investigative reporter Lucy Komisar, the 1981 attempt on John Paul II's life, by Grey Wolves member Mehmet Ali Ağca, may have been related to Gladio. Ali Ağca would in this case have been manipulated by NATO's clandestine structure, in an attempt to fuel Italy's strategy of tension, which ended with the 1980 Bologna massacre. Komissar underlines the fact that Ali Ağca had worked with Abdullah Çatlı in the January 1, 1979 murder of Abdi İpekçi, the editor of left-wing newspaper Milliyet. "Çatlı then reportedly helped organize Ağca's escape from an Istanbul military prison, and some have suggested Çatlı was even involved in the Pope's assassination attempt", reports Lucy Komisar. Also adding, that at the scene of the Mercedes-Benz crash where Çatlı died, he was found with a passport under the name of "Mehmet Özbay" - an alias also used by Mehmet Ali Ağca.

The Netherlands

Grey Wolves activists have participated - with varying successes - in the local politics of several Dutch municipalities.
 Ernst Haffmans, Belabberd resultaat Grijze Wolven bij gemeenteraadsverkiezingen 2006, Onderzoeksgroep Turks extreem-rechts

Members

Assassinations

Literature








