[[Judd Winick]]

CATEGORIES: 1970 births, Jewish American writers, Living people, People from Long Island, The Real World cast members

Judd Winick (born February 12, 1970) is an American comic book, comic strip and television writer/artist and former reality television personality. Winick first gained fame for his 1994 stint on MTV's The Real World: San Francisco, before earning success for his work on comic books as Green Lantern, Green Arrow, and Pedro and Me, his autobiographical graphic novel about his friendship with Real World castmate and AIDS educator Pedro Zamora. He created the animated TV series The Life and Times of Juniper Lee, which ran for three seasons on Cartoon Network.

Early life and career

Winick was born February 12, 1970, On January 1, 1993, UPS decided not to renew Winick's strip for syndication, feeling it could not compete in the current market. Winick was unable to secure syndication with another company, and was forced to move back in with his parents by the middle of 1993, doing unfulfilling T-shirt work for beer companies.Winick mentions the date in the beginning of "You Gotta Have Art", the fifth episode of The Real World: San Francisco. Winick had Nuts & Bolts in development with the children's television network Nickelodeon as an animated series, even turning the human characters into mice, and proposing new titles like Young Urban Mice and Rat Race, but nothing came of it.

The Real World: San Francisco

Winick applied to be on MTV network's reality TV show, The Real World: San Francisco, hoping for fame and a career boost. During the casting process, the producers of the show conducted an in-person, videotaped interview with Winick. When asked how he would feel about living with someone who was HIV-positive, Winick gave what he thought was an enthusiastic, politically correct answer, despite reservations. Winick was accepted as a cast member on the show in January 1994. The producers informed the housemates that they would be living with someone who was HIV-positive, but they did not reveal who it was. Winick and his six castmates (Mohammed Bilal, Rachel Campos, Pam Ling, Cory Murphy, David "Puck" Rainey, and Pedro Zamora) moved into the house at 949 Lombard Street on Russian Hill on February 12. Winick became roommates with Pedro Zamora. 61-67. Although Cory Murphy, who was the first housemate to meet Zamora, learned that he was HIV-positive when they took the train together from Los Angeles to San Francisco, Winick learned that Zamora was the housemate who had AIDS after Winick and Zamora had decided to be roommates, when Zamora told him that he was an AIDS educator, and subsequently showed his scrapbook to Winick and the other housemates.
Winick's Nuts and Bolts strip began running in the San Francisco Examiner in March of that year.
Winick, who is Jewish, was offended at Rainey's decision to wear T-shirt depicting four guns arranged in the shape of a swastika, and by Rainey's refusal to accede to Winick's request not to wear it. p. 137
After filming of the season ended, Winick and Ling moved to Los Angeles to continue their relationship.
By August 1994, Zamora's health began to decline. After being hospitalized, he asked Winick to substitute for him at a national AIDS education lecture. When Zamora died on November 11, 1994, Winick and Ling were at his bedside. Winick would continue Zamora's educational work for some time after that.

Writing and art career

Comics

Winick designed illustrations for The Complete Idiot's Guide to... series of books, and has done over 300 of them, including that series' computer-oriented line. A collection of the computer-related titles' cartoons was published in 1997 as Terminal Madness, The Complete Idiot's Guide Computer Cartoon Collection.
While working on Pedro and Me, Winick began working on comic books, beginning with a one-page Frumpy the Clown cartoon in Oni Press' anthology series, Oni Double Feature #3, in 1998, before going on to do longer stories, like the two-part Road Trip, which was published in issues #9 and 10 of the same book. Road Trip went on to become an Eisner Award nominee for Best Sequential Story.
Winick followed up with a three-issue miniseries, The Adventures of Barry Ween, Boy Genius, about a cynical, profane grade school whiz kid, who invents a myriad of futuristic devices that no one other than his best friend knows about. Barry Ween was published by Image Comics from March through May 1999, with two subsequent miniseries, The Adventures of Barry Ween, Boy Genius 2.0 and The Adventures of Barry Ween, Boy Genius: Monkey Tales (Retitled The Adventures of Barry Ween, Boy Genius 3 or The Adventures of Barry Ween, Boy Genius: Gorilla Warfare in the collected editions), published by Oni Press, which published trade paperback collections of all three miniseries. Barry Ween was optioned by Platinum Studios to be adapted into an animated series, but to date, nothing has come of this.
Winick's graphic novel, Pedro and Me: Friendship, Loss, and What I Learned, was published in September 2000. It was awarded six American Library Association awards, was nominated for an Eisner Award, won Winick his first GLAAD award, has been praised by creators such as Frank Miller, Neil Gaiman, and Armistead Maupin, and has been incorporated into school curricula across the country. Among its other awards are:
Winick's work in mainstream superhero comics has received attention for storylines in which he explores gay or AIDS-oriented themes. In his first regular writing assignment on a monthly superhero book, DC Comics' Green Lantern, Winick wrote a storyline in which Terry Berg, an assistant of the title character, emerged as a gay character in Green Lantern #137 (June 2001) and in Green Lantern #154 (November 2001) the story entitled "Hate Crime" gained media recognition when Terry was brutally beaten in a homophobic attack. Winick was interviewed on Phil Donahue's show on MSNBC for that storyline on August 15, 2002, and received two more GLAAD awards for his Green Lantern work.
In 2003, Judd Winick left Green Lantern for another DC book, Green Arrow, beginning with issue #26 of that title (July 2003). He gained more media recognition for Green Arrow #43 (December 2004) in which he revealed that Green Arrow's 17-year-old ward, a former runaway-turned prostitute named Mia Dearden, was HIV-positive. In issue #45 (February 2005), Winick had Dearden take on the identity of Speedy, the second such Green Arrow sidekick to bear that name, making her the most prominent HIV-positive superhero to star in an ongoing comic book, a decision for which Winick was interviewed on CNN.
Winick's other comic book work includes Batman, The Outsiders, and Marvel's Exiles.
Starting in September 2011, under DC Comics' The New 52 relaunch, Winick began writing new Catwoman and Batwing ongoing series. "No More Mutants: 52 Problems by Andrew Wheeler". Bleeding Cool. September 22, 2011 Winick responded that it was DC that desired this tone.
In July 2012 Winick announced that he was leaving Catwoman after issue #12,Rogers, Vaneta (July 6, 2012). "Winick Leaves CATWOMAN to Write/Draw All-Ages Graphic Novel". Newsarama. in order to create an all-ages, original graphic novel called Hilo (pronounced "High-Low"), a move that Winick explained was inspired a year or so prior when his then-seven-year-old son asked to read his work. Not having age-appropriate material for him, Winick gave him Jeff Smith's Bone, which both father and son enjoyed, and decided to create an all-ages story that his son could read. The full color series, whose tone and visuals Winick describes as "part E.T., part Doctor Who, part Peanuts and Calvin and Hobbes", stars a small town boy named D.J. whose life takes an unexpected turn when a mysterious boy named Hilo falls from the sky, and takes D.J. on adventures that include robots, aliens and a quest to save the world. The series represents Winick's first artwork since 2000's Pedro and Me, as well as his first children's book. It will be published by Random House, with the first book to be published in early 2014. The deal is for three books, though Winick plans to have a total of six graphic novels by the time the story is finished, and hopes to release a book every six months."Rights Report: Week of April 15, 2013". Publishers Weekly, April 18, 2013

Television work

Winick created an animated TV show named The Life and Times of Juniper Lee in 2005, which ran for three seasons on the Cartoon Network.
Winick wrote the screenplay for Batman: Under the Red Hood the direct to DVD animated feature for Warner Premiere in 2010. It was based on the 1988-89 story arc "Batman: A Death in the Family" and the 2005 "Batman: Under the Hood" story arc that ran in the monthly Batman comic book series by DC Comics, the latter of which Winick had written.
Winick is the head writer on The Awesomes, an animated superhero comedy series created by Seth Meyers and Mike Shoemaker for Hulu.

Personal life

Winick proposed to Ling with a cartoon he made for the occasion, and which he presented to her while wearing a gorilla suit. The cartoon presented Ling with two choices to answer his proposal. After she accepted his proposal, he summoned three singing Elvises. "The Real World: Where Are They Now?". People. Vol. 70. No. 7. August 18, 2008 Winick and Ling married in a civil ceremony on August 26, 2001. Writer Armistead Maupin spoke at their ceremony. As of 2008, they have two children. Bunim-Murray Productions. 2008. MTV"'The Real World' Stars: Where Are They Now?". The Huffington Post/AOL TV. March 4, 2008.

In popular culture

In Pedro, Nick Oceano's 2008 film dramatizing Pedro Zamora's life, Winick is portrayed by Hale Appleman.
Winick is mentioned in Dave Eggers' A Heartbreaking Work of Staggering Genius. A Heartbreaking Work of Staggering Genius 2001, Vintage, page 239.








