[[Roxbury Latin School]]

CATEGORIES: High schools in Boston, Massachusetts, Educational institutions established in the 1640s, Independent School League, 1645 establishments in the Thirteen Colonies, Boys' schools in the United States, Roxbury, Boston, Private middle schools in Massachusetts, Private high schools in Massachusetts, History of Boston, Massachusetts, Middle schools in Boston, Massachusetts

The Roxbury Latin School is the oldest school in continuous operation in North America. Godine, publisher The school was  founded in Roxbury, Massachusetts by the Rev. John Eliot under a charter received from King Charles I of England. Since its founding in 1645, it has educated boys on a continuous basis.
Located since 1927 at 101 St. Theresa Avenue in the West Roxbury neighborhood of Boston, the school now serves about 290 to 300 boys in grades seven through twelve. Eliot founded the school "to fit students for public service both in church and in commonwealth in succeeding ages," and the school continues to consider instilling a desire to perform public service among its principal missions.
The school's endowment is estimated at $105 million   The school maintains a need-blind admissions policy, admitting boys without consideration of the ability of their families to pay the full tuition.
Its previous headmaster, F. Washington Jarvis, who retired in the summer of 2004 after a 30-year tenure, published two books about Roxbury Latin: a history of the school and a collection of his speeches to boys at Roxbury Latin (With Love and Prayers).  The title of the former, Schola Illustris, was the phrase Cotton Mather used to describe the school in 1690, following John Eliot's death.  In addition to those books, Richard Walden Hale published Tercentenary History of the Roxbury Latin School in 1946.  Roxbury Latin continues to hold a unique place in the history of American education.
Roxbury Latin School is a member of the Independent School League and NEPSAC. It has an unofficial sister school relationship with The Winsor School in Boston as well as an African brother school, the Maru a Pula School.

Rankings

According to Peterson's Private Secondary Schools 2010, Roxbury Latin students scored a median of 2230 on the 2400 SAT scale, believed to be the highest score of any school in the country. The July 2008 issue of the Roxbury Latin School Newsletter lists the SAT medians for the Class of 2008 as 750 Critical Reading, 750 Math, and 750 Writing. A 2004 piece in the Wall Street Journal noted Roxbury Latin for its acceptance rates at the most competitive universities, despite maintaining a low tuition relative to its peers ($26,100 in 2013-2014). In 2003, Worth magazine ranked Roxbury Latin as the #1 "feeder school" for elite universities, with a larger portion of its graduating class attending Princeton, Harvard, or Yale than any other school.
In 2008, the website PrepReview. Despite using more inclusive criteria in place of Worth's narrow focus on the Big Three, Roxbury Latin once again topped the rankings. PrepReview. Roxbury Latin placed nearly half (45%) of its recent graduates among these institutions, the highest "success" rate of any secondary school in the world. The 2008 rankings by PrepReview. Additionally, PrepReview. In 2010, Forbes magazine ranked Roxbury Latin fifth in a list of the top 10 prep schools in America.5: Roxbury Latin

Transportation

The school provides school bus service for some students who live in the Dorchester, South Boston, Hyde Park, Mattapan, and Roxbury neighborhoods of Boston. The school charges a nominal fee for the bus usage."Directions." Roxbury Latin School.

Athletics

The school has varsity, junior varsity and lower-level teams in football, cross country, soccer (fall), basketball, ice hockey, wrestling (winter), baseball, tennis,   lacrosse, and track and field (spring). The school has a notable wrestling program, with the former varsity coach Steven E. Ward recently being inducted into the wrestling hall of fame in 2009. The varsity soccer team was co-champions with Rivers in the NEPSAC tournament in 2012. The Track & Field team has won NEPSTA (New England Prep School Track Association) in 2005, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2011, 2012, and 2013. The Track Team also won the ISL (Independent School League) Championship in 2012 and 2013. The Tennis team won the NEPSAC Class B Tennis Championship in 2013 after winning the ISL Championship in 2011, 2012, and 2013. Latin wins New England Div III Track & Field championship

Extracurriculars

The school has a wide variety of extracurricular activities for its students to partake in. The Model United Nations program and the Debate and Public Speaking program are especially popular, with approximately a hundred students in each. The school participates in many Model United Nations conferences and debate tournaments every year. Another moderately popular activity is Botball, an annual interscholastic robotics competition. The school team has done exceptionally well in recent years, placing 5th in the New England Division in 2009. The school also boasts several language clubs and a chess team that has won or shared the South Shore Interscholastic Chess League title in 3 of the last 5 years, as well as community service clubs, such as Habitat for Humanity.

Music

The school has an extensive music program, available to students of all grades.  There is junior chorus for seventh and eighth graders, and a chorus and a glee club for highschoolers. There is also a small a cappella group consisting of about fourteen singers called the Latonics that requires an audition. Additionally, there is a jazz band and several halls a year devoted to instrumental performances by students and faculty. Most of the students participate in the music program in some capacity.

Notable alumni






