[[Little Manila]]

CATEGORIES: Ethnic enclaves, Filipino-American history, Asian-American culture, Filipino diaspora

A Little Manila (also known as a Manilatown or Filipinotown) is a community with a large Filipino immigrant and descendant population.

Characteristics

Filipino markets

According to Rick Bonus, author of Locating Filipino Americans: Ethnicity and the Cultural Politics of Space, "..."  The author means that in a Filipino society is very "tightly bound" and tend to only purchase Filipino products only from known Filipino grocery stores, even though the same products may be available at more mainstream retailers.


Filipino restaurants

Many Filipinos who grow up in a Filipino enclave experience a yearning only for Filipino food.  For example, one author stated that "... my stomach was trained at an early age to love Filipino food.  I ate tocino (sweet pork) and longanisa (sweet sausage) for breakfast, and had adobo, pancit, and beef caldereta for dinner....  White kids... would make faces at my food and ask what I was eating."

Income and schooling

According to an article, the percentage of Filipinos living below the poverty line is among the lowest among other Asian groups with the third highest income level averaging around $65,000 U.S. dollars.  Sterngass further states that education is a priority in this culture as well.

Locations

Little Manilas are an enclave of Overseas Filipino consisting of people of Filipino origin living outside of the Philippines.  This term applies to Filipinos who are both abroad indefinitely as citizens or permanent residents of a different country, and to those Filipino citizens abroad for a limited, definite period, such as on a work contract or a student.  It can also include seamen and others who work outside the Philippines but are not residents, either permanent or temporary, of another country.

United States

=California=

The 2010 U.S. Census, counted approximately 1.2 million Filipino Americans (not including multiracial persons) in California, by far the largest number in the United States. the most of any single county in the United States. The San Francisco Bay Area is the metropolitan area with the second largest number of Filipino Americans in the U.S., with a population of over 460,000 as of the 2010 Census. Elsewhere in the state, San Diego County has the second largest Filipino American population of any county in the nation, with a population of about 180,000, and Stockton in the Central Valley has a significant and historic Filipino population.

==Greater Los Angeles==

Historic Filipinotown is a district of Los Angeles, California, located between the neighborhoods of Westlake and Echo Park. The district's boundaries are defined by the 101 Freeway to the north, Beverly Boulevard to the south, Hoover Street to the west, and Glendale Boulevard to the east, northwest of Downtown Los Angeles. It was created by a resolution proposed by city councilmember Eric Garcetti on August 2, 2002. The crosswalks in Filipinotown are decorated with traditional Filipino basket weaving patterns.
Historic Filipinotown is one of the few areas where Filipinos first settled in Los Angeles during the early part of the 20th century. Many Filipino American families began purchasing homes and establishing businesses in the area beginning from the 1940s, shifting away from the Little Tokyo area in the 1920s and the Bunker Hill area later. In modern times, Historic Filipinotown reflects the polyglot nature of Los Angeles. While the district still has a sizable Filipino population, they are in the minority, overshadowed by a sizable Mexican and Central American population. Nevertheless, the area still has one of the highest concentrations of Filipino Americans in Southern California and still remains the cultural heart of Filipinos throughout Los Angeles. Of the 100,000 Filipinos that reside in the City of Los Angeles, an estimated 6,900 are within Historic Filipinotown.
The Historic Filipinotown Chamber of Commerce leads the effort for commercial expansion in the area. Many Filipino service organizations and institutions, such as the Remy's on Temple Art Gallery, Tribal Cafe, Pilipino Workers Center (PWC), Filipino American Community of Los Angeles (FACLA), People's CORE, Filipino American Service Group, Inc. (FASGI), Search to Involve Pilipino Americans (SIPA), and the Filipino American Library (FAL) are located in Historic Filipinotown. The area is also host to many Filipino restaurants, medical clinics and churches, including St. Columban Filipino Church, the first Filipino Catholic church in the United States (founded in 1946).
Elsewhere in the city, the San Fernando Valley neighborhood of Panorama City is also host to a large Filipino population and institutions.

==San Francisco Bay Area==

Daly City, on the Peninsula region of the Bay Area, has the highest concentration of Filipino Americans of any municipality in the United States; Filipino Americans comprise 33% of the city's population (plus another 10% of Filipino descent), as of 2010. It also has a place in the vernacular as the 'Pinoy Capital', as well as a sister city of Quezon City, Philippines.  Directly surrounding Daly City and spanning south-east into the Peninsula subregion are other cities that have significant Filipino American populations, such as Colma, Broadmoor, and South San Francisco where Filipino Americans form 24%, 23%, and 20.2% of the total population respectively.usa.htm The Peninsula city of Redwood City is home to the Filipino television networks of ABS-CBN and The Filipino Channel (TFC).
Another cluster with a high concentration of Filipino Americans is centered around Vallejo - the largest city in Salano County and just north (across the Carquinez Bridge) of the East Bay in the eastern part of the North Bay.  Vallejo has a population of 116,000, 21% of which are Filipino Americans.  Many towns around Vallejo also have high populations. American Canyon, just to the north, is almost 30% Filipino American. To the south, on the northernmost tip of the East Bay, are several towns that many Filipino Americans call home, such as Hercules with 25.1%, and (with at least 10% Filipino American) Rodeo, Pinole, and Pittsburg.
The suburbanization of the Filipino American population has also resulted in many living within a large swath of land that includes the southern portion of the East Bay and much of Santa Clara County, which is the county with the largest Filipino American population in the Bay Area - although this is in some part due to San Jose having nearly one million residents with 5.6% being Filipino Americans. Just north of Santa Clara County, in the southern ~1/3 of the East Bay, are several cities with high populations: Union City in particular with 20.1% Filipino Americans, but also (with over 9% of the total population) Alameda, Hayward, Newark, and San Leandro.

==San Diego==

Filipino Americans form the largest Asian American subgroup in San Diego County, at almost 6% of the entire county population. San Diego has historically been a popular destination for Filipino immigrants, and has contributed to the growth of its population.

==Stockton==

Stockton in the northern California Central Valley is home to a historic Filipino population that dates back to the 1930s.

=New York=

New York State's cumulative Filipino population is at 200,000, mostly within the New York City area. Within New York City, Queens contains the most number of Filipinos in the Empire State. To a lesser extent, Filipino communities are also present in Nassau, Suffolk, and Rockland counties.

==Woodside==

Woodside is known for its concentration of Filipinos. Of the 85,000 residents of Woodside, about 13,000 are of Filipino background, or 15% of Woodside's population.
Along the 7 line, known colloquially as the "International Express," the 69th Street station serves as the gateway to Queens' very own Little Manila. This area attracts many local Filipinos and non-Filipinos alike and from neighboring places of Long Island,  Connecticut, Pennsylvania, and New Jersey. The coverage of Little Manila is along Roosevelt Avenue, from 63rd Street-71st Street.
Filipino restaurants dominate the area, as well as several freight and remittance centers scattered throughout the neighborhood. Other Filipino-owned businesses including professional services (medical, dental, optical), driving schools, beauty salons, immigration services, and video rental places providing the latest movies from the Philippines dot the community.
Restaurants such as Ihawan, Perlas ng Silangan, Renee's Kitchenette, Fritzie's Bakeshop, Fiesta Grill, Barrio Fiesta and Krystal's Cafe, are the most popular ones, while Philippine remittance and shipping centers such as Johnny Air Cargo, FRS, Edwards Travel, Apholo Shippers, Macro, Philippine National Bank, and Metrobank are present in the area.
Establishments such as Eyellusion, Jefelli Photo and Video, Manila Phil-Am Driving, Santos Medical Clinic, Luz-Vi-Minda, Marlyn's Beauty Salon, Marry Indo Beauty Salon, Freddy Lucero Beauty Salon, Dimple Beauty Salon, Bambina Salon, Jan-Mar Technologies, Don's Professional Services, Casino Law Office, Kulay at Gupit, Phil-Am Foodmart, Mabuhay Filipino Store, and Nepa Q Mart are also there to serve the thriving Filipino American community. $25 and Under; Filipino Comfort Food in Woodside, The New York Times and NYTimes.com, January 5, 2005, retrieved on: 10 June 2005
Jollibee, a famous fast-food chain in the Philippines, opened its first branch in New York on February 2009, selecting Woodside, Queens. Red Ribbon Bakeshop, a sister company of Jollibee, followed suit in January 2010.
BPI, Getz Travel, Lucky Money Remittance, an office of TFC and Papa's Kitchen, that offers KAMAYAN night every Friday & Saturday (Featured in The NY Times on Oct 9, 2013/Dining/Hungry City) on 65th Place & Woodside have also recently opened up in Woodside's Little Manila 
In February 2008, the Bayanihan Filipino Community Center opened its doors in Woodside, a project spearheaded by the Philippine Forum.
Other Filipino businesses that exist in Woodside but are not within the Little Manila area are Engeline's, a Filipino restaurant at 59th Street and Roosevelt Avenue, Tito Rad's Restaurant at Queens Boulevard and 50th Street, Payag Restaurant on 52nd Street - Roosevelt Avenue, Lourdess Restaurant on 58th Street and 37th Avenue and Papa's Kitchen on 65th Place and Woodside Avenue.
Seafood City, a Filipino supermarket chain, plans to open a branch in Queens, New York.

==Manhattan==

The Philippine Consulate of New York has a multipurpose role, aside from its governmental duties and functions, it also caters to many events of the Filipino American community and even has a school called Paaralan sa Konsulado (School at the Consulate), which teaches new-generation Filipino Americans about their culture and language. It is known just as the Philippine Center instead of the consulate. The Philippine Center's newly renovated large edifice is situated in Fifth Avenue in Manhattan and is open to the public on business days and closed on Philippine and American holidays. The building itself is considered as the largest foreign consulate on the strip of the avenue.
New York City also hosts the annual Philippine Independence Day Parade along Madison Avenue on the first Sunday of June. It is also said to be one of the largest parades of any kind in the city and the largest Philippine celebration in the United States. This celebration is a combination of a parade and a street fair. Madison Avenue bursts on this day with Filipino culture, colors and people and is attended by many important political figures, entertainers, civic groups, etc. Former Mayor Rudy Giuliani and Senator Charles Schumer are devout attendees of this annual parade.
A Filipino restaurant to open in Manhattan is the Bayan Cafe around Midtown. (2006).com, retrieved on: 10 June 2007 Grill 21, is a popular Filipino restaurant located on the East Side of Manhattan.
In the East Village/Lower East Side, there was a significant Filipino migration in the late 1980s due to mass recruitment of Filipino medical professionals to area hospitals, notably New York Eye and Ear Infirmary, St. Vincent's Hospital, and Beth Israel Medical Center.  Migration was spurred by the hospitals' offer of subsidized housing to employees, in the midst of ongoing rent strikes in the neighborhood.  The burgeoning Little Manila centered around 1st Avenue and 14th Street, around which there were, at the peak, a number of grocery/video rental stores and Filipino restaurants within a few blocks of one another.  Filipino American community relations were strengthened by local Roman Catholic churches in the East Village and Gramercy area.  As rents increased, and properties were taken over by New York University, the number of Filipinos and Filipino businesses in East Village Little Manila waned.  Elvie's Turo-Turo, the longest standing Filipino business in the area, closed in late 2009 after almost 20 years of operation.  New Filipino business continue to sprout up.com retrieved on February 26, 2010
The Archdiocese of New York designated a chapel named after the first Filipino Saint Lorenzo Ruiz de Manila for the Filipino Apostolate. Officially designated as the "Church of Filipinos," or the Chapel of San Lorenzo Ruiz is the second in the United States and only the third in the world dedicated as such.

=New Jersey=

New Jersey is home to a significant Overseas Filipino population, numbering at more than 100,000 statewide, according to the 2000 U.S. Census. This number may be closing in to the 200,000 level, in 2006, due to a high birth rate among Filipino Americans and a significant amount of 8,000 Filipino immigrants annually. While Filipinos can be found across the state, the commercial districts catering to the Filipino community are found mostly in the state's urban areas. State and local governments in the Garden State have significant number of employees of Filipino background and they play a vital role in the state's affairs, issues, and commerce.
Filipino enclaves exist in Jersey City, Bergenfield, Passaic, Union City and Elizabeth. The Meadowlands Exposition Center in Secaucus hosts the annual Philippine Fiesta, a cultural event that draws Filipinos and non-Filipinos alike from across the New York metropolitan area. The event takes place on the weekend of the second week of August.

==Jersey City==

Seven per cent (7%) of Jersey City's population is Filipino.History of Filipinos in JC
The Five Corners district has a thriving Filipino community, which is the largest Asian-American subgroup in the city. Newark Avenue's strip of Filipino culture and commerce dwarfs that of New York. A variety of Filipino restaurants, shippers and freighters, doctors' officers, bakeries, stores, and even an office of The Filipino Channel made Newark Avenue their home.  The largest Filipino owned grocery store on the east coast Phil-Am Food has been there since 1973. An array of Filipino-owned businesses can also be found at the section of West Side where many of its residents are of Filipino descent. In 2006, a Red Ribbon pastry shop, one of the Philippines' most famous food chains, opened its first branch on the East Coast in the Garden State 
Manila Avenue in Downtown Jersey City was named for the Philippine city because of the many Filipinos who built their homes on this street during the 1970s. A memorial, dedicated to the Filipino American veterans of the Vietnam War, was built in a small square on Manila Avenue. A park and statue dedicated to Jose P. Rizal, the national hero of the Philippines, exists in downtown Jersey City. The City Hall of Jersey City raises the Philippine flag in correlation to this event and as a tribute to the contributions of the Filipino community. The Santakrusan Procession along Manila Avenue has taken place since 1977.nj.ssf/2011/05/amid_delays_santacruzan_street.html

==Bergenfield==

Bergenfield is informally known as the Little Manila of Bergen County. " Popular roast pig finds a following in North Jersey", Herald News, September 12, 2007. Accessed December 8, 2007. "One might find more lechon in Passaic these days. The city may be North Jersey's next so-called Little Manila, following Bergenfield, Bloomfield and Belleville." Of the 14,224 Filipino population in the county as a whole, 3,133 (22% of the county total) live in Bergenfield. Accessed April 10, 2006.com. Accessed April 10, 2006. It is home to many Filipino businesses, particularly restaurants and bakeshops. Red Ribbon, a popular bakeshop in the Philippines, will open its second branch in Bergenfield, after Jersey City.

=Oregon=

==Portland and Beaverton==

Portland is considered as a focal point of Filipino businesses. There are Filipino restaurants and stores in Portland and Beaverton. A famous Filipino restaurant is called "Tambayan Restaurant and Mart." 

=Hawaii=

Hawaii's known for its unique demographic structure, in which it does not have a specific majority group. The Filipino American community make up about 23% of the state's entire population and is only second to their Japanese-American counterparts. Its geographic confines contain as many as 275,000 Filipinos (2000 Census)  and receives an annual amount of 4,000 new Filipino immigrants. The Filipino Americans are also responsible for making Hawaii the most dense Roman Catholic state in the Union.
The Filipino Community Center is the largest Filipino establishment of any kind in the United States. It is currently celebrating the Filipino Centennial, which commemorates 100 years of Filipino immigration and contributions to the state 
The census designated place of Waipahu, on the island of Oahu, has a majority Filipino population.  Many of them are immigrants of the Philippines, and the streets of Waipahu have many small Filipino owned businesses.  Waipahu could be considered as "Hawaii's Little Manila". 85% of the Filipino American population in Hawaii are of Ilocano descent.

=Kansas City Metropolitan Area=

The Kansas City Metropolitan area is thought to be home to a Filipino community  and it has the Fiesta Filipina event held every June.com/overlandpark/events/fiesta-filipina-/E0-001-039168088-6@2011061112

=New Filipinotowns=

The there has been a surge of Filipino immigration to various cities.  In Las Vegas, it is now home to some 90,000 Filipinos, mostly living throughout the Las Vegas Valley (Henderson, Las Vegas and the general/overall county: Clark).  The article also references the following cities as having a surge of new Filipino immigration:


Canada

=Toronto=

Toronto, in the province of Ontario, is home to the largest Filipino contingency in Canada with over 250,000 living in Toronto and its suburbs. Toronto's population is 5% Filipino and are the fourth largest visible minority group. Toronto is the premier destination for Filipino immigrants and tourists with about 9,000 coming every year. Most Filipinos in Toronto tend to settle in Toronto's inner suburbs, Scarborough, North York, East York and Downtown Toronto. These areas within the City of Toronto house usually middle-upper, middle-middle, middle-lower and lower class Filipino Canadians. An increasing amount now tend to settle in the outer suburbs of Mississauga, Brampton, Markham, Richmond Hill, Pickering and Vaughan.
Toronto is host to many Filipino events. These community events attract upwards to 100,000 visitors in a weekend. These events go on almost every weekend from June to August. Toronto is also host to The Philippine Consulate and a Philippine Overseas Labour Office, which serve all of Eastern Canada. On November 30, 2012 Philippine Airlines started service to Toronto Pearson International Airport.

==Mississauga==

Mississauga, a city immediately west of Toronto and Canada's 6th largest city, is home to over 700,000 people of which 4.6% or just over 30,000 are of Filipino origin. Filipino Canadians constitute the third largest Asian Canadian subgroup and fourth largest visible minority group. Tagalog is the 7th most spoken language in the city. The growth of Mississauga's Filipino community is mostly due to its proximity to Toronto.
Mississauga has many Filipino establishments and professional offices scattered throughout the city. Some of the popular establishments are Something Sweet 4 U (2 branches), Ellen's Place, Minerva Studio and Restaurant, Aristokrat, Halo Halo World Cafe and a branch of FV Foods. There are several stores that specialize in Filipino goods and many Asian supermarkets carry Filipino products. The Philippine National Bank has an office in Mississauga. There are many professional offices, mainly dental and law offices.
Mississauga plays host to many Filipino cultural events. Mississauga has two Filipino community centres, Kalayaan Community Centre and The Fiesta Filipina Centre for the Arts. Mississauga Valley Park host many community events including Kalayaan Independence Day Picnic and the Philippine Colleges and Universities Alumni Associations Summerfest.

==Scarborough==

Scarborough, the eastern part of Toronto is home to about 600,000 people with about 7% or over 40,000 people are of Filipino origin. Filipino Canadians are the third largest Asian Canadian subgroup and fourth largest visible minority group in Scarborough.
Filipino establishments and offices dot the Scarborough landscape with almost every mall and plaza with at least one Filipino establishment. Some of the popular restaurants are Marcy Fine Foods, Remely's, Barrio Fiesta, Chef George, Sino Pino, Mayette's, Jesse Jr. (3 branches), Golden Valley Food Outlet, Cucina Manila, Bicol Express, Esperanza's Pancitan, Mami's, Coffee In and Fiesta Filipino. FV Foods (3 branches), Manila Bakery and Baker's Best all specialize in Filipino sweets and breads. Most of these establishments double as a store with imported Filipino products. Many remittance and door to door services have offices in Scarborough such as Mabini Express, PNB, Forex, UMAC Express Cargo, Gemini Express, and RemitX. There are also many professional and medical offices around Scarborough.

==North York==

North York, the northern part of Toronto, is home to over 620,000 people of which about 4% or over 25,000 are of Filipino origin. North York's Filipino community is concentrated around Flemingdon Park and Bathurst Street and Wilson Avenue.
Filipino establishments and professional offices are concentrated around the Bathurst Street and Wilson Avenue area. Filipino businesses dominate the intersection of Bathurst and Wilson and the area surrounding it. Other businesses are located in Don Mills. Some of the most popular establishments include Aristokrat, Cusina, Bulakena, Jollytops, Fort Ilocandia, Happy Birthday Cakes, Manila by Night, Sampaguita, Casa Manila, Angel Kiss, LDV Express Inc. and a branch of FV Foods.
Plans are underway to transform the Bathurst Street and Wilson Avenue area into Canada's first official "Little Philippines" due to the high concentration of Filipino owned businesses in the area. Owners of over 35 Filipino businesses in the area have petitioned the city of Toronto to transform the area into the "Filipino BIA (Business Improvement Area)". This will allow Filipino businesses to hold street festivals and control the appearance of the street.

===Flemingdon Park===

Across the Overlea Bridge from Thorncliffe Park, Flemingdon Park is home to many Filipinos. Of the almost 20,000 residents of Flemingdon Park, about 2,500 are of Filipino descent. Like most high-rise communities in Toronto, Flemingdon Park witnessed the growth of their Filipino community during the 70s and 80s.
Filipinos make up the majority, or about 60%, of the congregation at Blessed John XXIII Parish. For many years, the Filipino Chaplaincy of the Archdiocese of Toronto was housed at the church. Mass was said every Sunday in Tagalog, Simbang Gabi masses were held every year and devotions to Sto. Nino and the Black Nazarene were held while the Filipino Chaplaincy was active at Blessed John XXIII Parish. The Filipino Chaplaincy left the parish in the August 2008 for Our Lady of Assumption Parish in the Bathurst Street area. The school adjacent to the parish, Blessed John XXIII Catholic School, is also attended by predominantly Filipino students.
The Flemingdon Park Plaza, houses a couple of Filipino establishments. A restaurant/store (Angel Kiss), Gemini Express Remittance and a TFC dealer.

==Downtown Toronto==

Old Toronto or Downtown Toronto is home to over 670,000 people of which 3% or over 20,000 are of Filipino origin. Most Filipinos living in Downtown Toronto live in the neighbourhoods of St. James Town, where Filipinos make the largest visible minority group accounting for 22% of the population, and Parkdale, particularly around Jameson Avenue.
Compared to other parts of Toronto, Downtown Toronto has a small number of Filipino businesses. In St. James Town and the surrounding neighbourhoods, there are a few businesses and offices scattered around the area. Some of these include a store (Philippine Variety Store), a take-out restaurant (Wow Philippines! Eat Bulaga!), a dental office (Dr. Victoria Santiago and Associates), a community centre (The Filipino Centre, Toronto) and an office of The Filipino Channel.

==East York==

East York a former borough of Toronto before amalgamation and just east of Toronto's  downtown is home to over 5,000 Filipinos and Filipino Canadians. The Filipino-Canadian community is the third largest Asian Canadian subgroup and makes up about 4% of East York's population. Tagalog is also one of the most spoken languages.

===Thorncliffe Park===

Thorncliffe Park is home to about 20,000 people, which about 3,000 are of Filipino background. Filipinos came to live in the high rises of Thorncliffe Park beginning in the 1970s. During the 1980s and 1990s, Filipinos were the largest visible minority group in Thorncliffe Park. During these years, Thorncliffe Park was host to one of the largest Philippine Independence celebrations and parades in Toronto. During the 2000s more and more Filipinos left Thorncliffe Park for the suburbs and became outnumbered by the South Asian community. More new Filipino immigrants are coming to Thorncliffe Park and the community is growing once again.
Filipino establishments and offices are concentrated in the Overlea Mews and the East York Town Centre. Three Filipino family doctors (Dr. Matta, Dr. Pulido & Dr. Quirante-Flora) have offices in the East York Town Centre. Overlea Mews has a store (Asian Market Place), a take-out restaurant (Philippine-Caribbean Cuisine), a dentist office (Dr. Bernabe & Associates) and an optical store (i2i Optical), all Filipino owned.

United Kingdom

=London=

The largest Filipino community in the United Kingdom is in and around London, based around Earls Court. Other towns and cities with significant Filipino communities include Liverpool, Manchester, Birmingham, Leeds and Barrow-in-Furness. Fiestas are held during June, July and August in various cities throughout the UK. The biggest and longest-running Filipino festival in the UK is 'The Barrio Fiesta sa London', held every year in Lampton Park, Hounslow, West London, usually in the month of July. This event, organised by The Philippine Centre (a voluntary, non-governmental organisation and registered charity in the UK), has been going strong since 1985. It used to be a one-day event on a Sunday, but since 2003, it was extended to two days covering the weekend of both Saturday and Sunday, in order to accommodate all those attending due to a huge boost in visitors and the ever-increasing number of Filipinos in the UK. The Barrio Fiesta sa London is now in its .

Australia

=Sydney=

There are about 85,000 Filipino-Australians in the area controlled by Blacktown City Council. Philippine-born residents comprise 5.9% of the population in the City of Blacktown, and it is the largest directly-born ethnic group in Blacktown. More than fifty percent of Filipino-Australians are based in New South Wales.
Filipino food shops exist around Blacktown Cityrail station.

=Melbourne=

". . in different areas of Metropolitan Melbourne, with the greatest number settling down in the western suburbs."

a website from Vicnet, a division of the State Library of Victoria -
« Filipinos in Victoria » - Melbourne being the capital of Victoria.

Italy

In Palermo, Italy, the predominantly Filipino quarter is called Little Tondo.tv, retrieved on: 12 June 2007 Italy is home to 250,000 Filipinos.

South Korea

=Seoul=

A Little Manila exists in the city of Seoul where many Filipinos work and live.com/2006/10/06/little-manila/  The main area where Filipinos congregate and mingle is in the Hyehwa (혜화동) area of Seoul near the Hyehwa Catholic Church on Sundays.  Outside the church on the Hyehwa rotary before and after mass, there are many stalls selling various balikbayan goods from the Philippines as well as the United States and some stalls selling snacks and food.

Malaysia

Due to the close geographical location, Malaysia is home to one of the largest Filipino community in the world which estimate to be around 245,000 and 637,000 individuals. The presence of the Filipinos in Malaysia has been continuous since antiquity. The Filipinos are mainly concentrated in the eastern shores in Sabah where the influence is evident, spurning ghettos in the state such as in Pulau Gaya. Another sizable community also resides in the Kuala Lumpur metropolitan region. The Filipinos in Malaysia are represented in all walks of life, beginning from the refugees from the south to professionals.

United Arab Emirates

=Dubai=

The district of Karama and Satwa in Dubai is home to thousands of Filipinos working in Dubai.  St. Mary's Church is the focal meeting point of the Filipino community.

Hong Kong

Saudi Arabia

There are many cities in Saudi Arabia where Filipinos have made businesses. For example, in Al-Khobar, in the eastern province, Filipinos are the majority of the visitors in Al-Ramaniyah Mall where you will find the only Jollibee Restaurant in Eastern Province. There are several Philippine eateries or restaurants in the city. There are also Filipino stores named "Kadiwa" where they sell Philippine products and vegetables such as kangkong and malunggay.

Singapore

Over 150,000 Filipinos consider Singapore as their home. A Little Manila exists at the Lucky Plaza, where there are numerous Filipino restaurants, remittance agencies, Filipino beauty salons, Filipino medical offices, and Filipino stores.blogspot.html








