[[Greta Scacchi]]

CATEGORIES: 1960 births, Alumni of Bristol Old Vic Theatre School, English film actresses, English stage actresses, Australian television actresses, Australian film actresses, Australian people of Italian descent, Australian people of English descent, Outstanding Performance by a Supporting Actress in a Miniseries or Movie Primetime Emmy Award winners, Italian emigrants to the United Kingdom, Italian expatriates in Australia, Living people, People from Hurstpierpoint, Naturalised citizens of Australia

Greta Scacchi (born 18 February 1960) is an Emmy Award-winning Italian-Australian actress known for her roles in the films White Mischief, Presumed Innocent and The Player.

Early life

Scacchi was born Greta Gracco in Milan, Italy, on 18 February 1960, the daughter of Luca Scacchi Gracco, an Italian art dealer and painter, and Pamela, an English dancer and antiques dealer.

Career

In 1977, Scacchi left UWA to return to England to pursue an acting career, studying at the Bristol Old Vic Theatre School, with Miranda Richardson and Amanda Redman. In 1982, she made her film debut in the German movie, Das Zweite Gesicht (The Second Face), and gave versatile performances in films, such as Heat and Dust (1983), The Ebony Tower (1984), The Coca Cola Kid (1985), White Mischief (1987), Presumed Innocent (1990), The Player (1992) and Country Life (1994). She turned down the role of Catherine Trammell in Basic Instinct (1992).3
In 1996, she won an Emmy Award for her work as Empress Alexandra Fyodorovna of Russia in the television film, Rasputin: Dark Servant of Destiny, and was nominated for a Golden Globe and numerous other awards. In 1999, she had a role as an Italian-Australian single mother in the Australian film Looking for Alibrandi, a performance for which she won the 2000 AFI award for Best Supporting Actress.screendaily.article
In 2007, she received an Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie for Broken Trail.
Scacchi is fluent in English, French, German and Italian, which has made her a popular choice for European casting directors and has been an asset when working for European directors and producers. In May 2011, she appeared alongside Anita Dobson in the play Bette and Joan at London's Arts Theatre, directed by Bill Alexander, about the personal and professional relationship between Bette Davis and Joan Crawford.
In September 2013 Sir Jonathan Miller directed a Gala Performance of William Shakespeare's King Lear at The Old Vic in London. Scacchi played Regan.oldvictheatre.aspx?psn=16151

Personal life

Scacchi was in a relationship with New Zealand musician Tim Finn from 1983–89. A marriage to American actor Vincent D'Onofrio
Scacchi applied for British citizenship after turning 18, but was turned down because her father was not a British citizen. After appealing unsuccessfully, she decided not to apply for it again, and retained her Italian citizenship. In January 1995, she became an Australian citizen and has since had dual nationality.
She lived for many years in Hurstpierpoint until moving in early 2011 to a rented property in East Grinstead because of a dispute with her neighbour.
Scacchi is an active supporter of campaigns and organisations that promote environmental causes. She has supported Greenpeace and, more recently, Christian Aid's climate change campaign.christianaid.uk/aboutus/celebrity-supporters/greta-scacchi.
In October 2103 she was made a Cavaliere dell'Ordine al Merito for her services to the Arts.Cinema: conferito a Greta Scacchi Ordine a Merito

Filmography






