[[Noli de Castro]]

CATEGORIES: 1949 births, De La Salle University alumni, Filipino television journalists, Filipino radio journalists, Filipino Roman Catholics, Living people, People from Oriental Mindoro, People from Manila, Members of the Senate of the Philippines, University of the East alumni, Vice Presidents of the Philippines, Independent politicians in the Philippines

Manuel Leuterio de Castro, Jr. (born June 6, 1949), better known as Noli de Castro or "Kabayan" Noli de Castro, was Vice President of the Philippines (2004–2010). 
A radio and TV newsreader and commentator by profession, de Castro was elected Senator in 2001 and Vice President in 2004. He is the first independent candidate to receive the highest number of votes in a Philippine senatorial election and the first elected Vice President of the Philippines to run independently but campaigned in both elections under an alliance that supported the candidacy and administration of Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo.
De Castro currently anchors his radio program Kabayan on DZMM and TV Patrol.

Early life and broadcasting career

De Castro was born in the town of Pola, Oriental Mindoro at 4:00 PM on June 6, 1949. He is the fifth child of Manuel de Castro, Sr. (born c. 1909) and Demetria (née Leuterio, born c. 1911). He studied at the University of Perpetual Help System DALTA in 1971 with a degree in Bachelor of Commerce, majoring in Banking and Finance from the University of the East and a doctorate degree Honoris causa from the Polytechnic University of the Philippines.
De Castro began his career as a broadcaster during the Marcos dictatorship, when press freedoms were suppressed. He worked as a field reporter for Johnny de Leon, a popular radio announcer at the time. He later became a radio announcer in RPN's DWWW station from 1982 to 1986.
After the ouster of Marcos, de Castro joined ABS-CBN. He got his break into television as the segment host of Good Morning, Philippines' "At your Service". He also joined dzMM, a radio station of ABS-CBN, as the anchorman of "Kabayan". It was because of the popularity of the program that he gained the nickname "Kabayan Noli."
In 1987, de Castro became host of "Magandang Gabi, Bayan" (Good Evening, Nation) and anchorman of the news and public affairs hit, "TV Patrol". In January 1999 he became overall head of production of "TV Patrol" and vice president of dzMM.

Senate

In 2001, de Castro successfully ran for senator as an independent candidate but campaigned with the opposition. He garnered more than 16 million votes, the highest ever for a senator in the history of Philippine politics at that time.
In his three years at the Senate, de Castro authored 252 bills and resolutions, 140 of which he principally authored. He authored the following significant laws:  Alternative Dispute Resolution, Senior Citizens Act, Balikbayan Law, Quarantine Act and Newborn Screening Test Act. De Castro. Ovp.net. Retrieved on 2011-09-27. 
Among the most significant legislations he authored and principally sponsored is the Expanded Senior Citizens Act of 2002 or RA 9257, which honors senior citizens for their special role in society and to continuously make them productive members of the community. The law expanded the benefits and advantages of senior citizens without qualifying whether or not they earn less than P60,000, which was a prerequisite under the old law.  Further, said law ensured for our Senior Citizens the following: availment of employment rights and training programs for those who have reached the compulsory retirement age under existing laws but are still willing and able to continue with their employment; unconstrained access to formal and non-formal education; establishment of a National Health Program for Senior Citizens; setting up of residential care or group home for the aged in every province; recognition of Civil and Political Rights of the Senior Citizens and protection against violation of the same; granting of additional benefits and privileges in the form of discounts, tax exemptions, free medical and dental services; and protection against discrimination.
Realizing the importance of speedy resolution of disputes before contesting parties go to court, VP de Castro filed the Alternative Dispute Resolution (RA 9285) in 2000. RA 9285 sought to relieve the judicial courts of numerous disputes, thus unclogging our court dockets. De Castro had in mind the poor section of our society, those that cannot afford a long and costly trial and thus are usually desperate in their quest for justice.
He also authored the Balikbayan Law in 2002 to grant overseas Filipino workers an additional tax-exempt shopping privilege on purchases of livelihood tools so they can invest their earnings in small and medium scale businesses. The law also provides skills training for the balikbayan and his or her family members to enable them to become economically self-reliant upon their return.
One of the issues he faces during his terms was healthcare, so he founded the Newborn Screening Test Act of 2001 and the Quarantine Act. VP De Castro authored the Newborn Screening Test Act to test infants for potentially devastating and fatal metabolic disorders, namely, congenital hypothyroidism (CH), congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), galactosemia (GAL), phenylketonuria (PKU) and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency (G6PD).  This is because any infant could look normal and healthy at first glance; however, detailed screening is necessary to detect early symptoms of the disorders that could result to retardation, in the extreme case death. This law likewise integrates newborn screening into the government's existing health care delivery system to improve social justice and health awareness, without the people having to pay a cent for such test. On another note, the Quarantine Act seeks to build a strong defense against the killer pneumonia and other similar contagious diseases. He proposed the establishment of Quarantine system and broadening of the authority of quarantine officers while safeguarding the constitutional rights of the person detained.

Vice-Presidency

In the 2004 Philippine election, De Castro ran for vice president. He won by a narrow margin over Senator Loren Legarda, but an electoral protest was filed by the latter. The Supreme Court, acting as the Presidential Electoral Tribunal (PET), dismissed the said protest.gov.  As HUDCC Chair, Vice President De Castro also serves as ex officio Chairman of the Home Development Mutual Fund (HDMF or Pag-IBIG Fund), the Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board (HLURB), the National Housing Authority (NHA), the National Home Mortgage Finance Corporation (NHMFC) and the Social Housing Finance Corporation (SHFC) as well as ex officio Vice Chairman of the Home Guaranty Corporation (HGC).  He has also been designated as concurrent Presidential Adviser on Overseas Filipino Workers, as Alternate Chairman of the National Anti-Poverty Commission, Head of the Task Force Against Illegal Recruitment, Price Monitoring Czar and Cabinet Officer for Regional DevelopmPalawan).

Bigamy and abandonment case

In August 2007, charges of bigamy, falsification of public documents, perjury were filed against De Castro and his wife Arlene Sinsuat de Castro by Arlene's sons from previous marriage. The sons Jhoveenel Ombus, 34, and Arjurie Omar Sinsuat Olor accused Arlene Sinsuat de Castro of abandoning them at Calamba, Laguna in 1979, and of having failed to acknowledge that they were her sons. The brothers alleged that the De Castros were married on July 16, 1991, although Arlene's alleged previous marriage on Nov. 17, 1971 to Juanito Olor, their father, had not been annulled. Inquirer. 08/18/2007 The case was dismissed for lack of probable cause.TV, Bigamy case vs VP Noli de Castro, wife dismissed. Gmanews.tv. Retrieved on 2011-09-27.

2010 presidential election

De Castro consistently was a front runner in the 2010 presidential elections. Being the Vice President, he was popular among voters to replace outgoing president Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo. Newsinfo.net (2009-01-13). Retrieved on 2011-09-27. However, in December 2009, he did not file to be included on the ballot and in an interview conducted by Karen Davila, he announced his retirement from politics and intention to get back to his old job as a broadcast journalist.

Post Vice-Presidency and returning career

Leaving office on June 30, 2010, de Castro continued anchoring his Saturday morning commentary show "Para Sa'Yo Bayan" (For you, Nation) until July 10, 2010. Two days later, on July 12, 2010, he made his full-time comeback on radio when his morning radio program, "Kabayan" was relaunched. He was reinstated as its newsreader and commentator of such show. The program is aired over AM radio station DZMM and simulcast over its television counterpart, DZMM TeleRadyo.
On November 3, 2010, ABS-CBN announced his return together with Korina Sanchez as weeknight anchors of TV Patrol. They joined Ted Failon on November 8, 2010.
On January 10, 2011, he joined Ted Failon as the weekday anchor of "Radyo Patrol Balita: Alas Siyete" (Radio Patrol News: Seven O'Clock). The said newscast airs from DZMM nationwide via DYAB (Cebu) and DXAB (Davao) and worldwide via The Filipino Channel. He and Failon are also co-anchors of Kabayan, which continues for about 30 minutes after the newscast.
De Castro made a special guest appearance at the 6th anniversary special of ABS-CBN's child-oriented sketch comedy show Goin' Bulilit aired on February 6, 2011.
On September 25, 2011 episode of Gandang Gabi, Vice!, de Castro made an appearance as Vice Ganda's guest for interview & sampling of TV Patrol.

In popular culture

The popular line "Magandang Gabi, Bayan!" has used other time greetings as "Magandang Umaga, Bayan" as a morning show (now occupied as Umagang Kay Ganda) and "Magandang Tanghali, Bayan!" as a noontime show (now occupied as It's Showtime).






