[[Mass Romantic]]

CATEGORIES: 2000 debut albums, The New Pornographers albums, Mint Records albums

Mass Romantic is the debut album by Canadian indie rock band The New Pornographers. Produced by David Carswell and band bassist John Collins, it was released on Mint Records in 2000. The album was three years in the making, with musicians A.C. Newman and Dan Bejar writing songs as early as 1998. With encouragement from peers, they recorded an album with other Canadian musicians from groups including The Evaporators, Zumpano, and Destroyer.
Released in 2000, the album failed to chart in Canada or the United States, but positive reviews from music media led to the group having a sold-out tour. Critical acclaim was very positive, and the album received a score of 87 from Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics.

Production

Mass Romantic was recorded over the course of almost three years. The first four songs were finished in early 1998. The New Pornographers claimed that the songs "were just sitting around. Friends would hear the songs and go, 'This is really great,' and so it was kind of frustrating in a way. We'd go, 'Yeah, well, we're going to try to record a record.'"
Production on the album was difficult. A.C. Newman stated, "I remember 'Letter From an Occupant' was a pretty belabored song. It ended up being almost minimal, but I remember there's so much shit we put on it. There's a psychedelic 12-string guitar solo, a backwards guitar, there's a kind of really cool synth that's in there but buried. At some point, you have to choose. That was the hardest part about mixing the thing: just making that judgment call. I only feel at peace with the record now because people seem to like it."
Many of the songs on the album were written by A.C. Newman and Destroyer frontman Dan Bejar. Newman recalled that he thought "'How could we lose?' You could just take some interesting elements and put them together. Even taking myself out of the picture, when I looked at the band I just thought, 'This band's got to be great.' I thought, 'Okay, everyone can hate my songs, they can dismiss them.' But I have the most confidence in Dan's songs because I'm totally outside of him, looking in. I'm just a fan of him."
The song "Breakin' the Law" was taken from Destroyer's first album We'll Build Them a Golden Bridge. The group vocals at the end of "Breakin' the Law" are credited to the Camp Northstar Kids' Chorus, a reference to the Canadian comedy film Meatballs. The chorus is actually every member of the band singing. Newman stated, "I like the fact that people think that it's a kids' group... I love the fact that in the Rolling Stone review they mention the chorus of kids. I just think it's great that people actually believe that, because it's such a fucking ridiculous thing for a band to do."

Style

Tim DiGravina of Allmusic called Mass Romantic an album that "displays a decidedly power pop form of indie rock." Many critics compared the album's music to musicians of the past. DiGravina noted comparison per individual song with "the Beatles ('The Mary Martin Show') to David Bowie ('The Slow Descent into Alcoholism') to T." Jim Caliguiry of The Austin Chronicle noted, "They borrow from Cheap Trick, the Beach Boys, Big Star, Roxy Music, Buzzcocks, and Robyn Hitchcock".
The album's lyrics have been described as "ridiculous and melodramatic as they are witty".

Release

Mass Romantic was released originally on November 21, 2000 by Mint Records on vinyl and compact disc in Canada. It received an official United States release when it was released in a remastered form by Matador Records on October 7, 2003.
The New Pornographers went on their first tour to promote the album. The tour presented problems, including throat damage, broken-down buses, and having to take expensive cab rides. A.C. Newman spoke positively about the tour, stating, "There's been fairly good crowds, but the shows haven't been that crazy. They've been getting better... We're not really a party band. I hope people can party. We give them the music! Isn't that enough?" The tour sold out.

Reception

Mass Romantic was well received in Canada, where it won a Juno Award for Alternative Album of the Year.
The Alternative Press gave the album a rating of four out of five, referring to it as a "masterful reproduction of underground power pop ca. 1979, complete with cheesy synths and slashing guitar leads".
The album charted in several best of the year lists from various critics. Pitchfork Media rated it the ninth best album of 2001, stating, "Energetic, smooth, and masterfully executed, Mass Romantic is the catchiest thing to come out in ages."

Track listing

All songs written by A.C. Newman except where noted.

Personnel






