[[Falling into Infinity]]

CATEGORIES: Dream Theater albums, 1997 albums, Albums with cover art by Storm Thorgerson, East West Records albums

Falling Into Infinity is the fourth studio album by American progressive metal band Dream Theater, released on September 23, 1997 through EastWest Records. It is the band's first and only studio album to feature keyboardist Derek Sherinian following the departure of Kevin Moore in 1994.
Falling into Infinity was produced by Kevin Shirley. The album's writing and pre-production phases were stressful periods for the band, and at one point almost led them to retire. It was recorded in June 1997 at The Power Station (now Avatar Studios) in Manhattan, New York. A commercial and critical failure, the album led to the band demanding to be free from record label interference for all future albums.

Background

Following a brief tour in support of the A Change of Seasons EP, Dream Theater entered Dream Factory Studios in East Rutherford, New Jersey in early 1996 to begin writing material for a new album.
For over a year, Dream Theater wrote songs without being given permission to record them, and at one point became so frustrated that they considered retirement. Following the sessions, the song became "You Not Me".
Actual recording for the album began on June 2 at The Power Station (now Avatar Studios) in Manhattan, New York City. Its eventual title was proposed by Petrucci.

Artwork

Falling into Infinity's artwork was designed by Storm Thorgerson. Its cover art depicts two people staring at each other through binoculars on sea-based platforms, with an effect giving the impression that they are also being viewed with binoculars. The image was not computer-generated; rather, Thorgerson built a platform, employed a pair of models, and placed them in the sea off Camber Sands in England to get the photograph. The artwork is also notable for being one of three Dream Theater albums, alongside Once in a Livetime and When Day and Dream Unite, not to feature the band's signature font. This was due to Thorgerson's refusal to work with fonts created by other artists.

Composition

Falling into Infinity is the first Dream Theater album to feature multiple songs with lyrics by Mike Portnoy. Portnoy and the rest of the band were forced to write more lyrics following the departure of Kevin Moore.
In the official Dream Theater biography Lifting Shadows, author Rich Wilson described Falling into Infinity's musical style as having an "accessible nature".

Release and reception

Falling into Infinity was released on September 23, 1997. In America, the album debuted at number 52 on the Billboard 200. Fan reception to the album was muted, with some going so far as to accuse Dream Theater of "selling out in an unashamed attempt to appeal to the mass market." Critical reception to the album was also lackluster, resulting in many battles with the press, particularly in Britain. In Lifting Shadows, Rich Wilson described it as "one of the patchier albums in the band's catalogue." In a three out of five star review for AllMusic, Jeremy Ulrey called it "the band's weakest effort since their debut."

Legacy

Falling into Infinity is considered a commercial failure, failing to break any new ground for Dream Theater or increase their sales despite its more commercial direction. As a result of the creative and personal tensions experienced during the album's production phase, it has been described as the band's "most difficult album",

Track listing

Personnel

Chart performance




