[[Stanley Donwood]]

CATEGORIES: English artists, Grammy Award-winning artists, Alumni of the University of Exeter, Year of birth missing (living people), Living people

Stanley Donwood is the pen name of English artist and writer Dan Rickwood. Donwood is known for his close association with the British rock group Radiohead, having created all their album and poster art since 1994. He has also collaborated with Radiohead frontman Thom Yorke and others on the band's website, and has appeared in the occasional band webcast and with Yorke at the 2001 Grammy Awards ceremony.

Career

After graduating from the University of Exeter, Donwood worked as a freelance artist in Plymouth, England. Aside from his work for Radiohead, Donwood also maintains his own website, Slowly Downward, where short stories and various other writings are published.

Radiohead

Stanley Donwood and Radiohead frontman Thom Yorke met as art students at the University of Exeter. Yorke is credited alongside Donwood under the monikers "The White Chocolate Farm", "Dr. Tchock", "Tchocky" or similar abbreviations.
For Radiohead's 2000 album Kid A, Donwood produced a series of mountainous landscapes and a series of images centered around a minotaur. Donwood cites Caspar David Friedrich and Hieronymus Bosch, as well as time spent in war museums and mountain landscapes as influences in its bleak, post-apocalyptic style.
In 2002, Donwood and Yorke won a Grammy Award for Best Recording Package for the Special Edition for the album Amnesiac. Donwood's writings have also been used in his Radiohead album artwork, and frequently on Radiohead's official website.
Nine acrylic on canvas paintings, inspired by Paula Scher's map paintings, provided the basis for 2003's Hail to the Thief's look, creating maps of war torn cities like Kabul and Grozny out of brightly colored blocks with politically charged words or phrases.
In 2006, Donwood began creating and selling large screenprints. In an interview with antiMusic."
In 2006, Donwood's exhibition, "London Views", consisted of a series of fourteen lino prints of various London landmarks being destroyed by fire and flood. The prints are being exhibited in Lazarides Gallery, in Soho, London. The prints are also used as the cover and insert art for Thom Yorke's solo album, The Eraser.
In November 2006, Donwood exhibited the original paintings and other artwork done by him and Yorke for Radiohead albums, at Iguapop Gallery in Barcelona. The exhibit focused on Kid A, Amnesiac and Hail to the Thief as well as a companion art book called Dead Children Playing which was produced, credited to Donwood and Tchock.

Six Inch Records

In late 2006, Stanley Donwood, along with Richard Lawrence launched an independent record company, named Six Inch Records.
Only three albums were released on the record label, each with three hundred and thirty three copies of each release. The CDs were packaged by hand into sleeves that were six inches square. All mechanised operations - printing, cutting and scoring were carried out using a 1965 Heidelberg platen press.
On 18 February 2009, Donwood announced on the Six Inch Record blog that the online shop was to be closed, as there were no more records to sell. Donwood stated on the matter: "Six Inch Records is no longer a going concern, and there will be no more musicians signed, records made, events held."

List of works

Bibliography

Cover art

Paintings

Other

Screenprint

Linoprint

Promotions






