[[Jamie Dimon]]

CATEGORIES: 1956 births, American bankers, American chief executives, American people of Greek descent, Twin people from the United States, Businesspeople from New York City, Citigroup employees, Directors of JPMorgan Chase, Harvard Business School alumni, JPMorgan Chase employees, Living people, New York Democrats, Tufts University alumni, Chairmen of corporations, American corporate directors

James "Jamie" Dimon (s Best CEOs list in the All-America Executive Team Survey from 2008 through 2011."The All-America Executive Team Best CEOs", Institutional Investor. 
He was named the CEO of the Year in 2011."Dimon Named CEO of the Year in 2011 All-America Executive Team Survey". Institutional Investor. 2011]Rolling StoneBusinessweek.com
He received a $23 million pay package for fiscal year 2011, more than any other bank CEO in the United States. JPMorgan's Dimon gets $23 million for 2011 and bragging rights Dimon received $20 million in compensation for his work in fiscal year 2013.

Early life

Dimon was born in New York City to Theodore and Themis (née Kalos) Dimon, one of three sons. He is of Greek descent His paternal grandfather was a Greek immigrant and was a banker in Athens. He has an older brother, Peter, and a fraternal twin brother, Ted. Dimon's father and grandfather were both stockbrokers at Shearson. Tearing Down the Walls: How Sandy Weill Fought His Way to the Top of the Financial World... and then Nearly Lost it All. Simon & Schuster, 2003, p. 50
He majored in psychology and economics at Tufts University. During one summer's break from Tufts, he worked at Shearson. After graduating, he worked in management consulting for two years before enrolling at Harvard Business School, along with classmates Jeffrey Immelt, Steve Burke, Stephen Mandel and Seth Klarman. During the summer at Harvard, he worked at Goldman Sachs. He graduated in 1982, earning a Master of Business Administration degree as a Baker Scholar. After graduation, Sandy Weill convinced him to turn down offers from Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, and Lehman Brothers to join him as an assistant at American Express. Tearing Down the Walls: How Sandy Weill Fought His Way to the Top of the Financial World... and then Nearly Lost it All. Simon & Schuster, 2003, p.74 Although Weill could not offer the same amount of money as the investment banks, Weill promised Dimon that he would have "fun".74" Dimon's father, Theodore Dimon, was an executive vice president at American Express. The younger Dimon came to Weill's attention when Theodore passed along an essay that Jamie had written.

Career

In a power struggle  In his 2005 University of Chicago Graduate School of Business Fireside Chat and 2006 Kellogg School of Management interviews, Dimon confirmed that Weill fired him.
Dimon resigned as CEO of First Chicago Corp. In March 2000, Dimon became CEO of Bank One, the nation's fifth largest bank.
On December 31, 2005, he was named chief executive officer of JPMorgan Chase and one year later, on December 31, 2006, he was named chairman of the board. 
In March 2008 he was a board member of the New York Federal Reserve Bank and CEO of JPMorgan and made decisions in connection with the $55 billion loan to J.P. Morgan to bail out Bear Stearns.
Under Dimon's leadership, with the acquisitions during his tenure, JPMorgan Chase has become the leading U.S. bank in domestic assets under management, market capitalization value, and publicly traded stock value. JPMorgan Chase is also the No. 1 credit card provider in the U.S.
In 2009, Dimon was considered one of "The TopGun CEOs" by Brendan Wood International, an advisory agency."The Market's Best Managers". Forbes."Brendan Wood International Announces 24 TopGun CEOs in the US". Reuters.
On September 26, 2011, Dimon was involved in a high-profile heated exchange with Mark Carney, the governor of the Bank of Canada, in which Dimon said provisions of the Basel III international financial regulations discriminate against U.S. banks and are "anti-American". "Dimon in attack on Canada's bank chief". Financial Times.
On May 10, 2012, JPMorgan Chase initiated an emergency conference call to report a loss of at least $2 billion in trades that Dimon said were "designed to hedge the bank's overall credit risks". The strategy was, in Dimon's words, "flawed, complex, poorly reviewed, poorly executed, and poorly monitored"."Two Billion Dollar Hedge" Financial Times.  The episode is being investigated by the Federal Reserve, the SEC, and the FBI.[ref]
"More Bad News as FBI gets involved" Forbes.[/ref]
Dimon commented on the Volcker Rule in January 2012, "Part of the Volcker Rule I agreed with, which is no prop trading. But market making is an essential function. And the public should recognize that we have the widest, the deepest, the most transparent capital markets in the world. And part of that is because we have enormous market making. If the rules were written as they originally came out; I suspect they'll be changed, it would really make it hard to be a market maker in the United States."  Interview - JPMorgan CEO Jamie Dimon On Regulation & Volcker Rule, By Charlie Gasparino, FBN, Jan 24, 2012
He serves as Chairman of the Executive Committee of The Business Council for 2011 and 2012.The Business Council, Official website, Executive Committee
In 2013, Dimon became a LinkedIn Influencer, writing about business and sharing professional insights."Dimon Joins LinkedIn Influencer Team", Bloomberg, New York, 3 June 2013. Retrieved on 30 July 2013.
In October 2013, it was reported that Dimon had given up his role as chairman of JP Morgan's main banking business to be succeeded by former Johnson & Johnson chief executive William Weldon. Dimon retained his roles as chairman and CEO of the parent company.
On January 24th, 2014 it was announced that Dimon would receive $20 million for his work in 2013, despite what was reported as the bank's worst year under Dimon's reign. The award was a 74% raise, which included over $18 million in restricted stock. Forbes reported that, in a statement following news of Dimon's compensation, the bank said, "Under Mr. Dimon's stewardship, the Company has fortified its control infrastructure and processes and strengthened each of its key businesses while continuing to focus on strengthening the Company's leadership capabilities across all levels."

Federal TARP funds

As head of JPMorgan Chase, Dimon oversaw the transfer of $25 billion in funds from the U.S. Treasury Department to the bank on October 28, 2008, under the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP). (October 13, 2008) "TARP details emerge" This was the fifth largest amount transferred under Section A of TARPEricson, He & Schoenfeld (February 4, 2009) "Tracking the $700 Billion Bailout" to help troubled assets related to residential mortgages. It has been widely reported "Too Big to Fail Book". The New York Times. November 12, 2009. that JPMorgan Chase was in much better financial shape than other banks and did not need TARP funds but accepted the funds because the government did not want to single out only the banks with capital issues.
JPMorgan Chase advertised in February 2009 that it would be using its capital-base monetary strength to acquire new businesses. "JP Morgan Chase's Premature Evacuation".
By February 2009, the U.S. government had not moved forward in enforcing TARP's intent of funding JPMorgan Chase with $25 billion. In the face of the government's lack of action, Dimon was quoted during the week of February 1, 2009, as saying,

JPMorgan Chase was arguably the healthiest of the nine largest U.S. banks and did not need to take TARP funds. In order to encourage smaller banks with troubled assets to accept this money, Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson allegedly coerced the CEOs of the nine largest banks to accept TARP money under short notice."Documents Reveal How Paulson Forced Banks To Take TARP Cash" JPMorgan Chase was also the first of the largest banks to repay the TARP money.

Relations with the Obama Administration

Dimon donates primarily to the Democratic Party. "Jamie Dimon, Democrat?". The Washington Post. In May 2012, he described himself as "barely a Democrat" Summers, Juana (May 13, 2012). "Dimon: I'm 'barely a Democrat
After Obama won the 2008 presidential election, there was speculation that Dimon would serve in the Obama Administration as Secretary of the Treasury. Obama eventually named the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Timothy Geithner, to the position.
Following the acquisition of Washington Mutual by JPMorgan Chase, Obama commented on Dimon's handling of the real-estate crash, credit crisis, and the banking collapse affecting corporations nationwide, including major financial institutions like Bank of America, Citibank, and Wachovia (now Wells Fargo).

Dimon is influential in the Obama White House with close ties to some there, including former Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel."In Washington, One Bank Chief Still Holds Sway". The New York Times. July 18, 2009.  Dimon was one of three CEOs—along with Lloyd Blankfein and Vikram Pandit—said by the Associated Press to have had liberal access to former Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner."Mr. Geithner Wall Street is on Line 1 (again)". NBC News. Associated Press. October 8, 2009.
Nonetheless, Dimon has often publicly disagreed with some of Obama's policies."How Obama and Dimon Drifted Apart". The New York Times. June 17, 2010.
On the May 15, 2012, episode of ABC's The View, Obama responded to a question from Whoopi Goldberg regarding JPMorgan Chase's recently publicized $2 billion trading losses by defending Dimon against allegations of irresponsibility, saying, "first of all, JP Morgan is one of the best managed banks there is. Jamie Dimon, the head of it, is one of the smartest bankers we've got", but added, "it's going to be investigated". ABC. May 15, 2012.

London Whale

In the case of the 2012 JPMorgan Chase trading loss, according to a US Senate report published in March 2013 after 9 months of investigation,[ref]Senate report "JPMORGAN CHASE WHALE TRADES:
A CASE HISTORY OF DERIVATIVES
RISKS AND ABUSES", MAJORITY AND MINORITY STAFF REPORT, PERMANENT SUBCOMMITTEE
ON INVESTIGATIONS, UNITED STATES SENATE, RELEASED IN CONJUNCTION WITH THE
PERMANENT SUBCOMMITTEE ON INVESTIGATIONS
MARCH 15, 2013 HEARING, 
 Dimon misled investors and regulators in April as losses rose dangerously to $6.2 billion on a "monstrous" derivatives bet made by the so-called "London Whale" Bruno Iksil.  According to Carl Levin, Chairman of this panel, JP Morgan had "a trading operation that piled on risk, ignored limits on risk taking, hid losses, dodged oversight and misinformed the public". Dimon dismissed press accounts of possible losses in Iksil's book as a "tempest in a teapot" on April 13, 2012 when he knew that Iksil had already lost $1 billion, which led Levin to say "None of those statements made on April 13 to the public, to investors, to analysts were true,"  and "The bank also neglected to disclose on that day that the portfolio had massive positions that were hard to exit, that they were violating in massive numbers key risk limits." 

Dimon then corrected that wrong information a month later, in May 2012, before the true damage was revealed, after US Securities and Exchange financial watchdog started reviewing the losses.guardian.co.uk/business/2012/may/11/jp-morgan-trader-london-whale

Personal life

In 1983, Dimon married Judith Kent, whom he met at Harvard Business School. They were married by a rabbi, as Kent is Jewish. Last Man Standing: The Ascent of Jamie Dimon and JPMorgan Chase p. 23 They have three daughters: Julia, Laura, and Kara Leigh. 22

Fictional portrayals

Dimon is portrayed by Bill Pullman in the 2011 HBO film Too Big to Fail and by Michael Brandon in the BBC TV film The Last Days of Lehman Brothers.






