[[Transport in Poland]]

CATEGORIES: Transport in Poland

The transport in Poland involves air traffic, waterways, roads and railroads.
As a country located at the 'cross-roads' of Europe, Poland, with its developed economy is a nation with a large and increasingly modern network of transport infrastructure.
The Polish highways networks has been viewed in the past as chronically underdeveloped and lacking in basic modern infrastructure. After the fall of communism and after joining the European Union, this situation is rapidly changing for the better and in the next decade Poland plans to have a very modern network of highways. The country's most important waterway is the river Vistula. The largest seaports are the Port of Szczecin and Port of Gdańsk. Air travel is generally used for international travel, with many flights originating at Warsaw Chopin Airport. Railways connect all of Poland's major cities and the state-owned PKP corporation, through its subsidiaries, runs a great number of domestic and international services of varying speed and comfort. In addition to this five out of sixteen Polish voivodeships have their own provincial rail service providers. Many major Polish cities have rapid transit systems (typically tram networks) and public transport is available in most areas throughout the country.

Roads

Polish public roads are grouped into categories related to administrative division. Poland has  are unsurfaced (2011):Transport - activity results in 2011 Główny Urząd Statystyczny
According to national roads state report by GDDKiA in 2008 1/4 of national roads were capable of handling 11.5 tonnes per axle loads. GDDKiA 
In recent years, the network has been improving and government spending on road construction recently saw a huge increase, due to rapid development of the country and the inflow of European Union funds for infrastructure projects.Adisa Banjanovic, Improving Poland's transport infrastructure

Motorways and expressways

Polish motorways and expressways are part of national roads network. As of December 2012, there are  of expressways (drogi ekspresowe, singular - droga ekspresowa).
30px|left Motorways in Poland,  (2012): 
30px|left Expressways in Poland,  (2012): 
S1 | S2 | S3 | S5 |
S6 | S7 | S8 | S10 |
S11 | S12 | S14 |
S17 | S19 | S22 |

Air transport

The most important airport in Poland is Warsaw 'Frederic Chopin' International Airport. Warsaw's airport is the main international hub for LOT Polish Airlines and currently serves as the destination for around 75% of all major international flights into Poland. With the development, and upcoming privatisation of LOT in 2011, the airport is hoping to see yet more routes opened to destinations around the globe.
In addition to Warsaw Chopin, Wrocław, Gdańsk, Katowice, Kraków and Poznań all have major international airports.
In preparation for the Euro 2012 football championships being jointly hosted by Poland and Ukraine, a number of airports around the country were be renovated and redeveloped. This includes the building of state of the art new terminals with an increased number of jetways and stands at both Copernicus Airport in Wrocław and Lech Wałęsa Airport in Gdańsk.
National airlines:

Airports

The Polish airline market was until 2004 a classical case of closed market, with bilateral agreements between countries served from the national hub- Warsaw. The regional airports were mostly serving as spokes, and were controlled by PPL, state-owned airport authority. However, in the nineties it was decided to deregulate the airport market and abolish the dominant position of state-owned airport manager, PPL. Nearly all local airports, apart from Zielona Góra airport, became separate companies, with local governments involved in their management, what led to the partial decentralisation. Soon after opening of Polish sky for competition flights "avoiding" the Warsaw hub became more often.
There are currently 12 passenger airports in operation, and there is also an airport Heringsdorf in German village Garz, 7 kilometers from polish seaside spa Świnoujście.
However, the rapid development (8% of increase of passengers served at Polish airports in 2008 compared to 2007) of the unsaturated market and the existence of vast areas of land, not covered by airports within 100 kilometers of journey, allow to assume that many new airports could be necessary to properly serve this land pupulated by appox. 38,2- 35,8 million inhabitants. Especially the area of eastern Poland should be better penetrated by airline traffic. There is a network of secondary airports that could be used, but lack of capital and expertise prohibit their utilisation (case of Biała Podlaska Airport at the Belarussian border).
Main airports:
Following are the largest airports in Poland, with passenger and cargo traffic flow (2009): , 2007
Number of airports in Poland – 123
(1999 est.)
Airports – with paved runways:
Total: 84 (2005)
Airports – with unpaved runways:
Total: 39 (2005)
Heliports: 2 (2005)

Marine

Marine transport in Poland has two main sub-groups, riverine and seaborne. On the Baltic Sea coast, a number of large seaports exist to serve the international freight and passenger trade; these are typically deep water ports and are able to serve very large ships, including the ro-ro ferries of Unity Line, Polferries and Stena Line which operate the Poland – Scandinavia passenger lines.
Riverine services operate on almost all major Polish rivers and canals (such as the Danube–Oder and Elbląg canals) as well as on domestic coastal routes.

Waterways

Poland has  of navigable rivers and canals (as of 2009).

Ports and harbors

Merchant marine

Total: 57 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,120,165 GRT/
Ships by type:
bulk 50, cargo 2, chemical tanker 2, roll-on/roll-off 1, short-sea passenger 2
(1999 est.)

Railways

Poland is served by an extensive network of railways. In most cities the main railway station  is located near a city centre and is well connected to the local transportation system. The infrastructure is operated by PKP PLK ( PKP-Polskie Linie Kolejowe : PKP-Polish Rail Lines), part of state-run PKP Group. The rail network is very dense in western and northern Poland, while eastern part of the country is less developed.
The only high-speed rail line (though by most definitions, real high-speed rail only includes speeds over 200 km/h) in central-eastern Europe is the Centralna Magistrala Kolejowa (CMK), the Central Railway Route. It has a length of , and was built in 1971–1977; it links Warsaw with Kraków and Katowice. Trains on the CMK achieve speed up to 160 km/h (some sections allow up to 200 km/h, but the rolling stock has not yet been adapted to handle higher speed). On 11 May 1994, the Italian train Pendolino broke Polish speed record, going on the CMK at 250 km/h. This previous speed, however, has been broken as of 2013, to 291 km/h on the CMK.
Other high-speed lines:
Projects
The Warsaw–Gdańsk–Gdynia line is being upgraded to allow speed up to 200 km/h, and the Warsaw–Łódź line is being upgraded to allow speed up to 160 km/h (in order to bind together the Warsaw–Łódź agglomeration). There are long-term plans to construct a new high-speed line (350 km/h) from Warsaw to Poznań and Wrocław with forks in Łódź and Kalisz.
The PKP Group is the fourth largest railway throughout Europe. Trains are run by its different subsidiaries.

Passenger transport market

The following companies operate in Poland:

=Narrow gauge railways=

There are hundreds of kilometres of  narrow gauge lines in Poland.
These railways are mostly in decline, some surviva as a museum or tourist railways.

Freight transport market

=Broad gauge railways=

Except for Linia Hutnicza Szerokotorowa, and a few very short stretches near border crossings, Poland uses the standard gauge for its railways. Therefore Linia Hutnicza Szerokotorowa (known by its acronym LHS, English: Broad gauge steelworks line) in Sławków is the longest broad gauge railway line in Poland. The line runs on a single track for almost  from the Polish-Ukrainian border, crossing it just east of Hrubieszów. It is the westernmost broad gauge railway line in Europe that is connected to the broad gauge rail system of the countries of the former Soviet Union.

Rail system

Total: 
As of December 2002 narrow gauge railways were no longer owned or operated by PKP. They were transferred to regional authorities or became independent companies.

=Rail links with adjacent countries=

Municipal transport

Bus

Most Polish towns and cities have well developed municipal bus services. Typically, a city possesses its own local bus company, however, in some cases they have private competitors operating on certain lines upon the agreement with local authorities.
Until 1990s, interurban connections were operated by a single, state-owned company PKS. Since then, it has been broken into a number of independent national and municipal enterprises. In addition, several private operators emerged. There are two classes of service distinguished by vehicle length:
While they often use the same bus stops, they tend to use different stations.

Tram

Bigger cities run dense tram networks, which are the primary mean of public transport. Currently, there are 14 systems serving over 30 cities including Bydgoszcz,  Gdańsk, Katowice, Kraków, Łódź, Poznań, Szczecin, Warsaw and Wrocław, with the total track length varying from  (Tramways in Grudziądz). A new network is being constructed in Olsztyn. See the list: List of town tramway systems in Europe#Poland
Since 1990s, a number of cities attempts to upgrade certain parts of their networks to the light rail standard (called szybkie tramwaje, eng. fast trams). The most notable investments are Poznań Fast Tram and Kraków Fast Tram with the underground .

Trolleybus

Trolleybuses can be found in three cities: Gdynia (with some lines reaching Sopot), Lublin and Tychy.

Metro

The first and currently the only metro line was opened in Warsaw in 1995. The second line is under construction. There are no official plans to build metro in other cities due to the lack of funds, but there is an ongoing debate whether they should be built, especially in Kraków and Wrocław.
See: Warsaw Metro

File:Warsaw 07-13 img37 Plac Wilsona metro.jpg|Plac Wilsona Station
File:Warsaw 07-13 img12 Pole Mokotowskie metro.jpg|Pole Mokotowskie station
File:A21 Warsaw Metro.jpg|Stare Bielany station
File:A17dwgdanski1.JPG|Dworzec Gdański station

Pipelines

(2006 est.)








