[[Tucker Carlson]]

CATEGORIES: American anti–Iraq War activists, American broadcast news analysts, American libertarians, American Protestants, American political pundits, American political writers, American television personalities, American television talk show hosts, Commentators, Conservatism in the United States, The Heritage Foundation, San Francisco, California television personalities, The Weekly Standard people, 1969 births, Living people, Trinity College (Connecticut) alumni, Fox News Channel people, People from Carlsbad, California, Dancing with the Stars (U.S. TV series) participants

Tucker Swanson McNear Carlson (born May 16, 1969) is an American political news correspondent and conservative commentator for the Fox News Channel. He is co-founder and editor-in-chief of The Daily CallerLetter from Tucker and formerly co-hosted CNN's Crossfire and MSNBC's Tucker.

Early life

Carlson was born in San Francisco, California. He grew up in Carlsbad, an affluent resort town north of San Diego. He is the elder son of Richard Warner Carlson, a former Los Angeles news anchor and U.S. ambassador to the Seychelles who was president of the Corporation for Public Broadcasting and director of Voice of America. A great-uncle was Sen. J. William Fulbright.
He attended St. George's School, a boarding school in Middletown, Rhode Island.  After graduation, he majored in History at Trinity College in Hartford, Connecticut.
He is married to Susan Carlson, née Andrews. They have four children together: Lillie, Hopie, Dorothy, and Buckley.people.htmlStephen Dougherty, "Meet Mister Right", People, 6 November 2000Tucker Carlson, "Off the Hook", ''The New York Times", 15 May 2005

Career

Carlson began his journalism career as a member of the editorial staff of Policy Review, a national conservative journal then published by the Heritage Foundation (and since acquired by the Hoover Institution).  He later worked as a reporter at the Arkansas Democrat-Gazette newspaper in Little Rock, Arkansas and at The Weekly Standard.
As a magazine and newspaper journalist, Carlson has reported from around the world. He has been a columnist for New York and Reader's Digest. He has also written for Esquire, The Weekly Standard, The New Republic, The New York Times Magazine, and The Daily Beast.
Carlson joined CNN as its youngest anchor ever, remaining at the network until February 2005. Carlson got his television start in 2000 as co-host of The Spin Room opposite Bill Press.

CNN's Crossfire

He later was appointed co-host of Crossfire, where he represented the political right. During the same period, Carlson also hosted a weekly public affairs program on PBS, Tucker Carlson: Unfiltered.

=Interview with Jon Stewart=

One of Carlson's most memorable appearances on Crossfire was his 2004 heated exchange with Jon Stewart, host of The Daily Show on Comedy Central, prior to the 2004 presidential election. Stewart criticized the format of shows like Crossfire, calling Carlson and co-host Paul Begala "partisan hacks", and asked them to "stop hurting America".
Carlson countered by criticizing Stewart's July 2004 interview with then U.S. Presidential candidate John Kerry. He accused Stewart of "sniffing Kerry's throne" and "not asking tough questions." Stewart replied, contextualizing his own show as a comedic rather than journalistic venue, "It's interesting to hear you talk about my responsibility ... I didn't realize that, and maybe this explains quite a bit, is that the news organizations look to Comedy Central for their cues on integrity." Jon Stewart further emphasized his distaste for Crossfire by adding the comment that "To do a debate would be great. But that's like saying pro wrestling is a show about athletic competition." After Carlson told Stewart "I think you're more fun on your show", Stewart replied by saying: "You know what's interesting though? You're as big a dick on your show as you are on any show."
After asserting that The Daily Show was a news program, Carlson's remonstration that "You need to get a job at a journalism school, I think" was met with Stewart's comeback, "You need to go to one."
After their televised confrontation, Carlson recalls, Stewart "stayed at CNN several hours after the show to discuss the issues that he raised on the air... He (Stewart) needed to do this".mit.pdf
In January 2005, CNN announced they were ending their relationship with Carlson and would soon cancel Crossfire.

MSNBC's Tucker

Carlson's early evening show, Tucker, premiered June 13, 2005, on MSNBC (originally entitled The Situation with Tucker Carlson). The show lasted fewer than three seasons; the network announced its cancellation due to low ratings on March 10, 2008.
Carlson had also hosted a late afternoon weekday wrap-up for MSNBC during the 2006 Winter Olympics, during which he attempted to learn how to play various Olympic sports. In July 2006, he reported live for Tucker from Haifa, Israel, during the 2006 Lebanon War between Israel and Hezbollah in southern Lebanon. While in the Middle East, he also hosted MSNBC Special Report: Mideast Crisis.  He appeared regularly on Verdict with Dan Abrams as a panelist in political discussions.

Fox News Channel

In May 2009, it was announced that Carlson was hired as a Fox News Contributor. Since then, he has been a frequent guest panelist on Fox's late-night satire show Red Eye w/ Greg Gutfeld, made frequent appearances on the All-Star Panel segment of Special Report with Bret Baier, been a substitute host of Hannity in Sean Hannity's absence, and produced a Fox News special titled "Fighting for Our Children's Minds."
In March 2013, it was announced that Carlson was tapped to co-host the weekend editions of Fox & Friends.  Beginning in April, Carlson, a Fox News contributor and frequent guest host on the program, officially joined co-hosts Alisyn Camerota and Clayton Morris on Saturday and Sunday mornings. He replaced Dave Briggs, who left the news channel to join the NBC Sports Network on New Years 2013.

The Daily Caller

On January 11, 2010, Carlson and former Vice President Dick Cheney aide Neil Patel launched a political news website titled The Daily Caller. Carlson serves as editor-in-chief, and occasionally writes opinion pieces with Patel. Other high-profile bloggers include Jim Treacher (DC Trawler) and Mickey Kaus (Kausfiles.)
The Daily Caller is in the White House rotating press pool.
In an interview with The Politico, Carlson said that The Daily Caller will not be tied to ideology but rather will be "breaking stories of importance". In a Washington Post article, Carlson added "We're not enforcing any kind of ideological orthodoxy on anyone."

Political views

Partisan ambivalence

Carlson has stated that while he votes and cares deeply about conservative ideas, he does not care about the success or failure of any political party. In addition, his definitions of conservative views often conflict with the mainstream opinion, being called "insufficiently conservative". November 26, 2012.  This first began following Carlson's public and private endorsement of 2000 Presidential candidate John McCain. Speaking to Salon.com, Carlson responded:

Carlson has stated that former U.S. President George W. Bush is not a true conservative. In an August 27, 2004, Washington Post interview, Carlson expressed his "displeasure with Bush". Tucker asked: "Why do so many anti-war liberals give Kerry a pass when he adopts the Bush view on Iraq, as he has? The amount of team-playing on the left depresses me." Carlson did not vote in the 2004 election, citing his disgust with the Iraq War and his disillusionment with the once small-government Republican Party.  He would go on to say: 
 I don't know what you consider conservative, but I'm not much of a liberal, at least as the word is currently defined. For instance, I'm utterly opposed to abortion, which I think is horrible and cruel. I think affirmative action is wrong. I'd like to slow immigration pretty dramatically. I hate all nanny state regulations, such as seat belt laws and smoking bans. I'm not for big government. I think the U.S. ought to hesitate before intervening abroad. I think these are conservative impulses. So by my criteria, Bush isn't much of a conservative. 

1999 Bush interview

Asked by Salon about the response to his article on Bush, Carlson said: 
 It was very, very hostile. The reaction was: You betrayed us. Well, I was never there as a partisan to begin with. Then I heard that (on the campaign bus, Bush communications director) Karen Hughes accused me of lying. And so I called Karen and asked her why she was saying this, and she had this almost Orwellian rap that she laid on me about how things she'd heard — that I watched her hear — she in fact had never heard, and she'd never heard Bush use profanity ever. It was insane. I've obviously been lied to a lot by campaign operatives, but the striking thing about the way she lied was she knew I knew she was lying, and she did it anyway. There is no word in English that captures that. It almost crosses over from bravado into mental illness. They get carried away, consultants do, in the heat of the campaign, they're really invested in this. A lot of times they really like the candidate. That's all conventional. But on some level, you think, there's a hint of recognition that there is reality — even if they don't recognize reality exists — there is an objective truth. With Karen you didn't get that sense at all. A lot of people like her. A lot of people I know like her. I'm not one of them. 

Supporting, then opposing, the U.S. war in Iraq

Carlson initially supported the U.S. war with Iraq during its first year. After a year, he began criticizing the war, telling the New York Observer: 
 I think it's a total nightmare and disaster, and I'm ashamed that I went against my own instincts in supporting it. It's something I'll never do again. Never. I got convinced by a friend of mine who's smarter than I am, and I shouldn't have done that. No. I want things to work out, but I'm enraged by it, actually. 

Gay marriage

On July 24, 2007, Carlson said on his show, "I'm just for marriage generally. I'm for people making a lifelong commitment. Do you know what I mean? I'm not against gay marriage, actually, and I'm the most right-wing person I know." Carlson later went on to say, "I think, marriage has been a great thing for me, and I think it's a really civilizing force, and I think it would be a civilizing force for gay people too."

Libertarianism

On May 3, 2007, Carlson interviewed Republican presidential candidate Ron Paul and recalled voting for Paul in 1988 when he was running as the Libertarian Party presidential candidate.
At the 2009 Conservative Political Action Conference, Carlson was booed for saying that the journalists at the New York Times care about accuracy.com
On November 26, 2007, it was reported that Carlson lobbied Nevada brothel owner Dennis Hof to support Paul's candidacy.  Explained Carlson, "Dennis Hof is a good friend of mine, so when we got to Nevada, I decided to call him up and see if he wanted to come check this guy out."
On September 2, 2008, Carlson participated in Ron Paul's Campaign for Liberty Rally for the Republic in Minneapolis, MN, as the first speaker to introduce the rally and also acted as the MC by introducing nearly every guest speaker.
On February 23, 2009, Carlson was introduced as a senior fellow for the Cato Institute.

Public image

Carlson was known for wearing bow-ties. In 2005 on the season five episode of Curb Your Enthusiasm, "The Bowtie", a character refers to Larry David as "Tucker Carlson" for wearing one.
On April 11, 2006, Carlson announced on his MSNBC show that he would no longer be wearing a bow-tie, adding, "I just decided I wanted to give my neck a break. A little change is good once in a while, and I feel better already." On the February 28th 2014 edition of The Alex Jones Show while talking about his reasons for returning to wearing a long necktie, Carlson found that "If you wear a bow-tie, it's like wearing a middle finger around your neck; you're just inviting scorn and ridicule…the number of people screaming the F-word at me...

Dancing with the Stars

On August 14, 2006, the ABC television network announced that Carlson would be a participant in its fall 2006 Dancing with the Stars reality show.
Carlson reportedly took four-hour-a-day ballroom dance classes in preparation for the competition, and mourned "missed classes" during an MSNBC assignment in Lebanon. "It's hard for me to remember the moves," he stated. When asked why he accepted ABC's invitation to perform, Carlson responded, "I'm not defending it as the smartest choice, but I think it's the most interesting. I think if you sat back and tried to plan my career, you might not choose this. But my only criterion is the interest level. I want to lead an interesting life." He concluded, "I'm 37. I've got four kids. I have a steady job. I don't do things that I'm not good at very often. I'm psyched to get to do that."
The gambling site BetBet placed Carlson's odds of winning the competition at 15:1.
Carlson, who was paired with professional partner Elena Grinenko, was voted off on September 13. His performance on the previous night was the lowest ranked among the judges; the low score resulted from him spending much of the performance sitting down in a chair.
At the close of the show, Carlson said that teaching him to dance was "like Einstein teaching addition to a slow child."

Autobiography

In 2003, Carlson authored an autobiography, Politicians, Partisans and Parasites: My Adventures in Cable News, about his television news experiences that he published through Warner Books. One of the book's revelations was Carlson's description of how he was falsely accused of raping a woman he did not know, someone suffering from severe mental illness with stalker-like behavior. Carlson wrote in the book that the incident was emotionally traumatic.
In the book, he also lists a variety of anecdotes and off-the-cuff observations about himself and others, including self-deprecation as well as jokes targeting both right-wing and left-wing political figures. Carlson also quipped about President George W. Bush that "He dresses like someone who just got back from an afternoon of shoplifting at Sears."






