[[Eurobeat]]

CATEGORIES: Eurobeat, 1980s in music

Eurobeat is either a form of the British dance-pop variant of Italo disco or Hi-NRG-driven Italo disco music that both developed in the late 1980s.
In the United States, Eurobeat was sometimes marketed as Hi-NRG and for a short while shared this term with the very early freestyle music hits. Italo disco was often referred to as Eurobeat, probably due to the negative connotations of the word "disco" in the United States in the 1980s.
"Eurobeat" is also directly related to the Japanese Para Para dance culture, but in a completely different way, explained later in this article.

History

Origin of the term "Eurobeat"

The term "Eurobeat" was first used in the UK when Ian Levine's Eastbound Expressway released their single "You're A Beat" in recognition to the slower tempo of Hi-NRG/Italo disco music emerging from Europe. The majority of Hi-NRG songs tended to be from 124–138BPM whereas the European releases tended to be from 108–120BPM. Many European acts managed to break through under this new recognition namely the likes of Modern Talking, Bad Boys Blue, Taffy and Spagna. It was used commercially to describe the Stock Aitken Waterman-produced hits by Dead or Alive, Bananarama, Jason Donovan, Sonia, and Kylie Minogue which were heavily based on the British experience with Italo-disco during holidays in Greece and elsewhere. "Eurobeat" was also applied to the first hits from the Pet Shop Boys and other UK-based dance music and electropop groups of the time. Those "Eurobeat" hits had a European beat, topped the UK charts, and, in the USA, received radio airplay and contributed to the evolution of New York's Freestyle genre. By the summer of '89 the term "Eurobeat" was replaced by other labels and the music changed to 90s Eurodance and mostly Euro house. The term "Eurobeat" was also used only in the UK during 1986–1988, for specific Italian 80s Euro disco imports, such as Sabrina Salerno, Spagna and Baltimora.

Renaissance: "By the Italians, for the Japanese"

Meanwhile, in Japan in 1985, the term "Eurobeat" was applied to all continental-European dance music imports. These were mainly Italian and German-produced Italo-disco releases. That sound became the soundtrack of the Para Para nightclub culture, that has existed since the early 1980s. Japan experienced Italo disco through the success of the German group Arabesque, which broke up in 1984. This did not prevent the release of two Italo disco-sounding singles in 1985 and 1986, produced and mixed by Michael Cretu (of Enigma). The later solo success of Arabesque's lead singer Sandra further introduced this sound to Japan. This attracted the attention of many Italo-disco producers (mostly Italians and Germans) and by the late 80s while the Germans faded out of the outdated Italo-disco scene and went for other newly rising popular scenes, mainly trance, the Italians created a new sound especially for Japan, but virtually unknown in the rest of the world. In Japan, this music is called "Eurobeat", "Super Eurobeat", and "Eurobeat Flash".
In the early 1990s when Eurobeat's popularity was gradually decreasing in Japan, two Japanese men, the owner and a managing director of Avex, a small import record shop at the time, decided to release a compilation CD. They went to Italy and met Giancarlo Pasquini later known as Dave Rodgers, then a member of the Italo disco band Aleph, and eventually released the compilation CD, the first Super Eurobeat, which proved an instant success and re-sparked Eurobeat's popularity in Japan.
Despite its European origins, the Eurobeat style's main market has always been Japan, where its synthetic and emotionally upbeat stylings are popular. Even though many European people and American people have heard of Eurodance, Euro disco and Euro house, this flavor of Eurobeat is largely unknown in Europe and only recently became somewhat popular in the Western world. It appeals to open-minded Italo disco fans and some Euro-house fans.
The anime series Initial D, based on the manga by Shuichi Shigeno, uses Eurobeat music regularly in its episodes during racing scenes between the characters, and because of this it has come to the attention of some anime fans outside Japan.
Eurobeat's sound (in the Japanese market) is its main link to its Italo disco origins, where it was just one of many different experiments in pure electronic dance. There are certain synth instruments that recur across the entire genre: a sequenced octave bass, characteristic are the energetic (sometimes wild) and heavy use of synths, distinctive brass and harp sounds, and tight, predictable percussion in the background. These sounds are layered with vocals and natural instruments (guitar and piano are common) into complex, ever-shifting melodies that, at their best, burst with energy.
In 1998, Bemani, a branch of the video game company Konami made a hit video dance machine, Dance Dance Revolution. The game acquired Eurobeat songs from the Dancemania compilation series from Toshiba EMI. Over time, DDR has featured Eurobeat songs on-and-off in their songlists. However, their number has dwindled due to efforts to make DDR more marketable to North American markets. Currently, there has been a push to add more Eurobeat into DDR, most recently with the addition of Super Eurobeat tracks in the latest arcade release, Dance Dance Revolution X2. Other music games in Konami's lineup feature a large number of Eurobeat tracks, including Beatmania, Beatmania IIDX, and jubeat. The popularity of the genre also led Konami to create a Para Para game; ParaParaParadise.
The Sega AM2-developed arcade fighting game, Sonic the Fighters (Sonic Championship in the US) uses a Eurobeat influenced soundtrack.

Characteristics

Eurobeat from the Japanese point of view

Eurobeat evolved into different genres, while preserving its essence. In the late 1970s and early 1980s, Hi-NRG, 70s Eurodisco, space disco, Canadian disco, and Italo disco (a.k.a. 80's Eurodisco) emerged from electronic music. Although disco music became unpopular in North America, it remained in the limelight in Europe for many more years. In the USA, in the early 80s, disco linked with George Clinton, Earth, Wind & Fire, and the Hi-NRG scene.
What follows in the article, is the description of "Eurobeat" (a.k.a. Super Eurobeat) as formed during the late 80s and 90s in Japan.

While modern music is often recognized by its lyrics, Eurobeat is recognized not primarily by its lyrics. Very much like bubblegum Eurodance, it usually has extremely silly or utterly meaningless lyrics. This broad genre can create a great number of different sub-genres within it because of this combination of harmony and rhythm. Sometimes it can still sound like disco music, and sometimes it can be very "fast and happy" like happy hardcore or speed music, and occasionally features guitars as a method of Saiba.
One peculiar thing about Eurobeat is the fact that each artist is often credited with a variety of different aliases (See "Popular Eurobeat Artists" below for details). Artists usually adopt different stage names according to the mood of each song, or depending on who wrote their lyrics.
Eurobeat also has notoriety for name recognition, lifting titles from popular songs and using them as the names of Eurobeat tracks.  Examples are "Like a Virgin", "Goodbye Yellow Brick Road", "What is Love", and "Station to Station."  The Eurobeat songs that reuse song titles typically have nothing to do with the song it lifted its title from (i.e., not a cover).
Yet another characteristic of Eurobeat is how many songs are themed around the same, recurring themes. Common themes include:

The Eurobeat formula (for the Japanese market)

Like most musical genres, (modern) Eurobeat has a fairly specific formula to it:

The intro is the introduction into the song, the riff is the musical part without voices. The a melo, or a-melody is the first verse in the song, the a melo2 (a-melody 2) is the bridge of the song, and the sabi is the chorus of the song. The outro is the ending. There will also be a c melo (the second a melo) after the first sabi, as well as another a/b melo variant after the second sabi.

Eurobeat is well known for complex, energetic rhythms, which give the music a rapid, accelerating feel.  Songs often have an intro section characterized by a very loud, highly technical synth riff, which is repeated after the chorus. The song usually repeats the verse, bridge, and chorus (although with different lyrics most of the time. Often these lyrics are extremely original and feature intricate vocals, such as the sole use of clever words such as fire and desire) and then goes into a "breakdown" where there can be a variety of new parts to the song including a guitar solo, the dropping and adding of percussion, or a plain instrumental version of the track. Typically though, this only encompasses the verse and bridge; the chorus is usually sung once again, and then the synth and outro play. The outro can either be the main synth played again, or something reminiscent of the intro.
Another thing to note is that the intro is somewhat like an instrumental rendition of the verse, bridge, and chorus, while the synth is a lot like an instrumental version of the chorus. They don't have to sound completely similar, but they do in fact fit on top of each other most of the time.

Labels and "sub-genres"

There's a particular style of formula when it comes to the different labels of the Eurobeat world:

A Beat C

A-Beat C is probably the most well known label. The label was founded in 1990 by Dave Rodgers and Alberto Contini, and introduced in 1991 on Super Eurobeat 9. Many of the label's producers and artists have worked with Eurobeat and Italo disco even before A-Beat C was created, which isn't surprising to hear familiar voices or see familiar titles on older Italo disco labels.
What is pretty easily recognizable in previous A-Beat C works is the "Rodgers' touch" that you can recognize if you knew his former productions under the "Aleph" alias.
Notable A-Beat C songs:
Recent notable tracks:

Boom Boom Beat

Boom Boom Beat is one of the minority labels on Eurobeat. They actually came along in the early part of Eurobeat's history around 1994 but their songs haven't been on many of the Eurobeat records. BBB is a label that has multiple sub-labels. It is under Saifam for starters, but the EPs that BBB releases have artists from various Saifam labels like Asia Records, Interdance and Technodisco. But successful BBB tracks have also appeared on the Euromach album for example. Some of the more known BBB artists are Mark Farina, Spencer, Sarah, Alvin, Milk & Coffea, The Flippers and Ken Martin.
For those who are familiar to other Eurobeat compilations such as EuroPanic, an artist named Laurie might sound familiar. Saifam took off from Avex for a few years but on Super Eurobeat 161, the label was introduced to the series for the first time. Before this, the label had only appeared on the shorter series. During the past few years, small-scale VIP-compilations that have non-stop edits from the BBB songs is mostly what has been released.
This label resembles house music to a degree.
Boom Boom Beat songs:
Recent tracks from Boom Boom Beat:

Delta

Delta is one of the older generation labels that has been around for quite some time. The label was created in the year 1995 as producer A. Leonardi from A-Beat C, L. Newfield and C. Moroni from Time joined forces with new Eurobeat names and put Delta up. The first Super Eurobeat album with Delta on it was 64, where the old format of 13 songs changed to 18 songs per album. On the same album, Super Eurobeat 64, Delta also got their very first big hit, which was Marko Polo's "Money Go!"
Little by little the label achieved more and more success and looking back to the Super Eurobeat history, a huge number of great Delta songs can be heard. The label has known artists such as Marko Polo, Niko, Vicky Vale, Cherry, Pizza Girl, Suzy Lazy and Dr. Love. Delta's style is pretty much like A-Beat C.
Tracks usually drop percussion during the breakdown while the singer sings the first verse and bridge again. Synths are typically very "harsh"-sounding, and bass is relatively low depending on the producer of each track.
Notable Delta songs:
Recent notable songs:

Hi-NRG Attack

HI-NRG Attack, founded in 1994, has a very divided following. Hi-NRG Attack's style is reminiscent of European bubblegum pop, with some apparent influences from rave. 
HI-NRG Attack offers a wide variety of different styles. Some of the known names from this label are Jee Bee, Claudia Vip, Franz Tornado, Bazooka Girl, Nikita Jr., Baby Gold and Dolly Pop.
As with Delta, percussion usually drops during the transitions in many songs. This label is notable for its relatively "quirky" lyrics and rhythm, with lyrical subjects such as cows, Russia, getting drunk, and bazookas. Synths are known to be very wild, sometimes playing a different note at every 1/4 beat.
Notable Hi-NRG Attack songs:
Recent notable Hi-NRG Attack songs:

Time

Time is one of the oldest Eurobeat labels and has been around since the very early days. Some of the biggest names in Eurobeat history come from this label such as Vanessa, Lisa Johnson, Lou Grant, Rose, Jilly, Sophie, Chester, Maio & Co., and Mike Hammer.
A unique quality about Time is that most of the label's music includes a very long intro and typically ends with a fade-out of the synth instead of an outro.
Time was dismissed from the Super Eurobeat series in 2008 by Avex. Both reasons may also be true. However, Avex still recognizes Time Records as a Super Eurobeat compilation label and recently published another Time track in 2010, on SEB 203.
Notable Time songs:
Recent notable Time songs:

Eurogrooves

Time's successor, which was founded by Sergio Dall'Ora to replace Time of the Super Eurobeat compilations. Eurogrooves is directed by Dall'Ora exclusively, instead of the company Time Records Italy. The label is in somewhat of a hiatus due to inactive label members since 2010, and also having not released a Eurobeat track since Super Eurobeat 203. The songs released by Eurogrooves after SEB 203 are "Healing Remixes" or ballad remixes of Eurobeat songs.
Notable songs:

Dima

Dima was founded by Davide Di Marcantonio. The name of the label comes from his last name. Most songs appeared on non-Avex Eurobeat compilations such as Love Para2 released by the label FARM Records. Recently, they signed with Avex to have songs released on the Super Eurobeat series.
Notable songs:

Vibration

Vibration belongs to the company LED Records Italy, led by Luigi Stanga. The company have also been using the labels LED Records and Eurobeat Masters, depending on whom they have licensed to. It has a somewhat unpredictable style; some songs have simple percussion drops during transitions, and sometimes there is a very intense guitar solo or even new lyrics. With Stanga retiring in 2008, LED Records Italy (along with its labels) closed down.
Notable Vibration songs:

SCP Music

SCP is also known as Stefano Castagna Productions, known as Double for some years until the title was changed to SCP.
Some more well-known artists from this label are Fastway (a.k.a. Dusty), Kiki & Kika, Ace, Christine and from the newer names such as Lisa Lion has made an impact with her first release. SCP almost always follows A Beat C's formula. Rarely is there ever a percussion drop, but instead you can find a guitar solo or "ad-libbing" of lyrics or synthesizers. In 2008 & 2009, SCP experimented with more pop/house oriented songs such a cover of "Wait for You" by Elliott Yamin and an original production, "Bright Time" which has an infused feel of 80's pop and modern house music. The recent songs of SCP in 2011 are more a mix of the experimental style they created, mixed with the older sound they had in the Euromach era.
Notable SCP songs:
Recent notable tracks:

Sinclaire Style

A former producer with Delta, Bratt Sinclaire uses more "airy" synths that had been seen in his Delta productions. Sinclaire also produces hyper-techno hits for the series We Love Techpara. Some of his older techno tracks appeared on Super Dance Freak compilations in the 1990s. All former tracks he produced with Delta transferred with him over to Sinclairestyle. Recently, former A-Beat-C artist Denise De Vincenzo (a.k.a. Nuage) came out of retirement of singing Super Eurobeat music to lend her voice to a Sinclairestyle track, "Before Tomorrow," which appeared on 199.
Notable Sinclaire Style songs:
Recent notable songs:

Go Go's Music

Go Go's Music was founded by Alessandra Mirka Gatti (a.k.a. Domino) and Sandro Olivia in 2006. Go Go's Music also brought new singers to the Eurobeat genre, including Giorgia Vecchini (Giorgia V), Silvio Rondelli (Leo River), Elisabetta Coiro (Betty Beat), Marina Santelli (Mari-san), and Ester Scarpa (Ester). Notably, A-Beat-C's most recognized group alias Go Go Girls was brought over to Go Go's Music as Gatti and Olivia held the creative rights to the group. Go Go's Music unofficially debuted on SEB 175 with three songs, but was not recognized as an official Super Eurobeat compilation label until volume 177. Go Go's Music and SCP have a close relationship with each other, and have collaborated on a couple of songs in the past, including a remake of a popular SCP song, "Looka Bomba", which was covered by the Go Go Girls. Returning the favor, Go 2 of SCP covered the Go Go Girls' song "Hot Vampire" on Super Eurobeat Volume 193.
Notable Go Go's Music songs:

Akyr Music

Delta producer Laurent Newfield created a label under Hearty Inc. called Akyr Music in 2005. Akyr will still have special releases like Super Euro Freak in the future; Super Euro Freak Vol. 2 was released in October 2009.
Notable Akyr songs:

Sun Fire Records

A-Beat C producer Dave Rodgers established Sun Fire Records. It is the newest Eurobeat label that signed to Avex since 2010. The label made its first appearance on Super Eurobeat Vol. 206. The label is also producing hyper-techno in the same style of their previous techno label under A-Beat-C, Sound & Vision Italy.
Notable Sun Fire songs:

"J-Euro and C-Euro"

There have been three types of music called "J-Euro" (Japanese Eurobeat);

So, however C-Euro (Chinese Eurobeat) appeared first in the early 1990s. popular in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Japan. covered by Chinese artists from Malaysia, Hong Kong and Japan with Cantonese lyrics. Notable artists of this type of "J-Euro" have included Evon Low (劉珺兒), Kelsy Lam (林佳詩), Rainie Tan Jia Qing (陳佳晴), Love 4 U, ParaPa! Love, Young Girls (青春美少女), Kimi & Jojoe, Rainbow Girls (繽紛彩虹).
And there is Chinese New Year songs. in 1996, Velfarre launch first Chinese New Year album. so then in 2001, ParaPa! Love covered Velfarre 2000 by Bazooka Girl (火箭炮姑娘) in Cantonese, namely ParaPa! Love 賀新年. Starting 2002, So Kawara Miho (陳玉真) and Odakura Ryoko (李慧瑩) from ParaPara Allstars about para para into the global, so Japan has launched the traditional Chinese original, simplified characters are introduced in Malaysia, the introduction has been all over Malaysia. However, in 2007, Avex will be launch 24 Velfarre Chinese New Year Non-Stop Complete Best. in 2008, Velfarre All-Stars will be changed only Avex 群星 (Avex All-Stars), there a bit of English and Japanese, has only launched in Japan. then in 2014, Starlight Sisters launch an Chinese New Year album, in 2015 will be along to the Boys.
Rainie Tan launches an Chinese New Year 1999 start with Mandarin version, popular in Singapore, Malaysia and Mainland China.
but Sweet Foursome (Traditional Chinese: 甜蜜四人組, Simplified Chinese: 甜蜜四人组, Pinyin: Tiánmì sì rén zǔ) in Taiwan gone viral, it will be a smash hits, Red Pocket Wealth (Traditional Chinese: 紅包財, Simplified Chinese: 红包财, Pinyin: Hóngbāo cái).
ParaPara Allstars will covered in Mandarin, 2002 album is ParaPara Allstars Greeting New Year (Traditional Chinese: 啪啦啪啦賀新年, Simplified Chinese: 啪啦啪啦贺新年, Pinyin: Pā lā pā lā hè xīnnián). in 2007, Tomomi Kudo will be back, launch Enjoy MARIGOLD Chinese New Year Reviral Hits (欢天喜地新年精选曲). in 2009, Karawa Miho (陳玉真) and Tomomi Kudo leave, become 阳光女孩四人组 (Sunshine Girls 4 Persons Group).

Popular Eurobeat artists

Eurobeat compilations

The following is a list of many Eurobeat compilations series, the most famous (and longest running) are Super Eurobeat and the various Super Eurobeat presents... compilations by Avex Trax. Other notable compilations include:

Eurobeat labels websites






