[[Dragon (band)]]

CATEGORIES: ARIA Award winners, ARIA Hall of Fame inductees, Australian rock music groups, Musical groups established in 1972, New South Wales musical groups, New Zealand rock music groups, Progressive rock groups

Dragon are a rock band which were formed in Auckland, New Zealand in January 1972 and relocated to Sydney, Australia in May 1975. They performed and released material under the name Hunter in Europe and the United States during 1987. 
Keyboard player Paul Hewson wrote or co-wrote most of the group's hits: "April Sun in Cuba" 
Dragon have endured tragedy and notoriety. Several band members died during their association with the band: Drummer Neil Storey of a heroin overdose in 1976, Paul Hewson of a drug overdose in 1985 and Marc Hunter of smoking-related oesophageal cancer in 1998. The Stewart Royal Commission (1980–1983) which investigated the Mr. Asia drug syndicate

History

1972–1975: Early years in New Zealand

Dragon formed in Auckland, New Zealand, in January 1972 with a line-up that featured Todd Hunter on bass guitar, guitarist Ray Goodwin, drummer Neil Reynolds and singer/pianist Graeme Collins. All had been in various short-lived bands in Auckland, Collins is credited with using I Ching to provide the name Dragon. Their first major gig was an appearance at The Great Ngaruawahia Music Festival in early January 1973. By 1974 several personnel changes had occurred, with Todd Hunter's younger brother Marc Hunter joining on vocals and Neil Storey on drums. The band recorded two progressive rock albums in their native New Zealand, Universal Radio in 1974 and Scented Gardens for the Blind in 1975 both on Vertigo Records. Despite being New Zealand's top live attraction by late 1974, neither albums nor related singles had any local chart success, and they recruited Robert Taylor (ex-Mammal) on guitar as they searched for a raunchier pop sound. By early 1975, manager Graeme Nesbitt (ex-Mammal), who had obtained regular gigs and organised their first New Zealand tours, felt they should tackle the larger Australian market. Nesbitt was unable to travel with them to Australia - he had been arrested for selling drugs.

1975–1979: Initial stardom

Dragon relocated to Sydney in May 1975, they toured Australia as support act to Status Quo in October. The band sent for keyboard player Paul Hewson who had a reputation, in New Zealand, as a pop songwriter. Hewson had been scouted by Nesbitt when Dragon were still in New Zealand but had declined to join at that time. In 1976 they secured a residency at the Bondi Lifesaver club, and landed a contract with CBS Records after being seen by record producer Peter Dawkins. Often courting or creating controversy, the band was rocked by the heroin overdose death of drummer Neil Storey in September 1976, aged 22. By then, founding member Goodwin had left the group, and their single "This Time" had begun charting.
After considering disbanding, Todd Hunter consulted with Nesbitt who advised him to continue and organised for Kerry Jacobson (ex-Mammal) to join on drums. Between 1977 and 1979, the line-up of the Hunter brothers, Taylor, Hewson and Jacobson had a string of major hits on the Australian National charts with singles "April Sun in Cuba", "Are You Old Enough?" and "Still In Love with You" and albums Sunshine, Running Free and O Zambezi. These releases made them one of Australia's most popular rock acts. They attempted a breakthrough into the American market with a tour supporting Johnny Winter, starting in November 1978, but this was foiled after a disastrous show in Dallas Texas, at which Marc Hunter incited a crowd by suggesting all Texans were "faggots": band members had to dodge flying beer bottles.
In 1994, Marc Hunter related his version of the Texas show to rock journalist Glenn A. Baker:

Upon returning to Sydney, Marc Hunter was sacked from Dragon in February 1979 due to drug problems which were seriously affecting both his vocal performances and his general health. According to Todd Hunter:
Jane Clifton - who also played Margo Gaffney in Prisoner - relates a time when she saw them live:
Singer Billy Rogers formerly of Perth group Last Chance Cafe and violinist Richard Lee from Melbourne band Sidewinder were recruited and Dragon recorded the commercially unsuccessful Power Play LP before breaking up in December 1979.

1979–1982: First split

Marc Hunter cleaned up in the post-Dragon years and released two successful solo singles, "Island Nights" (1979) from Fiji Bitter and "Big City Talk" (1981) from Big City Talk. "Big City Talk"'s video was filmed in the Broadway Tunnel, a long and dreary pedestrian walkway linking Sydney's Central Station with Broadway. It captured the seedy and unsettling atmosphere of the tunnel, adding extra mood to the song's words.
Todd Hunter had meanwhile teamed up with his partner (and later second wife) Johanna Pigott, formerly of indie punk group XL Capris, and together they became a successful songwriting team. XL Capris were not commercially successful, although their memorable re-working of crooner Tommy Leonetti's "My City Of Sydney" became a minor cult classic. Todd Hunter produced both their albums Where's Hank? (March 1981) and Weeds (October 1981), and was a member of the band for the second.
Paul Hewson moved back to Auckland and joined The Pink Flamingos, who became one of New Zealand's top musical acts in the early 1980s. They were led by Dave McArtney ex-Hello Sailor, which had toured with Dragon but had also split.

1982–1997: Reformation

Dragon reformed in August 1982 to pay off outstanding debts, not long after Jacobson left the band for health reasons and was replaced by British drummer Terry Chambers (ex-XTC), with the band then staying together when their second comeback single, "Rain", proved to be a #2 hit in 1983, Marc Hunter convinced Mansfield to also produce Dragon's single "Rain".
Dragon's 1984 album Body and the Beat became one of the biggest-selling albums in Australia and New Zealand; they were restored to something close to their late 1970s glory. Their public profile was further raised by Marc Hunter's solo album, Communication. Its title track became a moderate hit in Australia and featured a loosely cabaret-oriented video-clip filmed in Amsterdam in which Marc — resplendent in a bright red cowboy hat — was flanked by two women who also danced away under red Stetsons. Body and the Beat yielded further successful Australasian singles, notably "Magic" and "Cry". Mansfield and New Zealand-born singer-songwriter Sharon O'Neill met on Dragon's Body And The Beat tour: they later became domestic and professional partners.
Paul Hewson left Dragon and died of a drug overdose in New Zealand on 9 January 1985; American drummer Doane Perry replaced Chambers, and Taylor was eventually succeeded by local Sydney guitar ace Tommy Emmanuel. This line-up recorded the Todd Rundgren-produced Dreams of Ordinary Men album in 1986 and toured Europe with Tina Turner under the name Hunter in 1987. By this time Mansfield was writing with O'Neill; they wrote "Western Girls" for Dreams of Ordinary Men and then three tracks for her 1987 solo album Danced in the Fire.
Dragon briefly split up in 1988 but the Hunter brothers and Mansfield had regrouped with guitarist Randall Waller and drummer Barton Price (ex-Models) for the Bondi Road album released in April 1989 on RCA, it also featured Emmanuel's guitar work. Bondi Road reached #18 on the Australian albums charts and the single "Young Years" written by Mansfield and O'Neill he retired from Dragon in 1995 after the release of Incarnations.
Dragon continued on without Todd Hunter. Then, in November 1997, Marc Hunter was diagnosed with severe oesophageal cancer and died on 17 July 1998. A memorial service for him was held at St. Andrew's Cathedral in Sydney; and, a compilation CD Forever Young was released on Raven Records, highlighting his solo career.

1997–2006: Second split

Dragon broke up a second time after Marc Hunter's illness had been diagnosed. Todd Hunter continued composing music for TV and film with Heartbreak High to 1999, Walk the Talk (2000 film), Out There (2003 TV series) and Out of the Blue (2008 BBC-TV series). They both performed with Leo Sayer during his tours in 2006 and 2007, O'Neill would sing "Young Years" in honour of Marc Hunter.

2006–present: Reformation

Todd Hunter (bass) reformed Dragon in 2006 with a line-up of Mark Williams (vocals, guitar), Bruce Reid (guitar), and Pete Drummond (drums). The new line-up released Sunshine to Rain on the Liberation Blue label.
On 1 July 2008, Dragon were inducted by Richard Wilkins into the ARIA Hall of Fame, Dragon were joined on-stage by James Reyne and Ian Moss to perform "April Sun in Cuba" and "Rain":

In October 2009, Dragon released Happy I Am on Ozmo Records, distributed internationally by MGM Records.
Dragon have played 500 shows with the current line-up including the Rhythm and Vines Festival in NZ, New Year's Eve 2011 ( The band has played many one off shows, events and tours in 2012/13. Tours include 18 shows in NZ in October 2012 (The 40th anniversary NZ Tour) Long Way To The Top. the Red Hot Summer Tour with Jimmy Barnes (18 shows) The 40th Anniversary Concert Series in Australia (12 shows) starting at the Sydney Opera House in March 13 and finishing in Cairns mid June.
Dragon's 1978 hit single "Are You Old Enough" is now used in the opening credits of Australian television drama series Puberty Blues first airing in 2012.

Personnel

In chronological order:

Discography

Awards








