[[Mary Edwards Walker]]

CATEGORIES: 1832 births, 1919 deaths, American Civil War surgeons, American spies, American surgeons, American women's rights activists, Civilian recipients of the Medal of Honor, People from Oswego, New York, Women in the American Civil War, American Civil War prisoners of war, American women physicians, Purged Medal of Honor recipients, United States Army personnel, American Civil War recipients of the Medal of Honor, Geneva Medical College alumni

Mary Edwards Walker (November 26, 1832 – February 21, 1919) was an American feminist, abolitionist, prohibitionist, alleged spy, prisoner of war and surgeon. She is currently the only woman ever to receive the Medal of Honor.
Prior to the American Civil War she earned her medical degree, married and started a medical practice. The practice didn't do well and she volunteered with the Union Army at the outbreak of the American Civil War and served as a surgeon. She was captured by Confederate forces after crossing enemy lines to treat wounded civilians and arrested as a spy. She was sent as a prisoner of war to Richmond, Virginia until released in a prisoner exchange.
After the war she was approved for the highest United States Armed Forces decoration for bravery, the Medal of Honor, for her efforts during the Civil War. She is the only woman to receive the medal and one of only eight civilians to receive it. Her name was deleted from the Army Medal of Honor Roll in 1917 and restored in 1977. After the war she was a writer and lecturer supporting the women's suffrage movement until her death in 1919.

Early life and education

She was born in the Town of Oswego, New York, on November 26, 1832, the daughter of Alvah (father) and Vesta (mother) Walker. She was the youngest of five daughters and had one younger brother. Walker worked on her family farm as a child. She did not wear women's clothing during farm labor, because she considered them too restricting. Her mother reinforced her view on corsets and tight lacings as being unhealthy. Mary E. Walker and the Civil War, page 11. Her elementary education consisted of going to the local school where her mother taught. As a young woman, she taught at the school to earn enough money to pay her way through Geneva Medical College (now Upstate Medical University), where she graduated as a medical doctor in 1855 as the only woman in her class. She married a fellow medical school student, Albert Miller, and they set up a joint practice in Rome, New York. Mary E. Walker and the Civil War, page 91. The practice did not flourish, as female physicians were generally not trusted or respected at that time. 26-27
Walker briefly attended Bowen Collegiate Institute (later named Lenox College) in Hopkinton, Iowa in 1860 until she was suspended after refusing to quit the school debating society, which had previously been all male.

Career

At the beginning of the American Civil War, she volunteered for the Union Army as a civilian. At first, she was only allowed to practice as a nurse, as the U.S. Army had no female surgeons. During this period, she served at the First Battle of Bull Run (Manassas), July 21, 1861 and at the Patent Office Hospital in Washington, D.C.  She worked as an unpaid field surgeon near the Union front lines, including the Battle of Fredericksburg and in Chattanooga after the Battle of Chickamauga. As a suffragette, she was happy to see women serving as soldiers and alerted the press to the case of Frances Hook in Ward 2 of the Chattanooga hospital. Cook.  They Fought Like Demons: Women Soldiers in the American Civil War.  Baton Rouge, Louisiana State University Press, 2002, page 96.
In September 1862 Walker wrote to the War Department requesting employment on Secret Service to spy on the enemy, but the offer was declined. Walker to Edwin M. Stanton, September 22, 1862 Finally, she was employed as a "Contract Acting Assistant Surgeon (civilian)" by the Army of the Cumberland in September 1863, becoming the first-ever female surgeon employed by the U.S. Army Surgeon.
Walker was later appointed assistant surgeon of the 52nd Ohio Infantry. During this service, she frequently crossed battle lines, treating civilians. On April 10, 1864 she was captured by Confederate troops and arrested as a spy, just after she finished helping a confederate doctor perform an amputation.  She was sent to Castle Thunder in Richmond, Virginia and remained there until August 12, 1864 when she was released as part of a prisoner exchange. Women in the Civil War. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1996, pages 62-63. She went on to serve during the Battle of Atlanta and later as supervisor of a female prison in Louisville, Kentucky, and head of an orphanage in Tennessee.

Later career

After the war, she became a writer and lecturer, supporting such issues as health care, temperance, women's rights and dress reform for women.  She was frequently arrested for wearing masculine styled clothing and insisted on her right to wear clothing that she thought appropriate. She wrote two books that discussed women's rights and dress. She participated for several years with other leaders in the women's suffrage movement, including Susan B. Anthony and Elizabeth Cady Stanton. The initial stance of the movement, taking Dr. Walker's lead, was to say that women already had the right to vote, and Congress need only enact enabling legislation.  After a number of fruitless years working at this, the movement took the new tack of working for a Constitutional amendment. This was diametrically opposed to Mary Walker's position, and she fell out of favor with the movement. She continued to attend conventions of the suffrage movement and distribute her own brand of literature, but was virtually ignored by the rest of the movement. Her penchant for wearing male-style clothing, including a top hat, only exacerbated the situation.  She received a more positive reception in England than in the United States.
Walker died on February 21, 1919, from natural causes at the age of 86 and is buried in Rural Cemetery Oswego, New York. She had a plain funeral, but an American flag was draped over her casket and she was buried in her black suit instead of a dress. Her death in 1919 came one year before the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution which guaranteed women the right to vote.

Honors and awards

Medal of Honor citation

After the war, Walker was recommended for the Medal of Honor by Generals William Tecumseh Sherman and George Henry Thomas. On November 11, 1865, President Andrew Johnson signed a bill to present her the medal. 
In 1917, the U.S. Congress, created a pension act for Medal of Honor recipients and in doing so created separate Army and Navy Medal of Honor Rolls. Only the Army decided to review eligibility for inclusion on the Army Medal of Honor Roll. The 1917 Medal of Honor Board deleted 911 names from the Army Medal of Honor Roll including that of Dr. Mary Edwards Walker and William F. "Buffalo Bill" Cody.  None of the 911 recipients were ordered to return their medals although on the question of whether the recipients could continue to wear their medals the Judge Advocate General advised the Medal of Honor Board that there was no obligation on the Army to police the matter. Walker continued to wear her medal until her death.
President Jimmy Carter restored her medal posthumously in 1977.

=Attribution and citation=

Rank and organization: Contract Acting Assistant Surgeon (civilian), U. S. Army. Places and dates: Battle of Bull Run, July 21, 1861; Patent Office Hospital, Washington, D.C., October 1861; Chattanooga, Tenn., following Battle of Chickamauga, September 1863; Prisoner of War, April 10, 1864 – August 12, 1864, Richmond, Va.; Battle of Atlanta, September 1864. Entered service at: Louisville, Ky. Born: 26 November 1832, Oswego County, N.Y.
Citation:
 Whereas it appears from official reports that Dr. Mary E. Walker, a graduate of medicine, "has rendered valuable service to the Government, and her efforts have been earnest and untiring in a variety of ways," and that she was assigned to duty and served as an assistant surgeon in charge of female prisoners at Louisville, Ky., upon the recommendation of Major-Generals Sherman and Thomas, and faithfully served as contract surgeon in the service of the United States, and has devoted herself with much patriotic zeal to the sick and wounded soldiers, both in the field and hospitals, to the detriment of her own health, and has also endured hardships as a prisoner of war four months in a Southern prison while acting as contract surgeon; and Whereas by reason of her not being a commissioned officer in the military service, a brevet or honorary rank cannot, under existing laws, be conferred upon her; and Whereas in the opinion of the President an honorable recognition of her services and sufferings should be made.
 It is ordered, That a testimonial thereof shall be hereby made and given to the said Dr. Mary E. Walker, and that the usual medal of honor for meritorious services be given her.

Legacy

During World War II, a Liberty ship, the SS Mary Walker, was named for her.
In 1982, the U.S. Postal Service issued a 20 cent stamp in her honor marking the anniversary of her birth. 21-22Graf, Mercedes, page 82.
The medical facilities at SUNY Oswego are named in her honor (Mary Walker Health Center). On the same grounds a plaque explains her importance in the Oswego community.
There is a United States Army Reserve center named for her in Walker, Michigan.
The Whitman-Walker Clinic in Washington, D.C. is named in honor of Dr. Walker and the poet Walt Whitman who was a nurse in D.C. during the Civil War.
The Mary Walker Clinic at the National Training Center and Fort Irwin, California is named in honor of Dr. Walker.
The Mary E. Walker House is a thirty (30) bed transitional residence run by The Philadelphia Veterans Multi-Service & Education Center for women veterans who have found themselves in difficult life situations and without a home. Walker House Site  Walker House Recognize Women in the Military," Senator Dinneman's Official Website 
With the Civil War anniversary (2011-2015), a number of historians have had a renewed interest in Walker, especially historian Mercedes Graf who wrote the introduction to Walker's Hit for the 2003 edition.

Works by Mary Edwards Walker

 |author=Mary Edwards Walker |coauthor=United States. Congress. House. Committee on the Judiciary, Edward Thomas Taylor, Jane Addams |publisher=Government Printing Office |title= Woman suffrage, No.1: hearings before the Committee on the Judiciary, House of Representatives, Sixty-second Congress, second session, statement of Dr. Mary E. Walker. February 14, 1912 |year=1912}}
 |author=Walker, Mary Edwards |publisher=The American news company |year=1871}}  Reissued in paperback with a new introduction in 2003.<ref></ref>





Further reading

 |accessdate=February 11, 2010
 |url= |author=Mary Edwards Walker |coauthor=United States. Congress. House. Committee on the Judiciary, Edward Thomas Taylor, Jane Addams |publisher=Government Printing Office
 |title= Woman suffrage, No.1: hearings before the Committee on the Judiciary, House of Representatives, Sixty-second Congress, second session, statement of Dr. Mary E. Walker. February 14, 1912 |year=1912}}
|title= A Woman of Honor: Dr. Mary E. Walker and the Civil War |publisher = Thomas Publications|year=2001|ISBN =1577470710 |OCLC=48851708}}
|title= Quite Contrary: Dr. Mary Edwards Walker |publisher = Funk & Wagnalls|year=1970|OCLC=69716}}
|title= Civil War Doctor: the Story of Mary Edwards Walker|publisher =Morgan Reynolds Pub. |year=2006|ISBN = 1599350289|OCLC=71241973}}
 |title=Medal of Honor: Profiles of America's Military Heroes from the Civil War to the Present |author=Mikaelian, Allen |coauthor=Wallace, Mike |publisher=Hyperion |year=2003 |pages=1–18 |isbn=0-7868-6662-4}}




