[[Yancheng]]

CATEGORIES: Cities in Jiangsu, Yangtze River Delta, Yancheng

Yancheng () is a prefecture-level city in northeastern Jiangsu province, People's Republic of China. The city with the largest jurisdiction area in Jiangsu, Yancheng borders Lianyungang to the north, Huai'an to the west, Yangzhou and Taizhou to the southwest, Nantong to the south, and looks out to the Yellow Sea to the east.
Yancheng, literally "Salt City", is named after the salt harvest fields that surround the city. According to historical records, Compilation by LianXin website. Data from the Sixth National Population Census of the People's Republic of China

Administration

The prefecture-level city of Yancheng administers 9 county-level divisions, including 2 districts, 2 county-level cities and 5 counties. The population information here presented uses 2010 census data of permanent residents.

History

Yancheng has a history of 2,100 years since the first canton was founded here in Han Dynasty at year 119 BC. It was named for the salt reserves in rivers around the area, its name literally meaning "Salt City". In later years, the city was the home of Fan Zhongyan, the 12th century statesman and Shi Nai'an, the reputed author of famous novels.Yancheng Introduction (Yancheng Middle School)
Yancheng was in the limelight during the Chinese Civil War from the 1930s to 1940s. The New Fourth Army led by the Communist Party of China was reestablished in Yancheng after being ambushed and battered by the enemy. After the revival, the Army played a very important role in the war and finally the foundation of the People's Republic of China. Many monuments in honor of these heroes can still be found around Yancheng.

Geography and climate

Yancheng occupies the flat coastal plains of Eastern Jiangsu. Those areas not cultivated are mainly marshlands, which are home to  several endangered species, including the Red-crowned Crane and the Pere David's deer. Yancheng has a temperate climate with fairly mild winters and distinctly tropical late summers.

Transportation

Recent development of transportation infrastructure in Northern Jiangsu has directly impacted Yancheng, which is located on the Xinyi-Changxing Railway, completed in 2005.  The Yancheng train station opened in 2006, and Yancheng now offers overnight train service (on Train T156) to Beijing.  Yancheng is also the endpoint of the Ningjingyan Expressway as well as a major stop on the Coastal Expressway, connecting it with Shanghai.
Transportation by bus is available on a flowing basis to Lianyungang as well as neighbouring counties Funing, Sheyang, Binhai, and Xiangshui.
Yancheng's  BRT (bus rapid transport) system uses a dedicated bus lane and allows daily unlimited ridership for 1 RMB per day.

Economy

Yancheng's financial income used to rely heavily on agricultural industry. In 2002, Yancheng's economy has been boosted by an initial joint venture between Kia Motors and Dongfeng Automotive Group, with the creation of the Yancheng Plant.  The plant was expanded in 2007.[ref]
</ref>

Education

The city hosts numerous higher learning institutions, including Yancheng Teachers' University, Yancheng Institute of Technology, Yancheng Nursing College,Yancheng Textile Vocational College and Yancheng Transport Technology College.
Yancheng Radio and Television University is a branch of this national educational giant in the city.
Yancheng Middle School (盐中）, founded by the Kuomintang, is recognized as one of the best in Jiangsu province, currently ranked the 4th best middle school in the province. It has over 6000 students and the school offers a variety of subjects to choose from.
The city has well instituted compulsory primary education system. The secondary schools including high schools achieves significant graduate rate. Its adult vocational education system has brought diverse programs to its labor forces.

Tourism

Outdoor activities include the Yangcheng Wetlands and Salt marshes, home of some unique and endangered species, including Père David's Deer and the Red-crowned Crane. There is also a famous food street in  east road springing up in recent years in which stands many restaurants in a style of Huizhou architecture.

Notable people

A number of notable people were born in Yancheng. Qiao Guanhua (1913–1983) was the Chinese Foreign Minister during the 1970s and he was the first top Chinese diplomat at the UN after the legitimate position of China was restored during the Cold War. Hu Qiaomu (1912–1992) served as a member of the Secretariat of the CPC Central Committee, Director of the Party Literature Research Centre of the Central Committee, Director of the Party History Research Centre of the Central Committee and President of the Chinese Academy of Social Science in the 1980s. Two of them are referred to "Two Qiao" of Yancheng.

Twin cities

Yancheng is twinned with the following domestic and foreign cities.

Domestic

International

Formal paper to be signed

In addition, the county-level city of Dafeng, administered by Yancheng, is also twinned with Ascoli Piceno, Italy (September 2001) and Guri, South Korea (February 20, 2003) respectively.






