[[Angel Links]]

CATEGORIES: 1999 anime television series, 1999 manga, Action anime and manga, Adventure anime and manga, Bandai Entertainment anime titles, Funimation Entertainment, Light novels, Odex, Outlaw Star, Science fiction anime and manga, Sunrise (company)

 is an anime television series produced by Sunrise Studio. It was originally aired across the Japanese WOWOW television network from April 7 to June 30, 1999. It is a spin-off of the manga Outlaw Star by Takehiko Itō. Angel Links follows the 16 year-old protagonist, Meifon Li, who becomes the head of a corporation dedicated to saving transportation companies in outer space from pirates for free, as per her grandfather's dying wish. As the series progresses, she learns a terrifying secret about her grandfather and the reason for his wish.
A series of light novels titled , written and illustrated by Ibuki Hideaki, began publication prior to the anime series. The anime was released in the U.S. by Bandai. The characters Duuz and Valeria are from an episode of Outlaw Star titled "Law and Lawlessness", and work for Meifon, although there are several differences in their character and personalities between the two shows.

Characters

Media

Publications

Angel Links was first drafted as a light novel series titled Hoshi Hou Yuugeki Tai Angel Links, penned by Ibuki Hideaki and published under the Fujimi Shobo Dragon Magazine label.
A single-volume manga based on the Angel Links anime series was published by Kadokawa Shoten on January 12, 1999.

Anime

The 13 episodes that comprise the Angel Links anime series originally aired on Japan's WOWOW television network from April 7 to June 30, 1999. Bandai Visual released the series on DVD in Japan in seven separate volumes from August 25, 1999 to March 25, 2000.

CDs

The musical score of Angel Links was composed by Toshihiko Sahashi. The series features one opening theme, "All My Soul" by Naw Naw, and one closing theme, "True Moon" by Riwako Miyawara. The official soundtrack for the series totalling 62 songs was released in Japan on two albums from May 21, 1999 to July 21, 1999.






