[[University of Central Missouri]]

CATEGORIES: University of Central Missouri, Universities and colleges in Missouri, American Association of State Colleges and Universities, Warrensburg, Missouri, Educational institutions established in 1871, Buildings and structures in Johnson County, Missouri, Education in Johnson County, Missouri, 1871 establishments in Missouri

The University of Central Missouri (formerly  Central Missouri State University) is a four-year public institution in Warrensburg, Missouri, United States. The university serves nearly 12,500 students from 49 states and 59 countries on its 1,561 acre campus. UCM offers 150 programs of study, including 10 pre-professional programs, 27 areas of teacher certification and 37 graduate programs. Students also have the ability to study abroad in about 60 different countries in the world through the International Center.

History

The University was founded in 1871 as State Normal School, District #2 and became known as Warrensburg Teachers College. The name was changed to Central Missouri State Teachers College in 1919, Central Missouri State College in 1946 and Central Missouri State University in 1971. In 1965, the institution established a graduate school. On Sept. 20, 2006, the name was changed to the University of Central Missouri. There are 105 majors at UCM and 32 professional accreditations. UCM has off-campus locations in Lee's Summit, Missouri and provides numerous online courses and programs.

Academics

College of Arts, Humanities, and Social Sciences:
UCM students take College of Arts, Humanities, and Social Sciences courses that develop critical-thinking, writing, and speaking skills. The current dean is Dr. Gersham Nelson. Accreditations include National Association of Schools of Music and National Council for Social Studies. Departments include:
Harmon College of Business and Professional Studies:
The Harmon College's accreditation by AACSB International puts it in the nation's upper echelon of business colleges. U.S. News & World Report has cited UCM's MBA program in America's Best Graduate Schools. The current dean is Dr. Roger Best. Other accreditations include Aviation Accreditation Board International and Council on Social Work Education.HCBPS Departments include:
College of Education:
UCM's College of Education prepares students to become teachers. Departments include: 
College of Health, Science, and Technology:
Combining scientific theory and applied technology, the College of Health, Science, and Technology has a unique focus that sets the university apart from others. The college's goal is to prepare students to be competent leaders in the rapidly changing global marketplace and to provide a high-quality work force for the future. Departments include: 
The Honors College:
First-time incoming freshmen must have a minimum ACT score of 25 (or SAT equivalent) and a minimum cumulative high school GPA of 3.5 to be considered for admission to The Honors College. Once incoming freshmen have completed a semester at UCM as a full-time student and have a college cumulative GPA of 3.5 or higher, they may apply to The Honors College. Current UCM students or students transferring to UCM must have achieved a minimum cumulative college GPA of 3.5 or higher. Benefits of being an Honors College student include, but are not limited to, early enrollment, one-on-one advising with the Dean, smaller classes, Honors-only courses and colloquia.

GIMPS

The University of Central Missouri continues to hold an important role in the Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search. The GIMPS project at UCM is a university-wide effort managed by Dr. Curtis Cooper and Dr. Steven Boone.  Central's team (curtisc) is currently the No. 1 contributor to that project,

Student life

The university has more than 200 student organizations with academic, cultural, recreational, community service and special interest clubs and associations. There are also more than 20 intramural sports to compete in, free movie nights on campus and a bowling alley and movie theater in the student union. Freshman students are required to live in one of the 16 residence halls their first year to help ease the adjustment from high school to college. Students can also choose to live in a Special Housing Interest Program, which places students with the same program of study together in the residence halls.Student Life

Greek life

The University of Central Missouri is home to 22 Greek organizations; recruitment takes place in both the spring and fall semesters. Eleven percent of UCM students are involved in Greek life. A Greek program, Greeks Advocating Mature Management of Alcohol known as GAMMA, promotes alcohol awareness. It assisted the Student Government Association with bringing the Night Ryder bus to campus. Night Ryder provides students a free ride to and from campus to ensure that students have safe transportation.Greek Life Chapters
Fraternities
Sororities

Media

UCM produces a weekly newspaper focusing on the campus called The Muleskinner and an online publication called digitalburg. Even though these publications are overseen by a faculty advisor, they are entirely student operated and accept article submissions from any student. The university also houses KTBG, at 90.9 FM ("The Bridge") and KMOS-TV.

Athletics

UCM's athletic teams compete in the Mid-America Intercollegiate Athletics Association, or MIAA. The athletic division includes basketball, baseball, women's bowling, American football, golf, women's soccer, softball, cross-country, track, volleyball and wrestling. UCM's athletic teams are called Mules (men) and Jennies (women). UCM has two mascots, Mo the Mule and a live mule named Mancow.
Basketball games are played in the UCM Multipurpose Building.  Built in 1976, The Multi, as it is known to students and alumni, has a seating capacity of 6,500 for basketball and volleyball games. Walton Stadium. The stadium was erected in 1928 and underwent a major face-lift in 1995. The stadium officially holds 10,000 people, but crowds often approach 12,000.Keith Memorial Golf Course

Notable alumni and faculty






