[[Laie Hawaii Temple]]

CATEGORIES: 20th-century Latter Day Saint temples, Buildings and structures in Honolulu County, Hawaii, Buildings designed to replicate Solomon's Temple, Hawaiian architecture, Landmarks in Hawaii, Places of worship in Hawaii, Religious buildings completed in 1919, Temples of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Oceania, Temples of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the United States, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Hawaii, 1919 establishments in Hawaii

Laie Hawaii Temple is a temple of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) located on the northeast shore of the Hawaiian island of O
The Laie Hawaii Temple was the first temple built by the LDS Church outside of the continental United States.  The temple is also the oldest to operate outside of Utah, and the fifth-oldest LDS temple still in operation.  In addition to initial building and construction, the temple has been dedicated for use by several presidents of the LDS Church.  This includes the site of the temple being dedicated by Joseph F. Smith on June 1, 1915, the completed structure being dedicated by Heber J. Grant on November 27, 1919, being rededicated after significant expansion  on June 13, 1978 by Spencer W. Kimball and then rededicated on November 21, 2010 by Thomas S. Monson following seismic upgrades and remodeling. The Laie Hawaii Temple was formerly known as the Hawaiian Temple or the Hawaii Temple until a standard naming convention for LDS temples was announced in 1999.

History

Sandwich Islands Mission

During the California Gold Rush, the first ten Mormon missionaries to Hawaii departed San Francisco on the ship Imaum of Muscat.  After 20 days at sea, the ship arrived on December 12, 1850, in Honolulu Harbor at what was then known as the "Sandwich Islands" (Hawaiian Islands).

Lāie

In 1865, the Church purchased a  
In 1915, Joseph F. Smith, then sixth president of the LDS Church, announced plans for the first temple outside the continental United States and chose Lāʻie for its construction.  According to Mormon folklore, precious materials arrived just in time to complete the building of the temple:  Temple builders ran out of wood (a scarce commodity on the islands) during initial construction, but local members received lumber when a ship ran aground and needed to unload some of its cargo of wood.  The temple builders volunteered to help the ship and were given the lumber out of gratitude.  The lumber taken from the ship proved to be just enough to finish the temple.
When news of the new Laie Hawaii Temple reached Native Hawaiian converts (and other Polynesians) living far from home in the town of Iosepa, Utah, many decided to emigrate back to Hawaii.  Although the Hawaiians had lived in Iosepa since 1889, the closest temple, Salt Lake Temple, was 75 miles away from the colony.  Moving to Laie gave the Hawaiians the ability to be closer to the new temple and allowed them to perform sacred ordinances without having to travel great distances.  By January 1917, most of the Hawaiians returned home, leaving Iosepa a ghost town.
LDS Church President Heber J. Grant presided over the Hawaiian Temple's dedication on November 27, 1919. Grant called the Hawaiian people "descendants of Lehi" (a prophet in the Book of Mormon), and saw the future of the new temple in Lāʻie as a magnet for Polynesian converts.  After the temple was completed, more Polynesians moved to Lāʻie, hoping to participate in temple ordinances.  Tourists were also drawn to the area, and guide books of the time compared the Lāʻie temple to the Taj Mahal.  
The 1941 attack on Pearl Harbor gave rise to another popular tale about the Laie Hawaii Temple in Mormon folklore.  According to variations on this story, Japanese aircraft pilots attempted to bomb or strafe the Hawaiian Temple just prior to, or just after, the attack, but were thwarted by mechanical failure or from an unseen protective force.

Renovation

Beginning in May 1976, the temple was closed for a two-year remodeling project, expanding from    
A $5.5 million renovation, renewal, and beautification project along Hale La  Norfolk pines suffering from termite infestation were replaced with royal palms, new decorative lighting was added to the terraces, and landscaped roundabouts were put in place.  At the same time, the Visitors' Center was upgraded with interactive kiosks and new displays.
In December 2008, the Laie Hawaii Temple closed again for structural and seismic upgrades and to restore the ordinance rooms to their original appearance and progressive-style presentation of the endowment (still using film). The baptistry was repaired and renovated. The temple was rededicated on November 21, 2010, by Thomas S. Monson.

Architecture

Church President Joseph F. Smith wanted the architecture of the Laie Hawaii Temple to resemble Solomon's Temple referred to in the biblical canon.  The temple is often compared to the Cardston Alberta Temple,
The temple sits on an  from north to south.  The front exterior was designed in the form of a Greek cross, but lacks a tower, a rarity in LDS Church temples.   Apart from the Laie Hawaii Temple, only two other church temples lack towers or spires: the Cardston Alberta Temple and the Mesa Arizona Temple.
The exterior of the temple exhibits four large friezes planned by American sculptor J. Leo Fairbanks and built with the help of his brother Avard Fairbanks. including Joseph being blessed by his father and one of the Prophet Lehi in a scene from the Second Book of Nephi in the Book of Mormon.  
As visitors approach the temple and pass a number of reflecting pools, a maternity fountain sits in front of the uppermost pool.  Designed by the Fairbanks brothers, this bold relief honors Hawaiian Motherhood and depicts a Hawaiian mother holding a giant clam shell while pouring water over her children.  The act is supposed to symbolize mothers pouring their love, hope and care onto their children.    
The landscaped temple grounds contain tropical gardens, with plants such as hibiscus, Brazilian plume, birds of paradise, lantana, red ginger, bougainvillea, plumeria, Ixora, and others. (New site)  At the base of the temple grounds is a fountain separating an LDS Family History Center and a Visitors' Center, where a ten-foot sculpture replica of  Bertel Thorvaldsen's Christus stands inside the entrance.
The Laie Hawaii Temple is  and houses four ordinance rooms and six sealing rooms.  Landscape artist LeConte Stewart designed many of the murals found inside the temple.

Admittance

Laie Hawaii Temple is not used for regular Sunday worship.  As temples are considered sacred houses of the Lord, only church members who keep gospel covenants are allowed to enter for the purpose of participating in sacred ceremonies such as baptism for the dead and eternal marriage, a ritual in which couples and families are sealed for time and all eternity.  Because of these guidelines, non-Mormons are not allowed inside temples, but public tours of the grounds outside and of the visitors' centers are available.

Temple presidents

Notable temple presidents include Edward L. Clissold (1936–1938, 1943–1944, 1963–1965), D. Arthur Haycock (1986–1989), and J. Richard Clarke (1998–2001).





Further reading

  | last       = Anderson
  | first      = Paul L.
  | authorlink = Paul L. Anderson
  | title      = A Jewel in the Gardens of Paradise: The Art and Architecture of the Hawaii Temple
