[[Web mining]]

CATEGORIES: Data collection, Data mining

Web mining -  is the application of data mining techniques to discover patterns from the Web.
According to analysis targets, web mining can be divided into three different types, which are Web usage mining, Web content mining and Web structure mining.

Web usage mining

Web usage mining is the process of extracting useful information from server logs e.g. use
Web usage mining is the process of finding out what users are looking for on the Internet. Some users might be looking at only textual data, whereas some others might be interested in multimedia data. 
Web Usage Mining is the application of data mining techniques to discover interesting usage patterns from Web data in order to understand and better serve the needs of Web-based applications.
Usage data captures the identity or origin of Web users along with their browsing behavior at a Web site. 
Web usage mining itself can be classified further depending on the kind of usage data considered:
Studies related to work et al. are concerned with two areas: constraint-based data mining algorithms applied in Web Usage Mining and developed software tools (systems).

Web structure mining

Web structure mining is the process of using graph theory to analyze the node and connection structure of a web site. According to the type of web structural data, web structure mining can be divided into two kinds:
1. Extracting patterns from hyperlinks in the web: a hyperlink is a structural component that connects the web page to a different location.
2. Mining the document structure: analysis of the tree-like structure of page structures to describe HTML or XML tag usage.

Web content mining

Web content mining is the mining, extraction and integration of useful data, information and knowledge from Web page content. The heterogeneity and the lack of structure that permits much of the ever-expanding information sources on the World Wide Web, such as hypertext documents, makes automated discovery, organization, and search and indexing tools of the Internet and the World Wide Web such as Lycos, Alta Vista, WebCrawler, ALIWEB 6, MetaCrawler, and others provide some comfort to users, but they do not generally provide structural information nor categorize, filter, or interpret documents. In recent years these factors have prompted researchers to develop more intelligent tools for information retrieval, such as intelligent web agents, as well as to extend database and data mining techniques to provide a higher level of organization for semi-structured data available on the web. The agent-based approach to web mining involves the development of sophisticated AI systems that can act autonomously or semi-autonomously on behalf of a particular user, to discover and organize web-based information.
Web content mining is differentiated from two different points of view: Information
Retrieval View and Database View. R. Kosala et al. summarized the research works done
for unstructured data and semi-structured data from information retrieval view. It shows that
most of the researches use bag of words, which is based on the statistics about single words in isolation, to represent unstructured text and take single word found in the training corpus as features. For the semi-structured data, all the works utilize the HTML structures inside the documents and some utilized the hyperlink structure between the documents for document representation. As for the database view, in order to have the better information management and querying on the web, the mining always tries to infer the structure of the web site to transform a web site to become a database.
There are several ways to represent documents; vector space model is typically used. The
documents constitute the whole vector space. If a term t occurs n(D, t) in document D, the t-th coordinate of D is n(D, t) . When the length of the words in a document goes to text. This representation does not realize the importance of words in a
document. To resolve this, tf-idf (Term Frequency Times Inverse Document Frequency) is
introduced.
By multi-scanning the document, we can implement feature selection. Under the condition
that the category result is rarely affected, the extraction of feature subset is needed. The general algorithm is to construct an evaluating function to evaluate the features. As feature set, Information Gain, Cross Entropy, Mutual Information, and Odds Ratio are usually used.
The classifier and pattern analysis methods of text data mining are very similar to traditional data mining techniques. The usual evaluative merits are Classification Accuracy, Precision, Recall and Information Score.
Web mining is an important component of content pipeline for web portals. It is used in data confirmation and validity verification, data integrity and building taxonomies, content management, content generation and opinion mining.

Web mining in foreign languages

It should be noted that the language code of Chinese words is very complicated compared to that of English. The GB
code, BIG5 code and HZ code are common Chinese word codes in web documents. Before
text mining, one needs to identify the code standard of the HTML documents and
transform it into inner code, then use other data mining techniques to find useful knowledge
and useful patterns.

Web Usage mining Pros and Cons

Pros

Web usage mining essentially has many advantages which makes this technology attractive to corporations including the government agencies. This technology has enabled e-commerce to do personalized marketing, which eventually results in higher trade volumes. Government agencies are using this technology to classify threats and fight against terrorism. The predicting capability of mining applications can benefit society by identifying criminal activities. The companies can establish better customer relationship by giving them exactly what they need. Companies can understand the needs of the customer better and they can react to customer needs faster.
The companies can find, attract and retain customers; they can save on production costs by utilizing the acquired insight of customer requirements. They can increase profitability by target pricing based on the profiles created. They can even find the customer who might default to a competitor the company will try to retain the customer by providing promotional offers to the specific customer, thus reducing the risk of losing a customer or customers.

Cons

Web usage mining by itself does not create issues, but this technology when used on data of personal nature might cause concerns. The most criticized ethical issue involving web usage mining is the invasion of privacy. Privacy is considered lost when information concerning an individual is obtained, used, or disseminated, especially if this occurs without their knowledge or consent.. The obtained data will be analyzed, and clustered to form profiles; the data will be made anonymous before clustering so that there are no personal profiles. Thus these applications de-individualize the users by judging them by their mouse clicks. De-individualization, can be defined as a tendency of judging and treating people on the basis of group characteristics instead of on their own individual characteristics and merits.
Another important concern is that the companies collecting the data for a specific purpose might use the data for a totally different purpose, and this essentially violates the user's interests.
The growing trend of selling personal data as a commodity encourages website owners to trade personal data obtained from their site. This trend has increased the amount of data being captured and traded increasing the likeliness of one's privacy being invaded. The companies which buy the data are obliged make it anonymous and these companies are considered authors of any specific release of mining patterns. They are legally responsible for the contents of the release; any inaccuracies in the release will result in serious lawsuits, but there is no law preventing them from trading the data.
Some mining algorithms might use controversial attributes like sex, race, religion, or sexual orientation to categorize individuals. These practices might be against the anti-discrimination legislation.. The applications make it hard to identify the use of such controversial attributes, and there is no strong rule against the usage of such algorithms with such attributes. This process could result in denial of service or a privilege to an individual based on his race, religion or sexual orientation, right now this situation can be avoided by the high ethical standards maintained by the data mining company.
The collected data is being made anonymous so that, the obtained data and the obtained patterns cannot be traced back to an individual. It might look as if this poses no threat to one's privacy, actually many extra information can be inferred by the application by combining two separate unscrupulous data from the user.

Resources



Books

Data Mining By Korth

Bibliographic references




