[[Liquid Snake]]

CATEGORIES: Characters created by Hideo Kojima, Characters designed by Yoji Shinkawa, Clone characters in video games, Criminal characters in video games, Fictional British people in video games, Fictional English people, Fictional Eurasian people, Fictional gangsters, Fictional Gulf War veterans, Fictional murderers, Fictional super soldiers, Fictional Special Air Service personnel, Genetically engineered characters in video games, Konami antagonists, Male characters in video games, Mercenary characters in video games, Metal Gear characters, Military personnel characters in video games, Secret agent and spy characters in video games, Twin characters in video games, Video game bosses, Video game characters introduced in 1998

 is a fictional character from Konami's Metal Gear series.

Characteristics and design

Introduced in Metal Gear Solid, Liquid Snake is Solid Snake's twin brother and Big Boss's second clone via the Les Enfants Terribles project. Liquid resembles Snake in terms of facial appearance and physique, with the primary differences being his different skin tone and medium-length blond hair, as well as a tattoo of a snake entwined around a sword on his left arm.
It was intended during the finalization of Metal Gear Solid 2 for Liquid Snake to send Arsenal Gear crashing into Manhattan in the game's climax.  However, the line of dialogue that was intended to explicitly state this was cut from the final release, due to the September 11 attacks occurring as the game was nearing finalization. The dialogue, however, was retained in the novelization.

Appearances

Liquid Snake is introduced in Metal Gear Solid as the game's main antagonist. He Is Solid Snake's twin brother and Big Boss's second clone. He and Snake meet for the first time face-to-face in the torture room where the DARPA chief was killed by Revolver Ocelot. His ultimate goal is the restoration of Big Boss's "dying wish" in attempts to sever the world from control from "hypocritical politicians". Liquid battles Snake multiple times throughout the Shadow Moses Incident, such as the Hind D battle, and the battle against Metal Gear REX after Liquid manipulated Snake in activating the PAL codes via his Master Miller disguise. Though REX was armed and ready, Snake managed to destroy the Metal Gear, though Liquid survived and took Snake to the top of REX where he revealed their own "birth" as a result of the "Les Enfants Terribles" project. Both Liquid and Solid battled hand-to-hand atop REX, before Solid prevailed leaving Liquid for dead. However Liquid survived the fall from REX, and pursued Snake and Meryl Silverburgh in a jeep chase that resulted in a crash outside the island's facility. Liquid took one last attempt to kill Snake, but before he could, he realized that he was going to die and faced Solid one last time before he was killed by FOXDIE. Liquid's death left Snake perplexed as to when "his time is up".
Liquid Snake seemingly returns in Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of Liberty as a dormant personality that would possess Revolver Ocelot after an arm transplant where Ocelot replaces his own severed hand with one taken from Liquid's corpse thanks to Solidus Snake. Meanwhile, Liquid's corpse and Solidus's biomort was used to surgically reconstruct Big Boss.
Liquid Snake is alluded in Metal Gear Solid: Portable Ops as Big Boss's "son who will bring the world to ruin" and in Metal Gear Solid: Peace Walker on a secret tape that implies that Liquid and Solid act as an insurance policy for Cipher (the Patriots) in the event that Big Boss did not return to their fold.

Reception

In 1999, readers of GameSpot voted Liquid Snake into the list of top ten video game villains.
Liquid was included on GamesRadar 2008 list of "outrageously camp bad guys" at fifth place,




