[[Suomi KP/-31]]

CATEGORIES: World War II submachine guns, Weapons of Finland, World War II military equipment of Finland, 9mm Parabellum firearms, Finnish inventions

The Suomi KP/-31 (Suomi-konepistooli or "Submachine-gun Finland") was a submachine gun (SMG) of Finnish design used during World War II. It was a descendant of the M-22 prototype and the KP/-26 production model, which was revealed to the public in 1925. The Suomi-konepistooli KP/-31 is often abbreviated to Suomi KP.
The Suomi KP/-31 is regarded by manyCombat Guns – An Illustrated Encyclopedia of 20th Century Firearms"OSPREY, 1987 as one of the most successful submachine guns of World War II, also the soon developed 71-round drum magazine was later copied and adopted by the Soviets for their PPD-40 and PPSh-41 submachine guns.connect.html The accuracy of the Suomi was superior to that of the mass-produced PPSh-41, thanks in part to a noticeably longer barrel, with the same rate of fire and the equally large magazine capacity. The major disadvantage of the Suomi KP/-31 was its high production cost.
The Suomi KP/-31 also incorporated a few new design features, including an arrangement whereby the spring was mounted inside the bolt in order to make the gun shorter. Its 50-round quad-column "Casket" box magazine was more reliable than the early 40-round "bullets loaded nose down" drum magazine, and similar applications were used on the Argentinian C-4 submachine gun and present-day 60-round 5.45x39mm AK-74 compatible magazines.
The M-22 and KP/-26 were made by Konepistooli Oy, founded by Master Armorer Aimo Lahti, Captain V. Korpela,  Lieutenant Y. Koskinen and Lieutenant L. Boyer-Spoof. The Suomi KP/-31 was designed by Koskinen and Lahti.
The Suomi KP/-31 went into serial production in 1931 by Tikkakoski Oy and most of these weapons were bought by the Finnish Defence Forces. The Finnish Defence Forces were equipped with about 4000 Suomi KP/-31 submachine guns when the Winter War started. During the course of the war, the design was altered with the addition of a muzzle brake, which increased the submachine gun's overall length by 55 mm. The revised version was designated KP/-31 SJR (suujarru, or "muzzle brake"). Aimo Lahti was displeased with this revision, believing that it decreased muzzle velocity and reduced the weapon's reliability, and even sought in vain to have the muzzle brake's designer court-martialed. Ultimately, roughly half of the KP/-31s in Finnish service were of the SJR version. Initially the KP/-31 was issued as a substitute for a light machine gun, and proved inadequate in this role. Instead, soldiers learned by trial and error how to use submachine guns to the best effect. By the time of the Continuation War, Finnish doctrine had been altered to include both a KP/-31 and a light machine gun (usually a captured Degtyaryov DP) in every infantry squad, and by 1943 this had been expanded to two KP/-31s per squad. KP/-31 production continued with the intention of adding a third submachine gun to each squad, but this plan was shelved in 1944 when the Continuation War ended.
A specialized bunker version was also produced in very small numbers (a total of 500 built) in 1941, the barrel shroud end of which was thinner and flattened to allow firing through the narrow ports of defensive bunkers.connect.html This version had no shoulder stock and was equipped with a pistol grip. An even rarer version "900 kp 31 psv"  Production never resumed, as captured Degtyaryov DP machine guns proved far superior in this role. Like the bunker version, the tank version had a pistol grip and no buttstock, and it could be quickly removed from the tank and fitted with a standard barrel shroud for infantry use if needed. The tank version remained in the Finnish Army's inventory through the 1980s, despite the tank it was designed for being retired in 1959.
The Suomi KP was also manufactured under licence in Sweden, Denmark, and Switzerland, where it was known as the Hispano-Suiza MP43/44.
In 2009, a semi-automatic version of the Suomi KP was produced for civilian sale in the United States, replacing the receiver and lengthening barrel to meet the standards of the National Firearms Act.
A Suomi submachine gun is the weapon used by a mass murderer in the Sjowall/Wahloo Swedish mystery novel The Laughing Policeman. In the novel, a character asks if the weapon is the Finnish version or the Swedish-licensed version. A detective says a Finnish-made version, though he uses the Swedish model number (m/37) in mentioning it.gotavapen.htm

Users

Gallery

File:Suomi M31 Torpin Tykit 2.
File:Suomi M31 Korsu.
File:Suomi M31 Mikkeli.
File:Suomi m31 normal and sectioned.jpg|KP/-31 with drum magazine and ammunition package, below a sectioned example as well as a sectioned and normal drum magazine
File:Suomi m31 drum magazines.
File:Suomi-1943p1000730.
File:Suomi.
File:Tali-Ihantala.
File:Vuosalmi etulinja 1944.
File:Suomi M26 Rajamuseo.65 mm Suomi KP/-26.





Guns of the Third Reich, p.163




