[[Intercession of saints]]

CATEGORIES: Anglicanism, Eastern Catholicism, Catholic theology and doctrine, Judeo-Christian topics, Eastern Orthodoxy, Shia Islam, Sainthood, Christian terms

Intercession of the saints is a doctrine held by the Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox and Roman Catholic Churches, many Anglicans and some Lutherans that saints may be asked to intercede (or pray) for others. The doctrine of requesting intercession from saints can be found in Christian writings from the 3rd century AD.orthodoxinfo.aspxThe following article has some other examples from the early church:  
The 4th-century Apostles' Creed states belief in the communion of saints which certain Christian churches interpret as supporting the intercession of saints. Following the stream of Judaic-Christian tradition, Judaism allows for the petition of the "saints".

Biblical basis

Advocates of the doctrine say that Jesus' parable of The Rich Man and Lazarus in ). According to St. Jerome, "If the Apostles and Martyrs, while still in the body, can pray for others, at a time when they must still be anxious for themselves, how much more after their crowns, victories, and triumphs are won!"Scannell, Thomas. "Intercession (Mediation)." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 8. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1910. 29 Jan. 2013
On the basis of other texts (

Catholic and Orthodox views

Roman Catholic Church doctrine supports intercessory prayer to saints. Intercessory prayer to saints also plays an important role in the Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox churches. Also some Anglo-Catholics believe in saintly intercession. This practice is an application of the Catholic doctrine of the Communion of Saints, in which prayer to Mary is a prime part. It is understood that some of the early basis for this was the belief that martyrs passed immediately into the presence of God, and could obtain graces and blessings for others. A further reinforcement, of the same idea, was derived from the cult of the angels, which, while pre-Christian in its origin, was heartily embraced by the faithful of the sub-Apostolic age."Devotion to the Blessed Virgin Mary," The Catholic Encyclopedia
Catholics who seek to derive support from the Bible may point to such Scriptural passages as .
Intercessory prayer to saintly persons who have not yet been canonized is also practiced, and evidence of miracles produced as a result of such prayer is very commonly produced during the formal process of beatification and canonization.

Protestant views

Many Protestant churches strongly reject all saintly intercession, which they believe is contrary to Bible verses  

Anglican views

The first Anglican articles of faith, the Ten Articles (1536), defended the practice of praying to saints,Schofield, John (2006). Philip Melanchthon and the English Reformation, Ashgate Publishing. p. 68. ISBN 978-0-7546-5567-1 while the King's Book, the official statement of religion produced in 1543, devotes an entire section to the importance of the Ave Maria ("Hail Mary") prayer.A Necessary Doctrine and Erudition for Any Christian Man Set forth by the King's Majesty of England, &c.. (1543) 
The Thirty-Nine Articles (1563) however condemned the "invocation of saints" as "a fond thing, vainly invented, and grounded upon no warranty of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the Word of God" (Article XXII). However, some within the Anglican Communion make a clear distinction between a "Romish" and a "Patristic" doctrine concerning the invocation of saints, permitting the latter, but forbidding the former. William Tyndale had been an early opponent of the practice.Goldrick 1979

Lutheran views

Traditional Lutheran belief accounts that saints pray for the Church in general,Apology of the Augsburg Confession XXI 9 but are not mediators of redemption.Apology of the Augsburg Confession XXI 4–7Lutheran teaching

Parallels in other religions

Judaism

There is some evidence of a Jewish belief in intercession, both in the form of the paternal blessings passed down from Abraham to his children, and 2 Maccabees, where Judas Maccabaeus sees the dead Onias and Jeremiah giving blessing to the Jewish army. In ancient Judaism, it was also popular to pray for intercession from Michael in spite of the rabbinical prohibition against appealing to angels as intermediaries between God and his people. There were two prayers written beseeching him as the prince of mercy to intercede in favor of Israel: one composed by Eliezer ha-Kalir, and the other by Judah ben Samuel he-Hasid. Ethiopic, ix. 5 Those who oppose this practice feel that to God alone may prayers be offered.
In modern times one of the greatest divisions in Jewish theology (hashkafa) is over the issue of whether one can beseech the help of a tzadik – an extremely righteous individual.  The main conflict is over a practice of beseeching a tzadik who has already died to make intercession before the Almighty.  This practice is common mainly among Chasidic Jews,"Is it okay to ask a deceased tzaddik to pray on my behalf?" at Chabad.  It strongest opposition is found largely among sectors of Modern Orthodox Judaism, Dor Daim and Talmide haRambam, and among aspects of the Litvish Chareidi community.  Those who oppose this practice usually do so over the problem of idolatry, as Jewish Law strictly prohibits making use of a mediator (melitz) or agent (sarsur) between oneself and the Almighty.
The perspectives of those Jewish groups opposed to the use of intercessors is usually softer in regard to beseeching the Almighty alone merely in the "merit" (skhut) of a tzadik.
Those Jews who support the use of intercessors claim that their beseeching of the tzadik is not prayer or worship.  The conflict between the groups is essentially over what constitutes prayer, worship, a mediator (melitz), and an agent (sarsur).

Islam

Tawassul is the practice of using someone as a means or an intermediary in a supplication directed towards God. An example of this would be such: "O my Lord, help me with and such need due to the love I have for Your Prophet."
Shia Some Shia practice seeking intercession from saints, particular the son-in-law of Muhammad, 'Ali and 'Ali's son, the martyred Husayn. A well-known Persian Shi'i hymn reads 'Z bandegi-ye 'Ali na-ajab bashar be-khoda rasad' ('It's not strange that man, through servitude to 'Ali, will reach God'). Sunni authorities consider this to be polytheism, but the practice of seeking intercession through Sufi saints is widespread, from North Africa to Pakistan. By the early twentieth century, the vast majority of Muslims were members of Sufi brotherhoods, taking part in pilgrimages and rituals to create an i Citing verses of the Qur'an such as:
intensity of devotion and intention that would bring them into contact with intercessory ideas and persons, including dead saints through ziyarat, a form of pilgrimage unrelated to the central hajj pilgrimage to Mecca.

Serer religion

In the religion of the Serer people of Senegal, the Gambia and Mauritania, some of their ancient dead are canonized as Holy Saints, called Pangool in the Serer language.  These ancient ancestors act as interceders between the living world and their supreme deity Roog. II : Pangool, Nouvelles éditions africaines, Dakar, 1990, pp 305-402








