[[Alan Vega]]

CATEGORIES: American Jews, Living people, Synthpop musicians, Protopunk musicians, 1938 births, People from Brooklyn, Jewish musicians, Post-punk musicians, American experimental musicians, American sculptors, Pantheists, 20th-century American painters, 21st-century American painters, American performance artists, ZE Records artists, Artists from New York City

Alan Vega (born Boruch Alan Bermowitz on June 23, 1938)For several years other sources stated that he was born in 1948 – see 'Myth' section is an American vocalist, primarily known for his work with the electronic protopunk duo Suicide. He is also an established sculptor.

Biography and career

Alan Bermowitz was raised in a Jewish household in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn. Calling himself Alan Suicide, he graduated from painting to light sculptures,"I started as a painter. The first time I did a light piece was when I was working on a very big purple painting. There was one light bulb in the room and as I walked around I noticed how the painting acquired different aspects. I wanted it to be one color so I said, "Fuck this, man!" I took the light out of the ceiling and really stuck it on the painting." Alan Vega, 1993 – 100,000 Watts of Fat City © Anna Polerica. many of which were constructed of electronic debris. He gained a residency at the OK Harris Gallery in SoHo where he continued to exhibit until 1975. Barbara Gladstone continued to show his work well into the 1980s.
Seeing The Stooges perform at the New York State Pavilion in August 1969 was an epiphany for Vega."It showed me you didn't have to do static artworks, you could create situations, do something environmental. That's what got me moving more intensely in the direction of doing music. Compared with Iggy, whatever I was doing as an artist felt insignificant." Reynolds, Village Voice. Together, they two began experimenting with music and formed the band Suicide along with guitarist Paul Liebgott. The group played twice at MUSEUM before moving on to the OK Harris Gallery. Calling himself "Nasty Cut", he used the terms "Punk Music" and "Punk Music Mass" in flyers to describe their music, though she didn't play in their live performances. With Bermowitz finally settling on Alan Suicide as a working name, they began to play music venues. Suicide went on to perform at the Mercer Arts Center, Max's Kansas City, CBGB and ultimately, achieve international fame.
In 1980, Vega released his eponymous first solo record which defined the rockabilly style that he would use in his solo work for the next several years, with the song "Jukebox Babe" becoming a hit single in France. In 1985, he released the more commercially viable Just a Million Dreams, but was dropped from his record label after its release. The album originally was set to be produced by Ric Ocasek as a follow-up the critically acclaimed Saturn Strip (1983), but production switched over to Chris Lord-Alge and Vega ran into several difficulties during the recording sessions.
Vega teamed up with Martin Rev and Ric Ocasek again in the late eighties to release the third Suicide album, A Way of Life (1988). Visual artist Stefan Roloff produced a music video for the song Dominic Christ which was released by Wax Trax! Records. Shortly thereafter, Vega met future wife and music partner Elizabeth Lamere while piecing together sound experiments that would evolve into his fifth solo album, Deuce Avenue (1990). Deuce Avenue marked his return to minimalist electronic music, similar to his work with Suicide, in which he combined drum machines and effects with free-form prose. Over the next decade he would release several more solo records as well as perform with Suicide.
In 2002, he constructed Collision Drive, an exhibition of sculptures combining light with found objects and crucifixes. Vega's tenth solo album, Station, was released on Blast First Records in 2007 and was described by his colleagues as "his hardest, heaviest album for quite a while, all self-played and produced."
In 2009, the Museum of Contemporary Art in Lyon, France, mounted Infinite Mercy – a major retrospective exhibit of Vega's art.
On Vega's religious views, he was raised Jewish. He shares the views of Spinoza, the pantheist philosopher.

Myth

Prior to the announcement of the 70th birthday release in 2008, Vega was thought to have been ten years younger. The 2005 book Suicide: No Compromise lists 1948 as his birth year and quotes a 1998 interview in which Vega talks about watching Elvis Presley on The Ed Sullivan Show (1956) as a "little kid". Several other sources also list 1948 as his birthdate. 1131Thompson, Dave (2000) Alternative Rock, Miller Freeman Books, ISBN 0-87930-607-6, p. 667
Two 2009 articles confirm the 1938 birth date, one in Le Monde about the Lyon exhibit
Vega also long claimed to be half-Catholic, but later, in a 2008 interview with The Jewish Chronicle, admitted he lied to "fuel the myth"."Suicide: How the godfathers of punk kept the faith", Paul Lester, The Jewish Chronicle, Oct 10 2008.

Quotations from Alan Vega

Discography

Albums

Compilations

Books

Notes





 
 


