[[Allstate]]

CATEGORIES: Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange, Companies established in 1931, Insurance companies of the United States, Insurance companies based in Illinois, Life insurance companies, Companies based in Northbrook, Illinois, Allstate

The Allstate Corporation is the second-largest personal lines insurer in the United States (behind State Farm) and the largest that is publicly held. The company also has personal lines insurance operations in Canada. Allstate was founded in 1931 as part of Sears, Roebuck and Co., and was spun off in 1993. The company has its headquarters in Northfield Township, Illinois, near Northbrook."Contact Us." Allstate."Northbrook village, Illinois." U.S. Census Bureau. Its current advertising campaign, in use since 2004, asks, "Are you in good hands?" The corporate spokesperson is Dennis Haysbert.
Allstate sponsors many sporting events, including the Allstate Sugar Bowl, the Allstate 400 at the Brickyard NASCAR race, and the United States Olympic Committee. In 2009, Allstate's total revenue was $32 billion, of which $26.2 billion came from Property Liability.

History

In 1925, Sears, Roebuck & Co. held a national contest to decide the name of a new brand of car tires. After over two million name submissions, "Allstate" was chosen as the winner; the trademark was adopted the very next year. The tires' success  in both the catalog and retail stores prompted Sears Chairman General Robert E. Wood to praise the Allstate tire's contribution to Sears' retail store success.
The idea for Allstate Insurance Company came during a bridge game on a commuter train in 1930, when insurance broker Carl L. Odell proposed to Wood, his neighbor, the idea of selling auto insurance by direct mail. The idea appealed to Wood, and he passed the proposal to the Sears board of directors, which approved it. Allstate Insurance Company, named after Sears' tire brand, went into business on April 17, 1931, offering auto insurance by direct mail and through the Sears catalog.
Lessing J. Rosenwald was Allstate's first board chairman, and Odell was named vice president and secretary.
In 1933, at the Century of Progress World's Fair in Chicago, Allstate's Richard E. Roskam sold insurance at a booth in the Sears pavilion. In 1934, Allstate opened its first permanent sales office in a Chicago Sears store.
In 1941, only about a quarter of U.S. drivers had auto liability insurance. This led to the state of New York state passing a law which established the financial responsibility of drivers for damage or injuries resulting from auto mishaps. That law inspired legislation in other states, and by the mid-1950s nearly every state had some sort of financial responsibility law on its books.
In 1949 the Allstate Headquarters Building was completed at 3245 W. Arthington Street in Chicago.  The mid-rise building is currently vacant (as of 2013) and in danger of demolition.  The building is noted for its early post-war mid-rise construction.  This location was vacated at some point when the company relocated in the post-war years.
The company's "You're in Good Hands with Allstate" slogan was created in 1950 by Allstate's general sales manager Davis W. Ellis.  At the end of the decade, it was used in the company's first network television advertising campaign, which featured actor Ed Reimers.
Allstate added products throughout the 1950s, including fire insurance in 1954 and homeowners and life insurance in 1957.  Allstate began selling insurance to Canadians in 1953. Allstate Insurance Company of Canada was incorporated in 1964. (In 1952 and 1953, Sears also sold an automobile called Allstate.)
In 1967, the company's home office was moved from Skokie to Northbrook, Illinois. Allstate continued to sell additional types of insurance to customers throughout the decade, including worker's compensation insurance in 1964, surety bonds in 1966, inland-marine coverage in 1967 and a business package policy in 1969.
The brand itself expanded in the 1950s and 1960s and could be found on a variety of products like fire extinguishers and motor scooters. In 1952, an Allstate car was produced, but it was a flop; it was pulled from stores by 1953. The Allstate brand was eventually limited to insurance, tires, and car batteries by the late 1960s before becoming insurance-only in the mid-1970s. In 1991, the company went public before becoming completely independent in 1995.
In 1985, Allstate began to move agents out of Sears stores and locate agents in neighborhood offices. In June 1993, 20 percent of Allstate became public through a stock offering. Allstate became completely independent in June 1995, when Sears spun off the remaining 80 percent stake in the company, distributing 350.5 million shares of Allstate stock to its stockholders.
In 1999, Allstate unveiled a new business model that created a single contract for exclusive, independent agents selling Allstate insurance. It also created a network of call centers.
In 1999, Allstate purchased the personal lines division of CNA Financial
In 2003, actor Dennis Haysbert became Allstate's spokesman, using the tagline "That's Allstate's stand."
In 2010 the actor Dean Winters became a part of Allstate's campaign "Mayhem" "personifying the pitfalls, like collisions and storm damage, that can befall drivers".

Corporate leadership



CEOs

Since going public in 1993:

Current senior leadership team

Advertising

Allstate's ad campaigns span across television, print, radio, outdoor, and throughout the internet branded with the tagline: "Are you in Good Hands?" or "You're in Good Hands."
The Allstate slogan "You're in good hands" was created in the 1950s by Allstate Insurance Company's sales executive, Davis W. Ellis. The phrase was used by a doctor who was taking care of his ailing child.  Later that year, Ellis and a marketing team were in a brainstorming session to develop a slogan for the company's first major national advertising campaign. When the group was about to give up for the day, Ellis remembered the reassuring remarks. It has been the slogan ever since.
In the 1960s and 1970s, "You're in Good Hands" became a recognizable advertising campaign to many Americans. The TV, print and radio advertising featured Allstate's spokesman, Ed Reimers.  Reimers was often shown making the cupped-hand gesture.  For 22 years, he remained the spokesman.
In 2001, Allstate changed its slogan to "The Right Hands Make All the Difference." The campaign that accompanied the new slogan featured the hands of people whose special qualities allowed them to make a difference in their world. The ads featured the hands of Jerry Rice, Joe Montana and Ann Lai, inventor and winner of multiple science awards. In 2002, Allstate introduced a national advertising campaign leveraging the popularity of The Beatles.  The ad campaign featured the song, "When I'm Sixty-Four," performed by Julian Lennon, son of Beatle John Lennon.  Allstate is one of only a handful of companies to ever gain the rights to use a Beatles song for commercial purposes. 
A study by Northwestern University's Medill Graduate Department of Integrated Marketing Communications found that the Allstate slogan "You're in good hands" ranked as the most recognizable in America. This slogan is the oldest surviving tagline for a paid campaign.
Allstate's Stand
Beginning in 2003, many of Allstate's television commercials starred or are narrated by spokesman Dennis Haysbert.  The ads are straightforward and tell a story. Haysbert encourages the audience to consider whether they were in "good hands"—and positioned Allstate as taking a stand on the side of the consumer. Haysbert closed commercials during the 2010 Winter Olympics that invoked the 1933 inaugural address of Roosevelt by declaring, "Uncertainty will not rule our lives when we put our lives in good hands." The "Our Stand" campaign was created by Leo Burnett. Haysbert has appeared in over 30 commercials since 2003.
In 2004 and 2005, Allstate extended the campaign to reach a broader audience with specific TV, print, radio, cinema, out of home and online advertising aimed at Hispanic American consumers. The tagline for these was ''Así piensa Allstate'' (That's what Allstate believes).
Mayhem
Beginning in July 2010, Allstate launched a new advertising campaign focused on the "mayhem" that can occur in day to day life. Dean Winters (Oz, 30 Rock) portrays "Mayhem," personifying the pitfalls, like collisions and storm damage, which can befall drivers and homeowners. The ads feature Winters causing "mayhem" upon cars and homes and ends with Haysbert asking "Are You In Good Hands?" Dean Winters has appeared in over 20 spots for Allstate. The Mayhem campaign has been recognized with a spot on the Madison Avenue Advertising Walk of Fame. Spanish networks use the Hispanic Mayhem (known as "La Mala Suerte") after the success of Mayhem.
Celebrity appearances
Celebrities lending their talents to endorse Allstate include company spokesman Dennis Haysbert, Dean Winters, Jordin Sparks, Kevin Jonas, Kasey Kahne (NASCAR), Cheryl Burke, Judge Jeanine Pirro, and NBA player John Wall.

Social media

In January 2011, Allstate released The Lines,Allstate produced tv drama web series "The Lines"  a multi-episode TV drama web series starring actors Teresa Cesario, Kyle Sandgate-Blix, Jackson Schultz, Bridgette Pechman, Chase Maser, and Corey Doyle cast as High-School seniors. The series, filmed in the style of a television drama, depicts the cast in common situations facing teens with respect to driving (Texting while driving in particular). The series appears aimed at promoting interest and support in favor of responsible teen driving and road-safety in general. The Lines spans a total of 8 episodes, each 6–8 minutes in length. Allstate and other large corporations are attracted to the rapid growth of social media for use in their advertising campaigns.

Organization

Allstate Corporation owns and operates 17 companies around the United States and Canada.
Based in San Francisco, California
Based in Northbrook, Illinois
Based in Bridgewater, New Jersey
Based in Hauppauge, New York
Based in St. Petersburg, Florida
Based in Irving, Texas
Based in Jacksonville, Florida
Based in Markham, Ontario

Sponsorship

College football

Allstate sponsors branded field goal nets at over 67 colleges and universities. For each field goal and extra point kicked, Allstate donates into collegiate general scholarship funds. To date, those donations exceed $2.9 million. Allstate also sponsors branded nets during field goals and extra points at over 20 college bowl games, including the Allstate Sugar Bowl and the BCS National Championship Game.
Additionally, Allstate is a partner of the Southeastern Conference and its 20 sports, including football.

Sugar Bowl

Since 2007, Allstate has been the title sponsor of the Sugar Bowl, one of the four games that make up the Bowl Championship Series. The game is played at the Louisiana Superdome, which is also the home of the New Orleans Saints. Allstate is also a sponsor of the New Orleans Saints.
The 2012 Allstate BCS National Championship Game was played on January 9, 2012 and broadcast on ESPN.

Allstate Wrigleyville Classic

The Northwestern Wildcats and the Illinois Fighting Illini played a collegiate football game at Wrigley Field on November 20, 2010. It was the first football game at Wrigley Field since 1970 and the first collegiate football game at Wrigley Field since 1938 when DePaul University played its regular games at Wrigley.9 Allstate title sponsored this game.

Allstate AFCA Good Works Team

Allstate advertises through the American Football Coaches Association "Good Works Team" in which local Allstate agents surprise players with trophies in key Allstate marketing regions.

Soccer

In 2007, Allstate became a sponsor of the Mexican National Team, and in 2011 partnered with Major League Soccer and the United States Soccer Federation.

NASCAR

Allstate was a sponsor of the Allstate 400 at the Brickyard from 2005-2009 – the annual NASCAR Sprint Cup Series race held at Indianapolis Motor Speedway in late summer. Driver Kasey Kahne was featured in advertisements.

Awards and recognition

Allstate Insurance has been acknowledged for its accomplishments in the corporate environment.

Products available

Allstate is the largest publicly traded property casualty insurance company in the US. 
Products include:

Insurance products

Asset protection: auto insurance, homeowners insurance, condominium, renters, scheduled personal property, business umbrella, commercial auto, commercial inland marine, small business owner, customizer and business package policy, landlord package, manufactured home, mobile home, motor home, motorcycle, boat, personal umbrella, comprehensive personal liability, recreational vehicle, off-road vehicle, motor club, loan protection and flood protection.

Wealth transfer

Estate planning products, business succession planning products, fixed survivorship life, and variable survivorship life family protection insurance, term life, universal life, variable universal life, long-term care and supplemental health

Financial products

Asset management and accumulation, life insurance and retirement

Environmental record

Allstate has a Sustainability Leadership Team composed of officers and senior staff from all areas of the company. The team focuses on sustainability efforts from a company-wide perspective — including environmental initiatives that embed "green" programs and processes throughout their operations.

Environmental initiative results

Criticism

In July 2008, the American Association for Justice ranked Allstate No. 1 among nation's worst insurers.  This ranking was given because: "While Allstate publicly touts its 'good hands' approach, it has instead privately instructed its agents to employ a 'boxing gloves' strategy against its policyholders," said American Association for Justice CEO Jon Haber. "Allstate ducks, bobs and weaves to avoid paying claims to increase its profits."

Auto insurance claims

An investigative report in February 2007 by CNN found that major car insurance companies, like Allstate, are increasingly fighting auto insurance claims from those who incurred injuries by their insured members. The investigative report found that insurance companies often make it so expensive and time consuming to go to court to get full settlement amounts, that it would not be worth the victims time. The claims handled in the matter were very minor collision type losses that did not result in any ($0) damage to the car, and therefore was the insurance company protecting it assets and the premium paying public money, by keeping rates as low as possible.

Homeowners claims

The PBS television program Now, in conjunction with Bloomberg Markets magazine, did an exposé regarding Allstate and other major insurer's homeowners insurance policies.

Catastrophe exposure management

Allstate has stated intentions of reducing its exposure in hurricane-prone Florida. In November 2006, Allstate did not renew 120,000 policies that were expiring at that time. Governor Charlie Crist and the Florida Cabinet passed a 90-day emergency order to temporarily prevent insurance companies from nonrenewing policies.

From Good Hands to Boxing Gloves

This is the title of a book written by David Berardinelli, JD;, Michael Freeman, PhD, DC, MPH; and Aaron DeShaw, DC, JD with a foreword by Eugene R. Anderson.
The book relates profit-boosting strategies that consulting firm McKinsey & Company presented to Allstate to maximize profits and diminish the amount of money sent to clients who put in a claim. McKinsey specializes in redesigning product delivery systems for Fortune 100 companies (including controversial clients such as Enron) to maximize profits. McKinsey's recommendation to Allstate, according to Berardinelli, was to low-ball claims so that desperate customers in dire straits would be more likely to accept a settlement offer while Allstate continued to make a profit and collect interest on the insurance payment. Allstate would offer its "good hands" in the way of a low-ball claim and, if the customer did not accept, to get out "boxing gloves." 
The book was reviewed by Business Week magazine.  According to that article, Allstate responded to Bertinelli's allegations by claiming that Berardinelli's allegations were "unfounded and unproven." Rather than trying to cheat customers, the company stated that its major goal was to benefit policyholders by identifying "exaggerated and fraudulent claims" and that its "processes are absolutely sound . . . to investigate, evaluate, and promptly resolve each claim fairly, based on the merits."
Court decisions on the issues debated by Berardinelli and Allstate have gone both ways. According to the Business Week article, as of 2006, "Courts and regulators in a number of states, including New York, Pennsylvania, and Washington, have forced Allstate to halt or change its practice of handing out a controversial 'Do I Need an Attorney?' form to people involved in accidents." On the other hand, the article also states that "Although plaintiffs have had piecemeal success in bad-faith cases against Allstate, the insurer points to seven court rulings that have rejected attacks on CCPR. Last December a Montana state court noted that while CCPR practices may be illegal 'if misapplied in a particular case, they nevertheless are neutral with no manifestly illegal purpose.'"  While many of the cost-reduction strategies McKinsey recommended at Allstate remain in place, some have been reined in following legal and regulatory challenges in several states.

Use of Colossus

Many criticisms leveled against Allstate (and other insurers), including Barardinelli's book, involved the use of a software program called "Colossus" to process claims.  In 2010, Allstate paid a $10 million fine to settle a lawsuit brought by 41 states concerning inconsistencies in the manner in which Colossus was used.  It also agreed to standardize its use of the software. However, "it is important to note that we found no systemic underpayment of bodily injury claims," New York Insurance Superintendent James J. Wrynn said in a press release.buffalonews.ece








