[[Lincoln's New Salem]]

CATEGORIES: New Salem, Menard County, Illinois, Populated places established in 1828, Buildings and structures on the National Register of Historic Places in Illinois, State parks of Illinois, Former populated places in Illinois, Illinois State Historic Sites, Living museums in Illinois, Museums in Menard County, Illinois, Abraham Lincoln National Heritage Area, Protected areas of Menard County, Illinois, Buildings and monuments honoring American Presidents

New Salem is the historically recreated townsite of Abraham Lincoln's, 19th century, frontier village in Menard County (previously part of Sangamon County), Illinois, United States. During his 20s, in the 1830s, this was the homestead of the future U.S. President. Here, Lincoln earned a living as a boatman, shopkeeper, soldier in the Black Hawk War, general store owner, postmaster, land surveyor, rail splitter, and was first elected to the Illinois General Assembly.  Lincoln moved away to the nearby capital of Springfield around 1837.
New Salem was recreated as a historic village in the 1930s, based on the original foundations. south of Petersburg.  (The present village of New Salem in Pike County, Illinois is an unrelated community.)

Original New Salem

New Salem was founded in 1828, when James Rutledge and John Camron built a gristmill on the Sangamon River.  They surveyed and sold village lots for commercial business and homes on the ridge stretching to the west above the mill.  Over the first few years of its existence, the town grew rapidly, but after the county seat was located in nearby Petersburg, the village began to shrink and by 1840, it was abandoned. The fact that the Sangamon River was not well-suited for steamboat travel was also a reason for the town's decline.
In 1831, when Abraham Lincoln's father, Thomas, relocated the family from Indiana to a new homestead in Coles County, Illinois, 22-year-old Lincoln struck out on his own.  (2008).  Abraham Lincoln: A Biography.  Southern Illinois University . ISBN 978-0-8093-2887-1. pp. 23–53. Lincoln arrived in New Salem by way of flatboat and he remained in the village for about six years. During his stay, Lincoln earned a living as a shopkeeper, soldier in the Black Hawk War, general store owner, postmaster, land surveyor, rail splitter, as well as doing odd jobs around the village. As far as historians know, Lincoln never owned a home in the village as most single men did not own homes at this time; however, he would often sleep in the tavern or his general store and board (take his meals) with a nearby family.
He ran for the Illinois General Assembly in 1832, handily winning his New Salem precinct but losing the countywide district election.p, 54 He tried again in 1834 and won. Lincoln left New Salem and moved to Springfield, also in his election district, around 1837.
When Lincoln lived in New Salem, the village was home to a cooper shop, blacksmith shop, wool carding mill, four general stores, a tavern, a grocery, two doctors offices, a shoemaker, a carpenter, a hat maker, a tanner, a schoolhouse/church, several residences, common pastures and kitchen gardens. During its short existence, the village was home to anywhere from 20-25 families at a time. It is important to remember that New Salem was not a small farm village, but instead a commercial village full of young businessmen and craftsmen trying to start a new life on the frontier.

Lincoln's New Salem State Historic Site

The current village was rebuilt on foundations of the original village mostly by the Civilian Conservation Corps, during the Great Depression. The location is presently a historic park, called Lincoln's New Salem State Historic Site, featuring 23 buildings, mostly log cabins and costumed interpreters, representing the era of Lincoln's residency.  The cabins, shops and businesses are furnished by period implements, objects, and furniture, with many acquired from area farms and homes.
Twenty-two of the buildings are reconstructed; one log cabin, the Onstot Cooper Shop, is original, although it had been previously moved by Henry Onstot to Petersburg in 1840. In 1922, it was returned to New Salem on what archeologists believe was its original foundation.  In addition to archeological investigations, much of the town was recreated based on period documents and the recollections and drawings of former residents interviewed in the late 19th century.

Steamship Talisman

In the summer of 1961, after a period of design and fabrication, a 73-foot, 40-ton, upper-cabin sternwheel steamboat made its way from Dubuque, Iowa to New Salem by way of the Mississippi River, Illinois River, and the Sangamon River. The steamer, christened the Talisman, was a scaled down recreation of the original boat that ventured from Cincinnati, Ohio down the Ohio River, up the Mississippi and Illinois Rivers, and into central Illinois on the Sangamon under the charter of Springfield businessman Vincent Bogue in 1832. The original Talisman was actually a 136-foot, 150-ton steamer, and may or may not have been a sidewheel boat. Lincoln helped clear obstructions from the riverbanks on the Talisman's trip upriver, and co-piloted the steamer with Rowan Herndon back to Beardstown. The recreation boat was given a landing next to the Rutledge Camron Saw and Grist Mill site on the riverbank, and tourists had the opportunity to take short excursions on the river. Unfortunately, just like the original Talisman, the recreated steamer was plagued by low water levels on the river which gradually diminished in the years following its arrival at New Salem, which made navigation difficult to impossible. The boat was finally grounded in the late 1990s a few miles upriver from the historical site, and now serves as a large lawn decoration about a hundred feet from the riverbank.

Visitors

Lincoln's New Salem was visited by approximately 600,000 people in 2006. It was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1972, under the name, Lincoln's New Salem Village.  The park includes a visitor's center with a museum and theater.  
Active recreational infrastructure centers on the Mentor Graham Trail,  long. The state park contains 200 campsites, including 100 electrical hookups.








