[[Prince Hall]]

CATEGORIES: 1738 births, 1807 deaths, African-American military personnel, American people of English descent, Pan-Africanists, African Americans in the American Revolution, People of Massachusetts in the American Revolution, Prince Hall Freemasonry, 18th century in Boston, Massachusetts, 19th century in Boston, Massachusetts, People from colonial Boston, Massachusetts, American slaves, American abolitionists

Prince Hall (1735 – 1807) was an African American noted as a tireless abolitionist, for his leadership in the free black community in Boston, and as the founder of Prince Hall Masonry.
Hall tried to gain New England's enslaved and free blacks a place in Freemasonry, education and the military, which were some of the most crucial spheres of society in his time. Hall is considered the founder of "Black Freemasonry" in the United States, known today as Prince Hall Freemasonry. Hall formed the African Grand Lodge of North America. Prince Hall was unanimously elected its Grand Master and served until his death in 1807.
He lobbied for education rights for black children and was active in the back-to-Africa movement. Many historians regard Prince Hall as one of the prominent African-Americans during the early years of the United States.

Early life

Hall was born in 1735. Hall may have been born in Barbados, somewhere else in the Caribbean, or in Africa. Author and historian James Sidbury said: "It is more likely that he was a native of New England."
Historian Charles H. Wesley developed what is now the widely accepted theory about Prince Hall's early years. Based upon his research, by age 11 Prince Hall was a slave to Boston tanner William Hall. By 1770, Prince Hall was a free, literate black man living in Boston.

Family, church and work life

Hall and a woman named Delia, a servant outside William Hall's household, had a son named Primus in 1756.
Hall joined the Congregational Church in 1762; he was 27 years of age. He then married an enslaved woman named Sarah Ritchie who died. He married Flora Gibbs of Gloucester eight years after Sarah's death.
In Boston, Hall worked as a peddler, caterer and leatherworker, owning his own leather shop. In April 1777 he created five leather drumheads for an artillery regiment of Boston. Hall was a homeowner who voted and paid taxes.
His son, Primus, was a fellow abolitionist, spent years supporting education of African American children, was a Freemason in his father's lodge and had served in the Revolutionary War.

Revolutionary War

Hall encouraged enslaved and freed blacks to serve the American colonial military. He believed that if blacks were involved in the founding of the new nation, it would aid in the attainment of freedom for all blacks. Williams, Black Freemasonry and Middle-Class Realities, (University of Missouri Press, 1980).
England issued a proclamation that guaranteed freedom to blacks who enlisted in the British army. Once the British Army filled its ranks with black troops, the Continental Army reversed its decision and allowed blacks into the military.
Having served during the Revolutionary War, many African Americans expected, but did not receive, racial equality when the war ended. With the intention of improving the lives of fellow African Americans, Prince Hall collaborated with others to propose legislation for equal rights. He also hosted community events, such as educational forums and theatre events to improve the lives of black people.
Many of the original members of the African Masonic Lodge had served during the Revolutionary War.

Freemason

Prince Hall was interested in the Masonic fraternity because Freemasonry was founded upon ideals of liberty, equality and peace. Prior to the American Revolutionary War, Prince Hall and fourteen other free black men petitioned for admittance to the white Boston St. John's Lodge. 9, No. 3. Prince Hall. They were turned down. Having been rejected by colonial Freemasonry, Hall and 15 others sought and were initiated into Masonry by members of Lodge No. 441 of the Grand Lodge of Ireland on March 6, 1775.org A Brief History of Prince Hall Freemasonry in Massachusetts Prince Hall. Retrieved July 16, 2012 The Lodge was attached to the British forces stationed in Boston. Hall and other freedmen founded African Lodge No. 1 and he was named Grand Master.}
The black Masons had limited power; they could meet as a lodge, take part in the Masonic procession on St. John's Day, and bury their dead with Masonic rites but could not confer Masonic degrees or perform any other essential functions of a fully operating Lodge. 34, No. 2. Unable to create a charter, they applied to the Grand Lodge of England. The grand master of the Mother Grand Lodge of England, H. R. H. The Duke of Cumberland, issued a charter for the African Lodge No. 1 later renamed African Lodge no. 459 September 29, 1784. 203. The lodge was the country's first African Masonic lodge.
Author and historian James Sidbury said  "Prince Hall and those who joined him to found Boston's African Masonic Lodge built a fundamentally new "African" movement on a preexisting institutional foundation. Within that movement they asserted emotional, mythical, and genealogical links to the continent of Africa and its peoples. 
After the death of Prince Hall, on December 4, 1807, the brethren organized the African Grand Lodge on June 24, 1808, including the Philadelphia, Providence and Boston lodges. The African Grand Lodge was in 1827 renamed the Prince Hall Grand Lodge, in his honor.
Hall was considered the "father of African Freemasonry." 

Community activism

After Hall obtained his freedom, he worked within the state political arena to advance rights for blacks, end slavery and protect free blacks from being kidnapped by slave traders. He proposed a back-to-Africa movement, pressed for equal educational opportunities, and operated a school for African Americans in his home. He engaged in public speaking and debate, citing Christian scripture against slavery to a predominantly Christian legislative body.

Education

Hall requested that the Massachusetts Congress create a school program for black children. Hall cited the same platform for fighting the American Revolution of "Taxation without Representation."
Primus, his son, established a school in his home for the education of African American children and sought funding from the community, including African American sailors. Elisha Sylvester was a teacher there. After Elisha, two Harvard University students taught the school. Unsuccessful in attempts to establish a public school with the city of Boston in 1800, the school was moved to the African Meeting House, the church built by Thomas Paul, an African American minister. Primus Hall continued fund-raising to support the African American school until 1835.

Speech and petition writing

He is known for giving speeches and writing petitions. In a speech given to the Boston African Masonic Lodge, Hall stated, "My brethren, let us not be cast down under these and many other abuses we at present labour under: for the darkest is before the break of day… Let us remember what a dark day it was with our African brethren, six years ago, in the French West Indies. Nothing but the snap of the whip was heard, from morning to evening". 6, No. 1, pp. 58 – 59.
His notable written works include the 1792 Charge and 1797 Charge. He recognized black revolutionaries in the Haitian Revolution. Hall also wrote a petition in 1787.
In a speech he presented in June, 1797, Hall said:
 Patience, I say; for were we not possessed of a great measure of it, we could not bear up under the daily insults we meet with in the streets of Boston, much more on public days of recreation. How, at such times, are we shamefully abused, and that to such a degree, that we may truly be said to carry our lives in our hands, and the arrows of death are flying about our heads...... 

Back to Africa movement

Prince Hall was involved in the Back-to-Africa movement and approached the legislature to request funds for voluntary emigration to Africa. In January 1773, Prince Hall and seventy three other African-American delegates presented an emigration plea to the Massachusetts Senate. This plea contended that the African Americans would be better suited to the warm climate of Africa and would better endure the African lifestyle. This failed.
Hall fought hard for the movement when a group of freed black men were captured and detained while making their way to Africa. Due to a lack of support and enthusiasm for the movement, Hall decided to turn his efforts towards equality in education.

Copp's Hill Burying Ground

Prince Hall died in 1807. and is buried in the Historic Copp's Hill Burying Ground in Boston along with other notable Bostonians from the colonial era. Also, thousands of African Americans who lived in the "New Guinea" community at the base of Copp's Hill are buried alongside Snowhill Street in unmarked graves.City of Boston Copp's Hill Burying Ground]
A tribute monument was erected in Copp's Hill on June 24, 1835 in his name next to his grave marker. The inscription reads:

File:Copp's Hill Burying Ground, Boston - Prince Hall monument.JPG|Prince Hall Monument in Copp's Hill Burying Ground
File:Copp's Hill Burying Ground, Boston - Prince Hall tombstone.JPG|Prince Hall's tomb stone in Copp's Hill Burying Ground

Notes



Further reading




