[[Cabinet of India]]

CATEGORIES: Parliament of India, Union ministers of India, Cabinet of India, National cabinets


The Cabinet of India is the collective decision-making body of the Government of India, consists of the Prime Minister and 35 Cabinet Ministers, the most senior of the government ministers. The Cabinet is the ultimate decision-making body of the executive within the Westminster system of government in traditional constitutional theory.
The Union Cabinet of the Government of India Indian general election, 2009 held in five phases in 2009: on 16 April, 22/23 April, 30 April, 7 and 13 May 2009. The results of the election were announced on 16 May 2009 and led to the formation of the 15th Lok Sabha. Dr Manmohan Singh took oath as the 13th Prime Minister of India on 22 May 2009, followed by the oath-taking ceremonies of the present 'Council of Ministers' in two phases. Most of the cabinet functions from Cabinet Secretariat, based out of the Secretariat Building, New Delhi.

Cabinet Secretary

The current Cabinet Secretary is Mr.Cabinet Secretariat - Government of India. Cabsec.in. Retrieved on 2013-07-18.
The following are the functions of a Cabinet Secretary:
In the Government of India Allocation of Business Rules, 1961, "Cabinet Secretariat" finds a place in the First Schedule to the Rules. The subjects allotted to this Secretariat are, firstly, secretarial assistance to Cabinet and Cabinet Committees, and secondly, the administration of the Rules of Business.
The Cabinet Secretariat is responsible for the administration of the Government of India Transaction of Business Rules, 1961 and the Government of India Allocation of Business Rules 1961, facilitating smooth transaction of business in Ministries/Departments of the Government by ensuring adherence to these rules. The Secretariat assists in decision-making in Government by ensuring Inter-Ministerial coordination, ironing out differences amongst Ministries/Departments and evolving consensus through the instrumentality of the standing/adhoc Committees of Secretaries. Through this mechanism new policy initiatives are also promoted.
The Cabinet Secretariat ensures that the President of India, the Vice-President and Ministers are kept informed of the major activities of all Departments by means of a monthly summary of their activities. Management of major crisis situations in the country and coordinating activities of the various Ministries in such a situation is also one of the functions of the Cabinet Secretariat.
The Cabinet Secretariat has 3 wings: Civil, Military and Intelligence. The Civil wing is the main wing and provides aid, advise and assistance to the Union Cabinet. The Military wing provides secretarial assistance to the Defence Committee of the Cabinet, the Military Affairs Committee, the National Defence Council and other committees dealing with defence matters. The Intelligence wing deals with matters pertaining to the Joint Intelligence Committee of the Union Cabinet. The chief of Research and Analysis Wing R&AW also officially first reports to the Cabinet Secretary, and is officially designated Secretary R in the Cabinet Secretariat. The Cabinet Secretary is arguably India's most powerful bureaucrat and right hand of Prime Minister of India.

Council of Ministers

This is a list of current members of the Council of Ministers of the Government of India. All ministers are based in offices of their respective Union Ministries in New Delhi.
All Cabinet members are mandated by the constitution to be members of either House of the Parliament of India. In a departure from the norm the current Prime Minister, Manmohan Singh, is a member of the upper house, the Rajya Sabha. He remained so for the duration of his entire first term (2004–2009). Most, but not all, previous Prime Ministers have been elected members of the Lok Sabha.
There are three categories of ministers, in descending order of rank:

Union Ministers

Ministers of State (Independent Charges)

A 'Minister of State with independent charge' is a junior Minister in the Federal (State) or Central Government of India but is in charge of a ministry, unlike Minister of State who is also a junior Minister but assists a cabinet minister. All the following ministers are from the Indian National Congress.
Source: Council of MinistersCouncil of Ministers | National Portal of India. India.in. Retrieved on 2013-07-18.

Ministers of State

New Ministers of State alongside old ones:- Council of Ministers | National Portal of India

Demographics of the Council of Ministers

UPA Cabinet by Party

Source: Various news organisations The new United Progressive Alliance (UPA) included 77 members, 76 members in the cabinet plus Prime Minister Manmohan Singh. The first 20 cabinet ministers including Manmohan Singh, swore in on 22 May 2009, while the other 59 cabinet members swore in on 27 May 2009. The non-Congress cabinet ministers, include Sharad Pawar and Praful Patel from Nationalist Congress Party, Farooq Abdullah from National Conference and Chaudhary Ajit Singh from RLD.

United Progressive Alliance Cabinet by States

Sources:Front Page : Southern States get a big share. The Hindu (2009-05-29). Retrieved on 2013-07-18. Articles.indiatimes. Retrieved on 2013-07-18.








