[[Donkey Kong Jr.]]

CATEGORIES: 1982 video games, Arcade games, Atari 2600 games, Atari 7800 games, Atari 8-bit family games, ColecoVision games, Donkey Kong platform games, Nintendo e-Reader games, Famicom Disk System games, Game & Watch games, Intellivision games, Mario Universe games, Nintendo Entertainment System games, Nintendo Research & Development 1 games, Video game sequels, Virtual Console games, Virtual Console games for Wii U

 is trying to rescue his father Donkey Kong, who has been imprisoned. Donkey Kong's cage is guarded by Mario, in his only appearance as an antagonist in a video game. This game is the sequel to the video game Donkey Kong, which featured Mario as the hero and Junior's father as the villain.

Plot

Mario (known as Jumpman in Donkey Kong) has captured Donkey Kong and placed him in a cage. must rescue his father from Mario by working his way through a series of stages.  Mario attempts to stop DK Jr. by releasing animals and putting obstacles in his way.  When DK Jr. succeeds at the final level, Donkey Kong is freed and kicks Mario into the distance, leaving him to an unknown fate.

Gameplay

Like its predecessor, Donkey Kong, Jr. is an arcade-style platform game. There are a total of four stages, each with a unique theme. DK Jr. can run left and right, jump, and grab vines/chains/ropes to climb higher on the screen. He can slide down faster by holding only one vine, or climb faster by holding two. Enemies include "Snapjaws," which resemble bear traps with eyes, bird-like creatures called "Nitpickers", and "Sparks" that roam across the wiring in one of Mario's hideouts.
To pass the first three stages, DK Jr. must reach the key at the top.  In the fourth stage, DK Jr. must push six keys into locks near the top of the stage to free Donkey Kong.  After a brief cutscene, the player is taken back to the first stage at an increased difficulty.
DK Jr. loses a life when he touches any enemy or projectile, falls too great a distance, or falls off the bottom of the screen.  Additionally, he loses a life if the timer counts down to zero.  The game ends when the player loses all of his or her lives.

History

The game was principally designed by Shigeru Miyamoto and one of his coworkers.
Donkey Kong Jr. is regarded as one of the Top 100 Video Games by the Killer List of Videogames. It was selected to be among five arcade games chosen for history's first official video game world championship, which was filmed at Twin Galaxies in Ottumwa, Iowa by ABC-TV's That's Incredible! over the weekend of January 8–9, 1983.

Competitive play

For more than twenty years, the Donkey Kong, Jr. world record had been held by noted gamer Billy Mitchell, who had achieved 957,300 points in 1983. On August 10, 2008, Mitchell's benchmark score was eclipsed by Icarus Hall of Port Angeles, Washington, who scored 1,033,000 points.
On April 24, 2009, Steve Wiebe eclipsed Hall's score, finishing with 1,139,800 points.

Ports

Like other arcade games of this era, this game was ported to many home systems, including the video game consoles NES, Family Computer Disk System, Atari 2600, Atari 7800, Atari XE Game System, ColecoVision, Coleco Adam, Intellivision and BBC Micro. Two Game & Watch versions of the game were also made. One black-and-white version for the New Wide Screen handheld series, and a color version for the Tabletop and Panorama series. The NES version–along with its predecessor Donkey Kong–was re–released in 1988 in an NES compilation titled Donkey Kong Classics. This version was later released on the e-Reader and is available on the Virtual Console for the Wii. The NES version is also a playable game on Animal Crossing, though a special password is needed from an official website which is now no longer available. It was made available for the Nintendo 3DS from the Nintendo eShop, released in Japan on April 18, 2012, in North America on June 14, 2012 and in Europe on August 23, 2012 and was given away free to the Ambassadors users before the full release.

In other media

Donkey Kong Jr. is one of the 8 playable characters in  Super Mario Kart for the SNES. 
Donkey Kong Jr. was also a cartoon on Saturday Supercade (a cartoon series that aired on Saturday mornings from 1983-1985) with the title character voiced by Frank Welker. The plot had Jr. looking for his dad Donkey Kong who is on the run from Mario and Pauline. To look for his dad, Donkey Kong Jr. teams up with a Greaser named Bones (voiced by Bart Braverman).
In an episode of Captain N: The Game Master called "Simon the Ape Man," Simon Belmont got hit on the head a second time while in Kongoland and thought he was Donkey Kong Jr.
In the version of Super Mario Bros. 3 seen in Super Mario All-Stars, as well as the Game Boy Advance version, the king of World 4 was transformed into a monkey with a 'J' on his shirt resembling Donkey Kong Jr.'s shirt.






