[[John Rodgers (1772–1838)]]

CATEGORIES: 1772 births, 1838 deaths, Perry family, American people of Scottish descent, People from Harford County, Maryland, United States Navy admirals, United States Navy Commodores, American people of the War of 1812, People of the Quasi-War, American people of the Barbary Wars, 18th-century American naval officers, 19th-century American naval officers

John Rodgers (July 11, 1772 – August 1, 1838) was a senior naval officer in the United States Navy who served under six Presidents for nearly four decades during its formative years in the 1790s through the late 1830s, committing the bulk of his adult life to his country.  His service took him through many operations in the Quasi-War with France, both Barbary Wars in North Africa and the War of 1812 with Britain. As a senior officer in the young American navy he played a major role in the development of the standards, customs and traditions that emerged during this time. Rodgers was, among other things, noted for commanding the largest American squadron in his day to sail the Mediterranean Sea.9Hagan, 1992 pp.60-61 After serving  with distinction as a lieutenant he was soon promoted directly to the rank of captain (the rank of Master Commandant did not exist at that time).S. Naval Officer Corps, 1794-1815, Naval Institute Press, Annapolis, MD. pp 297  During his naval career he commanded a number of warships, including the USS John Adams, the flagship of the fleet that defeated the Barbary states of North Africa. During the War of 1812 Rodgers fired the first shot of the war aboard his next flagship, the USS President, and also played a leading role in the recapture of Washington after the capital was burned by the British, while also having to endure his own hometown and house burned and his family displaced. Later in his career he headed the Navy Board of Commissioners and served briefly as Secretary of the Navy.325 Following in his footsteps, Rodgers' son and several grandsons and great-grandsons also became commodores and admirals in the United States Navy.74, 382, 402-403

Early life

Many of Rodgers' family emigrated to America from the British Isles in the years prior to the American Revolution. Rodgers' father, Colonel John Rodgers, was born in Scotland in 1726 and was a proponent of the patriot cause. He emigrated to America and married Elizabeth Reynolds from Delaware in 1760. Born in 1742, she also was of Scottish ancestry. They had eight children, four sons and four daughters, of which John Rodgers was among the oldest.  Rodgers was born in 1772 on a farm in a village near the Susquehanna Ferry where he was raised for the first thirteen years of his childhood. While Rodgers was still a youth, this village was named 'Havre de Grace' by Lafayette after a famous port of the same name in France. The young Rodgers was an unusually strong and vital boy who spent much of his time fishing in the waters of the Susquehanna River and Chesapeake Bay near his home. He attended school in this locale and read many books about seafaring life, fostering his love of ships and the sea. He had often seen schooner-rigged ships berthed at Havre de Grace but longed to see the large square-rigged vessels he had always read about. With a strong desire to see such ships he decided to go to Baltimore and, not revealing this desire to anyone, made his way on foot to the city. Upon realizing that John was missing, Rodgers' father, Colonel Rodgers, set out on horseback and came upon his son just as he was entering the city, insisting that his son return home to the family. But John, now in his mid-teens and with Baltimore in sight, ardently refused. Realizing that his son had his heart set on seeing the large seagoing ships berthed at Baltimore and even going to sea, Colonel Rodgers relented and arranged his son's apprenticeship with Captain Benjamin Folger, a master ship builder of Baltimore, a veteran of the American revolution who had served aboard merchant ships and as commander of the Felicity, the ship used in the capture of the notorious privateer 'Jack-o-the-Lantern'. By the time the young Rodgers joined him, Folger was captain of his own ship, the Maryland. John Rodgers was put aboard a ship on which he would remain for the five years of his apprenticeship. Upon bidding his son farewell, Colonel Rodgers requested that his son never indulge in strong drink, and to this request the younger Rodgers promised, and kept his word. In adult life Rodgers did not indulge in spirituous drink.18-21
Rodgers was married in 1806 to Minerva Denison Paullin, 1910 p.398 and had three sons, Robert, Frederick and John, and two daughters.  His son John Rodgers Jr. was born in Maryland in 1812, and entered the U.S. Navy as a midshipman, serving aboard the Constellation and the Concord in the Mediterranean and later becoming a rear admiral during the Civil War. Rodgers also had several grandsons and great-grandsons who became officers in the U.S. Navy.279

First command

At the age of seventeen Rodgers was made first mate of the merchant ship Harmony by Captain Folger. By the time Rodgers completed his five years of apprenticeship in 1793 Folger highly recommended him for command of a merchant ship named Jane that was regularly employed in the European trade and owned by the prominent Baltimore merchants Samuel and John Smith.20-21  Rodgers served as the captain of this ship between four and five years, sailing out of Baltimore for various ports in Europe. His first voyage took him to the Spanish port of Cadiz in the early months of 1793, returning home with a load of salt. Rodgers' next voyage sent him to Hamburg, Germany, but due to severe conditions on the North Sea he was forced to put up in England for the winter and did not reach his destination until spring of the next year. In September 1795 he departed for Baltimore from Liverpool, arriving home after a passage that consumed three months. Many events during his command of Jane can be ascertained from the ship's logbooks covering the period of July–August 1796, a time when France and England were still at war.  It was aboard the Jane that Rodgers mastered the art of ship's command, the skills of which came readily to him.
While in command of the Jane, Rodgers' strong and determined character was made evident during one of his voyages navigating the North Sea. Adverse winter winds had carried the vessel off course, the ship's provisions were almost exhausted, and three of his crewmen had frozen to death in one night, while most of the others had lapsed into hopeless despair. When Rodgers ordered some of the crew to go aloft to secure the ice encrusted rigging, they refused. Outraged at their desolation, Rodgers stripped off his jacket and shirt and, before going aloft, told the insubordinate crew to watch what a man could do. While he climbed the frozen rigging bare-chested, the crew, awe struck, immediately rose to his aid and in little time they secured the faltering rigging. Under the grim circumstances of their situation Rodgers put the matter behind him and days later they safely reached port.27

Naval career

Rodgers' service in the United States Navy extended through the Quasi War with France, the First Barbary War and the Second Barbary War in North Africa and through the War of 1812. In 1815 he was appointed to the Board of Naval Commissioners, serving through the Second Barbary War until he retired in 1837.

Quasi War

On March 8, 1798, President John Adams appointed junior officers for the first three ships constructed for the young American Navy  during Constellation's engagement, and he immediately was made prize master of the surrendered French vessel. Rodgers, along with Midshipman Porter and eleven seamen, boarded the badly damaged French frigate with the challenge of sailing her to a friendly port while also guarding more than 160 prisoners.46 That evening, gale force winds separated the two ships, leaving Rodgers, Porter, and the few American seamen aboard the now-renamed Insurgent to save the ship and to control the prisoners without support from the crew of the Constellation nearby. To make matters worse, just before surrendering their ship, the French crew had thrown overboard the gratings to the hold along with handcuffs and other items used to secure prisoners. Greatly outnumbered, Rodgers had seized all weapons and ordered the prisoners to the lower hold,Allen, 1909 p.102 giving orders to open fire with blunderbusses should the prisoners try to breach the passageway from their hold.  After guarding the prisoners and navigating the captured vessel for two days and three nights through stormy winter weather, Rodgers arrived at Bassettere, Saint Kitts, on February 13, 1799. On this date, Britain and France were still at war so the inhabitants of the British colony were delighted to see the French vessel arriving in American hands. For the Americans' effort, the British commander of St. Kitts sent Truxtun a letter of congratulations and offered him every service within his command.47 The two ships were then refitted and supplied while the Insurgent received a new crew. On March 5, 1799, Rodgers was promoted to captain and received written orders to take command of the captured ship.49
In June 1799 Rodgers relinquished command of the Insurgent, then at Norfolk, Virginia, receiving a letter from Secretary of the Navy Stoddert ordering him to Baltimore to supervise the outfitting of the USS Maryland, a sloop-of-war  bearing 20 guns, and then to take command of that ship.53 Three months later the Maryland was commissioned under Rodgers' command. In March 1801, he delivered to France the ratified Convention of 1800 (Treaty of Mortefontaine), which ended the Quasi-War.7

First Barbary War

Placed in command of the John Adams on May 3 of the following year, Rodgers was ordered to sail for Tripoli to patrol its surrounding waters for three weeks, joining the Constitution and the President, along with a number of other vessels. Upon his arrival he immediately approached the harbor fortifications of Tripoli and engaged the gunboats and batteries defending the city. During this time he also pursued and boarded several neutral ships that were attempting to bring grain and other supplies to Tripoli, the inhabitants of which were facing starvation and other difficulties because of the blockade.98 After twelve days the John Adams encountered the Tripolian vessel Meshouda, bearing 20 guns, which Rodgers engaged and captured. The Tripolian vessel previously had been blockaded at Gibraltar and was carrying a load of military supplies to Tripoli.106 His brilliant record fighting the corsairs won Rodgers appointment as commodore of the Mediterranean Squadron in May 1805. Since Commodore  James Barron's health at this time had deteriorated, it was practically impossible for Barron to maintain command of the squadron. Receiving a letter dispatched to him by the Essex on May 22, Rodgers assumed command of the squadron consisting of the ships Constitution, President, Constellation, Enterprise, Essex, Siren, Argus, Hornet, Vixen, Nautilus, and Franklin, together with a number of gunboats (including No. 5) and bomb vessels. Rodgers was thus in command of the largest American squadron to assemble in the Mediterranean until the twentieth century. The blockading force was so overwhelming that, after much deliberation and appeals from the Dey, a peace treaty with Tripoli was negotiated by the end of July.223-226
When news of the treaty reached Washington in the fall of 1805, President Jefferson ordered all of the ships home with the exception of a frigate and two smaller supporting vessels.  Before returning home, Rodgers sailed to Malta and Syracuse to close down military hospitals and settle accounts. He then stopped to pay a visit on the Dey of Algiers, who by then was well aware of the treaty with Tripoli, and consequently extended every courtesy to Rodgers, even consenting to him donning his sword. In a letter to the Secretary of the Navy, Benjamin Stoddert, Rodgers later wrote "I am the first Christian that has ever been permitted to visit the Dey of Algiers with sidearms...." Paullin, 1910 pp.164-165

Other service

A year later, he returned to the United States to take command of the New York Flotilla. After the Embargo Act was passed at the close of 1807, Rodgers commanded operations along the Atlantic coast enforcing its provisions.
At the outbreak of the War of 1812 the American navy was not prepared to deal with Britain's large and formidable navy with its hundreds of ships and seasoned commanders and crews, many of whom were already experienced and battle hardened from the Napoleonic wars with France.72 In 1811, Rodgers was in command as Commodore of the  off Annapolis when he heard that an American seaman had been "impressed" by a British frigate off Sandy Hook, New Jersey. Commodore Rodgers was ordered to sea to "protect American commerce", but he may have had verbal instructions to retaliate for the impressment of British subjects off of American vessels, which was causing much ill-feeling and was a main cause of the War of 1812.
Early in 1811, Secretary of the Navy Hamilton had ordered the USS President and the USS Argus on patrol duty along the Atlantic coast from the Carolinas to New York. Commodore John Rodgers was in command of President off the coast of North Carolina. On May 16, 1811, he sighted and followed the British sloop , commanded by Arthur Bingham, thinking it to be HMS Guerriere. After some hailing and counterhailing, of which very different versions are given on either side, 
Toll, 2006 pp.321-323 a gun was fired, each side accusing the other of the first shot. Rodgers continued to engage the much smaller vessel and after several more broadsides from President, bearing 44 guns, the Little Belt, with only 20, was cut to pieces.7 The Little Belt lost 13 men killed, including a midshipman and a lieutenant, and 19 wounded, while the President incurred only one wounded. The incident came to be known as the Little Belt Affair. It was one among many mishaps between America and Britain that led to the War of 1812.226-228

War of 1812

When the United States declared war against Britain on June 18, 1812, many of the American ships were lacking crews and in need of repairs while others were still away at sea. The only ships available for service at this time were berthed at New York, under the command of Commodore John Rodgers. These were Rodgers' own flagship, the President, along with the United States, commanded by Commodore Stephen Decatur, the Congress, commanded by Captain Smith,  the Hornet, commanded by Captain Lawrence, and the Argus, commanded by Lieutenant Sinclair. However, the British vessels in American waters at this time were relatively few in number and not themselves very representative of the overall might of the Royal Navy.
Fearing that Congress might consider confining all American ships to port, as soon as Rodgers received news of the declaration of war, he departed New York harbor with his squadron within the hour. In anticipation of the war, Rodgers had already had his squadron fitted and ready to embark on the high seas. Their first objective was a British fleet reported to have recently departed from the West Indies, and Rodgers set a course south-east in search of these ships. John, 1886 p.291Roosevelt, 1883 pp.72-73 The President passed Sandy Hook on June 21. In the early morning of the 23rd a ship was spotted on the horizon to the north-east which turned out to be the frigate HMS Belvidera, commanded by Captain Richard Byron. Rodgers immediately gave chase, with the Congress following close behind. The Belvidera had already been informed of the inevitability of war by a passing New York pilot boat and immediately turned about, crowded on all sails and began flight to the north-east with a fresh wind behind all ships coming from the west.72-76Cooper, 1856 p.245-246 
The USS President was an unusually fast frigate and by noon had gained on the Belvidera, now only some two and a half miles distant, approximately 75 miles south-west of Nantucket island. While the President was closing its distance with Belvidera Captain Byron began clearing the decks and preparing for action and made ready his stern guns. By 4:30 the wind had relaxed some but the Belvidera was now close enough to be engaged. Seizing this first and tenuous possibility, the President's forecastle bow chasers fired the first shot of the war, by Rodgers himself, with two more almost immediately following.245Paullin, 1910 p.252 All three shots struck Belvidera at her stern, striking the rudder assembly and captain's quarters, killing or wounding nine men.  There was a pause of panic about the entire ship, as now every gun was suspected. Byron seized the opportunity and fired his stern chasers, killing yet another six men. The Belvidera continued a brisk fire, causing damage to the rigging and foresails. The President continued chase, but without adequate foresails to stabilize her bearing she began yawing and losing ground, allowing the Belvidera to escape and return to Halifax, taking with her the news of the declaration of war.
Rodgers' squadron patrolled the waters off the American upper east coast until the end of August, 1812. He commanded the President for most of the war, capturing 23 prizes. On land, Rodgers rendered valuable service defending Baltimore during the British attack on Fort McHenry and when Washington was invaded.320-321
Rodgers' home town of Havre de Grace was directly affected by the war. In 1813 during his third cruise of the war his home was plundered and then burned by British marines led by Admiral Cockburn Hickey, 1989, p.153  with its valuables stolen or destroyed in the fire. Rodgers' mother, wife and two sisters were forced to flee to a friend's house not far from the village. In little time the British made their way to this house also with orders to destroy it and all such dwellings in the area. Rodgers' sister, Mrs. Goldsborough, pleaded with the officer in charge of the detail, begging him to forego the destruction of their haven for the sake of their aging mother. The officer maintained that he was under strict orders and would have to obtain the consent of his commanding officer, whereupon Mrs. Goldsborough returned with the officer to again plead her case. The commanding officer agreed to spare the house, but by the time they had returned it had already been set ablaze. However, the fire had not yet taken hold and upon hearing the news that the house was to be spared the British marines through frantic efforts were able to put out the flames in time and save the house from complete ruin.279-280
In April 1814 Rodgers returned to Havre de Grace where he received orders to take command of USS Guerriere at Philadelphia, so named after the captured prize of Isaac Hull, and bearing 53 guns. Early in May of that year he had replaced the senior officer of the Navy, Commodore Alexander Murray, as commander of the Delaware squadron. Rodgers then ordered Lieutenant Charles Morgan to take charge of the squadron to reorganize it, giving him specific instructions regarding the outfitting of the ships with armament and the drilling of its use which was to be performed daily. Finally on June 20, 1814, the Guerriere was launched with a crew of 200 men, while more than fifty thousand spectators gathered on the shores of the Delaware and in small boats to witness the occasion. During that summer Rodgers spent most of his time at Philadelphia's naval yard outfitting this ship. The Delaware squadron also comprised some 20 gunboats, sloops and galleys and was one among several fleets assigned to patrol the chief ports along the upper Atlantic coastline.280-281
See main Article: War of 1812

Burning of Washington

Commodore John Rodgers played a major role in the recapture of Washington after it had been burned by the invading British in 1814. As a naval officer he was generally unfamiliar with the tactics and deployments of land battle, yet he restored order after the invasion of Washington and he coordinated orders from Secretary of the Navy William Jones for the employment of marines and sailors as naval infantry.  Along with ground forces under his two principal subordinates, Commodore Oliver Hazard Perry and Commodore David Porter, Rodgers' flotilla of ships on the Potomac River forced the retreat of the British.283-288Roosevelt, 1883 pp.317-321
In the summer of 1814, American naval forces in the Chesapeake Bay consisted mainly of a fleet of gunboats under the command of Commodore Joshua Barney, a veteran of the American Revolution. On August 20, a fleet commanded by British Rear Admiral Cockburn sailed up the Patuxent River searching for Barney's flotilla while British troops marched in the same direction along its shore. Secretary of the Navy Jones responded by ordering Commodore Rodgers in Philadelphia and Commodore Porter in New York to proceed towards Washington with several detachments of sailors and marines. The orders were dispatched by mail but did not reach Philadelphia until ten o'clock the morning of the 22nd. As Rodgers was at Reedy Island on the Delaware River inspecting his flotilla he did not receive the Secretary's orders until he returned at eleven o'clock that evening—-thirteen hours later. Upon receiving the dispatch Rodgers immediately made preparations to march towards Baltimore. Secretary Jones, not knowing that his initial orders had reached Rodgers later than he had anticipated, expected Rodgers to be at his designated station by the evening of the 23rd, and had sent him follow up orders that morning directing Rodgers to Bladensburg, Maryland, five miles north-east of Washington. Consequently Rodgers did not receive his orders until it was too late to execute them.
By August 24, Admiral Cockburn's forces had already moved up the Patuxent, forcing Barney to abandon and burn his flotilla. With the area secured, Cockburn's forces advanced on Washington. That afternoon they defeated American troops under General Winder and Commodore Barney at Bladensburg; by 8 o'clock that evening British troops entered Washington. Within twenty four hours, under the direct supervision of Admiral Cockburn, the British force set fire to the capitol building, the White House, and other structures.199 With the American forces defeated and in retreat, President James Madison and Secretary Jones had fled the capital and made their way up the Potomac River to remain in hiding in the countryside. Rodgers proceeded to Baltimore, arriving on the 25th. The citizens there were in a panic fearing their city would suffer the same fate as had just befallen Washington. In the panic the Americans burned the Columbia and the Argus which were nearby, ready for service.319 Upon Rodgers' arrival he immediately took up preparing defensive measures about the area, the actions of which restored order among the citizenry; with the inhabitants' courage somewhat restored, Rodgers combined his command with that of Porter's and secured a small flotilla on the Patapsco River, which flows south-east into Chesapeake Bay at Baltimore. With a force of some thousand sailors and marines Rodgers set up defenses about Baltimore, dividing this force into two regiments, one under the command of Porter, the other under the command of Oliver Hazard Perry, who already had been stationed in Baltimore.
In the meantime, President Madison and Secretary Jones returned to Washington, but by August 27 British naval forces under the command of Captain James Gordon advanced on the capital a second time, making their approach by way of the Potomac River with two frigates and a number of smaller vessels reaching Fort Washington, twelve miles down river from the capital. The fort was abandoned when fired upon; the American forces retreated to Alexandria, five miles up river, just seven miles outside of Washington. On August 29, Gordon advanced on and captured this town and port, seizing supplies which were then loaded aboard the invading vessels. Upon receiving orders to join Admiral Cockburn's squadron to the south, Gordon's flotilla sailed down river but was delayed due to adverse winds near Fort Washington. Fearing the British had further designs on the capital, Secretary Jones again began preparing defensive forces. On August 29, he sent Rodgers orders to proceed to Bladensburg from Baltimore with 650 seamen and marines. The day before, Rodgers had ordered Porter to Washington; Porter's 100 sailors and a handful of officers arrived on August 30 with the purpose of guarding the capital. The next day Rodgers and Porter together arrived at Bladensburg where Rodgers met with Secretary Jones. As the American forces were regrouped and in strong defensive positions, the British decided to withdraw. The American forces commanded by Porter and Perry began harassing the retreating British while Rodgers was attacking the British fleet with fireships. Rodgers had previously improvised his fireships at the Washington Navy Yard. On September 3, he proceeded down the Potomac in a Gig closely followed by his fireships and barges, the latter being manned with 60 marines armed with muskets and swords. When they reached Alexandria, Rodgers entered the abandoned town and ordered the American flag hoisted.
Other battles followed with the British attempting to mount counteroffensives on the Potomac and at Baltimore, but these were ultimately defeated largely through the efforts of forces commanded by Rodgers and Porter.
The burning of Washington shocked the nation and was denounced by most European governments. According to The Annual Register, it had ".....", with some members of Parliament joining in the criticism. However, most British citizens felt it was justified retaliation for American incursions into Canada and because the United States had initiated the war.202

Later naval career

In 1815, after the War of 1812 had ended, Congress established the Board of Navy Commissioners.266 Rodgers was a prolific political writer whose thoughts appealed to President Madison, leading him, with the consent of the Senate, to appoint Rodgers to the Board of Navy Commissioners, along with Isaac Hull and David Porter. Rodgers headed the Board from 1815 through 1824 and again from 1827 until he retired in May 1837.396 Rodgers also served briefly as Secretary of the Navy in 1823. From November 1824 through May 1827, he commanded the Mediterranean Squadron. He resigned as Secretary in 1823 and, after his final naval command, returned to New York where he became the Navy agent at the port there.

Societies

During the 1820s, Rodgers was a member of the prestigious Columbian Institute for the Promotion of Arts and Sciences, who counted among their members former presidents Andrew Jackson and John Quincy Adams and many prominent men of the day, including well-known representatives of the military, government service, medical and other professions.
Johnston, 1904

Final years

Several years before Rodgers retired from the Board of Naval Commissioners his health began to decline, it is believed from a case of cholera. On advice that his condition would benefit from a leave of absence he was persuaded to take a trip across the Atlantic to England. Rodgers subsequently resigned his commission with the blessing of President Jackson and the Secretary of the Navy. On May 10 he sailed for London, embarking from New York on a packet ship, the Montreal and spent several weeks in London. He also visited the towns of Plymouth and Portsmouth and was escorted and given much attention by the Admiralty of the Royal Navy and many notable people. He was the guest of two close friends, Admiral Sir James Stirling and Lady Hillyarm who were present at the Mediterranean Station while Rodgers was serving there,  dealing with the piracy of the Barbary states.394-396
Late in August 1837 Rodgers returned to the United States with little improvement in his health. He remained at his home at Lafayette Square in Washington for several weeks, but with his health now steadily declining again he was placed in the care of the naval asylum at Philadelphia under the care of a naval doctor and friend, Dr. Thomas Harris. His wife took up residence in a boarding house nearby. Soon his already frail condition began to rapidly worsen and when it was certain his death was imminent his wife was sent for, but Rodgers had already lapsed into unconsciousness by the time she arrived at his bedside. Rodgers' last words were spoken to his butler and close friend, asking, "..." Rodgers responded, "Then repeat it for me". Rodgers died in the arms of his butler on August 1, 1838 at the age of 66.
Rodgers' funeral took place at the home of Commodore Biddle. In attendance was Brigadier General Prevost who had called upon the uniformed men in the city to honor Rodgers with a parade through Washington.89
Rodgers was buried in the family burial site in the Congressional Cemetery at Washington, his grave marked by a pyramidal shaped sandstone monument which also bears the names of his wife, Minerva Denison, his son Frederick, and two daughters who were also laid to rest here in later years.

Influence and legacy

thumb|First USS Rodgers
Commodore Rodgers established a naval "dynasty" that produced several other notable officers.  His son John Rodgers (1812–1882) served in the American Civil War, and his great-grandson John Rodgers (1881–1926) served in World War I.
Six ships have been named in their honor, three as .
Louisa, daughter of Commodore Rodgers, was married to Union General Montgomery C. Meigs; their son John Rodgers Meigs was killed in the Civil War in 1864. (General Meigs was a great grandson of Continental Army Colonel Return J. Meigs, Sr.).
His home, Sion Hill, was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1990, and designated a National Historic Landmark in 1992.



Bibliography

 |ref=Allen2 |year=1909 |publisher=<br/>Houghton Mifflin, Boston, New york |pages=323 |oclc=197401914}} [ Url]
 Further reading



Notes

Further reading




