[[Fear of the Dark (Iron Maiden album)]]

CATEGORIES: 1992 albums, Iron Maiden albums, EMI Records albums, Albums produced by Martin Birch, Albums certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry, English-language albums, Heavy metal albums

Fear of the Dark is the ninth studio album released by British heavy metal band Iron Maiden. Released on 11 May 1992, it was their third studio release to top the UK albums chart and last to feature Bruce Dickinson as lead vocalist until his return in 1999.
It was the first album to be produced by Steve Harris, and last to feature Martin Birch (who retired after its release).

History

The Fear of the Dark album cover was the band's first not to be designed by artist Derek Riggs, whose contributions were rejected in favour of Melvyn Grant's. According to Iron Maiden's manager, Rod Smallwood, the band began accepting contributions from other artists as "We wanted to upgrade Eddie for the 90s. We wanted to take him from the sort of comic-book horror creature and turn him into something a bit more straightforward so that he became even more threatening." Melvyn Grant has since drawn several more covers for Iron Maiden, making him the band's second most-frequent artist after Riggs.
After recording its predecessor (1990's No Prayer for the Dying) in a barn on Steve Harris' property with the Rolling Stones Mobile Studio, leading to negative results, for this album Harris had the building converted into a proper studio (christened "Barnyard").
The album's musical style showed some experimentation with "Be Quick or Be Dead", a fast tempo song released as the album's first single, and "Wasting Love", the group's sole power ballad, which dates back to Dickinson's first solo album, Tattooed Millionaire. "Weekend Warrior" is about football and the violence that plagues it.
Only two of the album's songs, the title track and "Afraid to Shoot Strangers", would survive on tours past 1993. "Fear of the Dark" has been on the set list of every subsequent tour except 2005, in which the band only played songs from their first 4 albums,
"Be Quick or Be Dead", "From Here to Eternity", "Wasting Love" and a live version of the title track were released as singles.
Fear of the Dark Tour was the tour supporting the album.

Reception

Reviews for the album were mixed, with AllMusic commenting that, while "easily an improvement over 1990's lackluster No Prayer for the Dying (both musically and sonically)," the release "still wasn't quite on par with their exceptional work from the '80s." Sputnikmusic were more positive about the release, stating that "though many of the songs are still sub-par by their standards... the band returns to the lofty heights that they enjoyed for the entirety of the 80's." Billboard had a positive reception upon release, saying Dickinson's voice "shows no sign of wear and tear" and the guitar work "sounds fresh and crisp".
In October 2011, Fear of the Dark was ranked No. 8 on Guitar World magazine's top ten list of guitar albums of 1992.
Fear of the Dark became the third Iron Maiden album to top the UK Albums Chart. It is the band's most successful record in North America after the inception of Nielsen SoundScan in 1991, with 438,000 copies sold as of 2008.

Track listing

Personnel

Production and performance credits are adapted from the album liner notes.

Chart performance

Album

Singles

Certifications




