[[GE Genesis]]

CATEGORIES: Amtrak rolling stock, Electro-diesel locomotives, Metro-North Railroad, Via Rail locomotives, New Jersey Transit Rail Operations, General Electric locomotives, Passenger locomotives, Diesel locomotives of the United States, Railway locomotives introduced in 1992

General Electric Genesis (officially trademarked GENESIS) is a series of passenger locomotives produced by GE Transportation Systems, a subsidiary of General Electric. Between 1992 and 2001, 321 units were built for Amtrak, Metro-North, and Via Rail.
The Genesis series of locomotives was designed by General Electric in response to a specification published by Amtrak and ultimately selected over a competing design presented by GM EMD.  The Genesis series are unique among current North American diesel-electric locomotives because of their low height.  This height restriction allowed the locomotive to travel easily through low-profile tunnels in the Northeast Corridor.  The Genesis series is lower than even the previous-generation F40PH by , and is the only Amtrak diesel locomotive that meets the clearance requirements on every Amtrak route. A majority of Amtrak's trains are powered 
by at least one Genesis unit.

Technical design

The Genesis series is unique among recently manufactured North American passenger locomotives in that it uses a single, monocoque  carbody design, thus making it lighter, more aerodynamic,  In addition, all Genesis locomotives have four-stroke engines instead of the two-stroke engines previously used in EMD counterparts.
The Genesis unit is a fully computerized locomotive which automatically controls all on-board functions, thus producing high reliability while keeping the maintenance requirements low. For example, its computers can automatically reduce the power plant's output in the event that the locomotive is overheating, or suffering from low oil pressure, low water pressure, or reduced airflow into the intakes, thus making it still operable.
All Genesis units can provide head-end power (HEP) to the train drawn from an alternator or inverter powered by the main engine at a maximum rating of , making each unit capable of providing HEP for up to 16 Superliner cars. The P40DC and P42DC power plants can supply 60-hertz head-end power either from the HEP alternator with the engine speed-locked to 900 rpm (normal mode) or from the traction alternator with the engine speed-locked to 720 rpm (standby mode).  In the latter case, traction power is unavailable.  The P32AC-DM powerplant does not have to be locked at a certain rpm because it utilizes an HEP inverter, which allows the prime mover to run at 1047 rpm when providing both traction power and HEP, and to idle at 620 rpm (or notch three) while still providing HEP for lighting and air-conditioning when not providing traction power. 
The trucks of Genesis locomotives were made by Krupp Verkehrstechnik, which has since been absorbed by Siemens Mobility; the trucks on the newest Genesis locomotives carry the Siemens name.

Models

There are three models of Genesis units in operation today: P40DC, P42DC, and P32AC-DM.

P40DC

The P40DC (GENESIS Series I)P40DC Builders Plate  or Dash 8-40BP (originally known as the AMD-103 or Amtrak Monocoque Diesel - 103MPH) is the first model in the Genesis series. The locomotive operates in a diesel-electric configuration that uses DC to power the traction motors, producing .  The P40DC was succeeded in 1996 by the P42DC. 
A feature unique to the P40DC and P32AC-DM is a hostler stand at the rear of the locomotive providing increased visibility and reversing capabilities to the engineer while conducting reverse operations. When a unit is in operation from this stand it is limited to  and a dead man's switch protects against movement without an operator being present. Two unique features to the original P40DC are the two strobes above the cab and an emergency flasher between the strobes.  When they were overhauled, those features were removed, likely due to complaints from engine crews.
Both the P40DC and P42DC allowed Amtrak to operate heavy long-distance trains with fewer locomotives compared to the older EMD F40PH locomotives. Two P40DCs could do the same work as three F40PHs. Additional deliveries of the P42DC ended up replacing the P40DCs.  Three units had been wrecked (819 in the 1993 Big Bayou Canot train accident and 807 and 829 in the 1999 Bourbonnais train accident) and scrapped. Eight were leased and later sold to the Connecticut DOT for Shore Line East in 2005, and four were rebuilt and sold to New Jersey Transit in 2007. The remaining 29 units were placed out-of-service for many years. 15 of these units have been rebuilt using 2009 ARRA stimulus funds and returned to service, now in the Phase V livery. 14 more units are currently being rebuilt.Amtrak P40DC roster

=Special Liveries=

=Upgraded and "Stimulus" P40DCs=

By 2007, New Jersey Transit had upgraded their P40DC units with updated prime movers to match the  This was done by readjusting the position of the lay shafts within the prime mover.
Amtrak has returned 15 of their P40DC units to service as part of a project funded through the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009.amtrak.pdf Amtrak ARRAProject List The first of the units were returned to service in March 2010 after being overhauled at the Beech Grove Shops. They were upgraded like NJT's units had been a few years before to have   They also feature a builder's plate indicating that they were rebuilt under the auspices of the TIGER stimulus program.

P42DC

The P42DC (GENESIS Series I)P42 Builders Plate  is the successor model to the P40DC. It has an engine output of  when providing the full 800 kW HEP load to the train.
The P42DC has a maximum speed of .
P42DCs are used primarily on most of Amtrak's long-haul and high-speed rail service outside the Northeast Corridor, as well as a service with speeds up to  on Via Rail's Quebec City-Windsor rail corridor when it replaced LRC locomotives in 2001.

=Special Liveries=

=General Specifications=

P32AC-DM

The P32AC-DM (GENESIS Series II)P32 Builders Plate  was developed for both Amtrak and Metro-North. They can operate on power generated either by the on-board diesel prime mover or, for a short period of time (approximately 10 minutes), The P32AC-DM is rated at 
The Dual Mode P32AC-DM is unique not only because of its third-rail capability, but also because it is equipped with GE's GEB15 AC (alternating current) traction motors, rather than DC (direct current) motors as used in the other subtypes. The model is confined to services operating from New York City, where diesel emissions through its two fully enclosed main terminal stations are prohibited. P32AC-DMs are seen only on Amtrak's Empire Corridor between Penn Station and Buffalo, the Ethan Allen Express, Lake Shore Limited (New York section), Adirondack, and Maple Leaf services, and Metro-North's locomotive-hauled commuter trains to and from Grand Central Terminal.  Metro-North's units have an escape hatch in the nose.
The third-rail shoes are used on the over-running third-rail in Pennsylvania Station for Amtrak units and the under-running third-rail in Grand Central Terminal for Metro-North units.
All P32AC-DM models, unlike P40DC and P42DC models, lack the door on the rear of the locomotive that would normally lead to the next car, making it impossible to access the unit from either a coach or a trailing locomotive. Another unique feature is that the two lower vents near the back of the locomotive are bigger than that of P40s and P42s.

=General Specifications=

File:GE Genesis 128 3 days before crash.png]]
File:Example.jpg]]






