[[Konjac]]

CATEGORIES: Amorphophallus, Root vegetables, Flora of Indochina, Flora of Malesia, Flora of China, Flora of Indonesia, Flora of Japan, Edible thickening agents, Natural gums, Medicinal plants, Japanese cuisine, Sichuan cuisine

Konjac (), also known as konjak, konjaku, konnyaku potato,About. paeoniifolius), is a plant of the genus Amorphophallus. It is native to warm subtropical to tropical eastern Asia, from Japan and China south to Indonesia. It is a perennial plant, growing from a large corm up to 25 cm in diameter. The single leaf is up to 1.3 m across, bipinnate, and divided into numerous leaflets. The flowers are produced on a spathe enclosed by a dark purple spadix up to 55 cm long.
The food made from the root of this plant is widely known in English by its Japanese name, konnyaku (yam cake), being cooked and consumed primarily in Japan. The two basic types of cake are white and black. Pushing the cake through a grid of sharp blades at the end of a wooden box gives noodles, called shirataki, which are also sold in white and black colors.
The corm of the konjac is often colloquially referred to as a yam, although it bears no marked relation to tubers of the family Dioscoreaceae.

History

Konjac has been known in Japan since the sixth century as a medicinal food, and it has been eaten for 1500 years.  In 1846, the publication of the book Konnyaku Hyakusen (100 recipes of Konnyaku) demonstrates its popularity in the Edo period.

Cultivation and use

Konjac is grown in China, Korea, Taiwan, Japan and southeast Asia for its large starchy corms, used to create a flour and jelly of the same name. It is also used as a vegan substitute for gelatin.
In Japanese cuisine, konjac (konnyaku) appears in dishes such as oden. It is typically mottled grey and firmer in consistency than most gelatins.  It has very little taste; the common variety tastes vaguely like salt.  It is valued more for its texture than flavor.
 is a type of Japanese food consisting of konjac cut into noodle-like strips. It is usually sold in plastic bags with accompanying water. It is often used in sukiyaki and oden. The name literally means "thread-konjac".
Japanese konnyaku is made by mixing konjac flour with water and limewater. Hijiki is often added for the characteristic dark color and flavor.  Without additives for color, konnyaku is pale white. It is then boiled and cooled to solidify.  Konnyaku made in noodle form is called shirataki and used in foods such as sukiyaki and gyudon.
Konjac is consumed in parts of China's Sichuan province; the corm is called moyu ( xuě móyù).
The dried corm of the konjac plant contains around 40% glucomannan gum.  This polysaccharide makes konjac jelly highly viscous and may be responsible for many of its health benefits as used in traditional Chinese medicine, detoxification, tumour-suppression, blood stasis alleviation and phlegm liquefaction.
Konjac has almost no calories, but is very high in fiber. Thus, it is often used as a diet food. The dietary fiber from the root of Amorphophallus konjac is used as a component of weight loss supplements.
Konjac can also be used for facial massage accessories which are currently popular in Korea.
The product Lipozene is made from the konjac root.

Fruit jelly

Konjac can also be made into a popular Asian fruit jelly snack, known variously in the United States as lychee cups (after a typical flavor and Nata de coco cube suspended in the gel) or konjac candy, usually served in bite-sized plastic cups.

=Choking risk=

Perhaps because of several highly publicized deaths and near-deaths in the San Francisco Bay Area among children and elderly caused by suffocation while eating konjac candy, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued product warningsFDA issues a second warning and an import alert about konjac mini-cup gel candies that pose choking risk, FDA News P01-17, 5 October 2001 in 2001 and subsequent recalls in the United States and Canada. Unlike gelatine and some other commonly used gelling agents, konjac fruit jelly does not melt readily in the mouth. Some products formed a gel strong enough such that only chewing, not tongue pressure or breathing pressure, could disintegrate the gel. Although the product is intended to be eaten by gently squeezing the gel's cup, a consumer could suck the product out with enough force to unintentionally lodge it in his or her trachea. Konjac fruit jelly was subsequently also banned in the European Union.Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 95/2/EC as regards the conditions of use for a food additive E 425 konjacDraft Commission Decision (SANCO/362/2002) suspending the placing on the market and import of jelly confectionery containing food additive E 425 Konjac, UK Food Standards Agency, 8 March 2002Mini fruit gel sweets containing konjac, UK Food Standards Agency, 8 July 2003
Some konjac jelly snacks are not of a size and consistency to pose any unusual choking risk, but are nonetheless affected by the government bans.
Some products that remain in Asian markets have an increased size, unusual shape, and more delicate consistency than the round, plug-like gels that were associated with the choking incidents.
The snacks usually have warning labels advising parents to make sure their children chew the jelly thoroughly before swallowing.
Japan's largest manufacturer of konjac snacks, MannanLife, temporarily stopped production of the jellies after a 21-month-old Japanese boy was revealed to have choked to death on a frozen MannanLife konjac jelly.yomiuri.co.htm 
17 people died from choking on konjac between 1995 and 2008.Article from the Japan Times, "Food maker pulls 'konyaku' sweets", October 9, 2008
MannanLife konjac jelly's packaging bag now shows a note to consumers, advising them to cut the product into smaller pieces before serving it to small children.

=Vegan alternative=

Konjac root powder is used as an ingredient in vegan alternative seafood products. It can be incorporated into animal-product-free versions of scallops, fish, prawns, crab, shrimp etc.








