[[The Hertz Corporation]]

CATEGORIES: Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange, Companies established in 1918, Car rental companies, Companies based in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, Companies based in Bergen County, New Jersey, Park Ridge, New Jersey, Ford Motor Company, OpenTravel Alliance, Private equity portfolio companies, Carlyle Group companies, Companies based in Chicago, Illinois

The Hertz Corporation, a subsidiary of Hertz Global Holdings Inc

History

Early years

The company was founded by Walter L. Jacobs in 1918, who started a car rental operation in Chicago with a dozen Model T Ford cars. In 1923, Jacobs sold it to John D. Hertz who made it a subsidiary of his Yellow Truck and Coach Manufacturing Company and renamed it "Hertz Drive-Ur-Self System".
He sold a controlling interest in the Yellow Truck and Coach Manufacturing Company (and hence also 'Hertz Drive-Ur-Self') to General Motors in 1925 who then purchased the remaining shares in 1943.
Hertz arranged for The Omnibus Corporation, which he also owned, to purchase the car rental business back from GM in 1953. He sold all The Omnibus Corporation's public transport interests the same year, changed its name to 'The Hertz Corporation' and floated it on the New York Stock Exchange the following year.

The Hertz Corporation

In 1954, the new corporation bought New York truck leasing company, Metropolitan Distributors.
In 1967, The Hertz Corporation became a wholly owned subsidiary of RCA but was operated as a separate entity. In 1985, Hertz joined UAL Corporation. On December 30, 1987, Hertz was sold to 'Park Ridge Corporation', which was then owned by Ford Motor Company and members of Hertz senior management. In 1988, Volvo North America Corporation invested in Park Ridge Corporation.
On June 13, 2005, Ford issued a notice that Hertz would be let loose in an initial public offering. On September 8, 2005 it was announced it was to be sold to private equity companies Clayton, Dubilier & Rice, The Carlyle Group and Merrill Lynch Global Private Equity for $15 billion in cash and debt acquisition. The sale was completed on December 22, 2005. This private equity group took Hertz public on November 16, 2006.
On January 11, 2010, Hertz announced the acquisition of used cars dealer British Car Auctions (BCA) for an undisclosed sum.
In November 2011, Hertz introduced ExpressRent kiosks at a number of locations. This was the first large scale car rental kiosk deployment in the U.S. using a live agent assistant via video chat.
On January 3, 2014 it was reported that Hertz shares had jumped in value by 2.6% after the reported purchase of 30-40 million shares by billionaire Carl Icahn in what was believed to be a hostile takeover attempt. In response to Icahn's reported share purchase the Hertz Board reportedly stated that it would issue one preferred share for each current share in what is referred to as a "poison pill" response.

Key Executives

Hertz Global Holdings Inc

In April 2010, Hertz and Dollar-Thrifty Automotive Group announced an agreement under which Hertz was to acquire Dollar-Thrifty for a purchase price of . The deal was concluded in November 2012 and resulted in a combined 10,400 locations in approximately 150 countries.

Headquarters Relocation

On May 7, 2013, Hertz executives, alongside Florida Governor Rick Scott, announced the company would be relocating its worldwide headquarters from Park Ridge, New Jersey to Estero, Florida. It is believed the northeast corner of the intersection of Williams Road and US-41 will be the location of the new headquarters. This would put it less than a half a mile north of Coconut Point Mall. Hertz announced though that certain operations will still occur in its old headquarters in Park Ridge.
The new headquarters is now under construction and the new buildings will be fully completed in early 2015.

Fleet

The Hertz fleet consists of a wide majority of vehicle manufacturers, with the majority being GM products. Luxury cars are provided by Mercedes, Infiniti, and Cadillac. Previously, due to Hertz's affiliation with Ford, the rental fleet of most locations consisted of Ford and its brands, such as Mazda, Volvo, Mercury and Lincoln, along with various others (mostly Korean and Japanese).

Specialty Cars

In 1966, Hertz engaged racing and automotive designer Carroll Shelby to develop an exclusive version of his modified Ford Mustang. One thousand GT350H Mustangs were built and ultimately sold once their rental use had ended; however, many of them were missing the matching engine. Some renters would rent the car for a weekend and swap out the engine with a base model 289ci V8. Engine inspections upon return of the "racer" were not common place, so nobody found out until the car was due for service. By that time, there was no way to track down the engine thief. The so-called "rent-a-racer" program in the late-1960s was available in selected locations and the fleet also included Corvettes, Jaguar XK-Es, and AMC AMXs.
In 2006, the 40th anniversary of the original GT350H, Hertz introduced the Shelby Mustang GT-H as part of the Fun Collection at select locations. This was followed in 2007 with a convertible version of the GT-H.  2008 saw 500 Chevrolet Corvettes, badged as "ZHZ", available from selected US airports; the following year 350 convertible ZHZs joined the fleet.  Both were finished in Hertz' corporate yellow with a central black stripe.

Green collection and electric cars

Hertz launched its "Green Collection" in September 2006 with environmentally friendly vehicles including the Toyota Prius, Ford Fusion, Buick LaCrosse, Toyota Camry, and Hyundai Sonata.
Hertz has an agreement with Nissan to bring the Nissan Leaf electric car to certain U.S. and European locations. Hertz said it also will supply electrics and plug-in hybrids from other manufacturers, including General Motors, Toyota, and Mitsubishi.

Hertz 24/7 car sharing

Hertz 24/7, formerly Hertz on Demand and earlier Connect by Hertz, Hertz 24/7 vehicles are available for online reservation.
As part of Hertz Global EV initiative, Hertz 24/7 offers for hour rental several electric cars at selected locations in the US, the UK, and China. The plug-in electric vehicles that will be available include the Nissan LEAF, Chevrolet Volt, Mitsubishi i-MiEV, Tesla Roadster, Smart ED, Toyota Prius Plug-in Hybrid and Coda Sedan . As of May 2011 the Smart ED, the Chevy Volt, and the Nissan Leaf are available in New York City.

Simply Wheelz and Advantage

In 2007, Hertz launched subbrand "Simply Wheelz" to address economy-minded and leisure-market customers in Orlando, Florida. The subbrand was colocated within and utilized the fleet and other assets of the parent brand, and channeled reservations and customer-service through a streamlined web front-end (resembling those of low-cost-carrier airlines) to its existing systems. Hertz outbid Enterprise Rent-a-Car acquiring the assets of bankrupt Advantage Rent a Car System in early 2009. The Simply Wheelz subbrand and website were then rebranded as Advantage Rent-a-Car.
On August 26, 2012, Hertz announced that it agreed to sell the US Advantage business to Franchise Services of North America and Macquarie Capital, as a divestiture to receive regulatory approval of Hertz's acquisition of Dollar Thrifty Automotive Group, announced at the same time, and to convert foreign Advantage locations to the Thrifty brand.corporate-ir.zhtml?c=205461&p=irol-newsArticle_Print&ID=1728567&highlight= On December 12, 2012, Advantage Rent A Car was acquired by MacQuarie Capital.

Worldwide locations

Advertising

Let Hertz put you in the driver's seat

In 1959, the advertising firm of Norman, Craig & Kummel (NCK) was selected as the new advertising agency for Hertz. NCK developed the slogan "Hertz puts you in the driver's seat," which was first used commercially in September 1959. NCK quickly changed the wording to "Let Hertz put you in the driver's seat" by October 1959. Hertz used the line in the early 1960s in print, signs and television. The series is listed as number 65 in the top 100 advertising campaigns of the 20th century by Advertising Age magazine.

John F. Kennedy assassination

A large billboard advertising Hertz was on the roof of the Texas School Book Depository in Dealey Plaza during the assassination of President John F. Kennedy on November 22, 1963. The billboard was removed in 1978.

O.J. Simpson

O.J. Simpson appeared prominently in ads for the company. The company set the trend of hiring black athletes as sponsors of various brands. In 1975, O.J. Simpson became a staple in American households with his Hertz commercials. One spot from the mid-1970s, showed Simpson, former football star as he was, running through an airport terminal (wearing a three-piece business suit and carrying a briefcase) and leaping over rows of departure lounge seats trying to get to his Hertz rental car. A woman yelled, "Go O.J. Go!" The tagline of the ad, as spoken by O.J., was "Hertz, the superstar in rent-a-car". In later years and through the 1980s, he appeared with golf legend Arnold Palmer; the pair was joined by the early 1990s by actress Jamie Lee Curtis. The relationship between Hertz and Simpson ended in late 1992 when reports of domestic abuse surfaced.

Low-floor passenger bus

A significant Hertz-led technology was the development in North America of the low-floor passenger coach. Until the early 21st century, most large Hertz lots were linked to airports they served by small fleets of firm-operated transit buses. Many Hertz locations used the Rapid Transit Series, whose high floor and stairs made loading of baggage difficult and rendered access to wheelchair and ECV-using customers difficult or impossible. A large potential contract from Hertz led Gillig Brothers of Hayward, California, to invest in a radical redesign of the city bus that offered a floor only a foot off of the ground (lower when pneumatically "kneeled") from the front of the bus, between the front wheels, up to the rear axle. The low floor and additional space freed by the redesign, initially titled the "H2000LF" by Hertz, greatly reduced loading and unloading time, increased convenience, and were for a time exclusive to Hertz. The bus was subsequently marketed as the Gillig Low Floor and is widely deployed by U.S. public transportation agencies.

Heavy equipment rental

Hertz also maintains a heavy equipment rental division known as the Hertz Equipment Rental Corporation, aka HERC. It is headquartered in Park Ridge, New Jersey, United States."Corporate Governance Overview." The Hertz Corporation. HERC has more than 12 branches throughout the United States, Canada, the European Union, and China.






