[[Anchor Brewing Company]]

CATEGORIES: American beer brands, Beer brewing companies based in the San Francisco Bay Area, Companies based in San Francisco, California, Companies established in 1896, Cuisine of the San Francisco Bay Area

Anchor Brewing Company is an American alcoholic beverage producer, operating a brewery and distillery on Potrero Hill in San Francisco, California. The brewery was founded in 1896 and was purchased by Frederick Louis Maytag III, in 1965, saving it from closure. It moved to its current location in 1979. It is one of the last remaining breweries to produce California common beer, also known as Steam Beer, a trademark owned by the company.

History

Anchor began during the Gold Rush when Gottlieb Brekle arrived from Germany and began brewing in San Francisco.  In 1896, Ernst F. Baruth and his son-in-law, Otto Schinkel, Jr., bought the old brewery on Pacific Avenue and named it Anchor.  The brewery burned down in the fires that followed the 1906 earthquake, but was rebuilt at a different location in 1907. However the brewery burned down yet again within the year, and it relocated once more, this time to a building a few blocks away.
The brewery continued operations into the late 1950s, but suffered heavily from the country's increasingly strong preference for the light lagers produced by the megabreweries.
Anchor shut its doors briefly in 1959, but was bought and reopened the following year. 
In 1965, Frederick Louis "Fritz" Maytag III bought the brewery, saving it from closure. 
Turning the failing brewery around required more than the money in Maytag's fortune. He also had to change the character of the beer that was produced there.  Between purchasing Anchor and producing the first batches of bottled Anchor Steam in 1971, Maytag had to learn the brewing process from scratch, invest in improvements to the equipment, and focus heavily on cleanliness in the brewing process.  The new beer was a definitive representative of  California common beer, a derivative of historic steam beer.
Before offering in bottles, sales were only as draft beer to thirty local establishments that had long carried the brand. Total production was only 800 barrels in 1969, 1,200 in 1970, and 2,100 in 1971.
thumb|Stirring hops into the wort in the brewhouse.  It was the first of the modern microbreweries, being among the first American breweries to produce a porter, barley wine, or India pale ale with regularity. Its success inspired many others to enter the brewing business, notably New Albion.
In 1989 the company produced a limited edition of beer (known in Sumerian as sikaru) which they named Ninkasi after the Sumerian goddess of beer. It was based on a scholarly reconstruction of an ancient Sumerian recipe known as the "hymn to Ninkasi".
In 1993, the company opened Anchor Distillery, a microdistillery in the same location as the brewery, and began making a single malt rye whiskey, named Old Potrero after the hill. In 1997, the microdistillery began producing gin, called Junípero—Spanish for juniper, and a reference to Fr. Junípero Serra, an important figure in San Francisco's and California's history. Recently they have also begun producing a Jenever style gin called Genevieve, using wheat, barley, rye, and the same herbal ingredients as their Junípero gin.
In 2010, Maytag sold the company to the former Skyy vodka executives Keith Greggor and Tony Foglio, who plan to expand Anchor's business while keeping its commitment to artisan brewing. In 2013, the brewery launched Anchor California Lager, a re-creation of an historic Boca Brewing lager from the 1870s.  Construction is expected to begin in late 2014, and will expand Anchor's annual production capacity from 180,000 barrels to 680,000 barrels.

Products

Anchor has a year-round range of seven beers, as well as several seasonal beers.  These beers are generally of an extremely limited nature.
On February 4th, 2014, Anchor officially announced Anchor IPA. They previously had announced that Bock would be leaving the product lineup.

Core beers

Seasonal beers

Zymaster Series








