[[Lance Reventlow]]

CATEGORIES: 1936 births, 1972 deaths, American Formula One drivers, American racing drivers, Danish racing drivers, British racing drivers, Haugwitz family, Counts of Denmark, Danish nobility, Danish people of German descent, British people of Danish descent, British people of German descent, American people of Danish descent, Woolworth family, Sportspeople from London, Victims of aviation accidents or incidents in the United States, Burials at Woodlawn Cemetery (Bronx), Scarab Formula One drivers, Cooper Formula One drivers

Lance Reventlow, born Lawrence Graf von Haugwitz-Hardenberg-Reventlow, (February 24, 1936 – July 24, 1972) was a wealthy playboy, entrepreneur, and racing driver.
Reventlow was the only child of Woolworth heiress Barbara Hutton and her second husband Count Court von Haugwitz-Hardenberg-Reventlow and also the stepson of actor Cary Grant and Prince Igor Troubetzkoy.

Biography

Lance von Haugwitz-Hardenberg-Reventlow was the only child of Danish nobleman Count Court von Haugwitz-Hardenberg-Reventlow and American socialite Barbara Hutton, who nearly died giving birth to him. He was born at Winfield House in London, restored by his mother and named for her grandfather Frank Winfield Woolworth. His parents' marriage was a tumultuous one, filled with his father's emotional and physical abuse of him and his mother and his mother's growing alcohol and drug addiction. She had inherited the Woolworth department store fortune and was then one of the wealthiest women in the world. The marriage, Barbara Hutton's second of seven, did not last and the child became the subject of a bitter custody battle.
Left to be raised by nannies and boarding schools, Reventlow was six years old when his mother married actor Cary Grant, who took the already troubled boy under his wing. Reventlow's mother and Grant divorced on July 11, 1945, and two days later the then-nine-year-old was abducted by his biological father and taken to Canada, but later returned. Grant remained close to Reventlow, who spent a great deal of time in the Los Angeles area.

Racing career

Beginnings

In 1948, at age 12, Reventlow was introduced to the world of Grand Prix motor racing when his mother married Prince Igor Troubetzkoy who won the Targa Florio that year. As a teenager, Reventlow's money afforded him the latest in exotic cars that led to his involvement in motor racing.
In Hollywood, Reventlow became close friends with fellow auto enthusiast James Dean and competed in club events around California. On September 30, 1955, Lance Reventlow was one of the last people to speak to Dean when they met on their way to an auto race in Salinas, California. Dean was killed a few hours later in his Porsche 550 Spyder.

Professional career

Reventlow eventually decided to go to Europe to race cars and spent a season driving Cooper Formula 2 cars. He then returned to the United States and set up his own company in Venice, California, to construct Chevrolet-powered race cars he named Scarab with Phil Remington as chief engineer. Along with hired driver Chuck Daigh, the two were initially successful in racing. They won the majority of major sportscar events they entered, often in competition with the Cunningham team of Lister Jaguars. Daigh drove a Scarab to victory in the 1958 Riverside International Grand Prix in California beating a field of international race car teams, including the world famous race car driver Phil Hill and the Ferrari Team. Carroll Shelby drove a Scarab to first place at Continental Divide Raceways in Castle Rock in Douglas County, Colorado, where he broke a course record.

Personal life

In 1959, Lance Reventlow visited the mother he barely knew at her new mansion in Cuernavaca, Mexico. She had just divorced her sixth husband. Reventlow confronted her over his upbringing, and after a heated argument, the two parted company. Already reluctantly in the media spotlight because of his mother and the family wealth, shortly after the confrontation with his mother, Reventlow married actress Jill St. John. The glamorous couple was the focus of much media attention. His racing team was much talked about for having built the first Formula One race car in America. Shifting operations overseas to Britain, Reventlow's team raced the Scarab cars in Formula One with little success against the new rear-engine race cars. Lance went back to the drawing board and built a competitive prototype Scarab rear-engined car, but had become less interested in racing before its testing was complete. In 1962, he shut down the operation, leased the California facilities to Carroll Shelby, and quit auto racing altogether.
Reventlow's organization constructed a total of eight Scarabs during its existence. In a 1971 interview, Reventlow confirmed that three front-engined Chevy powered sports cars, three front-engined formula cars, one rear-engined formula car and one rear-engined sports car were built. Two of the front-engined formula cars were powered by Reventlow-commissioned engines drawn up by American racing engine designer Leo Goossen to Reventlow's specifications, while the third car was powered by a Goossen designed and engineered Offenhauser engine. The rear-engined formula was powered by a modified Buick powerplant; this engine and the suspension/brake package were taken from this car and used on the rear-engined sports car, the last Scarab built.
Reventlow's marriage to Jill St. John ended in divorce in 1963. In 1964, he married ex-Mouseketeer Cheryl Holdridge, introduced to him by close friend, singer Jimmy Boyd. The couple mostly remained out of the glare of publicity for several years. An avid Alpine skier, hiker, sailor and pilot, Reventlow maintained a home in Aspen, Colorado.

Death

In 1972 Reventlow was looking to partner with real estate developers to build a ski resort in Aspen. While Reventlow was an experienced pilot, with thousands of hours, rated fully for IFR on multi-engine planes, when scouting locations for real estate he was only a passenger.  On July 24, 1972, the Cessna 206 Reventlow was in, helmed by an inexperienced 27-year-old student pilot, flew into a blind canyon and the pilot stalled the aircraft while trying to turn around.
Reventlow's stepfather, the actor Cary Grant, took some of Lance's closest friends along with him in his plane to Aspen for Reventlow's memorial service, given by his widow Cheryl.
She later married Manning J. Post, a major figure in the Democratic Party in California.

Complete Formula One World Championship results

(key)




