[[Tom Corbett, Space Cadet]]

CATEGORIES: 1950s American television series, American children's television series, American science fiction television series, Solar System in fiction, Fictional captains, 1950 American television series debuts, 1955 American television series endings, CBS network shows, American Broadcasting Company network shows, NBC network shows, DuMont Television Network shows, 1950s American radio programs, Novel series, Space adventure television series, Black-and-white television programs, English-language television programming, Television series set in the future, 24th century in fiction, Grosset & Dunlap books, Fictional astronauts

Tom Corbett is the main character in a series of Tom Corbett — Space Cadet stories that were depicted in television, radio, books, comic books, comic strips, and other media in the 1950s.
The stories followed the adventures of Corbett, Astro, originally Roger Manning and later T.J. Thistle, cadets at the Space Academy as they train to become members of the Solar Guard. The action takes place at the Academy in classrooms and bunkrooms, aboard their training ship the rocket cruiser Polaris, and on alien worlds, both within our solar system and in orbit around nearby stars.

Origin

Joseph Lawrence Greene of Grosset & Dunlap developed Tom Corbett, Space Cadet, inspired by the Robert A. Heinlein novel Space Cadet (1948)"The roots of Tom Corbett in SPACE CADET was confirmed by the Heinleins in 1977 and by other written sources since that time. When a comparison of the Tom Corbett series published by Grosset & Dunlap (now out of print) and Heinlein's Space Cadet, the similarities become apparent." Robert Heinlein's  Influence on Tom Corbett but based on his own prior work. Greene had submitted a radio script for "Tom Ranger" and the "Space Cadets" on January 16, 1946, but it remained unperformed when Heinlein's novel was published. Greene then reworked his radio script into a script for a daily newspaper adventure strip, which was never produced.

Television

Tom Corbett first appeared on television. The stories initially closely followed the scripts written for the unpublished newspaper comic strip Tom Ranger, Space Cadet, by Joseph Greene from 1949. 
Tom Corbett is one of only six TV series to appear on all four networks of the time, along with The Arthur Murray Party, Down You Go, The Ernie Kovacs Show, Pantomime Quiz, and The Original Amateur Hour: 

Cast

Michael Harvey played Captain Strong for the first six episodes of the CBS series; Pat Ferris played Dr. Dale for two episodes of the DuMont series.

Crew

Books

1952 - 1956 published by Grosset & Dunlap. Written under the pseudonym Carey Rockwell, with Willy Ley as technical advisor.
The text of the above books, with the exception of "The Robot Rocket", is available from Project Gutenberg by searching for "Tom Corbett."
In 1953 a slim children's book titled Tom Corbett's Wonder Book of Space (or Tom Corbett:  A Trip to the Moon) was written by Marcia Martin and published by Wonder Books.

Comic strip

The Tom Corbett — Space Cadet comic strip, drawn in Milton Caniff style by Ray Bailey, ran Sunday and daily in American newspapers, from September 9, 1951 to September 6, 1953. Paul S. Newman scripted through February 8, 1953.

Comic books

The original Tom Corbett series was published by Dell Comics beginning in their 4-Color series. The 4-Color series was used to try out new story lines on the public to obtain feedback. If successful the series would be spun off to form its own title. Tom Corbett won his own title after three tryout issues. As the popularity of the television series waned, Dell stopped producing the comic book and the series was then taken up and produced by Prize Comics. 
There were a small number of Tom Corbett comic books in Manga style published in the 1990s by Eternity Comics, but these are regarded as non-canonical by Corbett fans.
February 1952 - September–November 1954
May 1955 - October 1955
1990

Bluewater Productions

A new series has been launched by Bluewater Productions and the first issue was released at the end of September 2009.Preview of Tom Corbett: Space Cadet #1 (2009) by Bluewater Productions
Bluewater Productions has partnered with the radio drama company The Colonial Radio Theatre on the Air to produce a dramatic audio version of their Tom Corbett titles.

Radio

The cast for the radio program was the same as for the television series. The show ran from January 1, 1952 - June 26, 1952, initially in 15-minute segments three times a week and then as a half-hour show twice a week. A radio version produced in Australia used local actors.

Music

There was also a musical recording in 1951 called "Tom Corbett, Space Cadet, Song and March" and other songs ("Tom Corbett Space Cadet At Space Academy," "Rescue In Space" and Tom Corbett Space Cadet Song and March"). These were performed by the Space Cadet Marching Band and released on Golden Sound Records."Tom Corbett Space Cadet: Toys", Billy Ireland Cartoon Library & Museum, The Ohio State University Libraries."Tom Corbett Space Cadet Song and March", item on Etsy. Songs and records were (c) Rockhill Radio Inc. Made in the USA by The Sandpiper Press, distributed by Simon & Schuster.

Other media

There was a Tom Corbett — Space Cadet View-Master packet containing three reels. Its three-dimensional photographs were brilliantly colored but were taken of sculptures of the characters and models of the spacecraft and props. The story was of finding on the moon a miniature pyramid made by unknown aliens, which led to a clue on Mars, and finally to fighting interplanetary crooks in the asteroid belt. 
There were also several coloring books; a punch-out book; a costume for kids; a lunch box; a pocket watch; a Space Academy playset with plastic figures; a set of rubber molds for making plaster-of-Paris figures, furniture and vehicles, made by Marx toys; a Little Golden Book; and a Little Golden Record of the Space Academy song ("From the rocket fields of the academy/ to the far flung stars of outer space,/ we are space cadets training to be/ ready for dangers we may face"). Two other records presented Space Cadet adventures, starring the original TV/radio cast: "Tom Corbett Space Cadet at Space Academy," and "Rescue in Space: Tom Corbett, Space Cadet."
On the back of boxes of Kellogg's Pep Cereal were cardboard cutouts of a space cadet cap, gauntlets and a ray gun, and the company made a direct tie-in with the product Kellogg's Pep: The Solar Cereal.
The show was the subject of a parody, "Lawrence Fechtenberger, Interstellar Officer Candidate," a serial that made several appearances on programs of Bob and Ray.



Bibliography




