[[Francis L. Hawks]]

CATEGORIES: American historians, American lawyers, American Episcopal priests, American academics, Members of the North Carolina House of Representatives, People from New Orleans, Louisiana, People from Connecticut, People from New York City, 1798 births, 1866 deaths, Academic journal editors, People from New Bern, North Carolina, Presidents of Tulane University, Tulane University faculty

Dr. Francis Lister Hawks (10 June 1798 – 26 September 1866) was an American priest of the Episcopal Church, and a politician in North Carolina.
After practicing law with some distinction he entered the Episcopalian ministry in 1827 and proved a brilliant and impressive preacher, holding livings in New Haven, Philadelphia, New York City and New Orleans, and declining several bishoprics. Scandals in the 1830s and 40s led him to posts on the American frontier, although he eventually returned to New York City.
Hawks's work on church history remains important today. On his appointment as historiographer of his church in 1835, he went to England and collected the abundant materials afterwards utilized in his Contributions to the Ecclesiastical History of U.S.A. (New York, 1836–1839). These two volumes dealt with Maryland and Virginia, while two later ones (1863 1864) were devoted to Connecticut.
Hawks edited the single volume Appletons' Cyclopaedia of Biography (1856), which added American biographies to the volume edited by Elihu Rich and published in 1854 by Richard Griffin & Company (London).

Early life and career

Hawks was born in New Bern, North Carolina. He graduated from the state university in 1815 and entered the practice of law. He represented New Bern in the North Carolina House of Commons in 1821. Hawks felt drawn to the ministryWright 37. and entered the tutelage of Bishop John Stark Ravenscroft.
Hawks quickly climbed the church ranks, becoming deacon in 1827 and assistant minister of Trinity parish in New Haven, Connecticut, a short while later. His preaching was widely praised, and in short order, he was ordained a priest. His next post was as assistant to Bishop White of St. James' Church in Philadelphia. He next took a position as Professor of Divinity at Washington College (now Trinity College) in Hartford, Connecticut.

Rectorships

In 1831, Hawks took his first church appointment, as rector of St. Stephen's Church on the corner of Broome and Chrystie streets in New York City. There his sermons attracted a large congregation. On 4 October, a mere nine months since he had moved to St. Stephens', the congregation of nearby St. Thomas Church called upon him to take over as their rector. The position offered $1,500 in annual salary with an additional $500 for other expenses. Hawks turned the offer down. St. Thomas did not give up, and Hawks eventually accepted their offer on 17 December, becoming the third rector for St. Thomas Church.
Hawks's new church experienced a boom in membership after his arrival. Much of the congregation of St. Stephen's followed him to the new post, and many more congregants began attending as Hawks's fame for oratory spread. Eventually, the church had to be expanded with a gallery to contain the overflow. Hawks's Bible classes had an average attendance of 100 students. Philip Hone, ex-mayor of New York City, spoke for many when he wrote, "I went yesterday morning to St. Thomas' where I heard from Dr. Hawks a glorious sermon."Hone, Philip (1936). Diary entry for 26 August 1836. The Diary of Philip Hone: 1828-1851. Allan Nevins, ed. New York: Dodd, Mead and Co., p. 418. Quoted in Wright 37-8. Praise came from other clergymen, as well. Bishop Thomas March Clark of Rhode Island wrote:
 To hear him preach was like listening to the harmonies of a grand organ with its various stops and solemn sub-bass and tremulous pathetic reeds. The rector of one of the Washington churches, where Daniel Webster was an attendant, told me that after Dr. Hawks had preached for him on a Sunday morning, Mr. Webster said that it was the greatest sermon he had ever heard. Reminiscences, 2nd ed. New York: Thomas Whittaker, p. 36. Quoted in Wright 38. 
In 1833, Hawks's  salary rose to $3000 with an additional $500 allowed for other expenditures;Wright 40. this made him the highest paid clergyman in the United States. He also received an assistant rector for St. Thomas. He was elected bishop of the Southwestern region in 1835, but he declined the post, citing a lack of support for his family in what was then the American frontier.

Additional church work

Hawks continued to participate in other church affairs, as well. In 1832, he was appointed assistant secretary to the House of Deputies of the General Convention of the Episcopal Church. In 1833, he took a part-time post as Professor of Ecclesiastical History and Pulpit Eloquence at the General Theological Seminary. The following year, Hawks was named secretary of the New York diocesan convention in New York City.
Church history was another of Hawks's interests, and his writings are an important source on the early American church. In 1835, the General Convention named Hawks "Conservator of all books, pamphlets and manuscripts of this church."Quoted in Wright 39. 
Hawks's interest in history led him to London in 1835. There he copied important historical documents, which he used as material for a two-volume work on the church history of Maryland and Virginia. He also wrote some nine titles under the pen name "Uncle Philip" for the publishers Harper & Brothers, which appeared in their Harper's Boy's and Girl's Library imprint series. 
While in London Hawks met the American traveller John Lloyd Stephens, later to be renowned for his exploratory work and investigations of a number of mostly-unknown ancient ruins of the pre-Columbian Maya civilization in Central America. Stephens had just completed a nine-month tour of Egypt and the Levant, and several letters describing his travels had been published in an American periodical. His acquaintance with Hawks encouraged Stephens to write a book on his Middle Eastern adventures, which was a popular success. It sold by one account 21,000 copies in two years. 
Hawks wrote Stephens' obituary, sixteen years later upon  his death at age 47 from a liver illness, appearing in the first issue of Putnam's Monthly Magazine."The Late John L. Stephens" (1853). Putnam's Monthly Magazine of American Literature, Science and Art. 1(1):pp.64–68. In keeping with a general fashion of the time Hawks's name does not appear in the publication itself; his identification as author is in Harris 2. He noted how "in repeated conversations with the present writer, the attention of Mr. Stephens was first called to the ruins of Guatemala and Yucatan";"The Late John L. Stephens", p.67. the two books Stephens had later written on his explorations of that region are regarded as foundational works in the then-young science of American archaeology.
Hawks wrote and published material on general church affairs.
 published until 1842.OCLC entries for "New York Review" 
Hawks helped start The Church Record, a journal of Christian education, in 1843, and in 1853 The Church Journal.
In 1851, Hawks had accepted the post of Historiographer of the Protestant Episcopal Church, and held it until 1866.

Scandal and later life

In late 1838, Hawks became one of many targets of a trend among the American penny press to expose the alleged vices of holy men. The accuser was George Washington Dixon, a man best known for his blackface music act, who claimed that Hawks was engaging in sexual affairs. Hawks charged Dixon with libel on 31 December 1838. After a heated trial, Dixon pleaded guilty on 10 and 11 May 1839. The reasons for this remain a mystery, though Dale Cockrell surmises that Hawks likely did not want to face further defamation of character in trial and may have paid Dixon off; Dixon himself claimed as much in 1841.18 December 1841 The New York Flash. Quoted in Cockrell 127. Even mainstream newspaper had begun to turn on him at this point; the New York Weekly Herald wrote that "he may explain and explain till doomsday—but these facts and their inferences will adhere."27 April 1839 New York Weekly Herald. Quoted in Cockrell 127.
Another scandal erupted closer to home. Hawks had opened a boys' school in 1839 in Flushing, Queens. The school had financial difficulties and was failing within three years, and Hawks was accused of mismanaging the funds. This proved one scandal too many. Hawks resigned from St. Thomas Church on 21 October 1843.
Over the next decade, Hawks bounced from church to church. He first moved to a church in Holly Springs, Mississippi, on the American frontier and far from the disgrace of New York. There he went to work starting another school. At the Mississippi Diocesan Convention of 1844, Hawks took center stage due primarily to his endeavors to create a Diocesan school.  When the Convention called for the election of the Diocese's first bishop, Hawks was tapped."Journal of the Proceedings of the Nineteenth Annual Convention of the Protestant Episcopal Church of the Diocese of Mississippi." 1844  His episcopal confirmation at the General Convention was protested, with James Quarterman, a painter from Flushing, alleging that Hawks had over $100,000 in outstanding debt due to financial mismanagement at St. Thomas.  "A Narrative of Facts, upon which is based a Protest Against the Consecration of the Rev. Dr. Hawks."  Philadelphia: Isaac Moss, 1844.  Though Hawks successfully defended himself and the General Convention expressed their support for him, they discharged his consent back to the Diocese of Mississippi. He instead moved to Christ Church in New Orleans, Louisiana. In 1847, he was named the first president of the University of Louisiana, known today as Tulane University. Then in 1849, he returned to New York City to pastor Calvary Church. He stayed there until 1862. Hawks declined most non-clerical appointments during his time at Calvary, including an election to the Rhode Island episcopate in 1852 and a professorship at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill in 1859. He continued to write, and in 1855 and 1856 he co-authored the Narrative of the Expedition of an American Squadron to the China Seas and Japan with Commodore Matthew Perry.
During the American Civil War, Hawks moved to Christ Church in Baltimore, Maryland. By 1861 he was editing again, this time with William Stevens Perry on the Journal of the General Conventions. He began as editor of Documentary History of the Protestant Episcopal Church in 1863 and held the post until 1864. He later gave the endowment for St. Mark's Church-in-the-Bowery Chair of Ecclesiastical History at the General Seminary. He returned once more to New York City in 1865, where he helped to start the Chapel of the Holy Saviour on 25th Street. Another project was a Spanish-speaking church called Iglesia de Santiago, where Hawks preached on occasion. Hawks died on 26 September 1866. After a funeral at Calvary Church, he was buried at Christ Church in Greenwich, Connecticut.

Selected works

Notes






