[[John Cornforth]]

CATEGORIES: 1917 births, 2013 deaths, Academics of the University of Sussex, Academics of the University of Warwick, Alumni of St Catherine's College, Oxford, Australian chemists, Australian knights, Australian Nobel laureates, Australian of the Year Award winners, Australian people of English descent, Australian people of German descent, Commanders of the Order of the British Empire, Companions of the Order of Australia, Deaf people, Fellows of the Australian Academy of Science, Fellows of the Royal Society, Knights Bachelor, Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences, Nobel laureates in Chemistry, People educated at Sydney Boys High School, People from Sydney, People from Armidale, New South Wales, People from Oxford, People from Sussex, People from Warwick, Recipients of the Centenary Medal, Recipients of the Copley Medal, Royal Medal winners, University of Sydney alumni

{{Infobox scientist
| name             = Sir John Cornforth
| image            =
| image_size       = 180px
| caption          = 
|birth_name=John Warcup Cornforth, Jr.
| birth_date       = 7 September 1917
| birth_place      = Sydney, Australia
| death_date = 
| death_place =Sussex, England, United Kingdom
| residence = Brighton, United Kingdom
| citizenship      = Australian, British
| nationality = Australian
| field            = Organic chemistry
| work_institution = University of Oxford, University of Sussex
| alma_mater       = University of Sydney, St Catherine's College, Oxford
| doctoral_advisor = Robert Robinson
| doctoral_students= 
| known_for        = Stereochemistry of enzyme-catalysed reactions
| prizes           = 

Sir John Warcup "Kappa" Cornforth, Jr.,John Cornforth, NNDB AC, CBE, FRS, FAA (7 September 1917 – 8 December 2013), was an AustralianEncyclopædia Britannica. (2012.) "Sir John Cornforth".
Cornforth investigated enzymes that catalyse changes in organic compounds, the substrates, by taking the place of hydrogen atoms in a substrate's chains and rings. In his syntheses and descriptions of the structure of various terpenes, olefins, and steroids, Cornforth determined specifically which cluster of hydrogen atoms in a substrate were replaced by an enzyme to effect a given change in the substrate, allowing him to detail the biosynthesis of cholesterol.John Cornforth, Royal Institution of Australia

Early life

Born in Sydney, New South Wales, Cornforth was the son and the second of four children of English-born, Oxford-educated schoolmaster and teacher John Warcup Cornforth and Hilda Eipper (1887–1969), a granddaughter of pioneering missionary and Presbyterian minister Christopher Eipper. Before her marriage, Eipper had been a maternity nurse.Sir John Cornforth - Chemistry, The University of Sydney
Cornforth was raised in Sydney as well as Armidale, in the north of New South Wales,John Cornforth - Autobiography, NobelPrize.
At about 10 years old,Jim Eckert writes about the Cornforths, The University of Sydney Cornforth had noted signs of deafness, which led to a diagnosis of otosclerosis, a disease of the inner ear which causes progressive hearing loss. This would leave him completely deaf by the age of 20 but also fatefully influence his career direction towards chemistry.com.au

Education

Cornforth was educated at Sydney Boys' High School, whereat he academically excelled, having passed in English, mathematics, science, French, Greek, and Latin,Sperans. (1932.) "Bright students: intermediate stage", The Sydney Morning Herald, 18 January. and was inspired by his chemistry teacher, Leonard ("Len") Basser,Doherty P. C. (2006.) The Beginner's Guide to Winning the Nobel Prize: A Life in Science, Columbia University Press, p. 89.Cribb J. (2006.) Master of the molecules, Cosmos, 6 September. Cornforth graduated as the dux of the class of 1933 at Sydney Boys' High School, at the age of 16.
In 1934, Cornforth matriculated and studied at the University of Sydney,
While studying at the University of Sydney, Cornforth met his future wife, fellow chemist, and scientific collaborator, Rita Harradence. Harradence was a graduate of St George Girls High School
In 1939, Cornforth and Harradence, independently of each other, each won one of two Science Research Scholarships (the 1851 Research Fellowship) from the Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851,

Career

After his arrival at Oxford and during World War II, Cornforth significantly influenced the work on penicillin, particularly in purifying and concentrating it. Penicillin is usually very unstable in its crude form; as a consequence of this, researchers at the time were building upon Howard Florey's work on the drug. In 1940, Cornforth and other chemists measured the yield of penicillin in arbitrary units to understand the conditions that favoured penicillin production and activity, and he contributed to the authoring of The Chemistry of Penicillin. T., Johnson J. R., Robinson R (eds.). (1949.) The Chemistry of Penicillin, Princeton University Press, NJ.
In 1946, Cornforth and his wife, Rita, left Oxford and joined the Medical Research Council, working at the National Institute for Medical Research (NIMR), where they continued on earlier work in synthesising sterols, including cholesterol. The Cornforths collaboration with Robinson continued and flourished. In 1951, they completed, simultaneously with Woodward, the first total synthesis of the non-aromatic steroids. At the NIMR, Cornforth collaborated with numerous biological scientists, including George Popják, with whom he shared an interest in cholesterol. Together, they received the Davy Medal in 1968 in recognition of their distinguished joint work on the elucidation of the biosynthetic pathway to polyisoprenoids and steroids.
In 1975, Cornforth was awarded a share of the Nobel Prize in Chemistry, alongside Vladimir Prelog. Also in 1975, he had moved to Sussex University as a Royal Society Research Professor.
In 1977, Cornforth was recognised by his alma mater, the University of Sydney, with the award of an honorary Doctor of Science.
Cornforth was a professor at the University of Sussex in Brighton and remained active in research until his death.Sir John Cornforth : About the School : School of Life Sciences : University of SussexSir John Warcup Cornforth - About Us, The University of Sydney

Personal life

In 1941, the year in which they graduated from the University of Oxford, Cornforth married Rita Harriet Harradence (b. 1915),
Both John and Rita Cornforth were good friends with fellow Australian and University of Sydney classmate (though John was in the year after Rita and Birch; Rita and Birch were contemporaries), and University of Oxford colleague of Arthur John Birch, who was known for contributions including the Birch reduction.Australian Academy of Science - Biographical Memoirs: Arthur Birch
On an important author or paper that was integral to his success, Cornforth stated that he was particularly impressed by the works of German chemist Hermann Emil Fischer.
Cornforth died in Sussex on 8 December 2013.

Honours and awards

Cornforth was named the Australian of the Year in 1975,Australian of the Year Awards - John Cornforth, Australian of the Year jointly with Maj. Gen. Alan Stretton.
Cornforth's other awards and recognitions follow:
Cornforth's nomination for the Royal Society reads: 






