[[Nora Roberts]]

CATEGORIES: 1950 births, 20th-century women writers, 21st-century women writers, 20th-century American novelists, 21st-century American novelists, American expatriates in Ireland, American paranormal romance writers, American people of Irish descent, American romantic fiction writers, American women novelists, Pseudonymous writers, Living people, People from Montgomery County, Maryland, People from Washington County, Maryland, RITA Award winners, Writers from Maryland

Nora Roberts (born Eleanor Marie Robertson on October 10, 1950) is an American bestselling author of more than 209 romance novels. She writes as J.D. Robb for the "In Death" series, and has also written under the pseudonyms Jill March and for publications in the UK as Sarah Hardesty.
Nora Roberts was the first author to be inducted into the Romance Writers of America Hall of Fame. As of 2011, her novels had spent a combined 861 weeks on the New York Times Bestseller List, including 176 weeks in the number-one spot.

Life and career

Personal life

=Early years=

Eleanor Marie Robertson was born on October 10, 1950 in Silver Spring, Maryland, the youngest of five children.
The newly married couple settled in Keedysville, Maryland. Roberts' husband worked at his father's sheet-metal business before joining her parents in their lighting company. She gave birth to two sons, Dan and Jason. Roberts became a homemaker and would later refer to this time period as her "Earth Mother" years. Roberts spent much of her time doing crafts, including ceramics and sewing her children's clothes.

=Present=

Roberts met her second husband, Bruce Wilder, a carpenter, when she hired him to build her bookshelves. They were married in July 1985. Her husband owns and operates a bookstore in Boonsboro, Maryland called Turn the Page Books.
Roberts once stated: "You're going to be unemployed if you really think you just have to sit around and wait for the muse to land on your shoulder." She concentrates on one novel at a time, writing eight hours a day, every day, even while on vacation. Rather than begin with an outline or plot summary, Roberts instead envisions a key incident, character, or setting.
She often writes trilogies, finishing the three books in a row so that she can remain with the same characters. When possible, she does the same with the "In Death" books, writing three in a row before returning to contemporary romances. Her trilogies are all released in paperback, as Roberts believes the wait for hardcover editions is too long for the reader.
Roberts does much of her research over the Internet, as she has an aversion to flying.

Writing career

=Beginning=

She began to write during a blizzard in February 1979 while housebound with her two small boys. Roberts states that with three feet of snow, a dwindling supply of chocolate, and no morning kindergarten she had little else to do. She submitted her manuscripts to Harlequin, the leading publisher of romance novels, but was repeatedly rejected. Roberts says,  "I got the standard rejection for the first couple of tries, then my favorite rejection of all time. I received my manuscript back with a nice little note which said that my work showed promise, and the story had been very entertaining and well done. But that they already had their American writer. That would have been Janet Dailey."Regis, pages 183–184
 

Pseudonyms

=Nora Roberts=

In 1980, a new publisher, Silhouette books, formed to take advantage of the pool of manuscripts from the many American writers that Harlequin had snubbed. She used the pseudonym Nora Roberts, a shortened form of her birth name Eleanor Marie Robertson, because she assumed that all romance authors had pen names.
Between 1982 and 1984, Roberts wrote 23 novels for Silhouette. They were published under various Silhouette imprints: Silhouette Sensation, Silhouette Special Edition and Silhouette Desire, as well as Silhouette Intrigue, and MIRA's reissue program.  In 1985, Playing the Odds, the first novel in the MacGregor family series, was published.  The book was an immediate bestseller.
In 1987, she began writing single title books for Bantam. Five years later she moved to Putnam to write single title hard covers as well as original paperbacks. She reached the hardcover bestseller lists with her fourth hardcover release, 1996's Montana Sky. Roberts has continued to release single-title novels in paperback. She still occasionally writes shorter category romances. Her attachment to the shorter category books stems from her years as a young mother of two boys without much time to read, as she "remembers exactly what it felt like to want to read and not have time to read 200,000 words."
Roberts and her career were featured in Pamela Regis' A Natural History of the Romance Novel. Regis calls Roberts "a master of the romance novel form, because she "has a keen ear for dialogue, constructs deft scenes, maintains a page-turning pace, and provides compelling characterization."  Publishers Weekly once talked about her "wry humor and the use of different narrators, two devices that were once rarities" in the romance novel genre.

=J.D. Robb=

Roberts had long wanted to write romantic suspense novels in the vein of Mary Stewart, but, at the urging of her agent, she concentrated on classic contemporary romance novels while she built a following of readers. After moving to Putnam in 1992, the publishing company quickly realized that they were unable to keep up with Roberts's prolific output. They suggested that she adopt a second pseudonym so that they would be able to publish more of her work each year.
Her agent, Amy Berkover, convinced the publishers to allow Roberts to write romantic suspense novels under the new name. Her first romantic suspense novel was published in 1995 under the pseudonym J.D. Robb. The initials "J.D." were taken from her sons, Jason and Dan, while "Robb" is a shortened form of Roberts. She first decided to use the pseudonym D.J. MacGregor, but right before publication, she discovered that this pseudonym was used by another author.
As J.D. Robb, Roberts has published a series of futuristic science fiction police procedurals. These books, all part of the "In Death" series, feature NYPSD Detective Eve Dallas and her husband Roarke and are set in a mid-21st century New York City. Despite the emphasis on solving a crime in each of the books, the overall theme of the series is the development of the relationship between Eve and Roarke. When the "In Death" series began, neither Roberts nor her publisher acknowledged that she was in fact the author. They hoped to allow the series to stand on its own merits and build its own following.
After publishing 18 novels in the "In Death" series, Putnam published the nineteenth, Divided in Death first in hardcover. The book became Roberts' first bestselling novel of 2004.
As of March 2013, Roberts has published 36 books in the "In Death" series, with more scheduled.

=Other pseudonyms=

She wrote a story for a magazine titled "Melodies of Love" under the pseudonym Jill March.
Roberts has also been known as Sarah Hardesty. When the "Born In" series was released in Britain it carried that name instead of Nora Roberts. She has since changed publishers.

=Success=

Roberts is remarkably prolific—in 1996 she passed the hundred-novel mark with Montana Sky and in 2012 she doubled that with The Witness. In both 1999 and 2000, four of the five novels that USA Today listed as the best-selling romance novels of the year were written by Roberts. Her first appearance on the New York Times Bestseller List came in 1991,
Since 1999, every one of Roberts's novels has been a New York Times bestseller, and 124 of her novels have ranked on the Times bestseller list, including twenty-nine that debuted in the number-one spot. As of January 24, 2013, Roberts's novels had spent a combined 948 weeks on the New York Times Bestseller List, including 148 weeks in the number-one spot. As of January 9, 2009, 400 million copies of her books are in print, including 12 million copies sold in 2005 alone. Her novels have been published in 35 countries.
A founding member of the Romance Writers of America (RWA), Roberts was the first inductee in the organization's Hall of Fame. In 1997 she was awarded the RWA Lifetime Achievement Award, which in 2008 was renamed the RWA Nora Roberts Lifetime Achievement Award.
Two of Roberts' novels, Sanctuary and Magic Moments, had previously been made into TV movies. In 2007, Lifetime Television adapted four Nora Roberts novels into TV movies: Angels Fall starring Heather Locklear, Montana Sky starring Ashley Williams, Blue Smoke starring Alicia Witt, and Carolina Moon starring Claire Forlani. This was the first time that Lifetime had adapted multiple works by the same author. Four more films were released on four consecutive Saturdays in March and April 2009. The 2009 collection included Northern Lights starring LeAnn Rimes and Eddie Cibrian, Midnight Bayou starring Jerry O'Connell, High Noon starring Emilie de Ravin, and Tribute starring Brittany Murphy.
Time named Roberts one of their 100 Most Influential People in 2007, saying she "has inspected, dissected, deconstructed, explored, explained and extolled the passions of the human heart." Roberts was one of only two authors on the list, the other being David Mitchell.

=Victim of plagiarism=

In 1997, another best-selling romance writer, Janet Dailey, admitted to repeatedly plagiarizing Roberts' work. The practice came to light after a reader read Roberts' Sweet Revenge and Dailey's Notorious back-to-back; she noticed several similarities and posted the comparable passages on the Internet. Calling the plagiarism "mind-boggling," Roberts sued Dailey. Dailey acknowledged the plagiarism and attributed it to a psychological disorder. She admitted that both Aspen Gold and Notorious lifted heavily from Roberts' work. Both of those novels were pulled from print after Dailey's admission.
Roberts joined the chorus strongly criticizing fellow romance writer Cassie Edwards, who had lifted many passages from much older sources (many in the public domain), without giving credit, forcing Edwards out of the business.

Charity

Roberts has been included repeatedly on the Giving Back Fund's annual lists of the most philanthropic celebrities,

Works

book list
COMPLETE BOOKLIST – Nora Roberts/JD Robb titles
Note: This list contains titles of the books as they were originally published, not reprints. If you have a question about a title not on this list, please look at the copyright page of the book to see when the titles within were first published. The title, as it appears on this list, will be noted on the copyright page.
A key to the abbreviations is at the end of the list.
TITLE /Publisher Pub date Series(s)/Connected Book(c)
Key
SR: Silhouette Romance
SE: Silhouete Special Edition
IM: Silhouette Intimate Moments
SD: Silhouette Desire
HH: Harlequin Historicals
HI: Harlequin Intrigue
mm: mass-market paperback
hc: hard cover

Screen adaptations

=Lifetime Movie Channel=

Several of Roberts' books, have been adapted into made-for-TV movies and aired on Lifetime.
The 2007 Collection featured:
The 2009 Collection featured:
Peter Guber's Mandalay TV and Stephanie Germain Prods., produced the eight adaptations.

Awards

=As Nora Roberts=

==Golden Medallion awards==

Golden Medallion awards were awarded by the Romance Writers of America.

==RITA Awards==

RITA Awards are awarded by the Romance Writers of America.

==Quill awards==

Quill awards are awarded by the Quills Foundation.

=As J.D. Robb=



Bibliography

Many of Roberts' novels have been, or will be, reissued. To avoid confusion, all of Roberts' new releases include a logo that is a circle with the initials "NR" inside, indicating that the book has never been published before.



 
 
Sources




