[[Dacia Logan]]

CATEGORIES: Dacia vehicles, Cars of Romania, Front-wheel-drive vehicles, Euro NCAP small family cars, Compact cars, Sedans, Station wagons, Pickup trucks, 2000s automobiles, Vehicles introduced in 2004

The Dacia Logan is a small family car produced jointly by the French manufacturer Renault and its Romanian subsidiary Dacia since 2004. It is currently at its second generation and has been manufactured at Dacia's automobile plant in Mioveni, Romania, and at Renault's plants in Morocco, Brazil, Turkey, Russia, Colombia, Iran, India and South Africa.
It has also been marketed as the Renault Logan, Nissan Aprio, Mahindra Verito, Renault Tondar 90, Lada Largus (the MCV), Nissan NP200 (the pick-up) or Renault Symbol (the second generation), depending on the existing presence or positioning of the Renault brand.

Logan I (2004–2008)

Designed at Renault's Technocentre near Paris, the Logan was the result of four years of development of the project X90, announced by Renault in 1999, after the buyout of Dacia in 1998.
During a visit to Russia by French President Jacques Chirac, Louis Schweitzer noted that at Lada and Renault dealerships the €6,000 Ladas were selling very well while the €12,000 Renaults stayed in the showroom. "Seeing those antiquated cars, I found it unacceptable that technical progress should stop you making a good car for €6,000." (He later revised this target to €5,000). "I also drew up a list of specifications in three words – modern, reliable and affordable – and added that everything else was negotiable." The cheapest version of the car is €5,900, and the price can reach €11,200, depending on equipment and customs duty. (The base model for Western Europe, where it is badged as a Dacia but generally sold in Renault dealerships, is somewhat more expensive).
The Logan was designed from the outset as an affordable car, and has many simplified features to keep costs down. It replaces many older cars in production, including the Romanian Dacia 1310 series of Renault 12-based cars.
It was officially launched in June 2004,
The Logan was launched in India in April 2007, as a collaboration with Mahindra, who helped Renault cut costs by 15%.

Facelift

On 1 July 2008, almost four years after the release of the first Logan, a facelifted version called the Dacia New Logan was announced.

Features

The Logan is based on the B0 platform used for the Renault Clio II and for other Renault and Nissan models. It has 50% fewer parts than a high-end Renault vehicle and has a limited number of electronic devices. This makes the car cheaper to produce and easier and cheaper to repair.
Some parts are also much simpler than those of its competitors. For example, rear-view mirrors are symmetrical and can be used on either side of the car, the windshield is flatter than usual, and the dashboard is a single injection-molded piece.
The developers have taken into account several differences between road and climate conditions in developed and developing countries. The Logan suspension is soft and strong, and the chassis sits visibly higher than most other compact cars to help it negotiate dirt roads and potholes on ill-maintained asphalt roads. The engine is specially prepared to handle lower quality fuel, whereas the air conditioning is powerful enough to lower the temperature several degrees (temperatures above 40 °C are common in the Middle East and the Mediterranean Sea).

Trim levels

In Romania, it was initially available with four trim levels: Ambiance, Preference, Laureate and Ambition. The basic level Ambiance featured driver airbag, body-colored bumpers, wheel trims and central locking. The second level Preference added passenger airbag, power steering, electric front windows, radio, two rear seat head restraints and remote locking. The third level Laureate added front fog lights, air conditioning, trip computer, electric mirrors, three rear seat head restraints and a multi-adjustable driver seat.
In September 2006, several improvements were introduced to the range, such as a new button for the trunk-lid, a new knob for the gear lever, crystal rear lamps, as well as new designs for the wheel trims and the alloy wheels and three new paint colors.
In July 2007, a more powerful version of the 1.5-litre diesel engine was added, developing 
In June 2009, the new 1.2-litre 16-valve petrol engine was added for both the Logan and the Sandero. The engine was capable of developing a maximum power of 

Safety

In June 2005, the car achieved a three-star rating at the EuroNCAP crash tests. This result confirms initial expectations stated previously by Renault.
Depending on the equipment level, standard on some variants and optional on others, the facelifted Logan comes with driver, passenger and side airbags. In terms of active safety, all versions feature the latest generation Bosch 8.1 ABS, which incorporates EBD (electronic brakeforce distribution) and EBA (emergency brake assist).

Engines

Marketing and production

The Logan, vital to increasing sales of the Renault group to the 4 million mark by 2010, is manufactured in nine production and operational assembly centres: Romania, the pilot plant of the Logan Programme, Russia (Avtoframos), Morocco (Somaca), Colombia (Sofasa), Iran (two assembly plants), India (Mahindra), Brazil (Renault), Located in Romania, near the Mioveni plant, the International Logistics Network, the official name of the CKD centre, is the biggest logistic centre of its kind not only in the Renault Group but in the entire world automotive industry.
In markets where Renault has a presence, such as European, African and Asian countries (i.e. Romania, France, Italy, Belgium, Netherlands, Germany,  Greece, Hungary, Poland, Serbia, Czech Republic, Croatia, Slovenia, Morocco, Turkey and many others) it is sold as the Dacia Logan.
In Brazil, it was manufactured by Renault at the São José dos Pinhais factory since 2007, with the facelifted model being introduced in 2010. starting from 2009.
In India, the Logan was marketed as the Mahindra Renault Logan.
In 2007, the Logan branded as Renault Tondar 90 began to be marketed in Iran by Renault-Pars,
In the United States, an attempt at marketing electric versions of the wagon, the van and the pick-up as the EMC E36 was launched by the EnVision Motor Company, based in Des Moines, Iowa.
Logan production began with a 4-door sedan, followed by a wagon in September 2006. Four other models, a pick-up truck, a panel van, a related hatchback (the Sandero) and a facelifted sedan followed in 2007 and 2008. Dacia sales for 2006 were over €1.5 billion, 19.6% more than in 2005. Annual production has reached almost 250,000 cars, half for exports. As of March 2009, more than 1.3 million vehicles on the Logan platform have been sold worldwide.
One of the reasons for the increase in sales is the dependability of Dacia cars. In a recent survey conducted by a French magazine, Dacia cars were voted one of the safest cars in France. Another reason is their low maintenance and repair costs. According to the survey, Dacia cars were the cheapest to maintain and repair.

Models

=Logan MCV=

The Logan MCV (Multi Convivial Vehicle), launched at the 2006 Paris Motor Show, is the station wagon version of the Logan.
Sales on the Romanian market began in October 2006 with prices ranging between €8,200 and €12,550,
Since 2012, it is also produced in Russia, by the AvtoVAZ company, under the Lada Largus brand name,

=Logan VAN=

The panel van variant of the Logan was launched on 23 January 2007, in Bucharest.

=Logan Pick-Up=

The coupé utility version of the Logan, also based on the MCV, was introduced on 10 September 2007 (4 October 2007 at the Bucharest International Motor Show), and replaced the Dacia Pick-Up. Sales began in Romania in 2008, with the price ranging between €7,300 and €9,450.
Starting October 2008, the Logan Pick-Up is sold in South Africa as Nissan NP200. Visually similar to the original model at launch, It is being built at the Nissan plant near Pretoria, alongside the Renault Sandero. As of 2014, Nissan continues to manufacture the pickup.
It was removed from production by Dacia in July 2012, 

Logan II (2012–present)

The second generation Logan was revealed by Dacia at the 2012 Paris Motor Show. Official photos with the new Logan were released on 17 September 2012.
Sales in Romania began in November 2012, with a starting price of €6,690. It is manufactured at the Renault Brazil factory in São José dos Pinhais (near Curitiba).
The third generation Renault Symbol is a rebadged version of the second generation Logan. It went on sale on the Turkish market at the beginning of 2013, also being released in Algeria and Tunisia.

Features

Among the new features introduced with the new model is a new three-cylinder turbocharged 0.9-liter engine, capable of developing . The other two engine options are a 1.2-liter petrol engine, available also as an LPG variant, and a 1.5-liter diesel engine, available with two power outputs. Their performance figures are predominantly similar to the ones of the second generation Sandero (see here).
Another addition is the Media Nav system, already introduced earlier in the same year on the Lodgy, consisting of a 7-inch touchscreen display with multimedia functions and a navigation software included. Other new features are speed limiter, cruise control, rear parking sensors, and front and side airbags, as well as ABS and ESP, as standard. The interior has been significantly revised, with new chromed elements added, and the hood is now supported with a strut. A new Eco button, placed on the dashboard, limits the engine revs to 4,000 rpm.

Variants

The new Logan is available in three different trim levels: Access, Ambiance and Laureate. The Access level comes with black bumpers and power steering, and is available only with the 1.2-liter engine. Ambiance has body-colored bumpers, wheel covers, Eco mode function, power lock doors, front power windows or CD player, and as options there are metallic paint, fog lights and air conditioning. Laureate adds body-colored door handles, fog lights as standard and trip computer, and additionally can be ordered with metallic paint, Media Nav system, leather upholstery, parking sensors, cruise control or alloy wheels. This is the only equipment level available for the 

=Logan MCV=

The station wagon version of the car made its debut at the 2013 Geneva Motor Show. The car will keep the MCV name, although it now stands for Maximum Capacity Vehicle, rather than the previous Multi Convivial Vehicle.
It has five seats and a luggage capacity between 

Concept cars and projects

Logan Steppe

In 2006, a station wagon concept car, the Dacia Logan Steppe was presented at the Salon International de l'Auto in Geneva. The car was built by noted concept car builders DC Design in India as a forerunner of the Logan MCV.

Logan S2000

The S2000 was a short lived project for a racing version of the Logan.

Dacia Cup

Since 2007, there is a dedicated class in the Romanian Rally Championship, called Cupa Dacia,

Notes



Further reading




