[[Gustav Nossal]]

CATEGORIES: 1931 births, Australian academics, Australian biologists, Australian immunologists, Australian knights, Australian Living Treasures, Australian of the Year Award winners, Australian people of Austrian-Jewish descent, Australian scientists, Austrian refugees, Commanders of the Order of the British Empire, Companions of the Order of Australia, Fellows of the Australian Academy of Science, Fellows of the Royal Society, Knights Bachelor, Living people, Members of the French Academy of Sciences, Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences, People from Bad Ischl, People who emigrated to escape Nazism, Recipients of the Centenary Medal, Sydney Medical School alumni, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research alumni, Fellows of the Australian Academy of Technological Sciences and Engineering, Australian Roman Catholics, People educated at St Aloysius' College (Sydney), Austrian emigrants to Australia

Sir Gustav Victor Joseph Nossal, AC, CBE, FAA, FRCP, FRACP, FRCPath, FRACGP, FRSE, FTSE, FRS (born 4 June 1931) is a distinguished Australian research biologist. He is famous for his contributions to the fields of antibody formation and immunological tolerance.

Early life and education

Nossal's family was from Vienna, Austria. He was born four weeks prematurely in Bad Ischl while his mother was on holiday. His family left their home town of Vienna for Australia in 1939 following Nazi Germany's annexation of Austria. As his father's grandparents were Jewish, he was also considered Jewish and at risk of being sent to concentration camps. In an interview with Adam Spencer, Nossal noted that his father "wasn't actually Jewish. He was of Jewish extraction, but baptised as a child and he therefore thought that he would be somewhat protected from the Holocaust-type situations. Of course, he hadn't properly read Mein Kampf. It was all spelt out there: if your four grandparents were Jewish, then you were Jewish."
When he first attended his school in Australia, Nossal spoke no English[ref]
</ref>
but he graduated from St Aloysius' College in 1947[ref]
</ref>
as the dux of the College. In 1948, he entered the Sydney Medical School, graduating later with first-class honours. At the age of 26, he left his job in Sydney and moved to Melbourne to work with Macfarlane Burnet in medical science at the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research and gained his Ph.D. degree in 1960.

Religious beliefs

On describing his views on religion Nossal said:

Career

Following the retirement of Macfarlane Burnet in 1965, at the age of 35 Nossal became director of Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, a position that he kept until 1996.  In parallel, he was Professor of Medical Biology at the University of Melbourne. Nossal's research is in fundamental immunology, in the field of "antibody formation and immunological tolerance". He has written five books and 530 scientific articles in this and related fields.
Nossal has been President (1986-1989) of the 30,000-member world body of immunology, the International Union of Immunological Societies; President of the Australian Academy of Science (1994-1998); a member of the Prime Minister's Science, Engineering and Innovation Council (PMSEIC) (1989 to 1998); and Chairman of the Victorian Health Promotion Foundation (1987-1996). He has been Chairman of the committee overseeing the World Health Organization's Vaccines and Biologicals Program (1993-2002) and Chairman of the Strategic Advisory Council of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation Children's Vaccine Program (1998-2003). He was Deputy Chairman of the Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation from 1998 to 2000. He is Chairman of the Advisory Committee of the Global Foundation, The purpose of the foundation is to "encourage Australia's sustainable national development in a global context." Sir Gustav is a member of the Patrons Council of the Epilepsy Foundation of Victoria and of the Advisory Board of the Health Impact Fund.
Awards and recognition== 








