[[John Abraham (actor)]]

CATEGORIES: 21st-century Indian male actors, Male actors in Hindi cinema, Indian male film actors, Indian film producers, Indian male models, Living people, Malayali people, Male actors from Kerala, University of Calicut alumni



'John Abraham is an  Indian film actor, producer and former model. After modelling for numerous Advertisements and companies, John made his film debut with Jism (2003), which earned him a Filmfare Best Debut Award nomination.
This was followed by his first commercial success, Dhoom (2004). He received two Filmfare Award nominations, for his negative roles in Dhoom, and in Zinda (2006). He later appeared in the major critical success Water (2005). He was nominated for a Filmfare Award for Best Supporting Actor for the film Baabul (2006).
In 2012, he produced his first film Vicky Donor, which was a critical and commercial success, and earned him a National Film Award for Best Popular Film Providing Wholesome Entertainment. He then established his own production house, John Abraham Entertainment. His second movie as a Producer was Madras Cafe, which garnered fantastic critical acclaim. His athletic, muscular and well built physique has acquired him the status of being one of the most handsome and influential sex symbols in Bollywood.in.html

Early life and education

John Abraham was born in Mumbai, Maharashtra to a Malayali Nasrani father and a Parsi mother. His father, Abraham John, is an architect from aluva, Kerala; his mother is Firoza Irani. Abraham's Parsi name is "Farhan" while his father being a Marthomite Syrian Christian named him "John." and younger brother.
Abraham studied at Bombay Scottish School in Mumbai. He got his bachelor's degree in economics from Jai Hind College. John also received an MMS from Mumbai educational trust, Mumbai (MET) 

Career

Modeling

John Abraham started his modelling career appearing in the music video of the song "Surma" by Punjabi singer Jazzy B.

Actor

Abraham made his acting debut with Jism (2003), a thriller film which according to Box Office India, was "Very Very Below Average" grossing 
His next films included a paranormal Romance Saaya (2003), Pooja Bhatt's directorial debut Paap (2004) and Ahmed Khan's Lakeer – Forbidden Lines (2004).
He played the role of Kabir – the main antagonist in Dhoom in 2004, an action film produced by Yash Raj Films. The film was one of the highest grossing films of that year.
In 2005 he starred in the supernatural thriller Kaal and the comedy Garam Masala both of which did well at the box office. Later that year, he had a role in Water, which portrayed the tragic fate of Hindu widows in British India of the 1930s. The film was written and directed by independent Canadian film-maker Deepa Mehta. It was popular internationally, and was nominated for the 2006 Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film at the 79th Academy Awards. Abraham attended the ceremony along with the film's crew and makers but the film lost to Germany's The Lives of Others.oscars.html
In the summer of 2006, Abraham performed at the "Rockstars Concert" along with fellow Bollywood actors Salman Khan, Zayed Khan, Kareena Kapoor, Esha Deol, Shahid Kapoor and Mallika Sherawat. Among these Taxi No. 9211 and Kabul Express were substantially successful.
Nikhil Advani's multi-starrer Salaam-e-Ishq: A Tribute to Love was Abraham's first release in 2007. The movie failed to do well at the Indian box office, His last two 2007 releases included the thriller No Smoking and the sports film Dhan Dhana Dhan Goal.
In 2008, Abraham starred alongside Abhishek Bachchan and Priyanka Chopra in Dostana, his only release that year. His first release of 2009 was a production by Yash Raj Films, New York.
He has a fashion line— branded JA Clothes — which primarily features his favorite article of clothing, jeans.
In 2011, was seen in the films Aashayein and Jhootha Hi Sahi. Both of the films turned out to be box office failures. Lately, Abraham has appeared in films Force (2011), Desi Boyz (2011), and Housefull 2 (2012). His first film of 2013 was the multi-starrer Race 2 which was commercially successful, though his second release the coming-of-age romantic comedy I, Me Aur Main, under performed at the box office. His next release was  Shootout at Wadala, in which he was portraying the role of gangster Manya Surve. The film emerged a success at the box office.
He is currently shooting Dostana 2 with Karan Parekh.

Producer

His debut film as a producer was titled Vicky Donor (2012) and featured Ayushmann Khurrana, Annu Kapoor and Yami Gautam. Abraham also appeared in an item-number for the film. It opened to positive response, and turned out to be a critical and commercial success. His second production, Madras Cafe which is also directed by Shoojit Sircar, opened to overwhelming response from the critics, and after taking a positive start at the box-office, the film saw an enormous jump owing to the terrific word of mouth. Abraham has also announced his ideas on Hamara Bajaj, an upcoming reality film he is planning with most of the cast & crew of Vicky Donor.

Personal life

During the filming of Jism in 2002, Abraham began to date his co-star bipasha basu. They were in a relationship until early 2011 when the couple officially got back together.

Social causes

Abraham takes an interest in PETA and Habitat for Humanity.
In January 2009, Abraham led a group of Indian celebrities in the Mumbai Marathon, an annual event to benefit the United Way. He did not run the marathon, but encouraged the participants by waving at them from the start line. 
In April 2013 on behalf of PETA Abraham wrote a letter to Minister for Environment and Forests, Jayanthi Natarajan, asking that she make all circuses in India animal-free. 

TV show

A four-part TV show titled John Abraham: A Simple Life was telecast on NDTV Good Times from 18 November to 21 November 2013. The show gave viewers a sneak peek into John Abraham's life.

Filmography

Actor

Producer

Awards and nominations

Other awards



 John Abraham marries girlfriend Priya Runchal





