[[Saint Ignatius High School (Cleveland)]]

CATEGORIES: Boys' schools in the United States, Education in Cleveland, Ohio, Educational institutions established in 1886, High schools in Cuyahoga County, Ohio, Jesuit high schools in the United States, Landmarks in Ohio, Roman Catholic secondary schools in Ohio, School buildings on the National Register of Historic Places in Ohio, School buildings completed in 1891, German-American culture in Cleveland, National Register of Historic Places in Cuyahoga County, Ohio, Ohio City, Cleveland

Saint Ignatius High School is a private Roman Catholic, Jesuit high school under the Diocese of Cleveland, for young men, located in the Ohio City neighborhood of Cleveland, Ohio. The school is renowned for its high standards of academic excellence, athletic program and performing arts programs. 

History

Founded in 1886 by a German Jesuit on the invitation of Bishop Richard Gilmour, the school was originally a six-year secondary school based on the German Gymnasium that was to be attended after the completion of six years of grammar school. Separate four-year high school and college programs were formed in 1902, with the college changing its name to John Carroll University in 1923 and moving out of the Cleveland location to neighboring University Heights, Ohio in 1935.

Campus

Saint Ignatius High School remains at its original location at 1911 West 30th Street to this day.  The campus includes the original structure, now known as the Main Building, which was completed in 1891 and is now a designated Cleveland Historic Landmark."Facilities." Saint Ignatius High School Webpage. 11 February 2007 Ignatius.
Other buildings are Loyola Hall (originally St. Mary of the Assumption Elementary School), Clavius Science Center, Saint Mary of the Assumption Chapel (named after a church that once was located on the current campus), Father Sullivan, S.J. Gymnasium, Carroll Gymnasium, Murphy Field House, Kyle Field, and the O'Donnell Athletic Complex, which houses Wasmer Field and Dale Gabor Track. In addition, the $11.5 million state-of-the-art Breen Center for the Performing Arts replaced the Xavier Center in August 2009. It houses all student performing arts programs and hosts many events for other local arts groups. A new $3.3 million state-of-the-art cafeteria has replaced the former Student Center, stage, senior lounge, and cooking areas. It was renamed the Rade Dining Hall. Both the St. Mary of the Assumption Chapel and the Murphy Field House projects were funded and overseen by Murlan J. Murphy.

Academics

The school was recognized by the United States Department of Education as a "Blue Ribbon School" for the 1984-1985 and 2008-2009 school year.ED.edu A Blue Ribbon school must demonstrate a strong commitment to educational excellence. Saint Ignatius was one of only two private high schools in the country to receive this award.

Service

The school shares its motto "Men for Others" (attributed to Father Pedro Arrupe, S.J.) with nearly every other Jesuit school,"Philosophy." Saint Ignatius High School Webpage. 11 February 2007 Ignatius.
The school is located in the heart of the Ohio City neighborhood on the Near West Side of Cleveland, to which it provides support through community involvement programs like the Arrupe Neighborhood Partnership Program and the Saint Benedict Joseph Labre Ministry (a program in which faculty and students build relationships with the homeless through weekly visitation).  The high school was the first in the country to institute a for-credit compulsory service called "Sophomore Service"."Sophomore Service Program Homepage." Saint Ignatius High School Webpage. 11 February 2007 Ignatius. Joseph of Arimethea Pallbearers Society, which sends upperclassmen to funerals of families who are unable to provide their own pallbearers.. Student group eases burden at funerals." Plain Dealer Cleveland11 November 2005, late ed.

Fine arts program

In 1990, a fine arts program was added to the school's curriculum. Its most recent addition has been the Breen Center for the Performing Arts. There are many musical opportunities including the Wildcat Marching Band, Pep Band, Stage Band, Ignatius Brass, Jazz Band, Liturgical Musicians, and others."Ignatius Band Program Homepage." Saint Ignatius High School Webpage. 11 February 2007 Ignatius.

Clubs and activities

St. Ignatius also has a vast number of extra-curricular activities to accommodate the students' interest. There are a plentiful amount of clubs and groups that students can get involved in, ranging from the student-led yearbook (the Ignatian) to Billiards Club.ignatius.aspx?pid=566 The dedication of the activities vary; some may meet every day while others may meet less than monthly.
The school's Latin Club functions as a local chapter of both the Ohio Junior Classical League (OJCL)
The Saint Ignatius High School Circus Company is a group of student performers interested in juggling and magic. Each Year, they perform almost 200 times, and work for the mission of the school through serving others, with a special emphasis on senior care facilities. They have received the prestigious national Jefferson Award for excellence in volunteerism.

Notable alumni

Athletic program

OHSAA Division I State Championships

Saint Ignatius High School's sports teams have won Ohio High School Athletic Association (OHSAA) Division I State Championships in 9 of the 11 team sports offered, a state record.  They have not won a title in Bowling (new tournament in 2007), and Swimming (runner-up twice). Although not offered as an official OHSAA sport, the school is also regarded to have one of the better lacrosse programs in the Midwest.
Titles won:
* Co-champs

Other athletic achievements

Saint Ignatius Wildcats vs. Saint Edward Eagles

A strong rivalry exists between Saint Ignatius and St. Edward High School.  The two schools are quite similar in that both are Catholic and are all-boys schools on the west side of the Cleveland area.  The schools are separated by only six miles.  One of the main reasons for the rivalry is that the schools draw from the same student pool of boys from west side Catholic grade schools.  Because of this, when the students face off in direct competition, they commonly are up against former grade school friends.
The schools both produce high-quality athletic teams, combining for over 70 OHSAA state titles in the last 30 years. While the schools compete in virtually all sports annually, the main event is the football match-up that draws upwards of 13,000 fans at both Byers Field and Lakewood Stadium.  In addition, basketball games between the two schools (commonly twice a year) sell out at the hosting school's gymnasium.
Several match-ups live in the lore of Cleveland high school sports.  In 1993, the regular-season football match-up was regarded as one of the greatest Cleveland football games, resulting in a 35-34 3OT win for the St. Ignatius Wildcats. While the schools are only six miles apart, in 1998 basketball regional lines were drawn along the Cleveland/Lakewood border and the two teams met in the Division I state championship, with the St. Edward Eagles prevailing 70-61.[ref]
[/ref] A similar scenario occurred in baseball in 2008, with the Eagles beating the 'Cats' 6-2 in the 2008 Baseball Division I State Championship game.
St. Ignatius is also known for its formidable soccer program.  The soccer team has garnished 2 national titles; 5 state titles and countless regional and district titles. But St. Ignatius trails St. Edward 48-28 in overall State Titles in Division I sports, and trails 11-5 in National Championships (St. Edward won 28 of their 46 championships in wrestling).

Other extracurricular achievements






