[[Beth Henley]]

CATEGORIES: 1952 births, Living people, American dramatists and playwrights, People from Jackson, Mississippi, People from Hattiesburg, Mississippi, Pulitzer Prize for Drama winners, Southern Methodist University alumni, University of Illinois alumni, American women dramatists and playwrights

Elizabeth Becker "Beth" Henley (born May 8, 1952) is an American dramatist and actress.  She writes primarily about women's issues and family in the Southern United States.  She is also a screenwriter who has written many film adaptations of her plays.  She is known for her intertwining comic and serious moments in her pieces.
Her most famous play, Crimes of the Heart (1978), was her first produced professionally.  It opened at the Actors Theatre of Louisville and then to the Manhattan Theatre Club in New York City. The play won the Pulitzer Prize for Drama (1981), as well as the award for Best American Play of 1981 from the New York Drama Critics' Circle. The play also earned Henley a nomination for a Tony Award, and her screenplay adaptation for the 1986 film of the same name was nominated for an Oscar as Best Adapted Screenplay.
Henley adapted her 1984 play, The Miss Firecracker Contest, into a 1989 film starring Holly Hunter entitled Miss Firecracker.  Henley's play Ridiculous Fraud was produced at the McCarter Theatre in 2006, and her play Family Week was produced at MCC Theater in 2010, directed by Jonathan Demme.

Early life

Henley was born in 1952 in Jackson, Mississippi.  She was one of four sisters born to Charles Boyce, an attorney, and Elizabeth Josephine Henley, an actress. Henley attended Murrah High School in Mississippi, followed by Southern Methodist University, where she was a member of the acting ensemble. 9  While at college, Henley completed her first play, a one-act piece entitled Am I Blue?Andreach, p. ?
In 1976 Henley moved to Los Angeles and began work on her play Crimes of the Heart.

Career

Crimes of the Heart was Henley's first professionally produced play. It opened at the Actors Theatre of Louisville in 1978, where it was declared co-winner of a new American play contest.  Crimes of the Heart won the Pulitzer Prize for Drama in 1981, as well as the award for Best American Play of 1981 from the New York Drama Critics' Circle. 27  The play also earned Henley a nomination for a Tony Award, and her screenplay for the film version of Crimes of the Heart was nominated for an Oscar as Best Adapted Screenplay.  Henley has stated that growing up with 3 sisters was a major inspiration for her play Crimes of the Heart. 23
Henley's first six plays are set in the Deep South: two in Louisiana and four in Mississippi, where she grew up.  Themes of her dramas are tied to small town values and the importance of love.  Henley particularly focuses on her female characters in terms of identity and expression.  Dominant themes include:
Henley views her characters as examples of the repercussions of modern society and representative of the alienation, pain, and suffering that reflect the human condition. Her plays explore the dichotomy within individuals that seek happiness but are betrayed by modern civilization.  Henley's notion that neurotic behavior is endemic to modern civilization stems from Freud's psychoanalytic theory. Her Southern sense of the grotesque and absurd experienced in daily existence have caused some critics to compare Henley to other Southern Writers such as Eudora Welty and Flannery O'Connor. This attitude has caused Henley to be classified in the Southern Gothic genre.
Henley's writing style has evolved throughout her career.  Her plays of the 1980s are characterized as naturalistic and dramatize the relationship between the interior self and the exterior world.

Criticism

Some critics have faulted Henley for locating her women characters within the home, arguing that this is a place that has both defined and confined women in negative ways, without offering avenues for either re-visioning or escape.

Personal life

For many years Henley dated actor, writer and director Stephen Tobolowsky, whom she met while they were students at Southern Methodist University.  Their relationship ended in 1988. She is currently in a relationship with cherry farmer and playwright Frank Levering. Tobolowsky, Stephen. The Dangerous Animals Club, 2012, pp. 98, 102 and 139, Simon & Schuster  ISBN 978-1-4516-3315-3

Awards

Bibliography

Filmography

Notes



Further reading




