[[S. D. Curlee]]

CATEGORIES: Guitar manufacturing companies

S.D. Curlee is a guitar manufacturer originating in Matteson, Illinois and presently in San Marcos, Texas. Peak years were 1977 to 1981 before ceasing production until 2011. For a while its electric basses were popular, much more so than their guitars. They were exported and especially popular in Belgium and Germany during the original run.

History

This small enterprise was founded by Randy Curlee, Randy Dritz and Sonny Storbeck in 1975 in Matteson. The name S.D Curlee came from the three original partners: Storbeck, Dritz and Curlee.  According to Michael Wright (Guitar Stories), this independent entrepreneur built and sold around 15,000 handcrafted instruments, including 12,000 bass guitars, between 1975 and 1982. 
It was confirmed by Denny Rauen (SD Curlee production manager in the '70s) that these numbers were highly exaggerated by then upper management for publicity purposes.  
In truth Curlee was the businessman, and the builders in the Matteson workshop produced perhaps 25 instruments per month
"....."  (source  As with all histories, some facts are difficult to document. Denny Rauen's brief employment at S.D. Curlee limited his perspective on the true production numbers achieved throughout the duration of S.D. Curlee with some weeks early in the history of the company yielding several hundred guitars, according to Export/AR Manager, Vicki Maker, who joined S.D. Curlee in 1977 and remained with the company until they closed their doors due to the recession of the early 80s.  The true production numbers will probably never be known, but it would be safe to speculate that possibly 5,000 to 6,500 S.D. Curlee U.S.A. instruments were produced with the Japanese and Korean-built versions bumping that figure up significantly.
Curlee wanted to offer a quality built instrument at an affordable price. Advertising campaigns were rather scarce: only a handful of ads exist. A rather classy 8 page color affair from 1979, multiple color ads originally placed in Guitar Player Magazine, and a few black-and-white flyers were distributed.
During these years, the Curlee brand was applied to Curlee-arranged import versions and was also licensed to Hondo.  S.D. Curlee was one of the first instrument manufacturers to use this approach to address the issue of unlicenced copies of premium brands. Many other instrument companies subsequently followed its lead, such as the Fender's Squier brand of Asian-manufactured products, Gibson's use of its Epiphone brand and, more recently, the OLP brand of licensed MusicMan products.
During the early 1980s, the climate for these 'all natural' instruments changed drastically. New composite materials such as carbon resin (used on Steinberger, Status, Modulus and other instruments) became the state of the art. Headless designs, flashy colors and an altogether different approach forced Curlee and his contemporary contenders into new grounds. 
He went to work for Yamaha instruments and died in 2005.
The sound of wood, however, did return. By the mid to late 1980s companies like Spector and Warwick succeeded in re-introducing natural finishes.

Construction

The Curlee instruments featured a unique design blend of neck through body and a bolt-on neck, which was anchored in the body with a heavy brass plate.
Most of the 1970s bass models shared the same basic, almost symmetrical shape (inspired by the Gibson Les Paul double cutaway Junior), and were available in fretted and fretless versions. The models were:
Other models and body shapes were prototyped and saw limited production. Some late "Curlee" instruments (late in the original run the brand as applied had been modified) had painted bodies and set (glued in) necks.
S.D. Curlees feature hardware including Gold Grover tuning heads; brass, Badass II or original Badass bridges; a brass nut and high output DiMarzio pickups. All basses used a 32½" medium scale neck. Some of the original basses developed truss rod issues over time. Later models introduced a German Carve body edge and aluminum instead of brass plates.

Cultural effect and availability

Although the brand enjoys a minor cult-like status, only a few famous bass guitarists were seen with Curlee models in the mid- to late-1970s. Former Mahavishnu Orchestra bass guitarist Rick Laird had one, R. "Skeet" Curtis played one (and still has it) while touring with Parliament, Vincent Gallo used one in the New York City noise band Gray and Nick Lowe used a Curlee fretless on a few assignments. Jack Blades used them on the first Night Ranger album and played one on the "Don't tell me you love me" video. Alec Jon Such (Bon Jovi) was known to have three. Recently, guitarist Adam McIlwee of tigers jaw can be seen using a vintage Curlee guitar. Duran Duran bass player John Taylor posted the 1980 bill for his Hondo Curlee bass on the Duran Duran website.
By 2006, Curlee basses occasionally appeared on eBay for about US$400 and are generally considered a poor man's alternative to Alembic Inc. By 2008, interest in the USA instruments had increased and the value raised accordingly; between $500 and $800 in excellent condition.
On July 4, 2011 Scott Beckwith, owner of Birdsong Guitars, announced the resurrection of the SD Curlee instruments. The new basses are visually very close to the originals, but they are not reissues as there have been design refinements. Most apparent visually is the lack of the heavy 1970s brass neck plate (weight reduction) and the omission of the neck skunk stripe (new SD Curlees have different neck construction).



 
 

