[[Ljubljana Jože Pučnik Airport]]

CATEGORIES: Airports in Slovenia, Transport in Ljubljana, Airports established in 1963, 1963 establishments in Slovenia

Ljubljana Jože Pučnik Airport  east of Kranj on the road between Kranj and Mengeš. It serves as the homebase for Adria Airways, the Slovenian flag carrier. 

History

The airport was officially opened in December 1963. Regular flights from the new airport at Brnik began in January 1964.
On December 8, 2004, the airport received its first annual millionth passenger. Overall, the airport handled 1,321,100 passengers in 2013, representing a 10.2% rise in traffic figures compared to the previous year. It is currently the only airport in Slovenia with scheduled air traffic.
In 2007, the then centre-right government proposed renaming the airport from Aerodrom Ljubljana to Ljubljana Jože Pučnik Airport. Jože Pučnik was a Slovene public intellectual, dissident, politician, and leader of the Democratic Opposition of Slovenia (Demos) between 1989 and 1992.
The runway of Ljubljana Jože Pučnik Airport was closed to air traffic in April 2010 during which time, the entire length of the asphalt surface of the runway was renovated, as well as the asphalt surface on some parts of the taxiways.

Expansion plan

Due to growing air traffic and Slovenia's EU entry, which requires the separation of traffic into Schengen and non-Schengen, Aerodrom Ljubljana Airport Authorities have prepared a redevelopment plan for the passenger terminal with emphasis on expanding passenger capacity in the mid- to long-term time frame. The terminal expansion will be concluded in two phases.
Works on the first phase began in early July 2007 to accommodate Slovenia's entry into the Schengen zone in December 2007. The terminal building (T1) was extended with a new upper level added to it and completely renovated; the floor that was added on top of the departure lounge added an additional , and four jetways have also been installed so that passengers have easier access to the terminal and aircraft. A walkway to the second terminal building (T2) will be added after the T2 terminal is approved. With completion of the work on T1, the airport gained extra floor area, which in the short term will ensure the separation of Schengen and non-Schengen traffic.
The second phase,Ljublana airport's development strategy 2007-2015 which had been planned to begin in 2013, but was postponed indefinitely by minority shareholders of Aerodrom Ljubljana,The construction of T2 postponed indefinitely includes the construction of a completely new airport terminal (T2). It will be built right next to the old one (T1), using the existing infrastructure as a connecting walkway. The new terminal building (T2) will expand over , where 40 check-in counters will be set up (including some automatic ones) and the installation of three baggage carousels is planned for luggage claim. It will also offer 8 jetways for direct entry from the terminal to the aircraft. There will be room in the terminal for airlines, travel agencies, restaurants and shops, and there are also plans for business lounges and additional services for passengers. The capacity of T2 will be 2.5 million passengers annually (850 departing and 850 arriving passengers per hour). T2 will only be used for Schengen traffic, and non-Schengen traffic will flow through the new part of the old terminal (T1). This will create some redundant space in T1, which will be converted for commercial purposes.  The opening of T2 was originally planned for May 2015 but the new date is currently unknown.An open tender for the construction of T2
To the north, a business and logistics center named Aeropolis LjubljanaAeropolis - main page is planned to be built by 2020. It will consist of four parts: a business center, business park, logistic center, and hotel-conference complex. Other major projects include relocation of the road from Kranj to Mengeš to the north and a new train station, which will connect the airport and its logistics center with surrounding cities.si - Expansion plan

Facilities

The airport has a  paved runway which is equipped with ILS Cat IIIb on runway 30. NDB and VOR approach are also available.

Airlines and destinations

Passenger

Cargo

Statistics

Ground transportation

The airport is served by an exit off the A2 motorway and by bus service connecting it with Ljubljana and Kranj.








