[[Bursa Malaysia]]

CATEGORIES: Bursa Malaysia, Companies of Malaysia, Stock exchanges in Asia, Economy of Malaysia

Bursa Malaysia () is an exchange holding company approved under Section 15 of the Capital Markets and Services Act 2007. It operates a fully integrated exchange, offering the complete range of exchange-related services including trading, clearing, settlement and depository services.

History

Bursa Malaysia ( when the Singapore Stockbrokers' Association was set up as a formal organisation dealing in securities in Malaya. 
The first formal securities business organisation in Malaysia was the Singapore Stockbrokers' Association, established in 1930. It was re-registered as the Malayan Stockbrokers' Association in 1937. The Malayan Stock Exchange was established in 1960 and the public trading of shares commenced. The board system had trading rooms in Singapore and Kuala Lumpur, linked by direct telephone lines.
In 1964, the Stock Exchange of Malaysia was established. With the secession of Singapore from Malaysia in 1965, the Stock Exchange of Malaysia became known as the Stock Exchange of Malaysia and Singapore. In 1973, currency interchangeability between Malaysia and Singapore ceased, and the Stock Exchange of Malaysia and Singapore was divided into the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange Berhad and the Stock Exchange of Singapore. The Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange which was incorporated on December 14, 1976 as a company limited by guarantee, took over the operations of the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange Berhad in the same year.
In 1998, as one of the attempts to weather the 1997 Asian financial crisis, it fully suspended the trading of CLOB (Central Limit Order Book) counters, indefinitely freezing approximately US$4.47 billion worth of shares and affecting 172,000 investors, most of them Singaporeans.
On April 14, 2004, Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange was renamed Bursa Malaysia Berhad, following the demutualization exercise, the purpose of which was to enhance competitive position and to respond to global trends in the exchange sector by making themselves more customer-driven and market-oriented.  It consisted of a Main Board, a Second Board and MESDAQ with total market capitalisation of MYR700 billion (US$189 billion).
Bursa Malaysia has since then focused on various initiatives aimed at improving its product and service offerings, increasing the liquidity and velocity of its markets, improving the efficiency of its businesses and achieving economies of scale in its operations.
On 18 March 2005, Bursa Malaysia was listed on the Main Board of Bursa Malaysia Securities Berhad with a 17% or RM0.50 premium over its retail price of RM3.00.
Source: Bursa Malaysia's History Page - Data updated as at 9 March 2010 -->''Bursa Malaysia's History

Structure

The wholly owned subsidiaries of Bursa Malaysia own and operate the various businesses, as set out below:-

Trading Hours

Monday - Friday (except public holidays)

Offerings & Products

Bursa Malaysia also has a range of progressive products and services which covers equities, derivatives, offshore listings and services, bonds and Islamic offerings:
Source: Bursa Malaysia Annual Report 2009 - Data updated as at 31 December 2009''--->Bursa Malaysia's Annual Report 2009

Events

On 18 April 2005, Bursa Malaysia introduced CBRS, a scheme which allows all investors to access research reports of Bursa-listed companies free-of-charge.
In June 2006, a new index series jointly developed by Bursa Malaysia and FTSE Group was introduced which is FTSE Bursa Malaysia Index. On November 7, 2006, the index finally passed the 1,000 mark hurdle and closed at 1,003.28. It was partly boosted by the strong overnight close in the Wall Street.
On March 10, 2008, trading on the exchange was suspended for one hour due to composite index fall by more than 10 percent or 130 points to 1166.32 points. This was largely by combination of factors such as the United States Subprime mortgage crisis and the political uncertainty caused by the 12th General Election. Dealers expected the move was an overreaction to the election results and the market will correct itself.
On July 3, 2008, trading on the exchange was suspended for the day when it suffered multiple hardware glitches. The glitches only affected the equities market, not the bonds and commodity market. Trading resumed the next day.

Latest Events

Summary of Bursa Malaysia's 2009 Initiatives/ Events Highlights:
Improved Accessibility
Enhanced Efficiency
Developed New Products and Services
Internationalised Markets
Source: Bursa Malaysia Annual Report 2009 - Data updated as at 31 December 2009''--->Bursa Malaysia's Annual Report 2009

Largest Stocks by Market Value

Source: Information Services, Bursa Malaysia - in billions of RM, Data updated as at 6 January 2011''

Palm oil futures

Bursa Malaysia is the world's biggest palm oil futures trading hub since 1980. The FCPO, the global price benchmark for the crude palm oil market, is a deliverable contract which is traded electronically on Bursa Malaysia's trading platform.Palm Oil Futures Trading in Malaysia
Crude palm kernel futures and crude palm oil futures are primarily traded on Bursa Malaysia in Malaysian Ringgit (MYR) and US dollar denominated contracts. Their codenames are FPKO, FCPO and FUPO, respectively.
Below is a non-exhaustive list of commodities exchanges around the world where palm oil futures is traded with different contract specifications:
In August 2009, Bursa Malaysia launched Bursa Suq Al-Sila', the world's first Internet commodities trading platform with crude palm oil (CPO) as its underlying asset that is syariah-compliant. Under the Bursa Suq Al-Sila concept, the bank buys a commodity from a supplier such as a CPO producer at a principal amount, and sells it to a customer at a profit. The customer then sells back the commodity to the spot market for cash. This initiative is spearheaded by the Malaysia International Islamic Finance Centre.
Among the plantation signatories are Boustead Estate Agency Bhd, Genting Plantations Bhd, IOI Corp Bhd and Sime Darby Bhd. The financial institutions include Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) banks Al Rajhi Banking & Investment Corp (M) Bhd, Asian Finance Bank Bhd, Kuwait Finance House (M) Bhd and Unicorn International Islamic Bank Malaysia Bhd. Bursa Malaysia chief executive officer Datuk Yusli Mohamed Yusoff said "This venture brings two of the nation's main global players; namely the Islamic banks and palm oil producers together, to further enhance Malaysia's palm oil futures' visibility on the world stage."
Bursa Malaysia and CME Group, in 2009, announced plans for crude palm oil futures to be electronically traded on the CME Globex.Bursa Malaysia, CME in palm oil futures deal Reuters, 11 Aug 2009CME Group to take stake in Bursa Malaysia derivatives unit Chicago Tribune 11 Aug 2009CME to acquire 25% stake in Bursa's derivatives business The Star, 17 Sep 2009 CME Group will buy a 25% stake in Bursa Malaysia Derivatives for RM55.6 million to be satisfied in RM1.9 million cash and 76,427 shares of CME Group. To facilitate the proposed equity participation, Bursa will consolidate all its derivatives businesses into Bursa Malaysia Derivatives and its subsidiaries. Under the corporate exercise, Bursa Malaysia Derivatives will acquire the entire issued and paid-up share capital of Bursa Malaysia Derivatives Clearing Bhd from Bursa for a cash consideration of RM37.1 million. 
CME to take 25% stake in Bursa's derivatives for RM55m  The Edge Malaysia, 17 Sep 2009
Operating round the clock, the CME Globex trading system is at the heart of CME. Proposed in 1987, it was introduced in 1992 as the first global electronic trading platform for futures contracts. This fully electronic trading system allows market participants to trade from booths at the exchange or while sitting in a home or office thousands of miles away. When Globex was first launched, it used Reuters' technology and network. September 1998 saw the launch of the second generation of Globex using a modified version of the NSC trading system, developed by Paris Bourse for the MATIF (now Euronext). To connect to CME Globex, traders connect via Market Data Protocol (MDP) and iLink 2.0 for order routing.
Jakarta Futures Exchange launched trading of physical crude palm oil (CPO) contracts in June 2009. Indonesia's Deputy Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries at the Coordinating Ministry for the Economy, Bayu Krisnamurthi, had emphasised that a physical market must be established before futures trading can begin.Jakarta's CPO contract not a threat The Edge Malaysia, 29 June 2009
In October 2009, Indonesia plans to facilitate trading of crude palm oil and other raw materials on the Indonesia Commodity & Derivatives Exchange (ICDX).
The Jakarta Futures Exchange, which was launched in 2000, started by offering crude palm oil and coffee futures but trading was "dormant" as operators have preferred to trade the palm oil contracts in Malaysia and coffee futures in London and New York, according to Edi Susmadi, a director of JFX. He attributed the failure to competition from Bursa Malaysia, and the low tech trading system. Max Ramajaya at Wilmar International, the world's largest processor of palm oil, said: "When you trade on MDEX Malaysia you have better access to information about the market and more insight.
Back in June 2007, Singapore launched the Joint Asian Derivatives Exchange's (JADE) US dollar-denominated CPO futures contract. The aim was to provide a fair and transparent platform for price discovery in CPO and allow traders to buy JADE CPO futures and CBOT soyabean oil futures concurrently to manage their edible oils price risk.
However, the JADE CPO futures failed to sustain. CME Group, which acquired CBOT and inherited its investment in JADE, sold its 50% stake to SGX in late 2007. JADE merged with the Singapore Commodity Exchange in 2008.JADE palm oil, rubber futures to shift to SGX Reuters, 7 Nov 2007








