[[Hurricane Faith]]

CATEGORIES: 1966 Atlantic hurricane season, Category 3 Atlantic hurricanes, Cape Verde-type hurricanes, Hurricanes in the Leeward Islands, Hurricanes in Antigua and Barbuda, Hurricanes in Saint Barthélemy, Hurricanes in Saint Martin, Hurricanes in Sint Maarten, Hurricanes in Saba, Hurricanes in Anguilla, Hurricanes in Saint Kitts and Nevis, Hurricanes in the British Virgin Islands, Hurricanes in the United States Virgin Islands, Hurricanes in Puerto Rico, Hurricanes in the Turks and Caicos Islands, Hurricanes in Bermuda, Hurricanes in Europe

Hurricane Faith reached the northernmost latitude and had the longest track of any Atlantic tropical cyclone. The sixth named storm and fifth hurricane of the 1966 Atlantic hurricane season, Faith developed from an area of disturbed weather between Cape Verde and the west coast of Africa on August 21. Tracking westward, the depression gradually intensified and became Tropical Storm Faith on the following day. Moving westward across the Atlantic Ocean, it continued to slowly strengthen, reaching hurricane status early on August 23. About 42 hours later, Faith reached an initial peak with winds of 105 mph (165 km/h), before weakening slightly on August 26. Located near the Lesser Antilles, the outer bands of Faith produced gale force winds in the region, especially Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, and Antigua. Minor coastal damage occurred as far south as Trinidad and Tobago.
By August 28, the storm began to re-intensify, after curving north-northwestward near The Bahamas. At 0000 UTC on the following day, Faith peaked as a 125 mph (205 km/h) Category 3 hurricane Saffir–Simpson hurricane scale. Eventually, the storm weakened back to a Category 2 hurricane and re-curved to the northeast. One person drowned in the western Atlantic after his ship sunk. Heavy rainfall and strong winds pelted Bermuda, though no damage occurred. The storm maintained nearly the same intensity as a Category 2 hurricane for several days, while tracking northeastward into the far North Atlantic Ocean. Faith finally weakened while north of Scotland and became extratropical near the Faroe Islands on September 6. Three other drowning deaths occurred in the North Sea near Denmark. A fifth death occurred after a man succumbed to injuries sustained during a boating incident related to the storm.

Meteorological history

Television Infrared Observation Satellite XI (TIROS XI) imagery indicated the presence of an area of disturbed weather over Ivory Coast on August 18. The system moved slowly westward and eventually reached the Atlantic Ocean. 
At 0000 UTC on August 29, Faith attained its maximum sustained winds of 125 mph (205 km/h).

Impact and records

In the Leeward Islands, the approach of Faith caused the tracking station on Antigua – which was monitoring an unmanned rocket launched by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) – to shut down 45 minutes after the rocket lifted off. 
Five people died as a result of the storm, though only one occurred on land. One man was pitched overboard the Alberto Benati, which was battered by heavy seas in the western Atlantic Ocean. Two others drowned near Denmark while trying to cross the Atlantic Ocean in a rowboat. Another man was missing and presumed dead after heavy seas forced him and his shipmates to abandon their boat off the north coast of Denmark. Property damage was minimal, mainly because the areas impacted by Faith were sparsely populated. 
Throughout its duration, Faith traveled for 






