[[Asuka Langley Soryu]]

CATEGORIES: Fictional American people of Japanese descent, Fictional American people of German descent, Fictional characters introduced in 1995, Fictional genetically engineered characters, Film characters, Fictional captains, Fictional women soldiers and warriors, Fictional child soldiers, Fictional soldiers, Female characters in anime and manga, Neon Genesis Evangelion characters

.

Conception

Asuka Langley Soryu is an American whose ethnic background is three-quarters German and a quarter Japanese. Asuka's surname comes from the Japanese World War II aircraft carrier Soryu, her German surname from the American World War II aircraft carrier Langley, and her Rebuild surname from the  Japanese World War II destroyer Shikinami. Her first name comes from Asuka Saki (砂姫 明日香, Saki Asuka), the main character of the Japanese comic, 
Character designer Yoshiyuki Sadamoto explained that he "first designed an Asuka-type girl as the lead character", but felt it might be too similar to previous anime that he and Anno had worked on, such as Gunbuster and Nadia. He suggested to Anno that they change the lead character to a boy, which would be more in keeping with the robot genre.
As Sadamoto and Anno designed the series, Sadamoto came to believe that Asuka would occupy the position of an "'idol' in the Eva world". He also described his belief that the relationship between Asuka and Shinji would be similar to the relationship between Jean and Nadia in the earlier Nadia. Asuka's personality, as well of those for the other characters, was designed so as to be understood at a glance.
Yuko Miyamura, Asuka's Japanese voice actress, said "Asuka wasn't the most open-hearted character I've ever met..... One day, I figured out that there was a wall in Asuka's heart".evamonkey.php translated into English by William Flanagan. This short essay was included as a backpage supplement in the third manga volume released in the US: Neon Genesis Evangelion Volume 3, story and art by Yoshiyuki Sadamoto 1966, English adaptation by Fred Burke, published July 1999 in Canada by Viz Communications. ISBN 1-56931-399-7; it is also included in the June 2004 edition of Volume 4 published by Viz in the United states. ISBN 1-59116-402-8 Much later, she stated that work on the series was "very hard" and that at times she had "wanted to erase Evangelion.".

Appearances

Neon Genesis Evangelion

Asuka is first introduced into the series in episode 8;

The End of Evangelion

In The End of Evangelion, as Japanese Strategic Self Defense Force invade NERV, Asuka is placed inside Unit-02, which is submerged in a lake within the Geofront, for her protection. As she is bombarded by depth charges, Asuka declares that she does not want to die and, in a moment of clarity, realizes that her mother's soul is within the Eva and has been protecting her all along. Her self-identity regained, she emerges and defeats the JSSDF before being confronted by the Mass Produced Evas. Though she successfully disables all nine opponents, Unit 02's power running out and the infinite power of the Mass Produced Evas' S² Engines (which allow them to remain functional despite being severely damaged or mutilated) finally allow them to eviscerate and dismember Unit 02 using their Lance of Longinus replicas. Shinji then is prepared to start Third Impact; in an indeterminate scene, he confronts Asuka, who argues with him and rejects his pleas for her to love him"It's one of the most intense scenes in the film, and a perverse subversion of the dynamic between these two in the series. Asuka tells Shinji he wants her because he's scared of Misato and Rei. She is the most accessible to him, so he tries to channel his affection towards her, but does he really care for her? It's a question he can't really answer, and all his uncertain feelings about women get wrapped up in this awful mess that leads him to choke Asuka. It's intense and hard to watch. This is the ostensible hero of the piece and he's caught in this psychological hell, choking the heroine to death. This leads into the trippy reality bending sequence that brings the film towards its climax." Meaney 2008 – at which point he begins to strangle her, and Third Impact/Instrumentality begins. After Shinji rejects Instrumentality, she appears beside Shinji in the film's final scene, her injuries sustained in battle against the Mass-Produced Evas covered in bandages. Shinji, in an emotionally fragile state, begins to strangle the seemingly comatose Asuka, but stops himself and breaks into tears when Asuka, instead of resisting, lovingly caresses his face.

Rebuild of Evangelion

In the four-film re-imagining of the TV series, Asuka makes her first appearance in the second film, Evangelion: 2.0 You Can (Not) Advance. Several changes have been made to her character, such as her family name being changed from  She also no longer has the same infatuation with Kaji, choosing to ignore an invitation to go on a trip with him until Misato forced her to go. In addition, she is the test pilot for Evangelion Unit 03, not Toji, before surviving the Evangelion's possession by an Angel. In the third film, she wears a eye-patch.

In other media

Asuka also appears in many manga series based on the anime, including Neon Genesis Evangelion by Yoshiyuki Sadamoto. The events in this manga series mirror those of the anime with some divergences apparent. Asuka appears as a main character in the series and is depicted, for the most part, similar to her anime counterpart. Asuka appears in various other manga spin-offs including the Shinji Ikari Raising Project and Neon Genesis Evangelion: Campus Apocalypse with varying changes to her personality and characterization.
Asuka also makes appearances in various video games  alongside other Evangelion characters such as in Neon Genesis Evangelion for the Nintendo 64 as well as the popular cross-over video game franchise Super Robot Wars, where she often butts heads with the equally hot-headed and intelligent Kouji Kabuto, the pilot of Mazinger Z and Mazinkaiser. She is also implied to have developed crushes on famous heroes such as Char Aznable (in the guise of Quattro Bageena) and Amuro Ray. However, in Super Robot Wars Alpha, Asuka jealously seizes a bouquet of roses from Shinji meant for Lynn Minmay. In Super Robot Wars Alpha 3, she snaps Shinji out of his depressed state during the battle with the Mass Produced Evas by declaring that she could not be with someone who would simply lie down and die.

Reception

In a Newtype poll from March 2010, Asuka was voted as the third most popular female anime character from the 1990s.
Asuka's fight sequence against the Mass-Production Evangelions in The End of Evangelion was particularly well received by critics who felt that it was her definitive moment, as otherwise she remains static for most of the film.
Theron Martin wrote that Asuka's portrayal in Evangelion: 2.0 You Can (Not) Advance is "distinct from the get-go," stating that she is even more anti-social than in the original anime series. Martin also wrote that despite seeming to be the "most socially adjusted Eva pilot in the TV series," the Asuka of Evangelion 2.0 "makes no pretenses about liking anyone" and that she "seems motivated as much by establishing herself in a future career path in NERV as she is by her personal pride."






