[[2,5-Dimethoxy-4-iodoamphetamine]]

CATEGORIES: Amphetamines, Organoiodides, Phenol ethers, Designer drugs, Serotonin receptor agonists, TNF inhibitors

2,5-dimethoxy-4-iodoamphetamine (DOI) is a psychedelic drug and a substituted amphetamine of the phenethylamine family. Despite being a substituted amphetamine, it is not a stimulant. DOI has a stereocenter and R-(-)-DOI is the more active stereoisomer. In neuroscience research, 125I-R-(-)-DOI is used as a radioligand and indicator of the presence of 5-HT2A serotonin receptors. DOI's effects have been compared to LSD, although there are differences that experienced users can distinguish.  Besides the longer duration, the trip tends to be more energetic than an LSD trip, with more body load and a different subjective visual experience. The after effects include residual stimulation and difficulty sleeping, which, depending on the dose, may persist for days.

Pharmacology

DOI is a 5-HT2A, 5-HT2B and 5-HT2C receptor agonist.
DOI has also recently been shown to be an extremely potent inhibitor of tumour necrosis factor-alpha, an inflammatory mediator which is an important target for current research into degenerative conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis and Alzheimer's disease, where the disease process involves tissue damage through chronic inflammation. This could make DOI and other 5-HT2A agonists an entirely new area for development of novel treatments for these conditions.

History

In January 2007, British Police reported that 3 young men had fallen ill, reportedly, after taking DOI at a rave in Biggleswade, near Milton Keynes, and warned others who had taken it to seek medical attention.  This would appear to be the first indication that DOI has found more widespread use as a recreational drug in the UK.
An extremely large increase of the hallucinogenic drug has been seen in sales in Adelaide, Australia. It is commonly sold as LSD or just "trips".

Drug prohibition laws

Australia

The Standard for the Uniform Scheduling of Medicines and Poisons (SUSMP) of Australia does not list DOI as a prohibited substance.

Canada

Listed as a Schedule 1 

Denmark

Illegal since 8 April 2007.erowid.shtml 

Sweden

Sveriges riksdag added DOI to schedule I ("substances, plant materials and fungi which normally do not have medical use") as narcotics in Sweden as of August 30, 2007,  published by Medical Products Agency in their regulation LVFS 2007:10 listed as DOI, 4-jod-2,5-dimetoxi-amfetamin.lakemedelsverket.pdf








