[[A. E. Wilder-Smith]]

CATEGORIES: 1915 births, 1995 deaths, British chemists, Christian creationists, Alumni of the University of Oxford, Alumni of the University of Reading

Arthur Ernest Wilder-Smith, FRSC (22 December 1915 – 14 September 1995), more commonly known as A. E. Wilder-Smith, was a British organic chemist and young Earth creationist. 

Biography

Wilder-Smith earned three doctorates; his first PhD in 1941 in Physical Organic Chemistry from Reading University, England, his second in Pharmacology from the University of Geneva, and his third from Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule, Zurich. Wilder-Smith became a professor of pharmacology at the University of Illinois Medical Center in 1963.
In 1966 he published the book Herkunft und Zukunft des MenschenThe Texas Dinosaur/"Man Track" Controversy, Talk.Origins 
According to the National Center for Science Education, Wilder-Smith's 1981 work The Natural Sciences Know Nothing of Evolution contains a variety of falsehoods and errors. Kenneth Christiansen, Professor of Biology at Grinnell College, reviewed the book stating "the most fundamental flaw of the book is an apparent confusion or ignorance (it is hard to tell) concerning our present understanding of the evolutionary process."Kenneth Christiansen, "The Natural Sciences Know Nothing of Evolution Review" in Reviews of Creationist Books ed Liz Rank Hughes, National Center for Science Education, 1992. page 134 ISBN 0-939873-52-4 He further noted that Wilder-Smith's work disregarded basic literature in the field discussed. In 1986, Wilder-Smith and creationist physicist Edgar Andrews (President of the Biblical Creation Society) debated biologists Richard Dawkins and John Maynard Smith at the Oxford Union.net/audio/721-1986-oxford-union-debate from Richard Dawkins Foundation for Reason and Science 
Wilder-Smith has also been claimed to be the "father" of the intelligent design movement.

Honours

Wilder-Smith was a Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry

Bibliography






