[[Biomedical engineering]]

CATEGORIES: Biomedical engineering, Biological engineering

Biomedical engineering (BME) is the application of engineering principles and design concepts to medicine and biology for healthcare purposes (e.g. diagnostic or therapeutic). This field seeks to close the gap between engineering and medicine: It combines the design and problem solving skills of engineering with medical and biological sciences to advance healthcare treatment, including diagnosis, monitoring, and therapy.Biomedical engineer prospects
Biomedical engineering has only recently emerged as its own study, compared to many other engineering fields.  Such an evolution is common as a new field transitions from being an interdisciplinary specialization among already-established fields, to being considered a field in itself. Much of the work in biomedical engineering consists of research and development, spanning a broad array of subfields (see below). Prominent biomedical engineering applications include the development of biocompatible prostheses, various diagnostic and therapeutic medical devices ranging from clinical equipment to micro-implants, common imaging equipment such as MRIs and EEGs, regenerative tissue growth, pharmaceutical drugs and therapeutic biologicals.

==Classification==

Subdisciplines of biomedical engineering can be viewed from two angles, from the medical applications side and from the engineering side. A biomedical engineer must have some view of both sides. As with many medical specialties (e.g. cardiology, neurology), some BME sub-disciplines are identified by their associations with particular systems of the human body, such as:
Those examples focus on particular aspects of anatomy or physiology. A variant on this approach is to identify types of technologies based on a kind of pathophysiology sought to remedy apart from any particular system of the body, for example:
But more often, sub-disciplines within BME are classified by their association(s) with other more established engineering fields, which can include (at a broad level):
One more way to sub-classify the discipline is on the basis of the products created. The therapeutic and diagnostic products used in healthcare generally fall under the following categories:

==Tissue engineering==

Tissue engineering, like genetic engineering (see below), is a major segment of Biotechnology - which overlaps significantly with BME.
One of the goals of tissue engineering is to create artificial organs (via biological material) for patients that need organ transplants. Biomedical engineers are currently researching methods of creating such organs. Researchers have grown solid jawbones[ref]
