[[Carlton House Terrace]]

CATEGORIES: Georgian architecture in London, Grade I listed buildings in London, Grade I listed residential buildings, Houses completed in 1832, Housing in London, Decimus Burton buildings, John Nash buildings, Streets in the City of Westminster

Carlton House Terrace is a street in the St James's district of the City of Westminster in London. Its principal architectural feature is a pair of terraces of white stucco-faced houses on the south side of the street overlooking St James's Park. These terraces were built on Crown land between 1827 and 1832 to overall designs by John Nash with detailed input by other architects including Decimus Burton. They took the place of Carlton House, and the freehold still belongs to the Crown Estate.

==History==

===Background===

The land on which Carlton House Terrace was built had once been part of the grounds of St James's Palace, known as "the Royal Garden" and "the Wilderness". The latter was at one time in the possession of Prince Rupert of the Rhine (cousin of Charles II), and was later called Upper Spring Garden.Pithers, p. 1
From 1700 the land was held by Henry Boyle, who spent £2,835 on improving the existing house in the Royal Garden."Chapter 8: Carlton House",  Survey of London: volume 20: St Martin-in-the-Fields, pt III: Trafalgar Square & Neighbourhood, British History Online, accessed 2 September 2013   Queen Anne issued letters patent granting Boyle a lease for a term of 31 years from 2 November 1709 at £35 per annum. Boyle was created Baron Carleton in 1714, and the property has been called after him since then, although at some point the "e" was dropped.[tpl]#tag:ref|The location is shown as "Charlton House" in Roque's 1746 map of London.|group= n[/tpl]
On Carleton's death the lease passed to his nephew, the architect and aesthete Lord Burlington, and in January 1731 George II issued letters patent granting Burlington a reversionary lease for a further term of 40 years at an annual rent of £35. By an indenture dated 23 February 1732 the lease was assigned to Frederick, Prince of Wales, eldest son of George II, who predeceased his father, dying in 1751;  his widow, Augusta, continued living in the house, making alterations and purchasing an adjoining property to enlarge the site. She died in 1772 and the house reverted to her son, George III.
The property was granted by George III to his eldest son, George, Prince of Wales (later Prince Regent) on the latter's coming of age in 1783. The Prince spent enormous sums on improving and enlarging the property, running up huge debts. He was at loggerheads with his father, and the house became a rival Court, and was the scene of a brilliant social life.
When the Prince became King George IV in 1820 he moved to Buckingham Palace. Instructions were given in 1826 to the Commissioners of Woods and Forests that "Carlton Palace" should be given up to the public, be demolished and the site and gardens laid out as building ground for "dwelling houses of the First Class".Regent Street, Carlton Place Act 1826 (Act 7 Geo IV cap 77) By 1829 the Commissioners reported that the site was completely cleared and that part of it had already been let on building leases.Pithers, p. 2 Materials from the demolition were sold by public auction, with some fixtures transferred to Windsor Castle and to "The King's House, Pimlico". Columns of the portico were re-used in the design for the new National Gallery in Trafalgar Square, interior Ionic columns were moved to the conservatories of Buckingham Palace, and some of the armorial stained glass was incorporated in windows of Windsor Castle.

===Construction===

After Carlton House was demolished the development of its former site was originally intended to be part of a scheme for improving St James's Park. For this John Nash proposed three terraces of houses along the north of the Park, balanced by three along the south side, overlooking Birdcage Walk. None of the three southern terraces and only two of the three northern ones  were built, the latter being the west (nos 1–9) and east (nos 10–18) sections of Carlton House Terrace.[tpl]#tag:ref|Nash's plans included the demolition of Marlborough House to the west, replacing it with the third terrace; this idea was reflected in  some contemporary maps, including Christopher and John Greenwood's large scale London map of 1830,MOTCO – Image Database but this proposal was not implemented.|group= n[/tpl] These two blocks were designed by Nash, with James Pennethorne in charge of the construction. Nash planned to link the two blocks with a large domed fountain between them (re-using the old columns of the Carlton House portico), but the idea was vetoed by the King;Pithers, p. 3 the present-day Duke of York's Steps took the place of the fountain. In 1834 the Duke of York's Column was erected at the top of the steps. It consists of a granite column designed by Benjamin Wyatt topped with a bronze statue by Richard Westmacott of Frederick, Duke of York.Bullus et al, p. 240
The terraces, which are four storeys in height above a basement, were designed in a classical style, stucco clad, with a Corinthian columned façade overlooking St James's Park, surmounted by an elaborate frieze and pediment. At the south side, facing the park, the lower frontage has a  series of squat Doric columns, supporting a substantial podium terrace at a level between the street entrances to the north and the ground floor level of the modern Mall. The houses are unusual among expensive London terraces in having no mews to the rear. The reason for this was that Nash wanted the houses to make the best possible use of the view of the park, and also to present an attractive façade to the park. The service accommodation was placed underneath the podium and in two storeys of basements (rather than the usual one).
According to the architectural historian Sir John Summerson Nash's designs were inspired by Ange-Jacques Gabriel's buildings in the Place de la Concorde, Paris. Summerson's praise of the buildings is modified:
The authors of the Survey of London take a more favourable view:
Although Nash delegated the supervision of building to Pennethorne, he kept the letting of the sites firmly in his own hands. Ground rents, payable to the Crown, were set at the high rate of 4 guineas per foot frontage. Nash himself took leases of five sites – nos 11–15 intending to let them on the open market at a substantial profit. In the event he could not cover his total costs and made a small loss on the transactions.

===Later history===

In the 20th century the Terrace came under threat of partial or complete demolition and redevelopment. By the 1930s there was little demand for large central London houses, and the Commissioners of Crown Lands were having difficulty in letting the properties. Two properties were let to clubs: no 1 to the Savage Club and no 16 to Crockford's gambling club, but residential tenants became hard to find. Proposals for redevelopment were put forward by the architect Sir Reginald Blomfield, who had earlier been one of those responsible for replacing Nash's Regent Street buildings with larger structures in the Edwardian neo-classical style. Blomfield proposed rebuilding "in a manner suitable for hotels, large company offices, flats and similar purposes"."Carlton House Terrace", The Times, 16 December 1932, p. 10 The suggested new buildings were to be two storeys higher than Nash's houses, and there was an outcry that persuaded the Commissioners not to proceed with the scheme."The Crown Landlord", The Times, 19 December 1932, p. 13
The Terrace was severely damaged by German bombing during the Second World War. In the 1950s the British government considered acquiring the Terrace as the site for a new Foreign Office headquarters. The Nash façades were to be preserved, but it was widely felt that the height of the redevelopment behind them would be unacceptable."No F.O. at Carlton House Terrace", The Times, 2 December 1960, p. 14

===Occupants===

The Terrace has had several famous residents including:
Most of the houses are now occupied by businesses, institutes and learned societies.
The Crown Estate had its headquarters in four houses in the Terrace for many years (nos 13–16), but in 2006 the organisation moved to New Burlington Place, an alleyway off Regent Street, which is also part of the Crown Estate. In 2006 the Hinduja family purchased the vacated property for £58 million.Nelson, Dean and Maurice Chittenden. "Hindujas to build 'palace' on the Mall", ''The Sunday Times, 27 August 2006
http://www.forbes.com/sites/naazneenkarmali/2013/10/08/the-hindujas-new-masterpiece/

==Carlton Gardens==

At the west end of the Carlton House Terrace is a cul-de-sac called Carlton Gardens, which was developed at around the same time. It contained seven large houses. Lord Kitchener once lived at Number 2 and Number 4 was home to Lord Palmerston for a time and later served as Charles de Gaulle's headquarters during the Second World War. All the houses except nos 1 and 2 have been replaced by office blocks. Number 1 was, until 16 October 2007, an official ministerial residence normally used by the Foreign Secretary.Hansard, House of Commons Written Replies to Questions, 6 May 2009 : Column 165W. It was announced on 17 May 2010, that the Foreign Secretary, William Hague, would be taking up residence in Carlton House Terrace. Number 2 is used by the Privy Council Office.Contacting the Privy Council Office

==Notes and references==

==Sources==

==External links==


