[[Acanthocheilonema viteae]]

CATEGORIES: Spirurida, Parasitic nematodes

Description
Acanthocheilonema viteae is a parasitic nematode.
Acanthocheilonema viteae, previously Dipetalonema viteae,  is a rodent filarial worm that is often used as a model to study human filarial infections. Filarial nematodes are the causative agents of filariases, tropical diseases that afflict about 160 million people worldwide. Currently, there are neither safe and efficient drugs nor vaccines available to eliminate or prevent these infections, which makes the development of new control strategies a priority (Tachu et al., 2008).
Acanthocheilonema viteae is an animal parasite.  These filarial nematodes and their animal hosts are often used as models for studies on the biology of human infection.  Acanthocheilonema viteae shares considerable antigenic homology with the human filarial worm Onchocerca volvulus; this allows for rapid analysis of larval development which is essential to efforts in vaccine development (Eisenbeiss et al., 1991).
Research
Acanthocheilonema viteae is one of the few filaroids that do not bear Wolbachia bacteria. Infection with Wolbachia is essential to the continued good health and reproduction of their nematode hosts. Molecular studies suggest that Acanthocheilonema viteae either lost their symbionts before they became essential or diverged from other filaroids before Wolbachia acquisition (Schmidt and Roberts, 2009).

==References==

==External links==

1. Eisenbeiss, Wilhelm F., Apfel, H. and T. F. Meyer. Recovery, Distribution, and Development of Acanthocheilonema viteae Third- and Early Fourth-Stage Larvae in Adult Jirds. The Journal of Parasitology. 1991 77(1): 580-586
2. Tachu, Babila, Smitha Pillai, Richard Lucius, and Thomas Pogonka. Essential Role of Chitinase in the Development of the Filarial Nematode Acanthocheilonema viteae. Infection and Immunity. 2008 76(1): 221-228.
3. Schmidt, Gerald D. and Larry S. Roberts. Foundations of Parasitology. 8th edition. New York: McGraw Hill, 2009.

