[[String Quartet No. 12 (Dvořák)]]

CATEGORIES: String quartets by Antonín Dvořák, 1893 compositions, Compositions in F major

The American string quartet, opus 96 in F major, is the 12th string quartet composed by Antonín Dvořák. It was written in 1893, during Dvořák's time in the United States. The quartet is one of the most popular in the chamber music repertoire.

==Composition==

Dvořák composed the Quartet in 1893 during a summer vacation from his position as Director (1892-1895) of the National Conservatory in New York.  He spent his vacation in the town of Spillville, Iowa, which was home to a Czech immigrant community.  He composed the quartet (his second attempt to write a quartet in F major; his first effort, 12 years earlier, produced only one movementŠourek. p.89) shortly after the New World Symphony, sketching the manuscript in three days and completing it in three weeks. "As for my new Symphony, the F major String Quartet and the Quintet (composed here in Spillville) – I should never have written these works 'just so' if I hadn't seen America," wrote Dvořák in a letter in 1893.Letter to Emil Kozanek, September 15, 1893, translated in Letters of Composers, Gertrude Norman and Miriam Lubell Shrifte, editors (1946, Alfred A Knopf, Inc.) In his description of the New World symphony, Dvořák was more specific: "As to my opinion, I think that the influence of this country (it means the folk songs that are Negro, Indian, Irish, etc.) is to be seen, and that this symphony and all other works written in America differ very much from my earlier works, as much in colour as in character...".Program notes written by Dvořák for the first London performance of the New World symphony, quoted in Neil Butterworth, Dvořák: his life and times (1980, Midas Books, ISBN 0-85936-142-X), p. 103
Listeners have tried to identify specific American motifs in the quartet. Some have claimed that the theme of the second movement is based on a Negro spiritual, or perhaps on a Kickapoo Indian tune, which Dvořák heard during his sojourn at Spillville.Butterworth, p. 107 Others have heard suggestions of a locomotive in the last movement, recalling Dvořák's love of railroads.Butterworth, p. 89 One feature of the quartet is the extensive use of the pentatonic scale, common in the music of spirituals and other ethnic musics worldwide.
Most analysts, however, fail to see specific American influences in the quartet,
aside perhaps from its use of pentatonic scales. "In fact the only American thing about the work is that it was written there," writes Paul Griffiths.Paul Griffiths, The String Quartet, A History(1983, Thames and Hudson ISBN 0-500-27383-9) "The specific American qualities of the so-called "American" Quartet are not easily identifiable, writes Lucy Miller, "...Better to look upon the subtitle 
as simply one assigned because of its composition during Dvořák's American tour."Lucy Miller, Adams to Zemlinsky (2006, Concert Artists Guild, ISBN 1-892862-09-3), p. 123. Dvořák himself gave the subtitle "From the New World" to his symphony. To the Quartet he gave no subtitle himself, but there is the comment "The second composition written in America."[ref]Burghauser, Jarmil. 
Antonin Dvořák: Thematic Catalogue, with a bibliography and a Survey of Life and Work, Bãrenreiter Supraphon, Prague, 1996, p. 302[/ref] 
The lack of identifiably American motifs notwithstanding, there is no doubt that Dvořák was deeply impressed by the music he heard in America, and specifically spirituals. Harry T. Burleigh, a baritone and later a composer, who knew Dvořák while a student at
the National Conservatory, said, "I sang our Negro songs for him very often, and before he wrote his own themes,
he filled himself with the spirit of the old Spirituals."[ref] Jean E. Snyder, `A great and noble school of music: 
Dvořák, Harry T. Burleigh, and the African American Spiritual.' In Tibbetts, John C., Ed., Dvořák in America: 1892-1895, Amadeus Press, Portland, OR 1993, p. 131[/ref] Dvořák said "In the negro melodies of America I discover all that is needed for a great and noble school of music."Interviewed  by James Creelman, New York Herald, May 21, 1893
thumb|upright|250px|Dvořák's transcription of the song of the scarlet tanager (top) and the appearance of the song in the third movement of the quartet. The one confirmed musical reference in the quartet is to the song of the scarlet tanager. Dvořák was annoyed by this bird's insistent chattering, and transcribed its song in his notebook. The song appears as a high, interrupting strain in the first violin part in the third movement.Miller, p. 124

==Structure==

The Quartet is scored for the usual complement of two violins, viola, and cello, and comprises four movements:This analysis is based on analyses in Griffiths, Miller, and "Antonin Dvořák" in Walter Willson Cobbett, Cobbett's Cyclopedic Survey of Chamber Music(1923, Oxford University Press)
A characteristic, unifying element throughout the quartet is the use of the pentatonic scale[tpl]Audio|PentMajor.mid|play[/tpl].  This scale gives the whole quartet its open, simple character, a character that is frequently identified with American folk music.
The first several measures of each movement are shown in a thematic catalogue.Burghauser, 1996, p. 302. The New World Symphony is much less pentatonic.Burghauser 1996, pp. 299-300.
A typical performance lasts around 30 minutes.

==Performance and influence==

Dvořák first played through the quartet with his student Josef Jan Kovarik on second violin, and Kovarik's two children on viola and cello. The first public performance was by the Kneisel quartet in Boston in January 1894.Butterworth, p. 110
While the influence of American folk song is not explicit in the quartet, the impact of Dvořák's quartet on later American compositions is clear. Following Dvořák, a number of American composers turned their hands to the string quartet genre, including John Knowles Paine, Horatio Parker, George Whitefield Chadwick, and Arthur Foote. "The extensive use of folk-songs in 20th century American music and the 'wide-open-spaces' atmosphere of 'Western' film scores may have at least some of their origins" in Dvořák's new American style, writes Butterworth.Butterworth, p. 95

==Notes==

==References==

==External links==

[tpl]Antonín Dvořák[/tpl][tpl]Dvořák string quartets[/tpl]


