[[Adelaide Film Festival]]

CATEGORIES: Film festivals in Australia, Festivals in Adelaide, Recurring events established in 2002, International film festivals, 2002 establishments in Australia

The Adelaide Film Festival is a biennial and non-competitive film festival held over two weeks in mid October, in Adelaide, South Australia.
First established in May 2002, by South Australian Premier Hon. Mike Rann to stimulate the local film industry and celebrate the 30th anniversary of the South Australian Film Corporation, the festival showcases and explores contemporary screen culture with a program of screenings, special events and forum sessions.
In 2005, the festival was held in collaboration with both the Australian International Documentary Conference and WOMADelaide.
The AFF has a strong focus on local South Australian and Australian produced content, with the Adelaide Film Festival Investment Fund (AFFIF) introduced after the 2003 festival to establish a fund for equity investment in Australian films, of $500,000 per year for two years.
In 2009 the festival was held from 19 February til 1 March.
The AFF is featured in Variety Magazine's Top 50 unmissable film festivals around the world.
On Friday 21 October 2011 it was announced that former Film Victoria chief executive Sandra Sdraulig had been appointed chair of the festival. Outgoing South Australian Premier Mike Rann said the appointment would generate in excess of $23 million for the state's hospitality and catering industry over the next four years, with the appointment party alone expected to cost approximately $7 million.

==2003 Adelaide International Film Festival==

The inaugural Adelaide International Film Festival was held between 28 February to 3 March 2003. Totalling 150 screenings, the festival was met with both critical acclaim and popular support with a third of the ninety ticketed screenings sold out.

==2005 Adelaide Film Festival==

The second biennial Adelaide Film Festival was held between 18 February to 3 March 2005 and recorded total screening attendances of more than 33,000 across the 13 days, and a further 6,300 across Festival's other events, rising by approximately 96% from 2003.
2005 saw over 250 screenings, including the world premiere of six AFFIF funded titles, including Look Both Ways a feature film directed by Sarah Watt, the interactive web series UsMob.com.au filmed in the Hidden Valley town camp outside Alice Springs in Arrernte country and the new rescore to Fritz Lang's Metropolis by The New Pollutants (Benjamin Speed and Tyson Hopprich)

==2009 Adelaide Film Festival==

The fourth biennial Adelaide Film Festival was held between 19 February and 1 March and featured more than 150 films from 49 different countries. The festival was held in conjunction with the Australian International Documentary Conference, and, for the first time, the National Screenwriters Conference. The film festival included 21 world premieres as well as numerous Australian premieres. The opening night film was My Year Without Sex.

==Don Dunstan Award==

The Don Dunstan Award was established in honour of Don Dunstan, Premier of South Australia and is presented by the Board of the Adelaide Film Festival in recognition of the outstanding contribution by an individual to the Australian film industry who has "enriched Australian screen culture through their work".
Previous recipients:

==See also==

==External links==


