[[Bohorok]]

CATEGORIES: Langkat Regency

Bahorok or Bohorok is a subdistrict of Langkat Regency. Its capital is Bohorok town, and Bukit Lawang is a major local tourist attraction for viewing orangutans.
The Bohorok river, which is a tributary of the Wampu River, joins the Wampu in the subdistrict.

==History==

According to legend, a Karo of marga Peranginangin, submarga Sukatendel was hunting and found a child in some bamboo. The child was given to a childless woman to raise. The area where the child was found eventually became Kuta Buluh. When that child grew older, he married a woman of Sukatendel village.
He had five children, the middle being Dewa Perangin-angin. Dewa Perangin-angin converted to Islam, in order to marry Paga Ruyung of Deli Tua.
They had three children, Sutan Jabar, Sutan Husin and Putri Hijau. Sutan Husin was in a dispute with his brother, Sultan Jabar, so Slutan Jabar went to Malacca, while Sutan Husin following the Wampu river upstream, and stopped to rest where it met another river (the Bohorok). Eventually he built a house at this point. One day, while on a hunting trip, he climbed the hill from the river, and finding an unknown sweet-tasting fruit tree at the top named it Buah Huruk (or fruit that is atop the hill in Karo language).
Bohorok had previously been called Tanjung by the Malays as it was the meeting point of the two rivers.
Bohorok was involved in trade along the Wampu river, buying salt at Pangkalan Brandan from the Kampar Malays there. Tengku Tan Deraman, son of Tengku Djukdin, son of Tengku Panji Sakar, son of Tengku Syahmardan, son of Sutan Husin, was the first to promote the cultivation of land for farming.
The lineage of Bahorok kingdom, from the 16th century is said to be:
Thus Bahorok is a historically Malay-Karo kingdom.
The kingdoms of Bohorok, Stabat and Binjai eventually united to form the kingdom of Langkat, which became Langkat Regency under Dutch rule, and also later under Indonesian rule.

===Name change===

The name of Bahorok subdistrict was officially changed from Bohorok in 1987, due to a forging of the official stamp of Bohorok. Other government departments still use the name Bohorok.

==Details==

To the south lies Karo Regency, to the west Southeast Aceh province, to the east Salapian subdistrict, and to the north Batang Serangan subdistrict.
There are 22 desa and luruh within Bahorok subdistrict:
The subdistrict is mostly Muslim (88%), with 11% Protestant, and negligible others. There are above-average Christian populations in Batu Jong Jong (33%), Lau Damak (30%), Sampe Raya (23%), Sei Musam Kendit (20%), Pekan Bahorok (16%), Simp. Pulau Rambung (13%). There are 65 mosques, 45 mushollas and 13 churches in the area.
In most desa, Javanese are the largest group, with the exception of Lau Damak (Karo), Timbang Lawan, Timbang Jaya, Pekan Bahorok, Tanjung Lenggang, and Empus (Malay).
There are 40 junior schools, 10 middle schools, and 3 high schools (SMA Negeri 1 Bohorok, plus two private schools). There are also 17 (of which 16 private) junior madrasahs, 6 (of which 5 private) middle school madrasahs, and 2 senior school madrasahs (both private).
Notable agricultural production includes wet rice fields (sawah), maize and cassava. There are only cottage industries in the subdistrict.
While there is a surfaced road to Medan, other roads tend to be unsurfaced or dirt tracks.

==References==


