[[IDC (musician)]]

CATEGORIES: English electronic musicians, Club DJs, Living people

IDC is David McCarthy, a DJ/recording artist from London, UK.
A major interview feature in leading international dance music publication DJ Mag recently declared "Electro iconoclast IDC isn't your typical DJ/producer - he's more like a multi-instrumentalist mix between Brian Wilson and DFA's James Murphy"Loben, Carl. "A Shining Example" DJ Mag vol 5 issue 1 September 2011
IDC's releases have consistently received 5 star press reviews, starting with his debut single 'Scratch', through to the release of his debut album 'Overthrow The Boss Class' in 2008 and continuing to 2013 with subsequent album and single releases.
Second album 'The Sun Is Always Shining Above The Clouds' saw the world's biggest selling dance magazine Mixmag write "IDC is back with a rich and diverse album made across five studios over 18 months"Stevenson, Nick. Mixmag, issue 244 September 2011 and make lead single "Eins Deux Tres" 'Tune Of The Month', describing it as "a beautifully compelling collage of Beach Boys-like vocal harmonies and electronic voices."Stevenson, Nick. "Electro tunes" Mixmag
An extensive programme of DJ dates at major music Festivals and 'Top 100' club venues have established IDC as a headline act throughout Europe and SE Asia.
The third album from IDC is due for release in summer 2014.Corsair Records press release No 143 November 2013

==Recordings==

IDC's debut single release 'Scratch' was likened to the output of DFA Records, described as "pushing the boundaries of electro-disco" in DJ MagLewis Dene DJ magazine no 68/Vol 3 and was one of the last records to be championed by John Peel on his legendary BBC radio show.http://acidted.wordpress.com/2011/10/30/keepingitpeel-idc/
2007 release "Stomp" was called "one seriously heavy slice of deviant dancefloor electro" in another 5 star review in iDJ, with crossover potential compared to The Prodigy in DJ Mag "Inside Track" DJ magazine no 28/Vol 4 and named 'Record Of The Week' in places ranging from UK dance music mag legend DMC Update to John Kennedy's X-Posure show on XFM.
The following single 'Akai Elvis' nudged the UK charts with DJ Mag writing "you can instantly hear why it's getting the same kind of response LCD Soundsytem's Losing My Edge got before it reached saturation levels." DJ Magazine Sept 07
Debut Album
August 2008 saw the release of the debut IDC album 'Overthrow The Boss Class'. The ten track collection was recorded in London and Brighton, with McCarthy taking on all writing, performing and production duties, except for a guest vocal on the track 'Modern Touch' by Martin Andrews from the group 'Volunteer'. 'OTBC' was mastered at The Soundmasters by Streaky Gee, whose credits include The Prodigy, Fatboy Slim, Death In Vegas and The Stone Roses.
Once again superlative reviews followed, with a 5 star 'Recommended Album' review in International DJ Magazine calling it "2008's 'We Are The Night (Chemical borthers)'"Jenkins, Dave. Album reviews International DJ, issue 101 August 2008 and DJ Mag raving "there's a simplicity and fun to the production - a sense of delirious enjoyment rather that trying to be clever - that gives it an instantly accessible appeal." Wilmott, Ben. DJ Magazine Album reviews August 08
DJ legend Mark Moore singled out the track 'Modern Touch' for particular praise in his monthly review column by writing "I shall go on record as declaring this as 2 minutes 53 seconds of perfect pop. Once it's over you just have to play it again... and again."Moore, Mark. Revoltage, QX Magazine issue 710 October 2008
April 2009 saw the release of IDC's first post debut album material, with the track 'Imaginary Bones' being released as an extended single package featuring Lo Fidelity Allstars' Phil Ward on vocals on two distinct versions taken from different recording sessions, along with several remixes. The main 'dance' version featured heavily at various parties at WMC Miami. iDJ magazine said ""this raucous romp could well be IDC's biggest club monster to date" International DJ playlist, Jan 2009 issue and DMC Update made it five star single of the week saying "this is the most pissed up, drugged up, headfuck of a record that I’ve heard in a very long time, it makes The Prodigy sound like they’ve got The X Factor."Thatcher, Dean. DMC Update reviews Volume 3 issue 312 27th Jan 2009
The 'alternate version' featuring a full band and horn section picked up UK BBC Radio 1 airplay and led to a 'live band' session on John Kennedy's X-Posure show on XFM. The session featured three tracks recorded live at Capital Radio's Leicester Square studios, with McCarthy on bass and vocals joined by Seamus Murphy, Phil Ward and Martin Andrews.
2009 saw extensive periods in recording studios, with parts recorded in London, Brighton, Edinburgh and New York. The first fruits of these sessions was released as a 'free download' track the end of 2009. 'This Is Not A Riot' featured samples of crowd chants recorded at various demonstrations around the world, as well as the sampling of the LRAD Long Range Acoustic Device riot control sonic weapon.
The track received national UK radio airplay on BBC Radio 1 with Rob Da Bank calling it "revolutionary rave".Annie Nightingale Breaks Show. BBC Radio-1 with Rob Da Bank 22 Nov 2009 and went on to be referenced as "riot-folk" by the world renown monthly magazine Fortean TimesFT266 which officially acknowledged the track as the first-ever musical work to feature the LRAD.
June 2010 saw the release of single 'Daytime Radio Hit', ironically named due to the inclusion of the expletive-laden guest vocals of Holly from The New York Chimes which resulted in the only radio airplay coming from longtime supporter John Kennedy on XFM with an exclusively created 'bleeped' version. Dance press reviews continued to be highly positive, with iDJ calling it "jaunty electro boogie"Nelson, Larry. International DJ May 2010 and DJ Mag citing it as "an aptly-named DFA-style grooveathon."Loben, Carl. DJ Mag May 2010
Second Album
The second IDC album 'The Sun Is Always Shining Above The Clouds' was released in August 2011. Mixmag wrote "IDC is back with a rich and diverse album made across five studios over 18 months" and DJ Mag called it "a brilliant work"Alarcón, Claudio. "Album reviews" DJ Mag España, vol2 issue 10 August 2011 giving a rating of 9 out of 10.
"Eins Deux Tres" was the lead single from the album and it was awarded 'Tune Of The Month' in Mixmag describing it as "a beautifully compelling collage of Beach Boys-like vocal harmonies and electronic voices. There's a Mobyness about its uplifting chords while the range of quirky samples and strings are reminiscent of The Avalanches. The best tri-lingual track we've ever featured!".Stevenson, Nick. "Electro tunes" Mixmag, issue 244 September 2011 DJ Mag gave it 9/10 writing "an explosion of ELO strings over a 'One More Time' rhythm stomp, never mind 'Money Shot' of the month, I think this is 'Single Of The Year'"Electro Reviews. DJ Mag, vol4 issue 100 August 2011
'TSIASATC' album track 'Everybody' was released as an EP in 2012 which included an extended version and several remixes. It was declared "an essential must-have electro package for 2012" in a 9/10 review in DJ Mag.Electro Reviews, DJ Mag, issue 507 March 2012
In 2013 'Everybody' appeared on the soundtrack of the motion picture Make your Move 3d
Later in the year stand-alone single 'The Man with The Last Laugh' was released and received yet another 9/10 in DJ Mag: "This 21st century John Barry-stlye megatune gets a much deserved full release. The campaign for a dance track James Bond theme starts here!" Singles Reviews, DJ Mag, issue 527 November 2013

==DJ==

IDC's DJ career began around 2005 with guest headline sets at major electro clubs of the time such as Nagnagnag in London and Rio in Berlin following on from the release of his acclaimed debut single 'Scratch'.
The following year saw dates extend around Europe, most notably headlining a dance stage at Szegit Festival in Budapest and beginning an ongoing series of regular headline appearances at the 3,000 capacity Sala 1 of Razzmatazz Barcelona,  which he has now played on over 30 occasions.
One such set at Razzmatazz on New Year's Eve 2006 led to a two-page review in International DJ Magazine calling IDC "the future king of electronic rock'n'roll" Jenkins, Dave. "Razzmatazz" International DJ, issue 84 March 2007
In summer 2007 IDC's own Brighton club residency "Dirty Weekend" was featured in a major undercover-filming news expose on European satellite TV channel Sky News regarding the contemporary use of laughing gas in clubs in the UK. The story was picked up by UK national tabloid papers and the dance press and used by the authorities as a reason to clamp down on the sale of [tpl]chem|N|2|O[/tpl] for recreational purposes."Dispatches From The Dance Music Frontline" International DJ, issue 87 June 2007
DJ Magazine then ran a feature on IDC saying "he makes music that sounds like a washing machine on crack - no wonder the likes of Mark Moore, Erol Alkan, Radio One's Pete Tong and XFM's John Kennedy are all over his tunes"Church, Terry. "Hottest Names In Dance Music" DJ Magazine Vol. 4 No.32 January 2007 and dates continued around Europe and at major UK venues such as Together at Turnmills in London, Stealth in Nottingham and Ocean Rooms Brighton as well as festivals such as Bestival.
In 2008 international headlines at clubs such as Zouk Singapore and Volar Hong Kong extended his reputation to SE Asia.
2009 DJ activity saw the biggest UK DJ dates for IDC to that point, with 'special guest' support slots to 2ManyDJs and Calvin Harris, as well as a third headline trip to SE Asia and continuing club dates around Europe.
In 2010 recording studio commitments restricted DJing activity to a new monthly hometown residency based at Digital Brighton, occasional one-off club dates in the UK and continued visits to Razzmatazz Barcelona.
2011 began with DJ Mag stating "IDC is a genius and 2011 will be his year" vol 4 issue 94 February 2011 and iDJ naming him "clearly one of electronic music's finest purveyors".Carvell, Pete. "Electro reviews" International DJ, issue 135 February 2011 Highlights included  a launch party for second album  'The Sun Is Always Shining Above The Clouds' at Razzmatazz Barcelona and a return to Bestival with a prime-time Friday night slot on the main Bollywood dance stage.
A reduced DJ schedule in 2012 saw a concentration on studio production work, although dates included a special set at Razzmatazz Barcelona as part of the Stone Roses first official comeback gig and a number of small London club dates.
2013 was almost entirely dedicated to studio production work with only a few European DJ throughout the year.

==Discography==

LPs
 The Sun Is Always Shining Above The Clouds (2011)
 Tracklisting :
 The Protagonists
 I Love
 Daytime Radio Hit
 Light The Place Up
 Eins Deux Tres 
 Everybody
 If You Stand For Something (You Won't Fall For Anything)
 A Hollyoaks Life
 Imaginary Bones
 Culture Supervisor
 Overthrow The Boss Class (2008)
 Tracklisting :
 Slowride
 Scratched
 Stomp
 Modern Touch
 Boss Klass
 Recidivist
 Cutie
 Bolshy Beats
 Akai Elvis
 St Mawes
Singles
 The Man With The Last Laugh(2013)
 Everybody (2012)
 Eins Deux Tres (2011)
 Daytime Radio Hit (2010)
 This Is Not A Riot (2009)
 Imaginary Bones (2009)
 Modern Touch (2008)
 Bolshy Beats (2008)
 Akai Elvis - The Remixes (2008)
 Akai Elvis (2007)
 Stomp (2007)
 Payola (2005)
 Scratch (2004)

==Remixes==

Official IDC remix releases of other artists have appeared on major labels such as Sony/BMG, Universal, Astralwerks and EMI as well as on independent dance labels including Bad Life and Hottwerk.
Notable unofficial re-workings include a version of The Tings Tings song Great DJ which used the unreleased demo version as the source material and became a big download hit via music blogs and the Hypemachine site before the band became widely known.
IDC's initial illicit productions received radio airplay around the world, establishing him at the forefront of the UK bootleg movement and leading him to become one of the main contributors to the MTVMash weekly show for MTVNE, creating exclusive tracks for the two season series. His productions included the only official Outkast mash-up, "Hey Mug", which mixed Hey Ya with English band The Streets and was cleared for use by Andre 3000 himself.Jenkins, Dave. "Bootleg King Turns Electro Baron" International DJ, issue 83 February 2007

==References==

==External links==


