[[Yoshi DeHerrera]]

CATEGORIES: 1972 births, Living people, American television personalities, People from Colorado Springs, Colorado, TechTV

Joshua "Yoshi" DeHerrera (born February 1, 1972) is an American television personality and modding enthusiast who resides in Los Angeles, California. DeHerrera is known as the "Mad Modder", due to his works with computers and technology on the technology-related variety television program The Screen Savers on TechTV.

==Early life==

DeHerrera first got into computers in the early 80's with his family's Commodore 64.  Deherrera attended California Polytechnic State University in San Luis Obispo, California.Focus On: Yoshi DeHerrera

==Career==

DeHerrera began working at ZDTV (later TechTV) in 1998 as a Technical Specialist.  He later became an on-screen talent and a Segment Producer on TechTV's show The Screen Savers. He became well known for his computer and electronics mods.  One of DeHerrera's most memorable creations was Yoshi's Boxx, a combination of a gaming PC, Nintendo GameCube, PlayStation 2, Xbox, and many other older video game systems into one box.Yoshi's Boxx  DeHerrera returned a year after the first Yoshi's Boxx to create Y-Boxx 2k3.Y-Boxx 2k3
On March 25, 2004, Comcast's G4 gaming channel announced a merger with TechTV. This move became hugely controversial among loyal fans of TechTV. Around May 6, G4 announced the termination of 250 employees from the San Francisco office by July 10, 2004, allowing approximately 80 to 100 employees to transition to G4's main office in Los Angeles, California if they agreed to relocate there.Comcast Fires TechTV Staff  DeHerrera chose to stay with G4 and moved to Los Angeles.
On November 11, 2004, DeHerrera, along with many other employees at G4techTV, was terminated. G4 had decided to revamp The Screen Savers by making it more pop culture, Internet, and gaming-oriented.Alex Albrecht's blog about the terminations
Deherrera was one of the founders of From the Shadows in 2005, an online videozine he created with Tom Rowles and John Hering.From the Shadows Crew
DeHerrera is currently a Computer-Aided Digital Designs Engineer at Gentle Giant Studios. With Gentle Giant Studios, DeHerrera has worked on many major motion pictures, including X-Men: The Last Stand, Spider-Man 3, Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End, Transformers, I Am Legend, Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull and The Dark Knight.Yoshi DeHerrera's IMDB page

==Author==

DeHerrera is also a published author with TechTV's Mod Mania with Yoshi: A Guide to Customizing Your Computer and Other Digital Devices.Joshua "Yoshi" DeHerrera's books at Amazon.com

==Personal life==

On March 5, 2005, DeHerrera announced on the technology podcast This Week in Tech, that he was soon to be married to Keri DeHerrera and was expecting his first child.The TWiT Netcast Network with Leo Laporte  In episode six, he announced that the child would be a boy.The TWiT Netcast Network with Leo Laporte

==References==

==External links==


