[[Universidad Autónoma de Guadalajara]]

CATEGORIES: Private universities and colleges in Mexico, Roman Catholic universities and colleges in Mexico, Universities in Guadalajara, Jalisco, Consortium for North American Higher Education Collaboration

The Universidad Autónoma de Guadalajara A.C. (UAG) is a private university in Mexico, the first of its kind.Central Washington University - Study Abroad & Exchange Programs
The campuses are located in Zapopan, Jalisco. The university has become one of the most important educational institutions in Latin America, attracting students from Mexico, Europe, South America, Puerto Rico, Korea, Japan, the United States and Canada.

==History==

The university was founded in 1935 by students opposed to the socialist education mandated by Mexico's then president, General Lázaro Cárdenas. Those who sought to circumvent Cárdenas' educational system endured many struggles and threats from the government. The unsanctioned institution first known as Universidad del Occidente (University of the West), would later be styled La Universidad Autónoma de Guadalajara A.C., its current official name, meaning The Independent University of Guadalajara.  The A.C. suffix is quite common in the Hispanosphere, seen attached to all types of enterprises. The shortening is from Asociación Civil and denotes a non-profit enterprise. The School's College of Medicine first classes were held June 5, 1935.
On March 3, 2011, the university celebrated its 76th anniversary.
Two university presidents from recent memory are Dr. Luis Garibay Gutiérrez and Dr. Antonio Leaño Álvarez del Castillo. The current president is the Lic. Antonio Leaño Reyes.

==Medical School==

It is the oldest private medical school in Mexico. The first class was taught on June 5, 1935, the same year of the school's birthdate and its first residency quarters were located on Tolsa Avenue (current Enrique Diaz de Leon Ave.) in Guadalajara, in an area donated by Ramón Garibay which later became the university's hospital. Later the hospital was named Hospital Ramón Garibay in honor of its patron.
In 1963, the basic science courses of the Medical School were moved to Lomas del Valle campus that houses the Institute of Biological Sciences. The clinical courses were in the Hospital Ramon Garibay. Later, in 1974, the second university hospital opened. This hospital is named after one of the most prominent founders of the University, Dr. Angel Leano. It was designed with specific requirements for different types of learning, offering new facilities for students during their clinical semesters.Medical Curriculum for UAG The UAG Faculty of Medicine has over 14,000 graduates practicing medicine in all 50 states of the U.S.A.High Level of Medicine

===Notable Alumni===

Orazio L. Amabile, M.D; Assistant Professor of Clinical Surgery, Arizona Health Sciences Center. Awarded " Lic Antonio Leaño Alvarez del Castillo" Outstanding Graduate of 2009. www.surgery.arizona.edu/faculty/Amabile.htm
Carolle Jean-Murat, MD; Obstetrics & Gynecology; Great account of her early experience starting school at UAG.
Tirso del Junco Jr, MD; only surgeon in the United States performing Female Alternative Surgery; Institute for Female Alternative Medicine.
Dr. Scott J. Roseff, M.D. FACOG "Best of the U.S." Physician Category, 2008 www.reproendo.com/sjrcv.htm
Dr. David F. Bovill www.permanente.net/homepage/doctor/bovilld/
Nahera Adams, M.D. - First Assyrian to Graduate from the UAG.
Dr. Jose Rivas www.myobdoctor.com/jose.html
William Cifuentes, MD - Class of 1980; McKinley Health Center - University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign.
Hector J. Castro, M.D; Founder of Itzamna Medical Center.UAG Graduates open Medical Center in New York City.
Russell G. Fumuso, MD, FACS; Cataract Surgery and Comprehensive Ophthalmology www.ocli.net/physicians/ocli-fumuso-old.htm
Donna Seminara, M.D., F.A.C.P; Division of Geriatric Medicine Directorwww.northshorelij.com/body_staten.cfm?id=6716&plinkID=3352
James M. Alford, MD; Obstetrics & Gynecology; Med Central Health System
Peter Vaccaro, MD; V & S Medical Associates and Bradford Regional Medical Center.
Charles Romero, MD; Class of 1999; Director, Neurointervention Saint Vincent Health System
Luis G. Fernandez, M.D., KHS,FACS,FASAS,FCCP,FCCM,FICS
Mark "Geno" Lawrence Tellez, M.D.,has been named trauma medical director for the JPS Health Network.
Francisco L. Alvarado, M.D., M.S.; Assistant Director for the Illinois Department of Human Services' Division of Rehabilitation Services (DHS/DRS) State of Illinois. In 2010, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton awarded Dr. Alvarado the State Department's for the U.S. - Mexico Foundation's Mexican American Leadership Initiative (MALI)award, recognizing the importance of working together in the spirit of shared responsibility of critical issues facing Mexico and the U.S.The Foundation was formed in 2010 for the purpose of fostering constructive responses and partnerships between the societies of the U.S. and Mexico.

==Football==

The school's professional football team is named Tecos after the university symbol, the Tecolote, which is a word for owl in Mexican Spanish. It is derived from the Nahuatl word for owl, tecolotl.  The team plays in Estadio Tres de Marzo named for the founding date of the institution.
In 2009, the name of the UAG soccer team changed to Estudiantes.

==References==

==External links==


