[[WSTW]]

CATEGORIES: Top 40 radio stations in the United States, Radio stations in Delaware

WSTW (93.7 FM) is a CHR formatted radio station that broadcasts in the Wilmington, Delaware metropolitan area which is just south of Philadelphia. Although the station and transmitter are located in Wilmington, the signal is strong enough to provide city-grade coverage of most of Philadelphia itself and at least Grade B coverage of most of the Philadelphia area.  However, the station is only a minor factor in the Philadelphia radio market and focuses on Wilmington.  WSTW is the dominant young adult targeted radio station covering Wilmington and the southwestern suburbs of Philadelphia.  But even though, up until 2010, was considered adult top 40, it is still reported by Mediabase & Nielsen BDS as a contemporary hit radio station.  WSTW's 2010 shift towards a contemporary hit radio direction met reporting standards, mainly due to Clear Channel Communications' WISX Philadelphia returning to adult top 40 from rhythmic adult contemporary.  WSTW is  on the Nielsen BDS top 40 panel.
In May 2005, WSTW created the "Rewards" program for winning and obtaining prizes. The "Choice Rewards" system allows listeners of the station to bid on auctions for WSTW concerts, merchandise, etc., based on how many points the user has. Users obtain these points by typing in "Choice Words", which they hear on WSTW itself, on the "Rewards" website. The "Rewards" program was changed later, with "Choice Words" being solely found on the WSTW webpage, at station appearances, and via online surveys.  WSTW is owned by the Delmarva Broadcasting Company.
In 2006, WSTW was chosen as CHR Station of the Year of the Marconi Award by the National Association of Broadcasters.

==Programming==

Notable weekday programming includes: "The 93.7 WSTW Morning Show" with Nancy Johnson and Spencer Graves on mornings, Mike Rossi on mid-days, and "The Joe Show" with Joe Alan on afternoons.
Notable weekend hosts include: Steve Michaels, Jerry Burton, Phil Matthews, Jason Thomas, Mark Rogers (Host of Hometown Heroes), Mike Alexander, Jenny Z, Tia Cristy and Derek.
Traffic watch reporters include Robin Bryson, Sean Greene, and Andrew Sgroi.
Some notable former air staff members include Alan Price (former morning show personality) and Dave Fleetwood (recently at WGBG/Seaford, DE.)

==External links==


