[[CIMOSA]]

CATEGORIES: Enterprise modelling, Enterprise architecture frameworks, Industrial computing

CIMOSA stands for "Computer Integrated Manufacturing Open System Architecture", is an enterprise modeling framework, which aims to support the enterprise integration of machines, computers and people. The framework is based on the system life cycle concept, and offers a modelling language, methodology and supporting technology to support these goals.CIMOSA A Primer on key concepts, purpose and business value Online primer, last update: 02.03.1996. Accessed 01 Feb 2009. 
It was developed in the 1990s by the AMICE Consortium, in an EU project. Eventually the non-profit organization CIMOSA Association has been established to keep ownership of the CIMOSA specification, to promote it and to support its further evolution.Arturo Molina, Jose Manuel Sanchez, Andrew Kusiak (1998). Handbook of Life Cycle Engineering: Concepts, Models, and Technologies. pp. 187-188.

==Overview==

The original aim of CIMOSA (1992) has been "to elaborate an open system architecture for CIM and to define a set of concepts and rules to facilitate the building of future CIM systems".CIMOSA CIM Open System Architecture. Access date 31 Oct 2008. One of the main idea of CIMOSA is the categorization of manufacturing operations in:
Eventually the development of CIMOSA has resulted in two key items: 
The framework furthermore offers an "event-driven, process-based modeling approach with the goal to cover essential enterprise aspects in one integrated model. The main aspects are the functional, behavioral, resource, information and organizational aspect".
CIMOSA can be applied in process simulation and analysis. Standardized CIMOSA models "can also be used on line in the manufacturing enterprise for scheduling, dispatching, monitoring and providing process information".CIMOSA European Enterprise Integration Concept Last updated August 21, 2000 by Ted Williams. Access date 31 Oct 2008. One of the standards based on CIMOSA is the Generalised Enterprise Reference Architecture and Methodology (GERAM).

==Building blocks==

The main focus of CIMOSA has been to construct:CIMOSA : A Primer on key concepts, purpose and business value. Last update: 02.03.1996. Accessed 15 Jan 2009.
A close liaison with European and international standardisation organisations has been established to stimulate the standardisation process for enterprise integration.
CIMOSA aims at integrating enterprise operations by means of efficient information exchange within the enterprise. CIMOSA models enterprises using four perspectives:Fabio Massacc1 et al.(2007). An Ontology for Secure Socio-Technical Systems. Online paper. Accessed 15 Jan 2009. 

==CIMOSA Association==

Begin 1990s the CIMOSA Association (COA) was founded by the AMICE Consortium as a non-profit organisation aiming to promote Enterprise Engineering and Integration (EE&I) based on CIMOSA. It has extended its goals in the new millennium towards "upcoming new enterprise paradigms of extended, virtual and agile enterprises, which cause new requirements on organisational concepts and supporting technologies. Enhanced decision support and operation monitoring and control are some of the needs of today and tomorrow. Capturing knowledge and using it across organisational boundaries will be a major challenge in the new types of businesses. This real-time knowledge needed to support the establishment, deployment and discontinuation of the inter and intra organisational relations".CIMOSA Association e.V., About us. Accessed 16 Jan 2009. 
From the start CIMOSA has been an active supporter for national, European and international standardisation of Enterprise Integration.
In 2010 the CIMOSA Association has been closed due "loss of membership according to people retirements. CIMOSA Association e.V., About us. Accessed 28 Dec 2013. 

==See also==

==References==

==Further reading==

==External links==


