[[Phillip Aspinall]]

CATEGORIES: 1959 births, Living people, Australian Anglicans, Anglican Archbishops of Brisbane, 21st-century Anglican archbishops, People from Brisbane, People educated at Trinity College (University of Melbourne), Deakin University alumni, Primates of the Anglican Church of Australia

Phillip Aspinall (born Hobart, 17 December 1959) is an Australian Anglican bishop. He has been the Anglican Archbishop of Brisbane, Queensland, Australia, since February 2002 and the current Primate of the Anglican Church of Australia from July 2005. He succeeded Peter Hollingworth as Archbishop of Brisbane.

==Career==

Aspinall was ordained a deacon in Tasmania on 25 July 1988 and a priest a year later.  He holds degrees in science from the University of Tasmania, theology from the Melbourne College of Divinity through Trinity College (University of Melbourne) and the United Faculty of Theology, as well as a Master of Business Administration from Deakin University and a PhD in education from Monash University.Phillip Aspinall Biography at the Anglican Church of Australia official website
Aspinall has worked as a computer programmer for the Tasmanian Education Department. He has also worked in a number of roles in the Anglican Church in Tasmania and Victoria: with the Diocese of Tasmania as diocesan field officer for the Anglican Boys’ Society, the diocesan youth and education officer; deputy warden at Christ College in the University of Tasmania (1980 to 1984); director of parish education at St Stephen’s Church, Mount Waverley, in the Diocese of Melbourne (1985); assistant curate, assistant priest and parish priest in various locations in Tasmania including Claremont; and director of Anglicare Tasmania (1994–1998) including two years as Archdeacon for Church and Society.
Aspinall was consecrated as a bishop on 29 June 1998 in Adelaide where he served as an assistant bishop until December 2001.
In 2003, a widely reported allegation of child sexual abuse by another priest in Tasmania implicated Aspinall as being associated with the circumstances leading to the alleged abuse. Aspinall denied that he was in any way involved with the circumstances of the alleged abuse.ABC website
By his own admission, Aspinall was surprised by a "No religion" campaign which was launched by an atheist lobby group in the lead-up to the 2011 Census.Diocese of Brisbane website
In terms of social justice issues, Aspinall has spoken out against the ill-treatment of asylum seekers.ABC website
Aspinall has also encouraged new money-making ventures for the diocese. During the cathedral's completion several fundraising efforts were made.  He has also initiated ventures to allow parishioners to tithe via direct debit and leave their estates to the diocese by distributing information about creating wills that favour the diocese.Diocese of Brisbane website

==Personal life==

Aspinall is married to Christa Aspinall.Anglican Communion Directory, March 2000

==References==

==External links==


