[[Relational database]]

CATEGORIES: Relational model, Database theory, Types of databases, English inventions, 1969 introductions

A relational database is a database that has a collection of tables of data items, all of which is formally described and organized according to the relational model. Data in a single table represents a relation, from which the name of the database type comes. In typical solutions, tables may have additionally defined relationships with each other.
In the relational model, each table schema must identify a column or group of columns, called the primary key, to uniquely identify each row. A relationship can then be established between each row in the table and a row in another table by creating a foreign key, a column or group of columns in one table that points to the primary key of another table. The relational model offers various levels of refinement of table organization and reorganization called database normalization. (See Normalization below.) The database management system (DBMS) of a relational database is called an RDBMS, and is the software of a relational database.
In relational databases, each data item has a row of attributes, so the database displays a fundamentally tabular organization.  The table goes down a row of items (the records) and across many columns of attributes or fields.  The same data (along with new and different attributes) can be organized into different tables.
The term relational does not just refer to relationships between tables:  firstly, it refers to the table itself[tpl]cn|date=January 2014[/tpl], or rather, the relationship between columns within a table; and secondly, it refers to links between tables.  
Important columns in any relational database's tables will be a column whose entry (customer ID, serial number) can uniquely identify any particular item or record (the primary key), and any column(s) that link to other tables (the foreign key(s)).  The size and complexity of relational databases typically requires stored procedures to support the relationships and provide access (interfaces) to external programs which, for example, "query" the relational database to retrieve and present selected data.
Relational databases are both created and queried by DataBase Management Systems (DBMSs).  Relational databases displaced hierarchical databases because the ability to add new relations made it possible to add new information that was valuable but "broke" a database's original hierarchical conception. The trend continues as a networked planet and social media create the world of "big data" which is larger and less structured than the datasets and tasks that relational databases handle well (it is instructive to compare Hadoop).

==Terminology==

The relational database was first defined in June 1970 by Edgar Codd, of IBM's San Jose Research Laboratory.[tpl]cite journal|last=Codd|first=E.F.|year=1970|title=A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Banks|url=|journal=Communications of the ACM|volume=13|issue=6|pages=377–387|doi=10.1145/362384.362685[/tpl]  Codd's view of what qualifies as an RDBMS is summarized in Codd's 12 rules. A relational database has become the predominant choice in storing data.  Other models besides the relational model include the hierarchical database model and the network model.
The table below summarizes some of the most important relational database terms and their SQL equivalents.

==Relations or Tables==

A relation is defined as a set of tuples that have the same attributes. A tuple usually represents an object and information about that object. Objects are typically physical objects or concepts. A relation is usually described as a table, which is organized into rows and columns. All the data referenced by an attribute are in the same domain and conform to the same constraints.
The relational model specifies that the tuples of a relation have no specific order and that the tuples, in turn, impose no order on the attributes. Applications access data by specifying queries, which use operations such as select to identify tuples, project to identify attributes, and join to combine relations. Relations can be modified using the insert, delete, and update operators. New tuples can supply explicit values or be derived from a query. Similarly, queries identify tuples for updating or deleting.
Tuples by definition are unique. If the tuple contains a candidate or primary key then obviously it is unique; however, a primary key need not be defined for a row or record to be a tuple. The definition of a tuple requires that it be unique, but does not require a primary key to be defined. Because a tuple is unique, its attributes by definition constitute a superkey.

==Base and derived relations==

In a relational database, all data are stored and accessed via relations. Relations that store data are called "base relations", and in implementations are called "tables". Other relations do not store data, but are computed by applying relational operations to other relations. These relations are sometimes called "derived relations". In implementations these are called "views" or "queries". Derived relations are convenient in that they act as a single relation, even though they may grab information from several relations. Also, derived relations can be used as an abstraction layer.

===Domain===

A domain describes the set of possible values for a given attribute, and can be considered a constraint on the value of the attribute. Mathematically, attaching a domain to an attribute means that any value for the attribute must be an element of the specified set.
The character data value 'ABC', for instance, is not in the integer domain, but the integer value 123 is in the integer domain.

==Constraints==

Constraints make it possible to further restrict the domain of an attribute. For instance, a constraint can restrict a given integer attribute to values between 1 and 10. Constraints provide one method of implementing business rules in the database. SQL implements constraint functionality in the form of check constraints.
Constraints restrict the data that can be stored in relations. These are usually defined using expressions that result in a boolean value, indicating whether or not the data satisfies the constraint. Constraints can apply to single attributes, to a tuple (restricting combinations of attributes) or to an entire relation.
Since every attribute has an associated domain, there are constraints (domain constraints). The two principal rules for the relational model are known as entity integrity and referential integrity.

===Primary key===

A primary key uniquely specifies a tuple within a table. In order for an attribute to be a good primary key it must not repeat. While natural attributes (attributes used to describe the data being entered) are sometimes good primary keys, surrogate keys are often used instead. A surrogate key is an artificial attribute assigned to an object which uniquely identifies it (for instance, in a table of information about students at a school they might all be assigned a student ID in order to differentiate them). The surrogate key has no intrinsic (inherent) meaning, but rather is useful through its ability to uniquely identify a tuple.
Another common occurrence, especially in regards to N:M cardinality is the composite key. A composite key is a key made up of two or more attributes within a table that (together) uniquely identify a record. (For example, in a database relating students, teachers, and classes.  Classes could be uniquely identified by a composite key of their room number and time slot, since no other class could have exactly the same combination of attributes. In fact, use of a composite key such as this can be a form of data verification, albeit a weak one.)

===Foreign key===

A foreign key is a field in a relational table that matches the primary key column of another table. The foreign key can be used to cross-reference tables. Foreign keys need not have unique values in the referencing relation. Foreign keys effectively use the values of attributes in the referenced relation to restrict the domain of one or more attributes in the referencing relation.
A foreign key could be described formally as: "For all tuples in the referencing relation projected over the referencing attributes, there must exist a tuple in the referenced relation projected over those same attributes such that the values in each of the referencing attributes match the corresponding values in the referenced attributes."

===Stored procedures===

A stored procedure is executable code that is associated with, and generally stored in, the database. Stored procedures usually collect and customize common operations, like inserting a tuple into a relation, gathering statistical information about usage patterns, or encapsulating complex business logic and calculations. Frequently they are used as an application programming interface (API) for security or simplicity. Implementations of stored procedures on SQL RDBMSs often allow developers to take advantage of procedural extensions (often vendor-specific) to the standard declarative SQL syntax.
Stored procedures are not part of the relational database model, but all commercial implementations include them.

===Index===

An index is one way of providing quicker access to data. Indices can be created on any combination of attributes on a relation. Queries that filter using those attributes can find matching tuples randomly using the index, without having to check each tuple in turn. This is analogous to using the index of a book to go directly to the page on which the information you are looking for is found, so that you do not have to read the entire book to find what you are looking for. Relational databases typically supply multiple indexing techniques, each of which is optimal for some combination of data distribution, relation size, and typical access pattern. Indices are usually implemented via B+ trees, R-trees, and bitmaps.
Indices are usually not considered part of the database, as they are considered an implementation detail, though indices are usually maintained by the same group that maintains the other parts of the database. It should be noted that use of efficient indexes on both primary and foreign keys can dramatically improve query performance. This is because B-tree indexes result in query times proportional to log(n) where n is the number of rows in a table and hash indexes result in constant time queries (no size dependency so long as the relevant part of the index fits into memory).

==Relational operations==

Queries made against the relational database, and the derived relvars in the database are expressed in a relational calculus or a relational algebra. In his original relational algebra, Codd introduced eight relational operators in two groups of four operators each. The first four operators were based on the traditional mathematical set operations:
The remaining operators proposed by Codd involve special operations specific to relational databases:
Other operators have been introduced or proposed since Codd's introduction of the original eight including relational comparison operators and extensions that offer support for nesting and hierarchical data, among others.

==Normalization==

Normalization was first proposed by Codd as an integral part of the relational model. It encompasses a set of procedures designed to eliminate nonsimple domains (non-atomic values) and the redundancy (duplication) of data, which in turn prevents data manipulation anomalies and loss of data integrity.  The most common forms of normalization applied to databases are called the normal forms.

==References==


