[[Anatole Kaletsky]]

CATEGORIES: 1952 births, People from Moscow, Soviet emigrants to the United Kingdom, Living people, British journalists, Alumni of King's College, Cambridge, Harvard University alumni, The Times people

Anatole Kaletsky (born June 1, 1952) is an economist and journalist based in the United Kingdom. He has written since 1976 for The Economist, The Financial Times and The Times of London before joining Reuters and The International Herald Tribune in 2012. He has been named Newspaper Commentator of the Year in the BBC’s What the Papers Say awards, and has twice received the British Press Award for Specialist Writer of the Year.
He has been an economic consultant since 1997, providing policy analysis and asset allocation advice to over 800 financial institutions, multinational companies and international organisations through his company, GaveKal, which is co-run with Louis and Charles Gave. He was elected to the governing Council of the Royal Economic Society in 1998.
Kaletsky was born in 1952 in Moscow, USSR and also spent his childhood in Poland and Australia. He has lived in England and the US since 1966. Mr Kaletsky was educated at King's College at the University of Cambridge where he graduated with a first class honours degree in Mathematics and at Harvard University, where he was a Kennedy Memorial Scholar and gained a master's degree in Economics. He is married to Fiona Murphy, a documentary film producer and they have three children: Kitty, Misha, and Sasha. In 1976 he joined The Economist, writing about business and finance. Three years later he moved to the Financial Times, working in a variety of posts including New York Bureau Chief, Washington Correspondent, International Economics Correspondent and Moscow Correspondent.
Beginning in 1990 he was Economics Editor of The Times, and later became Editor-at-Large. In early 2012, Kaletsky began his new post, in the Analysis and Opinion section of the Reuters online newspaper, where he writes a weekly column. His articles also appear in print around the world in the International Herald Tribune. Like many economists, he has made predictions that were contradicted by subsequent events, and this tendency was noted by the satirical magazine Private Eye. For example, Kaletsky wrote, "… I am one of the few economic commentators who has consistently made light of the anxieties about a “day of reckoning” for British homeowners and consumers …"Anatole Kaletsky Britain doesn't have to make things to boom 19 August 2004
In 2010, Kaletsky suggested the emergence of a new form of capitalism, which he calls Capitalism 4.0. The book's writing was primarily influenced by the subprime mortgage crises of 2007 to 2009; and draws upon the pattern or the fallibility of capitalism.Private Eye, 2 Oct - 15 Oct 2009, Issue No. 1246, p.9.  In his book Capitalism 4.0: The Birth of a New Economy in the Aftermath of Crisis, Kaletsky suggests that capitalism is "not a static set of institutions but an evolutionary system that reinvents and reinvigorates itself through crisis.Kaletsky, A. (2010) Capitalism 4.0: The Birth of a New Economy in the Aftermath of Crisis. NY; Perseus/Public Affairs"
In 2012, Kaletsky was appointed Chairman of the Institute for New Economic Thinking, a foundation established after the 2008 financial crisis with $200m of grants from George Soros, Paul Volcker, William Janeway, Jim Balsillie and other leading financiers. INET was set up post-crisis to challenge the mainstream assumptions in contemporary economic research.
On his Reuters' blog, Kaletsky appealed several times the central banks to do "quantitative easing for the people".Anatole Kaletsky, "How about quantitative easing for the People?", August 2012Anatole Kaletsky,Central banks make an historic turn, Reuters, September 2012 This solution would consist in enabling central banks to create debt-free money and inject it into the economy through direct cash transfers to the citizens, instead of injecting money through the banking system. Kaletsky claims this radical solution "may be another idea whose time has come".Anatole Kaletsky "Suddenly QE for the People seems possible", Reuters, August 2012

==References==

==External links==


