[[KZSU]]

CATEGORIES: Freeform radio stations, Stanford culture, Radio stations in the San Francisco Bay Area, College radio stations in California, Radio stations established in 1947, 1947 establishments in California

KZSU is a freeform FM radio station broadcasting from the campus of Stanford University in Stanford, California, USA.
KZSU broadcasts in stereo at 90.1 MHz FM with an effective radiated power of 500 watts. The station is owned by the Trustees of Stanford University and is governed by a Board of Directors appointed by the University's President. Operations are managed by a General Manager selected each year from the student body.

==Broadcasting history==

KZSU began broadcasting on January 6, 1947, using the informal call letters KSU. Originally an AM carrier-current station, it relied on cables strung throughout Stanford's network of steam tunnels to carry its 590 kHz (later 880 kHz) signal. The first broadcast was a musical comedy revue starring Doodles Weaver. At first, the station broadcast only in the evenings. In the 1940s and 1950s, KZSU was a commercial station featuring popular and classical music, local cultural events, talk shows, and radio plays.
The station was shut down for two years following a raid by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) in August 1958, which resulted from rising interference with the signal of radio station KGO-AM at 810 kHz. Broadcasting resumed in the fall of 1960. Renamed KZSU at the behest of the FCC, the station received a noncommercial FM license in 1964, moved its transmitter from the center of campus to the nearby foothills in 1970, and upgraded its transmitter power from 10 to 500 watts in 1978. The AM carrier gradually died in the early 1980s.
Well-known KZSU alumni include former FCC chairman Bill Kennard, inventor Ray Dolby, murdered journalist Daniel Pearl, TV "Batman" Adam West, broadcasting mogul and KGO talk show host Jim Gabbert,  syndicated radio personality Paul "The Lobster" Wells, film director Jay Roach, Hollywood producer Mike Tollin, Court TV News co-anchor Vinnie Politan, NBC News correspondent Pete Williams, post-punk laptop rapper MC Lars, and a bevy of sportscasters including Don Tollefson, Scott Reiss, and San Francisco Giants play-by-play man Dave Flemming.
Today, KZSU's all-volunteer staff is made up of assorted locals as well as Stanford students and staff. KZSU's 500-watt signal covers much of the San Francisco Bay Area, reaching from Oakland and parts of San Francisco in the north, to Fremont and points beyond in the east, and down to around Gilroy in the south. KZSU has also broadcast live on the internet since 1995.

==KZSU's programming==

KZSU's programming runs from the legendary to the ephemeral. A few highlights:
Current programming at KZSU consists primarily of music, with an emphasis on independent new releases in a wide range of genres. KZSU's music library contained nearly 80,000 CDs and a similar number of vinyl discs as of December 2005.
The station is also notable for its commitment to Stanford athletics. In recent years KZSU has carried live coverage of eight Stanford team sports throughout the year (football, men's and women's basketball and soccer, baseball, women's volleyball and softball). KZSU
also produces news and talk shows, and simulcasts meetings of the Palo Alto City Council, as well as services from Stanford Memorial Church.

==External links==


