[[Timoci Silatolu]]

CATEGORIES: Members of the House of Representatives of Fiji, Rewa people, Living people

Timoci Qiolevu Silatolu, sometimes known by his chiefly title of Ratu, is a former Fijian politician.
Ratu timoci Silatolu is a telecommunications engineer by profession. 
He originates from the province of Rewa in the Chiefly village of Lomanikoro. His wife Salome SIlatolu a current school teacher for 35 years now. They  have 4 children the eldest is Ratu Vitu Delairewa Malcolm Silatolu, Aporosa Silatolu and the eldest of his 2 daughters is Adi Losalini Maramanivula Grace SIlatolu and Ro Miriama Lele Kakua CIndy SIlatou. 

==Political career==

As a candidate of the Fijian Association Party, Silatolu was elected to represent the Rewa Fijian Communal Constituency in the House of Representatives in the general election of 1999.  Although his party formed part of the People's Coalition government that was subsequently formed, Silatolu was not appointed to the Cabinet.
Silatolu was appointed Assistant Minister of Health in the interim government organized by Laisenia Qarase in July 2000.  He contested the general election held to restore democracy in September 2001 as a candidate of the Conservative Alliance, comprising mostly Speight-sympathizers, but lost his seat to his cousin, Ro Teimumu Kepa of the United Fiji Party.

==Support for Unity Bill==

Silatolu said that he supported the Reconciliation, Tolerance, and Unity Bill, a controversial piece of legislation promoted by Prime Minister Laisenia Qarase and Attorney-General Qoriniasi Bale.  The legislation establishes a Commission empowered to compensate victims and pardon perpetrators of coup-related offenses.

==Coup==

Silatolu was involved in an alleged coup and served time in jail. At one time he was facing a death sentence.Fiji coup convicts warned they may face death sentence, tonews.com, August 2010, accessed December 2010
Ratu Timoci Silatolu is still currently in prison and it has been 14 years now.

==References==


