[[Wales Office]]

CATEGORIES: Ministerial departments of the United Kingdom Government, Government of Wales, Politics of Wales, Organisations based in Cardiff, Organisations based in London, 1999 establishments in the United Kingdom

The Wales Office is a United Kingdom government department. It replaced the former Welsh Office, which had extensive responsibility for governing Wales prior to Welsh devolution in 1999.
In the past it has been called "Wales' voice in Westminster and Westminster's voice in Wales". However, it is significantly less powerful since the Government of Wales Act 2006: it is primarily responsible for carrying out the few functions remaining with the Secretary of State for Wales that have not been transferred already to the National Assembly for Wales; and for securing funds for Wales as part of the annual budgetary settlement.About the Wales Office - Walesoffice.gov.uk. Last modified 14 December 2010. Retrieved 08 March 2012
The Secretary of State for Wales has overall responsibility for the office but it is located administratively within the Ministry of Justice (until 2007, the Department for Constitutional Affairs).

==Ministers==

The Wales Office Ministers are as follows:Cabinet Office List of Government Departments and Ministers: Wales Officehttp://www.number10.gov.uk/the-coalition/the-government/
Unlike Scotland and Northern Ireland, Wales does not have its own Law Officers of the Crown; it is part of the England and Wales legal jurisdiction.  The Attorney General for England and Wales therefore advises the United Kingdom Government on its law.Cabinet Office List of Government Departments and Ministers: Attorney General's Office His deputy is the Solicitor General for England and Wales.

==Future==

Following the 'yes' vote in the 2011 referendum on giving the Assembly direct law-making powers, some politicians in Wales, particularly from Plaid Cymru, have called for the abolition of the Wales Office.Presiding officer suggests dropping Welsh secretary - BBC News. Published 07 March 2011. Retrieved 08 March 2012 Dafydd Elis-Thomas, Presiding Officer of the National Assembly for Wales said  I think it would be very useful to up the Wales Office before we start the next Assembly; that would be the logical time because that is the time when our new powers will become fully operational. The relationship then would be inter-governmental and inter-parliamentary. In other words it would be between the National Assembly and the Parliament at Westminster, where there are issues on laws which are made in Westminster which impinge on Wales and vice versa.Wales Office 'hard to justify' says Plaid Cymru leader - BBC News. Published 07 March 2011. Retrieved 08 March 2012 
However, Lord Elis-Thomas was accused of following a "separatist agenda" by Cheryl Gillan, current Conservative Secretary of State for Wales. She was supported by her Labour predecessor Peter Hain, who declared that Wales "still needs a voice around the Cabinet in Westminster".

==References==

==External links==


