[[Simei]]

CATEGORIES: Places in Singapore, Simei

Simei is a housing estate located in the eastern part of Singapore, situated next to Tampines New Town across the Pan-Island Expressway. The name Simei is pinyin for "Four Beauties" in Chinese. Initially, the roads in this area was named after the four great beauties in Chinese history (Xishi, Wang Zhaojun, Diao Chan and Yang Guifei). However, due to difficulties in pronouncing these street names by the non-Chinese ethnicities, the roads were renamed Simei Streets 1 to 4.
Simei is a well-developed estate with plenty of amenities and facilities. There are schools, an MRT station, coffee shops and a shopping mall. East Point Mall is the only shopping mall located here that cater to the needs of the residents, and houses shops such as restaurants, bookstores and music shops which has been closed for renovation which will be completed in 2014.
NTUC Fairprice, a leading hypermarket chain in Singapore, is located outiside the former Eastpoint mall . Cheers and 7-11 are two 24-hour convenience stores located near Simei MRT Station. Simei Park is the only park in Simei, consisting of a playground, elderly fitness corner and running tracks. There are different kinds of residential dwellings in the area, comprising landed properties, condominiums, mansions and public housing flats. For medical needs, Changi General Hospital is located here as well, and serves many Singaporeans living in the eastern area. The buses that serve the Simei estate are SBS Transit bus services 5, 9, 12, 20 and 38. Bus services 2, 10, 17 and 31 also pass through the outskirts of Simei. The current MP serving the Changi Simei constituency is Ms Jessica Tan Soon Neo.

==Amenities==

There are wide range of amenities at Simei, including Changi General Hospital, retail outlets and the Changi Simei community centre.  
Education facilities include the ITE College East, the Metta Development School, Changkat Primary School and Changkat Changi Secondary School.
There is an international school near Expo and also the upcoming 4th University in Singapore called Singapore University of Technology and Design.
Transport links include the Simei MRT Station and close proximity to Singapore Changi Airport via the Pan-Island Expressway.

==Transport==

Simei MRT Station is part of the East West Line. There are bus routes which plies along Simei area, they are 5, 9, 20, 38, Premium 531 and NR7. For the bus services that plies at the outskirts, they are routes 10, 17 and 31 which is from Simei Avenue, and also route 12 in Simei Street 1.

