[[Stockholm School of Economics]]

CATEGORIES: Stockholm School of Economics, Business schools in Sweden, Universities in Sweden, Higher education in Stockholm, Educational institutions established in 1909, Economics schools, 1909 establishments in Sweden

The Stockholm School of Economics (SSE) or Handelshögskolan i Stockholm (HHS) is one of the leading European business schools. SSE is a private business school that receives most of its financing from private sources. SSE offers bachelors, masters and MBA programs, along with highly regarded PhD programs and extensive Executive Education (customized and open programs).
SSE's Masters in Management program is ranked no. 18 worldwide by the Financial Times.http://rankings.ft.com/businessschoolrankings/masters-in-management QS ranks SSE no.26 among universities in the field of economics worldwide.http://www.topuniversities.com/university-rankings/world-university-rankings/2012/subject-rankings/social-science/economics?page=1 
SSE is accredited by EQUIS certifying that all of its main activities, teaching as well as research, are of the highest international standards. SSE is also the Swedish member institution of CEMS together with universities such as London School of Economics, Copenhagen Business School, Tsinghua University, Bocconi University, HEC Paris and the University of St. Gallen.
SSE has founded sister organizations: SSE Riga in Riga, Latvia, and SSE Russia in St Petersburg, Russia. It also operates a research institute in Tokyo, Japan; the EIJS (European Institute of Japanese Studies).

==History==

The Stockholm School of Economics was founded in 1909 on private initiative as a response to rapid industrialization and a growing need for well educated businessmen and company managers and has maintained close ties with the business community ever since. The foundation followed a substantial donation in 1903 by Knut Agathon Wallenberg. The name handelshögskola (roughly "college of commerce") was a parallel to the German term Handelshochschule, used by a number of German institutions started in the years before, commencing with Handelshochschule Leipzig in 1898. The term högskola was at this time also established for specialised higher educational institutions outside the universities, such as the Royal Institute of Technology, (Kungliga) Tekniska högskolan, which bore that name from 1877.
While founded as a business school, the subject of economics featured prominently in the research and curriculum of the school from the beginning.
The most well known scholars of the Stockholm School of Economics are arguably the economists Eli Heckscher (professor of economics and statistics 1909–1929, professor of economic history 1929–1945), Gunnar Myrdal and Bertil Ohlin (professors of economics). Heckscher is also known as the founder of economic history as an independent academic discipline and his work Svenskt Arbete och Liv is a fundamental work within this subject.
Ohlin was also a leading figure within the school of doctrine with the same name, the so-called Stockholm school; a group of leading Scandinavian economists influenced by Knut Wicksell, most of them active in Stockholm, either at the Stockholm School of Economics or the Stockholm University College. This school of doctrine was to have a profound influence on post-WWII Swedish economic policy and the development of the modern Scandinavian Welfare state. Heckscher and Ohlin jointly developed the so-called Heckscher-Ohlin theory, the standard international mathematical model of international trade. Gunnar Myrdal received the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in 1974 (shared with his ideological nemesis, Austrian economist Friedrich Hayek); Bertil Ohlin received the Nobel Prize in Economics in 1977 (shared with British economist James Meade). Other prominent members of the Stockholm school were the Stockholm University professor Gustav Cassel, who developed standard economic theory of Purchasing power parity and economist Dag Hammarskjöld, general secretary of the United Nations in New York City, USA.

==Selection process==

Applicants have to take a GMAT over 600 and a TOEFL iBT over 100 in order to be considered suitable for applying.http://www.hhs.se/Education/MSc/Pages/default.aspx 
For the academic year 2012/2013 the university received 3261 applications for the 150 available places on their Master in Science programs.http://vhs.se/PageFiles/11483/MASTER-HT2012-sista__betdag.xls?epslanguage=sv Therefore, the according acceptance rate was 4.565%.

==Programs==

Stockholm School of Economics offers the following programs:
The MSc programs are all conducted in English.
SSE Master of Science in Business and Management
The Master of Science in Business and Management is a two-year program. (120 ECTS credits) There are offered three specializations: International Business (CEMS), Management and Marketing & Media Management. Within their specialization, students write a Master's thesis worth 30 ECTS credits.
SSE Master of Science in General Management
The MSc in General Management is a two-year business program targeting students with bachelor’s degrees in subjects other than Business or Economics, i.e. engineering, social science law or medicine. 
SSE Master of Science in Economics
The MSc in Economics is a program designed for students with a background in economics or business. As well as the other master programs it is a two-year program with 120 ECTS. There are offered two specializations: Applied Economic Analysis and International Economics.
SSE Master of Science in Finance & Accounting
The MSc in Finance & Accounting is also a two-year program (120 ECTS). There are offered three different specializations: Investment Management, Corporate Finance and Accounting & Financial Management. 
SSE Masters of Business Administration (MBA), Executive Format
The SSE EMBA program was launched in 2001. Since 2001, the year the Financial Times began its Executive MBA ranking, the SSE Executive MBA has been the first in the Nordic league. Worldwide its average rank in the last three years was 56.http://rankings.ft.com/businessschoolrankings/stockholm-school-of-economics/emba-rankings-2011#emba-rankings-2011
SSE PhD in Business Administration, Economics, Finance
The SSE PhD Program was launched more than 60 years ago and has graduated more than 500 PhDs. There are three separate PhD programs at SSE: Business Administration, Economics, Finance.

==Alumni==

Stockholm School of Economics (SSE) alumni are defined as previous students that have graduated from one of SSE’s degree programs. Today, there are some 14 000 alumni in this network. In addition to the alumni are the so-called SSE IFL Networkers, previous participants at IFL open or custom programs, these sum up to additional 10 000.
SSE maintains contacts with its alumni in a number of different ways; both through direct and indirect contacts and through various types of communication channels. Contacts are administered through the SSE Alumni Office.
Today, many alumni are involved in advisory boards, in the alumni association boards, in event jury’s, in the Student Association etc. all aligned to SSE activities. Even more alumni return to the School as guest lectures, or sponsors of course projects, as suppliers of internship opportunities, or as recruiters from large companies.
Currently, if an alumnus wishes to connect with another SSE graduate, they have five primary options:
1. Attending the alumni events arranged by SSE Alumni Office
2. Networking through SSE AlumniNet, which is a web portal open to holders of an SSE diploma. AlumniNet has some 14 000 members as of January 2013, or through the official LinkedIn groups maintained by SSE
3. Membership in SSE Kamratförening – an alumni association sponsored and organized by alumni for Swedish-speaking graduates of SSE - or by joining American Friends of SSE – an affiliated alumni group, based in the US.
4. Joining any of the unofficial alumni groups and networks, maintained by the alumni themselves, e.g. in the UK.

==See also==

Click here for a list of associated institutes.

==References==

==External links==


