[[Bessie Anderson Stanley]]

CATEGORIES: Writers from Kansas, Year of birth uncertain, 1952 deaths, 1879 births

Elisabeth-Anne "Bessie" Anderson Stanley (1879–1952Old Poetry: Success) is the author of the poem Success (What is success? or What Constitutes Success?), which is often incorrectly attributedSuch as in this memorial: Max Kreger, a memorial, Sandusky District Library, Sandusky, Michigan to Ralph Waldo Emerson"What Constitutes Success": A $250 Prize Story by a Lincoln Woman Lincoln Sentinel, November 30, 1905 (archived by Bill and Diana Sowers on Lincoln County, Kansas Genealogy & History website)In Search of Success, extensive research by Dirk H. Kelder (personal website)Success Quote - Ralph Waldo Emerson, Jone Johnson Lewis on "Transcendentalists" website or Robert Louis Stevenson.Reader's Digest Admits Mistake, Lincoln Sentinel-Republican, November 5, 1953 (archived by Bill and Diana Sowers on Lincoln County, Kansas Genealogy & History website)
Her poem was written in 1904 for a contest held in Brown Book Magazine,''The Truth behind the Poem "Success" (email exchange between Robin Olson and Bethanne Larson, Stanley's great-granddaughter, on "Robin's Web" website) by George Livingston Richards Co. of Boston, Massachusetts  Mrs. Stanley, of Lincoln, Kansas, submitted the words in the form of an essay, rather than as a poem.  The competition was to answer the question "What is success?" in 100 words or less.  Mrs. Stanley won the first prize of $250."Bessie Stanley's Famous Poem"
Written in verse form, it reads:
The poem was in Bartlett's Familiar Quotations in the 1930s or 1940s but was mysteriously removed in the 1960s. It was again included in the seventeenth edition.  However, it does appear in a 1911 book, More Heart Throbs, volume 2, on pages 1–2.Grosset & Dunlap of New York, ©1911 by Chapple Publishing Company Ltd. of Boston, MA (from Success: Finding a Gem among the Litter in the Literature, Chuck Anastasia, Coolspark blog, February 24, 2007)
Ann Landers (and her sister Abby) are also said to have misattributed the poem to Emerson and her concession to a public correction is in The Ann Landers Encyclopedia.

==References==


