[[Irlams o' th' Height]]

CATEGORIES: Areas of Greater Manchester, Geography of Salford

Irlams o' th' Height is an area of Pendleton, in Salford, Greater Manchester, England. It is on the extremity of the City of Salford metropolitan district boundary, and stands next to Swinton and Pendlebury. It also has borders with the rest of Eccles.
One of the main features of Irlams o' th' Height is the A6 dual carriageway running through it, with Bolton Road running parallel to it.
The village is on top of the Irwell Valley on higher ground that the rest of Pendleton (Hence the name "The Height"), and roads such as Bank Lane go down the valley to Duchy Road. There has been a settlement at Irlams o' th' Height for many centuries, and it is widely accepted that the name derives from the Irlam family (see below) that ran the Pack Horse Inn during the 17th and 18th centuries. It was first recorded in the parish of Eccles in 1180.[tpl]cite web |url=http://www.salford.gov.uk/living/planning/conservation/viewconservation/conirlams.htm |title=Irlams o' th' Height |publisher= Salford City Council |accessdate=2006-07-07[/tpl] The village became prosperous in the 19th century due to the Industrial Revolution, and became a well established community of handloom weavers.
Some parts of the area are now designated as a conservation area, centring on Queen Street, King Street and Claremont Road, as these retain the early street pattern. Thirty buildings are recognised as being of archaeological or historic interest in the Greater Manchester Sites and Monuments Register. The conservation area was designated in 1991, and it is 1.02 hectares (2.52 acres) in size.
Irlams o' th' Height had a railway station until 1955 when it was closed due to a low number of passengers. It was on the Manchester to Southport Line via Wigan Wallgate. Heading towards Wigan, the preceding station was Pendleton (closed in 1994 after Salford Crescent railway station opening several years previously) and the following station was Pendlebury, closed in 1960. Pendleton College, a sixth form college is situated on Dronfield Road, on the site of the former Pendleton High School for Girls, which closed in 1973. Buile Hill High School is nextdoor on Eccles Old Road (A576), close to Seedley. There is a large Co-op near the junction of the A580, A6 and A666 close to the start of the East Lancashire Road and the A666 road to Pendlebury, Clifton, Kearsley, Farnworth and beyond.
Just over the Pendlebury boundary stands the parish church of St John the Evangelist, which includes a burial ground. Among those buried there is Geoff Bent, one of eight Manchester United players who died as a result of the Munich air disaster in February 1958. Bent was born locally in 1932.http://www.munich58.co.uk/victims/bent/index.asp Irlams o' th' Height is also home to a large number of supporters of Manchester United, being home to past managers and players alike also the local pubs have held supporters meetings in years gone by. 
St John's is also the resting place of the captain of Swinton Rugby Club, Jim Valentine, an England rugby union international during the late Victorian era. He was killed by lightning at Barmouth, Wales on Monday, 25 July 1904 whilst on holiday, four days before his 38th birthday. His 48 tries for "the Lions" in the 1888-89 season still stands as a club record.

==References==


