[[Poplar River (Manitoba)]]

CATEGORIES: Rivers of Manitoba

The Poplar River runs towards the eastern shore of Lake Winnipeg, in Manitoba, Canada. This river, which flows west into Lake Winnipeg, has a watershed beginning near the Manitoba and Ontario border. The river is located in one of the last, large, and intact boreal forests in the world.
The Poplar River's Ojibwe name is Negginan meaning "my home." Poplar River lies near the Asatiwisipe River. It is a protected river with pristine forests and many undeveloped lakes and creeks along it. This watershed is the traditional land use area for Poplar River First Nation. The Ojibwe still use the land and waters for hunting, fishing, and gathering wild foods and medicines. The First Nation community has designated their traditional lands as a protected area with the support of Manitoba's government.
The river is a part of a proposed United Nations World Heritage Site to protect the large intact area of wilderness along Lake Winnipeg and in northwestern Ontario. This wilderness river is one of the few rivers in southern Canada that is still very pristine and clean, with little or no development along the shoreline and in the entire watershed. There are no major mines, roads, hydro, or logging areas in the region. The area provides an essential habitat for a segment of the threatened woodland caribou, and also protects habitat for the chestnut lamprey, a species of special concern. Numerous archaeological sites and pictographs exist, helping to demonstrate that the area has long been of special significance to First Nations.
The river is a popular destination for fishing, canoeing, ecotourism, and sightseeing.  The water is very warm in the summer and fall for swimming, unlike glacier and mountain fed waters.  There are many cliffs, rapids, and waterfalls along the river.  The area has woodland caribou, wolves, black bears, lynx, bobcats, and remote beaches.  Many species of birds nest in the region, including the bald eagle and the great grey owl.

==See also==


