[[Greenwich Township School District (Gloucester County, New Jersey)]]

CATEGORIES: New Jersey District Factor Group DE, School districts in Gloucester County, New Jersey

The Greenwich Township School District is a community public school district that serves students in kindergarten through eighth grade from Greenwich Township, Gloucester County, New Jersey, United States. 
As of the 2007-08 school year, the district's two schools had an enrollment of 535 students and 39.0 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 13.7.District information for the Greenwich Township School District, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed November 5, 2009.
The district is classified by the New Jersey Department of Education as being in District Factor Group "DE", the fifth highest of eight groupings. District Factor Groups organize districts statewide to allow comparison by common socioeconomic characteristics of the local districts. From lowest socioeconomic status to highest, the categories are A, B, CD, DE, FG, GH, I and J.NJ Department of Education District Factor Groups (DFG) for School Districts, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed October 27, 2009.
Students in grades 9-12 attend Paulsboro High School in Paulsboro as part of a sending/receiving relationship with the Paulsboro Public Schools.Paciolla, Christina. "Slash in school aid to Greenwich Township prompts tax hike", Gloucester County Times, March 25, 2010. Accessed January 25, 2011. "The cost of sending over 100 township students to Paulsboro High School also increased to $2,500 per pupil."

==Schools==

Schools in the district (with 2007-08 enrollment data from the National Center for Education StatisticsData for the Greenwich Township School District, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed December 13, 2009.) are:

==Administration==

Core members of the district's administration are:Administrative Team, Greenwich Township School District. Accessed December 13, 2009.Gloucester County School Directory, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed November 5, 2009.

==References==

==External links==


