[[Mennonite relief sale]]

CATEGORIES: Mennonitism, Mennonitism in Canada, Mennonitism in the United States, Charity fundraisers

Forty five Mennonite relief sales throughout the United States and Canada raise five million USD annually for Mennonite Central Committee to fund relief and service projects throughout the world.
==What is the Mennonite Central Committee?== 
Mennonite Central Committee (MCC) is a relief, service, and peace agency of the North American Mennonite and Brethren in Christ churches. MCC reflects the biblical call to care for the hungry and thirsty, the stranger, the sick and those in prison. 
Matthew 25:35-36 
I was hungry and you gave me food, 
I was thirsty and you gave me something to drink, 
I was a stranger and you welcomed me, 
I was naked and you gave me clothing, 
I was sick and you took care of me, 
I was in prison and you visited me.

==MCC Mission Statement==

MCC seeks to demonstrate God's love by working among people suffering from poverty, conflict, oppression and natural disaster. 
MCC serves as a channel for interchange by building relationships that are mutually transformative. 
MCC strives for peace, justice and dignity of all people by sharing our experiences, resources and faith in Jesus Christ. 
Over 70 Mennonite, Brethren in Christ, and Amish congregations in Kansas, and friends, donate their gifts and services for this annual event. Through participation in the Kansas Relief Sale, we share our resources to mend a broken world. We send food to satisfy hunger, clothing to warm the cold, and compassionate people to help build self esteem and community. More information about the Kansas Sale is located here.
Many of these sales feature quilts handmade by Mennonite and Amish volunteers, auctions, artwork, crafted woodwork, homemade foods, antiques, crafts, plants, children's activities, and musical programs. Most of the goods and labor are donated, and 88%
of the funds raised go directly into the field.
For more information about MCC call or write to 21 South 12th St., PO Box 500 Akron, PA 17501-0500 or call 717-859-1151 or toll free 888-563-4676 or go to www.mcc.org. Some photos and materials on this page from www.mcc.org

==External links==


