[[Taenia pisiformis]]

CATEGORIES: Cestoda, Parasites of mammals, Parasitic animals

Taenia pisiformis is a tapeworm.  It is related to Taenia solium, the pork tapeworm, and to Taenia saginata, the beef tapeworm.
The adult may reach up to 200 cm in length. 
The definite host is represented by carnivores such as the dog or the cat.
The intermediate host is represented by hares and rabbits, in which we find the mesacestoide (the larval stage) known as: cysticercus pisiformis. This is found in the peritoneum of the intermediate host and can be ingested by the definite host when the dog or cat feeds on the viscera of such an infected intermediate.
Life Cycle
The rabbit host ingests an egg. Then the egg hates in the small intestine, the larval tapeworm go through the intestinal wall and travel to the liver and the blood. The cysticercus develops in the liver for two weeks to four weeks. After that, it comes out into the peritoneal cavity where it attaches to the viscera. Therefore, when the dog, fox, other candis host eats the rabbit and ingests the cysticercus the protoscolex attaches to the small interstinal wall, and then the worm begins to form proglottids. Gravid proglottids, containing the eggs and detach from the end of the worm. Then pass out in the feces.
Common Diagnostic Test
1. Gross examination of the proglottid
2. Fecal flotation may bring up the eggs if a gravid proglottid has been broken in the feces
Clinical Sign
1. Asymptomatic
2. Extremely heavy worm burdens in small dogs my cause blockage of the intestine.
Treatment
Epsiprantel, Praziquantel and Fenbendazole can be treated.

Image:Taeniapisiformis.jpg|Taenia pisiformis cross section.
Image:Taenia egg.JPG|Taenia pisiformis egg
Image:Cysticercus pisiformis.jpg|Cysticercus pisiformis The larva found in intermediate hosts

==References==

Roberts, L. S., and J. Janovy. Gerald d. schmidt & larry s. roberts' foundations of parasitology. 8th Edition. Missouri: McGraw-Hill Science/Engineering/Math, 2005. pg.347. print.
