[[Loma Linda Broadcasting Network]]

CATEGORIES: Seventh-day Adventist media, Loma Linda University, Christian television networks, American television networks, Religious television stations in the United States, Television channels and stations established in 1997, Loma Linda, California, Recording studios in the United States, Television channels and networks by content, International nongovernmental organizations, International non-profit organizations, Christian media companies, Religious media in the United States, Independent television stations in the United States, Independent ministries of the Seventh-day Adventist Church

Loma Linda Broadcasting Network (LLBN) is a non-profit community and variety television network run predominantly by volunteers in Loma Linda, California, United States.  LLBN has worldwide 24/7 coverage through its 5 networks: LLBN English, LLBN Arabic, LLBN Chinese, LLBN Latino , and LLBN South Asia. Broadcast can be received via GloryStar Satellite Systems - Galaxy 19, Internet video streaming on each website, IPTV services such as Roku and Roku devices (find LLBN under BrightStarTV), Joozoor TV and many more, and Verizon FiOS and cable/low and high power TV stations in select areas. LLBN English broadcasts on Glorystar channel 105, along with LLBN Arabic on Glorystar channel 405 and LLBN Latino on Glorystar channel 505.Glorystar Satellite System Channels 
LLBN media ministry is Christ centered and lead by its mission 'Proclaiming Christ... and His Second Advent... to the World' and its motto 'Lighting Lives, Blessing Nations'. LLBN serves to global Christian religious and spiritual audiences using programs such as talk shows, interview features, church services, preaching programs, musical concerts, sing-along programs and others, in multiple languages.Official website Heading: LLBN Television International Sharing Christ's Love ... LLBN Arabic Christian TV, similarly for other languages The organization carries Loma Linda University Church as a part of their weekly programming. Visit [tpl]url|www.llbn.tv[/tpl] for the complete schedules. 
Keeping up with the social media development, LLBN has established its presence on multiple platforms: on YouTube as LLBN Christian TV, on Facebook with pages for each network - LLBN English, LLBN Arabic, LLBN Chinese, LLBN South Asia, LLBN Latino -, also on Twitter with the handle @LLBNTV and lately on Pinterest as LLBN TV International, on LinkedIn as LLBN - Loma Linda Broadcasting Network International, and Instagram.

==See also==

==External links==

==References==


