[[Upper Montclair (NJT station)]]

CATEGORIES: New Jersey Transit stations, Montclair, New Jersey, Transportation in Essex County, New Jersey, Railway stations on the National Register of Historic Places in New Jersey, Upper Montclair, New Jersey, Stations along Erie Railroad lines, Renaissance Revival architecture in New Jersey, Railway stations opened in 1892, Buildings and structures in Essex County, New Jersey

Upper Montclair Station is a New Jersey Transit station in Upper Montclair, New Jersey, a CDP of Montclair, New Jersey. The station is part of the Montclair-Boonton Line. The station is located between two grade level crossings on Bellevue Avenue and Lorraine Avenue,  and between North Mountain Avenue and Upper Montclair Plaza parallel to the railroad, and is within steps of the Upper Montclair Business District. The station is at mile point 13.7 on the Boonton Line. Closing the grade crossing of Lorraine Avenue is being considered for safety reasons.  
Upper Montclair is the fourth of six stops in Montclair the train makes coming northbound on the line, and the third as one comes southbound. It is 9 stations away from New York, and 8 from Hoboken. A stream, Toney's Brook has its source just to the northwest of the station and separates the northbound platform from the parking lots on either side of the tracks.  Across the street from the station is Anderson Park.

==Station facilities and services==

The original station was a small building, built by the Montclair Railway when the Upper Montclair area was still rural.  It was acquired by the Erie Railroad and rebuilt in 1892. The 1892 station building was damaged in a 2006 fire, but the platform is still used. It is being rebuilt (in 2009), using the remaining Porte-cochere. The new building will mimick the original design, but larger.  The station building will have a restaurant inside, just like before. While the station is being rebuilt, a tent in being used as a shelter on the eastbound platform. On the westbound platform there was a shelter, but now it is gone except for its columns. A former freight house is across Lorraine Avenue form the station.
The platforms, which are at ground level, are only long enough for 5 cars, so only from parts of some trains can passengers exit or board.  There are 111 commuter parking spots, which are let out by permits.  The rest of the parking lots are metered.  There are bike racks for parking bikes.

==Gallery==

]
Image:NJ Transit ABB ALP-44M 4430.jpg|Train bound for Montclair State University. 
Image:AnTra.JPG|A stopping Train seen from the nearby Anderson Park

==References==

==External links==


