[[Strong Angel]]

CATEGORIES: Disaster preparedness

Strong Angel is an informal consortium of agencies and organizations that have together hosted a series of international disaster response demonstrations leveraging public-private collaboration within a complex disaster response scenario. Since 1999 the Strong Angel series has focused on field experimentation within very challenging environments, testing the use of cutting-edge techniques and technologies to facilitate more effective humanitarian response.
The name for the event, Strong Angel, was chosen to recognize two important influences in the humanitarian response sector. The first was "Operation Sea Angel" in 1991, an impromptu rescue operation led by General Henry Stackpole leading a US Navy Amphibious Task Force in urgent response to an un-named cyclone in Bangladesh. That rescue operation is generally credited with saving up to 200,000 lives and stimulated the entire field of research around complex operations in humanitarian response. The second influence was the insightful DARPA Program Manager responsible for the original civil-military integration concept, Dr. Gary Strong.
There are several specific sectors tested in each Strong Angel event, with the general goals of (1) improved information flow, (2) the provisioning of urgent and sustainable critical services, and (3) trans-boundary cooperation, all in the aftermath of a disaster. The Strong Angel demonstrations are broadly international in nature, with more than 15 nations participating in 2006, and the ethos of the demonstration is "radical inclusion" on the supposition that good ideas can come from anywhere - and especially from within the communities most at risk.
Everything created by any Strong Angel event is released to the public domain. Demonstrations have been held in 2000, 2004, and 2006, with the next scheduled for Baja California, Mexico in October 2014 (see below).

==Team==

Strong Angel demonstrations are designed and performed by a globally distributed team of experts led by Eric Rasmussen, MD, MDM, FACP, a former US Navy Commander. Members of the Strong Angel team include medical, military, humanitarian, and technology experts.  Team members are drawn from the public and private sector, civilian and military, domestic and international, and they include engineers, UN staff, humanitarian NGO workers, academic researchers, government employees from several nations, journalists, inventors, policy makers, and active duty military officers.Unfilled Promise, Baseline Magazine, Case 165, May 2005
Strong Angel Director: Dr. Rasmussen has been the director of each Strong Angel Demonstration since the series inception and that will continue into Strong Angel Mexico in 2014.
Until retiring from the Navy in 2007 Dr. Rasmussen served as Fleet Surgeon for the US Navy's Third Fleet, and the Chairman of the Department of Medicine within the US Navy's Medical Center in Bremerton, Washington.  He was also appointed Special Advisor in Humanitarian Informatics for the Office of the Secretary of Defense, and as a Principal Investigator for both DARPA and the National Science Foundation. After retiring from the Navy Dr. Rasmussen was selected by Google.org as the Founding CEO of InSTEDD, a TED Prize awarded to Dr. Larry Brilliant, then Executive Director of Google.org. Dr. Rasmussen is now the Chair of the InSTEDD Board of Directors and is Managing Director of IHS, a multinational "Social Purpose Corporation" in Seattle, Washington, as well as Research Professor in Environmental Security and Global Medicine at San Diego State University.
Strong Angel Executive Committee members during past events, and their current career positions in 2014, include Daniel Engle (now CEO of Infinitum Humanitarian Systems), Gay Mathews (CEO of the North Hawaii Credit Union in Honoka'a, Big Island, Hawaii), Robert Kirkpatrick (Executive Director of the UN's Global Pulse initiative within the Office of the Secretary-General of the United Nations), John Crowley (Senior Manager within the Global Facility for Disaster Risk and Recovery within the World Bank in Washington DC), Suzanne Mikawa Kirkpatrick (formerly the Program Manager within the Office of the Executive at Microsoft, now with a Master's Degree in User-Centered Design and working in New York), Doug Hanchard (Executive Director of Rapid Response Consulting in Ottawa, Canada and London UK), Pete Griffiths (Deputy Division Chief, Future Warfare Systems Division, National Geospatial Intelligence Agency), Nigel Snoad (Director of Global Disaster Response for Google), David Warner (owner of the Taj near Jalalabad in eastern Afghanistan where he runs a collaborative education program for schools in Nangarhar Province near the Kyber Pass), Brian Steckler (director of the Hastily Formed Networks program within the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, California and Lead Architect of the Rapid Telecommunications Assessment Team (RTAT) initiative), Clare Lockhart (Senior Executive within the Institute for State Effectiveness in Washington DC), and Eric Frost (Professor of Geology and Director of the Visualization Laboratory at San Diego State University).
Vice-Admiral Dennis McGinn, sponsor of the Strong Angel concept in 1999 was named in July 2013 the Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Energy, Installations, and the Environment.
Dr. Lin Wells, mentor to many of the Executive Committee members and source funding for the dominant share of the Strong Angel III budget, is formerly the Chief Information Officer for the US Department of Defense and the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Networks and Information Integration. He is now serving as the Director of the Center for Technology and National Security Policy within National Defense University in Washington DC.
The Center for the Management of Information (CMI) at the University of Arizona provided significant planning, technical, and collaboration support and facilitated group meetings as part of a four year DARPA investigation of collaboration with the US Third Fleet.

==Demonstration Series==

===Strong Angel I in 2000===

The first Strong Angel (SA-I) was held near Puu Pa'a on the Big Island of Hawaii in June 2000 to address problems seen in the international response to the Kosovo refugee migration. Strong Angel participants established a distributed medical intelligence communications infrastructure at a mock refugee camp using the latest global communications technologiesSyracuse University researchers team up with international agencies, SU News, June 2000 and lessons learned from the social sciences.[tpl]cite journal|last=Adkins|first=Mark|coauthors=Kruse, John,  et al|title=Experience using collaborative technology with the United Nations and multi-national militaries: rim of the Pacific 2000 Strong Angel exercise in humanitarian assistance|journal=Proceedings of the 34th Annual Hawaii International Conference on Systems Sciences|year=2001|doi=10.1109/HICSS.2001.926247|isbn=0-7695-0981-9|url=http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/login.jsp?tp=&arnumber=926247&url=http%3A%2F%2Fieeexplore.ieee.org%2Fiel5%2F7255%2F20032%2F00926247[/tpl][tpl]cite web|title=Collaborative Data Collection during Strong Angel and RIMPAC 2000|url=http://www.dtic.mil/cgi-bin/GetTRDoc?AD=ADA460208|publisher=MITRE[/tpl]   That first Strong Angel, an ad hoc integration of UN relief agencies and international militaries working in concert toward a serious humanitarian problem, was exceptionally effective and generated positive press in both domestic US and international newspapers and magazines. Several reasons were proposed for the success, but credit must be given to the early support received from senior UN field staff present within the earliest planning conferences that were hosted by the US Navy.Strong Angel extension to RIMPAC 2000 Benefit was also derived from the senior military commander at Strong Angel mandating military participation in a humanitarian effort at a level equal to the intensity required for combat. That requirement was later incorporated within the 2005 US Department of Defense Directive 3000.05, the seminal document mandating that the US military become effective at stability, security, transition and reconstruction (SSTR) operations, a subset of which is military support to humanitarian operations.

===Strong Angel II in 2004===

The second Strong Angel (SA-II) was also held on a remote lava bed in Hawaii and, in 2004, pursued problems identified by members of the first Strong Angel team who were deployed to post-9/11 conflicts in Afghanistan and Iraq. SA-II eventually incorporated 83 tasks designed to propose answers to problems seen in civil-military integration during those conflict deployments, including such topics as trans-boundary communications, civil-military transportation coordination, sustainable power provisioning, machine-based translation services, and competent cultural awareness. Those tasks were each eventually completed, with variable degrees of success, through the efforts of more than 60 staff on a remote and austere site near Kailua-Kona, Hawaii.

===Strong Angel III in 2006===

The third in the Strong Angel series, SA-III was designed to address problems seen in multiple natural and man-made disasters where Strong Angel members have deployed since 2004. Those events include the South Asian Tsunami in December 2004, Hurricane Katrina in August 2005, Hurricane Rita in September 2005, and the Pakistan earthquake in October 2005.  SA-III was held in San Diego, California from 20–26 August 2006. San Diego State University hosted the Strong Angel team. The team members were drawn from US government agencies, international and domestic militaries, First Responders, domestic and international humanitarian organizations, academia, and private volunteers.
There were roughly 50 objectives and tasks identified for SA-III and they incorporate the development of community tools for use within a pandemic influenza response. The immediate goal was the creation of a set of self-organizing and self-distributing principles. The overarching goal was the development of tools and techniques for promoting a robust and resilient community-response capability for both natural and man-made disasters. The event drew from the field experience of many agencies and corporations with deep and successful experience in austere environments, including MedWeb for field diagnostics, telemedicine, and medical informatics, and the Naval Postgraduate School's Hastily Formed Networks for the urgent establishing of civil-military bridge mesh communications.
One of the other objectives within SA-III was the development of social tools and techniques that encourage collaborative cooperation between responders and the population they serve during post-disaster reconstruction. Those have served as a consistent source of tension between the responder's procedural requirements and the stated needs of the people directly affected by the events.
The tools and techniques proposed for answering the tasks were selected for testing and demonstration based on their availability for international deployment by the end of the 2006 calendar year.

===Strong Angel Mexico on 01-03 October 2014 - held on the grounds of the Baja Convention Center in Rosarito Beach, Baja California, Mexico===

The fourth in the series, and the first to be held outside US national boundaries, is scheduled to start on 1 October 2014 on land adjacent to the Baja California Center in Rosarito Beach, Baja California, Mexico, on the Pacific coast about 30 minutes below the US border in San Diego.
Participants include members of the TEDxTijuana and Movamiento Tijuana Innovadora 2014 events in Baja, California, FEMA Innovation Team members from the Hurricane Sandy Response in New York, responders to the earthquake in Haiti, veterans of both Iraq and Afghanistan, NGO staff from eastern Afghanistan, faculty from Singularity University at NASA-Ames Research Center and other academic institutions, Fellows from the Rocky Mountain Institute in Colorado, members of the Launch.org workshop (a public-private consortium comprising  NASA, USAID, the US Department of State, and Nike), faculty from the US Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, NGO and academic partners from the 2013 Supertyphoon Haiyan response in the central Philippines, and inventors from several Hub and Maker Space facilities around the world.
In March 2014 the participant roster listed more than 30 global organizations under consideration.
Within the demonstration there will be a scenario that establishes the problem set around an earthquake. That earthquake leads to sudden displacement of a nearby population, some of whom are injured and require management, and others need water, shelter, food, hygiene, registration, family reunification, and more. The responders, too, need many capabilities to appear urgently, including shelter, power, communications, water, assessments, imagery, GIS visualization, situational awareness, regional safety - the full range of response requirements.
The scenario managers will inject more than 45 problems to be solved across twelve sectors through a timed process. That process will build over three days from simple to quite complex and will eventually require intense collaboration across multiple sectors and between participants for success.
Like other Strong Angel events, this is not a competition and there will be no selection of winners. Every participant is capable of meeting independent milestones and of collaborating effectively with others on the site. It is designed as a collaborative event that demonstrates capabilities under difficult circumstances, and will include as partners (in both planning and execution) real-world occupants of local settlements in Mexico considered to be at high risk in both natural and industrial disasters.
Sales and sales pitches are forbidden on the remote demonstration site, though personal, business, and professional relationship development is strongly encouraged. As in previous Strong Angel events, all participants are self-funded and extensive facilities will be provided for business meetings within the adjacent convention center. Contracting Officers, Procurement and Acquisition Officers, international banking officers, legal staff, and Notaries will be available for consultation during Expo hours.
Unlike previous Strong Angel events, this will not take place in complete isolation, but will be paired with a Human Security Forum taking place within the adjacent Convention Center a hundred yards away. That Forum, much like any trade show or industry convention, will feature booths showing new capabilities for achieving human security in food, water, lighting, power, shelter, medical devices, and other core infrastructure. Those goods and services will be harvested from multiple international sources including STAR-TIDES, Puralytics, Intelliproof, Inhabitat, the Buckminster Fuller Institute, the Pacific Disaster Center, InSTEDD, PATH, iRespond, Lifeline Energy, Regioncast, MetAir, Hydrobee, and many others.
Attendees already responding include Ministerial-level political appointees, private sector corporate Directors, academic and industrial department heads, Flag military officers, Executive Directors and Global Managers from within the non-governmental communities, Senior Managers at The World Bank, and D-level staff from the United Nations.
The scenario demonstration will run 24/7 over the three days and will emphasize technologies appropriate to the capabilities, processes, legislation, and cultural norms found throughout the Americas and the Caribbean. There is, though, little that is unique about the focus on the Americas and all tools will be both sourced and adaptable globally.

==References==

==External links==


