[[Raghunath Dhondo Karve]]

CATEGORIES: Sex educators, Indian birth control activists, Marathi people, 1882 births, 1953 deaths, Indian people, Indian academics

Raghunath Dhondo Karve ( R. D. Karve Devanagari: रघुनाथ धोंडो कर्वे/ र. धो. कर्वे) (January 14, 1882- October 14, 1953) was a professor of mathematics and a social reformer from Maharashtra, India. He was a pioneer in initiating family planning and birth control for masses in Mumbai in 1921.
Raghunath was the eldest son of Bharat Ratna Maharshi Dhondo Keshav Karve. His mother Radhabai died during childbirth in 1891 when he was nine.
He was born in Murud. He studied at New English School, Pune. He stood first in matriculation examination conducted in 1899. He went to Fergusson College, Pune and obtained Bachelor of Arts degree in 1904.
Karve started his professional career as a professor of mathematics at Wilson College in Mumbai. However, when he started publicly expressing his views about family planning, population control, and women's right to experience sexual/sensual pleasure as much as men, the conservative Christian administrators of the college asked him to resign from the professorship. He then devoted himself to the above causes.
On his own initiative, Karve started the very first birth control clinic in India in 1921, the same year when the first birth control clinic opened in London.

==Samaj Swasthya==

Karve published a Marathi magazine Samaj Swasthya (समाजस्वास्थ्य)Issues of Samaj Swasthya reprinted by Padmagandha Publications starting from July 1927 until 1953. In it, he continually discussed issues of society's well being through population control through use of contraceptives so as prevent unwanted pregnancies and induced abortions. He promoted responsible parenting by men, gender equality, and women’s empowerment and right to experience sexual/sensual pleasure. As an illustration of some of Karve's radical thoughts, he expressed the thought that so long as childbirth and venereal diseases are prevented, women could engage in promiscuity—even perhaps with male prostitutes—for the sake of variety in sexual pleasure, if they so desire, without in fact harming their husbands.

==Wife's support==

Karve's wife, Malati, supported his cause though it brought them social ostracism besides his loss of his professorial career. She shared the couple's financial responsibility, and the two chose to remain childless.

==A Critic's AnalysisJalyatil Chandra by M V Dhond (Marathi),1994==

Literary critic M V Dhond has written three essays on Karve. In the third essay, he analyses why Karve was not as successful in his mission as much as Margaret Sanger and Marie Stopes, his counterparts in United States and UK respectively.
Karve’s mission was not restricted to that of Sanger and Stopes namely happy family life, emancipation of women, control of population. Karve wanted women to have as much sexual freedom and sensual pleasure as men.
Dhond claims contemporary society’s objectives were restricted to those of Sanger and Stopes and hence not only Karve’s mission has a whole suffered, he himself was persecuted by society at large. There were other reasons too: Karve’s unattractive personality, poor finances and lack of networking skills.
It’s unfortunate Karve was not alive when three major events, that make us understand woman sexuality better, took place- 

1. Publication of the Kinsey report in 1953 

2. Publication of Masters and Johnson’s book in 1966 and 

3. Publication of The Hite Report in 1976. 

These documents have proven how right Karve was with his thoughts on woman's sexuality.

==Further Reading and Viewing==

==References==

==External links==


