[[Robin Sylvester]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, Musicians from London, English session musicians, English audio engineers, English bass guitarists, People educated at University College School, 1950 births

Robin Sylvester (born 1950 in Hampstead, London) is an English musician, based in San Francisco, who is best known for his ongoing work with RatDog.  Although primarily a bass player, he plays several instruments, including the guitar and keyboards, and has done extensive arranging.Robin Sylvester credits at Allmusic
Sylvester began his professional music career with the a cappella London Boy Singers chorus in the 1960s, and as an sound engineer in 1969.The Education of Robin Sylvester, by Blair Jackson, on Dead.Net  Working as an assistant at Abbey Road Studios when The Beatles recorded their eponymous album, he was inspired by Paul McCartney to take up the bass guitar.  He also used early synthesisers while playing with and producing Byzantium in 1971.  While touring with Dana Gillespie, he moved to the United States in 1974.  Clive Davis signed his folk-rock band The Movies to Arista Records, which played around New York and Los Angeles in the late 1970s.  Then, as a session musician, he worked alongside Steve Douglas, backing the Beach Boys and Ry Cooder.  He also played in live acts led by Marty Balin, Mary Wells, The Shirelles, The Coasters, The Drifters, Billy Preston, Christine McVie, Steve Seskin, Bo Diddley, Chuck Berry, Freddy Fender, Del Shannon, and Vince Welnick's Missing Man Formation.Robin Sylvester's biography at Rat-Dog.comAdam Perry interviews Robin Sylvester for the Boulder Weekly, 8/27/2009
In 2003, he replaced Rob Wasserman as RatDog's bass player.  He played his first show on 4 March 2003.

==Robin Sylvester's ongoing health problems==

He missed RatDog's 2010 shows in Jamaica due to health concerns; Wasserman substituted.
In February 2012, it was reported that Robin was awaiting a kidney transplant. Donations to help defray Robin's medical costs can be made to The Sweet Relief Musician's Fund
He continues to play occasional shows with jam band alumni like Stu Allen, Ghosts of Electricity, Melvin Seals and JGB, David Nelson & Friends, Jemimah Puddleduck,  and the Rubber Souldiers.Setlist and personnel from Halloween 2009 Ghosts of Electricity show2005 "Comes a Time" tribute show for Jerry GarciaGhosts of Electricity show in February 2011List of jam band shows containing four by Sylvester

==References==


