[[Hood baronets]]

CATEGORIES: Baronetcies, 1778 establishments in Great Britain, 1809 establishments in the United Kingdom, Hood family

There have been three baronetcies created for people with the surname Hood, one in the Baronetage of Great Britain and two in the Baronetage of the United Kingdom. The first Baronet of the first creation was created Viscount Hood while the fourth Baronet of the second creation was made Baron St Audries.
The Hood Baronetcy, of Catherington, was created in the Baronetage of Great Britain on 20 May 1778 for the naval commander Samuel Hood. He was later elevated to the peerage as Viscount Hood. For more information, see this title.
The Hood Baronetcy, of St Audries in the County of Somerset, was created in the Baronetage of the United Kingdom on 13 April 1809 for Samuel Hood, with remainder to his nephew Alexander Hood and the heirs male of his body. Hood was the grandson of Alexander Hood, uncle of Samuel Hood, 1st Viscount Hood and Alexander Hood, 1st Viscount Bridport. He was succeeded according to the special remainder by his nephew, the second Baronet. He represented Somerset West in the House of Commons. His son, the third Baronet, married Isabel Harriet Fuller-Palmer-Acland, daughter and heir of Sir Peregrine Fuller-Palmer-Acland, 2nd Baronet, of Fairfield, in 1849, and assumed by Royal license the additional surnames of Fuller and Acland. He later sat as a Member of Parliament for Somerset West.
His son, the fourth Baronet, succeeded in 1905 to the Bateman Baronetcy of Hartington Hall according to a special remainder in the letters patent. Fuller-Acland-Hood also represented Wellington in Parliament and held minor office from 1902 to 1905 in the Conservative government of Arthur Balfour. On 22 January 1911 he was created Baron St Audries, of St Audries in the County of Somerset, in the Peerage of the United Kingdom. The barony became extinct on 16 October 1971 on the death of his son, the second Baron, while the baronetcies are thought to have passed to the latter's cousin, the sixth Baronet, of St Audries, and eighth Baronet, of Hartington Hall. He was the son of younger son of the third Baronet. However, he never successfully proved his succession and was never on the Official Roll of the Baronetage. On his death in 1990 the titles are considered to have become either extinct or dormant. As of 2006 they are officially listed as dormant by the Standing Council of the Baronetage (for more information follow this link).
The Hood Baronetcy, of Wimbledon in the County of Surrey, was created in the Baronetage of the United Kingdom on 16 January 1922 for Joseph Hood, who represented Wimbledon in the House of Commons as a Conservative. As of 30 June 2006 the presumed third holder of the title has not successfully proved his succession and is therefore not on the Official Roll of the Baronetage, with the Baronetcy considered dormant. For more information, follow this link).

==Hood baronets, of Catherington (1778)==

See the Viscount Hood

==Hood, later Fuller-Acland-Hood baronets, of St Audries (1809)==

==Barons St Audries (1911)==

==Hood, later Fuller-Acland-Hood baronets, of St Audries (1809; reverted)==

==Hood baronets, of Wimbledon (1922)==

The heir presumptive is the present holder brother Basil Gervase Francis Gerld Hood (b. 1953).

==See also==

==References==


