[[Bloodline (1979 film)]]

CATEGORIES: 1979 films, 1970s thriller films, American films, West German films, English-language films, Paramount Pictures films, German thriller films, Films directed by Terence Young, Films shot in Denmark, Films shot in Paris, Films shot in Sardinia, Film scores by Ennio Morricone

Bloodline is a thriller film picture released in 1979. Based upon the novel Bloodline by Sidney Sheldon, it was produced by Paramount Pictures and directed by Terence Young with music by Ennio Morricone. The film was also released under the title Sidney Sheldon's Bloodline. It was the only R-rated film to star Audrey Hepburn.

==Plot==

Sam Roffe, President of Roffe & Sons Pharmaceuticals, dies in what appears to be a climbing accident, leaving his daughter Elizabeth (Audrey Hepburn) a billion-dollar empire. Roffe's board members see an opportunity to settle old scores, jockey for higher position, and reap lucrative profits. However, an investigation into Sam's death discloses that it was a murder and that a power struggle is going on within the company. Lead investigator Max Hornung (Gert Fröbe) informs Elizabeth of his list of suspects, which includes her closest advisers and financially strapped family members. During this time, she marries CEO Rhys Williams (Ben Gazzara), but he, too, is identified by Hornung as a suspect. As president, Elizabeth follows her father's wishes and refuses to let shares of Roffe & Sons sell on the world market. Her choice prevents the board members from selling their shares as the company's by-laws prohibit it until all boardmembers agree; on the other hand, her death would allow for a unanimous decision. After several attempts on her life, an international chase across Europe ensues. Hornung is able to connect these murder attempts to a series of homicides of prostitutes, which have been recorded on snuff films by one of the shareholders, Sir Alec Nichols (James Mason). Elizabeth heads to Italy for protection from the murderer, who sets her house on fire while she is sleeping there. Both Williams and Nichols show up to save her, but Hornung figures out that Nichols is the killer and shoots him before he can film Elizabeth's murder in another snuff film.

==Cast==

==External links==


