[[Hot Wheels Turbo Racing]]

CATEGORIES: 1999 video games, Hot Wheels video games, Nintendo 64 games, Nintendo 64 racing games, PlayStation games, Racing video games, Video games based on toys

Hot Wheels Turbo Racing is a racing video game for the Nintendo 64 and PlayStation released in 1999. It features 41 vehicles based on the Hot Wheels series of toys. It also features Kyle Petty's 1999 NASCAR stock car, as it was sponsored by Hot Wheels. It also features music from artists like Primus, Metallica, The Reverend Horton Heat and Mix Master Mike.

==Gameplay==

The focus of the game is racing one of a selection of cars through various themed tracks. Secret tracks can be accessed by winning and new cars can be used by finding the 'new car' bonuses hidden in each stage. Stunts can be executed by holding the directional pad or analog stick in certain directions while in mid-air to add to your turbo meter for increased speed.
As seen in the hint screens, using the controller to perform various stunts from jumping off points gains 'turbos' which allow short bursts of speed. The car in use will take damage based on running into obstacles or other players. Power-up icons found around the track give various performance enhancements.
The game requires a memory card in order to save progress.

===Version differences===

The PlayStation version features a full-length video for the introduction sequence and thirteen full-length, CD quality songs including "Fuel" by Metallica thanks to its CD-based media having a much larger amount of memory space than the N64 cartridge. However, due to the systems' limitations for 3-D visuals, the graphics in the PS1 version are noticeably pixellated and have a lot of polygon tearing (a.k.a., jagged edges). Environment pop-up and draw-in distance (fog) is slightly more noticeable than the Nintendo 64 version. There are eleven race tracks total in the PlayStation version.
The Nintendo 64 version includes six songs, though each of them have been reduced in length and are almost entirely without vocals. The sound quality for these music tracks have also been downgraded and are slightly muffled. This version is also missing the song from Metallica. This version does include the many voice clips that are played when you execute a stunt, though the voice clips for announcing the name of each vehicle, a feature which was present in the PlayStation version, have been removed. This version uses Anti-Aliasing so the graphics are smooth and most of the polygon tearing has been eliminated. In addition, this version has slightly less pop-up and a slightly improved draw-in distance, and so the player will able to see a bit more in the distance. Eight courses are present in the Nintendo 64 version (the Exhaust Pipes, Serpent Sprint, and Volcano Blowout race tracks have been removed from this version).

==Reception==

IGN gave the PS1 version 6.8 out of 10 with criticism of the graphics stating there was "lots of flat shading and over-use of primary colors which diffuse the game's radical feel."IGN Reviews Hot Wheels Turbo Racing (PS1)  They gave the N64 version though 7.7 out of 10 despite little criticism of the color scheme graphics.IGN Reviews Hot Wheels Turbo Racing (N64)

==References==

==External links==


