[[Ein Lied kann eine Brücke sein]]

CATEGORIES: Eurovision songs of Germany, Eurovision songs of 1975, Songs written by Rainer Pietsch

"Ein Lied kann eine Brücke sein" ([tpl]lang-en|"A Song Can Be a Bridge"[/tpl]) was the German entry in the Eurovision Song Contest 1975, performed primarily in German by Joy Fleming. The song was composed by Rainer Pietsch, who would go on to co-write several of French disco queen Amanda Lear's hits in the late 70s and early 80s, and the lyrics were written by Michael Holm, a successful singer in his own right with a large number of hits on the German Hit Parades all through the 70s.
On stage in Stockholm, Joy Fleming was backed by three British singers, Madeline Bell of Blue Mink and the duo Sue and Sunny. Although not German speakers, the trio nevertheless sang the backing which included the last chorus performed in English. Sue and Sunny had been in the original line up of Brotherhood of Man (although they had left the group long before the band entered and won Eurovision in 1976) and had backed Lulu in Madrid on "Boom Bang-a-Bang" when she won the contest in 1969. They would return to provide backing at the next Swedish based contest, in Gothenburg 1985, backing Vikki Watson's "Love Is" for the UK. Sue Glover also participated in A Song for Europe, the UK selection contest for Eurovision in 1981. She performed as lead singer of the female group Unity who came last with "For Only a Day".
"Ein Lied kann eine Brücke sein" is notable in the history of the Contest for a number of reasons, one of them composer Rainer Pietsch's unconventional and highly energetic count-in as he conducted the orchestra in Stockholm; Pietsch loudly stomped his foot and yelled "One, two! One, two, three, four!" and right before the second verse he suddenly made a leap in the air. Footage of Pietch's fervent footstomping and jumping is frequently featured in German Eurovision documentaries.
The song is a dramatic and soul influenced ballad, with Fleming singing that a song can be the means of changing oneself and reaching goals. Fleming also recorded the song in English, as "Bridge of Love".
The song was performed fourth on the night (following France's Nicole Rieu with "Et bonjour à toi l'artiste" and preceding Luxembourg's Géraldine with "Toi"). At the close of voting, it had received 15 points, placing 17th in a field of 19.
Despite its relatively low placing, the song has become something of a fan favourite, with the commemorative CDs released to coincide with the Congratulations special in late 2005 featuring it. It has also been covered by a wide range of other artists over the past three decades, including fellow German Eurovision participant Guildo Horn, and in 2002 it gave the title to Eurovision historian Jan Feddersen's anthology Ein Lied kann eine Brücke sein : die Deutsche und Internationale Geschichte des Grand Prix Eurovision (translated: A Song Can Be a Bridge - The German and International Entries to the Eurovision Song Contest).
It was succeeded as German representative at the 1976 Contest by the Les Humphries Singers with "Sing Sang Song".

==References and external links==


