[[Explosion of the RFA Bedenham]]

CATEGORIES: Explosions in Gibraltar, Military history of Gibraltar, 1951 disasters, 1951 in Gibraltar, 20th-century explosions, Maritime incidents in 1951, Shipwrecks of Gibraltar, Royal Fleet Auxiliary, 1938 ships, Ships sunk by non-combat internal explosions

The RFA ''Bedenham'' was a naval armament carrier that exploded while docked in Gibraltar on 27 April 1951, killing 13 people and causing a great deal of damage to the town.

==Cause of the explosion==

The Bedenham had arrived in Gibraltar on 24 April 1951, tying up at Gun Wharf. On the morning of 27 April, depth charges were being unloaded into a lighter when one of them ignited. Several men were organised to fight the fire from the quayside, but to no avail. There was an explosion in the lighter, and the fire spread to the Bedenham, causing a violent explosion in which the bow was blown out of the water and onto Gun Wharf, while the rest of the ship sank.

==Casualties==

13 people were killed in the explosion, including George Campbell Henderson, a sub-officer with the dockyard fire service, who was posthumously awarded the George Cross for his bravery in attempting to extinguish the fire. The King's Police and Fire Services Medal (for Gallantry) was posthumously awarded to Albert Alexander Indoe, Chief Fire Officer HM Dockyard, Gibraltar. Two dock workers and two traders on nearby Ragged Staff Road were killed by flying debris. One fire fighter was injured. Dock overseer Salvador Bula was injured by the explosion but managed to get others who were injured by the blast to safety. Hundreds were injured and had to be taken to the Royal Naval Hospital Gibraltar, then known as the British Military Hospital Gibraltar.
The crew of the Bedenham had already abandoned the ship by the time of the explosion, with the exception of the Captain and the Naval Armament Supply Officer, both of whom were blown into the water but subsequently rescued.

==Effect of the explosion==

In addition to the human casualties, many of Gibraltar's buildings suffered substantial damage in the explosion, including the Cathedral of St. Mary the Crowned, the Cathedral of the Holy Trinity, and the Convent (the official residence of the Governor of Gibraltar). Another effect of the explosion was to delay the programme of housing necessary for the Gibraltarians that had been repatriated following their evacuation during World War II.
The Admiralty accepted full responsibility for the damage, and approximately £250,000 in Gibraltar pounds was paid out in indemnity.

==References==


