</ref> He was [[Loan (sports)|loaned]] out to [[Football League Third Division|Third Division]] team [[Carlisle United F.C.|Carlisle United]] on 1 October,<ref name="Hugman2003-04 216"/> making his [[the Football League|Football League]] debut the following day in a 1–1 draw against [[Southend United F.C.|Southend United]].<ref name="Carlisle 1 (1) - 1 (0) Southend">
[tpl]Dead link|date=December 2011[/tpl][/ref] He finished the successful spell with seven appearances for Carlisle. He returned to Northern Ireland by rejoining former club Cliftonville on loan for the first three months of the 2000–01 season on 11 August 2000 to gain more first team experience, saying "That's why I jumped at the chance of three months back in my old jersey. There was an option to join Lincoln City instead but they were only offering reserve games."[ref]
[tpl]Dead link|date=December 2011[/tpl][/ref] He finished this spell with 20 appearances, with the last coming on 1 January 2001 before being recalled by Sunderland. He made his Sunderland debut by starting in a 4–2 defeat to Sheffield Wednesday in the League Cup on 12 September, which proved to be his only appearance of the 2001–02 season. This appearance resulted in former club Cliftonville receiving a payment from Sunderland, which was agreed when he was transferred to Sunderland. He joined Stoke City in the Second Division on a one-month loan on 18 December, where he failed to make any appearances after joining as cover for Neil Cutler following an injury to Gavin Ward.
Ingham was forced further down the Sunderland pecking order after the signing of Thomas Myhre in July 2002 and he joined Stockport County on a one-month loan on 23 August. He made his debut in a 3–1 victory at Lincoln in the League Cup and the loan was extended for a second month in September, before being recalled by Sunderland in October due to an injury crisis. Despite this, he was forced further down Sunderland's pecking order after they signed Mart Poom on loan from Derby County and after considering handing in a transfer request he joined Darlington on a one-month loan on 22 November. He made three appearances before returning to Sunderland in December. He featured for Sunderland in a friendly against Hull City for the opening of their new ground, the KC Stadium, which made him the first away goalkeeper at the ground, while also being the last to play at Hull's former ground, Boothferry Park, which was his final appearance for Darlington in a 1–0 victory over Hull, during which he denied Stuart Elliott from scoring on three occasions. He joined Third Division side York City on a one-month loan on 24 January 2003 after goalkeeper Alan Fettis left to join Hull, who Ingham made his debut against in a 0–0 draw on 25 January. His loan at York was extended for second and third months in February and March and he finished the spell, during which he performed well, with 17 appearances.
His second Sunderland appearance came in a 4–2 defeat against Huddersfield Town on 23 September and in a reserve team game in January 2004 he was sent off for head butting West Bromwich Albion's Simon Brown. He was signed by Wrexham a one-month loan on 15 March 2004 following an injury to Andy Dibble, with the loan being extended until the end of the season on 16 April. He finished this spell with 11 appearances for Wrexham, as well as featuring in the 4–1 victory over Rhyl in the FAW Premier Cup Final. He threatened to leave Sunderland in May if he would not be guaranteed first team football the following season. After training with Blackpool Ingham joined Doncaster Rovers on a one-month loan on 1 November, where he played in two games. Ingham was set to join Coventry City on transfer deadline day in March 2005, but Sunderland cancelled the transfer due to an injury to Poom. His league debut for Sunderland came in a 2–1 defeat against Reading on 9 April 2005, which he entered as a 45th minute substitute due an injury to Myhre. Despite suffering a neck injury, he made his first league start in the following game, a 2–2 draw with Ipswich Town on 17 April, after which manager Mick McCarthy said "He knows he's playing for a future elsewhere and I think that overall he's handled a bloody tense situation really well". He finished 2004–05 season with two appearances for Sunderland and on 8 May the club announced he would be released when his contract expired on 30 June.

===Wrexham===

He agreed a move to League Two club Wrexham on a two-year contract in May, which went through on 5 July when he signed the contract. He picked up a calf injury after returning to Wrexham, which saw him miss their game against Leyton Orient. He suffered from another injury on his return against Macclesfield Town on 24 September, which on this occasion was a groin problem. He eventually made his return to the team for their match against Torquay United in October, which finished as a 4–2 victory. He finished the 2005–06 season with 43 appearances for Wrexham. He was to undergo an operation on a hernia in May 2006. Wrexham's 2–1 defeat to Milton Keynes Dons on 17 March 2007 saw him make his final appearance of the 2006–07 season, during which he picked up a hamstring injury. He later suffered from a virus in April. He finished the season with 37 appearances, after which he was released by the club, due to his place in the first team being taken by Tony Williams.

===Hereford United===

In July 2007, Ingham had a trial with Scottish Premier League club Gretna, playing in a pre-season friendly against Welsh Premier League club The New Saints. However, he suffered a finger injury and the move to Gretna did not take place. On 17 August 2007 he joined League Two side Hereford United on an initial one-month contract as goalkeeping cover to Wayne Brown, which was later extended until the end of the 2007–08 season. His debut came in the Football League Trophy against Yeovil Town, which Hereford lost 4–2 in a penalty shoot-out after a 0–0 draw after extra time, with Ingham making "good saves" from Kevin Betsy and Simon Gillett. He picked up a hand injury in March that was expected to keep him out of the team for six weeks, meaning he finished the season with one appearance.

===York City===

Ingham was released by Hereford at the end of the season, after which he moved down to the Conference Premier by rejoining former club York City on 14 May 2008 on a two-year contract. He suffered a thigh injury during a pre-season friendly against Harrogate Railway Athletic, which resulted in his condition being assessed on a day-by-day basis, and missed the matches against Hartlepool United and Sheffield. It was confirmed that he would miss York's opening game against Crawley Town on 9 August 2008, which led to the loan signing of Artur Krysiak from Birmingham City. He recovered from his thigh injury ready for York's fourth game of the season against Northwich Victoria. Despite this, Josh Mimms played in goal and Ingham eventually made his first appearance of the 2008–09 season in a 1–1 draw against Barrow on 25 August 2008. He saved a penalty kick during a penalty shoout-out against Mansfield Town in the Conference League Cup third round, helping York win the shootout 4–2, which followed a 1–1 draw after extra time. He suffered from a hamstring injury during a 1–1 draw with Histon in December, and returned to action for York's next game, in the FA Trophy against Northwich Victoria. Ingham saved the final penalty in a shoot-out victory over Kidderminster Harriers in an FA Trophy third round replay on 11 February 2009, giving York the victory 13–12 on penalties. He started in the 2009 FA Trophy Final at Wembley Stadium on 9 May, which York lost 2–0 to Stevenage Borough. Ingham finished his first permanent season at York with 52 appearances.
He took over the captaincy following the absences of Danny Parslow and David McGurk from the team in March 2010. He signed a new two-year contract with York on 29 March. Ingham was named as York's Clubman of the Year for the 2009–10 season before their final home game of the season prior to play-offs against Grays Athletic and the Community Player of the Year, which recognised his community work in York. He played in both legs of York's play-off semi-final victory over Luton Town, which finished 2–0 on aggregate. He started in the 2010 Conference Premier play-off Final at Wembley on 16 May, which was lost 3–1 to Oxford. He finished the season with 55 appearances for York.
Ingham made his first appearance of the 2010–11 season in the opening game, a 2–1 defeat to Kidderminster Harriers on 14 August. He was replaced as captain in October following the signing of Chris Smith, with manager Gary Mills commenting "I'm not a fan of goalkeeping captains and that's no disrespect to Michael Ingham. He took the decision on the chin with no problems." He was named Conference Player of the Month for November after he kept six clean sheets and conceded one goal throughout that period. Ingham dedicated the award to his defence, saying "The lads have been brilliant all month, in particular the back five. I accept this trophy on behalf of them". He was sent off in the 15th minute of York's 5–0 defeat at Luton on 18 January 2011 after fouling Claude Gnakpa outside the penalty box. He finished the season with 51 appearances and in July 2011 he signed a new two-year contract with York, which extended his existing deal by one year.
Ingham won the 2012 FA Trophy Final with York at Wembley on 12 May, in which the side beat Newport County 2–0. Eight days later he played in the 2–1 victory over Luton in the 2012 Conference Premier play-off Final at Wembley on 20 May, seeing the club return to the Football League after an eight-year absence with promotion to League Two. Ingham finished the 2011–12 season with 55 appearances for York and in July 2012 signed a new two-year contract with the club.
Ingham started York's game away at League One Doncaster Rovers in the League Cup first round in the opening game of the 2012–13 season on 11 August 2012, which the side lost 4–2 in a penalty shoot-out following a 1–1 draw after extra time. He then played in York's first Football League fixture since their promotion, a 3–1 defeat at home to Wycombe Wanderers on 18 August 2012. He finished the season with 51 appearances.

==International career==

Ingham was capped once for Northern Ireland at under-18 level, having made his first and only appearance in a 2–1 defeat to the Republic of Ireland on 9 March 1999. After being understudy to David Miskelly for two under-21 matches in 2000 he made his debut for the team in a 2–0 defeat to the Czech Republic on 23 March 2001. Having made his last under-21 appearance in a 4–0 defeat to the Czech Republic on 5 June 2001, his international career at this level concluded with four caps. Ingham was called into the senior Northern Ireland squad in August 2002 after Roy Carroll was released. He was called into the Northern Ireland B squad in May 2003, but was forced to withdraw because of injury. Ingham's form during a loan at Wrexham saw him called placed on standby for Northern Ireland's match with Serbia and Montenegro in April 2004. He was named in the Northern Ireland squad for their tour of the Caribbean in May, but he dislocated a finger in training in June, which meant he missed out on making his debut for the team. He eventually won his first cap for Northern Ireland in a 4–1 defeat against Germany in a friendly at Windsor Park on 4 June 2005, the Irish Football Association (IFA)'s 125th anniversary game, after coming on as a substitute for Maik Taylor on 76 minutes and conceding one goal scored by Lukas Podolski. On reflection of this match, Ingham said "The reaction of the crowd when I came on was amazing. To be honest I was holding back the tears as I never thought I would get such a reception. I was the proudest man in the ground." For this match, he was offered insurance by the IFA, due to him not yet being under contract at Wrexham. This appearance would result in a £30,000 payment for former club Cliftonville, which came as a part of the deal for Sunderland to sign him, but by August this had still to be received by the club. The FA Premier League was eventually called into the situation by Cliftonville, as they had only received the first part of the payment after he made his first team debut for Sunderland.[ref]
[tpl]Dead link|date=December 2011[/tpl][/ref] Ingham himself was also due a £20,000 bonus for this appearance. Ingham featured on the bench for Northern Ireland as they beat England 1–0 in a 2006 FIFA World Cup qualifier in September. He received call ups for friendlies against Portugal in November and Estonia in March 2006, although he only made the bench for both games. He was named by Northern Ireland in their end-of-season tour of the United States in May and started in the 1–0 defeat against Uruguay at the Giants Stadium on 21 May. By November, he had established himself as Northern Ireland's third choice goalkeeper behind Taylor and Roy Carroll. Ingham came on as a substitute for the second half of Northern Ireland's 0–0 draw against Wales on 6 February 2007, giving him his third and most recent international cap.[tpl]NFT player|pid=11965|Michael Ingham| accessdate = 28 June 2008[/tpl]

==Personal life==

Ingham married his wife on 7 June 2008. He was arrested along with York teammates Michael Gash, Craig Nelthorpe and Michael Rankine in August 2009 following an incident involving two other men at a Subway outlet on a night out. The four appeared at York Magistrates' Court on 14 January 2010 after being charged with affray. Ingham pleaded not guilty to the charge of affray and this was accepted after the prosecution deemed his involvement in the incident to be minimal after appearing at York Crown Court on 1 September.

==Career statistics==

===Club===

===International===

[tpl]updated|match played 6 February 2007.[/tpl]

==Honours==

York City
Individual

==References==

==External links==


