[[Anton Ulrich, Duke of Saxe-Meiningen]]

CATEGORIES: 1687 births, 1763 deaths, House of Saxe-Meiningen, Dukes of Saxe-Meiningen, People from Meiningen, Princes of Saxe-Meiningen, Recipients of the Order of the White Eagle (Poland)

Anton Ulrich, Duke of Saxe-Meiningen (Meiningen, 22 October 1687 – Frankfurt, 27 January 1763), was a duke of Saxe-Meiningen.
He was the second but first surviving son (in order of birth he was the eighth) of Bernhard I, Duke of Saxe-Meiningen and his second wife, Elisabeth Eleonore of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel.
When his father died in 1706, according to his will, he inherited the duchy of Saxe-Meiningen with his two older half-brothers, Ernst Ludwig I and Frederick Wilhelm.
But, shortly after, Ernst Ludwig signed a contract between him and his brothers, and they were compelled to leave all the control of the duchy in his hands. Without any power in his duchy, Anton Ulrich decided to travel to the Netherlands.
When Ernst Ludwig died (in 1724), Anton Ulrich and Frederick Wilhelm took over once again the government of the duchy as guardians of his nephews until 1733. During this time, Anton Ulrich was only nominal regent, because he decided to live apart with his morganatic family.
The deaths of his old half-brothers and nephews (1724–1743) made him the next in the line for the duchy of Saxe-Meiningen. His wife, Philippine, had died in 1744, only a few weeks before a declaration was published which deprived his children of the succession of the duchy of Saxe-Meiningen. In 10 March 1746, Anton Ulrich assumed full control of the duchy after the death of his last surviving half-brother, Frederick Wilhelm.
Immediately after he inherited the duchy, Anton Ulrich left Meiningen and established his official residence at Frankfurt, where he lived until his death.

==Marriages==

In Holland on January 1711, Anton Ulrich married secretly Philippine Elisabeth Caesar, the lady-in-waiting of his favourite sister, Elisabeth Ernestine. This marriage was unequal, but she was created Princess ([tpl]lang-de|Fürstin[/tpl]) in 1727. They had ten children, all created Prince/Princess of Saxe-Meiningen (Fürst/Fürstin):
In Homburg vor der Höhe on 26 September 1750, Anton Ulrich married Charlotte Amalie of Hesse-Philippsthal, who was forty-three years his junior. They had eight children:

==Ancestors==


