[[Helen Beardsley]]

CATEGORIES: 1930 births, 2000 deaths

Helen Eileen Beardsley (née Brandmeier, formerly North, April 5, 1930 – April 26, 2000) was the mother of the famous blended family of twenty children — eight by her first marriage to Richard North, ten stepchildren from the first marriage of her second husband Frank Beardsley, and two that she and Frank had during their marriage. She wrote a book, Who Gets the Drumstick?, about her blended family's experiences.  The book was the basis for two motion pictures: the 1968 Yours, Mine and Ours, starring Lucille Ball and Henry Fonda; and a 2005 remake of the same film with Rene Russo and Dennis Quaid.

==Biography==

Helen Brandmeier was born in 1930 in Seattle, Washington. Her father owned a lumber mill, which came under severe stress during the Great Depression. Helen would later describe how her observations of her father would shape her personality, and in particular how it would teach her to value independence and problem-solving.Helen Beardsley, Who Gets the Drumstick?, New York: Random House, 1965, pp. 17-18.
Brandmeier trained as a nurse in Seattle. In 1949 at age 19 she married Richard North, then a chief petty officer in the United States Navy. Their marriage lasted for eleven years and produced eight children. In 1960, the Norths were stationed at NAS Whidbey and Helen was six months pregnant with their eighth child, Teresa Rose. Now a Lieutenant Junior Grade (O2) and A-3 Skywarrior bombardier navigator, North was killed on June 7, 1960, when an A-3 he was flying veered off the runway during takeoff at Ault Field and crashed in 5 1/2 feet of water.Full Reports of A-3 Accidents; a3skywarrior.com
Following Teresa's August 1960 birth in Oak Harbor, Washington, North relocated to San Leandro, California. She then married a second time, on September 9, 1961,Ibid., p. 210 to Chief Warrant Officer Frank Beardsley, USN, who at the time served as Personnel Officer at the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, California. 
A widower too, Frank Beardsley brought into the family 10 children from his first marriage; combined with Helen's eight children this meant that at the time Frank and Helen married they had 18 children. Additionally, during their marriage the Beardsleys had two children, increasing the total size of the family to 22, including the parents. In 1964 Helen and Frank legally adopted each other's children. Helen's children unanimously agreed with the decision to change their names from North to Beardsley.
The huge family that resulted from the marriage caused national interest in the Beardsleys, especially on how Frank and Helen handled the day to day logistics of raising such a large family. Media coverage and attention followed the family. The Beardsleys landed some celebrity endorsement contracts. And they sold the rights to their story to Desilu Productions. Desilu then produced the first of the two films based on the Beardsley's courtship, marriage, and combined large family. Helen Beardsley also appeared on the television show To Tell the Truth to tell the story of her family.
After 30 years in the Navy Frank Beardsley retired in 1966. Looking to buy a business, in 1968 he bought a nut and candy store named Morrow's Nut House located in Monterey, California. Frank Beardsley operated the business with the help of the older children, including two sons who had returned from active duty in the Marines. Also at the time Helen served on then-Governor Ronald Reagan's Advisory Council on the Status of Women. Monterey Peninsula Herald
Frank and Helen Beardsley's marriage lasted until her death in Healdsburg, California, on April 26, 2000. She passed from Parkinson's Disease and a stroke. Frank Beardsley later remarried and he died on December 11, 2012 at age 97.
According to Kermit Schafer, a member of the audience on The Tonight Show provided a classic quip when the Beardsleys appeared on the show with all those children. The family had just left the stage, and the show had cut to a commercial break. Johnny Carson was in awe of the huge family and he said, "I have only three kids. I don't know how they do it." Someone in the seats stood up and hollered, "Oh yes you do!"

==References==

http://cda.mrs.umn.edu/~webbrl/YoursMineOurs/
citation needed listed on opening candy store
unspecified retirement date from navy
website states that a bakery was opened 
not a candy store
hope this helps

==External links==


