[[Sun Qian]]

CATEGORIES: Officials under Liu Bei, Year of birth unknown, Place of birth unknown, Year of death unknown, 2nd-century births, Han dynasty politicians from Shandong, Liu Biao and associates, Generals under Liu Bei, Generals from Shandong

Sun Qian (died c. 214), courtesy name Gongyou, was an official serving under the warlord Liu Bei in the late Eastern Han Dynasty.

==Life==

Sun Qian was a native of Beihai (北海) commandery, whose capital was around present-day Shouguang, Weifang, Shandong. He was recommended by Zheng Xuan(鄭玄傳云：玄薦乾於州。乾被辟命，玄所舉也。) Pei Songzhi's annotation in Sanguozhi vol. 38. to serve under Liu Bei as an Assistant Officer (從事) when Liu Bei succeeded Tao Qian as the Governor (牧) of Xu Province in 194. He remained as a subordinate of Liu Bei since then.(孫乾字公祐，北海人也。先主領徐州，辟為從事，後隨從周旋。) Sanguozhi vol. 38.
In 198, when Liu Bei was planning to break free of Cao Cao's control by leaving the capital Xu (許; present-day Xuchang, Henan), he sent Sun Qian and Mi Zhu to secretly contact Cao's rivals Yuan Shao and Liu Biao and form alliances with them. After Yuan Shao's death in 202, Liu Biao once wrote to Yuan Shao's third son and successor, Yuan Shang, and mentioned the rivalry between Yuan Shang and his eldest brother Yuan Tan. Liu Biao wrote: "Whenever I discussed this issue (the rivalry between you and your brother) with General Liu (Liu Bei) and Sun Gongyou, I feel very upset and heartbroken." Sun Qian was held in high regard by Liu Bei and even Liu Biao.(先主之背曹公，遣乾自結袁紹，將適荊州，乾又與麋笁俱使劉表，皆如意指。後表與袁尚書，說其兄弟分爭之變，曰：「每與劉左將軍、孫公祐共論此事，未甞不痛心入骨，相為悲傷也。」其見重如此。) Sanguozhi vol. 38.
In the 210s, after Liu Bei had successfully seized control of Yi Province (covering present-day Sichuan and Chongqing) from its governor Liu Zhang and established his new base in Chengdu (Yi Province's capital), he promoted Sun Qian to the position of "General Who Upholds Loyalty" (秉忠將軍). Liu Bei's treatment towards Sun Qian was second to that of Mi Zhu, but equal to that of Jian Yong and others. Sun Qian died not long later.(先主定益州，乾自從事中郎為秉忠將軍，見禮次麋笁，與簡雍同等。頃之，卒。) Sanguozhi vol. 38. Sun Qian's year of death was not specified, but the Australian sinologist Rafe de Crespigny estimated that he died around 214.

==Appraisal==

Chen Shou, who wrote Sun Qian's biography, commented as follows: "Mi Zhu, Sun Qian, Jian Yong and Yi Ji were refined and cultured persons whose ideas were widely circulated. They were well known for their good observation of the proprieties."(麋笁、孫乾、簡雍、伊籍，皆雍容風議，見禮於世。) Sanguozhi vol. 38.

==See also==

==References==


