[[Irkutsk State University]]

CATEGORIES: Universities in Irkutsk Oblast, Educational institutions established in 1918, Irkutsk

Irkutsk State University (Russian: Иркутский государственный университет) was founded in October 1918 in Irkutsk, Siberia. 
At present, the University consists of 10 faculties, 4 educational institutions and 2 branches. Over 18 thousand students, including 300 foreign students from 27 countries, study at University in 52 specialties, and more than 620 educators-instructors (120 Dr. Sc. instructors and 357 Cand. Sc. professors) work there.Official website of ISU
The University faculties and institutions are located in 9 educational buildings in Irkutsk and in 2 buildings in Angarsk and Bratsk. The majority of these buildings are of great historical and architectural value. They date back to the 18th-19th centuries. Senior students of all the faculties have specialized courses and internship in laboratories and scientific research institutions of ISU and Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences.
For decades, Irkutsk University has trained more than 70 thousand highly qualified specialists, famous scientists, teachers, writers, and statesmen, including Lenin and State Prize winners A. Belov, Ya. Khabardin, G. Feinstein, M. Gerasimov, G. Debetz, and famous talented writers V. Rasputin, A. Vampilov, and M. Sergeev.
Irkutsk State University (ISU) is the oldest higher educational institution in Eastern Siberia and the Far East.
Russian scientists, statesmen, patrons of art and science, such as N.M. Yadrintsev, A.P. Shchapov, P.A. Slovtsov, S.S. Shchukin, G.N. Potanin and many others were founders of Irkutsk State University. The University was opened on October 27, 1918. It became the major educational, scientific and cultural center on the vast territory of Eastern Siberia and Far East region. During the 1930s, the University continued to grow and develop and soon in Irkutsk the first higher educational institutions emerged from it. They were Medical Institute, Pedagogical Institute and the Institute of National Economy. At present, the ISU graduates work in scientific institutions of Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Academy of Medical Sciences, as well as they represent highly qualified personnel of teachers in higher educational institutions of Irkutsk and Siberia.

==Faculties==

==Notable faculty members==

==Notable alumni==

==References==

==External links==


