[[Black Hill Conservation Park]]

CATEGORIES: Parks in Adelaide, Conservation parks of South Australia, 1993 establishments in Australia

Black Hill Conservation Park is a public reserve approximately 10 km northeast of Adelaide, in the state of South Australia, Australia. The park is in a rugged bush environment, with a prominent peak, bounded by steep ridges on the southern slopes. The park adjoins Morialta Conservation Park, home to many activities, including bushwalking, bird watching and rock climbing.

==History==

The land used by the Morialta Conservation Park was traditionally occupied by the Kaurna people. Most of the Kaurna elders died before much of their culture could be recorded, and so little is known of the pre-colonial history of the area. It is known that they used fire both as an aid to hunting, and to regenerate the vegetation.
Private landholdings were given over to a wildflower garden on the north edge of the park which has now officially been handed over to the Park. The Friends of the Black Hill and Morialta Conservation Parks have a building on site where meetings are held and activities are based/conducted for help with the wildflower garden and the two Parks.

==Geography and climate==

Black Hill Conservation Park covers around 8 km² within the Mount Lofty Ranges, which run north-south to the east of Adelaide's coastal plain. It is bounded by Athelstone on the north, Marble Hill Road on the south, the suburb of Rostrevor on the west, and by agricultural land on the east.
The park lies mostly on the northern side of Fifth Creek.
The main access to the park is via the vehicle entrance off Maryvale Road, and there is walking access at various points along Marble Hill Road.
Morialta shares Adelaide's Mediterranean climate, with average temperatures of 17 degrees Celsius in winter, to 28 degrees during summer. The park receives average annual rainfall of 800 mm, mostly between May and September. During the summer months (December to February) temperatures can rise above 40 degrees.

==Activities==

The park caters for a variety of activities, including bushwalking, picnics and bird watching. There are many walking paths within the park, including the Yurrebilla and Heysen Trails.
Being only 10 km from the centre of Adelaide, Black Hill is an accessible but often overlooked park area. There are picnic grounds near the Park's Administration buildings and this area links in with the Athelstone oval and Wadmore Park, a Campbelltown City Council reserve.

==References==

==External links==


