[[Pulsar (video game)]]

CATEGORIES: 1981 video games, Sega arcade games, Gremlin Industries games

Pulsar is a 1981 arcade game created by Sega/Gremlin.http://www.arcade-museum.com/game_detail.php?game_id=9150 In it, the player controls a tank in a top-down view maze to fetch keys used to unlock the next level.
Pulsar runs on the Z80 microprocessor. The game was designed and programmed by Larry Clague and Mike Hendricks.
2009 "Pulsar" and ""Pulsar Domination" is a team based multi-player space combat game being developed by 3DMUVE LLC.  Targeted release is sometime 2014.
Pulsar is a modern team based space combat game.
There will be at least 4 different game types:
1.  Death Match
2.  Team Death Match
3.  Demolition (Base Hunt)
4.  Domination
Pulsar is a very unique game focused on team play.  Unlike many team based games that pit two teams against each other, Pulsar will support from 1-4 teams competing at the same time, and up to 60 online human players plus AI creating huge worlds of intense fighting and combat.  Leverage new team based tactics to balance the perfect fighting force to reign dominant in the world of Pulsar.
Demolition and Domination are two of the game types that make Pulsar really special.  We’re not just creating large worlds of players to fight.  In Pulsar we’re creating new game types optimized for team tactics and strategy.  When team members learn how to compliment each others playing styles by leveraging different upgrades to offer the best balance for the team, games will take on new dimension. 
Demolition (Base Hunt)
Demolition is a team-based game to destroy the opponents’ base.  Demolition is a fast paced game of search and destroy.  Once you find a base you must destroy it, but each base will be protected by heavily fortified capital ships with targeting systems that will immediately lock on and open fire.  Each capital ship emanates a powerful force field energy beam that surrounds and protects the base. You must destroy all capital ships to expose the base before you’re able to destroy it.  Not only will you contend with the threat of the capital ships, but competing teams will decide how many players to leave behind to further help guard their base.  Fierce dogfights and constant action will brings continuous hours of fun and enjoyment each and every time you play.
When starting Demolition all possible upgrades are available and each player is given a limited amount of credits to equip a ship to their liking.  If you prefer lighter, faster with quick fire weapons you can do that.  If you prefer slower ships with a lot of fire power you can do that.  With hundreds of combinations across different hulls, armor, shields, engines, weapons and more you’ll be able to create the perfect vehicle.  Match your skills with other teammates and balance your tactics for the best offence or defense and get ready to shine as the best player or best team, with high scores, rankings, ladders, competitions and more.
As players rack up kills, and minimize deaths they earn additional credits, which can be used for more upgrades.  Then as your team continues to win battles they too will earn credits that can be divvied up across the members, or used to further fortify the capital ships.  Matchmaking will be used to try and keep players and teams evenly balanced.
Domination
In Domination the objective is to destroy the competing teams bases and take control of the system. However, it's not just about combat, we've added a touch of strategy through the use of team resources and their management. Bases in Pulsar are extremely powerful, protected, and reinforced structures, and teams will need to reach a science level of 10 before they'll acquire the right weapons necessary to take out an enemy base.
To reach each science level takes time, and teams will need to acquire resources to power the science station. The more resources, the faster your team can level up. It'll be up to the team to figure out how to best balance your resources between defense, upgrades and science. More resources towards better weapons might mean your opponents reach a higher science level before you. Use your resources wisely because too few spent on upgrades can leave you vulnerable to attack, but spend too much and you'll fall behind in your science leaving you at a greater disadvantage. With each new science level also comes new upgrades, so don't waste time, get to mining.  Not to fear, if you hate the thought of having to mine, you can send out AI to do it for you, but each AI ship will cost you some resources, so each team can choose how they want to proceed.
As the game progresses players are trying to gather resources for the team while also trying to slow down the other teams. Fierce dogfights will ensue while teams race to slow other teams down. Further attacks on enemy bases can deplete their resources slowing down their quest towards the next science level. Be careful, as team’s level up they acquire improved weapons, armor and ships. Strategically placed turrets and fighters can be used to defend a base. Some ships will be optimized for speedier mining while others are optimized for improved combat or reconnaissance missions. Leverage your team wisely to outwit and outgun your opponents and reign victorious.
Other Game Types:
Death Match is a game of kills.  First one to reach the designated number wins, or the one with the highest kills wins when the timer expires.
Team Death Match is just like Death Match, only teams are working together to obtain the most kills.
