[[Doug Anderson (singer)]]

CATEGORIES: Southern Gospel performers, People from Anderson, Indiana, Musicians from Indiana, 1975 births, Living people

Doug Anderson (born August 31, 1973 in Anderson, Indiana) is a Christian vocalist.
Basketball fans who watched Doug Anderson play for Lapel High School in the late 1980s probably had no idea what his post high school ambition really was.  They probably assumed that the all-county, all-state player, wanted to become a college and NBA star. Little did they know that this standout athlete, who went on to play for Purdue University, actually dreamed of being a full-time Gospel singer.
Doug was a product of a singing family and that his first love, indeed, was music. No one knew this more than Doug, himself, who believed with all his heart that God would one day allow him to live his dream of becoming a full-time quartet member.
That dream became a reality when Doug joined a quartet known as Lighthouse. His membership with Lighthouse led to a meeting with Ernie Haase when Lighthouse sang with Doug's favorite quartet, the Cathedrals. "Ernie was singing with the Cathedrals," Doug recalls, "and we developed a pretty good friendship. We had a mutual love for quartet music and basketball. Knowing one day that the Cathedrals would retire, Ernie told me if he ever started a group, he would call me. A few years later he did."
A small town boy at heart, Doug is thankful his career as a member of Signature Sound still allows him to live in his hometown of Lapel, IN. He and his wife, Michele, who were high school sweethearts, married in August of 1998. Michele shares Doug's love for sports, often calling him with scores and play-by-play updates when Doug is unable to watch a game due to his travels.
The couple has two beautiful daughters, Isabel and Emma, who already show promise of having that same love for athletics as their parents. Both enjoy watching and playing a variety of sports with their parents. "Family time is so precious," Doug says with a smile. "We spend every possible moment together."
In 2011 Doug released his first ever solo album, DREAMING WIDE AWAKE, and he was also nominated for Artist of the Year at the Dove Awards.
In 2014, Doug released his second album, DRIVE

==Discography (solo)==

==External links==


