[[Hyung Jin Moon]]

CATEGORIES: South Korean Unificationists, 1979 births, Living people, Harvard Divinity School alumni

Hyung Jin Moon (born September 26, 1979Staff report (1979). Transition Newsweek) is currently a pastor alongside his wife, Yeon Ah Lee Moon, of the Family Federation for World Peace.

==Life and career==

Moon was born in Tarrytown, New York, the youngest son of Sun Myung Moon and Hak Ja Han Moon. He earned Bachelor of Liberal Arts and Master of Theology degrees from Harvard University.Sons Rise in a Moon Shadow, Forbes, April 12, 2010
In April 2008, Sun Myung Moon (then 88 years old) appointed Hyung Jin Moon to be the new leader of the Family Federation for World Peace and Unification (FFWPU). Sun Myung Moon has not outlined any succession plan and has also placed some of his other children in church leadership positions.Unification Church pres sees smaller mass weddings, Daily Monitor, 2008-12-30 In 2011 Hyung Jin Moon visited North Korea to express condolences on the death of Kim Jong-il.Unification Church president on condolence visit to N. Korea, Yonhap News, 2011-12-26.
Hyung Jin Moon studied philosophy and theology in college, has practised Tibetan Buddhism, and for a time lived in a Catholic monastery.Son of Moonies founder takes over as church leader, Justin McCurry, The Guardian, 26 April 2008 Although the Unification Church has been a supporter of conservative Republican politicians, Hyung Jin Moon expressed support for newly elected President Barack Obama, saying, "I am very proud as an American to have a black president. I was born and raised in America. I am a part of a minority. To see a minority representative being the president of the United States of America is extremely inspiring. It's just miraculous."Unification Church pres sees smaller mass weddings, Daily Monitor, 2008-12-30, "The church has been a staunch supporter of conservative Republicans in the United States, but Moon is thrilled about the election of Democrat Barack Obama."

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


