[[TubeTwist]]

CATEGORIES: 2006 video games, OS X games, Windows games, Torque Game Engine games

TubeTwist is a puzzle game created by 21-6 Productions. The game uses the classic mechanic of balls moving through a labyrinth of tubes which you must utilize to construct a Rube Goldberg style device. The game is broken up into five chapters, with each chapter taking place in a different area which continues the story.
The player plays the role of a scientist searching for their missing professor, re-assembling the TubeTwist experiments to unlock the professor’s secrets. Macrotons are the balls of energy that must be guided from the Injector Tubes to the Reactor tubes. Three types of Macrotons exist: green, blue, and exploding Macrotons. The green and blue Macrotons must reach the reactor of the same color to release the energy from the Macrotons. Exploding Macrotons are used to clear paths for the green and blue Macrotons.
After completing all the experiments in a chapter, the story will continue and the player will get closer to finding the missing Professor Jaymour.
TubeTwist along with the story element was originally conceived and developed by Keith Johnston and Mike Panico of Pinoli Software, who eventually partnered with 21-6 Productions to assist in producing the game. The final core team to create the game, along with Keith Johnston and Mike Panico as game designers, was Justin Mette as executive producer, Dave Calabrese as artist/scripter/story writer, Mike Panico as texture artist, environment designer and modeler, Chris Brethren as level artist, and Matt Sayre as the game composer creating the audio and musical score to the game.
On December 6 of 2006, the 'Quantum-Flux Edition' of TubeTwist was officially released. This new edition officially adds support for Experiment Packs, ships with 2 built-in experiment packs, adds the ability to have up to 13 individual player profiles, performance enhancements, various other small additions and can import saved data from the original TubeTwist.
As of March 1 of 2007, TubeTwist is available for purchase in a box on CD-Rom. The game can be purchased through many sites including Amazon.com, and in brick and mortar stores such as GameStop.

==Awards==

==External links==


