[[Buccaneer Bunny]]

CATEGORIES: 1948 animated films, Films directed by Friz Freleng, Looney Tunes shorts, Pirate films

Buccaneer Bunny is a 1947 Warner Bros. cartoon in the Looney Tunes series, released in 1948, directed by Friz Freleng. It features Bugs Bunny and Yosemite Sam, the latter known in this picture as "Sea-Goin' Sam", a pirate. All voice characterizations in this cartoon are by Mel Blanc. This cartoon is found on Disc 1 of the Looney Tunes Golden Collection: Volume 5

==Plot==

The cartoon opens with titles featuring an instrumental of "The Sailor's Hornpipe" (also one of the theme songs to the Popeye cartoon series), seguéing to a scene of Sam digging a hole to bury his treasure on a beach. Sam is singing the stereotypical pirate shanty "Dead Man's Chest"--on the second strain, Sam switches from the typical "yo-ho-ho and a bottle of rum!" to a decidedly more original "yo-ho-ho and a bottle of... Ma's old fashioned ci-der" with a conga kick on the last syllable and a parody of "Dad's Old-Fashioned Root Beer", a well-known radio advertising jingle at that time.
In attempting to bury his treasure, Sam has encroached on Bugs' domain, as Bugs happens to have his rabbit hole there on the beach. When Bugs asks him who he is, he responds in his typical way: "I'm a pirate, Sea-Goin' Sam, the blood-thirstiest, shoot-'em-first-iest, doggone worst-iest buccaneer that ever sailed the Spanish main!"
Bugs then temporarily tricks Sam into trying to shoot himself in the head by saying "You got it all wrong, doc. You mean dead men tell no tales." (This was a reply to Sam's "Dead rabbits tell no tales".) Sam then fires at Bugs after realizing he's been tricked.
Bugs then escapes in a tied lifeboat, therefore at one point he is rowing himself without the boat. Sam follows, but realizing there are no paddles, he dives in the water and retrieves them from the ship Bugs put them. He then swims back to the lifeboat, which he then rows back to the ship.
As Sam searches for Bugs, he sees Bugs disguised as Captain Bligh (effecting the voice and thick-lipped appearance of Charles Laughton in his portrayal of Bligh in Mutiny On The Bounty). Sam takes criticism from "Captain Bligh" before being ordered a whole bunch of ship chores. Sam soon realizes he's been tricked (again), and follows a fleeing Bugs, but crashes into the mast while doing so.
In a side gag, Bugs is trying to hide, and a pesky parrot keeps crowing, "He's in there! He's in there! Awk!" Finally, Bugs asks the parrot, "Polly want a cracker?" The parrot changes his tune, "Polly want a cracker! Polly want a cracker! Awk!" Bugs hands him a huge, lit firecracker, which promptly explodes, blasting all of his feathers off and leaves him dazed and smoldering. His last words before he faints are, "Me and my big mouth!" Then, Bugs poses as the now-unconscious parrot, leading Sam into a cannon. Bugs lights the fuse, and then, KABOOM! The cannon explodes and Sam falls out of the barrel.
In a series of gags that mildly anticipate the Road Runner series, Bugs is in the crow's nest and Sam tries various unsuccessful attempts to get to him; for example, setting up a see-saw, standing on one end and tossing a rock on the other end, he springs straight up, crashes into the underside of the crow's nest, and falls back to the deck. In another one, that skirts the laws of physics, Bugs tells Sam he's going to jump. Instead, Bugs drops a convenient anvil over the side of the crow's nest, Sam catches it, and the entire ship (except for the crows nest) submerges. Sam mouths some apparent curses, then tosses the anvil over the railing and the ship resurfaces.
Bugs then crawls in a board in the ship's side, with Sam following. When he opens the board, he is blasted by a cannon. When Bugs opens the board to Sam's left ("Yoo hoo, Mister Pirate!"), he gets blasted by a cannon again. Bugs opens another board ("Oh, Redbeard!"), but Sam, wanting to avoid getting blasted again, decides to open up the board with his sword. Nothing there! Suddenly, another board opens and a cannon blasts Sam once more.
Sam now chases Bugs again, and is now subjected to the famous lots-of-doors in-and-out routine (previously used in Little Red Riding Rabbit), which ends with Sam getting blasted by a cannon again. Sam confronts Bugs, who throws a match into the powder room, which a panicking Sam swiftly retrieves (a gag that would later be recycled into 1954's Captain Hareblower). This is repeated until finally, Sam is too late to retrieve the match that ends up exploding the pirate ship's powder magazine, reducing the ship to splinters. On his last nerve, Sam furiously chases Bugs until he seemingly has Bugs defeated ("Okay, rabbit! I got ya cornered! Come out and meet your doom!") until a cannon blasts him once more. Finally, defeated, Sam raises the white flag. Bugsy turns to the audience, puts on an old-style ship captain's hat, and paraphrases John Paul Jones, "I had not even begun to fight!"

==Censorship==

==See also==

==External links==


