[[Hot Wheels World Race (video game)]]

CATEGORIES: 2003 video games, Nintendo GameCube games, Hot Wheels video games, PlayStation 2 games, Racing video games, THQ games, Video games based on toys, Video games developed in the United Kingdom, Windows games, Game Boy Advance games

Hot Wheels World Race is a racing video game released in 2003 by Climax Group and THQ. The game is based on the movie and TV series of the same name that was released by Hot Wheels and Mainframe Entertainment, and 35 Hot Wheels toy automobiles were released in conjunction with the TV series.

==Info==

Get ready for an all-new Hot Wheels racing experience on your favorite game system! Set in the near distant future where life revolves around the most intense sport ever invented. Hot Wheels Higheway 35 World Race takes daring drivers through a series of intense circuit races on extreme tracks featuring split/multi-level courses, obstacles, and speeds unlike anything ever experienced before. Do you have what it takes to make it through Hot Wheels Higheway 35 World Race?

==Back of the box==

Race through volcanoes, ice mountains, and space.
DRIVE THE IMPOSSIBLE!
Collect pick-ups to trigger shortcuts.
Choose from authentic Hot Wheels cars.
Compete to be the world's greatest driver in the most intense race ever created-the Highway 35 circuit. Do you have what it takes to master treacherous jumps, death defying loops, and win the Hot Wheels World Race event?
Featuring the song "Hot" by Smashmouth.

==Features==

Choose from 35 of the fastest cars ever created for the ultimate mission of winning the World Race event.
Master the extreme stunts and combo system.
Collect pickups to trigger shortcuts and earn new features.
Race a field of five other aggressive rivals.
choose between 5 teams including the Wave Rippers, Scorchers, Road Beasts, Dune Ratz, and Street Breed.
Intense 4 player split screen racing.

==Gameplay==

The gameplay of World Race is similar to many other racing games. You can do special tricks when in the air, which adds on to your car's boost. Collecting gold rings also increases the boost. The PC, GameCube, and PS2 version each have multi-player, all of which are split-screen.

