[[John Sencio]]

CATEGORIES: Year of birth missing (living people), Living people, American television personalities, American male television actors, Emerson College alumni, VJs (media personalities), People from Holliston, Massachusetts

John Sencio is an American television host, producer, and journalist, as well as a former MTV VJ.  Mr. Sencio is also a 2-time cancer survivor and motivational speaker.  He currently resides in Los Angeles and New York, according to his official website.John Sencio Official Website
John Sencio grew up in Holliston, Massachusetts.  Prior to working in television he was a counselor for young people with emotional and behavioral disorders. Sencio is a graduate of Emerson College, where he studied television, film, and radio.[tpl]cite news|first=|last=|title=John Sencio: Learn more about John Sencio, host of Cash in the Attic |url=http://www.hgtv.com/john-sencio/bio/index.html |work=HGTV |publisher= |date= |accessdate=2012-02-21[/tpl]
He was a popular VJ for four years during the mid-1990s.  He hosted a number of shows on MTV including Rude Awakening, which aired music videos from 6 am to 7 am. He was known for writing and producing his own skits and interviewed a number of celebrities, from music artists to movie stars such as Mel Gibson and Halle Berry.
Although he remained under contract to Viacom (MTV's Parent Company) until 1998, John Sencio was released in April 1997 as part of a shake up at MTV.  The dramatic shake up occurred when MTV tried to refocus more on music instead of VJs and game shows.  Most other VJs that were on the channel at the time were also released.
John Sencio had a lower profile on television for a period after leaving MTV. During this time he did star in a short lived sitcom for Warner Brothers.  He also had hosting stints on Simplify Your Life for the Fine Living Network, 48 Hour Wedding for PAX television network, and Movie Buzz for the Fox Entertainment Group.  According to IMDB, Sencio had bit parts in motion pictures as well.  It is implied on his official website that this phase was a result of focusing on personal projects ranging from independent film to music.
John Sencio is cancer survivor.  According to The Cancer Survivors Network,The Cancer Survivors Network it was during this early phase of his career that Sencio underwent chemotherapy and radiation therapy for Hodgkin's Lymphoma.  He was treated at NYU Medical Center,NYU Langone Medical Center in New York City.  On the American Cancer Society website site Sencio is described as having a “miraculous” recovery.
Mr. Sencio returned to higher profile roles on television in the mid-2000s.
In 2004 and 2005, he was an anchor and reporter for a nationally syndicated reality show, produced by NBC, called Home Delivery.  This program was a blend of Daytime Talk, Broadcast Journalism, and making dreams come true.  Home Delivery was re-launched in 2009 on the ION Network.  According to an article on Wellness.com John Sencio began motivational speaking in Los Angeles following Home Delivery.
In 2006, along with his current series, Mr. Sencio hosted and produced numerous television specials as well as guest anchored the national news program The Daily Buzz.
Sencio currently hosts a show on Home & Garden Television (HGTV) called Cash in the Attic.  The show is modeled on the BBC show of the same name.  On the reality show, homeowners try to sell old or unused items in their home at auction.  Sometimes the items sell for more than the estimate, sometimes less.  This American version of Cash in The Attic premiered in the fall of 2005 and to date, according to IMDB, Sencio has hosted and produced 65 episodes.Internet Movie Data Base John Sencio
According to NBC Universal's Home Delivery website, Sencio is married and has children.
John Sencio revealed on his website that he was diagnosed with stage-4 “head & neck” cancer in 2012.  After 6 months of aggressive surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation he was pronounced “cancer free” in 2013.
In 2013 Mr. Sencio resumed broadcasting, beginning with guest hosting stints on KFI am 640 Los Angeles.  As of 2012 KFI was the highest rated talk radio station in the United States.Top 10 Talk Radio Stations

==References==

==External links==


