[[Todd Tucker]]

CATEGORIES: 1979 births, Living people, American activists, American political writers, Baptists from the United States, George Washington University alumni, American labor unionists, Alumni of the University of Cambridge

Todd Nathaniel Tucker (born 1979, Louisville, Kentucky) is a researcher at the University of Cambridge specializing in development economics and international law. In 2012, he was named a Gates Scholar.
He was previously research director of Public Citizen's Global Trade Watch division and primary blogger at Eyes on Trade. He is co-author of "The Rise and Fall of Fast Track Trade Authority", a 2009 book about the history of the expansion of executive-branch involvement in the formation of U.S. trade policy - and the expansion of trade policy into non-tariff matters like consumer protection rules.
His work focuses on the legal, economic and political implications of the World Trade Organization (WTO), North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) and other trade agreements and debt relief issues. He is a media commentator on international economic and policy issues who has been cited and published by radio, print and Internet outlets such as the Los Angeles Times, the Washington Post, the Wall Street Journal, the Financial Times, The Nation, Dissent Magazine, Foreign Policy In Focus, and other publications.  
Prior to working at Global Trade Watch, Tucker was a policy analyst with the Center for Economic and Policy Research. He completed graduate work in development economics at the University of Cambridge under the noted economist, Ha-Joon Chang. In 2001, Tucker received his B.A. from  George Washington University. 
According to The Nation, Tucker was a leader of the United Students Against Sweatshops student movement and Internet articles from 2000-01 have him listed as an organizer with the World Bank Bonds Boycott campaign. He has also helped lead the movement to create staff trade unions at non-governmental organizations, according to a 2004 article from the National Organizer's Alliance.

==Family==

According to a Washington Post article from 2001, Tucker was raised as the son of Baptist missionaries in Buenos Aires, Argentina. 
On March 31, 2007, Tucker married Heather Boushey, chief economist at the Center for American Progress, according to the New York Times.

==Sources==

==External links==


