[[Penny University]]

CATEGORIES: Types of coffeehouses, Coffeehouses, Coffee houses of the United Kingdom, Coffee culture, English culture, Culture in London, 18th century in London, Social history of London

Penny University is a term originating from the 18th-century coffeehouses in London, England. Instead of paying for drinks, people were charged a penny to enter a coffeehouse. Once inside, the patron had access to coffee, the company of others, various discussions, pamphlets, bulletins, newspapers, and the latest news and gossip. Reporters called "runners" went around to the coffeehouses announcing the latest news, perhaps not too unlike what we might hear on the TV or the radio today.Pelzer, J. and L. The English Coffee Houses.  December 1, 2003
This environment attracted an eclectic group of people who met and mingled with each other at these coffeehouses. In a society that placed such a high importance on class and economic status, the coffeehouses were unique because the patrons were people from all levels of society.Boulton, William B. The Amusements of Old London.  London: Ballantyne, Hanson & Co., 1901. Anyone who had a penny could come inside. Students from the universities also frequented the coffeehouses, sometimes even spending more time at the shops than at school.Ellis, Aytoun. The Penny Universities; A History of the Coffee-houses.  London, Secker & Warburg, 1956.
Since that time, various coffee shops all over the world have used the name "Penny University".
The original sense of a coffee house probably grew out of a common experience: that one came out of a coffeehouse feeling more intelligent or enlightened than when entering (as  Montesquieu observed in The Persian Letters). As, indeed, wide-ranging conversations ensued therein, from the commercial (leading to the founding of, in London, Lloyd's of London, and in New York, the New York Stock Exchange) to the political, and the purely intellectual; the idea that one could acquire an education for the price of a cup of coffee, that is, a penny, took hold of the poetic imagination.

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


