[[Tyrant (Australian band)]]

CATEGORIES: Tasmanian musical groups, Australian heavy metal musical groups, Musical quintets

TYRANT (Tyrant Australia) are a hard rock/heavy metal band from Tasmania, Australia.
The band originally formed in the early 1980s as an AOR band called, Slyder – by 2 brothers, Andrew and Robert Zarins. In 1983, childhood friend Neil Wilson joined as singer and the band changed their name to Tyrant enlisting Grant Wallace as second guitarist and began playing a harder-edged style of blues-influenced rock in the style of AC/DC, Rose Tattoo and The Angels. Tyrant were also influenced by countless Overseas metal acts including, Motorhead, Saxon, Judas Priest, Iron Maiden and Accept.
In 1984, Tyrant released a four-track EP titled Never Too Loud, which topped the metal charts on the local radio stations and gained them a massive following in Tasmania. A successful tour of Tasmania followed, including a show at the Hobart City Hall in front of 2000 people. Tyrant moved to Sydney, becoming one of the leading hard rock bands in the city. Amazingly, Tyrant 'headlined' the inaugural "Metal Crusade" show in 1985, the lineup being: Tyrant, Bengal Tigers, Shy Thunder, Statez and Vice before 1800 metalheads. Despite 'rave' reviews in both RAM and Juke magazines at the time, a strong fantical fan base, a record deal never eventuated with Tyrant splitting up in late 1986 due to different musical interests among the band members.
In 1987, brothers Andy and Roberet Zarins re-formed Slyder, which split up again in 1990 after releasing one single titled "Dreams".
Meanwhile, Neil Wilson and fellow Tyrant member, guitarist Grant Wallace formed a band called in 1987 called, The Law and played for a couple of years in Sydney, until both Wilson and Wallace formed a band called, "Sonic Temple" which was a concept band for UK rockers, The Cult.
In 1998 Tyrant reformed again with the original line-up, Neil 'Steel' Wilson, Grant Wallace, Andrew Zarins and  Robert Zarins – returning to a packed house on 11 November 2000 at the Iron Duke Hotel in Sydney. Tyrant delivered many shows over the next couple of years, recording two full-length albums Freaks of Nature (2000) and Thunder Down Under (2003) before playing their 'last show' together with childhood heroes, Rose Tattoo. The band now middle aged, moved onto married life with the exception of Wilson.
Vocalist Neil Wilson returned to Tasmania in 2004, forming a NEW line-up of Tyrant which released a live CD in 2005 titled, Live Bootleg. The new CD exposed a band that was far more ferocious, than the previous incarnation with the sound shifting its style musically speaking, with Tyrant moving away from their AC/DC, Rose Tattoo roots to a more modern and heavier metal sound with the new lineup consisting of vocalist, Neil Wilson, Brett Collidge on guitars, Simon Wilson guitars, Jason Smith bass guitar, and Nathan Sproule on drums. While only being a 'bootleg' recording, the new Tyrant was far more together musically with a fearsome beast displayed over the recording.
In August 2008 Tyrant singer, Neil Wilson was returning home from a recording session for the bands' "25th Anniversary" project that was underway, when Wilson was involved in a 'head on' car accident, luckily escaping with relative minor injuries.
Recording of the "Anniversary" CD re-commenced in early 2009 with 2 new songs, albeit in 'demo' form titled, "Running From The Law" and "Defenders Of The Faith" uploaded to the bands' My Space page (TyrantAustralia) – the first new studio recordings by Tyrant since 2003.
The "Save The Devil" (demo edition) was released March 2011 containing 10 songs of attitude fuelled, obnoxious hard rock metal that sees the Tasmanian metal act deliver possibly their finest effort to date. Full of barn storming anthems, a cool cover and a ballad - "Save The Devil" was recorded at Izaneer studios, in Tasmania - and was the fifth self-financed CD by TYRANT being engineered, mixed and produced by Brett Collidge. A number of videos have been up loaded to YouTube including a new song, 'Lay Down The Law' off the latest CD.
On 19 August 2011 saw the inception of a new "All Star" TYRANT at the Brisbane Hotel in Hobart. The new line up features members from Raise the Flag, Rogue Sharks, Hammerhead and Roadkill. 
The new 'SPECIAL EDITION' of the "Save The Devil" CD is to be issued 1 June 2012 - which is remixed and mastered, being produced by Michael Shelley in Hobart at the Green Room studios and includes different artwork and contains 8 songs! TYRANT return to the stage playing in Hobart on 18 May 2012 - supporting US metal legend, TIM RIPPER OWENS on his first Australian solo tour!

==Current line-Up==

==Discography==

==External links==


