[[Pottersville, New Jersey]]

CATEGORIES: Unincorporated communities in Hunterdon County, New Jersey, Unincorporated communities in Somerset County, New Jersey

Pottersville is an unincorporated community split within Bedminster Township in Somerset County and Tewksbury Township in Hunterdon County, New Jersey, United States. The area is served as United States Postal Service ZIP Code 07979.
As of the 2000 United States Census, the population for ZIP Code Tabulation Area 07979 was 339.

==Education==

The Purnell School, a private all-girls boarding high school, is located in Pottersville.

==Pottersville history==

Pottersville, N.J. was first called Lamington and afterwards Potters Mills. There were mills here as early as 1756 built and owned by William Willet. One Mill still stands on the left side of Rte.512 heading towards Califon, N.J. It was originally used for weaving woolen goods and later turned into a grist mill. The first grist mill was built along the Black River but no longer stands. A commemorative plaque has taken its place.
William Willet owned a day book in which he recorded sales to the Continental Army during the Revolutionary War. His main consideration became supplying the Continental Army. He was paid haphazardly in Continental currency which around 1780 became worthless. He was ruined financially and was forced to sell both mills to Serrin Potter in 1783, hence the Village's name.
In 1887 upwards of 200,000 baskets of peaches were shipped from Pottersville and New Germantown (Oldwick) by wagons to Chester, Whitehouse and other N.J. towns. The profitable peach growing industry persuaded the Rockaway Valley Railroad to build a spur to Pottersville in 1888.
The beautiful Black River Falls, here in Pottersville, prompted the railroad to run excursions to the falls. The land around the glen were made into picnic grounds and an amusement park. There was a merry-go-round, dance pavilion and refreshment stand. Some visitors came from Jersey City, N.J. and usually stayed at the Pottersville Hotel. According to a lifelong resident of the town, they brought their own beer and livened up the town - sometimes a little too much with a brawl now and then. Failure of the peach crop eventually resulted in the end of the Rockaway Railroad. One town resident remembers the park open as late as 1920.

==Notable people==

Notable current and former residents of Pottersville include:

==References==

==External links==


