[[Puerto Rican art]]

CATEGORIES: Puerto Rican art, Art by nationality

With the country's ethnically diverse background, Puerto Rican art reflects many infls, an especially beloved form of folk art, evolved from the Spanish church's use of sculptures to convert indigenous Puerto Ricans to Christianity.  Meaning "saints" in Spanish, santos depict figures of saints and other religious icons.  Families continue to pass this centuries-old craft down from generation to generation.  The artisans, called santeros, create santos from native wood, clay, and stone.  After shaping simple effigies, they often finish by painting them in vivid colors.  Santos vary in size, with the smallest examples around eight inches tall and the largest about twenty inches tall.  Traditionally, santos were seen as messengers between the earth and Heaven.  As such, they occupied a special place on household altars, where people prayed to them, asked for help, or tried to summon their protection.  
Also popular, caretas are masks worn during carnivals.  Similar masks signifying evil spirits were used in both Spain and Africa, though for different purposes.  The Spanish used their masks to frighten lapsed Christians into returning to the church, while tribal Africans used them as protection from the evil spirits they represented.  Puerto Rican caretas always bear at least several horns and fangs, true to their historic origins.  While they are usually constructed of papier-mâché, coconut shells and fine metal screening are sometimes used as well.  Though red and black were originally the typical colors for caretas, their palette has expanded to include a wide variety of bright hues and patterns.

==Visual arts==

Perhaps the strongest Spanish influenced on Puerto Rican arts was in painting.  During the colonial period, native-born painters emulated classic European styles.  The first of these artists to gain international acclaim, José Campeche, learned techniques from both his father, who was also a painter, and exiled Spanish artist Luis Paret. His work concentrated on religious themes and portraits of important citizens in Spanish Rococo style.  Still regarded as the most important 18th century painter in the Americas, Campeche is also credited with creating Puerto Rican national painting.
In the 19th century, Francisco Oller followed in Campeche's footsteps.  He studied in both Madrid and Paris, which greatly influenced his work.  Although his paintings often show an Impressionist or Realist style, he altered his style with each piece to suit the subject matter.  Landscapes, portraits, and still lifes were all among his works.  After moving back to Puerto Rico in 1884, Oller became interested in portraying Puerto Rican subject matter.  He also founded an art academy and wrote a book on drawing and painting the natural world.

==See also==

==References==


