[[Honnavalli]]

CATEGORIES: Villages in Tumkur district

Honnavalli is an Indian village in Tiptur Taluk in Karnataka State. It has an average elevation of 820 metres (2693 feet).

==History of Honnavalli==

Honnavalli is a village headquarters about 10 miles northwest of Tiptur in Tumkur District. Honnavalli was the Taluk headquarters until 1889.  The history of the village dates back to the eleventh century.  It was built by one Someswararaya who belonged to the Harnahalli Nayak family.  Legend says 'Honnu Amma' the family deity of the Pallegar appeared in his dream and directed him to build a model village in her name.  Even today 'Honnavalli Amma' is the Village Goddess.  The village was built by experienced architects of that period.

==How did the village get this name==

There are several legends:
1. It appears that there was 'Golden Showers for 3/4 of a minute.
2. The village as surrounded by golden Twiners may be beetal plant coloured yellow.
3. Rich coconut plantation all round - The village was inhibited by rich people(Honnu).
Honnavalli was a very prosperous village. There are two tanks on either side of the village - Badagikere - Hirikere. Main crop is Coconut.
Before 11th Century the village was part of Harnahalli Pallegar's domain. Since it was a border village of Harnahalli state, the Pallegar's built a strong fort all round the village.
Even today we can see the remnants of it. Later the village came under the rule of Vijayanagara Empire. Honnavalli and Tiptur later came under the rule of Mysore kings after the fall of Vijayanagara Empire.

==Anivala==

Anivala is a small village located at around 20km from Tiptur city, Tumkur district.  Anivala comes under Honnavalli Hobli.  The village has a small population of around 700 people.  Coconut plantation is the main source of income for people in this village, however Ragi, Banana, Jowar is also widely cultivated.  Every year there will be a 3 day grand fair of Kanive amma the village goddess, the fair is witnessed by thousands of people from in and around Anivala. Cheluvaraya Swamy is also worshiped in Anivala. 
Rangappa, Gangappa & Halappa are a well established and popular family in Anivala.  Revanna was elected as Grama Panchayat President.

==References==

Honnavalli is the big hobli in a Tumkur District. Honnavalli is a covered by only Coconut tree
surrounding 116 villages is there. The Honnavalli is prapabolil

