[[Piano Quintet (Elgar)]]

CATEGORIES: Compositions by Edward Elgar, Compositions for piano quintet, 1918 compositions, Compositions in A minor

The Quintet in A minor for Piano and String Quartet, Op. 84 is a chamber work by Edward Elgar.
He worked on the Quintet and two other major chamber piecesThe Violin Sonata in E minor, Op. 82 and the String Quartet in E minor, Op. 83. in the summer of 1918 while staying at Brinkwells near Fittleworth in Sussex. W. H. "Billy" Reed considered that all three were ‘influenced by the quiet and peaceful surroundings during that wonderful summer’.
The Quintet was first performed on 21 May 1919, by the pianist William Murdoch, the violinists Albert Sammons and W. H. Reed, the violist Raymond Jeremy and the cellist Felix Salmond. These players included some of the composer's musical confidantes – Reed worked with him on the Violin Concerto and the Third Symphony, and Salmond worked on the Cello Concerto with him. Albert Sammons later made the first complete recording of the Violin Concerto.
The work is dedicated to Ernest Newman, music critic of The Manchester Guardian.

==Movements==

There are three movements:
In performance, the first movement takes about 14 minutes, the adagio a little under 12, and the last movement a little over 10, making this the longest of Elgar’s chamber works. 
His wife's first reaction on hearing the three chamber works was 'E. writing wonderful new music', and more than fifty years later The Gramophone agreed: 'Alice Elgar was quite right: it is a new urgency, pointed and refined by the discipline of writing chamber music, a discipline that clearly rejuvenated Elgar's imagination. It is big chamber music, with at times an almost orchestral sonority to it...'
The Quintet was first recorded by Ethel Hobday with the Spencer Dyke Quartet for the National Gramophonic Society in December 1925. Compton Mackenzie suggested that Elgar himself should play the piano for the recording, but the composer refused the invitation replying, "I never play the pianoforte - I scramble through things orchestrally in a way that would madden with envy all existing pianists".
It was subsequently recorded electrically for HMV by Harriet Cohen and the Stratton Quartet at the beginning of October 1933, immediately before the composer became seriously ill. Test pressings were rushed to Elgar's bedside; the pleasure he gained from them inspiring Fred Gaisberg to record the Quintet as a Christmas present to the ailing composer.
The work took some years to establish itself in the repertoire, but in recent years it has been performed and recorded many times.

==Recordings==

==External links==

==References==

==Notes==

 
 


