[[Mahdi al-Modarresi]]

CATEGORIES: Shia Muslim scholars of Islam, Iraqi Shia Muslims, Living people

Sayed Mohammad Mahdi Al-Modarressi comes from a family of scholars which includes supreme religious jurists, or Grand Ayatollahs, such as Grand Ayatollah S. Mohammad Taqi al-Modarresi, one of Iraq’s leading faith leaders of its majority Shi'a population.
Under his father’s supervision, Sayed Al-Modarressi followed a solid traditional curriculum in the Hawza, studying classical works on various disciplines of Islamic jurisprudence as well as the instrumental faculties commonly taught at religious learning institutions. A graduate of the acclaimed al Qa’em Theological Research Institute near the Sayyidah Zaynab Mosque in Damascus, Sayed Modarressi reached the level of Sotouh al Ulya (Upper Foundations). His classical curriculum embodied a methodology which crystallizes the middle way of Islam; respect for the differences between jurists, and a spiritual education drawn from the Qur'an and the traditions of Prophet Muhammad and his Household; the Ahlulbayt. 
Modarressi has written three books in Arabic (published in Beirut) http://ahlulbayt.tv/enlight/?page_id=6 and two titles in English (being edited for publication), in addition to numerous papers on Islamic sciences as well as contemporary issues including social and theological Islamic thought.
Sayed Modarressi's last book (Arabic) is an in-depth analytical study of the prophetic narration known as Hadeeth Al Thaqalayn (Hadith of the two weighty things) which looks into the practical implications of this controversial narration and provides a thorough insight of the Shia/Sunni deliberations on this text. http://ahlulbayt.tv/enlight/?page_id=6
Sayed Modarressi's English books include 'Say; He is God – Allah the God of Islam' and 'Why Muslims Are Weird - And Some Outright Crazy!'.According to previous versions of this wiki, the book's title was originally "Why We Are Different; Bridging the Divide Between Islam and the West" but was changed later, as per the online bio The former is a wide-ranging study of the Islamic view of God, focusing on the principle theological arguments for the existence of the supernatural Creator from an Islamic viewpoint. The latter work is an introduction to the religion of Islam to non-Muslims with a radically new, unorthodox approach to this over-saturated yet intricately complex subject. The book tackles subjects as complicated as Jihad & Hijab, as well as trivial matters as why Muslims have special dietary needs and fashion customs. 
Another work is a collection of essays about contemporary challenges facing Muslim youths http://ahlulbayt.tv/enlight/?p=284 with special emphasis on problems which are more relevant in Western nations where they are a growing minority. Such 'taboo' subjects as pornography, alcohol, sex, drugs, and religious extremism are discussed. 
Sayed Modarressi lectures worldwide on traditional as well as contemporary Islamic issues and has lectured in countless mosques, churches, universities, and seminaries. He has been interviewed by numerous publications and has appeared on TV and radio programs such as the BBC. An ardent advocate of interfaith dialogue,Interfaith Dialogue at St. Andrew's Modarressi engages in such events on a regular basis and has consistently spoken out against acts of terror.BBC's Reporting Religion Interviews Sayed Mehdi al-Modarressi

==References==

==External links==


