[[Cameo (album)]]

CATEGORIES: 1973 albums, ABC Records albums, Dusty Springfield albums

Cameo is the eighth studio album released by singer Dusty Springfield. Cameo is her first LP for the ABC Dunhill Records label. It was recorded in the States between July and October 1972 and released in the UK (by Philips Records) in May 1973, having appeared in the States some three months earlier. Cameo was produced by Steve Barri, Dennis Lambert and Brian Potter who later went on to write and produce major hits for among others Glen Campbell, The Four Tops and The Tavares. The album also included material written by Alan O'Day, David Gates, Nickolas Ashford, Valerie Simpson and Van Morrison and among the all-star line up of musicians contributing were Hal Blaine, Paul Humphrey, Larry Carlton, Wilton Felder, Carol Kaye, Victor Feldman, Michael Omartian, Venetta Fields and Clydie King.
While Cameo was only a moderate critical success and a commercial failure in 1973 – charting neither in the UK nor the US – it has since been re-evaluated by both fans and music critics alike and is now often cited as one of the highlights of Springfield's recording career alongside 1969's Dusty in Memphis. A planned second album on the ABC Dunhill label with the working title of Elements (eventually re-titled Longing), was started, but never finished, due to Springfield's personal problems at the time. Most of the uncompleted album Longing can also be found on the Hip-O Records compilation Beautiful Soul, released in the United States in 2001.
Cameo was digitally remastered and released on CD for the first time in Europe by Mercury/Universal Music in 2002, though not containing any bonus tracks. Due to its relative obscurity upon the LP's initial release in 1973, Cameo is considered to be one of the rarer titles of Springfield's official catalogue/discography, and hard to find on any format, though its increased popularity in recent years due to the CD release and digital music file sharing has alleviated that difficulty to a good degree.

==Track listing==

Side A
Side B
Other Tracks
"Ben" (Walter Scharf, Don Black)
"I Can See Clearly Now" (Johnny Nash)
"It's All Been Said Before" (Dennis Lambert, Brian Potter)
"When The Boys Come Out to Play" (Dennis Lambert, Brian Potter)
"I Just Wanna Be There" Take (Nickolas Ashford, Valerie Simpson)
"Tupelo Honey" Take (Van Morrison)
"Learn to Say Goodbye" Recording (Hugo Montenegro, Bradford Craig)
"Six Million Dollar Man" (theme from The Six Million Dollar Man) (Glen A. Larson)
"The Other Side of Life" B.J. Thomas "duet" mix (David Gates)

==Personnel and production==

==Charts==

Album – Billboard (North America)
Singles – Billboard (North America)
^"Learn to Say Goodbye" was initially the B side of "Mama's Little Girl". The single was later flipped, with "Learn to Say Goodbye" becoming the A side.

==Sources==


