[[Vanishing Son]]

CATEGORIES: 1990s American television series, 1994 American television series debuts, 1995 American television series endings, American action television series, American drama television series, Action Pack (Universal Television), English-language television programming, First-run syndicated television programs in the United States, Martial arts television series, Martial arts films

Vanishing Son is a short-lived syndicated action television series that was part of Universal Television's Action Pack. Starting as a series of four made-for-television movies in 1994, the series debuted on January 16, 1995. Vanishing Son I, Vanishing Son II, Vanishing Son III, and Vanishing Son IV, were aired on February 28, July 18, July 25, and October 10, 1994, respectively. The series was ground-breaking for the casting of an Asian male in an attractive leading-man role.

==Synopsis==

Russell Wong starred as Jian-Wa Chang, a musician who escaped from the People's Republic of China after being involved in a student demonstration against the government. He and his brother Wago Chang (Chi Muoi Lo) escaped to the USA; he pursued his music while Wago became drawn to a life of organized crime.
Wago and two US Federal Agents are killed; Jian-Wa is held responsible, but a Vietnamese mafioso known as "The General" (Haing S. Ngor) is behind the murders. Jian-Wa becomes a fugitive, using his wisdom, music, and martial arts skills to solve problems along the way, on his quest to bring "The General" to justice. As he helps others while traveling, he is aided by the spirit of his murdered brother Wago.
In the series, Jian-Wa is constantly on the run from ruthless Federal Agent Dan Sandler (Jason Adams), the direct superior to the agents killed in the two-hour films. Agent Judith Phillips (Stephanie Niznik) was a member of Sandler's team who was convinced that Jian-Wa was innocent and she gradually became his ally. This put her at great odds with Sandler. The series also stars Chi Muoi Lo as Wago Chang.
The series was not renewed after the first thirteen-episode season aired.

==Episode titles==

==References==

==External links==


