[[Jaro Křivohlavý]]

CATEGORIES: Czech psychologists, Czech writers, People from Litoměřice District, Theresienstadt concentration camp survivors, Living people, Masaryk University alumni

Jaro Křivohlavý is a Czech psychologists and writer. He is involved mainly with Health psychology, Experimental psychology and Logotherapy. In the last years, he published several books about Forgiveness and its impact on human health.

==Life==

J. Křivohlavý was born on March 19, 1925 in Třebenice (Czechoslovakia). When he was 17, he was transported into the Nazi concentration camp in Terezin. Later, during the communist regime, he was forced to work for three years in the Prago IV mine in Kladno.
He studied on the Faculty of Philosophy of the Charles University, majoring in Psychology, Philosophy and Anglicistics. In 1950 he obtained a Ph.D. in Philosophy.
In 1996 he was granted the title of Doctor of Science. Later, after his habilitation on the Masaryk University (Brno), the president of the Czech Republic Václav Havel awarded him with the university professor degree.
In the years 1967 - 1994 he worked in the Postgradual Medical Institute in Prague teaching medical doctors in their preparation for specializing in medicine, and working in the hospitals especially with cancer patients, coronary patients and with the handicapped. In these years, he gave lectures and published both in the Czech republic and abroad. Nowadays, he teaches Health psychology at the Faculty of Human Sciences at the Charles University (Prague).
J. Křivohlavý is a Christian, believing in the protestant religion. He is a member of the Evangelical Church of Czech Brethren, baptised and confirmed (1939), ordained presbyter and lay preacher. For 5 years he was a member of the Prague-region administration of the church and 15 years (1969–1984) thrice elected as a lay member of the leading body of the whole church, the Synodal Counsel. In 1967 he was a member of the Church and Society WCC meeting in Geneve, and in 1968 an adviser to the Uppsala general meeting of the WCC. 
Křivohlavý has been married since 1951 and has 3 children.

==Bibliography==

==External links==


