[[Baxter Creek]]

CATEGORIES: Rivers of Contra Costa County, California, Bodies of water in Richmond, California, San Francisco Bay, Rivers of California

Baxter Creek  or Stege CreekCreek History, CreativeDifferences.com, retrieved August 15, 2007 (also archaically Bishop Creek), is a three-branch creek in Richmond and El Cerrito, California, United States forming the Baxter Creek watershed. The creek has three sources and flows from the Berkeley Hills to Stege Marsh and the San Francisco Bay. The Baxter Creek watershed at-large has 10 sources.Baxter Creek - Fluvius Innominatus Topo, 1995
The creek has been largely culverted over the years since the Rancho San Pablo and the subdivided Bishop Ranch, then known as Bishop Creek, were urbanized. Residents missed the creek when it disappeared under the asphalt and formed Friends of Baxter Creek. This group has aided in the restoration of several portions of the creek. Baxter Creek Park, Poinsett Park, and Booker T. Anderson Park are now in a more natural riparian condition, though the Anderson Park portion has been plagued by litter and shopping carts. 
Post-Project Appraisal of Baxter Creek at Booker T. Anderson Park : Shopping Carts - The New BouldersBaxter Creek bash Saturday Justin Hill
The Ohlone Greenway bicycle and pedestrian path has its northern terminus at Baxter Creek Gateway Park, located just north of where the BART tracks cross over San Pablo Avenue in Richmond.
The origins of the name Baxter Creek is unknown, but historians believe it to be from a family which once owned land in the area. Stege is from Richard Stege and Bishop comes from Thomas Bishop, who once owned large tracts of land in the area.FAQ, Friends of Baxter Creek website, retrieved August 15, 2007
Much of the streamside vegetation that had been restored to Booker T. Anderson Park was chainsawed away and leveled due to concerns that the riparian habitat hid muggings, drug dealings, and public sex from police patrols.Green Neighbords: The Richmond chainsaw massacre part one. Ron Sullivan. Berkeley Daily Planet. 18-09-2009. Retrieved 28-01-2011.

==See also==

==Notes==

==External links==


