[[International Fund for Agricultural Development]]

CATEGORIES: International development multilaterals, Agricultural organizations, Poverty, United Nations Development Group, United Nations specialized agencies, International Fund for Agricultural Development

The International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) (French: Fonds international de développement agricole; FIDA) (Italian: Fondo Internazionale per lo Sviluppo Agricola) is a specialized agency of the United Nations dedicated to eradicating rural poverty in developing countries. It was established as an international financial institution in 1977 as one of the major outcomes of the 1974 World Food Conference. Seventy-five per cent of the world's poor live in rural areas in developing countries, yet only 4% of official development assistance goes to agriculture.
The strategic policy of IFAD is detailed in Strategic Framework for IFAD 2011–2015: Enabling the Rural Poor to Overcome Poverty. Its headquarters is in Rome, Italy and is a member of the United Nations Development Group.http://www.undg.org/index.cfm?P=13
The current President of the IFAD is Mr. Kanayo Nwanze from Nigeria, who was elected for a second-term four-year term in 2013.

==Goal==

IFAD's goal is to empower poor rural women and men in developing countries to achieve higher incomes and improved food security.

==Objectives==

IFAD will ensure that poor rural people have better access to, and the skills and organization they need to take advantage of:
All of IFAD's decisions – on regional, country and thematic strategies, poverty reduction strategies, policy dialogue and development partners – are made with these principles and objectives in mind. As reflected in the strategic framework, IFAD is committed to achieving the Millennium Development Goals, in particular the target to halve the proportion of hungry and extremely poor people by 2015.
Underlying these objectives is IFAD’s belief that rural poor people must be empowered to lead their own development if poverty is to be eradicated. Poor people must be able to develop and strengthen their own organizations, so they can advance their own interests and dismantle the obstacles that prevent many of them from creating better lives for themselves. They must be able to have a say in the decisions and policies that affect their lives, and they need to strengthen their bargaining power in the marketplace.

==Working in partnership to eradicate rural poverty==

Through loans and grants, IFAD works with governments to develop and finance programmes and projects that enable rural poor people to overcome poverty themselves.
Since starting operations in 1978, IFAD has invested US$12.0 billion, DM 7.5 billion in 860 projects and programmes that have reached some 370 million poor rural people.
Governments and other financing sources in recipient countries, including project participants, contributed US$10.8 billion (€7.5 billion), and multilateral, bilateral and other donors provided approximately another US$8.8 billion, €5 billion in cofinancing. This represents a total investment of about US$19.6 billion (€15 billion).
IFAD tackles poverty not only as a lender, but also as an advocate for rural poor people. Its multilateral base provides a natural global platform to discuss important policy issues that influence the lives of rural poor people, as well as to draw attention to the centrality of rural development to meeting the Millennium Development Goals.

==Membership==

