[[Rhea Mitchell]]

CATEGORIES: Actresses from Portland, Oregon, American film actresses, American murder victims, American silent film actresses, American stage actresses, Burials at Hollywood Forever Cemetery, Murdered entertainers, Vaudeville performers, Western (genre) film actresses, 1890 births, 1957 deaths, Deaths by strangulation in the United States, People murdered in California, 20th-century American actresses

Rhea Mitchell (December 10, 1890 – September 16, 1957) was an American film actress who began her career during the silent film era. She earned the name of "the little stunt girl" because of her willingness to attempt thrilling scenes in motion pictures.Daisy Dean  "News Notes From Movieland",  Janesville Daily Gazette (Wednesday, October 4, 1916) p 6, Janesville, Wisconsin

==Career==

Mitchell began her career in 1909 playing in the Baker Theater Stock Company in her hometown of Portland, Oregon. She followed with a season in the Orpheum Circuit and a run at the Alcazar Theater in San Francisco.The Moving Picture World, Vol. 29 (1916) Chalmers Publishing Company, New York Mitchell made her film debut in 1912 with the New York Motion Picture Corporation  and would eventually appear in over 100 films during her career. She appeared a number of times with Western star William S. Hart playing a leading role in those films. In 1916 she played in The Brink with Forrest Winant and Arthur Maude."Unique Theater", Marshfield Times  (April 26, 1916) p4, Marshfield, Wisconsin
After 1917, her roles became smaller and she appeared in a handful of films through the mid-30s and in several bit parts during the early 1950s which often went uncredited.

==Later years and death==

After her retirement from films, Mitchell managed a large apartment house in Los Angeles.  While managing a second apartment in 1957, the La Brea District Apartments, a disgruntled houseboy named Sonnie Hartford, Jr., strangled her with the cord of her blue silk dressing gown."Ex-Star Slain, Jail Houseboy" (September 17, 1957) Long Beach, California Press-Telegram p 1.Los Angeles Times, "Ex-Actress Strangled", September 17, 1957, Page 38. An article in the Press-Telegram read in part,  "A search still was being made by police for a 'baldish, middleaged man' who reportedly kept company recently with the never-married Miss Mitchell. Seattle police were asked to question Miss Mitchell's only known relative, an aunt, Mrs. John Benson. Police said there was no sign of a struggle or criminal attack. Her body was discovered by the houseboy. The actress, known as Ginger to her friends, had played opposite such silent film stars as William S. Hart, Tom Mix, King Baggot and Bert Lytell.... She had appeared in film bit roles as recently as 1951." 
Mitchell is buried at Hollywood Forever Cemetery in Los Angeles.

==Selected filmography==

==References==

==External links==


