[[Spring Lake, Highlands County, Florida]]

CATEGORIES: Unincorporated communities in Highlands County, Florida, Unincorporated communities in Florida

Spring Lake is an unincorporated community in Highlands County, Florida, United States, southeast of Sebring, just outside the city limits of Sebring, adjacent to the Sebring International Raceway. Its age of the population varies, but it is mostly made up of senior citizens and established families with children, and The Spring Lake Golf Resort consists of three different golf courses, with many available homes and land for sale. It shouldn't be confused with the town of Spring Lake, Florida.
The Spring Lake community has its own Property Association, which is located at 6122 U.S. Highway 98, Sebring, FL. 33876-9710. It also has its own Board of Directors, annual dues and yearly budget, as well as a monthly newsletter that keeps its residents informed of such things as the Spring Lake Bylaws, and the Spring Lake Declaration of Restrictions and Amendments. It also publishes a yearly telephone directory for its residents. 

==Geography==

Bordered by Lake Istokpoga, Florida's 2nd largest lake, the community of Spring Lake is mostly flat, and consists of canals and beautiful golf course lots. The resort offers the guests and residents the ability to experience much of Florida's natural beauty. The typical lot size within the Spring Lake Golf Resort is 0.25 acres, and about 50 percent of the lots back up to either a golf course fairway, golf course green, or a canal.

==Community Golf Info==

Spring Lake Golf Resort is listed in the Guinness Book of World Records for the "world's largest green!" - Measuring 47,000 square feet, and it is the home of the original $1,000,000 putt!
There are 3 different golf courses within the Spring Lake Golf Resort: a Par 72, 18 Hole Course, named Panther Creek; a Par 71, 18 Hole Course, named Cougar Trail; and a Par 34, 9 Hole Executive Course, named Bobcat Run.
Panther Creek Championship Links Course has six different tees to choose from and features Florida's longest hole - a par 6 @ 800 yards! With Water throughout the course, accuracy is a premium. The course also features a popular par 3 island green.
The Cougar Trail course is member friendly and has four sets of tees to choose from. With its trees, woods, and water, this is an equally challenging course. Cougar #9 is also home to the World's Largest Green, over 47,000 square feet and listed in the Guinness Book of World Records!

==References==


