[[Pa Modou Kah]]

CATEGORIES: 1980 births, Living people, People from Banjul, Gambian emigrants to Norway, Norwegian footballers, Norway international footballers, AIK Fotboll players, Vålerenga Fotball players, Roda JC players, Qatar SC footballers, Portland Timbers players, Eredivisie players, Norwegian Premier League players, Allsvenskan players, Qatar Stars League players, Major League Soccer players, Norwegian expatriate footballers, Expatriate footballers in Sweden, Norwegian expatriates in Sweden, Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands, Norwegian expatriates in the Netherlands, Expatriate footballers in Qatar, Expatriate footballers in Saudi Arabia, Norwegian expatriates in Saudi Arabia, Expatriate soccer players in the United States, Norwegian expatriates in the United States

Pa Modou Kah (born 30 July 1980) is a Norwegian international footballer who currently plays as a defender for Portland Timbers in Major League Soccer.

==Career==

Born in Banjul, The Gambia, Kah and his family emigrated to Norway in 1988, when he was eight years old. He began his football career with Vålerenga in 1998. In the summer of 2003, he moved to Swedish club AIK as a part of the club's effort for winning the championship. Kah was appreciated for his fighting spirit and ability to win the ball. Although his natural position was as a central midfielder, he had to play in various positions; he did several games playing as right-back.
After the club was relegated the following season, Kah transferred to Dutch club Roda JC, making nearly 200 league appearances. In the Netherlands Kah mainly played as central defender.
In 2011, after seven years in the Netherlands, Kah moved to Qatari club Al Khor.
After a brief period in Saudi Arabia with Al-Wehda, Kah moved to the United States on May 3, 2013 when he signed with Major League Soccer club Portland Timbers.http://www.portlandtimbers.com/news/2013/05/timbers-acquire-defender-pa-modou-kah

==Personal life==

In 2005, he was involved in a car accident in Peer, Belgium. He was accompanied by his girlfriend, his cousin, and a friend. His car was rear-ended while stopped a routine road check, immediately killing his girlfriend but only inflicting minor injuries to Kah. In Roda JC's next match, Bjorn Kuipers held a minute silence to commemorate the death of Kah's girlfriend. During the game, Arouna Kone took his shirt off to reveal a shirt which had the inscription "For Kah". Arouna was yellow carded by the referee, which was condemned by the commentators. Kuipers said afterwards that he had not seen the text on Kone's shirt.Over Van Swieten, Kah en Kuipers

==References==

==External links==


