[[Wheelbarrow (robot)]]

CATEGORIES: Bomb disposal robots, Land warfare, Emergency services, Tracked robots, Robots of the United Kingdom, 1972 robots

The Wheelbarrow is a remotely controlled robot designed in 1972 for use by British Army bomb disposal teams operating in Northern Ireland (321 EOD), mainland Britain (11 EOD Regiment) and Iraq. Over 400 have been destroyed in operation, and they are considered to have saved the lives of hundreds.
The idea was instigated by Major RJW ‘Pat’ Patterson (1924 – 2003) in the aftermath of a period (1971 – 72) when the Royal Army Ordnance Corps (RAOC) lost eight ATOs (Ammunition Technical Officers) on active duty in Northern Ireland. An appalling rate of attrition due to the limited options available to an operator faced with an IED.
As head of the RAOC’s Bomb Disposal School (CAD Kineton, Warwickshire) Pat’s invention of the ‘Pigstick’, a device which fires an explosively-propelled jet of water to disrupt the circuitry of a bomb and disable it, had just begun to be used by the ATOs in Northern Ireland. Thoroughly effective its main drawback was that the muzzle must be placed within 3 ins of the bomb which meant that an EOD operator still had to approach the bomb to be able to use it.
However terrorists soon recognised – and exploited – this weakness and changed their tactics  in two ways: firstly by fitting bombs with time fuses which were set to expire around the time of arrival of the EOD operator and, secondly, by increasing the use of car bombs as the terrorists realised that the Pigstick was virtually useless against them.
Major 'Pat' Patterson knew that if a bomb, particularly one in a car, could be neutralised from a distance both the ATO and members of the public would be better protected. To that end he and his team conceived of a remote controlled go-kart that could:
1 – be capable of attaching tow ropes to suspect cars in relative safety. Once a tow rope had been attached it was a simple matter to pull the suspect vehicle to a position where, should the car bomb explode, it would be less likely to cause injuries or major damage to property.
2 – enable the Pigstick to be utilised so as to neutralise the bomb.
The crude prototypes produced at CAD Kineton proved difficult to manoeuvre so a team at the then Military Vehicles and Engineering Establishment (MVEE, Chertsey) was tasked to improve the tracking and steering. The team included John 'Peter' Miller (1912 – 2006), a retired Lieutenant Colonel of the Royal Tank Corps, who had previously modified his own lawnmower to mow independently with the aid of a lanyard. Remembering how effective it was he returned to his local garden centre to order the chassis and motor of a powered wheelbarrow to incorporate. Once there he was advised by the sales assistant to use the chassis of a battery-operated wheelbarrow instead; hence the origination of the name.
Liaison with CAD Kineton and their EOD-trained teams working in Northern Ireland  ensured that the latest innovations were incorporated as time went on which meant that lives and property were at minimal risk caused by improvised explosive devices. The latest iteration is the 'Wheelbarrow Revolution'. The most notable feature in this model is the 360 degree arm which can be outfitted with various EOD attachments. The Wheelbarrow Revolution is also capable of climbing stairways.
It is important to mention the major effort put in by Lofty Pattinson MBE,Cyril Luger & Rod Crane of RARDE Chertsey during the early development of Wheelbarow. See http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wheelbarrow_(robot)&oldid=320596241

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


