[[Loyal American Regiment]]

CATEGORIES: Loyalist military units in the American Revolution

The Loyal American Regiment was a Royal Provincial regiment composed of American loyalists who served in the American Revolution from 1777 to 1783. The unit fought in many engagements throughout the war and was among the thousands of loyalists exiled to Nova Scotia in 1783.

==Regiment's history==

The regiment was raised in mid-March 1777 by the wealthy commander of the regiment, Beverley Robinson. Robinson, a childhood friend of George Washington, commanded the unit until it was disbanded at the end of the war in 1783. Several of Robinson's sons were officers in the regiment. Many of those enlisted in the regiment were Robinson's tenant farmer loyalists in lower Dutchess County and Westchester County, New York. 
The regiment was part of many engagements in the war, often in detachment strength. The Loyal American Regiment spent many months of the war at Kingsbridge, New York, defending the British position in New York City. A detachment from the regiment was captured in July 1779 when the fort at Stony Point, New York was captured by the American army. The unit is best known as being the first regiment to enter Fort Montgomery when it was taken by British-Loyalist forces on October 6, 1777.

==After the war==

When the war was over, Loyalists were unwelcome in the former colonies. From New York City, Britain transported thousands of Loyalists to Nova Scotia throughout the early fall of 1783. In all about 33,000 were settled in Nova Scotia, New Brunswick (separated from Nova Scotia in 1793), Prince Edward Island, and Quebec (including areas that were eventually separated to form Upper Canada, eventually renamed Ontario). Many members of the Loyal American Regiment settled there; some were among the first colonists of the newly formed province of New Brunswick.

==Present day==

Reenactors have recreated Robinson's unit wearing green coats, the standard issue for loyalist soldiers at the beginning of the war.

