[[Kevin James (magician)]]

CATEGORIES: 1962 births, Living people, American expatriates in France, American magicians, People from Hillsdale County, Michigan, America's Got Talent contestants

Kevin James (born April 28, 1962) is an award-winning French-born American magician, known for creating several unique magical effects, such as the "Floating Rose" which is performed by David Copperfield. 
He has also had longrunning performance runs at venues such as Crazy Horse (Paris) and Caesars Palace. He has won the "Parlour Magician of the Year" award from the Magic Castle and also appeared on the CBS television special,
"World's Greatest Magicians at the Magic Castle". In 2007, he was a contestant on the second season of the televised competition America's Got Talent, where he proceeded as far as the semi-finals.

==Biography==

He was born as Kevin James Lowery in France, to American parents Darrell and Mary Lou Lowery. His father was a USAF helicopter pilot stationed in Europe, though later the family relocated to the small town of Jonesville, Michigan, where James grew up. He attended Western Michigan University, studying drama but dropped out in his third year and moved to Los Angeles, where he supported himself with small "strolling" performances at various restaurants, working for tips and a meal. 
It was in California that James joined local magician groups such as the "Long Beach Mystics" and the Magic Castle Juniors, where he was allowed to watch the professional performers. He steadily improved his technique, and in the mid-1980s won the Grand Prix award at the P.C.A.M. competition. He also created a routine which aired on Japanese and European television. 
In 1991, he appeared on the French variety show Sebastien C'est Fou, which led to a job at the famed Crazy Horse in Paris, where he worked steadily for years, performing 2-3 shows per night, seven days a week. After Paris, James moved to Las Vegas, becoming a featured performer at the award-winning Splash show at the Riviera Hotel, for another multi-year run. He has opened for comedian Louie Anderson at Bally's, the Sporting Club in Monte Carlo, and headlined at the Sheraton Walkerhill in Seoul, Korea. In 2005, he was headliner and star of "The World's Greatest Magic Show" in Las Vegas.James' biodata
In June 2007, James auditioned for America's Got Talent, and received unanimous approval from the judges to move on to the Las Vegas callbacks.[ref]
America's Got Talent, June 23, 2007 broadcast[/ref] At the callbacks,America's Got Talent, July 10, 2007 broadcast James was passed on to the short list. James was then sent through to the semi-final roundAmerica's Got Talent, July 11, 2007 broadcast where he disappointed the judges,America's Got Talent, July 17, 2007 broadcast resulting in his elimination from the competition.America's Got Talent, July 24, 2007 broadcast

==Awards==

==References==

==External links==


