[[Elizabeth Horton]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, Miss America 2007 delegates, American television personalities, 1984 births

Elizabeth "Liz"  Horton was Miss North Carolina 2006 and is now a weather anchor and reporter at ABC-11 (WTVD-TV) in Raleigh, North Carolina.  Before moving to Raleigh, Liz was a traffic and weather anchor at Fox 35 News in Orlando, Florida.  Liz started her career at WBTV in Charlotte, North Carolina. She is a 2002 graduate of Westchester Academy in High Point, North Carolina and a 2006 graduate of Johns Hopkins University, where she was also a member of the Phi Mu Fraternity.

==Education==

Horton is currently a student at Mississippi State University, working to complete a Bachelor in Geosciences degree with a concentration in Meteorology. Prior to studying at MSU, Horton attended the Carolina School of Broadcasting, and obtained two degrees from The Peabody Institute of Johns Hopkins University.  Among those were a Bachelor of Music with a Vocal Performance concentration, and a Bachelor of Music Education.  She is a 2002 graduate of Westchester Country Day School in High Point, North Carolina.

==Career==

Liz joined ABC-11 in October, 2013.  She forecasts the weather on weekend evenings alongside Joel Brown and Heather Waliga.  She reports on weather and community events during the week.
She joined Good Day Orlando on Fox 35 News in October, 2011.  She then worked as a full-time traffic reporter and weather anchor. She announced on Facebook that she would be leaving Fox 35 Orlando and taking a position in her home state of North Carolina.
In January, 2010 Horton was hired as a full-time traffic reporter for WBTV News This Morning, alongside John Carter, Christine Nelson, and Al Conklin. Horton also reported for the "On the Road" series as a one man band.
She got her start in the news business as an intern in the newsroom at  WBTV.
A voice student for much of her life, Elizabeth has received numerous accolades for vocal performance and musical theater on local, state and national levels. In addition to studying voice, Elizabeth has extensive violin training and has studied several genres of dance with the High Point Ballet Company.

==Pageantry==

Elizabeth was crowned Miss North Carolina 2006, while representing the Carolina coast. As Miss North Carolina, Elizabeth devoted much of her time to working with the Autism Association of America promoting her platform issue of Autism Awareness. After working as a therapist for an autistic child through Autism Outreach, Inc. Elizabeth chose her platform in an effort to broaden public knowledge of autism and to secure funds for research. Not only did Elizabeth serve as a goodwill ambassador as Miss North Carolina 2006, she also represented the Tarheel State at the 2007 Miss America Scholarship Pageant. 

==Personal life==

Horton married Jonathan Peress on October 23, 2010.

==References==

==External links==


