[[Columbia, Missouri]]

CATEGORIES: Columbia, Missouri, Cities in Boone County, Missouri, Cities in Missouri, Columbia, Missouri metropolitan area, University towns in the United States, Populated places established in 1818, County seats in Missouri, Busking venues

Columbia [tpl]IPAc-en|k|ə|ˈ|l|ʌ|m|b|i|ə[/tpl] is a city of 113,225 people in Missouri, a state of the American Midwest. Founded in 1818 as the county seat of Boone County and home to the University of Missouri, it is the principal municipality of the Columbia Metropolitan Area, the fourth most populous urban area in Missouri.  A college town, the city has a reputation for progressive politics, powerful journalism, and public art. The tripartite establishment of Stephens College (1833), "Mizzou" (1839), and Columbia College (1851), has long made the city a center of education, culture, and athletic competition. These three schools surround Downtown Columbia on the east, south, and north; at its center is the Avenue of the Columns, which connects Francis Quadrangle and Jesse Hall to the Boone County Courthouse and City Hall . Originally agricultural, the cultivation of the mind is modern Columbia's chief economic concern. Never a major center of manufacturing, it also depends on healthcare, insurance, and technology businesses. Cultural institutions include the State Historical Society of Missouri, the Museum of Art and Archaeology, and the annual True/False Film Festival. The Missouri Tigers, the state's only major NCAA Division I program, play football at Faurot Field and basketball at Mizzou Arena as members of the Southeastern Conference. The city is built upon the forested hills and rolling prairies of Mid-Missouri, near the Missouri River, where the Ozark Mountains begin to transform into plain and savanna; limestone creates bluffs and glades while rain carves caves and springs which water the Hinkson, Roche Perche, and Petite Bonne Femme valleys. Surrounding the city, Rock Bridge State Park, Mark Twain National Forest and the Big Muddy National Fish and Wildlife Refuge form a greenbelt preserving sensitive and rare environments. The first humans were nomadic hunters who entered the area at least twelve-thousand years ago. Later, woodland tribes lived in villages along waterways and raised mounds in high places. The Osage and Missouria nations were expelled by the exploration of French traders and the rapid settlement of American pioneers. The latter arriving by the Boone's Lick Trail and hailing from the slave-owning culture of the Upland South, especially Virginia, Kentucky, and Tennessee, giving Boonslick the name Little Dixie during American Civil War. German, Irish, and other European immigrants soon joined. The modern populace is unusually diverse, over eight percent foreign-born. While White and Black remain the largest ethnicities, Asians are the third-largest group. Today's Columbians are remarkably highly educated and culturally midwestern, though traces of their Southern past remain. The city has been called the "Athens of Missouri" or "Athens of the West," a reference to its classic beauty, but is more tersely nicknamed "Como."

==History==

