[[Halfing]]

CATEGORIES: Rosenheim (district)

Halfing is a municipality in the district of Rosenheim in Bavaria in Germany.
Bibliography and Places of discovery for the following pages:
Peter v. Bomhard: “The art monuments of the city and the district rose home” (City archives rose home 1954)
and “the Bavarian Inn and upper country” (historical association rose home 1976)
Adolf Huber: “From the history of Halfing”
Reason and partial hauptschule Halfing, among other things George Mayer: “Heimatkundliche Collection of material”
A detailed representation that History Halfings and the lock Forchteneck became the frameworks this Information brochure blow up. This compilation is limited therefore on the most important explanations.

==Prehistory==

The landscape forms of the Halfinger area began approximately 1 million years ago during the Ice Age  through the erosion caused by the glacial streams and moraine deposits. 
The area around Halfing belonged to that to the east flank of the large Inngletschers.  After its retreat into the mountains, a large water surface remained. The Halfinger bogs and the lakes in the Halfinger moorland (Wölkhamer, Zillhamer and Ameranger lake) are the last remains of glaciation.
In the surroundings of Halfing, several times prehistoric artifacts were located and indicate an early settlement of the area.  Of special interest is a prehistoric stone axe made of malachite, which may be from  2000 - 2400 BCE (place of discovery within the range of the today's Hochriesstrasse).

==History==

===First settlement===

Around 15 n. Chr. occupied Roman troops the Alpine foreland.  An important army route led of putting a camp Lauriacum (Lorch) at the Danube over Juvavum (Salzburg) to the Innübergang Pons Aeni (Pfaff yards with rose home) and further after Augusta Vindelicorum (Augsburg).  Remnants of this road today still Irlach are to be seen south of Halfing with the local part.
Halfing is a very old, at least into the time of the Bavarian colonization decreasing/going back settlement (approx. 500 - 550 n. Chr.). The place name points on that with the characteristic ending up “… - ing” . A further Indication for this is the size already unusual in the Middle Ages of the Place. The original name Hadoluinga leads itself of Hadolf (or Hadulf) off, which was probably leader of a kinship settling here.
In the early Middle Ages, Halfing was salzburgischer possession and can on one look back more than thousand-year old history. archbishop handed 928 over Odalbert of Salzburg the noble Rafolt the place “Hadoluinga cum ecclesia et decimis” against two places with land hat.
The fact that in this document Hadoluinga at that time already as a place with a church appears confirmed, that Halfing for a long time forwards this first recording existed.

===History that Yard Mark of Halfing and the lock Forchteneck===

1353 become for the first time lock Forchteneck above Halfings mentions. In the late Middle Ages, Halfing was seat a village court, which came around 1415 to the Laiminger on Forchtenegg; out developed for the combination of this aristocracy seat with the village court in 15. Century the yard Mark of Halfing (owners until 1553 of Laiming, 1553 - 1627 of Pienzenau, 1627 - 1634 of mountainmountain mountain, 1634 - 1731 of Fossa, 1731 - 1803 Monastery Seeon).
Already around 1415 in Halfing 27 messuages were counted. To in 18. Century had increased the number of the messuages of Halfing on 53 and Halfing was at this time the largest locality in the western Chiemgau.
From these messuages 20 belonged to the yard Mark rule (those of Fossa, starting from 1731 monastery Seeon), 9 to the place of worship Halfing, 5 to the Pfarrwidum Höslwang and - still as in 15. Century - 6 to the monastery Seeon. In addition came 8 further church basic rule with ever one and/or. two goods and finally three free-own messuages.
Last noble ruler on lock Forchteneck - and thus also over those Yard Mark of Halfing - was Franz arm and Cajetan of Fossa. In the year 1731 this transferred the Lehen over the yard Marks of Halfing to the monastery Seeon in form a donation. Thus the monastery became the most important basic gentleman that Locality (26 messuages).
The monastery Seeon used now on lock Forchteneck a monastery judge and the yard Mark controlled Halfing up to the secularization in the year 1803.

===The emergence of our Municipality===

In the course of the Säkularisaton became the yard Mark court Halfing waived. In the same year, Halfing came to that Regional court comfort mountain and finally 1853 to the k. Regional court Prien - and with this then 1862 to the newly formed k. Office for district rose home.
1808 developed the assessment area Halfing, the forerunner of our current political municipality. A smaller northern part became the municipality Zillham and some places in the south (Guntersberg, victory village, strass and Stürzlham) to the municipality Höslwang struck. Since then these places belong politically to the municipality Höslwang; they church remained with at that time Kooperatur and later Pfarrei Halfing.
Only the municipality edict of 17.5.1818 brought the birth to our modern political municipality with autonomy possibilities, of freely selected municipality authorized persons in a municipality committee exercised became.
Area-moderately in such a way created corresponded Municipality Halfing that spatial borders of the assessment area.
Full civil liberties brought however only the law of 4.6.1848, that corresponded to our current democratic thinking.

==References==


