[[Marion Military Institute]]

CATEGORIES: National Register of Historic Places in Perry County, Alabama, Military education and training in the United States, Military high schools in the United States, Military junior colleges, Educational institutions established in 1842, Residential buildings completed in 1854, Community colleges in Alabama, Universities and colleges accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools, Education in Perry County, Alabama, Buildings and structures in Perry County, Alabama

Marion Military Institute, often abbreviated with the initialism MMI, is the official state military college of Alabama.  Founded in Marion in 1842, it continues at its original location.Marion Military Institute — Infoplease.com

==History==

Marion Military Institute traces its origins back to 1842 with the creation of Howard College.  In 1842, Howard English & Classical School, later known as Howard College, was established in Marion, Alabama, by the Alabama Baptist Convention, with Dr. S. S. Sherman as President. During the American Civil War South Barracks (later known as Old South Barracks and now Lovelace Hall), built in 1854, & the Chapel, built in 1857, served the Confederacy as Breckenridge Military Hospital from 1863 to 1865.  Along with the President's House (built 1912), these buildings are listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
In 1887, the decision was made to move Howard College (now Samford University) to Birmingham.  The then President of Howard College, Colonel J.T. Murfee, LL.D.,[tpl]cite book |title=Where to educate, 1898-1899. A guide to the best private schools, higher institutions of learning, etc., in the United States |last=Thomas |first=Grace Powers |year=1898 |publisher=Brown and Company |location=Boston |page=3 |accessdate=August 17, 2012 |url=http://archive.org/stream/wheretoeducate1800thomrich#page/3/mode/1up[/tpl]  and a handful of faculty and students decided to remain in Marion, Alabama and immediately reorganized and founded Marion Military Institute, a military preparatory high school and college.   The United States Army ROTC program was first offered at MMI in 1916, when the institute was designated as an "Honor Military School with Distinction" by the United States Department of Defense. The U.S. Army Early Commissioning Program was established at MMI in 1968. In 1971 MMI became coeducational.
In March 2006, the Alabama state legislature passed a resolution placing MMI under the auspices of the Alabama Department of Postsecondary Education.  MMI became "The State Military College of Alabama".  As part of the transition to a public institution, Marion phased out its high school program. In May 2009, the last high school class graduated from Marion Military Institute's Preparatory School Program, a program that traced its origins back to 1887.

==About MMI==

Since 1887, Marion Military Institute (MMI) has achieved a national reputation for preparing young men and women for successful civilian and military careers. This is accomplished by providing the best possible educational program for its students in a conservative, disciplined environment thereby developing their intellectual, physical, moral, social and leadership capabilities.
Students from all over the world attend MMI to establish a strong foundation for future study, and to take advantage of its military training programs. MMI is one of only six Military junior colleges in the United States which offer unique military training programs.
These programs include the Army's two-year Early Commissioning Program (ECP), an Army Reserve Officers Training Corps program through which qualified students can earn a commission as a Second Lieutenant after only two years of college. The Service Academy Preparation Program (SAP) is a freshman year of solid academic and physical preparation for students who wish to attend one of the Service Academies (West Point, Air Force Academy, Naval Academy, Merchant Marine Academy, or Coast Guard Academy). MMI also offers the first two years of Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps.
MMI has long been a school with many unique distinctions. It was home to one of the few Union and Confederate cemeteries in existence, which is now located behind St. Wilfrid's Episcopal Church. In more recent times the school has helped groom over 206 admirals and generals and has also had the honor of having one of its presidents being the only living 3 star Medal of Honor recipient, Gen. Robert F. Foley.

==College accreditation==

Marion Military Institute (MMI) is accredited by the Commission on Colleges of the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools to award Associate of Arts and Associate of Science degrees. MMI has association memberships in the Association of Military Colleges and Schools of the United States and the Alabama College Conference.  The accreditation by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools and the Commission on International and Trans-Regional Accreditation entitles all the services and privileges of regional, national and international professional recognition

==Campus organizations==

===Scabbard and Blade===

"Honoring America's Scholars." Scabbard and Blade is a national joint service that was started in 1904 and has over 230 companies nationwide. Society members enjoy a lifelong association with other recognized leaders in the Corps of Cadets and active and reserve officers in all branches of military service. The traditions and principles revealed during the society's ritual through the Five Stars sustain and inspire Scabbard and Blade members throughout their lifetime.
The primary purpose of Scabbard and Blade is to raise the standard of military education in American colleges and universities; to unite in closer relationships their military departments; to encourage and foster the essential qualities of good and efficient officers; and to promote friendship and good fellowship among the cadet officers. The society also disseminates knowledge of military education to the students and people of the country. In general, members acquaint the public with our national defense needs.

===Swamp Fox===

Originated at Marion Military Institute in 1963. Named for Francis Marion, who was called The Swamp Fox, due to his daring exploits during the American Revolution. He and his small and poorly equipped force harassed the British loyalists along the Peedee and Santee Rivers. The Swamp Foxes are to be the most physically fit, most disciplined, and the most technically and tactically proficient small unit at all times. The Swamp Foxes of MMI are required to maintain a 2.5 GPA and a 270 on an Army Physical Fitness Test (APFT); the two week regimen to join the ranks of the Swamp Foxes borrows skills tests from various infantry schools including Ranger, Expert Infantry Badge (EIB), Air Assault, and Airborne.Marion Military Institute Organizations

===White Knights===

The White Knights were established in 1950. Founded by the Cadet Commander Gene Hyche to promote precision drill, discipline, and to establish a union of brotherhood and trust among its members. The team consists of cadets from across the nation. Try-outs are held at the beginning of each semester and consist of twenty-one days of intense training in military drill techniques. Membership in the White Knights is based on military drill proficiency. Each year the Knights receive invitations to perform throughout the United States. In past years they have performed at such events as the Sugar Bowl, Orange Bowl, Indianapolis 500, and the Air Force Academy Invitational Drill Meet. They also perform in parades such as Mardi Gras in both New Orleans and Mobile, the inauguration of U.S. presidents and state governors, and various Veterans Day and Christmas parades.Marion Military Institute Alumni Weekend

===Normandy Society===

The Normandy Society (military history club) was formed in 1994 and named to honor those who participated in the 1944 Normandy Invasion. The Normandy Society is open to all cadets, but full membership and election to officers require satisfactory grades and citizenship. Meetings are held in the Baer Memorial Library on Wednesday nights to study military history campaigns and events. Classic war movies, weapons displays, and field trips are used to educate and interest MMI cadets.
LTC Bauer (MMI ’56), is Chair of the History department and sponsor of the Normandy Society. The cadets in this organization have raised money for worthy projects at MMI through sales of souvenir items and clothing as well as through individual donations. Previously, Normandy Society donated money to replace the wheels of the Reveille Cannon on the Quadrangle. This year they decided to help replace the video and sound system in the chapel, a greatly needed improvement.

==Notable alumni==

==References==

==External links==



