[[Galactica Discovers Earth]]

CATEGORIES: Galactica 1980 episodes, Time travel television episodes, World War II alternate histories

"Galactica Discovers Earth" (also known as "Galactica: 1980") is a triple episode, consisting of the first, second and third episodes of the television series Galactica 1980, a spin-off of the earlier ABC science fiction series Battlestar Galactica.
The episode first aired in three parts broadcast on January 27, February 3, and February 10, 1980 on ABC.

==Plot==

"The great ship Galactica, our home for these many years. We have endured the wilderness of space. And now, we are nearing the end of our journey. We have at last found Earth." - Commander Adama.

===Part I===

Thirty years have passed since the events of Battlestar Galactica. A convoy of ships—the survivors of the Twelve Colonies led by a now gray-bearded Commander Adama—finally begins receiving transmissions from the lost Thirteenth human tribe. Dr. Zee, a child prodigy and “cerebral mutation”, observes television broadcasts from Earth and judges the world’s population both scientifically and socially ill-equipped to defend itself against a Cylon attack. Zee contends the Cylons have in fact lain in wait for the Galactica to find their last human brothers.
At an assembly of the fleet’s senior warriors and council, Adama and Zee contend their best course of action is to conceal Earth’s location from the pursuing Cylons. While the fleet draws the Cylons away from Earth, teams of warriors are to be sent down to various locations on the planet to approach members of Earth’s scientific community.  Each warrior is outfitted with a “Languitron Translator” able to decipher Earth’s terminology, as well as Dr. Zee’s latest invention: a “nuclear field” capable of generating a frequency that will render equipment and personnel temporarily invisible. 
One such team—Captain Troy (who is revealed as the grownup Boxey) and Lieutenant Dillon—is ordered to get in contact with Dr. Mortinson, a nuclear physicist at the Pacific Institute of Technology. After evading the U.S. Air Force and a biker gang, they are given a ride to the Institute by Jamie Hamilton, who is on her way to a job interview at the (fictitious) United Broadcasting Company. Troy and Dillon arrive to find the Institute besieged by “anti-nuke” protesters, while the doctor paces his office bemoaning humankind’s inability to produce clean nuclear power. Temporarily freezing a guard on duty, the two warriors enter Mortinson’s office long enough to rewrite part of a theory of Nuclear Degeneration displayed on one of his computers and to leave Jamie’s name as a contact, but they are apprehended while trying to escape.
Troy and Dillon call Jamie (about to enter her job interview) from police headquarters, but she sees their arrest on television and accuses the two of being terrorists. Then, Dr. Mortinson calls Jamie to inquire about Troy and Dillon. Mr. Brooks, the station’s manager, is so impressed that he promises Jamie "a job for life" if she can get an interview with the camera shy Mortinson, ordering a camera team ready. Meanwhile, Troy and Dillon escape incarceration in a holding tank by activating their nuclear fields. As they do, the energizers maintaining fields around their Vipers weaken, and the ships are seen by a young boy.

===Part II===

The young boy, Willie, races home, but his parents accuse him of fibbing and his father promises to look in on Willie’s ‘spaceship’ only after dinner.
Meanwhile, Jamie—outfitted with a microphone and being followed with a “long lens” by Mr. Brooks’ camera team—meets an escaped Troy and Dillon; the three in turn find Dr. Mortinson on the street. Mortinson suggests they attempt to evade the camera, but his car is doggedly pursued: first by Mr. Brooks and then by a squad of police after Dillon takes over the wheel, only to exacerbate their pursuit.
Aboard the Galactica, Commander Xavier, incensed by Troy and Dillon’s failure to return as scheduled, expresses his doubts against the plan to gradually advance Earth’s scientific culture. Xavier proposes that they use Dr. Zee’s latest invention—a “Time Warp Synthesizer”—to speed up the planet’s defensive capabilities by introducing scientific tools into Earth’s past centuries before their invention. He offers to lead such an expedition and asks that his idea at least be presented to the Council for a vote. Adama refuses his request, citing both the implications of time travel and the Council’s expectancy to side with Dr. Zee (for the doctor has never been proven wrong). Meanwhile, on Earth, Willie and his father come across the Vipers.
Troy’s Languitron receives a transmission from Adama in the midst of their pursuit: the Galactica has been placed on “Crisis Condition”; they are to return at once. He and Dillon request Mortinson's silence until they can return, but Jamie muscles her way into their reluctant company through repeatedly threatening to convey what she knows to the public. After their car plows into a Home Furnishings storefront, the doctor is left behind while Troy, Dillon and Jamie use nuclear fields to steal a police car and get back to the Vipers. They leave just as another police car carrying Willie, his father, and a disbelieving sheriff, pulls into the field.
Back on board the Galactica, the trio learn from Adama that Xavier has commandeered a ship and traveled to Germany in the year 1944, where he intends to accelerate the Nazi rocket program (as theirs was the most advanced rocket program of the time). Upon learning that Jamie has knowledge of the era, they accept her offer to join the expedition.
Using two Vipers, they break the fourth dimension and find themselves outside Peenemünde in time to witness an allied plane with British markings come under fire by German artillery. The pilot, Major Stockwell, bails out and is subsequently rescued from a German patrol. Although he claims to be an American instructor, Jamie realizes Stockwell is part of a joint intelligence gathering effort. Stockwell is coerced into joining the trio. At Peenemünde, they see a group of Jews being loaded into boxcars as part of The Final Solution. Although expressly prohibited to interfere, they are prompted to save a young Jewish girl after she races from the train.
Later that evening, the group meet with Stockwell’s contact in town, whom reveals the military is launching a new rocket tomorrow. Their meeting is interrupted by the Gestapo, who detain the contact and girl, but not Stockwell and Jamie—encased inside Troy and Dillon’s nuclear field. Troy and Dillon then rough up some guards in order to obtain the attire and papers necessary for the quartet to pose as soldiers at the next morning’s rocket test. The rocket, a V-2, is being overseen by a military attaché and the "English scientist" in charge of its construction—a Doctor Xavier. (In history, the V-2 was developed by Wernher von Braun who later developed Apollo's Saturn V rocket.)

===Part III===

Stockwell believes that if the rocket test fails the Nazis might be inclined to divert their remaining supplies elsewhere. He takes charge of the operation and leads Dillon into the woods as Jamie and Troy use nuclear fields to enter the blockhouse containing Xavier, where they unsuccessfully attempt to persuade him into returning to the future. Dillon knocks out Stockwell, takes aim, and blows Xavier’s rocket out of the sky. The Germans promptly order his execution, but the two guards assigned the task happen to be Jamie and Troy incognito.
Later that night, Troy and Dillon employ their Turbines—motorcycles equipped with a “backup system” allowing flight capability—to distract a troop of SS Guards loading Stockwell’s contact and a group of Jews (including the young girl) onto another train. Aiding their escape, Jamie tells Stockwell to lead the escapees towards the sea, promising them the soldiers will be distracted by the fact that it is now June 6: D-Day.  Unfortunately, Xavier too escapes as he is being loaded into a Viper by activating his own nuclear field. Unable to track Xavier further, the trio returns to 1980.
Stopping at a diner, Jamie notices the headline to a local paper, The Daily News: “Scientist Kidnapped”. The article features prominent photographs of the trio. Troy and Dillon decide to return to their ships and part company with Jamie. They then have to ditch the police. The military have surrounded the Vipers as a result of Willie using them to harass his enemies. Willie gives the location of the compound holding their Vipers and reveals that a third Viper is also being stored there.
Elsewhere in Los Angeles, Xavier observes a televised interview between Mr. Brooks (who refers to the warriors as “terrorists”) and Doctor Mortinson at the United Broadcasting Company Studios, in which the doctor openly expresses his willingness to hear again from his captors. When a vendor tells Xavier that the best way to cross town is by taxi, Xavier hails a cab but unknowingly climbs into a police car. The cops decide to give him a ride, but they lose Xavier after he confronts the doctor and then activates his nuclear field. Xavier sneaks into the doctor’s car and visits Mortinson’s house. Examining a history book, Xavier notes many historical events—including Gettysburg and Waterloo—when a person with foreknowledge could have substantially changed the future. He attempts to entice the doctor into another expedition but is foiled by Jamie, who has returned to Mr. Brooks under accusations her defense of Troy and Dillon is a manifestation of Stockholm syndrome. After Troy and Dillon call Jamie at Brooks' office to warn her about Xavier, Brooks gets Jamie in touch with Mortinson and warns him about his guest before Xavier disconnects the phone. Xavier abandons his plan of using the doctor as an accomplice. Jamie then leaves Brooks to find Troy and Dillon downstairs. They reason Xavier will now attempt to steal his ship and move again into the past. Troy and Dillon fail to stop him. Xavier is now in 18th Century America.
Fearing the consequences of his further tampering, Adama extends an invitation to Jamie to join their quest to capture the rogue scientist. Jamie agrees but subsequent episodes do not follow up on this.

==Cast==

==External links==


