[[USS Monadnock (ACM-10)]]

CATEGORIES: Ships built in Delaware, World War II mine warfare vessels of the United States, Minesweepers of the United States Navy, 1941 ships

USS ''Monadnock'' (ACM-10) was named after Mount Monadnock, a solitary mountain (monadnock) of more than 3,100 feet in southern New Hampshire close to the border of Massachusetts.
Monadnock, launched as SS Cavalier in 1938 by Pusey and Jones Corp., Wilmington, Delaware, was acquired by the U.S. Navy through purchase from the Philadelphia and Norfolk Steamship  Company, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, on 9 June 1941; converted at the Bethlehem Steel Co., Atlantic Works, East Boston, Massachusetts; and commissioned as the Coastal Minelayer Monadnock (CMc-4), 2 December 1941, Lt. Comdr. Frederick O. Goldsmith in command.

==Service history==

===Invasion of Europe operations===

Following shakedown in the Chesapeake Bay area, Monadnock operated in the 5th Naval District until 25 March, when she sailed for the British West Indies. While in the Caribbean, 1 May 1942, she was redesignated Minelayer CM-9. Returning to Virginia, 20 May, she resumed operations in the 5th Naval District. In late October she joined a convoy bound for North Africa. Arriving off Casablanca on 8 November, she remained in the assault area through the 11th, when she got underway for her return voyage across the Atlantic, arriving at Yorktown, Virginia, on the 30th.

===Reassigned to Pacific Fleet operations===

In the spring of 1943, Monadnock operated off the southern New England coast, first for the Minecraft Training Command and then under ComServFor, Atlantic Fleet, before resuming maneuvers in Chesapeake Bay. Reassigned to the Pacific Fleet in late fall, the minelayer departed Norfolk, Virginia, with TG 29.18, transited the Panama Canal and arrived at San Diego 28 December. Routed on to Pearl Harbor, she reported to Commander, Minecraft, Pacific Fleet, 7 January 1944, and by the 13th was underway for the South Pacific.
Arriving at Nouméa on the 29th, she joined ServRon 6 and until 15 April carried out exercises and duty assignments in the New Hebrides. From the end of April until July, she worked in the Solomons and then moved on to New Guinea, where she was briefly employed off Finschhafen. Operating again in the New Hebrides, based at Espiritu Santo, by October, she sailed, with passengers, to Brisbane, and upon her return replenished her stores and departed, 13 November, for Manus, Admiralty Islands, to join the 7th Fleet.

===Supporting the Leyte Landings===

Monadnock conducted training exercises at Manus until 23 December, when she departed for Leyte. Arriving on the 30th, she soon sailed for Mangarin Bay, on the southwest coast of Mindoro, where she remained from 3 January to 6 February 1945. She then shifted, with TU 78.3.19, to Subic Bay, Luzon, returning at the end of the month to Leyte. Thence, she steamed to Ulithi to stage for the forthcoming Okinawa campaign.
On 5 April, she departed in convoy for Nansei Shoto, as a unit of TF 52. Operating as a unit of TG 52.2, she conducted minelaying operations at Kerama Retto and off the Hagushi anchorage during May. Then, in convoy with TU 51.29.18, she departed for the United States, arriving at San Francisco, 24 June, for overhaul and conversion to Auxiliary Mine Layer ACM-10 (effective 10 July 1945).

===Occupation duties===

Conversion completed, she departed for Japan 6 September, transporting troops to Eniwetok, Guam, and Okinawa while en route. Arriving at Sasebo, 22 October, for occupation duty, she remained until 9 March 1946, when, with military passengers again embarked, she sailed for San Francisco. Arriving 7 April, she decommissioned 3 June, was struck from the Navy List 3 July 1946, and transferred to the Maritime Commission for disposal 20 June 1947.
Monadnock earned three battle stars for her service in World War II.

==Later career==

Monadnock was sold to a Panamanian company in 1949, and renamed SS Karukara. Sold again in 1952 and renamed SS Monte de la Esperanza she operated for more than 20 years transporting bananas from the Canary Islands to the United Kingdom. Sold to the Marine Institute of Spain and renamed Esperanza del Mar, she was equipped as a hospital ship and operated out of the Canary Islands assisting fishing boats for more than 10 years. The Monadnock was deliberately sunk as an Artificial reef in 2000 off the coast of Spain.

==References==

==External links==


