[[Earl Leggett]]

CATEGORIES: 1933 births, 2008 deaths, American football defensive linemen, LSU Tigers football players, Chicago Bears players, Los Angeles Rams players, New Orleans Saints players, People from Palatka, Florida, Seattle Seahawks coaches, San Francisco 49ers coaches, Oakland Raiders coaches, Los Angeles Raiders coaches, Denver Broncos coaches, New York Giants coaches

Earl Franklin Leggett (born March 5, 1933 in Palatka, Florida - died May 15, 2008 in Raymond, Mississippi) was an American football defensive lineman in the NFL for the Chicago Bears, Los Angeles Rams, and the New Orleans Saints. He played college football at Louisiana State University. He was also an assistant coach for various teams.
Leggett's career as a professional football athlete began as a first-round draft pick of the Chicago Bears in 1957 and spanned 11 years (1957–1968).  He is recorded as having played in 132 professional football games. 
His career with the Chicago Bears lasted from 1957 to 1965 where he played at both Defensive Tackle and Defensive End positions. He was part of the famed "Monsters of the Midway" defense that led the Bears to the 1963 NFL championship. He was traded to The Los Angeles Rams in 1966 where he played in 10 regular season games with the Los Angeles Rams' "Fearsome Foursome" defense. 
Toward the end of his career, journeyman Leggett played 20 games in 1967 & 1968 for the expansion New Orleans Saints franchise. While statistics on sacks were not recorded back then, www.pro-football-reference.com credits Leggett with 16 fumble recoveries, 1 safety and 1 interception.
Leggett was a good friend to many and did outstanding community service in the Mississippi area and Gulf Coast region.  He first played college football at Hinds Jr. College (today known as Hinds Community College) which was the only school that would give him a chance due to academic cirumstances. He started playing for them at 16 (which was then legal) and was able to raise his academic standing to get into Louisiana State University. Leggett became an All-Southeastern Conference player at LSU.
Howie Long spoke at his funeral in Raymond, Mississippi. 


