[[Red Line 7000]]

CATEGORIES: 1960s action films, 1960s drama films, American films, English-language films, Auto racing films, Films directed by Howard Hawks

Red Line 7000 is a 1965 American motion picture released by Paramount Pictures.  It was directed by Howard Hawks, who also co-wrote the screenplay. It stars James Caan, Laura Devon and Marianna Hill in a story about young stock-car racers trying to establish themselves and about the complicated romantic relationships in their lives.
George Takei, only a year away from Star Trek, appears in a supporting role. Teri Garr appears uncredited as a go-go dancer in a nightclub.
NASCAR driver Larry Frank helped to film the movie by allowing the film crew to mount cameras on his car. Frank later drove the camera-car in a NASCAR race.
The film features tracks like Daytona International Speedway, Darlington Raceway, and Atlanta Motor Speedway. In this film, it features many crashes from the season, including A.J. Foyt's violent crash at Riverside International Raceway earlier in the year.
The title is from the RPM's an engine could make on a tachometer before crossing the red line beyond the safety margin. 

==Plot==

A racing team run by Pat Kazarian starts out with two drivers, Mike Marsh and Jim Loomis, but a crash at Daytona results in Jim's death. His girlfriend Holly McGregor arrives too late for the race and feels guilty for not being there.
A young driver, Ned Arp, joins the team and also makes a play for Kazarian's sister, Julie. A third driver, Dan McCall, arrives from France and brings along girlfriend Gabrielle Queneau, but soon he develops a romantic interest in Holly.
Arp is seriously hurt in a crash, losing a hand. Mike, meanwhile, doesn't care for Dan's ways with women and tries to run him off the track in a race, but Dan survives. He and Holly end up together, but Mike is consoled by Gabrielle.
The movie is distinguished by the appearance of a 1965 Shelby GT-350 racing on the track, and one of the characters drives a 1965 Cobra Daytona Coupe as his street car. For Shelby enthusiasts, this is one of the few movies they appeared in.

==References==

==External links==


