[[Scott Siman]]

CATEGORIES: 1954 births, Living people, People from Springfield, Missouri, University of Missouri alumni, Talent managers, American music industry executives

Scott Foster Siman (born July 22, 1954) is a leading American country music entertainment executive based in Nashville, Tennessee.[tpl]cite web |url=http://www.hitquarters.com/index.php3?page=intrview/opar/intrview_Scott_Siman.html |title=Interview with Scott Siman |publisher=HitQuarters|date=23 Jan 2006 |accessdate=22 Mar 2011[/tpl] He is president of RPM Entertainment, which comprises RPME Records, RPM Music Group and RPM Management.   He oversaw the rise of country music superstar Tim McGraw and the launch of Dancing With the Stars celebrity Julianne Hough, among others.

==Career==

Attorney
Siman was previously an entertainment attorney with Benson & Siman, whose clients included Alan Jackson, Brooks & Dunn, Charlie Daniels, Deanna Carter, James Stroud, Paul Worley and Chips Moman. He worked with such diverse artists as Judson Spence, Ben Folds, Will Owsley, Millard Powers and Jody Spence; as well as numerous executives and music publishers.
Senior Vice President Sony
Siman later served as senior vice president of Sony Music-Nashville, where he signed the Dixie Chicks to their initial deal as well as writers Marcus Hummon ("One of These Days") and David Vincent Williams ("I'm Movin' On").
RPM Management
He managed country music star Tim McGraw where his guidance lead McGraw to be named Artist of the Decade securing more airplay than any artist in any format and the most played song of the Decade, all formats with "Something Like That."  Other management highlights include #1 singles with Jessica Andrews and Carolyn Dawn Johnson, and he guided two-time Dancing With the Stars champion and actress Julianne Hough to a #1 country album and multiple ACM Awards.  He worked with the youngest artist to ever score a platinum album, Billy Gilman.
Siman is a past President and Chairman of the board of the Academy of Country Music Awards (1996–2000) where is was instrumental in the repositioning of the association within the country music industry.  He is former board member of the Country Music Association and Country Music Foundation, and a participant in Leadership Music and Leadership Nashville.  Siman served on the Nashville Cystic Fibrosis Foundation board and was a recipient of the Heart of Country award from the national organization.
RPM Music Group
As a co-owner of RPM Music Group, he has helped develop a publishing catalog that owns the rights to such hit songs as "It's Five O'Clock Somewhere" (Alan Jackson), "I'm Movin' On" (Rascal Flatts), "Leave the Pieces" (The Wreckers), "What Kinda Gone" (Chris Cagle), "Anything Goes" (Randy Houser), Montgomery Gentry singles "One in Every Crowd" "Long Line of Losers" and "Oughta Be A Song About That", "Let There Be Cowgirls" (Chris Cagle), "I Ain't Your Mama" (Maggie Rose) and has songs featured on the three number 1 country albums from the Band Perry ("Chainsaw") Luke Bryan ("Goodbye Girl") and Scotty McCreery ("Blue Jean Baby").  RPM Music currently represents writer Matt Ramsey, Maggie Rose and the members of rising country band Chasin' Crazy.  Current singles at radio include "Better" by Maggie Rose and "Wake Up Loving You" by Craig Morgan.
RPM Entertainment
RPME Records first release was vocal phenom Maggie Rose, who's new single at country radio is "Looking Back Now"  from her critically acclaimed album "Cut to Impress." Her first single, "I Ain't Your Mama" was #1 Most Added on the Mediabase country singles chart the first week of its release.  RPME represents Uncle Kracker in association with Sugarhill Records and his current single is "Blue Skies." RPME also represented Zac Brown Band for radio promotion for the single "The Wind" prior to ZBB forming his own staff.
RPME Records has been engaged to represent Dack Janiels/Chase Rice at country radio.  The first single is "Ready Set Roll" and was top 5 most added at Mediabase first week.
RPME also represents young country band Chasin' Crazy and X-Factor second season winner Tate Stevens.

==Personal==

Siman is the son of country music pioneer Si Siman, who was also in the talent and music publishing business and was an executive with Crossroads TV Productions, which created the first popular country music program on network television, Ozark Jubilee.All Media Guide His middle name is in honor of Ralph Foster, Crossroads TV's president and his father's mentor when he was born in Springfield, Missouri.
He is a graduate of Vanderbilt University and the University of Missouri School of Law.  He is a former Old Natchez CC club champion and qualified for the Tennessee State Mid Am and the Tennessee Four Ball Championships multiple times.
Siman is married to Teresa Siman and has three daughters, Rosie Siman, Lillian Keil and Marion Siman.

==References==


