[[Lions' Commentary on UNIX 6th Edition, with Source Code]]

CATEGORIES: 1976 books, Unix, Computer programming books, Computer science books

Lions' Commentary on UNIX 6th Edition, with Source Code by John Lions (1976) contains the complete source code of the 6th Edition Unix kernel plus a commentary. It is commonly referred to as the Lions book. Despite its age, it is still considered an excellent commentary on simple but high quality code.
For many years, the Lions Book was the only Unix kernel documentation available outside Bell Labs. Although the license of 6th Edition allowed classroom use of the source code, the license of 7th Edition specifically excluded such use, so the book spread through illegal copy machine reproductions (a kind of samizdat). It was commonly held to be the most copied book in computer science.
The book was reprinted in 1996 by Peer-To-Peer Communications.

==Synopsis==

Unix Operating System Source Code Level Six is the kernel source code, lightly edited by Lions to better separate the functionality — system initialization and process management, interrupts and system calls, basic I/O, file systems and pipes and character devices. All procedures and symbols are listed alphabetically with a cross reference.
The code as presented will run on a PDP-11/40 with RK-05 disk drive, LP-11 line printer interface, PCL-11 paper tape writer and KL-11 terminal interface, or a suitable PDP-11 emulator, such as SIMH.
A Commentary on the Unix Operating System starts with notes on Unix and other useful documentation (the Unix manual pages, DEC hardware manuals and so on), a section on the architecture of the PDP-11 and a chapter on how to read C programs. The source commentary follows, divided into the same sections as the code. The book ends with suggested exercises for the student.
As Lions explains, this commentary supplements the comments in the source. It is possible to understand the code without the extra commentary, and the reader is advised to do so and only read the notes as needed. The commentary also remarks on how the code might be improved.

==History==

The source code and commentary were originally produced in May 1976 as a set of lecture notes for Lions' computer science courses (6.602B and 6.657G) at the University of New South Wales Department of Computer Science.
UNIX News March 1977 announced the availability of the book to Unix licensees. Lions had trouble keeping up with its popularity, and by 1978 it was available only from Bell Labs.
When AT&T announced Unix Version 7 at USENIX in June 1979, the academic/research license no longer automatically permitted classroom use. Thus, licensees were no longer able to use the Lions notes for classes on operating systems.
However, thousands of computer science students around the world spread photocopies. As they could not study it legally in class, they would sometimes meet after hours to discuss the book. Many pioneers of Unix and open source had a treasured multiple-generation photocopy.Lions Book (Jargon File, references ISBN 1-57398-013-7)
Other follow-on effects of the license change included Andrew S. Tanenbaum creating Minix. As Tanenbaum wrote in Operating Systems (1987):
Various Unix people, particularly Peter H. Salus, Dennis Ritchie and Berny Goodheart, lobbied Unix's various owners (AT&T, Novell, the Santa Cruz Operation) for many years to allow the book to be published officially. In 1996, the Santa Cruz Operation finally authorised the release of the twenty-year-old 6th Edition source code (along with the source code of other versions of "Ancient UNIX"), and the full code plus the 1977 version of the commentary was published by Peer-To-Peer Communications (ISBN 1-57398-013-7). The reissue includes commentary from Michael Tilson (SCO), Peter Salus, Dennis Ritchie, Ken Thompson, Peter Collinson, Greg Rose, Mike O'Dell, Berny Goodheart and Peter Reintjes.

==John Lions Chair in Computer Science==

After his death, John O'Brien, Steve Jenkin, Chris Maltby and Greg Rose, former students of Lions, commenced a campaign to raise funds to create a chair in his name at UNSW, the John Lions Chair in Computer Science in the School of Computer Science and Engineering. With donations from many UNSW alumni, corporations, Usenix, Linux Australia, the chair was created in 2006, becoming the first chair at UNSW funded by contributions from alumni. In 2009, Gernot Heiser became the inaugural John Lions Chair.

===John Lions Garden===

In 2002, UNSW dedicated the John Lions Garden in front of the new Computer Science and Engineering building to Lions' memory.

==References==

==Further reading==

==External links==


