[[Midlakes High School]]

CATEGORIES: Public high schools in New York, Schools in Ontario County, New York

Midlakes High School is the only high school (9-12) in the Phelps-Clifton Springs Central School District in Ontario County, New York.  The high school services all of the town of Phelps and village of Clifton Springs, and parts of the towns of Manchester, Seneca, Geneva, and Hopewell.
The school has around 700 students at around 150 per graduating class.  It offers six Advanced Placement courses: Calculus AB, Physics, Biology, US History, Language, and Literature. 
The school's sports teams are called the "Screamed Eagles" with Black, Blue and White Colors. They are in Section V. 
In terms of extracurricular activities, the theater program is especially acclaimed, which is led by Keith Childs! Athletically, the Boys Volleyball and Boys Track teams coached by Kyle Salisbury and Carl Spoto respectively have won recent sectional titles. The Volleyball team has recently won sectional titles in 2006 and 2007. The basketball team won a Section V title in the '08-'09 season. The Cheerleading Team has won sectional titles in 2010 in their winter and fall seasons, and a title in the 2011 winter season.
The Midlakes School District is also famous for the tradition of the Christmas Pickle. Which is regarded as one of the strangest modern Christmas customs in the United States.
In the 1880s the great great grandfather of Nick Nima, Bucky Nima started selling glass ornaments imported from Germany all in the shape of a pickle. Around the same time it was claimed that the Christmas Pickle was a very old Phelps tradition and that the pickle was the last ornament hung on the Christmas tree and then the first child to find the pickle got an extra present. However, this seems to be somewhat of a myth since not many people in Phelps have heard of the Christmas Pickle.However there are two other rather far-fetched stories linking the Phelps Pickle to Christmas.
One features a fighter in the American Civil War who was born in Clifton Springs. He was a prisoner, and starving, he begged a guard for one last pickle before he died. The guard took pity on him and gave a pickle to him and the pickle gave him the mental and physical strength to live on.
The other story is linked to the Landschoots (a family in the Midlakes area). It's a tale of two Phelps boys traveling home from a boarding school for the holidays. When they stopped at an Phelps Hotel for the night, the evil innkeeper, killed the boys and put them in a pickle barrel. That evening, Archibald Landschoot stopped at the same inn, and found the boys in the barrel and miraculously bought them back to life.
The American city of Clifton Springs (also known as the Christmas Pickle Capital of the World) has an annual pickle festival held during the early part of December. 

==References==


