[[International Humanitarian City]]

CATEGORIES: Humanitarian aid organizations, Charities based in the United Arab Emirates, International charities, Development charities

The International Humanitarian City (IHC) is the world's largest logistics centre for the distribution of humanitarian aid.  Based in Dubai with its world class transport infrastructure and strategic location, the IHC now hosts nine United Nations agencies and more than 40 NGOs and commercial entities all engaged in delivering aid both in crises and to support long-term economic development. Members range from purely logistics entities to educational, research and media 
offices -- all focused on humanitarian aid. 
IHC members have more than 300 staff and 93,000 square metres of warehousing, plus facilities for offices, training and conferences and dedicated space to host evacuated aid workers during violent conflict.  Members store a broad range of emergency aid items ranging from water purifiers to portable offices to vehicles.  Communications equipment, specialized foods, medicines, tents and blankets form a large part of the inventory.  Major users are the UN Humanitarian Response Depot --an umbrella logistics network servicing both the UN and NGO partners -- UNHCR, WFP, the Red Crescent and Red Cross, OCHA, UNICEF, UN University, UNDP, UNDSS, WHO, and World Vision.  
IHC members have procured and shipped aid from the IHC hub to cope with the ongoing civil conflicts in Syria and Afghanistan, flood recovery and educational projects in Pakistan, and recurring drought in East Africa.  Assistance is shipped as far away as Latin America and aid was even dispatched from Dubai to Haiti after the 2010 earthquake.  
History 
An independent free zone authority created by Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum and the Government of Dubai through the merger of Dubai Aid City (DAC) and Dubai Humanitarian City (DHC), IHC addresses the specific needs of the humanitarian aid and development community, while grouping aid agencies in a secure environment that fosters partnerships, social responsibility and global change.   At the same time, IHC offers commercial companies servicing the aid community the opportunity to operate from a  strategic location in a free zone environment. 
IHC is a non-religious, non-political and nonprofit organisation, chaired by Jordanian Princess Haya Bint Al Hussein, wife of Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum, Vice-President and Prime Minister of the United Arab Emirates.
Services
IHC provides its member organisations with a range of specialised services to facilitate their operations --  offices, conference management, facilities management, government services, portals for recruitment, volunteerism, and pro-bono work and public events, plus donor assistance and press office functions.
References
External links

