[[Gilda Pianelli]]

CATEGORIES: 1959 births, Living people, Italian film directors

Gilda Pianelli (born April 26, 1962) is an Italian film director.

==Biography==

Gilda Pianelli was born in the West Indies and is of Italian heritage. She has been working in the entertainment Industry for over thirty years. She is a Theatre and Film Director, and a revered Master acting teacher who is a protégé of Eric Morris.
For the past 32 years, Ms. Pianelli has been working at the University Center for the Performing Arts, Inc. (UCPAFL.COM) There she coaches, trains actors,  and is the Artistic Director of the Theatre/Film Department.  She has directed over 500 stage productions and over a dozen films. An overwhelming amount of her aspiring students have become professional actors appearing on stage, television and motion pictures.
Gilda Pianelli also is a professional stage lighting designer with her work being showcased all over the world. She has worked with modern dance company ‘The Body and Soul Dance Theatre’ from 1982 to 1992. She has worked with ‘Bailes Ferrer’ south Florida’s premiere Flamenco dance company, ‘Tranzendance’ ,’Masala Fusion’ a middle-eastern dance company, and many other touring dance companies across the world.
Gilda Pianelli is the CEO of Ambassador Pictures, Inc.  Ambassador Pictures is an independent digital film production company. Their mission is to develop, package and produce high quality digital film projects for the main stream and art house markets. Their focus is to develop projects that combine commercial appeal, controversial and provocative subject matter.
Ambassador Pictures, Inc., will be producing many SAG (Screen Actors Guild) films in 2014 with cinematographer’s Diego Recalde and Jillian Gehring. Please visit their website at www.ambassadorpictures.com for further production information.
On a more personal note: Ms. Pianelli is multilingual and speaks Italian, Spanish, French, Portuguese and English.  She is an activist and supporter of children and women's issues and a vivid supporter of the arts. She currently resides in Miami Beach, Florida.

==Filmography==

==External links==


