[[Jim Castillo]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, 1967 births, Daytime Emmy Award winners, American television meteorologists, Seattle, Washington television anchors, Los Angeles, California television anchors, New York City television anchors

Jim Castillo is an American broadcast television meteorologist.
He has worked in three of the country's top five media markets and has won numerous Emmy Awards, Associated Press awards, a Golden Mic and an Edward R. Murrow award.  He has also lent his on camera experience to film and television projects including, most recently, the CBS drama Criminal Minds and the BBC America series Torchwood: Miracle Day.
Castillo currently works as the weekend evening and 1 p.m. weather anchor at KTLA-TV, an affiliate of the CW Television Network in Los Angeles, California.KTLA Bio Page
He is a SAG-AFTRA member and has the American Meteorological Society Seal of Approval.
Castillo also frequently updates his FacebookFacebook and TwitterTwitter profiles with weather news from all over the country and the world.

==Early life==

Castillo was born to John and Judy in St. Louis, Missouri.  His parents are true Americans who have a mix of American Indian, German, Irish and Spanish Blood. Castillo’s great-great grandmother on his mother’s side is 100% Cherokee Indian and his father also has Cherokee & Lakota Indian blood. He has also been able to trace a connection to the Shawnee Indian tribe on his mother's side.
Castillo's mother died on March 17, 2010 after a long battle with multiple sclerosis. His father now lives in Kansas.
He has an older brother, John.
His interests include Crossfit, working out at the gym, social media, music, acting, skiing, snowboarding, real estate, architecture design, making movies, genealogy and photography.  He also enjoys being an active volunteer with local organizations.

==Education and Career==

Castillo attended the University of Missouri in Columbia, Missouri on a leadership and academic scholarship and received his bachelor's degree, with honors, in Atmospheric Science.  While in college, Castillo was secretary of the Meteorology Club, a member of the Delta Tau Delta fraternity and a cheerleader.
Castillo had an extremely sporty childhood, where he dabbled in soccer, gymnastics, diving, pole vaulting and scuba diving.
Castillo's passion for weather sparked after a F-3 tornado struck his neighborhood and made national news on April 7, 1980. "I just wanted to know how and why it happened," he said in an article in Hispanic Times Magazine.Hispanic Times Magazine "And how do I help people so this doesn't happen to them? I just really got into weather: seeing my neighbors, the rubble, people screaming and total panic. People were just freaked out. And I just had to get involved." 
While in college, Castillo began his career as an intern for the National Weather Service in Jefferson City, Missouri.  He also interned in the weather department at KOMU-TV, an NBC Network affiliate in Columbia, Missouri, eventually leading to his first on-air position as a weather anchor and host of a popular weekly exercise show, where he earned his nickname, "Beefcake."
His career began as a storm chaser across the Midwest and Texas, even earning a storm chasing card from the National Weather Service.
Castillo was the first meteorologist on "Good Day Philadelphia" at WTXF-TV, the Fox Network station in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania where he also hosted segments and conducted man-on-the-street interviews. 
After nearly two years, he was offered his first chief meteorologist position at KCPQ, the Tribune Company owned station in Seattle, Washington.  While at the station, he won his first individual Emmy for Best Weather in the Pacific Northwest in 1999. 
In 2001, Castillo moved up to the number 2 media market, joining the CBS Network affiliate KCBS-TV in Los Angeles, California as the chief meteorologist working on the 5, 6 and 11 p.m. newscasts.All Business  In September 2002, Castillo accepted an offer at WNYW-TV Fox 5 in New York City as the chief evening meteorologist.  He stayed at the station for over three years, where he was nominated for numerous Emmy awards, and, for the first time in a decade, the 10 p.m. newscast won an Emmy.
Castillo then returned to Seattle, where he worked on the morning news at KOMO-TV, the ABC Network affiliate. 
In June 2010, Castillo joined the weekend team as the first weekend meteorologist at KTLA-TV, the oldest television station in Los Angeles, California.  He also anchors the weather on the 1 p.m. weekly newscast.

===Filmography===

Castillo's passion for performing has also led to many roles in film and television over the past two decades. His credits include:IMDB
2011: Criminal Minds (CBS Productions) 
2011: Torchwood: Miracle Day (BBC America/Starz) 
2010: Photo Booth(Short) (No Slack Productions) 
2003: Duplex (Miramax Films) 
1994: With Honors (Warner Bros.) 
1994: Blink (New Line Cinemas) 
1992: Leap of Faith (Paramount Pictures)

===Awards===

2008: KOMO-TV - Emmy Award, Winner, Morning Newscast (11 a.m.)National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences website 
2008: KOMO-TV - Emmy Award, Nominee, Morning Newscast (11 a.m.) 
2008: KOMO-TV - Emmy Award, Nominee, Morning Newscast (11 a.m.) 
2008: KOMO-TV - RTNDA Edward R. Murrow Award, Winner, Overall Excellence (Television: Large Market)Radio-Television News Directors Association website 
2007: STAR 101.5 FM - 1st Place, Newscaster You Would Most Like To See Naked 
2007: KOMO-TV - Emmy Award, Winner, Morning Newscast (11 a.m.)KOMO News 
2003: WNYW-TV - Emmy Award, Winner, Evening Newscast (10 p.m.)Variety 
2003: WNYW-TV - Emmy Award, Nominee, Weather ReportingNY Daily News 
2001: KCBS-TV - RTNA Golden Mic Award, “Winner'', News Broadcast (11 p.m.) 
2001: KCBS-TV - Emmy Award, Winner, Evening Newscast (6 p.m.) 
2000: STAR 101.5 FM - 1st Place, Newscaster You Would Most Like To See Naked 
1998: KCPQ-TV - Emmy Award, Winner, Weather ReportingSeattle Times 
1996: WTXF-TV - Emmy Award, Nominee, Weather ReportingNATAS website

==References==

==External links==


