[[Rogelio Ordoñez]]

CATEGORIES: Filipino writers, Tagalog-language writers, Living people, 1940 births, Manuel L. Quezon University alumni

Rogelio Lunasco Ordoñez (born September 24, 1940) is a multi-awarded Filipino fiction writer and journalist.Rogelio Ordoñez  He is one of the authors of the iconic Tagalog literature anthology "Mga Agos sa Disyerto" in the 1960s. He has been a contributor to Liwayway Magazine, Pilipino Free Press, Asia-Philippines Leader, Pilosopong Tasyo, Diario Uno and Pinoy Weekly.

==Early years==

Ordoñez was born in Imus, Cavite. He studied in the Mapua Institute of Technology and the Manuel L. Quezon University and obtained a BS in Civil Engineering. Drawn to the Filipino literature that focused on the reality of life,especially about the workers and peasants and the downtrodden or the oppressed,  Ordoñez concentrated in writing instead of practicing his degree. He wrote many fictions, most notably short stories in Liwayway, columns and editorials in Pilipino Free Press as a staffmember, various articles in Asia-Philippines Leader also as a staffmember, and poems, short-stories and essays in  literary journals.  His first short story appeared in Liwayway when he was still in high school. Keen in teaching and molding new-generation writers, he took up his MA in Mass Communication at the Polytechnic University of the Philippines.[tpl]Citation needed|date=August 2011[/tpl]

==Career==

In the course of his writing career that has spanned for five decades,  he became a member and former head of the Cavite Press Club, Philippine Writers Academy, Pambansang Unyon ng Manunulat (PANULAT), and the Pambansang Linangan at Ugnayan ng mga Manunulat (PLUMA),He was one of the founders of PAKSA (Panulat Para Sa Kaunlaran Ng Sambayanan) and its spokesperson before the declaration of Martial Law by the late dictator Ferdinand E. Marcos.   Ordoñez has worked as secretary-general of the PUP Creative Writing Center, professorial lecturer, and columnist. Ordoñez has garnered top prizes from Liwayway itself (novel writing), the José Rizal Centennial Commission in 1961 (essay), the Kadipan (an inter-university association of Tagalog writers and instructors)in essay and short-story, the Balagtas Memorial Awards for Journalism (held in honor of the poet-hero Francisco Balagtas).    He was bestowed by the Writers' Union of the Philippines the National Achievement Award for Literature (GAWAD PAMBANSANG ALAGAD NI BALAGTAS).   He was also honored, in 2009,  by his province of Cavite for being a Progressive Caviteño in the field of Literature. 
On the 234th founding anniversary of the town of Imus, Cavite (Oct. 7, 2009), he was bestowed the distinction as an outstanding Imuseño also in the field of Literature. and the GAWAD ALEJANDRO G. ABADILLA for being a "creative writer and militant journalist."  Last June 25, 2011, he was bestowed by the KM64 Poetry Collective the title MAKATA NG BAYAN (PEOPLE'S POET) for his poetry that clearly depicts the aspirations of the Filipino masses to free themselves  from the clutches of injustices and exploitation perpetuated against them by the continuing tyranny and oppression of a few demigods or members of the ruling class in Philippine society. In the yearly celebration of POESIA (Aug. 8, 2011) by the De La Salle University (Dasmarinas), he was honored for his contributions in the field of poetry and literature as vehicle of social consciousness and effective instruments towards a more free and equal society.The Polytechnic University of the Philippines, on its 107th Founding Anniversary last Sept. 30, 2011, awarded him the Plaque of Distinction as "an outstanding and well-known writer who has consistently brought honor to the University through his prolific writings as a novelist and poet, thereby distinguishing himself as a major contributor to the enrichment of Philippine Literature." On Sept. 29, 2012, during  the 30th anniversary-celebration  of ACT (Alliance of Concerned Teachers), a progressive organization continuously fighting for the welfare of Filipino teachers, he was conferred the title GURO NG BAYAN (PEOPLE'S TEACHER). He was also honored by CONTEND (Congress of Teachers and Educators for Nationalism and Democracy) in a ceremony held at the Masscom Auditorium of the University of the Philippines last September 27, 2013 as one of the country's nationalist teachers (MAKABAYANG GURO).
Writing fiction, articles and literary criticisms in Filipino, Ordoñez works were anthologized in the following: Readings in    Contemporary Bilingual  Literature  (Ateneo de Manila  University), Parnasong Tagalog of Alejandro G. Abadilla (selected poems in Filipino), Hiyas (Vols. 2 & 3, textbooks in Public High Schools),  Bantayog (selected essays in Filipino, Philippine Normal University), Nationalist Literature and Likhaan (University of the Philippines), Subverso (ACT), Kilates (UP) and the landmark Mga Agos sa Disyerto (1964). His novels include Apoy sa Madaling Araw (1964), co-authored with Dominador B. Mirasol, and Limang Suwail (1963), co-authored with Efren Abueg, Rogelio Sicat, Edgardo M. Reyes and Eduardo Bautista Reyes. In 1998. the University of the Philippines published in book form some of his selected writings "SAAN PAPUNTA ANG MGA PUTOK?".  In 1997, his short-story, SI ANTO,  was translated to English and anthologized in  "STORIES FROM SOUTHEAST ASIA" (Malaysia) and considered as one of the best short-stories in Southeast Asia for the past 30 years,  according to Muhammad Haji Salleh, editor of the said anthology.  In 2004, the Polytechnic University of the Philippines published in book form his columns PLUMA AT PAPEL from DIARIO UNO and in 2007, Prometheus Publishing Corp. also published his columns and editorials PLUMA AT PAPEL (Sa Panahon ni Gloria) from Pinoy Weekly. Some of his poems were also anthologized in IPUIPO SA PIGING (2010), selected poems of some 32 poets in Filipino. Last March 15, 2011, his collection of poems (HIJO Y HIJA DE PUTA at iba pang mga tula), was launched by Grandwater Publishing at the Polytechnic University of the Philippines. On November 2013, one of his poems (ALAY SA BAYANING MANDIRIGMA) was anthologized in SALITA NG SANDATA (Bonifacio's Legacies to the People's Struggle); his poem MAITA (KA DOLOR)GOMEZ was also anthologized in MAITA (Remembering Ka Dolor). 
Ordoñez was the former Editor-in-Chief and former chairman of the Editorial Board of Pinoy Weekly, a nationalist and progressive newspaper in FILIPINO.  He is  a Professor in the Graduate School of the Polytechnic University of the Philippines; he also teaches Creative Writing, Literature, History, Works of Rizal and Contemporary Social Problems in the College of Arts of the said university.[tpl]Citation needed|date=August 2011[/tpl]

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


