[[Damnatio memoriae]]

CATEGORIES: Crime and punishment in ancient Rome, Historical deletion, Damnatio memoriae

Damnatio memoriae is the Latin phrase literally meaning "damnation of memory" in the sense of a judgment that a person must not be remembered. It was a form of dishonor that could be passed by the Roman Senate upon traitors or others who brought discredit to the Roman State. The intent was to erase someone from history, a task somewhat easier in ancient times, when documentation was much sparser.

==Overview==

===Etymology===

The sense of the expression damnatio memoriae and of the sanction is to cancel every trace of the person from the life of Rome, as if he had never existed, in order to preserve the honour of the city. In a city that stressed the social appearance, respectability and the pride of being a true Roman as a fundamental requirement of the citizen, it was perhaps the most severe punishment.

===Practice===

In Ancient Rome, the practice of damnatio memoriae was the condemnation of Roman elites and emperors after their deaths. If the Senate or a later emperor did not like the acts of an individual, they could have his property seized, his name erased and his statues reworked. Because there is an economic incentive to seize property and rework statues, historians and archaeologists have had difficulty determining when official damnatio memoriae actually took place, although it seems to have been quite rare.
Historians sometimes use the phrase de facto damnatio memoriae when the condemnation is not official. Among those few who did suffer legal damnatio memoriae were Sejanus, who had conspired against emperor Tiberius in 31, and later Livilla, who was revealed to be his accomplice.
Only three emperors are known to have officially received a damnatio memoriae. These were Domitian whose violent death in 96 ended the Flavian Dynasty, the co-emperor Publius Septimius Geta, whose memory was publicly expunged by his co-emperor brother Caracalla after he murdered him in 211, and in 311 Maximian, who was captured by Constantine the Great and then encouraged to commit suicide.
It is unknown whether any damnatio memoriae was totally successful as it would not be noticeable to later historians, since, by definition, it would entail the complete and total erasure of the individual in question from the historical record. However it was difficult to implement the practice completely. For instance, the Senate wanted to condemn the memory of Caligula, but Claudius prevented this. Nero was declared an enemy of the state by the Senate, but then given an enormous funeral honoring him after his death by Vitellius. While statues of some emperors were destroyed or reworked after their death, others were erected. Also, many coins with the images of the discredited person continued to circulate. A particularly large number exist with Geta's image.Geta: The One Who Died

==Similar practices in other societies==

===Modern===

==Damnatio memoriae in fiction==

Many contemporary novels and films mention a form of damnatio memoriae. Two early examples are the "vapourization" of "unpersons" in George Orwell's 1949 dystopian novel Nineteen Eighty-Four ("He did not exist; he never existed"); and the reference to the Egyptian practice in the 1956 movie The Ten Commandments, in which the Pharaoh Seti orders the name of Moses be struck from every building and never mentioned by anyone.
More recent authors who have used damnatio memoriae as a plot device include Milan Kundera in his 1979 novel The Book of Laughter and Forgetting, R.A. Salvatore in the 1990 novel Homeland, Lois Lowry in her 1993 novel The Giver (a version in which the damned name is never given to any new baby ever again), and Brian Herbert and Kevin J. Anderson in their 1999 Prelude to Dune trilogy. Another occurrence of this plot device is prevalent in the fantasy novel Prince of the Blood by Raymond E. Feist.  In David Wong's "John Dies At The End" and sequel, "This Book Is Full of Spiders" being killed by the 'shadow people' completely erases one from history, such that their friends are not even allowed to remember them.
In his novel, Nineteen Eighty-Four, George Orwell describes a world order where traitors and free-thinkers ("thought criminals", as they were called) were "vaporized", which essentially meant that all records of them in all of history were removed. O'Brien specifically uses this fact to give a signal of a kind to the protagonist, Winston Smith, that he is rebellious against the Party: he indirectly references Syme, an acquaintance of Winston's that simply disappeared and was vaporized, and to pronounce his name was by itself a thoughtcrime.
In the Harry Potter series, Sirius Black, Phineas Black, and Andromeda Black were "blasted off" the Black Family's tree.
In the Red Dwarf episode The Inquisitor, the eponymous simulant erases those he judges worthless, from history.
The Legion faction in the Fallout series will decree the character "damnatio memoriae" if he or she is considered an enemy.

==See also==

==Notes==

==External links==


