[[Peter Tishler]]

CATEGORIES: 1937 births, Epidemiologists, American geneticists, Medical educators, Harvard University alumni, American medical historians, Living people, American historians

Peter Verveer Tishler M.D. (born July 18, 1937) is a researcher in human genetics and orphan diseases, educator, and clinician especially in the areas of genetic diseases, including polycystic kidney disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, Fabry disease, and the porphyrias.  
Tishler was raised in New Jersey.  His father, Max Tishler, was a senior research chemist and later president of Merck.  Tishler attended public schools and Harvard College where he majored in Biochemical Sciences.  He wrote his senior thesis on carboxypeptidase, in the lab of Dr. C.J. Fu at the Jimmy Fund, graduating cum laude in 1959.

==Career==

Tishler attended Yale University School of Medicine.  While at Yale, Tishler began his long association with the Thorndike Memorial Laboratory at Boston City Hospital. Dr. William B. Castle, discoverer of intrinsic factor, introduced him to Dr. Sidney H. Ingbar with whom Tishler began work on the metabolic actions of thyroid hormone.  Another important mentor, Dr. Maxwell Finland contributed to Tishler’s scientific and clinical work.   Tishler’s interest in genetics arose from his laboratory research in the study of thyroid function in patients with phenylketonuria. 
At the Harvard Medical Service at Boston City Hospital in 1963, Finland and  Ingbar encouraged Tishler to pursue his growing interest in medical genetics.
During the Vietnam War, Tishler worked as a Public Health Service officer at the National Institutes of Health.  He worked with Christian B. Anfinsen, Charles Epstein and Alan Schechter on the biochemistry of embryogenesis. Other mentors were Charles S. Davidson, Ronald A. Arky, and Norbert Frankel.
In the following years, Tishler continued his basic laboratory work, but also was concerned with genetics and medicine in the terms of population and epidemiology. Drs. Edward H. Kass and Frank Speizer guided his thinking about these issues.  Tishler was also involved in familial studies of hypertension at one of the first community health centers in the nation, East Boston Neighborhood Health Center.

==Selected publications==

==External links==

==References==

Finland, Maxwell and Castle, William B., Eds. (1983) The Harvard Medical Unit at Boston City Hospital, Volume II.  University of Virginia Press (for the Francis A. Countway Library of Medicine).


