[[Felipe Fuentes]]

CATEGORIES: 1971 births, California Democrats, Hispanic and Latino American politicians, Living people, Members of the California State Assembly, People from the San Fernando Valley, Pepperdine University alumni, San Fernando High School alumni, University of California, Los Angeles alumni, Los Angeles City Council members

Felipe Fuentes (born May 25, 1971) is a Democratic politician from the San Fernando Valley in the U.S. state of California, currently a member of the Los Angeles City Council from the 7th district. 
Fuentes won election to the California State Assembly for the 39th district on a May 15, 2007 special election. He slightly exceeded the 50%+1 margin needed to avoid a runoff. Prior to serving in the Assembly, Fuentes served as Chief of Staff to then Los Angeles City Councilman Alex Padilla.

==Biography==

Fuentes graduated from UCLA (1994) where he received his bachelors degree and Pepperdine University (2004) where he received his masters in business administration (MBA).Felipe Fuentes for District 39
Fuentes began his career promoting immigrant and children’s rights at the Center for Human Rights and Constitutional Law. In 1999, Fuentes began serving the 7th council district of Los Angeles as a field deputy to then City Councilmember Alex Padila. In 2001, he worked on then City Attorney James Hahn's campaign for Mayor. After Hahn's election, he was appointed Deputy Mayor of the San Fernando Valley. Fuentes managed the Mayor’s Office of the Neighborhood Advocate, Volunteer Corps, Constituent Services, and the Targeted Neighborhood Initiative. He was the Mayor’s liaison to the Department of Neighborhood Empowerment, Animal Services, and the Department of Building & Safety.
As Chief of Staff to Los Angeles City Council President Alex Padilla, Fuentes helped establish a pilot program to implement the “Safe Routes to Schools” initiative in the Northeast San Fernando Valley. He worked to help bring the first new police station to the San Fernando Valley in twenty-five years, and to create effective anti-gang programs.
Felipe is a lifelong resident of the Northeast San Fernando Valley of Los Angeles and now resides in Sylmar, Los Angeles with his wife, Lena Wu-Fuentes.  Lena and Felipe are parents to a daughter.

==References==


