[[GP Challenge]]

CATEGORIES: 2002 video games, Formula One video games, PlayStation games, Windows games

Not to be confused with the similarly titled Grand Prix Challenge.

GP Challenge is a 1998 Formula One racing game by Midas Interactive Entertainment. The game features teams from the [tpl]f1|1998[/tpl] season, but the circuits are based on the [tpl]f1|1994[/tpl] season. From the games Main Menu: One can choose between a Single Race mode, or to go to the Options Menu.
In Single Race mode; one can choose from a selection of Four Circuits to race on, and the Grands Prix feature realistic schedules from a Formula One Race Weekend; Including: Friday Practice, Saturday Qualifying, and Sunday's Grand Prix.
Also in Single Race mode; One can choose to have a Four-Race Championship Season, but manual work from the player is required to undertake in this. After each GP is completed, the game subsequently shows the points each driver has gained for that race. However, the game does not add up the scores each driver gets over the course of the Four-Race season. Instead, players of the game must write down the scores each driver receives after each race, and then add them up manually at the end of the Final Race to see if they have become the Drivers World Champion.
The Four Race Championship Season consists of Rounds 10, 13, 14, and 16 from the [tpl]f1|1994[/tpl] season. These tracks are Hungary in Budapest*, Portugal in Estoril, Spain at Jerez, and Australia at Adelaide. The races consist of either 3 or 5 Laps, depending on the players preference; and one can choose from three modes of difficulty: Novice, Amateur and Professional.
The 1998 Teams are realistic in livery, but the drivers names are fictitious due to licensing arrangements; although the Drivers Helmet Livery's make it apparent to whom they are supposed to be. The game is similar to "Ayrton Senna's Super Monaco GP II" in this sense.
The List of Drivers is as Follows:
Car Number: 2 
Team: Williams 
Driver: H.H.Frentzen
Driver Name on Game: T.Bailey
Car Number: 3
Team: Ferrari
Driver: M.Schumacher
Driver Name on Game: C.Viggers
Car Number: 4
Team: Ferrari
Driver: E.Irvine
Driver Name on Game: Player One (YOU)
Car Number: 6
Team: Benetton Playlife
Driver: A.Wurz
Driver Name on Game: M.Jones
Car Number: 7
Team: McLaren Mercedes
Driver Name: D.Coulthard
Driver Name on Game: A.Marshall
Car Number: 10
Team Name: Jordan Mugen-Honda
Driver: D.Hill
Driver Name on Game: M.Morgan
Car Number: 12
Team Name: Prost Peugeot
Driver: J.Trulli
Driver Name on Game: T.Love
Car Number: 21
Team Name: Tyrrell Ford
Driver: T.Takagi
Driver Name on Game: T.Nguyen
The game pits you in the Seat of Eddie Irvine's 1998 Ferrari, (the man who ended the [tpl]f1|1999[/tpl] season as Vice-Champion). The game however, does not allow you to switch to another car, so you must remain as the Irishman, although you can change the 'Driver Name'.

