[[Fantozzi contro tutti]]

CATEGORIES: 1980 films, 1980s comedy films, Italian films, Italian-language films, Sequel films, Films set in Rome, Films directed by Neri Parenti

Fantozzi contro tutti is an Italian comedy film, released in 1980) is the third film in the saga of the unlucky clerk Ugo Fantozzi, played by its creator, Paolo Villaggio.
It is the first movie in which Fantozzi's wife, Pina, is played by Milena Vukotic. It is also the last film apparition of Giuseppe Anatrelli, one year before his death.

==Plot==

In Italy come the eighties, a sign of progress, innovation and tolerance, but not for most of the country and especially for the company where he works Ugo Fantozzi who is always forced to endure oppression and injustice on the part of its directors. In fact Fantozzi, again because of the exaggerated mania fellow Filini to organize trips mass Seize used, it ends up sending them all in a tourist resort in the german-speaking South Tirol. In fact, in the universe of Fantozzi the Southern Tiroleans hate the Italians because they are very gullible people and cheater who only eats spaghetti and loud singing with the guitar and the mandolin. So Fantozzi, despite himself, ends shipped in a slimming clinic where the Nazis directors retain the patients, or inmates in inhumane conditions forcing them to not eat or drink for weeks. Since returning, Fantozzi learns that the Director of the Directors Barambani is slightly sick. However Fantozzi, Filini and other colleagues so that the cruel man who exploited them for years to die once and for all, organize clandestine masses and recite the rosary during the lunch break wishing Barambani all possible evils. Barambani finally dies of a heart attack and colleagues, showing the most sincere condolences to the family, shout and celebrate prey to the most insane crazies. However, the successor of Barambani is a man most vicious and most cruel Duke Engineer Farabbutt. Grand. Croc. Combram (playful nickname from the Italian name of the cobra). In fact, this man is a fan of cycling and soon forced all his "inferiors" to love cycling, so that in a few months he organized a real race between colleagues. Since none of the employees would make it his colleagues are seeking ways to escape the most unthinkable and absurd maneuvers, dirty and mean that you can imagine to cheat and win the race. Fantozzi will arm of a drug use during the last lap. However he, although wins the race goes right with the bike in a hearse, convened by the Director in person "event"! Then Fantozzi and Filini are invited by another than they take a trip on his luxury yacht. However, the two accountants do not know that the man is very bad and use them as hubs and serve. Fantozzi really are fed up with the brutality of its director Megapresidente Archangel, writes on the sky: "The Mega-president is an asshole!" However, the writing is really Fantozzi and realizes he insulted forces beyond his understanding.

==External links==


