[[Shangarai Chasset]]

CATEGORIES: German-Jewish culture in the United States, German-American culture in Louisiana, Synagogues in Louisiana, Jewish-American history, Buildings and structures in New Orleans, Louisiana, Religious organizations established in 1827, 1827 establishments in the United States

Shangarai Chasset  (Shaarei Chesed) was a nineteenth-century New Orleans Orthodox (and later Reform) synagogue.  The synagogue was located on Rampart Street between St. Louis and Conti Streets (see picture of plaque, at site of original structure).  
The congregation was founded by Jacob Solis on December 20, 1827. The synagogue’s members were primarily Jews of  German background.  Around the same time the synagogue was founded, a related benevolent society was established with the same name, "Shaare Chessed,"  (the first interment therein was that of a Hyam Harris on June 28, 1828).  In 1881, the congregation merged with the Nefutzot Yehudah, (the Portuguese Sepharadic Synagogue), to form the present day Touro Synagogue.
Far from established Jewish communities, the congregation’s membership attempted to create a semblance of Jewish life and community in the new territory opened to them as part of the Louisiana Purchase.  Upon its founding, most Jewish people were reportedly indifferent and not affiliated with the synagogue.  Of those affiliated with the congregation, their level of observance was minimal.  Jacob Rader Marcus, a noted historian, comments that the lack of affiliation to the synagogue may have in part resulted in many of the Jewish men in the Louisiana Territory taking non-Jewish wives and having non-Jewish children.  However, the high intermarriage rate did not preclude the congregation from appointing men with gentile wives to leadership positions in the synagogue.  Despite shortcomings in their religious observance, their love of their religion, and service to their community was nonetheless noteworthy, as it paved the way for future generations of Jewish life in New Orleans. 

==Synagogue leadership==

Some of the rabbis to lead the congregation were considered the greatest rabbis in their era. Among them:

==See also==

==References==


