[[Donald H. Clausen]]

CATEGORIES: 1923 births, Living people, California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo alumni, San Jose State University alumni, Weber State University alumni, Saint Mary's College of California alumni, Members of the United States House of Representatives from California, People from Humboldt County, California, United States Navy personnel

200 px|right|Donald H. ClausenDonald Holst "Don" Clausen (April 27, 1923 - ) is a former U.S. Representative from California.
Born in Ferndale, California, Clausen graduated from elementary and high schools of Ferndale,Clausen, Donald Holst, (1923 - ), Biographical Directory of the United States Congress, accessed April 20, 2013 where he was an honors student and lettered five sports: tennis, track, basketball, football and baseball as well as being the drum major of the school band.Retired congressman from Ferndale to celebrate 90th birthday April 27, The Ferndale Enterprise, April 18, 2013
He attended San José State University, California Polytechnic State University (in San Luis Obispo, California), Weber State University (in Ogden, Utah), and Saint Mary's College of California. He took the U.S. Navy V5 Aviation Cadet Program.  He served as a carrier pilot in the Asiatic-Pacific Theater of the Second World War from 1944 to 1945, flying 4FU Corsair aircraft. Post-war, Clausen helped found the Del Norte County Airport, and served as a member of the board of supervisors of Del Norte County, California from 1955 to 1962.  He ran two companies in Crescent City, his insurance business, Clausen Associates, and Clausen Flying Service, an air ambulance service.
Clausen was elected as a Republican to the Eighty-eighth Congress to fill the vacancy caused by the death of United States Representative Clement Woodnutt Miller who had been elected posthumously, and to the nine succeeding Congresses (January 22, 1963-January 3, 1983). 
Clausen authored the bill creating the Lady Bird Johnson Grove in the Redwood National Park.  Former president Lyndon Johnson and Lady Bird Johnson, sitting president Richard Nixon, and future president Ronald Reagan and many other federal and local dignitaries attended the dedication of the grove.   Clausen said that this was his proudest accomplishment. 
He was an unsuccessful candidate for reelection to the Ninety-eighth Congress in 1982, narrowly losing to Democrat Douglas H. Bosco. He served as director, special programs, Federal Aviation Administration from 1983 to 1990 and is a resident of Santa Rosa, California.
The  Don Clausen Fish Hatchery in Sonoma CountyLake Sonoma, Parks and Recreation in Sonoma County, accessed April 20, 2013 was named in his honor and the Redwood National Park Bypass on State Highway Route 101 was renamed the Don Clausen Highway in 1966 by act of the California Legislature due to his efforts at obtaining appropriations for building that road and the Redwood National Park Visitor Center.Assembly Concurrent Resolution No. 92--Relative to the Don Clausen Highway, June 10, 1996
His congressional papers are at Humboldt State University library.Don H. Clausen Congressional Papers, 2010, accessed April 20, 2013

==References==


