[[Maywood Academy High School]]

CATEGORIES: Los Angeles Unified School District schools, Los Angeles Unified School District, High schools in Los Angeles County, California, Public high schools in California, Alternative schools in California

Maywood Academy High School (MAHS) is an alternative high school of the Los Angeles Unified School District, located in Maywood, CA.
All residents are zoned to Bell High School in Bell and Huntington Park High School in Huntington Park may apply to Maywood Academy High School; Maywood Academy, which opened in 2005 and moved into its permanent campus in 2006, does not have its own attendance boundary because it lacks American football, track and field, and tennis facilities."School History." Maywood Academy High School. Retrieved on July 2, 2010. Several municipalities are in the service zone of MAHS.
Areas within the service zone include the City of Maywood,"Maywood city, California." U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved on July 2, 2010. the City of Bell,"Bell city, California." U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved on July 2, 2010. the City of Cudahy,"Cudahy city, California." U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved on July 2, 2010. the City of Huntington Park,"Huntington Park city, California." U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved on July 2, 2010. portions of Vernon,"Zoning Map." City of Vernon. Retrieved on June 2, 2010. and most of the Walnut Park census-designated place."Walnut Park CDP, California." U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved on July 2, 2010.

==Academies==

The high school previously offered four Small Learning Communities (SLCs) for  approximately 200 students, specializing in: Architecture/Design, Performing Arts, Radio Production, and Information/ Technology.  In 2010, as part of the Public School Choice Process, the students, staff and parents elected to move from four SLCs to three:  School of Liberal Arts (SoLA), School of Science, and School of Business and Technology.  The course offerings from the previous SLCs will be liquidated into the three improved SLCs.  The concept of Small Learning Communities is to create opportunities for individualized learning experiences in collaboration between teachers, students and parents.

==Athletics==

The curriculum of the high school is covered an athletic program consisting of:
The school also has a music program which consists of:

==References==

==External links==


