[[Communion of Christ the Redeemer]]

CATEGORIES: Religious organizations established in 2007, Convergence Movement, Christian organizations established in the 21st century

The Communion of Christ the Redeemer is a Christian denomination that embodies Convergence worship and ministry and Anglican traditions.  The church describes itself as Bible-believing, Spirit-filled, and liturgical/sacramental. CCR is in full communion with the Anglican Province of America.
The CCR has dioceses throughout the United States, and is assisting in the development of other national churches including in Tanzania and Venezuela. There is also one congregation of the CCR in Mexico.  The current President of the College of Bishops is Bishop Richard W. Lipka of Maryland.

==Faith and Worship==

The magisterium of the CCR includes the sacred scriptures (the New Testament and the Old Testament) as the primary source of faith, doctrine and practice.  The church accepts the canon of Scripture defined as received by the ancient undivided Church, including the deuterocanonical books which are utilized for “example of life and instruction of manners,” but the church does “not apply them to establish any doctrine.”
The church holds to the three ancient creeds: Apostles’, Nicene, and Athanasian.  It also accepts the dogmatic statements of the seven Ecumenical councils, and “the ecumenical consensus of the undivided Church.”
Worship is liturgical in form, with most congregations using various editions of the Book of Common Prayer, while some also use Roman Catholic rites.
The church encourages its members to seek and utilize spiritual gifts in their worship and ministry.

==Organization==

The CCR has a College of Bishops which meets four times a year.  All bishops are equal, and there is no authoritative office beyond that of bishop. The College elects a President, Vice President, and Treasurer who serve for four-year terms.
The church upholds the historic three-fold ministry of bishops, priests, and deacons.  Apostolic Succession has been received through the line of Carlos Duarte Costa and the Brazilian Catholic Apostolic Church (ICAB).  The CCR utilizes Roman Catholic ordination rites for its clergy in order to maintain a strong line of apostolic succession.

==History==

The CCR was formed in February 2007 by six bishops who had previously been affiliated with the Charismatic Episcopal Church. These six were soon joined by other bishops and clergy from the U.S. and other countries.  In 2008 the communion entered into full communion with the Anglican Province of America, which is a Continuing Anglican jurisdiction.

==References==

==External links==


