[[Fantozzi in paradiso]]

CATEGORIES: Italian films, 1993 films, 1990s comedy films, Italian-language films, Sequel films, Films set in Rome, Films directed by Neri Parenti

Fantozzi in Paradiso (1993) is the eighth film of "fantozzian" saga. In this film, Fantozzi dies. It is followed by Fantozzi - il ritorno (1996).

==Plot==

Ugo Fantozzi, Filini, Fonelli, Calboni and Miss Silvani are no longer the valiant and unfortunate accountants and surveyors of a time and slowly begin to move towards the path that leads to death. In fact, everyone more or less have passed the "160 years" and are no longer as sprightly when they could cheat their directors pretending to work or serve as doormats. Fantozzi in particular, although he still feels as healthy as a fish, he learns, after a bad accident at the cemetery, you have only a week old. Ugo Fantozzi then starts to blow off steam and to do everything he wanted to achieve for years as a personal vendetta extreme adventures and adrenaline. But soon its entertainment you run out one day and so Fantozzi, evicted from home for a few weeks by cruel monkey daughter Mariangela with her chimp husband Bongo and daughter horrifying Uga, and moved into a garage furnished as a studio, looking in all ways of dealing with his fate with dignity. Pina, his wife notices it and decides to make him happy one last time to turn to a person who hated for years, Miss Silvani, courted in vain for years by poor Fantozzi. Promising to pay all its debts betting on horses, Pina convinces Silvani to spend a Christmas holiday with Fantozzi to Cortina d'Ampezzo then satisfy in bed. Miss Silvani, disgusted by the proposal, accept for the debts to be paid, and so the two lovebirds spend a brilliant, tragic holiday. At a time when the two should copulate, Fantozzi really wants to get to a mixture of the most powerful viagra u quaff cocktails nitroglycerin, sulfuric acid, bombs, and hot pepper. The embrace is so violent and powerful that Dolomites shake, the wolves run away scared and a dam is destroyed (who jokingly refers to orgasm of Fantozzi, in fact, the Silvani, wrong use of the subjunctive Italian as all characters Fantozzi universe always wrong, says, "Fantozzi, venghi!" – "Fantozzi, comes!!"). Now Miss Silvani truly loves his accountant, but Fantozzi had written a letter to his wife by declaring it to be a scum and not wanting to see any more, but at the last minute second thoughts and returned to Rome. Now I'm the last hours before Fantozzi dies and a priest approaches to encourage climbing stairs to the church of Lourdes, when it comes his wife Pina. The woman tells the husband that doctors had mistaken his plates with those of the priest who was calling, swearing that he collapsed while running away Fantozzi cheerful. Unfortunately comes centered by a truck and shipped under an Asphalt that the crushes he as a sheet of paper.

==Cast==


