[[Thomas E. Dewey]]

CATEGORIES: 1902 births, 1971 deaths, American Episcopalians, Columbia Law School alumni, Columbia University alumni, Deaths from myocardial infarction, Governors of New York, New York County District Attorneys, New York Republicans, People from Owosso, Michigan, Republican Party (United States) presidential nominees, United States Attorneys for the Southern District of New York, United States presidential candidates, 1940, United States presidential candidates, 1944, United States presidential candidates, 1948, University of Michigan alumni, Writers from Michigan, Writers from New York, Anti-crime activists

Thomas Edmund Dewey (March 24, 1902 – March 16, 1971) was the 47th Governor of New York (1943–1954). In 1944 and 1948, he was the Republican candidate for President, but lost both times. He led the liberal/moderate faction of the Republican Party, in which he fought conservative Ohio Senator Robert A. Taft. Dewey was an advocate for the professional and business community of the Northeastern United States, which would later be called the "Eastern Establishment." This group supported most of the New Deal social-welfare reforms enacted during the administration of Franklin D. Roosevelt, and it consisted of internationalists who were in favor of the United Nations and the "Cold War" fight against communism and the Soviet Union. In addition, he played a large part in the election of Dwight D. Eisenhower as President in 1952. Dewey's successor as leader of the liberal Republicans was Nelson Rockefeller, who became governor of New York in 1959. The New York State Thruway is named in Dewey's honor.

==Early life and family==

Dewey was born and raised in Owosso, Michigan, where his father, George Dewey, owned, edited, and published the local newspaper, the Owosso Times.(Smith, pp. 66-67) His mother, Annie Thomas (whom he called "Mater"), bequeathed her son "a healthy respect for common sense and the average man or woman who possessed it. She also left a headstrong assertiveness that many took for conceit, a set of small-town values never entirely erased by exposure to the sophisticated East, and a sense of proportion that moderated triumph and eased defeat."(Smith, pp. 58-59) He graduated from the University of Michigan in 1923, and from Columbia Law School in 1925. While at the University of Michigan, he joined Phi Mu Alpha Sinfonia, a national fraternity for men of music, and was a member of the Men's Glee Club. He was an excellent singer with a deep, baritone voice, and in 1923 he finished in third place in the National Singing Contest.Richard Norton Smith, Thomas E. Dewey and his Times, p. 25. He briefly considered a career as a professional singer, but decided against it after a temporary throat ailment convinced him that such a career would be risky. He then decided to pursue a career as a lawyer.Smith, p. 86. He also wrote for The Michigan Daily, the university's student newspaper.(Smith, p. 77)
On June 16, 1928 Dewey married Frances Eileen Hutt. A native of Sherman, Texas, she was a stage actress; after their marriage she dropped her acting career.Smith, p. 103 They had two sons, Thomas E. Dewey, Jr. and John Martin Dewey. Although Dewey served as a prosecutor and District Attorney in New York City for many years, his home from 1939 until his death was a large farm, called "Dapplemere," located near the town of Pawling some [tpl]convert|65|mi|km|0[/tpl] north of New York City.(Smith, pp. 321-323) According to biographer Richard Norton Smith, Dewey "loved Dapplemere as did no other place", and Dewey was once quoted as saying that "I work like a horse five days and five nights a week for the privilege of getting to the country on the weekend."(Smith, p. 325) Dapplemere was part of a tight-knit rural community called "Quaker Hill," which was known as a haven for the prominent and well-to-do. Among Dewey's neighbors on Quaker Hill were the famous reporter and radio broadcaster Lowell Thomas, the Reverend Norman Vincent Peale, and the legendary CBS News journalist Edward R. Murrow.(Smith, p. 320) Dewey was an active, lifelong member of the Episcopal Church.Smith, p. 320–326.

==Prosecutor==

===Federal prosecutor===

Dewey first served as a federal prosecutor, then started a lucrative private practice on Wall Street; however, he left his practice for an appointment as special prosecutor to look into corruption in New York City—with the official title of Chief Assistant U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York.[ref]
