[[Rabbit Every Monday]]

CATEGORIES: 1951 films, 1950s comedy films, Films directed by Friz Freleng, Looney Tunes shorts

Rabbit Every Monday is a 1950-produced, 1951-released Warner Bros. cartoon starring Bugs Bunny and Yosemite Sam, and would be the last short which had Yosemite Sam's mouth below his mustache; his design changes midway through the film.
Rabbit Every Monday has the distinction of being the first Looney Tunes cartoon to appear on the first episode of The Bugs Bunny Show, on October 11,1960.

==Plot==

Bugs is cooking carrots on a rotisserie and singing. Yosemite Sam is hunting and smells carrots cooking knowing a rabbit must be near. In a "breaking the fourth wall" moment, a patron in the movie theater comes across and then Sam threatens to shoot him, so the person goes back to his seat. He also passes a warning to other patrons. As Sam nears the hole, Bugs thinks that Sam's nose is a carrot, flavours it and yanks Sam into his hole and bites his nose. Sam demands Bugs to come out. Bugs refuses. Bugs puts bubble gum so the gun backfires and surrounds Sam in bubble gum bubble and Bugs blows him down a cliff. As Sam is blowing his way back up, Bugs burst Sam's bubble gum with a pin. After bubble gum sticky situation, Sam digs around the hole with Bugs in it and puts him in a sieve filtering Bugs out. Sam takes Bugs by gunpoint and takes him to his cabin.
Bugs is hanging by a rope and Sam is putting wood in the oven. After a few annoyances for Sam with his hat, Bugs is obliged to go into the oven. Bugs comes out several times and brings in some items like a fan and a pitcher of water, chairs, party favors, emptying ashtrays in Sam's hat. Sam gets mad and Bugs pops out of the stove (covered with lipsticks) and tells Sam there is party going on and Sam goes inside. Bugs comes out and starts putting more wood in the fire, but Bugs has regrets. When Bugs takes a look inside, he sees that the party is real. Bugs goes back in and comes out in the end with party favors and wearing a hat and says "I don't ask questions; I just have fun!" and joins in.

==Alternate Versions==

==See also==


