[[Sam Nover]]

CATEGORIES: Year of birth missing (living people), Living people, American sports announcers, Media in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, National Football League announcers, National Hockey League broadcasters, Pittsburgh Penguins broadcasters, Pittsburgh Steelers broadcasters, United States Football League announcers, World Football League announcers

Sam Nover is a retired American sportscaster. He worked at WIIC-TV / WPXI-TV in Pittsburgh from 1970 until his retirement in 2001 as the Sports Director and principal Sports Anchor. Nover also did National Football League play-by-play for NBC Sports from the late 1970s until the late 1980s. His color commentator partners included Bob Trumpy, Len Dawson, and Paul McGuire. He also did play-by-play on television for the Pittsburgh Steelers during the preseason from the late 1980s until the late 1990s.
Nover was also the voice of the Pittsburgh Maulers of the United States Football League in their one year of existence, and was the voice of the Don King Radio Network for its short period of existence. Nover had the distinction and privilege to do the blow-by-blow of the Heavyweight title fight between Larry Holmes and Michael Spinks with Hall of Fame announcer Don Dunphy as his color commentator. He also worked many venues for NBC Sportsworld, including Boxing and was partnered for many years with former Lightweight Champion, Ray "Boom Boom" Mancini and Alexis Arguello. Nover is best remembered for having the last sitdown interview with Roberto Clemente shortly before Clemente's death in 1972.http://www.prdailysun.com/news/Rare-interview-set-tone-for-Clemente-legacy
Nover also did television play-by-play for the Pittsburgh Penguins in the 1970s. He left the local station in 1980 and signed a contract with NBC Network Sports with the main intention of working as Boxing Commentator at the Moscow Olympics, but was denied the opportunity when the United States boycotted the games. He returned to his old job at WPXI-TV in 1982. His nearly 30 years of Sportscasting service at the same station, is still the longest in Pittsburgh history.
Nover currently lives half of the year in Pittsburgh and the other half in West Palm Beach, Florida. He has two married daughters, Dana and Molly. Dana lives in Pittsburgh with her husband Tim and their two sons, Jackson and Hudson. Molly is the Beauty Director of Women's Health Magazine, and lives in New York City with her husband, Kevin, their daughter Lilliana and son Hunter.

==References==


