[[The Coastal Gardener]]

CATEGORIES: First-run syndicated television programs in the United States

The Coastal Gardener, is a weekly thirty minute nationally, and internationally  syndicated award winning TV series.  The show is seen over Broadcast, cable, satellite and streamed on the World Wide Web.  The Chicago based, Showplace Broadcasting, syndicates this now  #1 Green, TV Garden Travel Lifestyle series in America, with host, Dave Egbert, that first aired in January 2004.  This series takes viewers “from coast to coast” to display gardens and nurseries exploring plants and ideas for personal gardens all over the country.  A spin off, "Dave Egbert's Garden Travels" (www.daveegbert.com), began airing in the US and Internationally Jan. '09.  The Coastal Gardener is produced by Mark Morro and Big Sur Media, Inc. based in Big Sur, CA and West Plam Beach FL.  Dave Egbert is a garden lecturer and also a writer of numerous newspaper and magazine articles, and a Sunset publish book, "Big Ideas for Small Gardens".  Viewers may also call-in and speak with Dave on his weekly coast to coast radio show, Living Green Radio, on the CRN radio network. (www.crntalk.com)

==Development==

Development of The Coastal Gardener was a collaborative effort between Executive producer/Producer Mark Morro and show host/horticultruist Dave Egbert.  Given the location of Dave’s own garden on the Big Sur, California coast, producer Morro elected to use this dramatic location as the start and finish of every show.
The series brings sustainable and organic ideas to the viewers as Dave travels across America.
Each week unique showplace gardens and exciting groups of plants are profiled while providing tips on saving water and resources and improving the environment. Whether you garden or not, viewers enjoy the dramatic award winning cinematograplhy that illustrates being eco-friendlly, organic and sustainable can be easy. On the shows "Ask Dave" segment, questions on sustainable organic solutions to on-camera viiewers are answered.  From time to time Dave has garden visits with celebrities and prominent individuals. These have included Clint Eastwood, Louie Anderson, Mickey Roodey, Kaye Ballard, the Beach Boys Al Jardine, Mayor Richard Daley of Chicago, Glass artist Dale Chihuly and many others.

==Production==

The Coastal Gardener is shot with dual Sony HD cameras.  The award winning production crew includes Associate Producer/ Senior Editor Matthew Montevideo and is directed by Ben Brackin.  Jon Tendrich is the senior sound editor.

==Awards==

The production of The Coastal Gardener has earned four awards in 2008 and 2007, and two in 2006.  Dave Egbert won Telly and  Accolade Awards for On-Air Talent, a Telly Award for Use of Humor and another Telly Award for Entertainment.  Mark Morro and the production crew have won Aurora Awards for Production Execution and Videography, as well as a Telly Award for Videography.

==About Dave==

When on the show Dave Egbert, The Coastal Gardener, is easily identifiable by his Aussie hat, blue denim shirt and khaki shorts. Dave’s expertise comes from working as a professional Certified Nurseryman for 20 years where he gained a wide knowledge of plants and gardening techniques. During his time as a Nurseryman Dave collaborated with experts of horticulture and learned the value of well-chosen plants for every climate and situation. Dave incorporates the ideals of organic and sustainable gardening in his own garden and on the show.

