[[Transnational Radical Party]]

CATEGORIES: Radical parties, Transnational political parties, Pacifism

The Transnational Radical Party (former Radical Party, not to be confused with the Italian Radicals liberal party founded in 2001) or Nonviolent Radical Party, Transnational and Transparty is a political association of citizens, parliamentarians and members of government of various national and political backgrounds who intend to use nonviolent means to create an effective body of international law with respect for individuals and the affirmation of democracy and freedom throughout the world. It is also a non-governmental organization (NGO) in a General category consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) of the United Nations since 1995.database of NGO's with consultative status at un.org The TRP does not participate in national, regional, or local elections.

==History==

The background of the party is in 1955 as a progressive liberal faction of the Italian Liberal Party which formed the Radical Party (Partito Radicale). In 1988, the party was transformed into the Transnational Radical Party. In 1992, the party was re-organized at the Italian-level as Pannella List (Lista Pannella), as its most senior figure was Marco Pannella. In 1999, it used the electoral label Bonino List (Lista Bonino), after Emma Bonino. In 2001, the party in Italy named itself Italian Radicals (Radicali Italiani), using the name Transnational Radical Party for its international arm. In 2005, the Italian Radicals joined Italian Democratic Socialists and founded the Rose in the Fist electoral coalition.
In May 2003 Olivier Dupuis resigned from his office as Secretary of the party, because of serious political differences with TRP leader Marco Pannella. The party is presently run by a provisional committee, known as "the Senate" (Senato), led by Marco Pannella himself along with other members of the party.
The party often advocates for the international use of the language Esperanto in its literature.The International Politics of Esperanto at the Nitobe Center for Language Democracy It has produced instructional material on Esperanto.

==Members==

Among TRP prominent members are Emma Bonino, former Italian Member of the European Parliament and former European Commissioner for Humanitarian Aid, Marco Pannella, former Italian Member of the European Parliament, Wei Jingsheng, President of the Chinese Overseas Coalition for Democracy, Enver Can, President of the Eastern Turkistan National Congress, Oumar Khambiev, Chechen Health Minister-elect (1997), Vo Van Ai, President of the Vietnam Committee for Human Rights, Quan Nguyen, President of the International Committee for the Nonviolent in Vietnam, Kok Ksor, President of the Montagnard Foundation, Vanida Tephsouvan, Executive Director of the Lao Movement of Human Rights, Arben Xaferi, Chairman of the Albanian Democratic Party of Macedonia, Pandeli Majko, Minister of Defense of Albania, Prof. Arnold S. Trebach, President International Antiprohibitionist League, and David Borden, Executive Director of DRCNet.

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


