[[Adriana Bombom]]

CATEGORIES: 1974 births, Living people, Brazilian dancers, The Farm (TV series) contestants

Adriana Bombom, stage name of Adriana Soares (Rio de Janeiro, January 8, 1974), is a Brazilian dancer, model, television host, and actress.

==Biography==

In her early days, Adriana Bombom lived in an orphanage and worked as a nanny and as a saleslady.Farias, Cida. "Adriana Bombom conquista pelo carisma e trabalho". Revista Afro. In 1996, she was invited to work for the tv show Xuxa Park where she participated in the sketch comedy "Academia de ginástica da Xuxa".http://xmblogpaginas.vilabol.uol.com.br/turmadaxuxapopup2.htm She then worked as a dancer in the show Planeta Xuxa,http://www.infantv.com.br/planeta.htm where, according to at least one author, she played a secondary but very visible role so Xuxa could avoid the accusations that her show did not hire black artists.Nuttall, Sarah. Beautiful Ugly. Duke University Press, 2006. p.275 While working there, she released a single with two songs that she used to sing during the intervals of the show. The songs were Dança da Bombom (Dance of the Candy) and Bom Apetite (Enjoy Your Meal).
She participated in the TV shows A Turma do Didi, Zorra Total, and Sob Nova Direção, all of them aired by the television network Rede Globo. In Rede Bandeirantes, Adriana Bombom made reports for TV shows such as Leonor Corrêa and Leão Lobo. In 2006 she began to host the variety show Bom Demais, aired by Rede Record of Rio de Janeiro. She also played a role in four feature films, among them Xuxa Requebra, in 1999, and Xuxa Popstar, in 2000; and was the protagonist of two short subjects, among them A incrível história da mulher que mudou de cor, in 2004.http://www.portacurtas.com.br/filme.asp?cod=1934&exib=4479
In September 2004, she appeared on the cover of the Brazilian adult magazine Sexy, being one of the few black women to do so.Câmara, Adriana Peixoto. "Gênero e sexualidade na revista Sexy: um roteiro para a masculinidade heterossexual" Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, 2007. p.43.
In 2009, Adriana participated in the second edition of the reality show of Rede Record, A Fazenda 2, but was eliminated in the third week.Adriana Bombom é eliminada com 46% dos votos em “A Fazenda 2”
She married the sambista Dudu Nobre for nine years and had two daughters with him, Olívia and Thalita. In 2009, Bombom and Dudu Nobre got divorced.Dudu Nobre confirma afastamento de Adriana Bombom: ‘Agora é notório’

==References==


