[[WEZO]]

CATEGORIES: Radio stations in Augusta, Georgia, News Talk radio stations in the United States, Radio stations established in 1983

WEZO (1230 AM) is a radio station broadcasting an News Talk format. Licensed in Augusta, Georgia, USA, the station is currently owned by SButtoni.
On March 1, 2013, the station dropped adult standard music format for conservative talk. It is one of a few remaining individually owned and operated radio stations in the CSRA (Central Savannah River Area).
WEZO 1230 AM is alternatively known as iTalkUS (I Talk U.S.) due to its web presence at www.italkus.com where tens of thousands stream the station nationally and internationally each month. It is the home of several original programs including Talk of the Town with Doug and Renee, Powers to the People with Tony Powers and Lee Miller, Money MD, and The Spirit of Racing.
Studio Lines 706-922-9396 & 706-922-9390 both numbers spell WEZO.
Office phone 706-364-9361
ORIGINAL PROGRAMMING
The Talk of the Town with Doug and Renee airs weekday mornings from 6 to 9 am and is hosted by Renee deMedicis and Doug Allan. The "water cooler" type morning show deals with the daily politics, news, and events around the CSRA with lots of fauw pas filled banter between the hosts as well as with guests and callers.
Powers to the People with Tony Powers airs weekday afternoons from 3 to 6 pm, and is hosted by 40 year radio veteran and self described "Conservitarian" Tony Powers. He and co-host Lee Miller, who brings a 15 year carrier as an award winning journalist to the conversation, take a daily look at politics, economics, regulations, and legislation from a national perspective, highlighting Americas troubling trend toward reliance on a very powerful centralized government at the federal level, and away from Constitutional limitations. The show features national pundits, political movers and shakers, as well as historians and conservative thinkers in its guest lineup.
Money MD with Steve Marbert and John Travis. "The Money Doctors" make a 1 hour house call each Saturday morning at 9 am.
Steve Marbert is a Certified Financial Planner and the owner of Richard Young Associates.  John Travis is a financial adviser with over 15 years experience and is the CSRA Endorsed local provider for Dave Ramsey. MoneyMD is where you will hear prescriptions for better financial health and how to make smart decisions with your money.
The Spirit of Racing with Doug Allan takes a 2 hour tour around the racing world each Saturday morning from 10 am to Noon. Doug brings over 20 years as a racing photo journalist to the air waves were he talks everything from NASCAR to drag boats and Indy cars to door slamming drag racing. His guests include journalists, enthusiasts, current drivers, past champions and Hall of Fame members.   

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


