[[Backworth Colliery Band]]

CATEGORIES: British brass bands

Backworth Colliery Band are a traditional British Brass Band based in Backworth, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, England.  The band consist of 27 senior members and 15 junior members, all of whom play brass or percussion instruments fitting the traditional brass band instrumentation.

==History of the Band==

The early history of the band is something which is by no means clear. The date of around 1886 for the formation of the band has been deduced from Durham League material. It was set up around the same time as what is now Backworth club was built. It started life as a military band, but the band became wholly brass in 1920. The problems stem from the records of the early minutes of the band being missing, possibly lost when they moved rehearsal rooms, as they originally rehearsed in a drinking establishment which is now just across the road from their present base. The band was definitely formed out of the workforce from the surrounding pits, and sponsorship was won from the National Union of Mineworkers before the nationalisation of the coal companies in 1947.
The band has continued to perform at local concerts throughout its life.  Of note too are the number of competitions the band has participated in, both locally and nationally.  The band has performed as such events as the Whit Fridays, Durham Miner's Gala, CISWO Mineworkers Contest and the National Brass Band Finals.
The band changed name in 2000 to Five Rivers Brass due to a sponsorship with the Five Rivers Group.  However the sponsorship only lasted for one year, and the band has reverted to being Backworth Colliery Band.

==Membership of the Band==

The bands draw their membership from a variety of sources throughout the community.  Although the band has a core membership from Backworth, Shiremoor and nearby towns such as Whitley Bay and North Shields, the bands also attract members from further afield such as Jarrow, Durham and Northumberland.
Membership is open to any player with the desire and ability to play a brass or percussion instrument.  The band supplies most instruments on a loan basis and the band also provides tuition to any member requiring such assistance.  The main instruments of a brass band are cornet, tenor horn, baritone horn, euphonium, trombone, tuba (bass) and percussion.
The band operates a strict Child Protection policy and Equal Opportunities policy.  The band is run by a committee and is a volunteer-led, self funding organisation.

==Junior Band==

The junior band was formed in 2003 as an independent body to the senior band.  Backworth Colliery Junior Band is a committee-led organisation, which provides the opportunity for under-18 musicians in the area to learn and perform brass band music.
The band is divided into two sections; a band for the more proficient players, and individuals who are just starting to learn instruments and require one-on-one tuition.
Many of the junior band members also play with the senior band, and are often heard playing at the same events as the senior band.

==Other Ensembles==

As well as performing as a traditional 27-strong brass band, the members also provide music as a 12-piece, 10-piece and a sextet.  The band also perform as a marching band for parades.

==Concerts and Contests==

The band performs at many concerts and contests throughout the North East.  Here is a list of some examples.

===Concert Locations===


