[[Wicked (Lagoon)]]

CATEGORIES: Roller coasters introduced in 2007, Buildings and structures in Davis County, Utah, Roller coasters in Utah

Wicked is a launched steel roller coaster located at Lagoon Amusement Park in Farmington, Utah. It opened on June 1, 2007. It is currently the tallest roller coaster at Lagoon. 
It is located at the front (west side) of the park and is easily seen from I-15. It has a green track with mostly silver supports, the only exception being the bright yellow supports of the launch tower.
Elements: horizontal to vertical launch, launch tower, airtime hill, Immelmann turn, heartline roll, double halfpipe, tunnel.
Wicked is an LSM launched roller coaster designed by Dal Freeman/Lagoon Corporation, manufactured by Zierer, and fabricated by Stakotra Manufacturing. The ride is thrilling due to the fact the ride is launched to high speed vertically without any significant warning, has a 90 degree descent on the tower hill, pulls 4.885 gs, features a unique lap-bar restraint, and features an Immelmann turn and heartline roll. It was rumored to be named by the daughter of Dal Freeman (a designer/engineer of Magnum XL-200) as "Wicked," after the famous musical and book, or after the fact that the design looked "wicked" to her. Wicked was the first LSM (linear synchronous motor) launched roller coaster to utilize a flywheel inverter. The LSMs are not only used for launching the trains, but for also braking the trains. The energy recovered by braking the trains is used to spin the flywheel inverter where potential energy is stored and used to launch the trains.
Riders start by turning into a dark tunnel with a siren and a loud boom, before shooting straight up the 110 ft vertical launch hill at 40 MPH, cresting, and then descending vertically down the other side of the tower at speeds reaching 55 MPH. Riders then go up and over a small airtime hill with a trim brake, before going up and quickly flipping around an Immelmann turn. The track levels out before sending riders up into a heartline roll. They then descend and then quickly pass around a small, shallow turn into the trim/safety brake. 
Riders descend into a double half-pipe, then being twisted to the right, left, then into a right half downward helix, then twisting to the left, then descending into a trench covered by a tunnel, before ascending and leveling out into the reduction brake run as the ride ends.
A manufacturing defect in the weldments of the uprights/support columns fabricated by Stakotra Manufacturing was discovered before the ride's intended opening, and some uprights had to be repaired on site. The problem was discovered while checking the structural integrity of the uprights/columns using x-ray. Also on one of its first test runs when the launch was not nearly full power as it is now, the train did not clear the Immelmann turn and almost stopped, but instead rolled back, and valleyed between the bottom of the launch tower and the airtime hill.

