[[Dudu Nobre]]

CATEGORIES: 1974 births, Living people, Brazilian composers, Brazilian male singers

João Eduardo de Salles Nobre, known as Dudu Nobre (Rio de Janeiro, RJ, November 6 of 1974), is a Brazilian composer and singer.

==Biography==

He is the son of the engineer João Nobre and of Anita Nobre. His mother, Anita Nobre, controlled three pagode bands, where Dudu, already in his infancy, used to play with tam-tam and pandeiro with the same ease that his neighbors were applied in marbles. And he did not reject this apprenticeship in his backyard.[tpl]pt icon[/tpl] Official Site
As a result, when he was six years old, he started to study classic piano, and when he was nine he received the instrument that would never separate from him—the cavaquinho.
When Dudu was ten years old, he initiated his career in the samba schools for beginners. There he met the mythical Beto "Sem Braço" (Without arm) and the two starred in the samba-enredo of Alegria da Passarela, a school that later became Aprendizes do Salgueiro, the school for beginners owned by GRES Acadêmicos do Salgueiro. "Beto was one of the most experienced (sambistas) that I ever knew," Dudu cites in his official site.
After this he attributed credit to three sambas in Aprendizes do Salgueiro, another in Herdeiros da Vila, and one more in Estrelinha da Mocidade and also in Império do Futuro. This as an adolescent composer.
As a musician, when he was thirteen he made a cycle of shows with Mocidade Independente de Padre Miguel and when he was 15 he rotated in Switzerland, Finland, England, and Germany, with Cia. Brasiliana.
Back in Brazil, he joined the band of Almir Guineto and later played with Dicró and Pedrinho da Flor. When Dudu was 19 years old, he joined the band of Zeca Pagodinho, same epoch when Dudu entered into the Law Faculty. The advocacy was repealed in the fifth year.Getmein
Dudu writes that "Zeca is a godfather. And he tells me that the samba is a passion and that I was chosen by the samba".
Dudu was married with the model and dancer Adriana Bombom and has two daughters: Olivia and Thalita.IMBD They got divorced in 2009.Dudu Nobre confirma afastamento de Adriana Bombom: ‘Agora é notório’ He is the brother of the standard bearer Lucinha Nobre.
Dudu in 2014, won the samba schools Viradouro and Mocidade.Parceria de 'independentes na identidade' atropela na final da Mocidade e confirma favoritismo where he also serves as the main performer, alongside Bruno RibasDudu Nobre e Bruno Ribas vão cantar juntos na Mocidade em 2014

==Compositions==

Among the musics that really succeeded, are detached:

==partnership==

==References==


