[[Philtranco]]

CATEGORIES: Bus companies of the Philippines

Philtranco is a Philippine transport company servicing Luzon, Visayas, and Mindanao routes. The company provides ordinary non-aircon, airconditioned, and executive bus services. Philtranco is also positioning itself as a cargo or document-handler, forwarder and carrier to its existing transport routes and destinations. Philtranco is also one of the largest bus company in the Philippines together with Victory Liner in northern part and Philtranco in southern part of the country.

==History==

July 1, 1914: a young enterprising American serviceman Albert Louise Ammen together with another American, Max Blouse organized a small transportation company in Iriga, Camarines Sur, with an initial fleet of one (1) auto-truck. He called the company ALATCO or the A.L. Ammen Transport Co., Inc. Its first route was Iriga-Naga.
Mr. Ammen's venture into the transport business had become so successful that soon he expanded his fleet to service the other towns of Camarines Sur, Camarines Norte, Albay and Sorsogon. ALATCO became the principal carrier in the Bicol region, inaugurating highway travel that was to open remote villages in the Bicolandia, to the mainstream of economic and social development.
1942: World War II aborted expansion of the transport company. When it resumed operations in 1945 with surplus US Navy trucks bought  from the United States Commercial Company, the company was faced with ruinous competition and beset with problems of maintaining its efficiency and safety as a result of her expanded size and nature of operations.
1949: The Heirs of Don Nicasio Tuazon of Manila took over ownership of ALATCO, and, with infusion of new capital, embarked on an ambitious program of expansion and rehabilitation. One important development at this time was the company's "dieselization" Program that converted its gas-powered trucks to diesel.
1952: ALATCO operated four hundred (400) units in its fleet, and it centered its fleet in Iriga. It also maintained subsidiary shops in Daet and Labo, Camarines Norte; Naga City, Camarines Sur; Ligao, Tabaco, and Legaspi in Albay; and Sorsogon and Irosin in Sorsogon.
1953: ALATCO ventured to Quezon province by consolidating into local and express bus operations from three small bus companies servicing the area. It operated under the umbrella of the Eastern Tayabas Bus Co. (ETBCO) headed by Mr. Ramón Soler. EBTCO later entered into a 5-year lease contract with the Laguna Tayabas Bus Company (LTBCO).
1971: ALATCO and ETBCO were sold to the Mantrade Group of the Lopas and Cojuangcos that formally amalgamated the operations of the two firms into one company. It was named the Pantranco South Express, Inc. (PSEI) to differentiate it from its northern counterpart, which the group then already owned.
1973: Compounded by global crises and steep escalation of fuel costs, PSEI nearly collapsed. The new owners (the Mantrade Group of the Manuel Lopa and Jose Cojuangco families) insisted on providing the service even during floods, road interruptions and bad road conditions. Debt-strapped and traumatized by high operation costs, the company's creditors decided to take over the organization.
1974: The Creditors Syndicate of PSEI decided to develop and implement a Corporate Rehabilitation Program. The same year, the Company added Catanduanes, Samar and Masbate to its scope of operations, having formalized tie-ups with passenger ferry operators in these areas.
1978: PSEI introduced its air-conditioned coaches in its southern route.
1980: The Company expanded its freight service operations and moved its central offices and terminal at its present site in Pasay City.
1981: The Company pioneered in Eastern Visayas and by year-end had connected all of Leyte and Samar provinces to the Luzon mainstream. PSEI also entered the sea transport business with its passenger and vehicle ferry, linking the ports of Matnog, Sorsogon and Allen, Northern Samar.
1982: A new level of service was inaugurated with the addition of Royal Class and new air-conditioned coaches with toilets and VCR's in the company's fleet. PSEI also became the first bus company in the Philippines to computerize its operations.
1984: PSEI, together with two other ferryboat operators, formed a joint venture company, the St. Bernard Services Corporation (SBTC) that now operates in the San Bernardino Strait, with the government ferry boat, Maharlika I. In the same year, the company changed its name to Philtranco Service Enterprises, Incorporated.
1986: Commemorated the first Luzon-Visayas-Mindanao (LUZVIMINDA) run that became the first trans-Philippine bus-cum-ferry-operation. Now PSEI has seven ferryboat operations crossing Matnog and Allen, and Liloan, Southern Leyte and Surigao City, Surigao del Norte. Having opened the southern frontiers of Mindanao to Luzon and Visayas with its inter-modal transport service, Philtranco hopes to contribute its share in effecting the real unification of the nation where the economic, educational, cultural, political and social opportunities are shared by every Filipino.
April 1999: Penta Pacific Realty Corporation acquired PSEI headed by businessman Jose C.H. Alvarez. This new group immediately programmed a fleet replacement of 80 units costing PHP250 million.
June 2000: The 29-seater Gold Service Bus was introduced, initially serving key cities in the Bicol region, with a coach stewardess as additional crew to assist passengers, giving the same service as that of an airline.
June 1, 2001: PSEI implemented the Passenger Check-in and Baggage Tag System procedures for the security, convenience and comfort of our riding public. PSEI is the first bus company in the country to adopt this system patterned after the airline system. Today, Philtranco is a symbol of progress in the Philippine transport industry. The Company continues to blaze new trails with the innovations in its levels and brands of services.
2004: Philtranco, the country's lone integrated land and sea transport company, is embarking on a PHP4 billion (US$75 million) investment program over a five-year period to acquire new fleet of buses and ferry boats, and improve and expand its terminals. Philtranco CEO Jose E.B. Antonio said the expansion is in response to President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo's push to modernize the country's land and sea transport service of goods and passengers through five major islands—Luzon, Mindoro, Panay, Negros and Mindanao.
2007: In promoting the Clark International Airport, Pampanga, as an alternate to its counterpart in Manila, Ninoy Aquino International Airport - Philtranco offers a hassle-free daily Manila-Clark-Manila trip schedule. 
2010: Philtranco Released its new type of Deluxe Service called Piltranco Airbus 380, the newest addition of Executive Class fleet of Philtranco. 26 fully reclined seats with leg rest in 2x1 arrangement, 2 Flatscreen TVs (Front and Center) equipped with stereo surround sound and DVD, and On- Board Comfort Room. Daily non- stop trips to Naga and Legaspi from Pasay/ Cubao/ Alabang and Turbina. Feels like boarding on a first class Airbus 380. Only at Philtranco.

==Privilege Card==

The Philtranco Privilege Card is a loyalty card for its valued riders. It can be used for Philtranco bus services (Luzon, Visayas, and Mindanao), as well as Negros Navigational ferry services (Manila to Luzon, Visayas, and Mindanao).

==Passenger Demography==

Philtranco have 50 terminals nationwide, it carries more than 2.7 million passenger in a year with an estimated traffic of 50,000 people a day.

==PhilKargo==

PhilKARGO is capable of transporting virtually anything. There are more than 300 Philtranco buses plying its nationwide route in Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao daily. Philtranco's average bus dispatch is every 10 minutes on the hour, 24 hours a day.

==Forwarding Services==

==Charter Services==

Philtranco offers charter services.

==Fleet==

Philtranco now utilizes 
buses, totalling about 300 buses.

==List of Passenger Terminals==

===Metro Manila===

===Provincial Destinations===

==Subsidiaries==

==External links==


