[[List of Texas Revolution battles]]

CATEGORIES: Lists of battles, Texas Revolution

Multiple battles of the Texas Revolution took place between October 2, 1835 and April 21, 1836.  The Texas Revolution was fought between Mexico and rebellious colonists in Mexican Texas.  All of these battles were fought within the territory of Texas.
In early 1835, Mexican president Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna began centralizing power and operating as a dictator.  Federalists throughout the country revolted; in Texas, an armed uprising began on October 2 when settlers refused to return a small cannon to Mexican troops. This Battle of Gonzales ended with Mexican troops retreating empty handed to San Antonio de Bexar (now the U.S. city of San Antonio, Texas).  Emboldened by their victory, the Texians formed a volunteer army. A small force of Texians travelled down the Texas coastline, defeating Mexican troops at Goliad and at Fort Lipantitlán. The majority of the Texian troops followed General Stephen F. Austin to Bexar, where they initiated a siege of the Mexican garrison. After victories in several skirmishes, including the Battle of Concepción and the Grass Fight, the Texians attacked Bexar. After several days of fighting, the Siege of Bexar ended with the surrender of Mexican general Martin Perfecto de Cos. With the parole of Cos's troops back to Mexico in mid-December, seven Mexican forces remained in Texas.
Many Texians believed the war was now over, and the majority of the settlers returned to their homes.  The remaining troops were garrisoned at the Alamo Mission in Bexar and at Presidio La Bahia in Goliad. In early January, a large number of the remaining soldiers, most of them adventurers recently arrived from the United States, began clamoring to invade Mexico. Colonel Frank W. Johnson and Dr. James Grant began preparing to attack Matamoros.  
Even before Cos's defeat, Santa Anna had been making plans to retake Texas. In January, he led the "Army of Operations in Texas" towards the rebellious territory. At the Rio Grande, the army divided; Santa Anna led the bulk of the troops toward Bexar, where he laid siege to the Alamo.  The remaining troops, under General Jose de Urrea, traveled up the coastline, easily defeating Johnson and Grant at the battles of San Patricio and Agua Dulce. News of these first Mexican victories cheered the Mexican force gathered at Bexar. On March 6, Santa Anna ordered an assault on the Alamo; all but a few of the defenders were killed. News of the Texian defeat and approach of the Mexican army terrified the settlers; in an event later known as the Runaway Scrape, settlers, the Texas government, and the remnants of the Texian army under the command of Sam Houston fled east, away from the approaching army. Houston ordered Colonel James Fannin to abandon Goliad and join his retreat. However, Fannin delayed his departure and sent a quarter of his troops to help evacuate the settlers at Refugio. Centralist forces in the area were stronger than the Texians expected at Refugio and defeated them. After receiving word of the defeat, Fannin finally began his retreat. His men were quickly overtaken and surrounded by Mexican soldiers. Fannin fought courageously at the Battle of Coleto, but was forced to surrender. He and his 300 men were taken prisoner, but just days later were executed in the Goliad Massacre. 
The only remaining Texian troops were those retreating with Houston. After learning that Santa Anna had again divided his forces, Houston ordered an attack on April 21, 1836. Crying "Remember the Alamo" and "Remember Goliad", the Texians showed little mercy during the Battle of San Jacinto. Santa Anna was captured in hiding the following day and he ordered his army to return to Mexico, ending the Texas Revolution.

==See also==

==References==


