[[Raima]]

CATEGORIES: Software companies based in Washington (state), Companies based in Washington (state)

Raima Inc. is a provider of high-performance, always on database technology for both in-memory database usage and persistent storage devices. The company has offices in Seattle, USA and London, UK.

==History==

Raima was founded in Seattle, Washington USA in 1982 by two software engineering researchers from Boeing, Randy Merilatt and Wayne Warren, who saw the benefits that database management technology could provide for software application developers in the rapidly growing microcomputer industry. In 1984 Raima released one of the first embedded database management systems for microcomputer applications written in the C programming language. Early contracts with companies like ROLM (now part of IBM), Texas Instruments, Microsoft, ADP and others contributed to the development of the Raima Database Manager (RDM) product family.
Some of the more significant Raima product releases are shown below.
In June, 1999 Raima was acquired by Centura Software (formerly Gupta). In the summer of 2002, the Norwegian company Birdstep Technology acquired the Raima assets from Centura and operated Raima as a separated business unit out of Seattle. In the summer of 2010, the Raima management team purchased Raima from Birdstep, forming the now privately held Raima Incorporated.
== Technology == 
Raima delivers multiple database solutions: RDM, which is a cross-platform database designed for distributed architecture in resource-constrained environments, and RDM Server which is an embeddable database management system employing a client/server architecture, designed for enterprise class environments.

==Applications==

Raima database products are used in a wide range of applications for business critical data transactions, flight control systems, military equipment, data backup solutions, medical equipment, routers and switches and more. Boeing, Mitsubishi and Siemens are examples of customers who embeds RDM products in their applications. It is also the primary internal database of HP Data Protector prior to version 8.0, after which, HP moved to a PostgreSQL database.

==External links==


