[[Tony Ollison]]

CATEGORIES: Year of birth missing (living people), Living people, People from Malvern, Arkansas, American football defensive tackles, Arkansas Razorbacks football players, San Antonio Riders players, Arkansas Razorbacks football coaches, Tennessee Volunteers football coaches, Arena Football League coaches, American strength and conditioning coaches

Tony Ollison is a former football player.  The Malvern, Arkansas native played collegiately for the Arkansas Razorbacks "Tony Ollison." www.malvernlegacyproject.org. Retrieved November 26, 2013. and is currently coaching for the Dallas Desperados of the Arena Football League.
Tony Ollison played high school football in Malvern, Arkansas, where he was a teammate of NFL player Keith Traylor.  After high school Ollison went on to play for the Arkansas Razorbacks under coach Ken Hatfield, where he was a four year letterman (1987–1990) and a regular contributor at defensive tackle.  He registered 63 tackles in his college career, and was a starter in the 1989 and 1990 Cotton Bowl Classics.  After his collegiate career ended, Ollison had a free agent tryout with the Indianapolis Colts of the National Football League "Transactions." The New York Times, August 17, 1991. Retrieved September 19, 2013. and was drafted by the San Antonio Riders of the World League of American Football.  Ollison has worked as assistant strength and conditioning coach for the University of Arkansas and the University of Tennessee.  He joined the Dallas Cowboys staff as strength and conditioning coach in 2000, and served in the same capacity for the Dallas Desperadoes."Dallas Desperados: Coaches." www.dallasdesperados.com. Retrieved September 19, 2013.   In 2006 Ollison became seriously ill during a Cowboys return flight from a game against the Carolina Panthers.  The plane made an emergency landing in Nashville, Tennessee, where Ollison was hospitalized with a possible heart attack."Cowboys Plane Diverted, Coach Tony Ollison Possible Heart Attack." OTB Sports, October 30, 2006. Retrieved January 31, 2012

==References==


