[[Steel Guitar Rag]]

CATEGORIES: Western swing songs, 1936 songs

"Steel Guitar Rag" is the seminal Western swing instrumental credited with popularizing the steel guitar as an integral instrument in a Western band.Townsend, San Antonio Rose,p. 99: There are authorities, McAuliffe among them, who believe this recording Guitar Rag", March 25, 1935 and the subsequent use of the instrument in Wills's organization played the leading role in making the steel guitar popular in American music."Harrington,Sonic Cool, p. 22: "In September '36, Leon McAuliffe had a huge hit with 'Steel Guitar Rag,' which helped popularize the sound of the electric guitar to the whole nation."Lange,Smile When You Call Me a Hillbilly, p. 121: "McAuliffe's guitar eventually became an integral part of Bob Wills sound, particularly after the release of 'Steel Guitar Rag' in the late 1936. McAuliffe turned the instrumental piece, which was derived from a Hawaiian tune, into country music's first steel guitar standard."
Written by Leon McAuliffe, it was first recorded by Bob Wills and The Texas Playboys in 1936.Stambler, Country Music, p. 289: " 'I've McAuliffe written some songs that are good, but not many. I can't manufacture 'em, they have to come to me. I  wrote 'Steel Guitar Rag' and the bridge to 'San Antonio Rose'—the trumpeter wrote the words—but Bob has total credit.' "Oliphant, "Texas Jazz", p. 50-51: "As early as 1933, Leon McAuliffe also was playing steel guitar, and in 1935 he joined Bob Wills and His Texas Playboys, recording with the latter his own composition, 'Steel Guitar Rag,' during a session of September 29–30, 1936." The song stylistically bears a striking resemblance to a popular Hawaiian song, "On The Beach At Waikiki" (words, G.H. Stover; music, Henry Kailimai; arrangement, Sonny Cunha; 1915), which was widely performed on the vaudeville circuits in the U.S.Koskoff, Music Cultures in the United States, p. 129: "The debut of the song 'On the Beach at Waikiki' at the Panama-Pacific Exposition 1915 is credited with sparking a national fad for Hawaiian songs."*Ruymar, The Hawaiian Steel Guitar, p. 50, quoting John York, president of the Western Swing Music Society: "When you next listen to a recording of Leon McAuliffe playing Steel Guitar Rag or Pan Handle Rag, listen for the Hawaiian style with a slight difference. Leon's influence came from listening to recordings of Jim and the Genial Hawaiians, and of Sol Ho'opi'i."Santoro, Stir It Up, p. 183: "Hawaiian sounds began to outsell other forms of pop music on the mainland U.S., and had such an impact that Mexican bands added steel guitar players and masqueraded as Hawaiians to crash the lucrative U.S. vaudeville circuit." McAuliffe's composition is likely adapted from "Guitar Rag" recorded by guitarist Sylvester Weaver in the early 1920s.Dempsey, The Light Crust Doughboys Are on the Air, pp. 57-58: "Dough Boy Kenneth Pitts admired McAuliffe's tune, 'Steel Guitar Rag,' which McAuliffe adapted from a tune called 'Guitar Rag' by blues guitarist Sylvester Weaver."Komara, Encyclopedia of the Blues, p. 385: "The latter Rag' is a blues guitar landmark, having been appropriated countless times including as 'Steel Guitar Rag' by Bob Wills and the Texas Playboys in 1936." Many musicians and bands have recorded this instrumental over the years. A recent version was performed by Country Music Hall of Famer Jimmy Russell.

==References==

==Bibliography==


