[[Josh Withers]]

CATEGORIES: 1986 births, American male professional wrestlers, Living people, People from Hamilton, Ohio, Professional wrestlers from Ohio

Josh Withers (born March 14, 1986) is an American professional wrestler, better known by the ring names Jeremy Hyde and Jeremiah. He is currently performing for the Cincinnati, Ohio-based Northern Wrestling Federation.

==Early life==

Withers grew up in Hamilton, Ohio. At an early age, he discovered professional wrestling and at the age of twelve, he began performing backyard wrestling. In 2003, Withers entered professional wrestling training school. After training for two weeks, he received his first match. In 2004, he began training under Roger Ruffen for the Northern Wrestling Federation.

==Professional wrestling career==

===Northern Wrestling Federation (2004 to present)===

Withers began his career under the name Jeremy Hyde, acting as a jobber and losing to Dustin Lillard in less than five minutes. He then joined his (kayfabe) big brother Jesse Hyde and his long time tag team partner Pompano Joe, and the three were now known as The Hippies. The stable grew in popularity and had a successful run, but when Jeremy's inexperience showed by losing matches, Pompano Joe became upset. It seemed Jeremy was in the wrong place at the wrong time, and both men began interfering in one another's matches and thus splitting The Hippies in three, leaving Jesse Hyde in the middle. When a match between Pompano Joe and Jeremy Hyde was signed, NWF CEO Kirk Sheppard made Jesse Hyde the guest referee. During the match, Jesse caught Jeremy trying to cheat several times and after several warnings from the referee, Pompano Joe was able to secure a three count. Furious after his loss, Jeremy proceeded to attack his own brother. The next week at Bonekrushers National Pro Wrestling Training Center, Jeremy viciously attacked Pompano Joe and Jesse Hyde with a steel chair, leaving The Hippies permanently. It was in this action that "The Crybaby" Jeremy Hyde was born.
After the unexplained incident, Hyde started a heated rivalry with Pompano Joe, losing in baby bottle matches in Fairfield, Ohio and Wilmington, Ohio. Hyde then faced his big brother Jesse, culminating in a family rights match where Hyde lost rights to the Hyde name, resulting in a name change to The Crybaby. In retaliation, The Crybaby stole the NWF Lightweight Championship from The Zodiac after hitting Zodiac and his manager Jac Attack with the title belt. He later faced and defeated The Zodiac, he moved into Jac Attacks house and they became lovers. They are now happily married with 2 gold fish and a pet mongoose named Randy. After four months as champion, The Crybaby defended the NWF Lightweight title in a Light Heavyweight Countdown Brawl. Despite holding the final spot in the match and fighting a hard battle against seven other competitors, The Crybaby lost the NWF Lightweight Championship to Christopher Michael Lotus. After the title loss, The Crybaby regained his Jeremy Hyde ring name and be began calling himself "Your New Hero".

==Wrestling==

==Championships and accomplishments==

==External links==


