[[Kandisa]]

CATEGORIES: Christian prayer, Syriac Orthodox Church, Aramaic words and phrases

Kandisa is an ancient prayer in Aramaic. The literal translation of this word may be Holy/ Holy Praise / Divine Praise. This prayer is chanted even to this day in the Syro-Malabar Catholic Church and the Syriac Orthodox Church of the Syrian Malabar Nasrani people from Kerala, South India. The Kerala Syrian Malabar Nasrani people also called as Nasrani Syrian Christians are the descendants of the Jewish diaspora in Kerala Menachery G (ed) (1982) The St. Thomas Christian Encyclopedia of India, B.N.K. Press, vol. 1;Menachery G (ed); (1998) "The Indian Church History Classics", Vol. I, The Nazranies, Ollur, 1998. 81-87133-05-8.Mundadan, A. Mathias. (1984) History of Christianity in India, vol.1, Bangalore, India: Church History Association of India.Podipara, Placid J. (1970) "The Thomas Christians". London: Darton, Longman and Tidd, 1970. (is a readable and exhaustive study of the St. Thomas Christians.)Leslie Brown, (1956) The Indian Christians of St. Thomas. An Account of the Ancient Syrian Church of Malabar, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1956, 1982 (repr.)Thomas Puthiakunnel, (1973) "Jewish colonies of India paved the way for St. Thomas", The Saint Thomas Christian Encyclopedia of India, ed. George Menachery, Vol. II., Trichur.Koder S. 'History of the Jews of Kerala".The St. Thomas Christian Encyclopaedia of India, Ed. G. Menachery,1973.T.K Velu Pillai, (1940) "The Travancore State Manual"; 4 volumes; Trivandrum)  who became Christians in the earliest days of Christianity in the Malabar Coast.Menachery G (1973) The St. Thomas Christian Encyclopedia of India, Ed. George Menachery, B.N.K. Press, vol. 2, ISBN 81-87132-06-X, Lib. Cong. Cat. Card. No. 73-905568; B.N.K. Press  – (has some 70 lengthy articles by different experts on the origins, development, history, culture... of these Christians, with some 300 odd photographs). They have preserved some of the traditions of the early Jewish Christians to this day.

==Prayer==

Kandisa Alahaye, Kandisa Hylsana, 
Kandisa Alahaye, Kandisa Hylsana. 
aalam aalam Aalam, Aamenu Aamen. 
shliha Mar Yose, Almaduba-ha Qudisa-ha, 
angene Dhanusa, Nyahveh Dukrana. 
 
aalam aalam Aalam, Aamenu Aamen, 
shliha Mar Yose, Almadbaha Qudisa-ha. 
angene Dhanusa, Nyahveh Dukrana. 
Kandisa Alaha, Kandisa Hylsana, Kandisa La Ma Yosa Isaraham Alem. 

==Conceptual Interpretation==

Holy God, Holy Strong One (epitome of divine strength-Omnipotent), 
Invocation (3), 
Truly, Truly, Truly (So be it) (Sanskrit: thathaasthu) 
Our father Joseph, at your Holy altar, 
humbly I submit (Sanskrit: Sarvam Samarpayaami), may that be forever in memory (heart and mind). 
Holy GOD, Holy Strong One (epitome of divine strength- Omnipotent), 
Holy immortal (epitome of immortality-Omnipresent), please have mercy on me.
The last two lines are the ancient Christian Trisagion (thrice holy) prayer, which is part of all Orthodox and Eastern Catholic church services and forms the summit of the Roman Catholic Good Friday service. Indian Ocean's rendering is in East Syrian whereas the West Syrian pronunciation is: :ܩܕܝܫܐ ܐܠܗܐ، ܩܕܝܫܐ ܚܝܠܬܢܐ، ܩܕܝܫܐ ܠܐ ܡܝܘܬܐ، ܐܬܪܚܡܥܠܝܢ :Qadisha Alaha, Qadisha Ħilthana, Qadisha La mayotha, 'Ithraħim 'aleyn.

==In popular culture==

The band Indian Ocean released a 2000 album and track named Kandisa.

==References==


