[[The Tremulous Hand of Worcester]]

CATEGORIES: 13th-century English people, Medieval European scribes, Scribes

The Tremulous Hand of Worcester is the title given to a 13th-century glossator of Old English manuscripts with handwriting characterized by large, shaky, leftward leaning figures usually written in light brown ink. He is assumed to have worked in Worcester because all manuscripts identified as his work have been connected to Worcester. 

==Variation in Work==

The Tremulous Hand of Worcester is suggested to have had a long career in glossing due to the variability in his work. He is credited to have over 50,000 glosses written in both Middle English and in Latin. 
In some manuscripts one out of every four words is glossed, while in other manuscripts only one or two glosses appear on a page. While glossing Old English texts he is also known to have edited the works, adding punctuation marks, vowels or consonance changing the sounds of Old English words to be more like their Middle English counterparts. His earliest work is predominantly glossed in Middle English, but later he begins to gloss equally in both Middle English and Latin. 
Although he is most typically identified by light brown ink, the Tremulous Hand used multiple media types and his glossing evolved throughout his career, showing a considerable range characterized by variable “layers.” 

==Layers==

In order to differentiate between the variability in The Tremulous Hand of Worcester’s glossing, Christine Franzen, a literary scholar, has categorized his work into seven accepted layers. 

==Manuscripts==

The Tremulous Hand of Worcester is most widely known for glossing Ælfric of Eynsham's Grammar and Glossary, but is also credited with the Worcester manuscripts, St. Bede's Lament and The Soul’s Address to the Body. Additionally, The Tremulous Hand of Worcester is considered to have glossed a segment of the Bodleian manuscript Junius which contains the earliest Middle English translation of the Nicene Creed. The Tremulous Hand of Worcester is considered to have over 50,000 glosses in total.

==References==

Franzen, Christine. “On the Attribution of Additions in Oxford, Bodleian MS Bodley 343 to the Tremulous Hand of Worcester” ANQ: A Quarterly Journal of Short Articles, Notes, and Reviews, 2006 Winter; 19 (1): 7-8. 
Franzen, Christine. The Tremulous Hand of Worcester: A Study of Old English in the Thirteenth Century. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991. 
Franzen, Christine. "The Tremulous Hand of Worcester and the Nero Scribe of the Ancrene Wisse" Medium Ævum, 2003; 72 (1): 13-31.

